THE SECOND PART OF THE GARDEN of EDEN.

OR An accurate Description of all Flowers and Fruits growing in ENGLAND; WITH
Partuicular Rules how to advance their Nature and Growth, as well in Seeds and
Herbs, as the secret ordering of Trees and Plants.

By that Learned and great Observer, Sir HUGH PLAT Knight.

Never before Printed.

LONDON Printed for William Leak, at the Crown in Fleetstreet betwixt the two
Temple-Gates. 1660.

TO THE READER.
IT were very vain to commend the First Part of the GARDEN OF EDEN which has
been so often welcomed into the world in so short a time; for (without foolish
Apologies, which are but officious lies) we can assure you it has had four
Impressions in less than six years. The benefit it brings is as well known to
the Country as to the London Stationer. Only let me inform you, That a Second
Part (never before Printed) full as large as the First, is here presented you;
and (if possibly upon reading you could doubt its integrity) you may at
pleasure see the original Manuscript under the Authors own hand, which is too
well known to undergo the suspicion of a counterfeit. Therefore if heretofore
the First Part of the GARDEN OF EDEN were a useful Book, this is now much more,
when the GARDEN is enlarged, and far better stored. You will soon find if
truth be not now told you.

AN Alphabetical TABLE TO THE BOOK.
ALmond trees to forward. p. 42 Apples, Pears, Cherries, Grapes, to grow great.
112 Apples, Pears, Plums, Grapes etc. how to make dry as they grow. page 151
Apricocks to make prosper well. 154 Arbor an Artificial one. 46 Artificial
Dogs, Lions, Foul, Fishes, etc. 46 Artichokes to grow great. 53 Artichokes a
second crop the same year. 71 Artichokes how to makes the leaves, stalks, and
roots good food for the table. 113
B. BEans steeped in oil. 21 Beans and Pease cut down betimes. 25 Beans a
second crop the same year. 48 Beans and Pease salt will forward. 72 Beans and
Pease forwarded. 108 Branches or arms of trees how to make them root. 123 Broom
and Fern to destroy. 109, 112
C. CAnvas Tent for Dwarf-trees. 5 Canvas Walls. ibid. Carnations,
Gilliflowers, Pinks, etc. how to graff upon a root of Carnations. 136
Catterpillers how to destroy. 151 Cherryes kept backward by a Tent 22 Cherries
early. 52 Cherry-trees, whether horn will forward. 75 Clay ground how to make
fruitful. 156 Cions or young trees to make to grow full of squares and
losanges. 125 Cions new graffed, the best manner of binding or closing. 127
Cions how to make the best choice. 119 Colleflower hindered in the blowing. 72
Corn ground enriched with salt. 78
D. DWarf-trees more fortunate in bearing than others. 6 Dwarf-trees the manner
how to water them. 7 Dwarf-trees tenderly kept, a caveat for. 12 Dwarf-trees,
watering them in a Stove. 13 Dwarf-trees, pots for. 31 Dwarf-trees, tubs for.
32 Dwarf-trees or flowers to backward. 36 Dwarf-trees to preserve fruit on 73
Dwarf-trees, the fashion of your stove for. 38
E. EArth compounded for Parcely. 20 Earth compounded for Carnation 22 Earthen
pans to place your pots in. 35
F. FLowers and fruit to keep backward. 51 Flowers and herbs kept by covering
them as they grow. 24 Flowers and dwarf-trees, how they may be forced to grow
in pots or wooden vessels. 89, 90 Flowers to make double, as also to enlarge
either fruit or flowers, and to make young trees prosper well. 115 Flowers kept
from cleaving. 89 Frosts in May to prevent. 4 Fructifying waters for seeds. 73
Fruit early without the help of Brickwals. 4 Fruit and flowers backwarded
several ways. 24 Fruit kept backward. 26 Fruit forwarded by a tent. 40 Fruits,
horn into gelly will forward. 76 Fruit when to gather. 78 Fruits late. 74 Fruit
how to bring into any shape, or to grow in moulds. 126 Fruitfulness every
second year of Pears, Apples, Plums, proved. 88 Fruit Trees how to dwarf, so as
your Orchard shall bear the first year. 138
G. GArden pease or French-beans, to grow without help of stick or poles. 107
Gilliflowers, Pinks, Strawberries to backward. 128 Gilliflower or Carnation
root, how to increase the bearing exceedingly. 137 Graffing time in respect of
Cion and stock. 96 Grapes nipping. 15 Grapes growing late and kept long. 54
Grapes, to have several growing upon one branch, and so also Roses,
Gilliflowers, etc. 147 Grapes, how to keep upon the Vine till January, and so
of other fruit and flowers to keep backward. 149 Grapes watering. 157 Ground
prepared for dwarf-trees. 6 Ground arched for dwarf-trees. 23 Ground enriched.
157 Gunpowder, Salt peter, and Salt to forward Plants. 21
H. HOw to sow in the wain, or increase of the Moon, the weather being
unseasonable. 105 Honeysuckle, Jessamie double, how to multiply 142 How to
graff in a dead trunk, or stock of a willow-tree. 144 Hysop and Time high
borders speedily. 44
I IMplastering, inoculating or graffing in the bud. 98 Iron backs to your
pots. 48
L. LEmon-tree to bear fruit. 3 Lemon, Orange, Pomgranate-tree. 74 Lo^, or
proin, when. p. 75
M. MOunt Pyramids. 45 Musmellons, Cucumbers, Pompeons, Gooseberries, how to
have great and large. 111 Musmellons and Pompeons, etc. observations in
removing. 135 Musmellon, Cucumber, Pompeon, the planting and ordering. 79
N. NIpping the first blossoms. 41 Nourishing liquor, rich mold. 4 Nourishing
water. 34
O. OLive and Orange tree to bear fruit. 3 Onions young all the year. 68
Orange, Lemon, and Almond-trees forwarded. 43 Orchards, the bigness. 8
Orchards, the height of the walls. 9 Orchards speedily to make. 53 Orchards, to
flourish and bear store of fruit. p. 91 Orchard or tree how to defend from the
frosts of April or May, whereby the blossoms may knit without danger. 116
Orchard how to have to bear speedily. 121 Ordering pots. 30
P. PArseley to grow speedily. 20 Peach-tree to make to bring forth Pomgranats.
146 Peach-trees forwarded. 76 Peach-stone to have no kernel. 146 Pease and
other seeds steeped in several liquors before the sowing. 20 Pease forwarded
with horn. 76 Plants young, covered with a vail in the night. 77 Plums kept
from cleaving. 89 Pomgranate tree to bear fruit. 3 Pompeons, Musmellons,
Strawberries, and Artichokes to make them prosper and grow great. 152 Poses and
Emblems of Checker-work. 45
R. RAdishes young all the year. 68 Refreshing pots with new mold. 36 Rich
earth for pots. 70 Roots of young plants well watered, 77 Rooting of seeds
within door before they be sowed abroad, 16 Rosemary to make prosper
exceedingly, 155 Roses late. 26 Roses early. 51 Roses growing at Christmas. 69
Roses a practice upon. 75 Rose-trees, horn will forward. 76
S. SAge, to have great store speedily. 147 Salt and earth putrified together
to forward plants. 22 Salt mold for your pots. 35 Seacoal-ashes to kill worms
and weeds. 23 Seed when to sow in respect of the Moon. 72 Seeds to grow the
better, outlandish or English. 129 Several waters for plants. 49 Shavings of
horn steeped in water for plants. 75 Sides of Borders in works. 45 Soil for
outlandish plants. 42 Sope-ashes used often to forward Pease, fruit, etc. 23
Sow when, that you would have to seed. 44 Stockgilliflowers double or single
how to increase. 148 Stove to keep Dwarf-trees in. 9 Stove kept with small
charge. 10 Stove for all vegetables good cheap; 17 Strawberies to grow great.
53 Sunbeams on Trees how to multiply. 2
T. TRees against Brickwalls. 1 Trees wrapped about with hay. 3 Trees when to
place in a stove. 10 Trees cropping. 78 Trees and hedges kept backward by the
ignorance of the Planter. p. 124 Trees when to proin them. 77 Trees to
transplant, to know the just time. 120 Trees of Time, Hysop, Lavender,
Rosemary, etc. how to have. 148 Trees to help, whose stock or fruit begineth to
rot. 146 Trees to make flourish wonderfully. 156
V. VInes to bear early. 14 Vines cut to bear quickly. 40 Vine how to stay
bleeding. 110 Vineyards hew to have, bear grapes the first year. 142 Violets or
Strawberies covered with sand or pots. 27 Voiding of frosts in May. 37
W. WAlks of green trees in winter. 47 Watering by a List. 34 Weeds, Worms,
Rushes, to destroy, etc. a^ also to enrich ground. 108 Weeding of Woad saved.
ibid. Wine, Aquavitae, Wine-Lees water with. 21 Wines good of English grapes.
56 Worms prevented. 29

The Second Part OF THE Garden of EDEN. Diverse conceited Experiments in Trees,
Plants, Flowers, Herbs, and Fruits.
Number. 1.
Fruit and Flowers to come early, and before others, or late and after others,
or to have them growing all the year.
Sect. 1.
SIR Francis Walsingham caused diverse Apricock Trees to be planted against a
south Wall, Planting of Trees against brick walls.
and their Branches to be born up also against the wall according to the manner
of Vines, whereby his Plumbs did ripen three or four weeks before any other
that grew at large in any Orchard, and had not the benefit of the Suns
reflection. Hereupon I do infer, How to multiply the Sunbeams upon Trees.
That if every Tree were planted in a several Tabernacle, or such Concave as
were aptest for the receiving and reflecting of the Sunbeams upon the Fruit;
and the same also either lined with Lead or Tin plates, or garnished with
glasses of steel or crystalline, that by such means, peradventure, the
reflection might be multiplied, to the greater forwarding of the Fruit,
especially the Trees being Dwarf-trees, whereby the Sun might reflect both from
the sides and from the ground, unto the uppermost branch or bough of the Tree:
Olive, Pomgranate, Orange and Lemond trees to bear fruit.
And by these helps the Olive, Pomgranate, Orange and Lemond trees, and such
like, might happily bear their Fruit in our cold Clymate. Quaere, Sol and
Vulcan meeting together in the walls
if these walls did stand so conveniently, as they might also be continually
warmed with the Kitchen fires, as serving for Backs unto your Chimneys, if so
they should not likewise find some little furtherance in their ripening.

2. Quaere also, Trees wrapped about with Hay.
If wrapping of ropes of Hay about the bodies of the Trees to defend them from
the winds, and other cold that happens most in the night season.

Nourishing Liquor, rich Mould.
3. Water these Trees with nourishing and feeding Liquors, and give a new supply
now and then of richer Mould unto them; and if you will prevent the dangers of
the frost, which they are subject unto in their blossom; To prevent the fr^sts
in May.
then lay open the roots for a time, that the sap may not rise too fast; or if
your Orchard consist of Dwarf-trees, growing in great pots of stone, or vessels
of wood, you may remove them from time to time as you see cause, and so
preserve them from all injury of the weather.

Early fruit without the help of Brick walls.
4. And lest I should leave all other men destitute of early Fruit, whose
ability will not serve to compass their Orchards with Brick-walls (which would
prove an excessive charge) my advice is, that their Orchard should consist
wholly of Dwarf trees, over which, being close compact together, they may
spread a canvas tent removeable at pleasure, Canvas tent.
or defending only the North, East, and Northeast winds from them with canvas
walls; Canvas Walls.
which canvas they may hire of the Upholsters after the rate of one penny the
ell for many months together; for notwithstanding this employment it serves
the Painters turn sufficiently. Neither ought this course seem very chargeable
unto us, if we do either consider the infinite number of Trees that a small
square will receive, if they be closely packed together; or if we do estimate
the profit that will arise of such forward fruit, which will easily countervail
the hire of our canvas. And yet for our better encouragement herein, I have
heard that also noted of our best experienced Practisers this way, Dwarf trees
more fortunate ^hen others.
That these kind of Dwarf-trees are commonly more fortunate in their bearing,
then our ordinary trees, whose bodies are greater, and carry their heads so
high into the weather; and it shall not be amiss, notwithstanding these walls
or covers, Preparing of the ground for Dwarf-trees.
to place these Dwarf-trees (especially if they grow in vessels removeable)
either upon Pavement of Freestone or Brick, or upon a platform of Gravel,
whereby the Sun may reflect the stronger upon them, always provided that you
have also care to keep them sufficiently moist, and from being withered or
parched with the heat, The manner how to water them.
(which you may easily prevent in the time of dry weather) by watering them
continually by way of filtration out of apt vessels placed for the purpose. And
though your trees be fixed and growing in the ground, yet it shall not be amiss
to have a flore of hard gravel round about them to help the reflection of the
Sun, so as you have care either to leave sufficient store of earth about the
body of every Tree, and the same earth to be laid in the form of a concave
receptive to receive such rain water as falls, and to convey that unto the
root; or else if you will cover the whole face of the ground with gravel, you
must then at the foot of every tree thrust in a pipe of stone (for which
purpose, and to avoid charge, the neck of these stone bodies wherein the
Goldfiners do use to draw their strong water, will serve very aptly) which must
receive a continual watering per laneam linguam, as before, The bigness of
these Orchards.
to keep them moist: And here (if it were not for charge) I could wish all
these Orchards that are replenished with Dwarf-trees, to consist of small
squares, so as they might be ten or twelve yards every way in length and
breadth, and no more; The hight of the walls of this Orchard.
about which squares I would also erect the cheapest wall that could be
devised, which should not exceed three or four foot in height; the use whereof
is so manifest, as that I shall not need to publish the same in any plainer
terms. A Stove to keep dwarf trees in.
But if to have early Fruit, we do neither regard labor nor charge, then let us
build a square and close room, having many degrees of shelves, one above
another, in which we may aptly place so many of these Dwarf-trees as we shall
think good; in time of cold weather, we may keep the same warm in nature of a
Stove, with a small fire being made in such Furnaces, and in such manner as I
will at all times be ready to show to such as are willing to make any use
thereof; and if the weather be fair and open, and that the room be made full of
windows or open sides, we may for such time use the benefit of the Sunshine,
or carry them abroad at our pleasure; and for the forwarding of your Fruits,
When to place the Trees in a Stove.
you shall not need to begin this practice till the sap begin to rise, and then
but for a few months only, except in the night time, when we shall fear any
frosty or other nipping weather. A Stove kept with small charge.
There be diverse persons whom this secret does fit very well, and may perform
the same without expense of money, amongst which number are all such as are
forced in respect of their trade to keep any great or continual fires, as
Brewers, Diers, Soap-boilers, Refiners of Sugar, and the owners of
Glass-houses, and such like, who may easily convey the heat or steam of their
fires (which is now utterly lost) into some private room adjoining, wherein they
may bestow their Fruit trees to their greater pleasure and contentment. Winter
Parlors made Orchards.
Neither do I think it an unseemly sight to have some dozen or twenty of these
Dwarf-trees ranked in good order upon high shelves in our winter-Parlors, where
we may also make a second use of our chargeable fires. Yet this caveat let me
give by the way (which I learned by the experience of my friend who in one
frosty night, A caveat for dwarf trees that have been tenderly kept.
by the negligence of his Servant, lost 20 of the fairest Carnation Pots that I
have seen, being all of them very full of Buds, and many of them blown out in
the dead of winter, and all this happened by leaving them only one frosty
night abroad) that when we have made our Dwarf-trees thus tender, by defending
them from all cold and hard weather, by a close and warm Stove, that we must be
very careful, that if (to take the advantage of a shower of rain, or some other
fair and sunny weather, we happen to carry them abroad) that about the Sunset,
or rather somewhat before, we convey them again to their place of refuge, and
some think it necessary to expose them to the air only in rainy and temperate
days, and rather to lose the rain, then to set them abroad in a cold day. I
hope I shall not here need to give any advice for the necessary watring of
these Trees in their convenient time, Watering the dwarf trees in the Stove.
because there is no man so ignorant, but that he knows that all Vegetables
do receive both their life and nourishment from heat and moisture; only they
may make their choice (if they please) of these several manners, and likewise
of some of these compound liquors as are elsewhere in this Discourse handled
more at large, whereby to water them in a more fructifying manner then any of
our ordinary means does afford, set your pots in pans of water that has been
before exposed to the Sun.

Vines to bear early.
5. The blood of beasts tempered with some lime and earth (for without lime the
blood engenders great store of worms) is most excellent to lay at the roots of
Vines to hasten the ripening of the Grapes: Several earths or moulds.
Quaere, if the same be not good for all other Trees and Plants to that end. I
have also both heard and read of Pigeons dung greatly commended for the
forwarding of Fruit Trees. Quaere, the ashes of Beans stalks or Vines, or of
salt alone, or salt and earth first putrified together, of Sope-ashes, and all
those sundry sorts of Soil more plentifully displayed in my Discourse upon the
vegetable Salt, if any of these being applied in due proportion, and in the
true season of the year, will not afford some expedition in this work, and how
often it shall be necessary to change and renew your soil in one year, if you
mean to have the first Fruit, and before all other. Quaere, Lime.
of Lime, and of such earth as is found in hollow Willow trees, and of Fearn
first putrified.

6. Nipping off Grapes.
When the Grapes are knit, you must nip off the new sprigs from time to time as
they put forth, and thereby (as some think) your Grapes will both grow the
greater, and ripen the sooner.

Rooting of seeds within doors before they be sowed abroad.
7 Mr. Googe in his book of Husbandry commends the mingling of stones with
earth, and so laid up together in a vessel one year before you plant them, and
by this means you may have store of Sets very speedily to make Hedges withal,
by planting them in a inner Garden, as he terms it, Quaere, if Pease, Beans,
Pompeons, Musk-Mellons, and all other Pulse and Seeds which we would have to
come early, were used in this manner for a season, in some small pots, or other
vessels, and filled with rich mould, and watered with the Liquors ante number. 3.
being first made blood warm, and the same pots and vessels also placed in a
gentle Stove or some other convenient place aptly warmed with the fire, and
after in March if it prove warm, or else in the beginning of April, if the same
were sown, if so they would not be much forwarded.

8. A Stove for all Vegetables good cheap.
And for the keeping of any Flowers or Plants abroad, as also of these seeds
thus sown within doors, or any other Pots of Flowers, or Dwarf-trees in a
temperate heat, with small charge, you may perform the same by hanging a cover
of Tin or other metal over the vessel wherein you boil your Beef, or drive
your Buck, which having a pipe in the top, and being made in the fashion of a
funnel, may be conveyed into what place of your Orchard or Garden you shall
think meet; which room, if it were so made, as that at your pleasure it may
become either close or open, you may keep it in the nature of a Stove in the
night season, or in any other cold weather, and in the Summer time you may use
the benefit of the Sunbeams, to comfort and cherrish your Plants or Seeds. And
this way, if I be not deceived, you may have both Orange, Lemons, Pomgranet
trees, yea peradventure Coloqnintida, and Pepper trees, and such like: The
sides of this room, if you think good, may be plaistered, and the top thereof
may be covered with some streined Canvas to take away at your pleasure. Quaere,
if it be best to let the pipe of lead to breath out at the end only, or else
at diverse small vents which may be made in that part of the pipe which passes
along the Stove. I fear that this is but a mere conceit, because the steam of
water will not extend far; but if the cover to your pot be of metal, and made
so close that no air can breath out saving at the pipe, which is sodred or well
closed in some part of the cover, then it seems probable, this cover may be
put on after the pot is scummed.

9. Mr. Googe cites an opinion of some men that hold, Pease and other seeds
steeped in several liquors before the sowing.
that Pease being laid in water a day or two before they be sown, will grow the
sooner. Quaere of Milk, Spirit of wine, or water that has been long infused
upon dung, or waste soape ashes, or common ashes, whose heart and salt has not
been drawn out before; quaere also, whether the waters aforesaid being cold, or
blood-warm do serve best for this purpose; quaere of steeping them in Sack or
Malmsey, White wine, aqua composita, etc.

Parsley to grow speedily.
10. I have been credibly informed, that if you make a lay of powdered lime and
ashes, Compound earth.
and then a lay of earth and dung, and then a lay of lime, and upon that a lay
of good fat mould, and do therein sow your Parsely seeds being first steeped in
white wine, Wine, Aqua vi^ae, Wine lees, water with
and then water them presently, that so the heat of the lime and dung will
force up a wonderful and sudden spring in a few hours: Quaere, if there be any
good use of this secret though it should be true; quaere also of watering the
said seeds with Aqua vitae, or wine Lees. Fabam referunt novem diebus obrutam
oleo, Beans steeped in oil.
germinare in duabus horis impositam pani calido. Cardan. de rer. varietate,
878.

11. Gunpowder, Saltpeter, and salt.
Some commend the applying of Gunpowder to the roots of Plants to forward
them; quaere of Saltpeter, and quaere of the Salt that the Petermen derive from
the Salpeter; quaere of the ashes of every Plant bestowed upon it self. Ashes.


Compound earth.
12. Take one part of Soot and one part Cowdung, and two parts earth; plant the
Slips of your Carnations therein after they are well rooted. Quaere of Roses
and other plants.

Cherries kept backward by a tent.
13. Sir Francis Carew, as I have heard, did spread a tent over a Cherry-tree
that was well taken, and before they were grown to any great bigness, and
thereby defended them from ripening; now and then also sprinkling water upon
the Tent.

Salt and earth putrified together.
14. Quaere of putrefying of salt and earth together in some apt place, before
you apply the same to the roots of your Fruit trees, or Flowers, whether the
same will not help your Plants forward?

15. Soap ashes used often to forward Pease; Fruit, etc.
Quaere of strowing Sope-ashes at several times upon Pease, or at the roots of
other Fruits or Flowers before they be ripe, what effects will follow; and so
of salt, lime, and all other kinds of enriching soil. These ashes are reported
to kill worms, Seacoal ashes.
weeds and rushes where they are bestrewed. Quaere of the use of Sea-coal-ashes.

16. Arching the ground
Quaere of arching of a small Orchard for Dwarf-trees, and fire placed under
the arches in cold weather; quaere also of planting of great store of pieces of
glass upon the whole face of the ground to procure a stronger reflection.
Glasses upon the ground.


Herbs and flowers kept by covering them as they grow.
17. There were diverse dainty fresh sallat herbs presented at Christmas, to Sir
Cutbert Bucks Lord Mayor of London by an Italian, which he had only covered in
the earth as they grew. Quaere if it be not better to cover them over with sand
than with earth, to defend them from putrefaction; quaere how many sorts of
Herbs and Flowers may be kept this way. Plus number. 19.

Backwarding of Fruits and Flowers several ways.
18. Cut Roses in the end of April; (quaere if the bud only, or the buds and
other shoots must be cut off) when they are full of young buds, and the
branches will bud again when all other Roses have done blowing; this I did see
experimented in Oxford in July 1585. Cut Roses monthly one under another, and
see what effects will follow. I have proved the cutting off of such
Gilli-flowers stalks as began to spindle, and by that means they put forth
their buds much later; quaere in what other Fruits or Flowers this practice may
be used; quaere also, if Flowers or other Dwarf-trees may not be hindered from
bearing their fruit early, by keeping such pots in shady places, or keeping
them within doors for a time, until you would have them to come forward; Beans
and Pease cut down betimes.
quaere of Beans and Pease cut down in April or May; Fruit kept backward.
quaere of twisting the branch of any Tree or Flower, and binding the same so
twisted to a stick; quaere of binding a band straight about the branch of any
Tree or Flower, or winding of Packthread many folds about the same. And quaere
how long such fruit or flowers will hang upon their branches being thus used.
Also when you have wreathed a branch of a Cherry-tree, or Plum-tree with your
hand somewhat hard, then stay it there with two splents, and vide quid fiet.
Also prove how little of the bark will serve a branch to convey the sap up to
the fruit, and take away all the rest with a knife. Late Roses
Roses have been tried to come late by binding the bark hard of the branches
whereon they grow.

19. Covering of Violets or Strawberries with sand or pots.
Quaere of covering over the Violets that come about Michaelmas with sand,
sicut ante number. 17. and so of Strawberries that blow in cold weather; but this
covering for Flowers, I think, would be done by whelming of apt earthen pots
upon them, which pots may also be covered over with earth or sand if you see
cause, for that otherwise you shall deface the Flowers. Quaere of Artichoke
roots covered so all the winter to make them more forward in the Spring, and so
of the like profitable Plants; quaere if it be not necessary to have earthen
covers or caps to fit these pots, which you may take off at your pleasure in
warm and rainy, or in sunny weather, and after close them up and cover them
again, as before. You may also cover each Dwarf-tree either growing in a pot or
standing in the earth with a several cap made of wood according to the bigness
or spreading of the branches, by which means you may either keep the fruit long
upon the tree, or after they are blossomed in the spring time, defend them from
the frosts in May, and so you shall have many times fruits when other men shall
fail and want them.

Pots divided in halves for Flowers.
20. For the forwarding of all the seeds of Pompeons, Musk-Mellons, Cucumber
seeds, Artichoke seeds, etc. you may procure diverse earthen pots of a
reasonable bigness and well gl^zed within to be made either of the fashion of
Gillifl were pots, or round, upright and of an equal bigness, Pots without
bott^ms and steeplewise.
but let them be made either without bottoms in the fashion of a steeple or
else parted into two equal halves, from the uppermost edge even to the center
of the bottom, in the midst of which bottom there may be a hole made of a
convenient largeness; Prevention of worms.
upon which (lest any worm should enter) lay a thin flat piece of lead full of
small holes, through which the water may pass; let the sides of these pots meet
so close as that thereby also no worm may enter to bite or gnaw the Seeds;
Ordering these pots.
these pots you may set abroad in warm and sunny weather, or when there falls
any temperate rain; and at all other times you may either keep them within
doors, or place them in your warm Balneo, ante number. 8. and by this means, as I
guess, you may have very early and forward Plants, from the which having
artificially and workmanly taken the loose sides without loosening the earth
from the roots, you may place the Plants with the earth about them, in
convenient holes made beforehand for that purpose; or if you set these divided
pots into the earth at the first planting of your seeds, then may you cover and
uncover them at your own pleasure, which other pots having holes in the tops of
them, in the which you may place stone Funnels, whereby to retain the rain that
falls in the night, being first ordered sicut ante number. 19. is more fully
handled; and when you think that the Plants have rooted deep enough, then you
may dig about the sides of your pots, and so gently remove them, leaving the
Plants fast growing behind in the earth. Pots for Dwarf-trees.
But if your purpose be to plant either Pepper trees, or Coloquintida trees,
Orange or Lemon trees, Pomgranate trees or Almond trees, or such like, then you
may likewise use pots of the same fashion, saving only that they must be made
of a far greater receipt, because they are to yield a sufficient nourishment to
a greater Plant, and that it will be requisite to have four large and strong
ears to every pot; Tubs for Dwarf-trees.
although I know that some do rather commend large deep and strong tubs, well
pitched or cemented within and without, which may be transported upon great
Coulstaves or other carriages. And peradventure it shall not be amiss to have
these divided pots without any earthen bottoms, instead whereof you may bind a
strong and double oyled paper, Bottoms of oyled paper
having a large hole therein, which may be fast tied about the skirts of your
pot with Packthred, which paper bottoms may very well decay and rot during the
time that each Plant will require for his deep rooting; and if you doubt that
the worm will be the rather busy with the paper because of the oil, then it
shall not be amiss to make the oil somewhat bitter by a decoction of Wormwood
therein, and by this means you may easily draw your pot out of the earth,
without loosening the earth at all that cleaves to the roots of your Plants.
Holes in the lips of the pots.
I could also wish that each of the aforesaid pots should have some small holes
in the lip of every pot, especially if they want ears, that thereby thin plated
lead might be fastened by small wiers; in which leads, having your Prints for
that purpose, Leads with letters hanging at the pots.
you may strike two or three such Letters of the A B C as you shall think good,
which letters you may always refer to some paper book, wherein you may set down
in particular the name of the Seed or Plant, the ordering, the season wherein
you set them, and all other circumstances whatsoever, whereby you may learn
either to iterate or avoid the like practice the next time. Watering by a List.
And it shall not be amiss in a time of drought or dry weather, as also in the
first sowing or planting of your Simples, either to water them by a list, as
appears more fully ante, number. 4. or else to place every pot in an earthen
pan, Nourishing waters.
half full of such water as has been first infused in dung, sope-ashes, etc.
and exposed a few days to the Sun before you do use it in this manner; for by
this means the earth will draw or suck up sufficient moisture at the holes in
the bottom, whereby the root shall be kindly watered. Neither is it amiss, as I
think, B^rthen pans to place your pots in.
to have shells or pans of earth, wherein to place all your artificial pots,
which may receive such rain water as soaketh through at the bottoms of your
pots, which water because it contains the strength or salt of the earth,
would be after every great shower returned upon the pots again. Salt mold for
your pots.
But the first and principal care of all other must be to fill your pot with a
fat and rich mould, whereof there is good choice in this small Treatise, which
being now and then refreshed with fresh earth at the top and sides by opening
the pot, and paring away first of the old earth, Refreshing with new mold.
and then filling them up again with new, may peradventure give great
furtherance to your desires. And if you would have your dwarf-trees growing in
the aforesaid pots kept so backward as that they may bear their fruit after all
other Fruit Trees of the same kind, then you may in the beginning of the year
give them only the morning Sun, Backwarding of your Dwarf-trees or Flowers.
or but one hours Sun in the morning, and another in the evening, or else you
may place them in shady places, till you would have them to come forward; and
hereby you may keep your Cherry-trees as backward as you please; Avoiding of
the frosts in May.
and so likewise if your desire be to avoid the dangerous frosts in May, then
must you keep these pots, trees and flowers in some close room from the Sun,
thereby to defend them from their early blooming, Hiding of the art.
whereby those later frosts being spent before you expose them to the weather,
the fruit shall be in no danger at the time of the knitting; and by this
practice you may happen to have Cherries upon your Dwarf-trees when the great
Cherry-orchard in Kent shall fail. And because every spectator or beholder of
these conceited trees may not presently look into the invention hereof, it
shall not be amiss to make either so many holes in the ground, or so many brick
receptacles as will receive your pots all the Summer time, wherein they may be
so closely placed even with the ground, and all the brims of the pot so covered
with earth, as that they shall seem to be growing ends in ordinary manner, to
the great admiration of all such as shall behold them.

The fashion of your Stove for the Dwarf-trees.
20. Your Stove or close Orchard may be made to open at all sides saving the
North, in the manner of the shop-windows in London, whose board and timber must
be well pitched, oiled or greased over with the fat of the powder-beef-pot; but
then perhaps it will be offensive to your apparel, because it is over long in
drying; the roof also may be divided into four parts, and each part so placed
as that it may be drawn up with a pulley, thereby to receive the Sun and Rain
when you shall think good; and in cold weather, or in the winter season to be
kept warm, according to the manner set down ante, number. 8. But how to build a
house in such form as that the Sun both in the Summer and also in the Winter
season may shine therein very plentifully, see the opinion of Cardanus cited in
the Collection of secrets, made by Wickerus, p. 591. Quaere of a round Stove
turning on a pin like a Windmil, and being full of glass-windows.

Forwarding of fruit by a tent.
21. A tent spread over a Cherry-tree, or any other Fruit-tree, and receiving
that vaporous heat, ante number. 8. will help greatly to forward the blossoming
and ripening of any fruit, being used in the night time, and in all other sharp
and cold weather; all the Art will be herein to have some speedy means of
pitching or spreading this tent, and taking the same down again.

Cutting of Vines to bear quickly.
22. When you plant the cuttings of Vines, choose such of the last years shoots
as may have some part of the former years stock cut off with them, and so you
shall have Grapes a year sooner at the least.

23. Quaere, Nipping off the first blossoms.
if the taking away of the first blossoms of Fruits, will force any Fruit-tree
to bring forth new blossoms, and thereby to bear fruit a great deal later; post
81.

24. Glasses on your young plants.
When you have first pricked in your seeds into the ground, set over each of
them a glass which is broad below, and the bottom broken out, and whose neck is
narrow, but leave the mouth open; these glasses defend off the cold air,
increase the heat of the sun, and keep the Plants moist; because the water as
it ascends by the attraction of the sun, so it slippeth down again by the
gliding sides of the glass; for I have seen in dry weather, the ground which
has been covered with one of these glasses much blacker and moister then any
other earth round about it; this is done to defend a young plant from the
nipping cold, and from the parching heat, until it have gotten up to some
growth whereby it may defend it self the better, and then you may remove the
glass.

Soil for outlandish plants.
25. Let every outlandish Plant be set in such soil as comes nearest in kind
to that soil wherein it did naturally grow beyond the Seas; or if you can,
bring over sufficient of the same earth wherein it grew.

To forward Almond trees
26. Steep the Almonds with their shells in milk two or three days, then make a
trench of good dung of two foot deep, upon which make a lay of fine sifted
earth of a hand breadth deep, into which prick your Almonds, then cover them
with more sifted earth, and every year remove them, always planting them in the
same trenched ground, and so they will grow a yard in height every year, as Sir
Edward Denny of Ireland assured me, upon his own trial; these because they are
dainty and shady trees, are fit to make stately Walks in Noblemens Gardens.

27. Orange, Lemon and Almond trees forwarded.
For the forwarding of your seeds of Oranges, Lemonds, Almonds, Pomgranates,
etc. use the same order as is here set down, for Musk-mellon seeds, and then
remove your Plants into pots, which by apt covers you may sufficiently defend
from all manner of cold weather, not exposing them to the air, but only in a
sunny day.

When to sow that which you wou d have to seed.
28. Whatsoever you would have to run to seed apace, sow that seed either in
three days before, or three days after the full of the Moon; quaere, if the
three first days be not the better; and quaere, if the day of the full be not
the best of all other.

High borders of Time, Hysop, etc. speedily.
29. If you board up earth to the height and breadth of a privy hedge that is of
six or seven years growth with boards that be thick and well seasoned, and
bored through full of large and slope holes, or rather being full of long
slits; after the earth is well settled, you may plant the top of the border and
sides likewise with Hysop, Time, Sides of borders in works.
Lavender, etc. or else you may plant the sides with some contrary Plant to
make the one to set off the other the better; This way you may make dainty
Borders of Carnations if you keep the sides cut in frets or other works,
planting the Carnations on the top of the borders; or if you please, you may
cut out square holes like checker boards, Checker-works, Pos^s and Emblems.
or fair Roman Letters in poses, or emblems in the sides of the borders, and so
keep them according to the works. By this devise you may also make Mounts,
Pyramids etc. Mou^ts, Pyramids.
according to the shape of the case wherein you plant; and it will seem very
strange being set of such plants as do ordinarily grow very low and near the
ground. An artificial tree or arbor.
This way also a man may plant an artificial Tree or Arbor, planting the body
and arms of the tree with Herbs or Flowers; and to cover the secret, you may
hide the arms and body with the bark of trees or moss; as also Dogs, Dogs,
Lions, Fowl, Fish, etc. artificial.
Lions, Bulls, Men, Fishes, Foul, etc. having hollow moulds for the same,
either of stone or wood well pitched within and without: There may be also
pipes of lead conveyed through the bodies of such forms, which must be stopped at
the ends, and have diverse little holes in them, whereby water may be conveyed
with a Funnel into the pipe, unto every part of the earth.

30. Walks of green trees in winter.
If it be possible any way without fire or great charge, to have green Oaks,
Elms, or other Trees at Christmas, then I hold this for one of the likeliest,
To graff in the bud or otherwise any of the aforesaid Trees upon the Bay or
Holly-tree which seem to have strong and hot sap by their greenness in winter
time. If this prove, you may graff and imp in the bud all sorts of Fruit Trees
upon the aforesaid stock, whereby you may have most comfortable and dainty
Walks in your Orchard or Garden. Mr. Maskalls Book of the art of grafting, fol.
56. Some commend the planting of Fir-trees in Walks, for this purpose.

Iron backs to your pots.
31. Quaere if it be not good in the Summer and Spring time to place concave
backs of iron or tin plates in every pot wherein you have planted either
Dwarf-trees or Flowers, and so to remove your pots from time to time as they
may best receive the reflection of the Sun, whereby to ripen them the sooner;
use the like against your clusters of Grapes. Quaere if it be not good to plant
Vines in moist grounds in respect of this secret.

A second crop of the same beans
32. If you cut down Beans as soon as they have done bearing, and that the year
prove a dripping year, you may have a second crop growing from the same stalk
that will come late; this I have proved in my Garden in St. Martins-lane.
Quaere of Pease, otherwise you must water them presently upon the cutting down,
and now and then after, as the weather shall give occasion.

33. Several waters.
I think of all waters that are not infused, rain water to be the best of all
other to water your delicate plants with; but if for want thereof you shall be
forced to water them with common water, yet let the same stand in a great stone
or wooden vessel three or four days in the Sun, before you water therewith; but
for the better forwarding of your Fruit and Flowers, you may prove brackish
water, viz. such as comes near in proportion of saltness to the Seawater,
which is one part salt to twenty parts of water, or much thereabouts; but this
may not be used often for burning of your plants; or rather you may try water
infused upon common ashes, or sopeashes, and all manner of dung, or wherein
there has been store of Hay, Litter or some other Herbs infused; you may also
prove Wine, Milk, Wine-Lees, Strong-Beer, and Aqua composita, if they be not
too chargeable. Quaere of Sopesuds and powder Beef broth; quaere if it be not
better also to water your plants with the said water or liquors being made
first blood warm, plus post. 35. Quaere of the strength or heart of much earth,
extracted by common water, or rain water, and then evaporated to a small
quantity, wherewith you may water your plants to make them increase exceedingly.

34. Backwarding of Fruits and Flowers.
Quaere of grafting Cherry-trees upon Apple Trees or Pear Trees, and so
generally of all Flowers and Fruit that may be grafted, if being grafted upon
such kind as be late and backward in bearing, if so the same will not bear
their fruit much later.

35. Roses early.
About three weeks or a month before their usual time of bearing, water your
Roses morning and evening only with warm water, and by this means a Cambridge
man had Roses yearly some twenty four days before others; quaere of this
practice in all other Flowers, especially the water being first prepared ut
supra, number. 33.

Early Cherries.
36. A Frenchman did greatly commend unto me the applying of unfleakt lime to
the roots of Cherry-trees being first made bare in a convenient time of the
year, ( quaere if it be not better to sleak it first with water) and this for
the forwarding of them in their bearing. Quaere if one part lime and one part
earth, or one part lime and one part hors-dung. This practice destroys the
Tree in a few years, but that loss is supplied with the advantage in the price
of such early fruit. Quaere of Sopeashes laid at their roots.

37. Artichoke and Stawberries to grow great
Lay sheeps dung in soak in water for a convenient time, and water your
Artichokes therewith, and it will make them very great: So likewise will the
water wherein dung has been steeped make Strawberries very large and great; An
ancient Citizen in London did use in the winter time to burn the earth from the
roots of his Artichokes, and instead thereof to lay in some of his waste
Sopeashes, and he found the same to forward them greatly.

38. A speedy Orchard.
Slope your Stock upward, and slope your Cions downward, and join back to back,
bind them together as Colliers do their whips, and close the joints with
tempered Loam and Moss, or rather with wax, ut postea. 110. This is called the
Whip-stock grafting, and you may in this manner graff a whole bow of a Tree to
have an Orchard that shall bear fruit speedily.

Grapes growing late and kept long.
39. Put the bunches of Grapes after they are knit into great and apt glasses,
having two mouths, holes or little pipes, the one just opposite to the other,
viz. the one upward, the other downward, whereby both the water and the sun may
have issue: And when you fear the frosts you may stop up the ends closs, and by
this means you may happen to have Grapes growing upon the Vines at Christmas;
or else when the Grapes are ripe, if you cut off a long branch of the Vine
which has one, two, or three clusters of Grapes upon it, and at either end of
the cutting, if you put a Pomwater, and every three days or six days change
your Apples, tying a thread in the midst of the cutting, and so hang the same
up in a cool and dry place, they will keep fresh a long time. Some thrust only
the stalk whereon the bunch grows in a sound and lasting Apple, and so hang
it up; or else dig a hole in the earth, and lay good store of straw therein,
and then Grapes, and then straw again, and over them lay boards, which must be
so covered over with sand, as that no air may enter; and by this means, as I am
informed by a stranger, they will last a long time, vid. post. 109.

Good wines of English Grapes.
40. I think it not impertinent here to set down a means how we may of our
English Grapes purchase an excellent good Wine; and the rather, for that I
find the same to be both probable and possible, both by some antiquities and
experiences set down by Mr. Barnabie Googe in his Book of Husbandry, as also
by that inevitable argument which he draws from the same altitude of the Pole
wherein we are, and under which there be found beyond the seas most fruitful
Vineyards, and which do yield both good and pleasant wines, as about Backrach,
Colin, Andernach, and diverse other places in Germany, which have (as he
affirms in his Epistle to the Reader) the self same latitude and disposition
of the Heavens that we have, whereby is sufficiently confuted that common,
though erroneous received opinion against our Climate, that it should not be
hot enough for that Plant; nay he proves further that the wideness to the
South is not altogether the cause of good Wines, as appears in that you have
about Orleans great store of good and excellent Wine, whereas if you go to
Bruges, two days journey farther to the South, you shall find a Wine not worth
the drinking. The like is of Paris and Barleduke (as Mr. D. Dale did inform
him) the one being southward, with naughty wines; and the other a great way
farther to the North, with as good Wines as may be; and thus far Mr. Googe. Mr.
Holinshed also, in that his painful and commendable History of England, does
constantly affirm, That this Island has been greatly replenished with
Vineyards, and that it is not to be doubted but that if the same Plants were by
continuance of time, and good ordering of them made familiar with our soil, we
should have both full and rich wines of our own growing. And here I have just
cause to accuse the extreme negligence, and blockish ignorance of our people,
who do most unjustly lay their wrongful accusations upon the soil, whereas the
greatest, if not the whole fault justly may be removed upon themselves. For
whereas neither in Pasture nor arable grounds they look for any great or
continual increase without all the due and necessary circumstances of Husbandry
be performed to the same; yet in Vines they only expect a plentiful Harvest
(or else they condemn the soil) although they bestow no other manuring,
proining or ordering of them, but only cut and proin them in the 12 days, and
that very careless, and without any due regard or choice had of the branches
which should be taken away close to the stock, and which should be cut off
between the third and fourth joint, and maintaining as well the waste and
sucking roots, as the principal and master roots which ought most chiefly to be
cherished and preserved. But because this matter requires a large discourse,
and for that Mr. Barnaby Googe has very sufficiently handled this subject
already, I will refer you to his labors, by which you may learn both the
election of your soil, and the best situation thereof, the planting of your
Sets, the proining both of the Stock and Roots, the turning and translation of
the ground, the choice of the best and aptest dung for them, with all other
necessary circumstances requisite to the Plant, unless peradventure there may
be some few observations else to be learned, either at the hands of an
experienced French Gardner, or that you shall think good to put in practice
some one or other of these few conceited helps for the better forwarding of
them in this our cold Climate; only I have thought it necessary for the
avoiding of all French and Spanish objections, to set down a new, and yet a
most assured and undoubted course how to furnish our selves with such store of
good and perfect wines, as that we shall not need either to be beholding to the
Frenchmen our doubtful friends, or to the Spaniards our assured enemies, for
this sweet and delicate kind of liquor; always provided that we use some
careful means at the first to store our selves with the right and natural
plants of those Vines, whose wine we desire to have; for the bringing over of
which plants from beyond the Seas, if we cannot otherwise furnish our selves of
them within our own Continent, we may use that pretty ingenious help for the
carrying of our Sets being well covered with earth, and conveyed into close
vessels, as Mr. Googe in his aforesaid Book has in plain terms disclosed. Then
supposing all the skilful experience of France to be first showed and performed
in our English Vineyard, and that yet notwithstanding there wants a
sufficient and perfect digestion to bring the Grape to his full ripeness and
maturity let us according to the French manner press out their sweet and
pleasant juice such as it is, and by sufficient decoction and ebullition bring
the one moity thereof to the fullness of a cute, which being cold, we may well
mix with equal proportions of the crude and raw wine, or so proportion the same
as it may be most pleasing to our own mouths, leaving them to the weather till
they have inseperably united and incorporated themselves together; and this is
no strange practice, but only drawn from the Spaniard and the Greek who
cutteth both his Malmseys and Muskadines, and for the most part also his Canary
Sack both to make them last the longer, and also to be more fuller of wine.
Neither are we here to be discouraged at the charge of fire, or the wasting of
that faint flegmatique liquor that must of necessity be used in this work, for
that (if every acre of ground will yield 700 gallons of wine, as Cato, Varro,
and Colnmella do testify, or as the Vineyards of Seneca did yield with trade a
Thousand gallons upon every acre) I think we shall pay our selves with a higher
interest then the Statute of 13 EliZ. will allow. Yet because I will not
altogether persevere in Vestigiis patrum, I have thought good to set down
another course out of mine own experience, whereby (if we shall be forced to
use any outward helps in the default of our Soil or Climate) we may yet by Art
supply that unto our selves, which nature has denied to perform of her self:
Then having first expressed such liquors as our English Vines being well
ordered will afford, let us to every gallon thereof add one pound of the best
Rasins of the Sun, or Malaghie Rasins first washed in some change of waters; or
if you will aim at a Canarie Sack, then choose the best of the Xanthe Currens
you can get, being well cured and conditioned, and take a like proportion of
them to each gallon of your crude wine; leave them in this infusion or
imbibition, until the liquor have extracted both the tincture and strength of
the fruit; then draw the wine from the fruit, and when these two liquors have
in time wrought themselves into one body, they will become a most pleasant
wine, either resembling the Bastard, the Muskadine or Canarie Sack, either to
be drunk alone, or serving to compass or taste any other wine withal, according
to the proportion of the fruit which you infuse, and according to the
workmanship which you shall show therein; for herein I am assured that I have
given light sufficient to an ingenious Artist, both to check and mate all those
brewing Copers and Vintners of our age, who rise early and work late in their
gross and jumbling slights and apparelling about their wines, when as it were
much better both for the credit of their houses, and the health of their
Customers, if they spent that time in their beds which they spend in their
Cellars at midnight. But it shall suffice at this time, that I have broken the
ice into a harder passage, and that I have given a taste of some new skill,
which I will be ready to enlarge and amplify as well in this subject as in
others of higher reach, when I shall see men of worth and special desert to be
distinguished from the vulgar sort by their honorable reward, till which time I
will leave Nature in a sweet slumber; Sed nunc ad oppositum.

Young Onions all the year.
41. If you sow onion seeds every month in the wane of the Moon, and in cold
weather; if you steep the seeds in warm water, and sow them in earth well
dunged in pots, and remove the pots into close rooms in cold and unseasonable
weather, you may by this means have Onions young and fresh growing all the
year, as a Gentleman of Ireland did credibly inform me of his own experience.
Quaere if young Radishes may not be had in the same manner. Young Radishes all
the year.


42. Roses growing at Christmas
If you cut a Red or Damask Rose root on Mid-summer day, between eleven and
twelve of the clock before noon, at Christmas it will bear Roses. Note that you
must defend them from cold weather by covering them all over with straw. Quaere
if this secret may not be performed best in such Roses as grow in pots or tubs,
because they may be best defended from all injury of frosts, by removing them
into closs places.

43. Grapes g^owing late.
Toward cold weather you must cover with some well tempered loam (as with
hors-dung or flocks, but I take flock to be the better) all the stalks of the
Vine even to the bunches of Grapes, covering the bunches themselves with straw,
and so you shall have your Grapes growing upon the Vine at Christmas. Quaere if
this secret serve for any other Trees. Note also that your vines must be opened
three times in the year, and be dunged with some apt soil for them.

Rich earth for pots.
44. Take the earth that you shall find under an old Muck heap, but dig not too
deep; this alone is an excellent mold to plant your Gilliflowers and other
Flowers and Dwarf-trees in; but if you mingle therewith both lime and dung
also, and temper them well together, it will be a good means to forward such
Flowers as you shall place therein, but you must not set your pots in the South
sun. Quaere of planting each Flower in its own putrefaction with earth, or in
the putrefaction of Corn or any other Vegetable. See more at large hereof porta
page 100.

45. A second crop of Artichokes
Some by cutting down of Artichokes presently after their bearing, gain also a
second crop about Michaelmas or Alhallontide, if the weather prove not too
sharp, because the Plant is tender; or else after they have done bearing you
may cut them often, if you will lose your second crop of Artichokes, and
content your self only with such stalks as will spring from time to time, and
be very good meat being tenderly sodden.

When to sow seeds in respect of the Moon.
46. All such seeds as you would have to run to seed again, must be sown in the
three days before or after the full of the Moon, or at the full, and these will
be forwarder then those which be sown three weeks before them in the wain of
the Moon, as some Gardeners do hold.

Hindering of the Colleflower in blowing.
47. When your Coleflower is almost ripe, cut it off, leaving a pretty long
stalk at it, prick the stalk in the ground, and by this means the flower will
be somewhat long before it blow, and so you may have then one under another, as
you shall have cause to spend them.

Salt to forward Pease
48. Quaere of sowing of two bushels of salt amongst four bushels of Beans or
Pease what effects it will work either in forwarding them, or in the enriching
of the soil, especially being oftentimes strewed; for I have been credibly
informed that the like proportion of salt amongst seed-corn will multiply the
increase thereof exceedingly.

49. To preserve fruit upon dwarf trees.
Plant many Dwarf-trees, and bow down their branches with their fruit upon
them, including the fruit And quaere how long the fruit will keep; you must
have party covers to your pots, and well luted.

50. A fructifying water or seeds.
Quaere of striing of seeds in water wherein some Sandiner is first dissolved.
Quaere if one sixteenth part be not a good proportion, for that comes near
unto the salt water, wherein there is some eighteen or twenty parts of salt.
Lemon, Orange, Pomgranate tree.
Quaere also of watering all outlandish Trees, as Lemon, Orange, Pomgranet,
etc. therewith to forward them in their bearing. Quaere also of a strong Lee
made of the waste Sope-ashes plus ante number. 33.

Late fruits
51. Some do hold that if you nip off the blossoms in the midst with your nails
when they do first bud forth, that new blossoms will afterward break forth
close by them, which will come later then the first. Quaere of the like
practice upon those new blossoms likewise, ante number. 23.

52. A practice upon Roses.
Quaere what will follow by the declination of the branches of Roses and other
Flowers into pots either empty or half full of water, and standing within the
ground.

53. Sopesuds and Powder-beef-broth.
Quaere of throwing all the sope-suds, and all the Powder-beef-broth at the
roots of Cherry-trees, and other Trees, what effect will follow, and so of
flowers.

54. When to lop or proin.
Lop no tree in wet weather, neither cut down any Herbs in a rainy day, but in
necessity. Andrew Hill.

55. Shavings of horn.
Quaere of steeping shavings of horn a long time in water, and after watering
of Trees or Plants therewith. Horn to Cherry-trees.


56. Quaere of laying of store of horns at the roots of Cherry-trees, etc. if
they will forward their bearing. P^ase forward^d with horn.


57. What shavings of horn will do in forwarding a Pease field, or in
forwarding of outlandish seed; but especially sow early Pease, such as Mr.
Flower sows by Bednal-green.

Tailors shreds.
58. Tailors shreds laid upon the ground will enrich it greatly.

Horn into a gelly to forward fiui^s.
59. If you steep shavings of horn in water and lime, the horn in time will grow
to a gelly, then may you drein away the water, and apply the same to the roots
of Trees or Herbs, without discovering of your secret. Rose-trees forwarded.
I have heard them much commended in forwarding of Rose-trees.

60. When to proin trees
The branches of all Trees must be cut off in setting time, Peach tree.
except the Peach tree, from which you must only take away the dry branches.
Ex veter. lib. manuscrip. pergam Th. Gas.

61. Young plants covered with a vail in the night.
When you plant any tender Tree, as the Apricock or such like, place it if you
can against a pale or wall, and till cold weather be past, cover the same with
a close cloth every night, rolling it up in the day time when the sunshineth,
or when the air is warm and temperate.

62. Roots of y^ung plants well watered.
In the planting of every young Tree or Bush, pour in after it is set a gallon,
two or three of water after it, to make it root the sooner.

When to gather fruit
63. Gather your Apples when the weather is dry, and also in the waining of the
Moon, and that will preserve them greatly from rotting; quaere if that be not
general in all fruit.

Cropping of trees.
64. When you cut off the head of any Tree, either to graff upon or for fuel,
leave one branch near the top for the sap to run up upon, for fear the tree
perish.

Enriching of corn ground with salt.
65. If you scatter three bushels of bay salt upon arable ground after harvest,
you may sow four times barley upon the same ground, and gain rich crops; quaere
of a fith crop. Probat. at Cheswick per Mr. Phil. Herb.

66. The whole manner of planting and ordering the Musk-Mellon, Cucumber,
Pompeon, etc.
Get a load or two of new horsdung, wherein there is good store of Litter, and
such as is not above seven or ten days old, or not exceeding fourteen, and
which has been laid still upon a heap, as it was taken out of the stable; dig
a pit that may be fit to receive the same, and ever as you lay any reasonable
quantity thereof, tread it down as hard as you can; then sift about two inches
thick of fine mold upon the dung, and prick in at every three or four inches a
Musk-mellon seed (which must be first soaked twenty four hours together in
milk) stake this border of dung and earth round about very thick with sticks or
forks that may appear above the ground some four inches in height, and upon
these sticks lay hurdels or lathes or other twigs, so fastened together as that
lying upon the sticks they may cover all the Plants over; upon these Hurdels
lay good store of straw, viZ. so much as may be sufficient both to defend the
cold from the seeds, and also to keep out a reasonable shower of rain if it
happen to fall before the removing of your plants. Let them so rest for twenty
four hours, and then you shall see them peep above the ground, and if the
weather be open, and that the Sun shine, give them for seven or eight days
after two hours sun at the rising, and likewise at the setting thereof every
day, by removing away the Hurdels with the straw upon them; then if the weather
have been warm and that you see that every Plant has gotten three or four
leaves, you may remove them, taking also sufficient of the earth and dung that
grew about each Plant with it, not loosening the root at all; then set these
Plants in holes made of purpose, so as they may stand about six inches within
the earth, that thereby you may cover them and uncover them as before for five
or six days; and if they hold out so long, then are they past all danger,
unless some storm of hail happen to beat upon them; but to avoid all danger, I
think it not amiss for three or four weeks after they be removed, to keep them
covered with empty pots as before, both night and day, saving that in fair days
you may acquaint them by little and little, more and more with the Sun, in cold
or gloomy days not uncovering them at all. Now when they have shot out all
their joints (which you shall perceive when you see a knot at the very end of
the shoot, which is somewhat before the flovvering time) then must you cover
every knot or joint with a spade or shovelful of earth, and thereby each knot
will root, and put forth a new shoot; ( quaere of the same order in
Cucumbers, Pompeons) by which means you shall have great increase of Mellons,
as perhaps twenty five or thirty rising from one Plant. But if in twenty four
hours space your Plants do not peer above the ground, then you must water them
in the heat of the day, and your water being pretty warm; and quaere if some of
those waters, ante number. 33. be not good for this purpose; quaere also of salt
or urine which are thought of some to be a very special good means to keep a
dunghill a long time hot for the digestion of Chemical work. You must not forget
to water these young Plants often, at which time you may prove either common
water, or first infused in some rich soil, and then warmed before you apply the
same; quaere of bestowing of sope-ashes about their roots. When your Mellons
are as big as little balls, then if you nip off the shoots that are beyond
them, they will grow exceeding great; for then the sap does not run any more to
waste. Note also that this fruit desires to be kept from moisture, and
therefore you must use to cover them with broad leaves from the rain. Some be
of opinion that all the art before set down for the speedy obtaining of Plants
is needless, and that if you do only let a few Musk-mellons shed their seeds
as they grow, that so they will be much forwarder then by this device. Sed
quaere, if it shall not then be very requisite to cover and defend them from
all the injury of the winter frosts, which the tenderness of that Plant will
otherwise very hardly bear or endure; quaere, of Ridge tiles, or other
Cilinders of clay or tin plates to set opposite against the Sun, and close by
their roots, in such sort as they may receive the reflection of the Sun upon
them to hasten their bearing, which you must remove in the afternoon, opposing
them still toward the sun, so as the Cilinders may at no time in the day
shadow the roots; but then it will be also necessary to water them continually
with dropping lists, lest the excessive heat of the sunbeams should make them
to parch and wither. See all this more truly set down in my last book of
Gardening, fo. 8. number. 18.

Speedy arbors and green in winter.
67. The Beech-tree grows green continually, and therefore most apt to make
pleasant Arbors for the winter also. See Googes Husbandry, fol. 101.

68. Beech-trees or Birch-trees make an Arbor speedily, and so likewise of the
Jesamy, and of the Pompeon Plants, but they grow not long green; quaere of
French-beans.

Delicate pots for Carnations
69. In this manner you may have most delicate Carnation or Gilliflower pots;
Cause pots of eighteen or twenty inches height, and of a good breadth to be
made in what fashion you will, with two ears East and West, and two pipes North
and South, at the which you may water your Flowers; let the pipes be full of
little holes at the entering into the pot, and let your pot be made full of
holes at the sides, each hole distant one full inch from another, in the which
you may plant Time, Hysop, or small Lavender, and as it grows keep the same
even with cutting, or you may leave some part of the Herbs to grow longer then
the rest, to make thereof Diamonds, Frets, etc. In these pots you may plant
Roses, Carnations, Lillies, etc. or you may have your pots made in the shape of
Flower-de-luces, round Balls, Diamonds, etc.

70. How to prevent the common error, whereby every second year is made more
unfruitful then otherwise it would be of Apples, Pears, Plums, etc. by the
negligence of man.
Preserving the Bud.
This is done by the careful gathering of your Fruit; for almost every Apple,
Pear, Plum, etc. when it is ripe has a little pin or bud hard by it, which the
next year would be an Apple, Pear, or Plum; and therefore in the gathering of
your Fruit, you must have special care to pull them off so, as you hurt not the
bud, which is easily done if you break off the Pear, Apple or Plum from the
bud, and not toward it, whereby to hurt it.

71. How to keep Plums from cleaving, and so of Flowers.
This is done by the opinion of some by wreathing only of the bows or branches
whereon they grow. Quaere, if this or any such like means will help where
Carnations or Gilliflowers do use to break the Cod.

72. How Flowers and other Dwarf-trees that root deep, may notwithstanding be
forced to grow in small pots or wooden vessels.

Quaere if this may not be done by planting them in pots that be divided in
halves, in ante number. 20. or such as be made steeplewise, whereby the earth and
plant together may be uncased, and pared away at the sides and bottoms, and
supplied with good and fresh mold, and by taking away all the superfluous
ragged roots thereof, and cutting of the master root the shorter. For the only
let as I imagine, that should hinder great Plants from growing long in small
vessels, is because the root cannot have room and deep enough to grow in; as
also for that so small a quantity of earth cannot give nourishment enough to so
great a Plant; without some yearly helps.

73. A special order for planting and ordering of all Orchards, whereby your
Trees shall flourish exceedingly, and bear store of fruit.
Some hold opinion, That if the ground be moist, then the shallower you set the
Trees, the better they will prosper; but if the ground be dry, then the deeper
the better; but I have heard it very confidently affirmed by a Gentleman of
good judgment, and great experience in re rustica, That all Fruit Trees would
be placed even in the summity of the earth, so as their roots may only be well
covered with earth, by which practice he has seen a Tree that grew deep
before, removed and planted in this manner, which bare his full burden of
Fruit in the first year of the transplanting thereof; and by this means every
ground that will carry a good and rich swoard of grass, and being only two
foot or eighteen inches of good earth, will serve to make a most fruitful
Orchard, whereby that erroneous conceit (that it is impossible to have a
prosperous bearing Orchard where a vain of gravel lies within two foot of the
turff) is utterly confuted and reproved, which would be a very joyful and
welcome secret to a great number of our English Gentlemen and others, who
notwithstanding their great charge in laying in of infinite store of earth upon
their Backsides, can by no means procure a good Orchard to themselves, and that
only by reason of the deep setting of their Trees, which (how good soever the
earth be) does greatly hinder them and keep them back both in spreading and
fructifying; the reason whereof is apparent to every young Novice in the
Schools of Philosophy. Now because these shallow-rooted Trees will be in some
danger to be overcome with the high and boisterous winds, it is therefore
necessary to set them about Alhallontide when the ground being moist moist and
supple, and the driping season of the year may fasten and knit the earth unto
them; and for their better stay, it will be requisite, that every tree have a
sufficient prop to support it; all such grass or other weeds as grow about
these trees must either be weeded out or pared away, that there may be no Plant
at all to draw any of that vegetative salt of the earth from the roots of the
Trees; this grass may be laid in some fit place till it be putrified, and then
returned again to his first place. And because in hot Summers and dry weather,
these Trees that shall root thus near the superficies of the ground will be apt
to parch and burn away, unless there be some moistning means used to the same;
I would therefore advise that there be some pretty store of pease-straw or
Fearn laid about the bottom of each Tree, which being now and then well
moistened with water, if the season happen to be dry, will keep the roots wet
enough, and defend them from the scorching heat of the sun, or else you may wet
them with a dropping list that may distill even through the straw or fern unto
the root. Quaere if that Vines may be used in this manner. These Trees may be
succored and relieved now and then with some fresh mold, whereof a small
quantity will serve, because the roots are so near to the uppermost crust of
the ground; here I think Sopeashes would serve to good purpose.

74. The just time or ipsum nunc, when it is best to graff, both in respect of
the Cions, as also of the Stock.
The Spring time of all other is the most proper and apt time for graffing,
because then Nature being stirred up by the strength of the climing Sun, does
force the sap to ascend into the uppermost part; but because this season of the
year is subject to much alteration, either by excessive moisture, or too much
drout, and sometimes by the sharp and nipping frosts, that often do kill, and
many times do stay and hinder the first putting forth of Vegetables. I have
therefore thought it good for the better certainty of thy election and choice
of times, to show thee some undoubted way how thou may understand Nature
herself speaking in this point by undoubted and demonstrative signs unto thee.
And therefore when thou shall perceive that she begineth to thrust forth those
little red buds, which give the first hope of increase unto thee; then, I say,
and before those buds do break out either into a green color, much less into
leaves, thou must assure thy self that thy Cions is ready to be taken off, and
graffed in such a stock, as has also buds of the like color and bigness unto
them, by which means they will so jump in a sympathy of Nature together, as
that they will most lovingly and kindly embrace each other. And note, that the
stock must always be as forward at the least as the Cions; for otherwise the
Stock will starve the Cions.

75. The manner of implastering, Inoculating, or Graffing in the bud, with all
necessary circumstances.
In some smooth part of the Stock whereupon you mean to graff, you must first
slit the bark about half an inch overthwart the body or branch; then slit
likewise the bark thereof downward from the midst of the overthwart slit
somewhat more then an inch in length, into which convey your bud with the leaf
at it, so as you place bark to bark at the upper end, and croping of the
uppermost part of the leaf; then bind the bark of the stock about the bud,
with such bands as are commonly used in the binding up of Brawn, and close up
the joint with Loam and Moss well tempered together; at three weeks end you
must take off that band, because the bud will swell, and then you must bind
the same again more easily with a new band; but some do hold it sufficient to
slit the band only in the backside, and so to leave it. Note that in the
gathering of your bud you must be careful that you hurt not the bud in the
inner side of the bark, when you divide the same from the branch whereon it
grew; for if you find any hole or pit therein, it is a manifest sign that you
have left the bud behind; for the avoiding of which danger, the best way of all
other that ever I could find was, to slope the bark a little upward in taking
off the bud, and to slit down at the sides and bottom thereof, so as it may be
a pretty large square, and then putting in your finger gently at the upper end
to draw the same downward, as you would slip off an Eels-skin; this bud you
must place in a square hole cut out of purpose for the same, and sitting bark
to bark as near as you can in every place. Some in gathering of the leaf with
the bud do make an overthwart slit a little above the leaf, which leaf would be
such a one as has a fair swelling bud by it; then they slit the bark on either
side for the leaf, and so make the same to meet in the base point in form of an
Eschocheon. Some do hold the best time of this graffing to be about the midst
of June, or few days before or after; and some about the twelfth or fourteenth
of June, but you shall find out the best time of all for this practice by the
sappiness of the Tree when you slit the same, and by the smooth and easy
dividing of the Bark from the Tree. If your bud take well, then must you cut
off the stock or branch whereon you have thus graffed about the end of December
a shaftment about the bud, and when the bud has afterward given a sufficient
shoot, then may you take off the branch or body whereon you graffed close at
the bark of the bud, sloping the same upward with your knife: When you go about
this work choose a fair, mild and temperate day, and shun all rainy and windy
weather. Note also, that after you have taken off your buds, and until you
have sitted them in their stock or branch, you must lay them in a sawcer of
fair water to keep them moist, and graff them as speedily as you may. Cut the
bands in sunder in the backside about three weeks or a month after you have
graffed; close it at the first with wax besides the bands; let the schocheon be
rather a little too big then any thing too little, especially at the bottom for
his place, because it will shrink, and be sure you close your schocheon well at
the bottom; and so likewise in the graffing of a Cion. By this Art one small
twig well chosen, and being full of buds will serve to graff sundry Trees, and
it is not amiss to graff in diverse places of the same Tree, if some should
miss; for this graffing, though it take not, does not any way impair or hurt
the Tree. Graff Apple-tree-buds upon Apple-tree-stocks, and so of Pear Trees;
and Stone-fruit-buds upon Stone-fruit-stocks. Quaere of graffing one Rose upon
another, or upon any other Tree or branch. Quaere, if the bud would not be
graffed in a shoot of the same year. In stones Fruit it is thought better to
graff upon a shoot of three years old at the least; but in Pear Trees or Apples
you may graff this way upon a shoot of one year. Prepare your stock first, and
presently apply the bud; for it is a rule in all graffing whatsoever, the
sooner that you close them, the more ready they will be to knit together, even
as a piece of flesh that is newly cut, being presently bound up will heal more
speedily, whilst the vital spirits be yet warm.

76. How to sow sufficiently in the wain or increase of the Moon,
notwithstanding the unseasonableness of the weather.
It is a common received opinion at this day, that it is necessary to sow all
seeds which you would have to run to seed again in the increase of the Moon,
except Beans and Pease, which must be sowed in the wane of the Moon, the nearer
the change the better; and so likewise to sow all such seeds as you would have
to bring large roots, and not to run to seed in the wane of the Moon, as
Parsenips, Carrets, Radish, and generally all Pot-hearbs; now if either the
wane or increase prove so wet and showry, or so cold and frosty that you cannot
conveniently sow your seeds in their due season, then mingle well together each
seed with a sufficient quantity of fine and rich mold, and leave them so
together in pots, pans or dishes, till you find apt weather to sow them
abroad; and so you shall not be forced to lose any season at all. Quaere if all
these pots or pans were set in a stove or other warm place, if so the seed
would not be much forwarder then if they had been scattered abroad. Or else you
may sow them, the earth being moist, so as you provide sufficient store of dry
mold or earth to cover the seeds.

77. How to have Garden Pease or French-Beans to grow without the help of
sticks or poles.
Set one row of Beans, and another of Pease some five or six inches asunder,
and the Bean stalks will outgrow the Pease, and be strong enough to support the
Pease; your French Beans you may prick round about your Trees in your Orchard,
suffering them to climb up by the bodies, and if need be you may bind them to
the trees with rushes or some such gentle bands.

78. How to destroy weeds, worms, rushes, etc. as also to enrich any pasture or
arable ground, and perhaps to forward the Crop thereof.
This is done first by plowing the ground twice, and then by sowing of the
waste Sopeashes in some reasonable quantity upon the ground after it is sown
with grain in the winter time; two load or three load of them will serve an
acre of ground very richly: quaere, Pease and beans forwarded.
what effects will follow in the forwarding of Pease or any other grain or
pulse, if the same be bestowed upon ground every two months; Weeding of Woad
saved.
If this fall out, then imagine how profitable it were for all such as sow any
store of Woad; for by this means they may save an infinite charge in the
weeding thereof, which now they cannot avoid; some think that salt is of equal
force with sope-ashes in all these purposes; and that two bushels will suffice
for an acre of ground, being mingled with the grain in the sowing; and that
thereby you may have yearly a rich crop of Wheat in a barren ground. Quaere,
Broom and Fern destroyed.
if Broom or Fern may be destroyed by this mean.s I make no doubt of Broom if
the ground were plowed and then the ashes strewed thereon; there is no doubt
but that these ashes will also be very necessary for the enriching of Garden
grounds.

79. How to stay the bleeding of any Vine.
This is done by binding the ordure of a man that is somewhat dry or stiff in a
linen cloth, close to the place where it bleedeth, with some packthread or
other bands; this I learned of an expert Gardener. Quaere of the droping of
melted brimstone upon the place, or wax and Turpentine, Pitch, Rosin and such
like. Also if you fear it with a hot iron, and drop tallow thereon, and then
bind the bark hard with diverse folds of cord or Packthread about, this will
stay the bleeding thereof; experienced per Mr. Hill.

80. How to have great and large Musk-mellons, Cucumbers, Pompeons,
Gooseberries. etc.
When your Pompeons are as big as little apples, Nipping of the young shoots.
then nip off all those young shoots that grow beyond them, by which means a
Gentlewoman of her own experience did assure me, Pompeons.
that she had Pompeons as big as a gross woman in the waste; the same may be
done in Cucumbers, and Musk-mellons, as soon as they are grown to some little
bigness. Goosberries.
So likewise by nipping off the tops that grow beyond the Goosberries presently
after they are knit, she had exceeding great Goosberries. Quaere of the like
practice in Apples, Pears, Cherries, Apples, Pears, Cherries, Grapes to grow
great.
Plums, Peaches, Grapes, etc. Quaere also if there be any use of this secret in
Flowers. Some commend the taking away of all the Runners except two or one from
every pompeon, Pompeon.
whereby more sap may be conveyed into the Fruit.

81. How to destroy Fern or Broom.
So soon as it is ready for the Sith or Hook, cut it down, and continue this
practice two or three years together, and in the end, the sap wanting issue
will choke the root; according to that opinion it is likewise held in the
destruction of a Tree, by taking away all the sprouts and buds from time to
time, as they put forth at any of the branches. Quaere if this practice will
not destroy Broom.

82. How to make the leaves, stalks and roots of Artichokes to be good food for
the Table.
The roots of all young Artichokes, as I have heard some Travelers report, be
in a manner as sweet and delicate as the Potatoe root, and therefore to have
store of them, I think it requisite to sow whole beds or borders of them; and
if you will make use of the leaves, you must whilst they are young, viZ. before
they do carry any apples, bind all the leaves in one mass together, and then
bury them in the ground, and so they will become both sweet and tender; and
this is a practice very usual in Barbary. Or if by cutting down the stalks you
prevent the bearing of their fruit, you shall have their stalks full of
strength and food, and to make pleasant Sallets withal, and that oftentimes in
one year. Also if you cut them down presently after their bearing, you shall
have young Artichokes toward Michaelmas, if time or season be any thing mild
and temperate.

83. How to make flowers double, as also to enlarge either fruits or flowers,
and to make young trees to prosper well.
This is thought to be best performed by often removing the young Plant (and as
some will have it, in the increase of the Moon, or rather just at the full) and
so likewise of Dwarf-trees. Quaere whether the removing of a stock before it be
graffed, or after it be graffed, be the better way to make the Tree to prosper,
and whether it be not good for the increase thereof, to remove and transplant
it often whilst it is young.

84. How to defend a whole Orchard, or any particular Tree from the frosts of
April or May, whereby the blossoms may knit without any danger.
If you can happen upon a place defended, either by a hill, or some rows of
high trees already growing, from the North and East winds, then shall you not
need to show any other art, for that your Orchard having this defensative, is
very likely to prove fruitful if there be no other impediment in the soil. But
if you cannot be so happy to find a place so guarded to your hand, then plant
on the East and North side thereof a Quickset-hedge of Hathorne, which will
grow to a reasonable height in a short time, without the which you may also set
a rank or two of Elms, Ashes, or Sycamore, to break off the cold blasts from
your Trees. But if by chance you have any wall already built, with two sides
against the same wind, that will be a special good corner to set an
Apricock-tree therein. Or if you are desirous to defend the blossoms of some
few Trees from those cold winds, whereby to have store of fruit when others
shall fail, then must you strein Canvas on the East and North side of them,
until all cold weather be over-blown, and so you may have Cherries, Peaches,
Apricocks and all other early fruit, when the rest of your Neighbors may happen
to want: And this Canvas will be afterward as serviceable for the Painter as
any other, and so you shall reap great profit with no loss at all. But this
practice fit than Orchard that consists of Dwarf trees most excellently, as
also a Garden of dainty Flowers that may be couched together under such an
Artificial wall. But if your Plum-trees do grow against a wall, then may you
hang a sheet or piece of canvas only over them every morning and evening.

85. How to make the best choice of any Cions whatsoever.
Choose that twig which you see to put forth as many or more buds then the rest
of the Tree, and which seems best to prosper in your eye.

86. How to recover an old Border of Time or Hysop that is almost dead.
You must cut the same down very low at a convenient time, and if you can after
some present rain or against a shower, and then earth the same presently, by
sifting earth all over the borders with a long and flat Sive, made for that
purpose, which being in some measure answerable to the breadth of your borders,
will be much apter for this purpose, then those round Sives that are usually
employed in this work, whereby much earth falls into the Alleys of your
Garden.

87. How to know the just time when to remove or transplant any Tree.
When the leaves begin to fade color, and wax yellow, then is the fittest time
of all other to remove them, if you would have them to root well, and bear
speedily.

88. How a man may have a speedy bearing Orchard, but the trees not beautiful,
or to have fair and goodly Trees, that will not bear Fruit so soon.
Prick in the kernels of Pippins, Pears or other Fruit in your Nursery (which
Nursery would be always a worse ground then the Orchard wherein you must
afterward remove them; for otherwise your trees will not prosper so well when
they are transplanted:) and after they be of three years growth, viZ. about the
bigness of your little finger, you may graff them either in the stock or in the
bud; these young graffed Trees being afterward removed into your Orchard,
consisting of a good fat mold, will bear fruit very speedily, but thereby they
will be hindered from being fair and mighty Trees, like a woman that begins
soon to teem, whereby her growth and spreading is much hindered; and this is an
approved way to have a speedy Orchard. But if you desire to have an Orchard
consisting of fair and beautiful Trees, but three or four years more backward
in bearing, then plant your Orchard at the first with Crabstocks, and when they
are able in any one year to put forth a shoot of two foot long at the least,
then are they fit to be graffed, and not before; these stocks being thus
graffed will spread into goodly high and large Trees, but not bear so soon as
your other Trees any store of fruit. And thus you may make your own election
which manner of Orchard shall like you best.

89. How to make branches or Arms of Trees to root.
If any Bough of a Tree do put forth a great number of warts or little knots in
any place, saw off that Arm or Bough one inch below those warts, and prick it
into the ground, and it will root and become a Tree.

90. How diverse Trees and Hedges are kept backwurd by the ignorance of him that
planteth them only.
When a Privy Hedge is laid too late, as in February or March, it will never
come forward or prosper greatly; Yea, I have heard a man of good experience
affirm, that if this year in March a Privy Hedge be laid, and another about
Alhallontide the next year, that the later hedge in seven years space, will
gain three years growth or spreading of the first; the like is to be thought of
all Trees.

91. How to make the body of a Tree, or any young Cions to grow full of squares
or Losanges.
Slit a tender young stock, or a shoot of six years, when it is of some
reasonable length, about one finger or six inches in length, and in the midst
of the slit overthwartwise place a short stick that by thrusting out of the
sides may make the form of a Losange, the inside whereof must be covered with
tar, and in time the bark will cover the same, and thus you may have a Tree
full of Losanges, and one square made contrary to the other, whereby your work
may seem the stranger.

92. How to bring Fruit into any shape, or to grow within molds.
This is done by clapping of party molds having vents upon young Pears, Apples,
etc. which have such forms and portraitures within as you like best; I think
leaden molds, or molds of burnt clay to be the best and cheapest of all others.
You may also put in young bunches of Grapes into little stone pots or glasses
made of purpose, having vents in the top (for I think otherwise they will
distill with the heat of the sun.) Quaere of putting of water in the molds, so
as it touch not the fruit, to make the Grapes to swell. Quaere, if leaden molds
be not the best of all other to ripen Grapes; quaere also if these molds being
well sured toward Winter when the Fruit is ripe, if so the Fruit will not hang
a long time upon the Tree notwithstanding all frosty weather.

93. The best manner of binding or closing of any new graffed Cions.
First let in the Cions of a good depth into the Stock, so as if it take not in
one place it may take in another, then bind the same about with such bands as
they use to bind Brawn, and cover the band and slit all over with wax (green
wax I have seen to take good proof this way) for loam will chop in dry weather,
and let in both wind and rain which wax will not; and loam by its hardness
binds in the sap too much, which wax does not hinder at all by reason of its
softness and pliantness in warm weather, through which, even the buds by help
of the sun do easily break.

94. To backward Flowers, as Gilliflowers, Pincks, Strawberries, etc.
Quaere, if by covering them over with some earthen pan with wet straw or hay
about it, they will not be much hindered; removing the pot but one or two days
in the week to take the sun, least they wither away.

95. Necessary Observations to make either outlandish or English seeds to grow
the better.
If you can take the advantage of a hard frosty winter, which has mellowed the
ground well, and made the earth to crumble; and then if it be also dry in
March, that the mold may fall to fine powder in the digging thereof, and that
your seeds be sowed and well covered before it rain (if the infertility of the
ground hinder not) you shall be in good possibility of a rich crop. I did sow
some Staves-acre in a place whose mold was cast up in wet weather, and
consisting of earth and clay, it did so clod together, as that the seeds which
were sowed the 26 of March did not appear above ground until the latter end of
May, and then also they came very thinly. I had the like success in the same
earth with Artichoke seeds, whereof the hundredth one came not up (although
peradventure I might be abused in the seeds, which is an ordinary practice in
these days, with all such as follow that way, either to deliver the seeds which
they sell mingled with such as are old and withered, or else without any
mingling at all to sell such as are stark naught) I would there were some fit
punishment devised for these petit coseners, by whose means many poor men in
England, do oftentimes lose, not only the charge of their seed, but the whole
use and benefit of their ground, after they have bestowed the best part of
their wealth upon it. Cheapside is as full of these lying and forswearing
Huswives as the Shambles and Gracechurch-street are of that shameless crew of
Poulters wives, who both daily, and most damnably, yea upon the Sabath day it
self, run headlong into wilful perjury, almost in every bargain which they
make, selling Cocks for Capons when they have pared their combs, and broken off
their spurs; old Hens for Pullets, when they have broken their pinions and
brest-bones; Buntings for Larks, when young Dames go to market, bruised Rabbits
for sound, being in their skins, and yet they will have their Cases too except
the bargain be the wiselier made; and stale Fowl for fresh and new, or at the
least both sorts mingled together, maintaining their sales with such bold
countenances, and cutting speeches, with such knavish practices, and such
forlorn Consciences, as that they have both driven away many honest Matrons
from their stals, and so corrupted a number of young maiden Servants with their
bold and lewd lying, with their desperate swearing and forswearing, that they
have made all plain and modest speech, yea all kind of Christianity to seem
base and rustical unto them. I would inveigh more bitterly against this sin, if
my text would bear it; but now I will leave it unto the several Preachers of
the Parishes where they dwell, who can present this matter more sharply, and
with less offense then I may; I pray God, that either by them, or by the
Magistrate, or by one means or other, this great dishonor of God and of
Religion may be speedily removed amongst us. But to return to our first
subject, I think it very necessary to sow as early as the coldness of the
Spring will give you leave. I sowed Anni eeds and Fenigreke the 26 of March,
1594. and they prospered exceeding well, and yet I would have sowed more early,
but that the beginning of March was so showring, that I could not garden any
sooner; these Anniseeds began to flower about the midst of June, at which time
also the Fenigreke was full of cods. Quaere if the Staves acre,
Artichoke-seeds, and Comin-seeds which I then sowed also, would not have proved
better if they had been steeped for some reasonable time in water. I do find
by experience that Anniseeds and Fenigreke delight in ground that is enriched
with Soap ashes; and Cominseed, as I think, would either be steeped in salt
water before it be sowed, or else some little store of salt would be mingled in
the earth, for I found it to fail me in diverse other trials which I made
without salt; and yet if I had not over-salted the ground, I think it would
have proved much better. Quaere of ground enriched with horn for outlandish
seeds, because I have been credibly informed that they will make Parsely seeds
to disclose themselves in three weeks. In March 1595. I sowed English Wormseeds
(a seed much like if it be not the same, to that which is called Semen Ameos)
in ground enriched with horn, and it grew very rank, and full of blossoms.

96. A necessary observation in the removing of young Plants of Musk-mellons,
Pompeons etc.
The younger that you set them, being strong enough to be removed, I think they
will prosper the better; for the sap will sooner rise, and be able to feed them.

97. How to graff upon one root of Carnations all manner of Carnations,
Gilliflowers, Pinks, etc.
Pull off the top (some two or three inches in length) of every branch, and in
their places put the like tops of flowers of contrary colors, thrusting them
in as closs as you can, and then bind them about with some thread, and they will
bring forth the like flowers as those roots did bear from whence they were
taken. This of Mr. Jarret the Chyrurgeon in Holborn.

98. How to increase the bearing of any Gilliflower or Carnation root
exceedingly.
Wreath every stalk a little in that place which you mean to cover with earth,
then lay your earth thereon, and by this means every Slip will bring forth
great store of Flowers. You may also dwarf them into little pots, being slit on
the sides, and when they have taken sufficient root, you may cut them off from
the old root, and so of every slip you shall have a bearing root the same year.
This also of Mr. Jarret the Chyrurgeon.

99. How to increase the double or single Stock-Gilliflowers.
Nip off the tops of them before they bud, at some reasonable length, and beat
the stalk toward the bottom with the back of a knife, and then prick them into
the ground, and close the earth well unto them. I have heard that the double
Stock-gilliflower does never yield any seed.

100. How to dwarf any manner of Fruit Tree, so as your Orchard shall bear
fruit the first year.
In the beginning of January, or at the least before the same month expired,
choose a shoot of two years old, and if you can such a one as has some small
sprigs about that part of the branch which shall rest in the midst of the pot,
for they help greatly in the rooting; then cross-hack near those sprigs, about
some two inches in length round about the bark with the edge of your knife, and
then let it in at a slit, which of purpose must be made in the pot, wherein you
mean to dwarf; fill the same full of earth, and if occasion serve, now and then
you may water the same; hang this pot either by wiers firm to the body of the
Tree, or else drive in a stake near the shoot and place your pot thereon, and
let the same continue one whole year before you cut it off from the old Tree.
Note that the aptest pots for this purpose be such as hold sugar loaves, having
slits of an inch in bigness at one side thereof from the bottom to the very
top, and having feet made unto them whereon they may stand (wherein they differ
from the sugar pots) and it will not be amiss if these pots consist of two
parts, whereby you may take them from the earth, without breaking of the earth,
when you would plant them in the ground; and so the same pots will serve often.
These Dwarf-trees will bear fruit the first year. See ante number 83. how to
defend such an Orchard in blooming time from frosts. Also if these Trees be set
in rancks, the Walks being well gravelled, leaving only round rings of earth
about the bodies of each, of six inches in breadth, where you may place some
straw or fern if you fear the exceeding heat of Sol; by this means the Sun will
make a strong reflection upon the fruit to procure a speedy ripening. Quaere of
adding the gelly of horn dissolved in limewater to the roots of them to make
them more forward. Quaere of lapping of thin sheet-lead upon the bodies of your
Trees to enforce the heat of the sun upon them: You may choose such a plat for
this purpose, as is either naturally or artificially defended from the North
and East winds, by hills, walls, pails, or hedges, but so as the Sun be not
kept also from them.

101. How to multiply the double Honeysuckle, Jesamie.
Lay a number of their stalks or brances in the earth, and each sprig will
become a root the next year, and so you may store your self of any slender
Plant, either to sell or give to your friends, and by this means you may make
one root to run at what length you please in time, laying the shoot into the
earth, as it grows to any reasonable length.

102. How to have a Vineyard to bear Grapes the first year.
Let such shoots as are most likely to bear Grapes, run through the sides of
pretty big baskets, opening the twigs to make passage for the branches, and
filling the baskets full of earth in cutting time. Quaere, if there need to be
any wreathing of the branch, or hacking of the bark as before, number. 100. in the
dwarfing of Trees to make them root the sooner; These baskets may afterward be
placed in any plat where you mean to make a Vineyard, and they will bear the
first year; the reason is apparent. Note if your Vine whereon you dwarf do run
upon a frame, then you may easily place the basket upon the frame; and if they
run upon a wall, then may you hang the basket by the ears to the wall. Some do
use pots with holes bored through both the sides of them; But I do hold the
baskets the better way, because they will soon rot being put into the ground,
whereby the earth needs not to be loosened from the roots, neither will they
take so strong a heat in the Summer time to parch them away before they be
fully rooted, as the stone pot will do.

103. How to graff in a dead trunck, or stock of a Willow-tree.
Put a Willow-stock, ( quaere if it must not be green and fresh) into a furrow
of earth made for that purpose, make clefts or slits in the same fit for such
branches of the Mulberry-tree as you will graff therein; they must be made like
wedges, joining sap to sap, then close up the clifts and defend them from
weather, and then put all the stock of the willow under the furrow; this is
borrowed out of Celsus. And one skilful in planting told me that no Tree will
perish that is planted in this manner. After the first and second year past
thou may also saw or cut the trunck in sunder between the Plants, and
transplant them in places convenient. Ex vetere lib. manuscrip. Th. Gasc.

104. To help a tree whose stock or fruit begins to rot.
When this happens, it is a sign that the bark of the Tree is sick, and
therefore slit the same with a knife; and when the bad humor is sufficiently
spent, dung the Tree well, and close the wood with tempered clay. Ibid.

105. That the Peach-stone may have no kernel.
Graff a Cions of a Peach-tree upon a Nut-tree. Ibid.

106. To make a Peach-tree bring forth Pomgranates.
Water the same with Goats milk three days together, when it begins to
flower. Ibid. Quis hoc credat nisi sit pro test vetustas?

107. To have great store of Sage speedily.
A Monk told me that if thou sow the seed of Sage well ripe, as thou sowest
other seeds in good earth that it will multiply exceedingly. Ibid.

108. To have several grapes growing upon one branch, and and so of Roses,
Gilliflowers, etc.
Plant a white and a red Vine closs together, and being both rooted, set a
branch of either of them together in the top, sloping them upward unto the
pith; join them sap to sap, bind them together, wrapping a supple linen cloth
about them, and at three days end, moisten them with water till it burgeon.
Quaere, if after a convenient time one of the roots may not be taken away, to
make it seem the more strange. Quaere if this may not also be performed in
other Fruit Trees, Roses, Gilliflowers, etc. Ibid.

109. How to have trees of Time, Hysop, Lavender, Rosemary, etc.
Quaere if by some one or other of the ways of graffing, the same may not be
performed. Rocellae, ruta, and caules in arbores mutantur; test Cardano in
lib. de rer. variet. p. 225.

110. How to keep Grapes upon the Vine till the Calends of January; and so of
other fruit and flowers; as also to keep backward both fruit and flowers.
Servantur in arbore, sacculo ex papiro nostra circumposito. Card. in lib. de
variet. rer. 224. Quaere, if an oiled paper will not perform this, especially
if the paper be oiled over often, as occasion serves, and the thread also oiled
with it. Quaere also, if oyled papers, especially two or three double, or more,
will not keep any fruit backward by defending the Sun from it, but then it will
be necessary (as I think) to give some vent by pin holes underneath, least the
heat of the Sun do burn up the fruit, and work a distillation upon it; let the
thread also be well oyled or waxed, wherewith you tie your paper; If
Lin-seed-oyl alone will not serve, mix some powdered Amber therewith in the
boiling, according to that set down in my Book of Experiments; for this is an
excellent secret, and to be applied many ways if it be true, and it seems
very probable. This is a delicate device to defend Gilliflower pots in winter
from the cold, and in Summer from the heat. Quaere, if a Bladder will not serve
instead of an oiled paper. Quaere, if taking away the bark almost round, or
round, when the fruit is near ripe.

111. How to make Pears, Apples, Plums, Grapes, etc. to dry as they grow.
Before they be fully ripe, wreath the stalk of every fruit, by this means the
fruit wanting nourishment will grow dry as it hangs on the Trees. Ex veter.
lib. manuscrip. Th. Gasc. Quaere of taking away the bark round about the
branches that bear the fruit.

112. How to destroy Caterpillars.
Make a ring of tar toward the bottom of the Tree, then hang a bag full of
Pismires by a cord in the top of the Tree, so as they may easily get out, and
the Ants when they cannot get down by reason of the tar, rather then they will
starve for hunger, will eat up all the Caterpillars, per Lupton. 282.

113. Secrets in Pompeons, Musk-mellons, Strawberries, and Artichokes, to make
them prosper and grow great.
Temper fat mold with cream, and therein prick your Pompeon-seeds, the mold
being in a pot or earthen pan; cover them in the night and in cold weather; and
when it is warm, or during the sunshine uncover them, and when they are
sufficiently sprung up to make plants of, remove them into good ground, and
they will grow to a monstrous greatness. Probat. per Sir Tho. Challenor. Quaere
if the same practice will not serve in Musk-mellons, Beans, Pease, etc. The
water wherein sheeps dung has been infused, will make Strawberries very great.
And the Doze of Tanners well rotted in good earth will make rich ground to
plant Artichoke plants in; and when you have set your young plants, if you
strein a canvas over them, uncovering them only in warm weather, and in the
warmest part of the day, they will prosper exceedingly.

114. To make Apricocks to prosper well.
Plant them against a wall that stands into the East, and on either side of
the Tree place a Fir-pole that is somewhat higher then the Tree, sloping wise;
on the top of the poles place a course cloth, or rather a Sear-cloth, which in
the day time, or in the warmth of the day may be rolled up, or in the night or
in cold weather let down to cover all the Tree, as it were with a Penthouse;
and in this manner your Tree will prosper exceedingly; these clothes do also
serve to keep off the frosts or cold winds when they are in blossom, until the
fruit be knit, at which time you must only unfold your clothes in the warmth
of the day, or when the Sun shines, if the wind happen to be in any cold
corner. A wooden pale may also serve instead of a brickwall for the like
purpose. This of And. Hill.

115. To make Rosemary to prosper exceedingly.
Take of the dirt of the Highways, especially in the midst of them, where
cattle have dunged and stalled most, make a bed thereof, and therein plant your
Rosemary. Quaere of all other plants and flowers. Probat. per Mr. And. Hill in
Rosemary, which he could never have to prosper in his London Garden till he
used this Experiment.

216. To make trees to flourish wonderfully.
Water them now and then with the Dregs of Beer or Ale. Per Mr. And. Hill.
Quaere of applying the same to all Herbs and Flowers. Quaere of Saltpeter, or
Sal Armoniack applied to the roots of Plants, being first well putrified or
rooted in earth.

117. How to make a clay ground fruitful.
This is done by mixing of a reasonable proportion of sand with it, not that
the sand gives any strength to the ground, but that it opens the clay, which
is oftentimes so binding, that the grain is starved therein before it can break
out: specially in a dry season.

118. Certain Observations for the enriching of ground.
The River of Trent in Lincolnshire is suffered once in seven years to overflow
a great Marsh, whereby it carries as much Swarth as can stand upon the ground:
Per Harsley my Neighbor at Bishops-hall.

A Gentleman having his Stable near his Vine, Watering of Grapes.
had his Grapes exceeding great and pleasant, by reason of the stale of his
Horses, that descended from his Stable to his Vine, and after turning his
Stable into Lodgings, the Vine began to starve, and brought forth poor and
hungry grapes. Per And. Hill.

A Western Gentleman by direction of my Book of Husbandry, steeped two years
together his Barley for twelve hours in the Seawater, and then sowed the same,
an. 1595 and 1596. and had a very plentiful crop. Quaere what soil. This of Mr.
Andrew Hill.

By my Cousin Duncombe, a neighbor of his steeped his Wheat in stale four and
twenty hours, and sowed the same in a ground consisting of sand and lome, being
very barren, and had great yield, anno 1596.

The Gall of a beast applied to a young graffed Plant, makes the same to shoot
forward exceedingly; quaere of Allom mixed with the gall; for one of these ways
Mr. And. Hill proved excellent. Hereupon I gather, That all off al of Beasts,
and all garbage of fish is very good.

FINIS.
Books printed or sold by William Leak at the sign of the Crown in Fleetstreet
between the two Temple-gates.
A Bible of (...) fair large* Roman ^et^^* Yorke's Heraldry. Man become gu^^y
(...) Joh. Francis Sen^^, and Englished by H E. of Mo^^ou^h Wilby's second Set
of Music, 3.4, 5 and 6 parts. The History of Vienna, and Paris. Callis learned
Readings on the Stat 21 H. 8. cap. 5. of Sewers. Sken' de significatione
Verborum. Posing of the Accidence. Delaman's use of the Horizontal Quadrant.
Corderius in English. Doctor Fulkes Meteors. Nye's Gunnery and Fireworks. Cato
Major, with Annotat. Lazerillo de Tormes. The Idiot in four Books. Aula Lucis,
or the house light. Wilkinson's office of Sheriffs. Parson's Law. Mirror of
Justice. The Fort-Royal of holy Scripture, or a new Concordance by, J. H.
Solitary devotions. ^er^ita^^ Scholastica. Mathematical Recreations. The
several opinions of sundry Antiquaries; touching the power of Parliam. The
Right of the people concerning Impositio^^ stated in a learned Argument. An
exact Abridgment of the Records in the Tower of London, by Sir Rob. Cotton, Knight.
An Apology for the discipline of the ancient Church, intended especially for
that of our Mother the Church of England; In answer to the admonitory Letter,
lately published by Will. Nicholson Archdeacon of Brecon, in 4. The Garden of
Eden.
PLAYS.
The Wedding. The Hollander. Maids Tragedy. King and no King. Philaster. The
grateful Servant. The strange Discovery. The Merchant of Venice.

