A plain word of Truth to all the Officers and Soldiers of the ARMY.
THE Cause of God is once more revived, which was almost lost by the Cunning
and Self Ends of some: you must ere long die as the late Protector; then will
your Posterities be the greatest Vassals and Slaves that ever were, for your
fighting, etc. and will never be forgotten; Because you have done so many
irregular acts, and so little good for your Country, which has always been
your pretense; but in stead of doing Good and Justice to the good People, you
have all along Exalted your selves; until you are an ill savor in the nostrils
of almost all sorts of Men.

There is no way left under Heaven for your Redeeming the Peace and Safety of
these Nations (as now the Case stands) but an absolute Commonwealth; that so
the good People of England may taste of that Good, for which so much Blood and
Treasure has been expended; for which there has been so great a contest as
the like was never read of before. Gods signal hand was against the King and
his Party; his Providential hand against the late Protector for his, etc. at
the time when he would have further settled himself and been King.

The like will be against you, if you go on any longer, and build again the
Name or Thing God has so eminently born witness against, from Heaven.

Your Adversaries are many; and you increase them every day (by your Juggling:)
speak plain English, and be honest if you can; and trust God in the Work of
God; and lay aside every thing, or the thing that besets you: is he a Wise man,
or like his Father? if he were, it were then another Case: is he altogether
Incapable, or A -- then you will be as much troubled on the other hand. Know
what God the Lord of Hoasts has done before your Eyes, and trust him in his
work if you can; you will never live to see a fairer opportunity, then is at
this time: for all good men in City, Town, and Country, will be of one piece
for you; but if you put them to their shifts, and misery, and blood come, you
will have it charged on your heads: whatever calamity or misery befall the good
People of England, you will be the Contractors of, as well as the preventers of
that Good which otherwise they might enjoy.

According to the course of Nature, you cannot live long: and if F. and D. dye,
or be taken out of the way, when this day is over, which will be ere long,
(unless there be a going on without hypocrisy or deceit in the Good Old
Cause) then, as well as now, your Adversaries to the Cause will cry Ah ha.

They will never forget the taking away their God and King.

The Cavaliers must have a Vicegerent on Earth, as they call it.

The Presbyterians Principle leads them to the same thing under another Name or
Title; that so they may have their will on all Men that differ from them; for
they think they can never do enough for God; as if God were altogether unable
to do his own work, in heaven and earth. The King would frequently swear, By
God, the Presbyters are the Men that first began the War, and would have no
other men live but themselves: and that they were not sociable, and would set
all the Nation in blood again, if they had not their end.

And see how the Cavaliers and Presbyters have of late combined against the
Commonwealth. The Cavalier is known enough to all; but the Presb. and his
Conjunction is forgotten: though the same Game be now playing, and men will not
believe it.

Mr. Love the Minister, who was eminently for the Parliament, afterward joined
with the King, and carried on his designs, to the involving this and the
Scottish Nation in Blood. Their Conjunction with the King and Cavaliers was
such, that they did flatter themselves; and said, They would have the Cavaliers
help, and then lay them by. The same was in the Cavaliers toward them; and that
was most likely to carry it.

The Plot was bloody, and deep laid; for there were above 300. Ministers, so
called, in Conjunction with Mr. Love in that Plot; and abundance of
considerable men more; a List of which was given to the late Protector; as
also, of what Moneys had been raised and promised to buy Arms, and raise an
Army; which was partly modeled.

What Game has lately been playing, less then a resurrection of this Plot? and
they will never leave, till they have destroyed this Army (whom they hate to
the death) what ever their pretenses are, etc. for crossing their Scottish
Covenant, and taking away their King; which they cannot live without, or some
such like fine thing.

Printed at London, 1659.


