THE PIMPES PREROGATIVE: Exactly and compendiously deciphered in a Dialogue
between Pimp-Major Pig, and Ancient Whiskin, two most eminent men in that
Faculty, with their exultation at the downfall of Doctors Commons.
I fear no Summons,
From Doctors Commons.
I care not a Straw
For the Baudy Law.


Pigg. WHat Ancient Whiskin? Your face prognosticates a good Term ensuing; you
have sure gotten some new acquaintance: I pray resolve me punctually; Are there
any handsome young Country Girls lately come to Town that you know of, who
have not too much of bashfulnes, but are a little entered and partly exercised
in their several Postures and Motions, whereby they may be fit to present to
an inteligent Heir of ample Revennues?


Whiskin. Truly Seigneur Pigg, my self am (I confess) sufficiently
experienced in the breeding and bringing up of young Lasses (gramercy good
Venus) and have been as glad of such a purchase, as St. Nicholas Clerks of a
ponderous Purse; yea, and have paid soundly for it too, being cited to appear
before a Court of Ciuilians; and thence indeed is the chief cause of my blithe
countenance, to hear of the downfall of those Courts, (I mean the Doctors
Commons, (my Bully-rooke) that is it that elevates my Spirits in Quintoquillio
to think upon.


Pigg. Let me hug thee for that news kind Ancient: But, art thou sure thou
speak nothing but truth?


Whisk. Am I sure that thy face keeps the old tincture still* that never-fading
dye, that pure scarlet Nose of thine enami'ld with blew? So sure what I tell
thee is truth without exception.


Pigg. This thy good news is welcome to me, and, will be seconded with much
mirth through all our Quarters. There Is not a reverend Matron in all the
Suburbs but (for joy to hear of this News) will make her Bottle ale fly like
Chambers at the Bank-side on a Lord Majors day; we will have this day registered
in the Sister of the Scabberds Calender, and annually kept Holiday.


Whisk. We have good reason so to do; for those Baudy-Courts are such
scarcrowes to our capering Trade, that we have been so troubled with the
Sumners, Apparitors, Promooters, Snap-dragons and Smel-smocks, we could not
lie in our beds at quiet for them, but we should have commendations from one
spiritual Judge or other.


Pig. I; and if they met not with us, they would clap a Paper upon the Door as
if the house had been infected, or to be let; I know not what a pore they call
it, I think a Quorum nomen or some such damnd name: by this Charm we were
forced presently to walk to the Consisting Court in Paul's; or they would
excommunicate us from the Church next Sunday.


Whisk. Faith, if they had known our devotion, they would never have troubled
themselves so far; our chief trading is on Sundays; so they do us a
courtesy, and we may stay away cum privilegio.


Pigg. Tush, their Excommunications fright not us; but our Land-ladies (poor
souls) lie in most danger; for them they serve after with Excommunicato
capiendo; and then our Forts are beleaguered with Undersheriffs, Bum-Bayliffs,
Shoulder-clappers, etc. whom we sometimes beat back by violence.


Whisk. That happens but seldom Brother; I am sure Madam Burley of Beech-lane
was feign to compound and pay the Knaves Quartridge: she durst as well bide at
home a whole Shrove-Tuesday, as deny it. There Is an old plump Devil called
Beelzebub haunts her often; that Rogue will never be satisfied, he will devour
more Ale then a Legion of Whores (as he terms them) for love whereof he is
since turned Brewer.


Pigg. Dammee Brother Whiskin, I was ever most troubled with your dapper
Clerks; they will demand the best ware in the house, put their hands in their
pockets nimbly, and come upon us with an injungendo mandamus; they feed high*
and are as hot as Goats to be satisfied: I have kept the door forthem at their
Coitum, and they pay me as a Usurer does a Noble-mans Porter, with God a mercy
Pig: but sometime I help them to a ripe Medlar, and within a week after they
will catch a running Nag.


Whisk. I, but now we may fit them for their swaggering and stand on our
Pantofles; this happy downfall of the Doctors Commons is as welcome news to our
Regiment as a rich Fathers death to his Prodigal Son.


Pigg. True, Jack Whiskin; now my golden days come in: I intend to keep my
footboy ere long; my Revennues will quickly swell to a high pith; not a
Cockatrice shifts a smock without my privity, nor opens her Shop without my
license. O my conscience were I free of any Company, I should within two years
be called upon for Sheriff; a scarlet gown would be come me rarely.


Whisk. I grant it, and make thy habit with thy face suitable. The very gilding
of thy face cost more then any Broker will lend on it; yet it is wonderful rich,
one can scarce put a pins head betwixt a Rubie and a Pearl.


Pigg. Faith Jack how rich so ere it be, it nere cost me twopence, I thank my
Stars I am respected by the bravest Boys in Town; they grace me with the name
of Cousin. I flesh and furnish with variety young Gallants, whose stomachs can
digest nothing but raw mutton, and they fill my Fob for it with their bounties,
and fox my Nose at their own proper charges. I am now puveying for a Gent. a
young Leveret; therefore I must take leave, and cannot stay.


Whisk. Well go thy way Tom: thou have a priority of thy whole Profession: I Will
have The destruction of Doctors Commons proclaimed, that the Lemmonds may trade
with more security: they will now keep open-house, dance Levalto's for joy, and
danme a Tun in healths to its confusion.


Farewell.
The last Will and Testament of DOCTORS COMMONS.
I DOCTORS COMMONS, of the Parish of St. BENEDICTS Pauls-Wharfe London, being
very aged, and sorely shaken both in Body and mind by a Westminster Ague; and
perceiving by general Computation, and sundry apparent Symptoms, that I
cannot long continue, but my time draws near to an end; yet nevertheless for
the present of perfect memory; (to avoid all Suits and Controversies that
hereafter may arise concerning my Estate, or any part or parcel thereof, and
to the intent and purpose that my contentious days may be consummated and
ended in peace) Do by these presents constitute, ordain, declare and make
this my last Will and Testament in manner and Form following.

First, and principally, I bequeath my Soil to the Salt-peeter-men to be made
into Gunpowder, which shall only be employed for the discharge of the new
Cannons. Item, I bequeath my whole Bulk and Body to the Earth from whence it
came, decently but not sumptuously to be buried, in the Convocation House
adjacent to the Cathedral Church of St. Paul's London aforesaid according the
discretion of my Executors hereafter named. Item, for my personal Estate,
(having never been possessed of any Lands) I willingly bequeath the Judges.
Vicars-Generalls, Chancellors, Commissaries, Archdeacons, Deanes, Chapters,
and their Surrogates; as also all high Commissioners, Judges, Delegates,
Advocates, and Legum Doctores quoscunque (O G, the great Commissary, alias Dr.
Roan only excepted) to the high Court of Parliament* there to be ordered
according to their merits and deservings. Item, all my Procurators, Registers,
Deputy-Registers, Proctors, Examinors, and public Notaries I bequeath to the
Courts of Kings Bench, Common Pleas, at Westminster, there to be admitted
Attourneys, (in case there be not enough already, or Prohibition to the
contrary.) Item, I will and bequeath all my fifty Pound Clerks to their Friends
in the Country, or the Justices of Peace and Quorum, to be employed as Clerks
use, tho wiser then their Worships. Item, I bequeath all my Iourney-men
sub-journeymen, Hackney and Penny-lease Clerks, to Chancery Lane Offices, and
Brittanick Sir Hugh Prestar to the Star Chamber. Item, I will and bequeath all
my Pursevants, Messengers, Apparators, Cryers, Sumners, Beadles and Promooters,
etc. to the under-Sheriffs, or to be sent to their Father the Devil for he has
most right to them. Item, all my Writings, Manuscripts, Records, Transcripts,
Prescripts, Postscripts, and Subscripts. I will and bequeath as follows. All
my great Books of Acts to be divided between the Fortune and the Bull; for they
spoil many a good Play for want of Action. My Decrees to the Courts of
Chancery. My Sentences to those Orators that imitate Tullies Quanquam te Marci
Fili etc. My Bonds to large measuring Tailors; my Bills of Transmission to
retailing Tobacconists; my incontinent Articles to Bloomsbury. Long Acre, and
other places of good Fellow-ship; My Libels of defamation to all the Scolds at
Billings-gate and elsewhere to be orderd by their discretions. Lastly, I will
and bequeath my new Cannons, and the Oath, etc. to the Tower to defend him that
made them. And all the roast of my Manuscripts, Escripts, Writings, and
superfluous Papers whatsoever to Cooks, Bakers, Grocers, and Chandlers. Item,
I make the Scotch-men my Executors, (who (I doubt not) but with all diligence
will see the execution of this my last Will and Testament, and desire they will
see these my Legacies paid and performed immediately after my decease. In
witness whereof, I the said Doctors Commons have hereunto set my hand and
Seal this 26. of June in the year of our Lord. 1641.

Signed, sealed, and declared in the presence of, W. C. R. P. B. K.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London in the Year, 1641.


