A PLEA FOR PEACE: SHOWING THE DIGNITY OF Princes, against the many Railings
of the Rabble, the Invectives of the Ignorant, and Murmurs of the Malicious.
Written by a Well-wisher to the peace of this our Sion.

September 22. London, Printed for Francis Coals. 1642.

A Plea for Peace.
THat the Government of the Civil Magistrate is the Ordinance and Institution
of the Almighty, I hope, at this time needs no disputation, for that I believe
it remains without and beyond all matter of controversy, the Lord himself
not having only testified with acceptance and approbation thereof, but with
much commendation has set forth its honor and dignity to his people, as in
Psalm. 82. 1, 6. God stands in the Congregation of the mighty, he judges
among the Gods. I have said, ye are Gods, and all of ye are children of the
most High. Prove. 8. 15. By me Kings reign and Princes decree Justice. And in
the 16. By me Princes rule. Romans 13. 1, 2. Let every soul be subject to the
higher Powers, for there is no power but of God the powers that be are ordained
of God, whosoever resists the power resists the Ordinance of God, and they
that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. And in the 5. verse. he
concludes, that we must needs be subject not only for wrath but for
conscience sake. Esaias 49. 23. Kings shall be nursing fathers and Queens shall
be nursing mothers. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. I exhort therefore that first of all
supplications, prayers, and intercessions, and giving of thanks be made (for
all men) for Kings and all that are in Authority, as if the Apostle had said
especially for them, adding further reason, That we may lead a quiet life in
all godliness and honesty, as if he there intended to teach Christians
(whatsoever their condition were) not to think of other weapons to mend
themselves than only their prayers; many other places of Scripture might be
alleged to this purpose, but these I suppose are sufficient to let men know
how detestable it is to the ears of God to heat a wicked Shimei cursing and
railing against the Prince of his people, a sin too too common in these our
days, not only among the basest of men, but even in the Priests and pastors
of the people, who should teach them a lesson of meekness, modesty, and
moderation, in stead of which they stir them up to madness, sedition, tumults,
and faction, by rendering in what in them lie the person of sacred Majesty
odious to all men, but whether in so doing they spit not in the face of the
Almighty and strike at his honor in the person of his Ministry, he that has
an eye to see let him see. To stand here to make a large relation of the
several sorts of Government, or what jurisdiction would best suit with this or
that people were a business to as little purpose as profit, and therefore
briefly the best way is to fall quickly on the matter intended, for if we
compare without circumstance the several estates together it will not be
difficult to discern which of them in profit overbalanceth the other, if they
be impartially compared together; for as the way is easy to fall from kingdom
into tyranny, so it is no way harder to fall from the rule of many to the
faction of a few, and most facill of all from a plebean Government to fall to
sedition, but whatsoever the Lord has established among us, it is not only
unsound but unsafe to seek to alter it, for that in so doing we contemn the
providence of God, whatsoever therefore it has pleased that eternal Majesty
to set over us, whether Kings over Kingdoms, Senators or Officers over free
Cities, whosoever he makes Rulers in power over us it is our praise to yield
obedience to them, and first acknowledging their powers from God let us
reverently esteem them as the deputies of God. Many indeed there are who hold
the Civil Magistrate in a kind of venerable estimation, as things expedient
for the common benefit, accounting them in themselves no more in a manner than
as necessary evils, but if they cast their eye upon the rule of all good, they
shall find themselves bound to a far greater respect. 1 Pet. 2. 17. Fear God,
and honor the King; as if the fear of the one were inseperably joined with the
honor of the other. Solomon Prove 24. 21. as with a self fame conclusion
says, My son fear thou the Lord and the King. And no whit inferior is that
example of Paul before alleged, that we obey not only for wrath but
conscience, as he had said, that in so doing we yield our obedience to God, we
must be obedient to them in every respect, obeying their proclamations, paying
their tributes, and what not which stands not opposite to the Almighty; for as
Paul says, Every soul must be subject to the higher powers, and who so
resists it, resists the Ordinance of God: and since the Magistrate cannot
be resisted but with the resistance of God himself, though he be altogether
naked, the Almighty is ever strongly armed to take vengeance on those who in
themselves do fight against him. Nor is this subjection and obedience limited
or restrained, so that it shall extend no further than to such Princes whose
pious and godly endeavors are still executing their duties to the people, but
even to the most lewd and malevolent Magistrate amongst men, and to that
purpose mark the close of that most reverend, learned, and orthodox Divine
Master John Call. l. 4. c. 2. sect. 24. he calls a Prince the father of his
Country, the Pastor of his People, the keeper of peace, the protector of
righteousness, the revenger of innocence, and says he, he is worthy to be
accounted a mad man who allows not of such a Government. But where as this is
in a manner the experience of all ages, that of Princes some being careless of
all things, do without all care slothfully wallow in delights, other some
addicted to their gain do set out to sale all Laws, privileges, judgments,
and grants; other some spoil the poor Communalty for money, to be wasted on
their own prodigal and lavish expendings; other some exercise mere robberies,
in pilling of houses, defiling of virgins and matrons, murdering of innocents,
many cannot be persuaded that such should be acknowledged for Princes whose
authority they ought to obey so far as they may, for that in so great an
unworthiness, so much contrary not only to the duty of a Magistrate, but
even of a man, they behold no form of the image of God which should be in a
Magistrate: and therefore conclude, that they ought not to acknowledge such a
Governor. And to say truth, this feeling of affection has ever been
naturally implanted in the minds of all men, no less to hate and abhor
Tyrants, than to love and honor lawful Kings. But if we look to the word of
God (says he) it will lead as further, teaching not only to subject our selves
to the government of such, who execute their office toward us well, and as they
ought: but also unto theirs, who perform nothing less than the duty of
Princes; for as those who rule for the good and benefit of a Commonwealth, are
true patterns of his bounty; so they that rule unjustly, wickedly, and
wilfully, are set up by him to punish the naughtiness of the people. And that
both equally have that Majesty wherewith he furnishes: lawful power,
concluding thus (in these words) that in a most naughty man, and most unworthy
of all honor, (if he have the Public Power in possession) remains that
noble and divine power, which the Lord by his Word gives to the Ministers or
his righteousness and judgment, and therefore that of his Subjects he ought
to be had in as great reverence and estimation (for matter of public
obedience) as if he were the very best of Kings that could be given them.
Nebuchadnezzar was little better than a robber and murderer, for he was a
strong invader and destroyer of others (and most certainly) he was an Idolater;
yet mark what the Prophet Daniel speaks of him, Dan. 2. 37. Thou, O King, art
a King of Kings, for the God of Heaven has given thee a Kingdom, power, and
strength, and glory, and wheresoever the children of men dwell. The beasts of
the field, and the fowls of the Heaven has he given into thine hand, and
has made thee Ruler over them all. Then again Dan. 5 18 19. O thou King, the
most mighty God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy father a kingdom, and majesty, and
glory, and honor, and for the Majesty that he gave him, all people, nations,
and languages trembled, and feared before him: whom he would he slew, and whom
he would he kept alive, and whom he would he set up, and whom he would he put
down. Samuel likewise premonishing the children of Israel of what they should
suffer under their Kingly government tells them (yet in Gods own words) 1 Samuel 8. 10, 11, 12. And Samuel told all the words of the Lord unto the people
that asked of him a King, and he said, This shall be the manner of the King
that shall (...) over you: he will take your sons, and appoint them for
himself for his charriots, and to be his horsemen, and some shall run before
his charriots; and he will appoint him Captains over thousands, and Captains
over fifties, and will set them to eat his ground, and to reap his harvest,
and to make his instruments of war, and instruments of his charriots, and he
will take your daughters to be Confectionaries, and to be Cooks, and to be
Bakers, and he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your olive-yards,
even the best of them, and give them to his servants. And he will take the
tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and give to his Officers, and to his
servants; and he will take your menservants, and your maidservants, and your
goodliest young men, and your Asses, and put them to his work, etc. As if
Samuel should have absolutely concluded, that whatsoever be the lewdness and
licentiousness of the Prince, there is nothing but obedience left to the
people, which they no sooner run out of, but they as it were run from God in
his Ordinances, and not only absolutely oppose him, but contemptuously despite
him and spit in his face.

David when he had his great persecutour Saul at his mercy, and though himself
by the ordinance of God was anointed King in his room, yet would not so much as
lift up his hand to hurt him, for when Abishai with his own spear would have
smote him, and nailed his body to that ground whereon he lay, 1 Samuel 26. 9, 23,
24, 25. David cries out, Who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords
Anointed and be guiltless? No, says that good man, the Lord shall smite him,
ere his day shall come to die, ere he shall descend into the battle, and
perish: the Lord forbid that I should stretch forth my hand against the Lords
Anointed: and well might Saul freely confess and proclaim him more righteous
than himself, who when he took the spear and pot from his head, might as
easily have taken his head from his shoulders; but he was well content with
this conscientious conclusion, As thy life was set by this day in mine eyes, so
let my life be much set by in the eyes of the Lord, and let him deliver me out
of all tribulation, as if that Worthy of Worthies should have made this
inference, though thou wickedly and maliciously seek my life, yet art thou
the Anointed of the Lord, so that should I have laid hand on thee, I should
have made my self abominable to him, and in stead of delivering me from, he
would have cast me into, for my crying offense even the greatest tribulation.
Curse not, neither speak evil of the Princes of thy people, no not in thought,
says Solomon, 1 Samuel 24. 4, 5, 6. And the same David in another place, when he
might have cut the throat of his enemy Saul was conscious of sin in the cutting
his garment, for says the Text, his heart smote him because he had cut off
only Saul's skirt: good men are conscientious of the credit of a King while the
wicked curse and blaspheme his name, if cutting only the skirt of a King made
such smitings in the heart of a King, what may it do in Subjects, who would
clip the wing of their Princes power, and inslave him to infranchise
themselves. This amongst us is daily done in the common discourse of every
scoundrell, but let such remember that cursing Shimei, escaped not without
reward for his cursings, even then when he thought himself safe and secure.

What the power of Parliaments are, I question not; yet it is out of all
question, that they are by duty bound carefully and conscienciously to
discharge that trust which the people have committed unto them, and to defend
their just liberties and privileges, so far as they bold correspondencie with
the known Laws of the Land, yet with obedience unto that Majesty from whence
as from their fountain and original (next under God) those freedoms first
came, rather willingly to lose some thing of what is ours, that any way to
encroach on the least of his, with consideration, that as Princes have their
Jurisdictions from Heaven, so Parliaments hold their power from Princes.

It is a most horrible and hateful hearing for men continually to cry out on
Authority, one part of the King, the other of the Parliament, and that without
either mean or moderation, and for the most part (setting their malevolent
dispositions aside) without the least show of reason for their railings (nay
should they go to it to morrow as many call it and desire) not one of a
thousand I believe (except by tradition) were able to give an account for what,
though for whom they fight, and which is most to be lamented, Ministers in the
Pulpit are not ashamed to preach and pray against all means of moderation, or
reconciliation, lest as they say all should again be spoiled which has been so
happily begun.

These men little consider the great division of the Kingdom, where the father
is of one side, the son on the other, one brother on the one side, another on
that; the Nephew for his Prince, the Uncle for the Parliament; here one
Kinsman, there another; the Father ready to sheathe his sword in the body of
his son, the son ready to rip out the bowels of his father; a brother
bathing in the blood of a brother and kinsman cutting the throat of another;
friend butchering friend, and neighbor killing neighbor, and all things
brought to such a barbarous cruelty, as if there were no Religion left amongst
men beside murder, no rule but rapine, no regulation but ruin and destruction;
children snatched from the parents wing, babes from the mothers tender breast,
and barborously butchered before their eyes, wives rent from the bosom of
their mourning husbands and ravished, they being forced to be spectators.
Virgins whose tender years scarce ever did admit so much as thought of man,
deflowred before their parents mournful eyes: Nay Churches will scarce escape
from being orespread with gore, the Table where we have often freely fed on by
faith the Body and Blood of a Redeemer, now stained even with the blood of
those our painful Pastors, who all their times have labored to instruct those
to eternal life, who now with earnestnes do seek their death Sure if we could
but attain to a true apprehension of these ensuing miseries, the inseparable
companions of homebred broils, it could not choose but mollify the flintiest
heart, and make the marble melt with tears of mourning, and force these
praters which now preach nothing else but war, to tune their tongues with
pious prayers for peace, which God of his infinite mercy once more settle
amongst us to the glory of his sacred name, and the good of his poor
distressed people, and let all good subjects say Amen.

I will conclude all with two verses of the Prophetical Psalmist; He that
delights in blood shall not live out half his days, and the Lord shall
scatter the people that delight in war.

FINIS.

