AN EXACT ABRIDGMENT IN ENGLISH, OF The COMMENTARIES, or REPORTS of the learned
and famous Lawyer, EDMOND PLOWDEN, An Apprentice of the Common Law.

Concerning diverse Cases and Matters in Law, and the Arguments thereupon; in
the times of the Reigns of King Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, King Philip, and
Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, with the Exceptions to the Pleadings, and
Answers thereunto; the Resolutions of the Matters in Law, and all other
principal Matters arising upon the same.

By F. H. of the Inner Temple London, Esquire

Tractant fabrilia fabri. London, Printed by R. White, and T. Roycroft, for
Henry Twyford, and are to be sold at his Shop in Vine Court in the Middle
Temple, 1650.

A Table of the several Cases Contained in this Book.
A
ARchers and Saunders Case, Indictment. Fol. 28. Part. 2
B
Berkley Knight, Lord Berkly, Ej. firm. fol. 223 Brett against Rigden
Replevin. fol. 195 Bracebridge against Cook, Ej. firm, fol. 44. part 2
Bracebridge against Clouse, fol. 6. p. 2 Bransby against Grantham, Ej. firm.
f. 48. part 2 Browning against Beeston, Trespass. fol. 102 Buckley against Rice
Thomas, debt. fol. 96
C
Colthirst against Bejushyn, Trespass, Fol. 20 Chapman against Dalton, Covenant.
fol. 169 Carrill against Cuddington, Court of Wards. fol. 176 Coals case,
Pardon. fol. 232 Clear against Brook alias Cobham Wast. fol. 18. p. 2 Croft
against Howell, Ej. firm. fol. 51. part 2 Crown, matters concerning it. fol.
87 Croker against Partridge maintenance. fol. 74
D
Dive against Maningham, debt. fol. 64 Earl of Darby, Challenge. fol. 95
Duchy of Lancaster. fol. 134 Delamer against Barnard, Trespass. fol. 200 Davies
against Pepis, debt. fol. 17. part 2. Doctor Ellis Case, Indictment. fol. 88
E
Ellis Case, Indictment fol. 38 Eyston against Studd, Ej. firm. Fol. 29. p. 2
Ear against Snow, Ej. firm. fol. 43. p. 2
F
Fulmerston against Steward, trespass, fol. 89 Fish against Brocket, Error.
fol. 160
G
Greisbrooke against Fox, detinue. fol. 163 Grendon against the Bishop of
Lincoln. fol. 37. part 2
H
Hill against Grange, trespass. fol. 124 Dame Hales Case for forfeiture. fol.
153 Hare and Bickly, Annuity. fol. 50. p. 2 Hadden against Brook, wast. fol.
18. p. 2
K
Kidwelly against Brand, trespass. fol. 71
L
The Earl of Leicesters Case, trespass. f. 224 Ludford against Gretton,
trespass. f. 36. p. 2
M
Mantle against Redsole, Replevin. fol. 86 Matters of the Crown at Shrewsbury.
f. 87 Mines Information. fol. 184 Manors at the suite of Vernon. fol. 10. p. 2
N
Norwood against Read, action Sur le Case. fol. 126 Earl of Northumberlands
Case, Information. fol. 148 Sir Henry Nevells Case in the Exchequer. fol. 221
Nicholls against Nicholls. fol. 30. p. 2
O
Osborne against Carden, and Iay, trespass. fol. 175
P
Platt against the Sheriffs of London, debt. fol. 42 Partridge against
Strange. etc. debt. fol. 74 Pollards assise of Fresh force. fol. 85 Parson of
Hony-lanes Case, Assise of Freshforce. ibid. Paramor against Yardley,
trespass. f. 53. p. 2 Pepis at the suite of Davies. fol. 17. p. 2
R
Reniger against Fogassa, Information. fol. 1 Rosse against Pope, Audita
Querela. f. 73 Rice Thomas at the suit of Buckley, debt. f. 96 Ratcliffes case
in the Court of Wards. f. 160
S
Say against Smith and Fuller, Replevin. f. 161 Stradling against Morgan, debt.
fol. 128 Saunders against Freeman, Quid Juris clamat. fol. 133 Smith and
Fullers case Replevin. fol. 161 Sherington and Pledalls case, trespass. f. 177
Stowell and Zouch entry Sur, disseisen. f. 204 Scholastic N^wys her case
against Lark. fol. 1. part 2 Smith and Stapletons case, repl. fol. 10. p. 2
Sobie and Molins, Attachment upon a Prohibition. fol. 26. p. 2 Saunders and
Archers case, Indictment. f. 28. p. 2
T
Townsends case in the Court of Wards. f. 93 Throgmorton against Tracy, second
deliverance. fol. 112
V
Vernon against Manors, Formedon. Challenge. fol. 10. p. 2
W
Wimbish against Tayllois, trespass. fol. 46 Lord Willoughbies Case, Assise.
fol. 73 Willion against Berkley, Ej. firm. fol. 137 Woodward against the Lord
Darcie, debt. fol. 126. Wrotesly against Adams, Ej. firm. f. 127 Sir Thomas
Wroths case, Petition. f. 20. p. 2 Welkden against Elkington, trespass. fol.
44. part 2 Walsinghams case, Information for Intrusion. fol. 59. p. 2.
THE FIRST PART.
Reniger against Fogassa.
An Information by Reniger, against Fogassa, upon the Statute of

1. Ed. 6. cap. 13.
FOgassa shipped 4500 Kintals of Woad for England, 2 E. 6. in the Exchequer
Chamber.
and upon the sea a tempest did arise, and endanger the drowning of the ship;
for the safety whereof, and of the men and goods in it, he casts part of the
Woad into the sea, and after (arrives at the Port with the residue; and before
the landing, Fogassa came to the Collector of the Subsidy, and showed unto him
the accident aforesaid, and that by reason thereof, he knew not the certainty
of the remnant, and prayed him to make entry of 2000. Kintals of Woad, which he
supposed were left; and if more were remaining, then he would pay Custom for it
according to the rate when the certainty should appear; and desired license for
to land it, which was granted; and before the woad was weighed, Reniger
informed against him for landing 1693 Kintals of woad more then 4500. Kintals,
the Subsidy not paid, nor the Collector agreed with for it; to which he
pleaded the matter aforesaid, and concluded; and super hoc, he did agree, and
upon the agreement Issue was taken, and the Defendant gave in evidence, the
especial agreement aforesaid, and upon the evidence, the King Demurs, and
adjudged for Fogassa the Defendant, by force of a Privy Seal sent by the King
to that purpose. But the opinion of all the Justices and Barons, except Hales
and Montague, were with the Defendant.

1. For that this agreement uncertain, and conditional, is an agreement, and so
says the words of the Statute, which suffices, because the Statute is penal,
and shall be expounded strictly against offenders, and shall not be intended
beneficial for the King to be an agreement.

2. Admit it to be an Agreement, yet here this incertaintie is reducible to a
certainty, by circumstances, viz. by weighing, which shall be done by the
Collector at his pleasure.

3. Admit that the agreement ought to be certain at first, yet here the casting
out of the woad for the avoiding of greater mischief, viz. The drowning of the
ship, men, and goods, the necessity, for the avoiding of eminent danger of
death, the compulsion, for fear of death, caused his ignorance to be
involuntary, and by consequence, his agreement uncertain, every one of which by
it self, may dispense with any law, a fortiori, altogether.

4. When the defendant pleads a special agreement in the Affirmative, and
concludes upon it, and super hoc agreement, the conclusion has not waved the
matter aforesaid, as if it had been in the Negative.

5. He had performed the intent of the Statute by this agreement, for when the
Collector has weighed the woad, that he may do his pleasure, then the King
shall have an action upon the agreement, and if he does not weigh, it is the
folly of the Collector.

Griffith, the Kings Solicitor. Agreement, or concord nudum pactum, as in 20.
H. 6. In Trespass the Defendant pleads concord between them, That he shall pay
20. s. to the Plantiff at a day to come; it is not a bar, because it is not
satisfaction, nor recompense for it, because he shall not have debt after the
day, so 9. E. 4.19. in Trepsass upon 5. R. 2. Defendant pleads accord, That the
Plantiff should reenter, and have the land, and that the Defendant deliver to
the Plantiff all the Evidences concerning the land, and said that the Plantiff
had entered, and that he had delivered all the evidences unto him; It is no bar,
for it intends the proper evidences of the Plantiff, and so no satisfaction of
the wrong, but if it conveys to him Title to the evidence, then it is a good
bar, so in 15. H. 6. in Trespass against him by the Plantiff, he pleads, That
they agree, that if the Defendant does his endeavor for to agree them for a
Trespass by the Plantiff to S. That then, etc. and says, That he did his
endeavor, so that they are accorded: it is no plea, because no satisfaction;
but if he says, That he has accorded them at his own costs, it is a good bar.

Gaudy the elder, for the Defendant. Arbitrament, E. 4.51. Fitz. H. 4. Br. 3.
accord is a good bar in Trespass, because he may have debt at the day appointed
for the payment of the sum agreed to be paid in recompense, and so the
Trespass is converted into another thing, viz. Debt by the Arbitrators, which
are judges of it: and so accord countervails satisfaction in facto, otherwise,
it is of a concord executory, 6. H. 7.11. because the pleading of the concord
confesses a wrong, and it is not reason that the Plantiff in an action
thereupon, should be barred without satisfaction. And so shall the King be
satisfied here. Also in concord, the wrong to be recompensed precede the
agreement, but here the agreement precedes the wrong supposed, and comes not
after the wrong, as in concord, and therefore this case may not be resembled to
the case before of accord. Incertaintie at the beginning, which may be reduced
to certainty by matter ex post facto, countervaileth certainty, ab initio; as
a man leaseth all his Acres in D. paying for every one 12. d. it is a good
reservation, because when the Acres are measured, the Rent shall be certain; so
a gift of two Acres, of the one for Life, and of the other in Fee, by the
Feoffment, of the one he shall have Fee in this ab initio: so Lessee of
white-acre, and Black-acre for life: the remainder of the one in Fee, to a
stranger, and the Lessor licenses him for to cut Trees in White-acre: now he
shall be adjudged to have the remainder of this Acre, ab initio; so the thing
which at the commencement was uncertain, is made certain. So in Wheelers case,
14. H. 8.17. So a Lease for so many years as I. S. shall name, is good, when he
shall name the years. So 17. E. 4.1. A. bargains that B. shall have his wheat
when he has viewed it, if he please, paying 4. s. the Acre, good contract, if
he paies when he carries it away, yet the quantity and sum uncertain at the
first, so here, when the Collector has weighed the woad. And therefore this
conditional agreement does countervail an agreement certain at the beginning.
And where acts ought to be performed strictly, yet in diverse cases the
performance of the intent, and not the words, good, for it countervaileth the
performance of the words: So here. But performance of the words, and not of the
intent, is not good: as Lit. fol. 182. of conditions upon a Feoffment, for to
give again to I. S. and his wife in special Tail, and they die, and the
Feoffees make an estate to their issue, and the heirs of his father and mother,
good, because the intent of the condition is performed. So E. 4.3. Obligation
upon condition to infeoff I. S. and he Lease for years, and Release in Fee, it
is a good performance, and a good Feoffment, and yet the words of a condition
shall be performed as strictly as a Statute.

Bradshaw the Kings Attorney. The mutual assent of the parties upon a thing
uncertain, is in Law but a vain communication before the certainty known, as in
37. H. 6.8. A man promises in marriage with his daughter so much as I. S. shall
arbitrate. The party which shall marry his daughter shall not have it, if he
marry her, until I. S. has made his award, and appointed it; for before that
it is reduced into certainty, it is but a vain communication. So in 20. H. 6. A
man Leases to A. for so many years as B. shall name, he cannot enter into the
land, before that B. has named the number of years; And the witness of the
Defendant, which says, That he found suerties, and has not showed who, or
what, as he ought, is wanting both in the name and ability of the sureties,
which the Court ought to adjudge of, as in 22. E. 4.40. A man that was bound to
show a sufficient discharge of an annuity, pleaded that he had offered to show
it to him, and he refused to see it, and held no good plea. Agreement according
to the Statute in issue shall be intended general; viz. certain, and special;
viz. uncertain in evidence proves not the issue, neither is it pursuant to the
issue; as in 31. H. 6. Upon non est factum pleaded in debt, witnesses say, That
it was delivered at another place then it did bear date, whereupon the
Defendant demurred, and the Plantiff was barred, because this proved not it to
be his Deed; for the delivery shall be intended where it was dated, and the
witnesses prove the contrary, and so the evidence warrants not the issue; so in
18. H. 6.16. One deed of Lease for life without Livery given in evidence, shall
not maintain upon Freehold, pleaded the issue; so in 14. E. 3. Upon traverse
of a gift in Tail, the witnesses prove that another made the gift, and awarded
that the Plaintiff should be barred, so if he had pleaded the general agreement
in bar, and special in the rejoinder, it is a departure; as in 6. H. 7.8. In
Trespass the Defendant pleaded a descent to him, and the Plaintiff said, That
after the Defendant infeoffed him; and the Denfendant said, That it was upon
condition, and for breach thereof he entered; this is a departure from E. 3.50.
So here the Defendant had but one witness which proves for him, which is not
sufficient, and so judgment shall be given for the King.

Atkins for the Defendant. A witness produced to prove a thing, if he says.
That he knows nothing of the matter, his deposition is void; so, if he depose
negatively, as to say no more was not entered then so much, and if no witness,
the knowing of the Jurors aid not the trial of the matter; and a Verdict given
contrary to the testimony of witnesses, good. It is not needful to aver that,
which of necessity must be intended; as that the King has a Beam there;
special agreement is an agreement, as a Feoffment upon condition, is a
Feoffment, and so this word Agreement, includes every agreement, by which the
evidence well maintains the issue. The Statute speaks not of surety, and
peradventure intends it not, and therefore in vain to speak of it; and
therefore it may be he has not answered to this exception. Agreement in our
Law is threefold, viz. Executed at the beginning of it, with payment intended,
by the Statute of 25. E. 3. cap. 3. which says, That goods bought by
fore-stallers, are forfeited to the King, if the buyer had made agreement with
the seller; such agreement is not meant in our case, because then, the Statute
should not be intended in the disjunctive; for then the first, and the second
clause should be all one: but the word, [Or] disjoyns the clauses. Agreement to
an act made by another, as in 20. E. 4.9. To a disseisin to his use, makes him
a disseisor from the beginning: and 26. H. 8. cap. 3. intends such, because it
speaks of payment, or agreement for first fruits, etc. and common usage to pay
after, upon obligation made before, proves this, which intends agreement
executory; and here agreement is intended executory; because it is not the
first, nor the second; and an agreement executory, is Duplex, the one certain
at the beginning, as this of first fruits; the other by matter ex post facto,
upon certainty to be known, as here; and such agreement executory, the Statute
will warrant; for no Law will punish him, in whom there is no default, and
where he cannot prevent the mischance by no possibility, for the necessity of
the matter, and for that inevitable chance shall not prejudice any: 20. H.
7.11. Fineus: A man by the Common Law may kill another in his own defense, or
as a champion, for the necessary safeguard of his life, and the Trial of right;
so notwithstanding the custom of the Realm, new Natura brevium, 94. b. If
enemies of the King steal of Guests, the Hoastler is

Sanders, the Kings Sergeant. Notwitstanding that an agreement conditional is
included in the words of the Statute, viz. The Collector not agreed with; yet
every Statute, although it be penal, shall be taken as the makers intended; for
the Statute of Waste, is; If any make waste in Lands which he holds by
Demise, etc. yet if his Estate be Ex ligatione, it shall be punishable in
waste; and yet the Statute gives Ex demissione only, suo de assignat. and so
it is holden, 10. H. 6.3. But Gloucester, cap. 5. W. cap. 14. nor Martebridge,
cap. 13. speaks nothing de demissione. So, quia emptores terrarum, viz. W. 3.
speaks secundum quantitatem terrae intend. valor. So 4. E. 4.12. An
information for shipping Wool without sureties, of the carrying of Bullion
according to the 14. E. 3. the last chapter, holden good, because the finding
of sureties is not repealed by the general words of 36. of E. 3. cap. 11. which
gives the old custom of half a Mark for every sack after three years, nor of
45. E. 3. cap. 4. which imposes no charge upon Wool, other then Custom, and
Subsidy granted to the King, and without assent of Parliament; and the two
last Sta^intend not for to discharge Bullion, but great Subsidies upon Wool
after 3. years; so that the mind and intent of the makers shall expound the
general, and doubtful words of Star and abridge the generalty of them: so here
it shall be intended an agreement certain. Also because the Commons pray the
King, That he will be pleased to accept of their Grant, for that the words of
the Statute, which is their Grant, shall be taken more beneficial for the King,
and most strong against the Grantors, according to the Principle of the Common
Law, in Prerogativa Regis, 17. Ed. 2. Rastal, wards 13. is the Grant of the
Commons to the King, which says, The King shall have the custody of all the
Lands of such which hold of him by Knights service in Capite, whereof the
Tenants were seized in their Demeasne, as of Fee at the day of their death, of
whomsoever they hold also by like Knights Service, and notwithstanding that Fee
is commonly taken to be Fee-Simple, yet the King shall have of Tail because it
shall be construed most strongly for the K. where it has two intendments.
Agreements upon which the Common Law gives no remedy, are void, and not good;
as in 19. H. 6.36. Upon an information for the forging of false Deeds, the
Defendant pleads Arbitrament made, viz. That the Plaintiff shall not farther
prosecute his Writ against the Defendant; and says also, That the Defendant
shall be nonsuited in the Assize; This is no Plea, because nonsuited founds
not in satisfaction, and cannot compel him to be nonsuited: for the award is
not good, if it be not executed wholly, or the thing awarded may be recovered
by action; and therefore in 6. H. 7.10. In Trespass, to say, That he has paid
money, but he has not made his windows, which the Heir may compel him to do,
for the concord is entire, but wants execution in all; and indeed before action
brought, is not good, then it is performed, yet not immediately, and therefore
it was held no Plea. So in 27. ass. pl. 5. A Baily known pledge the Ox of his
Master for Wheat, and if he pays not, etc. he shall keep the Ox always. This
shall bind the Master, because the wheat comes to his use, otherwise not,
because he had no recompense. So in 17. E. 4.1. In Trespass for the taking of
wheat, the Defendant pleads, That the Plaintiff sold it, if he liked it upon
view, he should have it, paying 40. d. and afterward he saw it, liked it, and
took it; this is no good justification, because he does not allege payment,
so here. So contracts conditional are good, when they are performed, but before
performance, they are only communications.

Brook, Recorder of London, for the Defendant. Where matters are to be tried in
the Civil Law, there ought to be two witnesses, here not necessary; For where
trial is by twelve men, because the Inquest may give a precise Verdict, where
there is no Testimony, or Verdict, or Evidence, or Evidence be contrary to the
Witnesses, as in 14. H. 7.2. the Inquest acquit one indicted of murder; he is
arrained, and acquit; the Jury shall say, who killed him? although they have no
witnesses, and so witnesses are not necessary, but where the matter is to be
tried by witnesses only; for if the witnesses were so necessary, then it would
ensue, That the Jurors should not give their Verdict contrary to the witnesses,
where the Law is merely contrary; for when witnesses for trial of the Fact join
with the Jury, if they cannot agree with the Jurors, the Verdict of the 12.
shall be taken, and the witnesses rejected; wherefore this point is clear
enough. And as to this which has been said by Bradshaw, That the deposition of
Da. will make against us; for that he says, That S. showed to him, that the
entry was not made for more then 2000 Kintals: Sir, this saying is nothing to
the purpose, for if he cannot say something to prove the issue, in which he
comes to depose, then it is neither with us, nor against us, but it is of the
same effect in Law, as if he had said nothing, or that he knew not of the
matter; and so this point is also clear enough. And as to that which has been
moved also by Mr. Attorney; That he ought to show what rate in certain: Sir,
this needs not here, because it is expressed in the Statute, 12. d. of every
20. s. and of general Statutes every one shall take notice. And he argued and
said; That the agreement here shall be good, and is within the intent of the
Statute; for in many Cases, Gifts, and Grants made, will not be certain at the
beginning, and yet shall be good, for that there is a mean to reduce them
afterward to certainty, and yet the nature of Gifts, and Grants is to be
executed presently, and every Gift is an agreement between the parties, and so
is every Grant; and then if Gifts and Grants, (which are also agreements, and
the nature of which is to be executed properly at the time of the making of
them,) it shall be good, notwithstanding they are uncertain at the beginning a
fortiori. Agreements Executory of things shall be good, where they are
uncertain at the first, and to prove that such Gifts, and Grants shall be good,
notwithstanding their incertainty at the first, there are many Cases and
therefore if the King at this day grant over certain Lands, which have come to
his hands before, and Grant over to the Grantee such Liberties, Privileges,
and Jurisdictions, howbeit that the King knows not the certainty of the
Liberties, etc. yet the Grant is good. So in 9. H. 6.27. The King grants to the
Duchess of York an Island, with all Issues and Amerciaments, etc. there it is
holden that the grant is good, yet the King knew not what Issues, or what
Americiaments shall be afterward forfeited; but for that, that when they shall
be forfeit, they will be certainly known, and so has a means to know the
certainty of them; this is the cause that the Grant shall be good. And so in 5.
E. 4. the King Granted to one called Garter, the Office of the King of Heralds,
cum seodis and prosicuis ah antiquo, etc. There this Grant purports a certainty
of the Fees, and Profits belonging to it, and therefore good. And so in 30. H.
6. The King Grants all such Lands as came to him by Attainder, etc. it is good,
although it comprehends no certainty. And so if the King will pardon all Riots,
Pardon is good; howbeit, it comprehends no certainty. 21. H. 6.43. A Parson
grants to me his Tythe-wooll the next year, or perquisites of his Court, the
Grants are good. So Perkins 17. Feoffment of two Acres, to hold the one for
life, the other in Fee, without saying he shall have Fee; if he lose both by
default, he may have Quod ei deforceat for the one, and Writ of right for the
other. So if one grant a rent charge to another, the Grantee may avow, or have
a Writ of annuity. So in 9. E. 4.36. per. Litt. Grant 20. s. or a garment,
good, because certain by the will of the Grantor. So a Lease for so many years
as I. S. shall name, is good. So Perkins Fol. 17. If I have a black and white
Horses, and I give one of them to I. S. this gift is good, notwithstanding the
incertainty by the election of the Donee. And although it is not concluded who
shall weigh, and when, yet it is good, because there is an Officer in every
Port which keeps a Beam, and ought to weigh. And although the Statute do speak
of an agreement certain, yet Law, the reason aswaies exempts something out of
the prohibition of the words of Statutes, as 15. H. 7.2. by Keble, a Prisoner
which breaks Prison, by the words of the Statute is a Felon; but if he break
it when it is on fire, not. So 14. H. 7.29. Stamford, 25. cap. 5. Jurors
severed by a great Tempest, shall not be Amerced, and their Verdict good. So W.
2. cap. 3. Gives not to a Fem Covert Receipt, but where the wife is ready to
answer, yet the wife received by prayer in aid, 20. H. 6.48. and there she is
received, where she is not ready to answer, because otherwise she shall loose
the recompense by warrantie. So W. 2. cap. 1. say, That Dones shall not alien;
yet 5. E. 2. is intended of their Issues, so here, for to avoid mischiefs, etc.

Harris the Kings Sergeant, to the contrary. And formedon in discendre, upon a
gift in free marriage: if the gift is traversed, and a Deed is showed of the
gift in free Marriage. the Remainder over in Fee, or upon traverse of a Lease
for years, alleged without Deed, and the Deed is showed in evidence, this
evidence warrants not the issue: So here an agreement conditional maintains not
the general agreement intended in issue; the Collector could not agree
otherwise then for landing, because the Statute will; as if a Baily pay the
debts of his Master, he shall not be allowed for this in his account, without
specialty; but if he pay Quit-Rents, issuing out of the Land, he shall be
allowed for this, for that the payment of this belongs to his Office. And so
if the Collector accept another Agreement then is intended by the Statute, this
shall not help the party; and said, that agreement upon condition ought to be
performed before it be pleaded; as if I give all the money in my purse to I. S.
he cannot have his action for it, except that he allege the certainty of it;
So here: wherefore judgment shall be given for the King.

Pollard, Sergeant for the Defendant. An agreement upon condition, is an
agreement, as a Feoffment upon condition, is a Feoffment, and included in words
of the issue, (that is to say in this word Agreement, which contains every
agreement. So 36. H. 6.2. In debt upon a Regognisance, and the Defendant says,
That there is no such Recognisance, whereupon they were at issue, and at the
day, etc. a Recognisance with condition was certified, and held good, and that
he had not failed of the Record, because a Recognisance upon condition is held
to be a Recognisance. So here, the agreement general was put in issue, the
which shall be intended the more common agreement, and this is the general
agreement, and the evidence given by W. proves a special agreement, viz. an
agreement upon condition, which is other then the agreement tendered by the
issue; and therefore the Demurrer shall be adjudged for the King, and Informer.
Sir, as to this I answer; That by the arguments made before, nothing has been
put in issue, but if they agree according to the Statute; so here: admitting
that the agreement general had been in issue, but the especial is: The especial
matter, viz. Tempest, and super hoc agreavit, are in the affirmative, and may
stand together; and therefore both remain as one entire matter, and substance
of the issue. As if the Tenant pleads special Bastardy against the in mort
D'ancester, and allege this uncertain, as he ought, viz. That the Plaintiff
was engendered between I. and A. and born before marriage, and then they marry
and conclude as he ought, and so Bastard; This conclusion has not avoided the
special matter before, for if so, then it should be Bastard generally, and
triable by the Bishop, and then shall be by him certified Mulier, because such
is a mulier in the law spiritual, but shall be tried here by Assize; and
therefore the special matter remains, and the issue is taken thereupon. So 3.
H. 7.5. by Keble. One counts of a gift in formedon, and being demandant,
maintains it by recovery in value, by reason of a Warranty; and so gave, the
Tenant ought not to traverse the conclusion, viz. as he should do if he had
avoided the special matter before, because it is matter in fact, triable by the
Country, but he ought to answer to the recovery, triable by Record, which
proves, That the special matter before the conclusion shall remain. So 32. H.
6.14. by Litl. If the Plaintiff in Assize makes to himself a Title, and
concludes, and so he was seized until by the Defendant disseised; now if this
conclusion has avoided the especial matter before, then it ensues that the
Defendant cannot answer to the Title; but the Law is, That he ought to answer
to the Title, and traverse it; by which it is proved, that the conclusion has
not avoided the especial matter before; and in all these cases, the matter
before the conclusion, and the conclusion, are in the Affirmative; as in Debt,
the Defendant pleads payment, and so ows nothing; and in Trespass the Defendant
pleads a gift of the goods, and so not guilty: when it is agreed between any,
That a principal thing shall be done or had, and before that this may be done
or had, there is another thing first to be done, which is not certainly agreed
who shall do the other thing; the Law appoints him which has the most skill,
to do the said other thing. So 9. E. 4.4. One is bound to make the great Bell
of M. tunable with the other Bells; there in that case to say in Debt by
Obligation, That the Bell was not weighed, judgment if action, is no Plea,
because in construction of the Law he shall weigh it, for it belongs to his
Office. So a Tailor bound to make a gown, shall shape the cloth: So here the
Collector in behalf of the King, shall have the Subsidy which is the principal
thing; and therefore he shall weigh, for it belongs to his Office to try the
certainty, for without certainty the King may not be satisfied. And in
Trespass, because that he justisies the necessary circumstance and mean, or
has Title to the principal thing; as R. 2. Fitz. Bar. 333. and Perkins, fol.
23. He may cut and carry trees granted to him, and justify it, although the
grass is spoiled by it. So one may take Fishes in a Pond with Nets, and
justify it, but if he digg a Trench to drain out the water, not. A Collector
may weigh when he pleases; for where one shall have benefit upon the first act
to be done by him, and no time is limited when he shall do it; the Law says,
That it shall be done at his pleasure: So the Mortgager shall pay when he
pleases, when no time is limited; so one may marry the daughter of A. when he
pleases, if no time be limited: so in the principal case, for as much as
payment shall be made to the Collector upon the weighing, and no time is
limited for the weighing, the Law refers the time of it to the will of the
Collector, and so the agreement is good and perfect. 3. H. 7.11. The Sheriff
takes A. by Capias, now he non est inventus, then he shall be a Trespassor ab
initio; but here the not weighing, because the King refers this to the
Collector in the behalf of the King, in his default the agreement shall not be
made void ab initio, in prejudice of the Defendant, which before was good,
notwithstanding that the agreement special is an agreement, as Sanders
confesses; yet it shall be construed best, viz. general for the King, as he
urged. The rules of the Common Law in the construction of Statutes, prohibit
this; for Statutes Penal shall be taken and restrained to their general words,
favorably, and to the benefit, and not prejudice of him against whom the pain
is inflicted, and shall not extend farther then the words, as W. 2. cap. 40.
says, where the husband aliens the land of his wife, quod secta mulieris non
differatur, etc. per minorem aetatem heraedis qui warrantizare debet, and says
not the Heir of the husband, nor of a stranger; yet 18. E. 4.16. and 17. E.
4.59. and postea 47. the patol Demur, in cui in vita per nonage of the second
vouchee, because he was not heir to the husband, and so because penal, here in
savor of him it is restrained to the heir of the husband only: So by W. 2.
cap. 11. an accomptant found in arrearages, shall be imprisoned by Auditors,
and says not when, in 27. H. 6 8. In debt for arrearages of account, it is
adjudged, That if the Auditors do not commit the accomptant to prison presently
after the account; and therefore the generality of time is restrained to a
particularity, by the rule of the Common Law in construction of Statutes, and
also by the intent of the makers; for if the scope and end of the matter is
satisfied, all the matter, and intent of the matter is accomplished: and the
scope of the Statute here was, That the King shall have the Subsidy, and the
agreement here suffices for that, because it authorizeth the King to weigh
Woad by the Collector when he pleases, and then the King has Title of Action
and so the surety of the King thereby is referred to will. Also such agreement
has been allowed upon the same words of former Statutes for Subsidies. Also if
the Statute had expressed the agreement in certain, yet agreement uncertain
should have been good here, and out of the penalty, because the infringing of
the words of the Law, without the infringing of the intent of the Law; for upon
some accidents the law privileges some things done against the words of the
Law, of the nature of the Law of this Realm, and of other Realms, and the Law
of God: viz. First, for to avoid greater inconveniences. Secondly, for
necessity. Thirdly, by compulsion. Fourthly, by involuntary ignorance. First
for the avoiding of greater inconveniences; as 22. ass. pl. 6. where a man of
non sane memory, and in his rage did great hurt; and another man and his
parents took him, bound him, and beat him with rods; and here it is holden that
they might justify this in avoidance of greater damage, being of non sane
memory; and yet the Law of nature, and of the Realm prohibites battery, but
this particular case for the avoiding of greater mischief, has one exception,
and special privilege. So 1. H. 6.9. The Lord (contrary to the Statute of
Marlebridge,) may lead the Distress from the Land into another County where the
Manor is; for it should be prejudicial to the Lord, if he should not carry the
distress to his Manor. Amongst the Romans they had a Law, That every one which
should scale the walls in the night, should be condemned to death; and one in
the night did scale the walls in the time of War, to discry enemies to the
Romans, and he by the judgment of the Senate was not only discharged, but had
a reward therefore; so such interpreting of Laws, is a tempering of the rigor
of the Law. Secondly; necessitas non habet legem; and therefore it is a good
excuse in every Law, as 38. H. 6.11. Increasing of water excuses a default in
a precipe quod reddat, because he could not appear without danger of death; yet
the Law abhors every default, because it is in contempt of the Court: So David
did eat bread for necessity, although prohibited by the Law of God. Thirdly;
compulsion excuses in Law, as the avoiding of an obligation made by dares: So
if the arm of any man is drawn by compulsion, and a weapon in his hand kill
another, this shall not be Felony, nor he damnified, because he did it by
compulsion. Fourthly; involuntary ignorance does excuse: as 3. H. 7.1. Kell.
fol. 268. An infant kills another, it is not Felony, because he has not
discretion, and it shall be imputed to his ignorance, which is involuntary by
compulsion of nature; and so no default in him. So Fitz. Not. br. 202. b. if
one of non sane memory kill another because his ignorance by compulsion, viz.
the hand of God, and such other things done by ignorance, because not to be
resisted, and this involuntary ignorance is cause of the Act; and therefore he
which kills another by involuntary ignorance, As by the fall of a hatchet out
of his hand, shall have Sanctuary, Deuteronomy. 19. But ignorance voluntary is not
privileged; as if a man kills another, because this ignorance comes by his
own act and folly, which he might have resisted; and therefore shall not be
privileged, because he himself was the cause of such ignorance, if any were a
fortiori in all the cases together before mentioned, shall excuse, for the Law
is not offended for the said four causes; the incertainty of the agreement
here, and therefore in as much as the Statute says, The Collectors not agreed
with, and so gives him authority to agree with the Collector, and the Defendant
has made a special agreement with him, which is an agreement, and so within
the words of the Statute; if seems that by the rules of the Common Law used
in construction of Statutes, is by the intent of the makers, and by all reason
and equity shall be adjudged a sufficient agreement, and warranted by the
Statute; and therefore demanded judgment against the King, and so it was
adjudged: But all the Judges were of opinion against the King, only Hales and
Montague; and afterward the King sent his Privy Seal.

Colthirst against Bejushin.
23. Tr^; E. 6 in the Common. Pleas.
En Trespass, the Defendant pleads a Lease for life to H. B. and E. his wife
remainder to his son W. for his life si ipse habitaret, and residens esset, in
and upon the aforesaid Grange and Farm; and if he should dye in the life time
of H. and E. then to remain to B. the Defendant for his life; if he also would
inhabit there during the Term aforesaid, and says, That W. did dye in the
life of H. and E. and after H. and E. dyed also, and the said B. now Defendant,
entered without showing in certain when, and took averment that he had inhabited
there always after his entry, and upon this Plea, the Plaintiff Demurs; and it
was adjudged against him for the Defendant.

1. For that the averment of his continual residence, is surplusage; and
therefore the incertainty thereof nil refert, by Harris, Hind, and Montague.

2. It is not a condition compulsary, but a thing elegible, at the discretion
of the Defendant, (by Montague) and then his entry is not material, but at his
pleasure.

3. Admitting that it be a condition, yet it is subsequent, and in defeasance
of his Estate; and therefore ought not to be showed by him, which shall have
benefit thereby: the contrary is of a condition precedent.

4. For that it is pleaded by way of Bar, and being certain to a common intent,
it suffices, and it shall be intended that he entered immediately after the
Remainder happened; but by Hales Justice, this common intent ought to be of a
vehement presumption, and not indifferent.

5. That this word, if W. dye, then this shall remain, is a limitation of time
when this shall vest, and not a condition by Hind, and Montague.

6. Admitting that it be a condition, yet a remainder may depend upon a
condition. By Hales, Hind, and Montague, and adjudged accordingly.

7. The Plaintiff has not conveyed to himself Title, to have benefit of the
breach of the condition, if it be broken. By Montague.

Pollard, Sergeant for the Plaintiff. Except that the Form of the Plea is
sufficient. 1, Because he does not aver his continual residence after the
Remainder happened, but after his entry, which may happen to be long time
after, and so although that he has performed the words of the condition, which
has not satisfied the intent thereof, yet he has not performed the condition,
because the intent was, That he should have all the Manor. So 21. H. 6.10. A
man is bound that his Feoffees of the D. should grant a Rent of 40. s. to the
Plaintiff. He had three Feoffees, and two of them grant the said Rent to him,
and there all the Justices said, That it shall be intended all the Feoffees; so
that always the intent of the condition ought to be as well performed, as the
words of the condition; and here the intent of the condition appears to be,
That Hospitality shall be kept upon the Grange continually from the beginning
to the end of the Term, which is the death of the Husband and the Wife; and
here he has not showed that he entered within as short time as he conveniently
could after the death of the Husband and Wife; and therefore because he has
not showed and averred this, he has not showed the performance of the
condition, and therefore his plea is not good: For in all cases where the time
is issuable, he ought also to show it certainly, and therefore in 32. H. 6. it
is held, That if a man plead a Lease for years made to him, that he ought to
show what day the Lease was made, because it is issuable. So in 33. H. 6.44. In
debt by an Executor the Defendant says, That the Testator made the Plaintiff,
and one R. his Executors at L. the which R. is alive and not named, judgment
of the Writ, and the Plaintiff confessing it, says, That after this time last
assigned by the Plaintiff, that the Testator made the Plaintiff his sole
Executor in Middlesex, and the Defendant says, That after this time last
assigned by the Plaintiff, that the Testator made the Plaintiff and R. his
Executors after this time, and the Plea of the Defendant was not held good, for
that the day on which the Plaintiff, and R. were made Executors, is uncertain.
So 3. H. 6.33. In Trespass the Defendant pleads in Bar the day of the retaining
of the Plaintiff, who traverseth the Bar, and the Defendant enforced to show
the day certain. Matter in Law.
As to the matter in Law, it seems to him that the Remainder is void, because
it ought always to be limited to take its effect after the partricular estate
ended, and not during the particular estate; for if it be limited, and
appointed to take its effect, during the particular estate, then it shall be
utterly void. As if A. Leases to B. for life, the Remainder for life; and if B.
dies, that it shall remain over to a stranger in Fee, this Remainder is void,
for that it is appointed to take effect immediately after the first estate for
life ended; for if the Remainder in Fee should commence, then it shall avoid
the Remainder for life; so if a Lease be made to two, the Remainder over in Fee
after the death of the first of them; this Remainder is void, because the
Survivor shall have the Land. So in the principal case it is given to the Baron
and Fem for their lives, the Remainder to the eldest son for life upon
conditon, That if the eldest die, living husband and wife, that then it shall
remain to the Defendant for life, which cannot be; for the first estate at this
time continues, and if the Remainder shall be good, it drowns the estate of
husband and wife, and therefore the Remainder void, and also for which enures
always in privity; therefore if a lease for life be made, rendering rent, and
upon condition, That if the Rent be arear, that then it shall remain to a
stranger in Fee; if the Rent be arear, and not paid, the remainder is void; for
the Remainder which commence upon condition, is not good, otherwise it is, if
an estate be made for life upon condition, That if the Tenant for Life dies, it
shall remain over, this Remainder is good, because that it commenceth upon the
Determination of the I state, the which is certain; and therefore no condition,
because conditions are always uncertain, and may be performed or broken; and
as our Law is, for to know the time certain when the things pass from one to
another, and namely Freehold, because the Law has it in greater estimation
then other things, and so to prevent contention, has ordained Ceremonies to be
used, as in every Feoffment, Livery, and in every Grant, Reversion, or Rents,
etc. That Attornment shall be made, the which are points certain containing
time, and by them Estates pass. Rules to know when Remainders are good.
The Law has appointed that every Remainder shall have three things by the
matters aforesaid, as Notes and Rules certain for to discern when good. The
first is an Estate precedent, made at the same time that the remainder
Commences, and that the particular Estate continue when the Remainder vests,
and that the remainder be from the Donor at the time of Livery, and if any of
the said three things fail the Remainder is void. And therefore for the first
point, if the Lessor confirm the state of his Tenant for years, the Remainder
in Fee; this Remainder is vold, for that the Estate for years was made before
the Remainder. So if a Lessor disseise his Tenant for Life, and after makes a
new Lease to him for Life the remainder in Fee; this Remainder is void because
it is a Remitter to his Estate. So an Estate precedent was not made at the time
of the remainder, and therefore the Remainder is void. So the Heir endows his
Mother Remainder in Fee, by reason of Relation, and so the precedent Estates
are made before the Remainder appointed. Secondly, That the particular Estate
continue when the remainder vests, as 21. H. 7.12. per Frowick, Lease for Life
upon Condition, That if he does not such an Act, that his Estate shall cease,
and that then the Remainder over is void, because the Estate precedent is
determined before the Remainder appointed, and the Remainder must vest during
the particular Estate. Thirdly, because the Remainder passes from the Lessor at
the time of the delivery, as Hales, Hind, and Montague say, and as it is
proved by the Cases before cited. So Perkins, 12. and 19. Remainder to the
right Heirs of I. S. in Life, passes from the Lessor presently, although it
vests not presently; but here the Remainder passes not presently, because the
Condition precedes the Remainder, as 15. H. 7. 1. if A. Grant to B. That when
he is promoted to a Benefice, or do such an Act, he shall have an Annuity;
there he shall show his Promotion, if he demands his Annuity, because it is a
Condition precedent, and to him which makes the Grant; but if he Grants an
Annuity until he be promoted, there he shall not show it, because the Promotion
is subsequent to the Annuity, and will defeat the Annuity; and therefore it
shall be showed by the other party, which is contray. So 7. E. 3.10. A Rent is
a Chattle, because the Fee passes not presently, for that the Condition
precedes the Fee. So 6. R. 2. a Lease to two for years upon Condition, That if
the Lessee aliens within the Term, or die, he shall have Fee: it is holden that
the Fee passes not presently, because the Condition precedes it; which Cases
prove, That the Remainder passes not out of the Lessor at the time of the
Livery, albeit that the Condition precede the Remainder; and proves also, That
the Remainder Commenceth upon Condition; and proves also, That the Remainder is
appointed to begin after the Commencement of the particular Estate, the which
is contrary to the grounds of Law, and therefore, and for the said other
causes, the Remainder shall be void. And so for the insufficiency of the
matter of the Bar, and Form also, the Plaintiff shall recover.

Cook, Sergeant to the contrary. As to the two Exceptions which have been
moved, That the Plea is not good, because he shows not that he has been
resiant (after the deaths of the Husband and Wife) always, nor what day he
entered. Sir, I take it, That it shall be taken, that he entered immediately
after the death of the Husband and Wife, for the Defendant has pleaded by way
of Bar, and if the Bar has matter of substance, and is good to a common
intent, it suffices, although it be not good to every special intent; and
therefore in the Case of 33. H. 6. fol. 24. where the Defendant pleads, That
the Testator made the Plaintiff, and one R. his Executor, Judgment, etc. The
Plea was good, without showing that he was made after that the Plaintiff was
made sole Executor, because it shall be intended after. So 10. H. 7. 15. by
Keble; in Trespass the Defendant pleads his Freehold good; because good by
Common intendment; yet the Plaintiff might have an Estate for years, and it may
stand with his Bar, and by which he may punish the default, but such special
matter will not be intended. So 6. E. 4.1. in Debt upon an Obligation the
Defendant says, That he has done such things as was contained in the
Indenture, and at Issue, and found for the Plaintiff, and spoken to in Arrest
of Judgment, because the Defendant said not that the two Covenants were all,
and so had not alleged the performance of all, but held good, because by
Common intent there shall not be intended more then two Covenants, if the
Plaintiff show not the contrary. So 3. H. 6.4. in Formedon he gave not prima
facie, a good Bar, because it intends a general gift; and yet it may be, That
the Land was recovered in value, and then the Plea is not apt, for other Land
was given. So 3. H. 6.3. In Debt, nothing in their hands pleaded by Executors,
good; yet it may be that other goods first, not the Testators, at the day of
his death, are come to their hands in place, instead of other goods. So 21. H.
6.17. In Assise the Defendant was in by descent, where he had a mean Title,
which tolled the Assise of the other, and shall not be void by the said
recovery; but this shall not be intended without showing; so descent and entry
in Bar, good; yet it may be that a stranger abated, and dyed seized, and the
Heir could not enter; but if shall not be intended without showing specially;
but when a thing Commenceth in respect of the time, then the certainty of the
time shall be showed, fol. 24.27.33. as 20. H. 7.12. by Read. A Servant, which
demanded 20. s. Sallary for his service by the year, ought to show the
expiration of the year, because the Action is given in respect of the year
past, and the time is parcel of the cause of the Demand, and precedes the
Demand; but here the time pursues the Remainder, and is not cause of the
Remainder; and therefore we ought to show it so certainly, as where time gains
a thing, for here it goes in defeasance of the thing; and therefore the Bar is
good, notwithstanding the said two Exceptions; besides, it seems to me the
Remainder is good. For first, he has an Estate here, upon which the Remainder
may be grounded; and here the remainder is appointed thereupon, but the cause
wherefore the Remainder shall not be good, is alleged in two great points,
viz. because the Fee passes not presently forth of the Lessor, and also for
that the Remainder cannot pass upon Condition. And it seems to me, That the
Remainder passes out of the Lessor presently, howbeit that it vests not
presently, as in Litl. 81. A Lease for five years, if he pay within the first
two, that then he shall have Fee, the Fee passes out of the Lessor presently;
so the Remainder to the right Heirs of I. S. in life; and a Remainder may
Commence upon Condition, as a Lease for life upon Condition, That I. S. Marry
my Daughter during the state for Life, which shall remain to him, is good,
because he has an Estate upon which it may be grounded. So 34. E. 3. Devise
for Life upon Condition, That if the Heir to whom the Reversion discends,
disturbs Tenant for Life, or his Executors of their Administration, That then
the Land shall remain to the Daughter of the Devisor, and to her Heirs, and
dies: Tenant for Life dies, the Son of the Daughter brings his Formedon
against the Heir, because he disturbs the Tenant, and also the Executors of the
Tenant traverse it, and at issue, and upon this issue is joined, which should
not have been so, if the Remainder had not been good. Also if Assent, as 18. E.
4. 12. by Catesby, ante 8. post 31. to the Diseisen made before to another
use, may Traverse the Freehold from one to another, a fortiori a condition
may, namely where the Franck-Tenement precedes, to which a Condition may be
annexed.

Morgan, Sergeant for the Plaintiff. The Plea is not good, because it does not
show the day in certain, of the death of W. nor of the Husband and Wife, but he
argued not this. Also it is not good, because he showed not the day of the
entry for a Bar good to a Common intent, is not good; because parcel of the
Substance is left out, and because Durante termino, is for all the Term; for
that the time, which is parcel of the Substance of the Bar, ought to be showed
as the Obligee infeoffees fee; another before M. he must show in certain what
day he did infeoff him. So 3. H. 7.3. the Lord which Leaseth within the year,
entered for Mortmain, for otherwise it shall not be intended for to enter within
the year, if he does not set it forth; but the Bar is good where such things
are limited, because that by special, and not by general intendment they are
omitted; as a Feoffment in Bar is good to a Common intent, yet it may be, That
the Feoffor was within age, or in prison, but such special things shall not be
intended by the Law, but shall be showed. As to the matter, there are
principally two things, upon which Arguments may be made, viz. Maxims, and
Reasons, the Mother of all Laws; and the Maxims are the Foundations of the Law,
and Conclusions of Reason, and therefore are holden as firm Principles, and
Authorities of themselves. One is, a Remainder shall not be limited, except it
be to a person capable at the time, as to a Monk professed, which afterward is
deraigned, and after this, the Tenant for life dies, the Lessee for life shall
not have the remainder, because he was not a person able at the time of the
remainder limited to take it; so a remainder to him, That the particular
Tenants shall name, and after he names one, yet the Remainder is void for the
cause aforesaid. But 32. H. 6. if the remainder is limited to the right Heirs
of Jo. S. who is living, and he die before the particular Tenant, is good,
because I. S. shall be intended then dead; also because by all presumption, and
intendment of Law, I. S. may have an Heir, which the Law will appoint in
despite, and so will be certain; and therefore the Remainder good, but shall
not be good where it stands indifferent, if he to whom the Remainder is
limited, will be a person able, or not. Another Maxim is, That a Remainder may
pass out of the Lessor at the time of the Livery; for that Richel says in
Litl. 162. the Remainder is void for this cause amongst others: so here it
passes not by the first Livery, because a Condition precedes the Commencement
of the Remainder, viz. if W. die, living the Husband and Wife, then the
remainder to the Defendant, and so passes not at the first Livery; and
therefore void.

Brook, Sergeant to the contrary. As to the uncertainty of the time of the
Entry, the Bar shall be intended the better for the Defendant, which is, That
he entered immediately, and the Bar suffices, which is good to a Common intent.
And therefore about 20. E. 3. it is holden, That if one plead in Bar, That one
I. S. died seized, and R. S. entered as Son and Heir to him, whose Estate he
has, this shall make the Bar good; and yet it may be that he was not Heir, for
it is not expressly said, That he is Son and Heir, but that he Entered as Son and
Heir; and yet in as much as it is pleaded by way of Bar, the best shall be
intended for the Defendant; so here. And he argued besides, much in effect as
Cook did.

Sanders, Sergeant for the Defendant. The Bar is good to a Common intent, and
the best shall be intended for him which pleads it; for a Plea in Bar is
always made for two causes: The one to enforce the Plaintiff to make his
replication. The other is to compel him to join Issue, which cannot be joined
upon the replication, as it may upon the Bar, and then the certainty shall be
in it, and not of necessity in the Bar; and therefore the Bar good, if it be
good to a Common intent. As in Assise, the Tenant pleads in Bar a descent to
the Plaintiff, and to two others, and that he has the state of one, and it is
a good Plea, because it is intended lawfully, yet he may have it by Disseisen,
and then he is a Disseisor to the Plaintiff also; for he cannot be a Disseisor
to one, except he be so to the other. So 27. ass. 31. in an Assise by the Heir,
the Tenant says, That the Father of the Plaintiff being Tenant by the
courtesy, and now in life, Leased his Estate to his Father, which died, and he
is in as Son and Heir, Judgment if Assise, and held a good Bar; yet he does
not say, That he was the first which entered, and yet good. So 21. H. 6. 17.
here fol. 26. as to the Remainder it shall be good, because it is a principle,
that it shall be taken most strongly against him which made it; and therefore
in 31. H. 8. If a man gives to a man, and to Heirs, without [his] it is Fee;
yet he gives not E. 3. 28. after 170. A good Remainder by word, That after the
Decease of Tenant for Life, the Lands shall return to A. and B. in Fee. So a
Remainder to the right Heirs of I. S. in Life passes presently, and shall be
in abeyance rather than void; and that if shall be to the benefit of the Lessee
against his own Livery and limitation, as always the Law interprets words
strongest against the Speakers, as in 40. E. 3. 5. and 49. E. 3. 1. A Termor
counts that he left this as good as he found it, and the Wind blew down the
House, it is not waste, but Covenant lies, for the special Agreement alters the
Law, and makes his words to be taken more strongly against him. So the Law
takes the Acts aforesaid strongly against the Makers. And therefore if I. give
to B. Land upon Condition, That if he Marry my Daughter, he shall have Fee; if
he Marries her he shall have Fee, for by the Livery it takes Commencement, and
by the performance of the Condition, it takes perfection, and in the mean time
it is ambiguous. So a Lease for years upon Condition, That one month after he
shall have Fee, he shall have it after the month accordingly, for the thing
passes according to the Covenant, most strong against the Donor. So a Lease to
two upon Condition, That if the one die within seven years, that then after the
death of the other, it shall remain to a stranger, good; and Privies and
strangers are all one. 24. and 32. he differs, because he has an Estate first
given, to which the Condition may be annexed, and Livery, and by imitation
shall be taken strongest against him which makes it. Three things one shall
have by Remainder. First, he shall have a Remainder to vest; Secondly, a
Possession in Law; and Thirdly, a Possession in Deed, and if he be capable at
the time of the Possession in Law cast upon him, it suffices (28. against it)
as 17. E. 3. 29. and 18. E. 3. 15. a gift to one and his first begotten Son,
and he has no Son then, but afterward he has, is a good Remainder to his
Son. So 39. Assise Pla. 20. a gift to Husband and Wife, and to one Heir of his
body, is a good Remainder, yet no Heir to the gift, if he be in being when the
Possession in Law is cast upon him; but a Remainder limited fol. 24.)
according; but the other cause that Litl. assigns for that it vests not at the
time of the Livery, is no cause, as is proved by the cases aforesaid, because
after the Alienation and gift, it may not remain to another. And the other
cause that Litl. alleges is, because it vests not at the time of Livery,
which is no cause. So a gift to A. and his Heirs so long as B. shall have heirs
of his body, Remainder to C. in Fee is void; for the contrariety, because a
Remainder cannot depend upon a Fee determinable. So a Lease for life to A. upon
Condition, That if B. pay 20. l. to the Lessor, that then immediately it shall
remain to B. is void for the contrariety, because A. ought to have it during
his life. But if it were to remain after the death of A. to B. then it were
good, because no contrariety there; and here if W. dies, living the Husband and
Wife, that then it shall remain to to the Defendant, is not intendable
immediately in their lives, but that it should remain as it ought to remain,
viz. after their deaths, and so there is no contrariety, and therefore good. As
to the Condition which is subsequent if he would dwell there, etc. because it
has two intendments; the one that he should inhabit there all the Term, and
the other to some time during his life, shall be taken strictly, and the more
strongly against the Lessor, viz. That he inhabites there at some times during
his life which suffices, as the Feoffee upon Condition for to pay 10. l. to
the Feoffor, and no time is limited he has during his life. So to serve him in
such an Office, and says not how long he has, during his life.

Harris, Sergeant to the same purpose. And as to the Exceptions he said, That a
Condition subsequent, and which goes in the Defeasance of the Estate, as here
he that claims the Estate shall not show it, but the other which will defeat
the Estate. But where the Condition precedes the state, he shall show who shall
have it, because enabled thereunto; as if I grant a Rent Charge upon Condition,
That he shall do such an Act, there the Grantee shall avow for the rent without
showing the thing done, because it is a condition subsequent, and defeats his
Estate. But if I grant, That if he does such a thing, that then he shall have
the rent, he shall not avow without performance showed, because he is enabled
by this to the rent. 14. H. 8. Wheeler Grants his Term to one upon Condition,
That he shall obtain the good will of the Lessor, and then shall have it; he
shall not have it until he has showed the performance of the Condition, and he
affirms the remainder upon Condition to be good.

Hales, Justice. If he would, etc. is a Condition, and that the Plea is
insufficient, because the Defendant has not averred his continual residence
after the Remainder happened; for during the Term, shall be intended all the
Terms as it shall be in reservation of rent or Covenant to repair a house
during the Term, 27. H. 8. 19. by Audley; so the Feoffees shall be intended all
the Feoffees, and if he has a reasonable excuse, he ought to show it. fo. 272.
viz. That he was 200. miles and Wife, and entered so soon as he had notice,
which he shall show in certain, that the Justice may try it, as 22. E. 4. 27.
Tenant for Life Leases for years, and dies; The Lessor brings Trespass
against the Lessee, who says, That in as short time as he could after that he
had notice of the death of the Tenant for Life, he chased his beasts forth of
the land; and said also that the Trespass was between the death of the Tenant
for Life, and the chasing out of the beasts, and held no plea; for by the death
of Tenant for Life, the Lease for years was determined, and no man bound to
give him notice; and there it is holden, that he ought to say; That such a day
he chased out the beasts, and might show that the Lessor died in another
County, and so he could not have so soon notice; and this shall be tried by the
Justice if the avoidance was in reasonable time. So in this case the day of his
Entry for the knowledge of the Jurors ought to be set forth; common intent is
that which has more vehement presumption and intendment then any other intent
has, as 3. H. 6. 3. before 26. fully administered all goods which were the
Testators the day of his death, good; yet might have goods were not the
Testators, which are assets after the Debts paid; but the most common
intendment is, That he had no other goods, except those which were the
Testators, but intendment indifferent the more strong intendment the one way or
the other, and therefore ought to be pleaded in Bar, as 13. H. 8. 15. by
Willoughby, the life of cestui que vie is pleaded in a Lease for another life
which is indifferent if he be alive or not. So if he pleads a release made
after the Obligation, it is not good if he shows it not by express words, that
it was delivered after; it shall be intended that it was delivered when it
bears Date. But on the other part it shall be intended also, That the other
would not bring an Action if it were delivered after, and therefore shall be
showed which intendment stands indifferent; so here. A Demurrer all times after
the Remainder happens or not, is uncertain, and therefore because he has not
showed this, the Plea is naught. As to the matter in Law, it seems to him
that the remainder is good; for a man may pass the thing in question when,
where, and how he will if it be not against Law, nor repugnant, as here the
limitation, if the remainder is not against Law; for the remainder need not
pass forth of the Lessor, so. 29. for upon the Agreement first had by Act made
afterward, Franck-Tenement, or remainder, may be transferred and divested from
one, and vested in another; as a Lease for life, remainder for life upon
condition, That it shall be void if he does not such an act, the remainder
before the Condition broken is in him; when broken it comes to the Lessor. So
a rent or Reversion passes by Attornment, not by the Grant presently. So 1 H.
7.31. by Brian, a remainder to the K. when the Deed is enrolled, then it shall
pass and relate to the Livery. So in the case of Plessington 6. R. 2. where the
Condition was, That if the Lessor die within the Term, the Lessee shall have
for life, and there holden that his estate shall be enlarged if the Lessor die.
So Disseisen to the use of I. passes not a Free hold of I. to I. without his
agreement; so here. A remainder passes when W. died, not before, by force of
the words annexed to the Livery. So by Litl. a confirmation to the Husband and
Wife, Tenants for life, passes the remainder to the Husband, yet it passes not
at the time of the first Estate, and the diversity where Fee upon Condition is
appointed to privy, and whereto a stranger is but a conceit which is worth
nothing, (29. according 24. to the contrary,) and is privity because it
reserveth out of both; so it shall bind him in remainder, and also he in
remainder shall have waste, and so is privy to the particular Estate, and the
Lessor also; and the words then E. 4.44. The King discharges an Abbot, That he
shall not be a Collector, when any Titles should be granted by the Clergy of
England; and Canterbury Grants Tithes, provided that the Collector returned by
the Bishop, shall not be discharged by the King; and the Bishop returns the
Abbot Collector; there holden that the Grant by the Clergy in this point, viz.
to charge persons exempt, is void, because it is in prejudice of others. And so
the remainder here shall be void, rather then a shranger shall have prejudice
by it; but for defaults in the pleading, the Plaintiff ought to recover.

Hind, Justice to the 3. exception; the death of the particular Tenant shall
not be showed, which is only conveyance of the execution of the remainder, and
is not Traversable, nor Issuable. To the first, and Second exceptions, he needs
not show his continual residence after the Remainder is fallen, nor the day of
his entry, because it is a Condition subsequent, and goes in defease of his
Estate; and he which has benefit by it, ought to show it; as 29. H. 6.22. the
Grantee of an annuity pro concilio impendendo, shall have the Annuity without
showing that he has given Council, for that the showing of it is not
beneficial to him, and the denial of Council defeats the Annuity; so he agrees
to the diversity in case of Annuity. 15. H. 7.1. bont. fol. 25 by Pollard when
one shall be promoted, and therefore the showing hereof that which is
surplusage, and the imperfectness of it shall not make the Bar vicious; and the
Remainder here by him commenceth not upon Condition; but it is a limitation,
and explanation from the time that it first begun for nothing, or words makes a
Condition but such, which restrains the thing given; as If I. Lease for life
upon Condition, That if the Lessee die, or makes waste, and I. recover the I.
shall enter into all; for it is a Condition for that part in which no waste is
done, because it restrains and defeats that part. And if it be a Condition
here, yet the Remainder thereupon is good, if it commenced and vested at any
time during the particular Estates; (24, 29. 32, 34.) for when he has
Fee-Simple, he may Condition with it as he pleases, if it be not against Law;
as if I. Lease for life upon Condition, That I. S. paies to me 20. l. that I.
shall enter, then the Remainder is void, because the entry avoids the first
estate, and then no particular estate continues upon which a Remainder may
depend.

Brown, Justice to the same purpose. The entry of the Defendant, shall be
intended immediately, for this is the most common intent; and a Bar good to a
common intent, shall be intended that he entered presently after his Title
accrued, and to the matter in Law, hold that the remainder shall be good upon
Condition.

Montague, Chief Justice to the same intent. The entry of the Defendant shall
be intended presently; for this is the most common intent; and a Bar good to a
common intent, is good; as 21. E. 4.83. in Assize the Tenant pleads a descent
to him as Son and Heir, and he entered, and it was held good; yet the Father of
the Plaintiff might have abated, and died seized, and then the Plaintiff is in
as Son and Heir, in which case the Tenant might not enter. But this is not
intendable; but the most common intent is, That the Tenant entered immediately
after the death of of his Father. So 9. E. 4.12. in Debt against five
Executors, at the Distress, 3. makes Default, 2. appears and pleads Recovery
against them two of 300. and that more they had not in their hands. Exception
taken, That because by intent there should be five Executors, two might have
abated the first suit, and so the Recovery not duly had, but holden good:
because it may be that then they two only administered, and then they did lie
against them two only; and the most common intent is, that it might be so
rather than at first to lose advantage to have abated the Writ; and therefore
the Plea in Bar was held good, and Execution duly had; and if it were
otherwise, the Plaintiff ought to have showed it. So 21. E. 4.8.1. In formidon
in discender, The Tenant pleads the release of the Demandant without Warranty
in Bar, yet might be made by him in the life time of the father, and then it is
no Bar; but it shall be intended to be made after the death of the Father, if
the Demandant replies not to the contrary; but if he which pleads in Bar is
bound at a time certain, he ought to show the day of his Act certainly (24, 26,
27.) as the day of entry for Mortmain, so that it may appear to be within the
year. So if one justifies for Common between Lammas and Candlemas. So if one
justifies by Warrant, by License, by Authority, he always ought to show the
time certain of his justification; so that pleading in abatement of the Writ,
or a plea after the last continuance, ought to plead certainly; and these are
observed as principles in our Law; but he which pleads in the Negative etc. It
is like that it is not a Condition here, because it is not compulsive, so that
he shall have prejudice if he does not, but is a thing obligable at the will of
the Defendant, and then his entry is not material, but is at pleasure; and
therefore the not showing thereof shall not make the Plea vicious. Admitting
that it be a Condition, yet it is subsequent, and in Defeasance of his Estate.
(30.) And therefore shall not be showed by him, but by him which shall have
benefit by the breaking of it. So if a Condition be enlarged, which may be
good, leaves that out which is material, because it is Surplussage. Also it
has no Livery for to convey Title, nor has it enabled him any ways to take
the benefit of the breach of the Condition if it were broken, because he has
Demurred generally upon the Bar, in which the Defendant has not acknowledged
any reversion. And so it appears not by the Record that he is other then a
mere stranger. And by the Common Law no man shall take benefit of a Condition,
but such a one as is privy. And therefore 38. H. 8.34. Pattentees of the King
(after 177.) Also if it be a Condition during the Term, it shall be intended
all the Term; as a man bound to perform Covenants, is bound to perform all, and
his Feoffees. ( fol. 30.) Yet if he be sometimes absent, and his Family there,
it is good, because the Law shall have a reasonable Construction in things
always. If W. dies, then the Remainder is a Limitation, and appointment of the
time when the remainder shall vest. But admitting that it be a Condition, yet a
Remainder may depend upon a Condition, which every lawful owner of the land
may give to what person or persons, and in what manner, and at what time he
pleases, if his gift be not against Law, or repugnant; as 10. E. 3.39. A man
makes to his Termor in surety of his Term, a Charter of Feoffment upon
Condition, That if he be disturbed of any part of his Term, that then he shall
have Fee; he was disturbed, and afterward outed, and recovers in Assise, which
proves that the Franck-Tenant passed upon condition express to the Livery; and
be it mediate, or immediate, it stales not the Remainder, because his Livery
shall be taken most strongly against him. So 27. H. 8.24. Remainder to a
stranger if the gift fail, for bearing of the standard. So in Plessintons case
it is held, That the estate of Freehold there could not Commence upon
Condition: but the cause wherefore, was because he had not the Freehold upon
performance of the Condition, which was repugnancie. So a Remainder upon
condition, contrary to the Law, or impossible, is not good; because a Condition
unlawful, or impossible, may not obtain the thing by doing of it. So if the
Do^ aliens, then it shall remain, is not good, because repugnant; for when he
has aliened to one, it may not remain to another. Remainder ought to have
estate precedent; for that 9. H. 6.24. Lease to a Monk, Remainder over void,
because a Monk has not capacity, and so the estate which precedes the
Remainder, void. Remainder also esse before; and therefore a Grant of a rent
out of land, remainder in Fee, void; because the rent was not in esse before;
and the remainder here passes presently by the Livery upon possibility to be
afterward performed, and vests when W. dies, and in the mean time rests in
abeyance; as 15. H. 7.10. Fee Tail passes upon possibility, That a Fem Covert,
and a married man may inter-marry, and in the mean time the Inheritance, viz.
The Tail shall be in abeyance, but holden there, That they are seized in Tail
presently, and concludes that the Remainder is good, and the pleading also; and
so the Plaintiff shall be Barred.

Plat, against the Sheriffs of London.
ONe Goodlad was in Execution Ludgate upon a recovery in Debt had against him
by plaint in the Guild Hall of London; 4 E. 6. In the Excheq.
and going with a Baston, (that is to say, a Servant of the Gaolers) attending
upon him into Southwark, in the County of Surrey: and the Administrator of him
which recovered, brings his Bill of Debt into the Exchequer against the
Sheriffs for the escape; and adjudged that he should recover thereupon. But no
exceptions were taken to the Bill, and the reasons of the Judgment were,

1. For that the Action lies at the Common Law by 45. E. 3.9. Debt against one
Abbot, or Prior, and also for that, That he had not remedy against him which
escaped; for by the esape he is discharged for ever against the party, and the
Jailer also; and the Officer which suffers the escape, is charged contrary to
13. H. 7.1. But the Action lay not by the Common Law, by 42. ass. 11. 2.
Admitting that it lay not by the Common Law, yet it lies by equity of the
Statute of 1. R. 2. c. 12. which gives an Action against the Warden of the
Fleet, or by the equity of the Statute of Westminster. 2. c. 11. which gives an
Action against the Jailer which suffers an Accomptant for to escape. 3. The
defendants have admitted the action good by their Demurrer. 4. That it is an
escape, because he was out of the Jurisdiction and Authority of the Sheriffs,
and that his Imprisonment is ended the last instant that he was in London, and
his escape began the first instant that he came into Southwark; and so he was
never in prison in Southwark, for he had no guard there.
The effect of every suit contains and implies in which escapes (nor the Jailer
never apprehended him, because a personal thing once suspended, is
extinguished.) and therefore if the Debtee makes the Debtor, and another which
surviveth the Debtor, his Executors, yet the Debt is extinct, and the person of
either of them discharged. Therefore in respect that after the escape, the
Plaintiff shall not have other execution, and so without any remedy against
the Defendant, in the first suit the Common Law which is Common Reason,
provides, That the Plaintiff shall have an Action of Debt against the Jailer,
in whose default the Execution of the Plaintiff, or otherwise the Common Law
will be defective in this point. And therefore by 45. E. 3. 9. Abridged by
Fitz. h. in Title Debt. 130. which was before the Stat. of R. 2. where a Prior
dative and removeable, lets one in Execution in his Guard for damages
recovered in his Court of Py-powder escape, P. D. brings an Action of Debt
against him, and the Abbot his Sovereign; the Writ shall abate, because he is
named Prior, whereas he is but one of the Monks, where he may not be Debtor.
But it had been good, if the Prior had been omitted; and Debt is maintainable
without contract between them, or privity, in possibility upon the escape. As
1. H. 7. 8. against the Clark of Hamper, upon a Liberate delivered to him when
the Comisor has assets. Admitting that it lies not by the Common Law, yet it
lies by equity of the Statute of Westminster, the 2. chapter 11. which gives in
Action against the Jailer which suffers an Accomptant to escape: and by the
equity of the Statute of 1. R. 12. which gives an Action against the Warden of
the Fleet upon an escape, for it shall extend to all other Gaolers by equity;
for although it be penal against the Warden, yet it is benificial to many
others; As 13. E. 1. circumspecte agatis extends to all other Bishops as well
as Norwich. So the Statute of 9. E. 3. 5. That the Executor which first comes
by distress, shall answer. 3. H. 6. 14. extends to an Administrator, and 9. H.
6. 19. Debt upon an escape of one in Execution, was maintainable against the
Major of the Staple, who in excuse of himself, says, That he was imprisoned by
force of a plaint, and not in Execution; the words of R. 2. prohibites the
Warden of the Fleet only to suffer any in Execution to go out of Prison by
Baston, Mainprise or Bail, and by equity all other Gaolers; yet these in London
use it, and it is not an escape in them, because they may prescribe against the
equity and words of Statutes, which is contrary to their Customs and
Prescriptions; for that their Customs as Prescriptions, are confirmed by
Statute; and contrary to the Statute of Silva cedua, and keeping gof Leets at
other times then the Statute appoints, and so let them in execution to go by
Baston within their liberty. But others shall be bound by equity of the said
Statute; and because this Statute extends to others by equity in this point of
escape, it shall extend also to an Action to charge other Officers as to
matters of escape. A prisoner marry the Warden of the Fleet, this is an escape,
and he is at liberty, for he cannot be under his Wifes Custody. So if the
Office discends to an Heir which is a prisoner, there he shall be adjudged at
Liberty, although he lies in fetters, because he cannot be his own keeper in
prison.

Baitons case, 44. and Ridgwaies case, 3. 52. by which it appears that the
cause here is to be understood of voluntary escapes in the Jailer; for if the
prisoner escape to his own wrong, the Plaintiff shall have a new Capias ad
satisfaciendnm, if the Writ of Capias, (upon which he is not imprisoned) be not
returned, or shall be in Execution to the Plaintiff again if he be re-taken by
the Sheriff, before an Action brought against him upon the escape.

Wimbish against Talbois.
THe Husband makes a Feoffment in Fee, to the use of himself, 4. E. 6. In the
Common Pleas.
and his Wife, in special Tail, the Remainder to the Husband in general Tail,
the Remainder to him in Fee, 27. H. 8. of Uses was made; the Husband and Wife
entered, the Husband dies, the Wife suffers a recovery by Confession the first
day, which is not executed; and the Issue in Tail enters for the forfeiture by
the Statute of 11. H. 7. c. 10. and the opinion of the Court.

1. That the entry is lawful, and this forfeiture is within the words of the
Statute, although that the wife had not any estate in the Land in use, yet she
had the use in the Land, which is all one; and this is an Hereditament which
will make Possessio fratris, by 5. E. 4. and was appointed by the Act of the
Husband, and was an inheritance and purchase in him, and so within the words of
the first branch of the Stat. of 11. H. 7.

2. Admitting that it should be out of the words of the first branch, because
it speaks of gifts to the Husband and wife by any seized to his use; and
Feoffees are Donees by the Stat. of 27. H. 8. of Uses, by 6. E. 6. Formedon 40.

3. Admitting that it be forth of the words of the first branch, yet it is
within the equity, because it is a benificial law, and in advancement of
justice, and suppression of fraud.

4. That a remedy by Covin upon a false, or true cause, is within the Statute,
although no execution be sued; for the Covin is a Condition in Law annexed to
an estate, which Condition is broken, although that Execution is not sued; the
Statute is general of Recoveries by Covin, and includes all recoveries, and
this Condition annexed to the use, shall transfer to the possession by the
Stat. of 27. H. 8.

5. That he which entered by such forfeiture, shall be seized in Tail or Fee, as
she should be, if the Wife were dead, and this in course of descent, and not
purchase, ( paramount, contrary to Hales) and that a Son born, may enter upon
the Daughter which has entered for such forfeiture; contrary of a purchase; and
that the entry for the forfeiture, is maintainable presently in the life of the
Wife, which makes it; and he which enters may aver generally in pleading, That
he is that person which ought to take benefit of the forfeiture; by all the
Justices contrary to Montague.

Cook, Sergeant to the Defendant, which says, That the Replication is not
good, because it shows not how he is Heir in special (but has averred, That he
is the same person to which, etc. general abatement) for it is issuable, and
when such Statutes gives entry generally to one, yet if he will take advantage
of it, he shall show how he is the same person, and shall not say generally
that he is the same person; as upon 6. R. 2. cap. 6. which E. 4. 6. ought to
show how he is next Heir, yet the Stat. is general. so for prayee to be
received upon default of Tenant for life, by W. 2. cap. 3. ought to show how he
came to the Reversion. So he which will Entitle himself upon 7. E. 1. for entry
upon Mortmain, how he is Lord. As to the Obligation, That because the Defendant
in Bar in saying whose heir he is, has affirmed the Plaintiff to be heir, and
therefore in the Replication has conveyed himself to his entry as Heir
special, and so the Replication ill, for default of certainty. Secondly, for
that the Plaintiff has not showed that execution was had of the said recovery
against the Defendant. Thirdly, Exception because he has not evered the Covin
specially; for otherwise it is not intendable in Recoveries, because they are
always intended true, and upon good cause; and therefore the Wife at the
Common Law, by default against her, and her husband, had not any other remedy
then a Writ of Right before the Statute of W. 2. cap. 3. which gives a Cui in
vita: and before W. 2. cap. 3. a faint Recovery against Tenant for life, bound
him in Remainder. Litl. Release, 112. because the Law presumes the Title and
case true. So a Recovery upon a faint Title by a man of Religion was out of the
penalty of the Statute of Religiosis, until W. 2. cap. 23. made a Recovery
without Title in such plight as a Feoffment in Mortmain was, for the truth
supposed by the Law to be therein. So here the Recovety is intended to be true;
and therefore the Plaintiff ought to show matter (if there be any) to prove the
contrary. As in 11. H. 4.19. if the Tenant in a precipe vouch one of the
Demandants, he ought to show cause; because otherwise the Law will presume that
he has not cause against right. So 15. E. 4.4. Contrary entry by Title,
general averment of Matter in Law.
As to the matter in Law, it seems here that the case is clear out of the
words and penalty of the Statute of 11. H. 7. cap. 30. For although 27. H. 8.
has executed the Possession to the use, yet this case remains here, so as if
27. H. 8. had never been made, and the Wife had continued Tenant in Tail in
use, and out of the words of the first branch because he has an Estate Tail in
the use in the land, but has not an Estate in the land in the use; and the
Statute speaks of an Estate in the Land; and this Hereditament or use, which is
the matter and substance, and the use it self, which is the confidence of the
thing, differ. But one may not have the state in Land and use also, because
suspended; yet two may, to the use of one of them; as Husband and Wife to the
use of the Wife; and so it shall be intended here. Also the first branch speaks
of lands, etc. of Inheritance or purchase of the Husband; but here the use is a
new thing, which Commenceth now and was not in being before; and so is not the
inheritance or purchase of the Husband; and therefore out of the Statute; as a
Rent granted to one out of lands to the use of the Wife of the Grantor; or if
the Husband gives a signiory in Tail to the Wife for her Joyncture, and the
Tenancie Escheat, and the Wife suffer a faint Recovery, this is forth of the
Statute. So the Husband makes a Feoffment upon Condition to re-enfeoffee him,
and his Wife in Tail, the Wife suffers a faint Recovery; this is out of the
Statute; because the Feoffment of the Land from the Possession of the Husband,
and was her purchase, and not the purchase of the Husband, or his Inheritance;
for the Condition, which is the cause of the gift, is a new thing, is not
within the second branch; because the Wife had nothing here of the gift of any
of the Ancestors of the husband. Nor the third branch, because the wife had not
possession by the Statute, nor by the Feoffees to the use of him in Reversion,
but he in Reversion has the present Title; and so the Statute shall be
intended; and therefore he may enter presently: If Tenant for Life suffer a
faint Recovery; but 11. H. 7. says Enjoy according to their Title, intends
that he shall not Enter until after the death of his Ancestor, because he has
no Title in the life of his Ancestor. And therefore when the Wife assents to
the Ravisher, 6. R. 2. gives title of entry; saying, habeat titulum intrandi,
etc. intends that he shall not have it in the life of the Ancestor. And if the
makers of the Statute of 11. H. 7. had intended that the issue in Tail should
have entered presently, they would have given to him Title by such like words as
the Statute of 6. R. 2. has; but the end of the clause which says, That they
shall enjoy according to their Title, expresses that they intented not so. For
which causes it is probable that the Defendant is out of the penalty of the
Statute; and that the Plaintiff might not enter, and so shall be Barred.

Whiddon, Sergeant for the Plaintiff. Because the Defendant has said whose
Heir he is, he H. 7.2. in Trespass, Release generally is no Plea, because it
may be taken to be delivered before the Trespass, or after. So 3. H. 7.8. and
9. and 26. H. 8. Entry to avoid Warranty Collateral, pleaded in Bar, is no
Plea; because it may be intended after the descent; for he may enter in the
life of the Ancestor, or after. Also the Plaintiff need not show how he is
Heir, because he was once seized by entry. But if he had brought a formedon
upon the Estate Tail, he should; because by way of Demand; as 6. E. 4.1.
Executor brought Trespass for a thing taken out of his Possession, he shall not
show his Testament; but if he Demands a thing whereof he had not ever
possession; he shall. It is not needful to show Covin certainly, which is a
secret thing; and the Law does not enforce one to show a thing, when by
intendment of Law it lies not in his Conusance; as 20. H. 7.7. A woman shall
have Dower of a Rent Charge without showing the Deed of the Grant; because it
belongs not to her. So the Lord shall have Covin generally for the Ward,
where his Tenant aliens, and re-taketh for life, the Remainder to his Heir,
being it lies secretly in the breast, as suspicion lies; for that he may
justisie imprisonment for suspicion of Felony, without showing of the cause of
his suspicion. So 33. H. 6.5. In Trespass, a man buys in a Market Overt; the
Plaintiff said, That the said buying was by fraud between the Defendant and a
stranger generally, without showing any thing special of the Covin; and the
Plea the e admitted good, So in a Precipe against the Lord of ancient Demeasne,
and Tenant, the Lord shall show that he is Lord; and this Action is brought
against him by Covin generally. So 9. E. 6.41. He which alleadges Covin, ought
to show cause of the Covin; and the cause is, for that the Recovery, or Title
was tried by Verdict; because to say that it was by Covin, shall not be
intended true against a Verdict. But Covin generally may be averred, against a
Recovery not gainsaying or default; because this is cause of the Judgment, and
no Trial. Wherefore in this case a man shall aver that this was by Covin
generally. And as to that which has been said, That execution ought to be
showed of the Recovery; that needs not: For the Statute speaks only of the
Recovery, and without Execution, it shall be a Recovery, as a Fine is without
Attornment; for the habere facias seisinam, recites cum A recuperavit seisinam
suam, etc. because the Husband raised the use. First it is his purchase, and so
within the words of the Statute; and if not, yet it shall be within the equity;
and nevertheless it is penal.

Sanders, for the Defendant. The Statute here Statute of W. 2. cap. 14. before
fol. 17. expectet emptor for Warranty; because he vouches an Infant; and yet it
is adjudged 18. E. 4.16. If he makes a Feoffment over, this Feoffee shall
vouch; because penal against one, shall not extend to another. So by 32. H. 8.
cap. 33. The dying seized of a disseisor without peaceable possession before;
for five years shall not take away the Entry of the disseisee; yet if one
Abator die seized within five years, this descent shall take away the Entry.
And so if Tenant for life be disseised, and the disseisor die within five
years, and the Tenant for Life dies, he in Reversion or Remainder may not
Enter; because he was no Disseisor to them; and to the descent, they had no
Title to Enter, but the Tenant for Life, and taken strictly; because it
abridgeth the Liberty given by the Common Law. By inheritance is understood
Land by dicent, as it is proved by a case in 7. H. 4.5. and a cui in vita
abated, because it was quam clamat esse jus and Hereditatem suam; whereas it
was his own purchase. And by 4. H. 5. cap. 3. which speaks of Lands by
purchase, or by descent, and the disjunctive prove the difference between the
words. Purchase intends Land by gift or purchase, which is by Title. Disseisen
is not purchase, because without Title. Now because the Plaintiff has in the
Replication said, That the Grandfather of the Defendant was seized in Fee; for
to prove the Defendant to be within the first Branch; the Plaintiff ought to
show here how the Husband of the Defendant Statute; Recovery without Execution
is not a discontinuance.

Harris, Sergeant argues to the same intent; And he takes also, that Covin
cannot be where the Title is good, except that wrong be done by him which has
the Title; and this ought to be showed; for here in respect that the Title is
confessed to be good in this, That it is not traversed, nor confessed and
avoided; this Recovery may not be averred to be by Covin; for this avernment is
repugnant in it self, and it cannot stand together to say that she did right by
Covin. And as to the Statute he takes the case here to be out of the words of
the Statute. And note thou that he argued to all the other points moved to the
same purpose that they were arguod before.

Molineux, Justice. It is a vain thing to aver this specially, which is
apparent, as the Covin, and therefore when the Tenant infeoffes his Son within
age by Collusion, the Lord shall seize him for a Ward, without showing this
Collusion specially. So if the Husband will confess an Action, the Wife shall
have Dower by the Common Law, proved by recital W. 2. cap. 4. For it is
intendable by the Law to be Covin apparent; but it was doubted if the Recovery
had been by Default; but here the Action had been tried by the Verdict of 12.
men, the cause of the Covin ought to have been showed, because the Law gives
credence to it. As 5. H. 7.20 Upon an Attaint no Supersedeas shall be granted,
because the Law presumes the Verdict to be true, until the Reversal be tried
upon Error, in Deed or Record; so that the Law has an indifferent judgment of
it, viz. to be true or false. And so the Covin averred in the avoidance of the
trial by Verdict shall be showed certainly for the credence given to the
Verdict. Also Covin upon a good Title is prohibited; because the Statute of 11.
H. 7. is general. And so Covin generally averred here, without falsifying of
the Title, is good; as 4. H. 7. cap. 20. says, That if a Recovery be pleaded
in Bar of a popular Action, the Plaintiff may aver it was by Covin generally by
the Warrant of the Statute. As to the second exception, the Stat. expounds it
self to be intended of a Recovery without execution. Every Fee-simple is an
inheritance, and then she had an use in the inheritance of her Husband; and
held that the Wife held the inheritance of her Husband, (that is to say) his
Land in use jointly with her Husband, and so within the words of the Statute,
and if not, it shall be within the equity and intent of the Statute; and he
took without question, that the Heir in Tail might enter presently, and our the
Wife which is Defendant, and so held the Plaintiff should recover.

Hales, Justice to the same intent. And first to the Covin, the Replication is
good without showing cause of it. And the Statute is for frail, inconstant
women, and will not make them Judges, if the Title of Action be good or not.
18. R. 2. cap. 17. gives receipt to him in Reversion; where the Tenant for Life
is impleaded by Covin of the demandants, that the Tenements shall be
recoverred, and he in Reversion, because it speaks generally of Covin. 2. H.
6.14. and 11. H. 4.3. For this cause there it suffices to say, That Tenant for
Life pleaded faintly, and pray to be received without showing cause; otherwise
it is of Covin at the Common Law; and 11. H. 7. would have limited the pain to
fained recoveries expressly, if it had intended so much. And the Statute
prohibits the Covin only, be the Title good or faint, for faint Recoverie by
Covin, the issue in Tail may falsify before Warranty made 20. years after the
Disseisen; yet it commenceth by Disseisen, by the intent. As if the Father
Disseiseth the Son, to the intent to make a Feoffment with Warranty to Bar his
Wife, Recovers against one which outs the Tenant by Covin; yet she had not good
Title of Dower, is a Disseiseress; and Covin is apparent here, because he never
took view, voucher, essoin, or other delays which he might. The Statute says,
That the Recovery shall be void, whereby it is not intended that it shall be
executed, and shall not be intended to be by Disseisen without showing.

The words of 11. H. 7. explain the intent, That are within the Statute.
Recovery against Tenant in Tail, was good only for his life before this Stat.
and therefore comprises use here, because the Stat. shall not be made in vain;
for Tail in use may do as great prejudice, as Tail in possession, and so the
intent shall aid the obscurity of the words in Construction of words; but if it
be not within the words, yet it shall be taken by equity; because it restrains
Liberty that the Common Law gave to the prejudice of another, as here of Tenant
in Tail to bind their issues by recovery or Warranty. So Marlebridge, cap. 6.
speaks of a Lease for years for to defraud the Lord of Ward; yet if it were for
Life, or in Tail, taken by equity. So W. 2. cap. 1. speaks of 3. gifts in Tail;
yet 4. H. 5.6. and 19. H. 6.74. comprise by equity all manner of intails,
because it restrains liberty of breaking the intention of the Donor, suffer by
the Common Law. So W. 2. cap. 3. gives receipt to the Reversioner by equity to
the Remainder; for the Common Law, which may not suffer him to be received,
suffers a wrong, and this Statute remedies it. So 13. R. 2. cap. 17. gives
receipt for faint pleading by equity; receipt by equity shall be for faint
defending. So an Administrator shall have account by equity of Statute, where
it is given to Executors only. So 1. H. 7.3. gives an Action of Forgery of
false Deeds, by which the Title and Possession of another are disturbed in the
Copulative by equity, if the Title only be disturbed; and therefore the
disseisee which has not but only a right, shall have an Action in 4. H. 6.26.
because where the Law defective suffers a thing which is a wrong to another,
and a Statute redresseth it, there things in the like mischief shall be taken
by equity, in the like purview. So here because it is made in avoidance of
Covin, therefore it is beneficial to the Commonwealth.

Brown, Justice, argued to the contrary for 2. causes in the Pleading. The one
was for that the cause of the Covin was not showed; for howbeit that the
Statute speaks generally of Covin, yet it refers the pleading of this to the
Common Law; and therefore because the cause of Covin was not showed, the
replication was naught. The other cause was, for that the Plaintiffs have not
showed how the Wife Plaintiff was Heir, and therefore may not be seized in
Tail, as it was pleaded. And as to the execution, he held that it was not
necessary to be showed. And as to the matter in Law, he held the case here
within the words of the Statute; and if it were not, yet he held them within
the equity; for that the Statute was made in avoidance of Covin, which is to be
abhorred; and therefore the Statute is benificial to the Commonwealth; But for
the said defaults in the replication, he held that the Plaintiffs should not
recover.

Montague, Chief Justice. Title amends not Covin, for it may be upon a good
Title; and therefore the books are, If a Wife recover Dower against A. who by
Covin enters, and outs the Tenant, as in 15. E. 4.4. yet she is a Disseisoress;
and by 8. H. 4.6. where the issue in Tail recovers against A. who by Covin
Disseise the Discontinuee; yet 18. H. 8.5. is not remitted, although his Title
good, but is a Disseisor by reason of the Covin. The Title of a man shall not
be tried between strangers, where he which has the Title is not party, nor
show Covin, because it is a thing secretly determined to the prejudice of
another; as Joyntenancie on part of the Plaintiff; the Defendant which pleads
this, shall H. 21. E. 4.78. and 19. H. 6.32. So 19. H. 79. he which pleads a
Deed which belongs not to him, shall not be enforced to show it: a man may
aver Covin generally, where averment is given by Statute, or Common Law; as the
Statute of 13. R. 2. gives receipt for faint pleader, and may allege it
generally when he prays to be received. So a Termor for years by the Statute of
Gloucestor shall be received, and aver Covin generally; and faint pleading, and
Covin is all one. So 8. H. 6.7. In Assise the Tenant makes default; one shall
answer for him as Baily, he appears and disallows him, and says, That he will
make default; the Bailiffs comes and Demands Conusance of this default made by
Covin for to take away their Conusance generally, and holden good. So 10. H.
6.15. In Formedon one Demandant agrees with the Tenant in Challenge which he
made to a Juror; the other Demandant avers the Challenge to be made by Covin
generally, and good. So if one pleads imprisonment in excuse of his default, or
sale in a Market overt; the other avers, That it is by Covin generally; or if
he pleads a Feoffment, the other avers, That it was by Champerty generally, and
so may aver Covin given by the Statute or Common Law generally, where the cause
of it may not be special: if it may be special otherwise, it is 7. H. 4.15. in
scire facias, the Wife received, pleads a recovery by a stranger, upon a not
denial, and execution against him; it is but the acknowledgement of the Tenant,
and his own Act, and so Covenous. Faint recovery against Tenant in Tail, which
dies before execution, the issue is remitted, and the Recovery not executory
against him, and so is defeasable; yet the Covin in the Recovery, which is as a
Condition, is cause of the forfeiture of the State; as a Feoffment upon
Condition, not to infeoffee I. albeit that he within age infeoffees I. and so
the State is defeasable, yet he has broken the Condition.

And as to the other exception taken, for that Montague held the Replication
naught; for Replications, Titles, Pleas in abatement of Writs, and Estopples,
ought to comprehend certainty; the Replication forces the party to issue, and
therefore shall be certain, because the Court, nor the Jury may not be
inveigled, or troubled for the incertainty of the Replication, which makes the
issue, ordained and provided that they should be certain. But a Bar which is
certain to a common intent, is good; for a man shall plead in Bar an Estate,
without showing how, it is not good; as it is holden 2. E. 4.26. and every
Replication ought to show contrary matter to the Bar, and then ought to take
Traverse, or confess, and avoid the Bar. And here the Bar is good, and the
Replication contains a misbehavior of the Wife of the Defendant, by which here
Estate is void, and then the Plaintiff ought to make him able for to take
benefit of the misbehavior of the Defendant: and here the Heir pleads this
ability certainly, the Bar which is plainly confessed, is not plainly avoided;
for it appears not here how the Plaintiff is cosen to G. T. and pretoxtu
quorum premissoy, refers to him which is said before, only as it is expounded
7. H. 6.51. in a Bill of Debt against the Warden of the Fleet. 4. H. 7.13.
where one binds himself, That he will not claim, nor enter into the said land
in bar, that he entered not, nor claimed; the Plaintiff replies that he claims,
he ought to say how, viz. That he came to the Land, and claimed, and entered. So
in 5. E. 4 6. in Replication the Plaintiff ought to show how he is next of
blood to the Woman ravished, with consent to the ravishment. So for Mortmain,
how he is Ld. So for receipt, how he came to the reversion by special
conveyance to the things, which the Statutes give by general words, as here.
Titles always ought to be certain, because he that makes Title, is by this an
Actor, and an Actor ought to plead certainly; by Hales fol. 51. b. If a Wife
which has a Joyncture by her Husband, suffers a faint recovery, contrary to
11. H. 7. if the Daughter enter, the Son born after shall not out her during
the life of the Wife. By Montogue, he may enter presently, (and save) because
the Statute says, he shall enjoy it according to his Title therein; and the
Title is Tail, which is devolved to the Son, and after f. 1^. But the Daughter,
because prima de sanguine ^ring, because the Wife assents to the Ravisher,
shall hold against the Son born afterward, and there it is Fee-simple. In 5.
E. 4.6. So 9. H. 7.25. the Daughter shall hold the Remainder appointed to the
right Heirs, against a Son born afterward, because it is vested in the
Daughter as a purchaser, because it is Fee-simple, to which the Son afterward
born, has not right: for the Land was never in any of his Ancestors before, Et
possessio fratris de feodo simplici facit, etc. of Fee-Tail not, but it
discends to the youngest Son of the half blood. So a Bastard eign-abate in
Fee-simple Land, and dies without interruption, and his issue enter, he shall
hold against the Mulier puisne 39. E. 3.38. Of Land entailed it is otherwise;
so it is a great difference between Fee-simple, and Fee-Tail; and according to
the Proverb, One shall beat the Bush, and another shall have the Bird. As 9. H.
7.24. and 25. A man has Lands by the Mother, and aliens upon Condition, and
dies without issue; the Heir of the part of the Father enters for the Condition
broken, the Heir on the part of the Mother outs him. 14. H. 8.18. by Portman;
if a Remainder in Tail be once executed, the issue in formedon shall declare
upon the Gift immediately, for all passes at one time, and upon one Livery. But
in 20. Ass. Ph. ultima, it was showed of a Reversion, after Seisen, or making
Title by grant of the Reversion, he which makes Title, is always Actor, and
ought to plead certainly. So 2. H. 6.14. A Patentee shows his Letters
Patents; if he makes Title by them. Words always if they are ambiguous and
obscure in Statutes, have been expounded according to the intent of the makers;
as W. 2. cap. 3. speaks when a man amiserit per defaltam is expounded, when the
Husband and Wife lose by default; because the Law always was, that the Wife
may enter, if the Husband alone lose by default. So W. 2. cap. 1. Et si finis
super hujusmodi tenementa imposterum levetur, ipse in re sit nullus. The Words
seem to make a Fine void, but yet it is not void; but is a discontinuance, and
void as to bar the right of Tail. So the Statute of Gloucester, cap. 3. says,
Whereof no Fine is levied, intends by husband and Wife; for they may well levy,
the marriages of Women and their Estates, and advancement, by this are greatly
H. 8.7. The Wife shall recover her Land given causa matrimonii praelocuti, if
the Feoffee will not marry her. So shall have all Freehold after Divorce. So a
Wife shall have a Cui ante divortium, to recover the land lost by the Husband
and Wife by default before the Divorce. So 11. H. 7. intends to punish women,
if they will recompense this favor of the Law with wrong to the disinherison of
Heirs; here the Wife has an Estate in the use, and by his inhereditament, and
the Land; and Use also is the inheritance of the Husband, and therefore within
the words of the Statute; because an Use is an Hereditament. For 5. E. 4.7.
possessio fratris of an Use good, for the Sister also if she has the value of
40. s. in Use. 15. H. 7.13.5. E. 4 7. and by Litl. 108. he shall be sworn in
Assizes by the Common Law, and Statute of Pernors of Profits, and other
Statutes have admitted an Use, for an Hereditament, and the Land and use also,
is the inheritance of the Husband; for an inheritance is such an Estate as the
Heir may inherit, as he may here; and every Fee and Tail by purchase or
descent, is inheritance, by Littleton, and Britton contains many errors. As to
the Case of cui in vita, in 7. H. 4. before fol. 47. by those of the Chancery,
and also by the Register Original 232. is the one and the other quam clamat
esse jus and hereditat. etc. The Feoffees here were seized to the use of the
husband, and every of them has an entire Use; for between Husband and Wife are
no moieties, and after the H. 8. The Parliament made the Conveyance of the Land
from one to another; and the Feoffees are Donors; for when a Gift is made by
Parliament, every one by it is privy, and assents to it; yet the thing shall
pass from him which has most right, and most Authority to give it. As in 21.
H. 7.32. He to whose Use, and the Feoffee join in a Feoffment, it shall be said
the Feoffment of the Feoffee; for they have most Authority for to give this. So
Tenant for Life, and he in a Reversion joins in a Feoffment, it shall be
adjudged the Livery of the Tenant for Life. So if one seized in Fee, and
another which has nothing joins in a Feoffment, it shall be said the Feoffment
of him which has right, and the confirmation of the other. So here it shall be
said the Gift by Parliament of the Feoffees, and the assent and confirmation of
all others. For if any other shall be adjudged the Donor, the Parliament should
do wrong to the Feoffees in taking the thing from them. And an Act of
Parliament will not prejudice any man, as 19. H. 6.62. the Rector of Edington
had an exemption from Tithes by the Kings Grant, he afterward agrees to the
Act which granted Tithes to the King, and so was one of the Grantors, yet shall
not take benefit by this, but shall be discharged. For the Common Law says,
That none shall be damnified by such general Act made by the Parliament; and
therefore W. 2. cap. 1. Gifts upon Condition shall not take away right Pattent
in London; but that remains to this day with protestation to sue in the nature
of a Formedon in Discender, if it be out of the words, yet it shall be taken by
equity, although it be penal to some man; for here it restrains the Liberty of
Tenant in Tail, because it was for to redress false Covin, for to advance right
and justice and benificial to the wealpublick, As W. 2. cap. 3. gives a cui in
vita upon a recovery by default, which was a wrong to the Wife, and therefore
gave Cui ante Divortium by equity. So Marlebridge, cap. 6. De primogenith, and
of Feoffment; yet if the first Son dies, and he infeoffees the second Son, or
Levy a Fine, it shall be taken by equity; because it redresses Covin, which the
Law abhors. So 1. H. 7. cap. 1. gives a Formedon in Remainder against Pernors
of Profits. and 14. H. 7.31. and after 178. scire facias for to execute a
Remainder against the taker of the Profits, shall be maintainable by equity. No
judgment was ever given in this case for this default, viz. because he had not
showed certainly how he was Heir, and in special, for that it was issuable, and
Title given is certain.

Note, that all the Justices held the case here within the words of the Statute
of 11. H. 7. And if it were not within the words, that yet it was within the
equity of the Statute. And they held also, that the Heir may enter immediately,
(that is to say) in the life of Tenant in Tail; but no judgment was given.

Dive against Maningham.
ONe was in prison in execution upon a Recognisance of Debt, M. 4 E. 6 In the
Common Pleas in debt.
taken according to the Statute of 23. H. 8. cap. 6. and the Defendant being a
stranger made an Obligation to the Sheriff, indorced with Condition, That the
prisoner should save him from damage against the King, and the Conusee; and
also that he should be always at his commandment as a true prisoner to appear
before the justices and the King at Westminster, or elsewhere, within this
Realm. And it was adjudged a void Obligation by the Statute of 23. H. 6. c. 10.

1. For that the prisoner was not bailable, but excepted by the Statute which
in this point is not, but an affirmance of the Common Law.

2. For that, That the third branch of the Statute which makes all Obligations
vold, taken for any the causes abovesaid against the form there expressed,
extends as well to the second branch, in which the exception is, as to the
first; for the generalty abovesaid, and also by the intent of the Statute, to
suppress the extortion of Sheriffs in this behalf.

3. Although it shall not be so, yet he takes the Obligation color officii,
as Sheriff of his prisoner; and so within the Statute.

4. No day or place of appearance is limited in the Condition; so the form
appointed by the Stat. is not observed.

5. Other things are mixed in the Condition, with the appearance, as that he
shall save harmless; and this shall be intended there for all things, and at
all times.

6. He had but one surety, and the Statute speaks of surety of sufficient
persons, in the plural number. by Montaigue. fol. 63.

7. The Obligation here is void by course of the Common Law, for that the
Condition is against the Law, for the party is not bailable. 2. H. 4.9.

The Extent ought to precede the Liberate, here are both in one Writ, yet in
nature they are several, but the Writ remains good for the extent, and the
other is surplusage. 7. H. 4. 44. for Toll not paid, the Writ was Tolloneum
asportavit, and illud solvere recusavit asportavit, is void, because
surplusage, and it abates not because he refused to pay, for that is
sufficient, and be the Writ good or bad in Law, it shall stand in force until
it be Reversed by Error; because an ancient Record. 37. H. 6. 1. the Sheriff
took a single Obligation for to let one to Mainprise, which is not
Mainpernable, it was void, because he took color efficii, which is taken
always in ill part, and implies that the thing is done by pretense of Office,
but not yet duly; and their office is but a vail and shadow to falsity,
Virtute officii, or Ratione officii taken in good part, because it is always
where the Office is just, which causes the thing, and it is pursuant to the
office. Obligation is void where the condition is contrary to Law; as to be
saved harmless if he kills a man, or does commit trespass; so here the
Obligation is void by the Common Law, because it was to save the Sheriff
harmless for wrong done against the Law, as is the letting the Prisoner at
freedom, he being one which is not Bailable. So 2. H. 4. 9. A Baily by
withernam takes the Beasts of the Defendant, and afterward re-delivers them to
the Defendant, upon Obligation given to him by the Defendant, for the saving of
him harmless, wherefore holden void; because it was to aid the Baily for this
wrong in the re-delivery of the beasts to the party, for he ought to have
detained them until, etc.

And afterward Mollineux, Hales, and Brown Justices, argued to the same purpose.

Montague, Chief Justice. It is likely to me that the Plaintiff shall be
barred; for an Act which is general in particularity, or particular in a
generality, which is all one, as in 13. E. 4. 8. That all Corporations, and
Licenses made by H. 6. shall be void. So that all Bishops or Justices shall do
such an Act shall be pleaded; but a general Act which extends to every man,
not; but the Justices ought to take Conusance thereof; but if this Act has
several branches concerning several matters (yet contained in one Chapter)
there he needs not recite all; but this only which concerns him, and makes
for his purpose: for every branch is a several Act by it self. But a Record
shall not be pleaded ( inter alia,) for it is entire upon one Original, and
one Judgment upon it, but ought to plead certainly all the Record when it is
pleaded in Bar; because the Record is the matter of substance, and the effect
of the Bar, which ought to be plain and perfect when the Record is but
conveyance and induction to the Bar or Action, it is sufficient to reciteithis,
which is the cause of the Action, as 34. H. 6. 48. A Tenant by Elegit makes
avow in ^eplegiare, for that he had execution as Tenant by Elegit, and made a
Lease reserving Rent, for which being arear, he avowed he needed not show the
Record, because the Lease only is traversable, and is the effect of the
Avowry; and the execution by Elegit, is the Record from which it issues, which
is nothing but conveyance to the effect; and therefore it suffices to begin at
the Execution upon Damages recovered without pleading how lie brought his first
Action, and what answer the Defendant made, or such like. So in the 19. H. 6.
29. a Bill of Deceit against an Attorncy. for imbesseling of a Habcas Corpora
upon a Formedon between the Plaintiff and another, holden good, whithout
showing the Original and certainty of the Land, and all the Record in certain;
because the Record is but a conveyance to the suit of Deceit; and therefore for
this cause cannot be Nultiel Record. But where a Record is pleaded in Bar, all
shall be showed certainly; and is Traversable there, in Conclusion or general
Demurrer (as petit judicium) if the Plaintiff shall maintain the Action, one
shall have advantage of all defaults, and of every thing mentioned in the
Record, and of every point that the Law gives him. In Conclusion special, of
defaults only alleged in certain as here, petit judicium, if the Plaintiff
shall maintain the action there if it be void; for another cause then this
which is mentioned, he shall not have benefit of this: of a thing void ab
initio, as the Obligation here, because void by Statute; so in avoidance of a
Deed, That he was not a man lettered, and that it was read to him in another
form, So 24. H. 8. 28. because delivered as an Escrow upon. Condition, the
Conclusion shall be, so not his Deed, because the matter proves that it was
never his Deed of a thing voidable, where it was void after; because once is
was a Deed; the Conclusion shall be Judgment, if Action; because the duty is
now extinct, as 1. H. 7. 15. by release. 35. H. 6. 18. for nonage. 7. E. 4. 5.
by dures. When the Conclusion is naught, and the matter in Law good. Officium
Judicis est, for to give Verdict against the Plaintiff, if it appears that he
had not cause of Action, howbeit that the Defendant has lost the advantage
thereof, as it is here. So 7. E. 4. 31. Trespass against B. and C. B. pleads
not guilty. C. pleads the gift of B. found guilty, and found for C. no
judgment for the Plaintiff, because found against him. So. appeal of a woman
for the death of her father 10. E. 4. 7. because she shall not have an appeal
of the death of any man except her husband, or Trespass against the Lord by
distress where nothing is in arear; because the Statute is Non ideo puacatur
dominus, abate ex officio, although the Defendant accepts the Writ, good; for
the Plaintiff shall be barted by the Court ex officio, and shall not have
judgment, although the Defendant admits his Title; or by his Conclusion has
concluded himself of his advantage, if it appears that he had no Title.

1. The first branch is commanding and authorizing the Sheriff to let to Bail,
persons manipernable by the Common Law, viz. persons taken by Writ, Bill, or
Warrant upon an Action personal, or indictment of Trespass; for it was
(indifferent if they were guilty or not) made in affirmance of the Common Law.
2. The second Branch, viz. The exception was also made in the affirmance of the
Common Law before; for such persons which were in by condemnation, execution,
Capias, ut legate. etc. were not bailable before. 3. The third is only the
purview, which relates to the second branch as well as to the first; for
before, refers to all this spoken of before, as well the thing excepted, as
otherwise; as a Lease for years of a Manor, except a Close, rendering Rent, the
Lessee binds himself to perform all Covenants, Grants, and Agreements,
expressed or recited in the Indenture, and after disturbs the Lessor of a thing
excepted, he has forfeletd the Obligation, because it is an Agreement; for
when he excepted the Close, the other was contented with it, and that the
Lessor should occupy it; and recited goes to the exception as to the rest. 45.
E. 3. 4. contained, and recited, goes to every Covenant in the Indenture. An
Act done Color officii, is extortion; as if an Officer takes more for Fees
then he ought. And an Obligation taken of a prisoner for meat and drink, is
void, because it is color officii; for he nor the Plaintiff are not bound to
give him sustenance: as he which distrains, is not bound to give, although he
be in for Felony; because 7. H. 4. 47. his goods are his until he be attainted
by the Common Law; which is confirmed by 1. R. 3. c. 3. Rastal Forfeiture fol.
15. and if he dies for want of sustenance, it is his own fault; because that by
presumption, his ill demeanor brings him to such imprisonment.
The Statute of R. 3. restrains the Sheriff and other Officers to take
Obligations of their prisoners, except the Warden of the Fleet, and the Kings
Palace at Westminster. A Sheriff lets to mainprise one taken by Capias upon an
indictment of Trespass, which for the surety of the Sheriff, makes an
obligation to a stranger to keep his day, is 7. E. 4. 5. held to be void;
because taken to another, and not to the Sheriff only, according to the
Statute. Also there it is held, if the Obligation has not the Conditions
expressed in the Statute, That it is not the Deed of the party ex quo sequitur,
that he ought to conclude, not his Deed: keeping without damage shall be
intended by the generalty for all things, Treasons, Felonies, Accounts, and for
all times; if another thing is added by the Statute to be given, it shall make
all void; as if a Condition be made according to the Statute, and has another
thing not according to the Obligation, is void. So to add other words in a
Formedon, or Writ of Waste, which are given by Statute, all is void. So to
alien all the Land, when he has license for part, the license is void in all:
by the Statute of 32. H. 8. because he has exceeded the Authority thereby
given to him. The Statute Statute says, That if it shall be taken in any other
manner then is contained in the Statute, if shall be void. Also here by
Plowden, yet taken by one at large by the words of the first branch, and those
aid then third branch; every person which extends to those at large, nor for
any person in their Ward, which extends only to prisoners.

Kidwelly against Brand.
LEease for years rendering 40. s. Rent by the year at H. out of the Land at the
Feast of M. and if the Rent be behind, H. 4. and 5. E 6. In the Common Pleas.
and not paid by the space of 40. days after the said Feast; then it shall be
lawful for him, etc. for to re-enter; the Reversion is granted for Life, the
Grantee comes to the Land 40. dales after M. to demand the Rent aforesaid, but
demanded it not, and for not payment re-entred, and adjudged lawful.

1. A Grantee for Life of a Reversio, is an assignee within the Statute of 32.
H. 8. c. 34. to enter for a Condition broken.

2. The tender of the Rent on the Feast day is not requisite, nor until the
last instant of the 40. day.

3. Notwithstanding that the Rent be apppointed to be paid out of the Land at
the Feast day, and not the 40. day by express words; yet it shall be so
intended by relation to the place last named.

4. No demand here is requisite; because that the Land which is Debtor, is
absent; the contrary is upon a general reservation; and if a Rent seck payable
in a foreign County be demanded and denled, there it is not a disseisen by
Plowden, contrary upon the Land.

The place which was once charged with the payment in the hands of the Lessor,
remains chargeable in the hands of any other because he has this as a Liberty
and Authority imposed upon it by the Lessor, and such Liberty is saved by the
Statute of suppression of Monasteries; and therefore the Lessor, nor the Lessee
are not Trespassers, by their coming there to tender and receive the Rent.

Rosse against Pope.
ROss acknowledged a reconusance to Pope, and after Levies a Fine to him of
patcel of his Land, 5. E. 6. In Chancery upon an Audita quetela.
and Pope sues Execution, and takes the body of the said Rosse, and he brings
an audita querala in the Chancery, and adjudged that it lies not.

1. For that the Land is not debtor, but the person, and the Land is only
charged in respect of the person, and not otherwise, until Execution sued.

2. For that the purchase was before Execution sued, otherwise it had been, if
sued afterward; for then the Land was charged in facto, and not chargeable.
And if any part be discharged by act in Law, as descent, or act of the party,
as Surrender, Feoffment, etc. also it shall be discharged, because the duty is
personal and entire.

3. Because that the Conusor shall not have contribution against the Feoffees,
but they shall have against him; and here the Conusee shall not have Execution
against his Feoffees for that they may not have contribution against him.

Wimbish against Willoughby.
Assize directed Coronatoribus, in Lincoin, upon the surmise of the Plantiff
that the Sheriff was Tr. 6. E. 6. Assice against L. Wall.
That one of the Coroners was servant to the Defendant, and adjudged good.

1. For the speedy expedition of the Assize, and the mischlef of the Plaintiff,
if it should be abated by the exception of the Defendant, and no mischief to
him; and here the venire facias is awarded the first day, as in a precipe.

2. Coroners in Lincoln shall be intended Coroners of Lincoln, for that they
are the words of the King.

In the Argument of this case; see first where a Writ Original shall be
directed to the Coroners, where not. Secondly, and when other Judicial process.
Thirdly, an exposition of the words ( in and de) in Writs, Grants, or, etc.
Fourthly, what words are sufficlent to make a Grant of a Rent charge. Fifthly,
some matters touching challenges, and where they shall be Traversed, etc.

Partridge against Strange and Croker.
IN Statute of 32. H. 8. cap. 9. H. 6. and 7 E. 6. In the Common Leath.
Of buying and selling of pretenced Titles and Rights, and allege this to be
done 28. April, 32. H. 8. where in truth it was not done this day; and that the
Defendants have made a Lease for years of a house, and nine acres of Land
pertaining to it, whereof they nor their ancestors, nor any by which the claim
were in possession, Reversion, or Remainder, nor took the Profits for one
entire year before, etc. and holden.

1. That the Statute need not to be specially recited and pleaded, because it
is general; but for that it is misrecited, it is not good by the Court, sol.
84. and yet is surplusage, and it shall prejudice the party in some cases, sol.
29. as debt by I. S. Parson of D. it is a good Traverse, because he is not
Parson; or that there is not such a village called D.

2. When the Term shall not be certainly pleaded, for that it is Conveyance of
the Action, and is not material here, and he which pleads it is a stranger; as
an Indictment of the death of a certain man unknown, or the stealing of the
goods of a certain man unknown.

3. That a Lease for years, or a grant of parcel of the Right is within the
Statute; because the Statute speaks of any right, and is not intended only of
an entire right, and that the entire value of the Land shall be forfeit by such
Lease, per Curiam fol. 87.

That this Lease made by one in possession, is out of the Statute; for that it
is not averred to be a pretenced right, by Hales and Montague, fol. 87. against
Cook. For they mean that he which has possession one day, or however may make
a Lease, or Feoffment bona fide, and shall be forth of the Statute, although
that he has not possession, or takes the profits one whole year without
averment, that it is made for maintenance, and the Statute shall be intended
only of those which makes Leases, etc. having but a right, and not the
possession, as Montague held, a promise by him which is out of possession, to
depart with the Land when he shall attain the possession. is within the danger
of the Statute. fol 88. And if the Issue in Tail at full age marry a woman
discontinuee of his father, and makes a Lease for years, this is within the
Statute; for that he Leases his ancient right. So by Morgun, if the heir
release to the Abator, and afterward claiming by descent, makes a Lease for
years, this may be averred a pretenced right, and then is within the danger of
the Statute: fol. 86: and a right is within the Statute, which comprehends all
rights.

Pretenced right is, where one has the possession, and another which is out of
possession claims this, or sues for it by Mont. f. 88.

Morgan, Statute here, no Act without the consent of the King, when all assent,
it shall have relation to the first day of the Parliament, and from that time
is an Act of Parliament, unless it be otherwise appointed when it shall first
take effect. An act made in the first, or second Session relates not but to the
first day of the same Session. Misrecital shall prejudice the party in some
cases; as Debt by I. S Parson of D. where there is no such Village D. a good
Traverse, and abates the Writ; yet the naming of him Parson, surplusage. So
here because it recites a Statute certain made such a day, where it was not,
although that the day is surplusage, it has made the matter vicious, although
it be a general; because the not referring to the science of the Judges, as he
does, if he says generally contra formam Stat. etc.a Statute has no words in
vain.

Whiddon, for the Plaintiff. A general Statute shall not be recited, as 27. H.
8. of Conveyance of the possession to the Use. So the demandant may Demur
without recital of the Statute of W. 2. c. 36. If the Tenant vouches out of the
line. So an Executor of an Executor shall have account without recital of the
Statute, of 25 E. 3. cap. 5. So 5. H. 7.17. Information for Liveries, good,
without reciting of the Statute.

Misrecital of the surplusage shall not make the mattor bad, as 21. H. 6.1. by
Newton; one as an Executor shall not bring an action of Debt upon a Contract
made with himself; he shall not show the Testament, for that the naming of him
[Executor] is surplusage. So 33. H. 6.19. by Danby in Detinue against two as
Executors; They shall not plead that another is Executor with them, because
they are not charged as Executors. But Detinue is cause of Action, and the
naming of them Executors, is surplusage. A man shall not aver that, which by
the Statute is made apparent; as the Lord show that he entered into the Land
within the year, because his Tenant aliened to the Dean and Chapter, he shall
not aver that it is Mortmain, because it appears now; nor here that it is a
pretenced right, because he counts that the Defendant nor his Ancestors, etc.
were not in possession the space of a year before the Lease, and then is
pretenced Conveyance to the Action (as the Lease is here) shall not be pleaded.
So certainty is the substance it self, as appears 34. H. 6.4 by Prisot in
decies lantum. If the Plaintiff shows such part of the Record as conveys him
to his Action, it is sufficient without showing all. But a Writ judicial ought
to recite the Record certainly out of which it issues; because the Record is
the substance and effect there; and not only the Conveyance a stranger to the
Deed or thing, as the Plaintiff here is to the Lease that he pleads, shall not
show the certainty of it; as 35. H. 6.8. after fol. 148.13. H. 7.19. By Fineux;
au ancient Major in Trespass justify the taking of goods, because the Plantiff
was outlawed without showing Pattent, because he is now as a stranger to them;
for it belongs to the successor, and not to him. So a Wife shall have Dower
for a Rent Charge granted to the husband without showing the Deed. So 7. H.
6.1. by Strange; Lessee in Debt against him for Rent reserved, may say, That
the Estate of his Lessor was upon Condition, for which broken, such a one had
entered before the Rent arear, Judgment, if Action, without showing what
condition.

Sanders, Statute here, although penal, yet because it is beneficial for the
Common Wealth, viz. for to avoid maintenance, subordination of witnesses, etc.
Things taken out of the Works thereof, taken by equity, and the words obscurely
expounded, most strong for the Common wealth; and words are but the image of
the Statute, and the life thereof in the minds of the makers, and Expositors of
it, and which approach nearest to their minds, are the true Expositors; and
words should be inclinable to the mind. So W. 3. cap. 2. Fines upon Lands
intailed ipso jure sit millus, viz. as to right, to be bound; but as to the
possession, is a discontinuance, before fol. 57. and after fol. 137. So the
heir may demand the heritage of his Mother, aliened by his Father; if he only
Levied the Fine: Yet Gloucester cap. 3. says, Whereof no Fine is Levied,
intends lawful Fines by the Father and Mother: before fol. 57. So a Statute
Merchant wills that it shall be delivered to the Conusee: Yet 21. E. 3.21.
shall be delivered to the extendors, because prised too high; it shall he
delivered to the praisors for the price, after f. 172. So if the Plaintiff be
nonsuit in a second deliverance, the Defendant shall recover Damages by the
equity of 7. H. 8.4. Return irreplevisable shall be awarded; and so by this
means the Plaintiff is barred, and so the intent of the makers directs the
words and equity of Statutes. Lessee for years Bracton he has jus utendi and
fruendi in alieno libero Tenemento; an Estate, because a Remainder in Fee is
good upon a Lease for years, and a Remainder is not good without an estate
precedent, Title because 7. H. 7.11. a Termor may falsify a faint Recovery
against his Lessor by the Common Law. So 9. H. 6.64. by Strange: I grant to B.
That if my Tenant for life dies, living my self, that he shall have for 10.
years. B. may maintain, because he has color, yet he has nothing, and is in
doubt if he shall have it for 10. years or not: Then if the Leffee for years
has such interest, that by the Common Law he may maintain, there is no need of
a remedy, for all other the Statutes before avoid maintenance, the suit
depending; for the Staute of 32. H. 8. is made for the avoidance in meddling
with other men's matters before any suit or after. Account shall not abate for
default of form, if it has substance. 36. E. 3. cap. ultimo. After fol. 190.
If one be found guilty of an offense which is pardoned by Parliament, Judges
ought not to proceed to judgment; yet it is not pleaded, because they are
bound to take notice of it; for it appears to them by judicial knowledge. 26.
H. 8, 7. by Fitz. H. But if A. kill B. in the presence of the Justices, and C.
is found guilty of it. 7. H. 4.41, by Tirwit and Gascoin, the Justice ought to
respite judgment, because he knows the contrary; but not to acquit C.
because he cannot judge of his own knowledge. 22. E. 4.47. where it was granted
by Parliament, That A. should have a Writ with Proclamation, out of

And as to the cerainty of the Term he shall not show it, because he is a
stranger to it. As the Defendant shall plead Joyntenancie of the Plaintiff
without showing of whose gift.

All the Court say, That Declarations ought to have certainty. So that the
Defendant may know to what thing he ought to answer (after fol. 193.) and 3. H.
7.12. So 3. E. 4.21. In Debt for a sallary against a Successor declares, That
he was retained with his Predecessor, and shows not who retained him; because a
stranger may retain him; the County shall abate by the better opinion for the
incertainty; good by Brook: Laborers, 39. and the truth is, That it ought to be
conjoined to certainty, as 9. H. 7.3. by Fineux, and 6. H. 4.7. Debt upon
payment at two days, whereof the one is come abates by showing of the Plaintiff
the same, because he has showed falsity. So 20. H. 6.30. one ought to rehearse
the Stat. upon which he brings Champerty for to Warrant this certainly, which
ought to appear always to the Court, but not in one manner; as sometimes by
the replication in Assizes, sometimes by Verdict, as in aquare impedit the
value of the Church. In Ward the value of the Marriage, in Detinue the value of
the goods; as in 20. H. 6. Champerty was brought, which was not Warranted by
any Statute; and there Newton said, That if the party could not show to them
some Statute by which it is Warranted, that they would award that the Writ
should abate. And for that which has been said that he needs not to recite the
Statute, and therefore misrecital is not material; it seemed to them, That
howbeit he need not, yet if he recites it, and there is none such, then he has
failed of his substance; for the Court will not aid him nor think he intends
any other thing then what he has showed; and by this abundance in reciting
more then needs, hurts the party many times. And therefore in 20. H. 6. fol.
42. contrary to 8. H. 6.33. Fitz. H. Count 15. of forging of false Deeds, the
Writ was of Diversa facta, and minimenta, etc. and he counted but of one only,
and by assent of all the Justices it was awarded, That the Writ should abate,
and so abundance abated the Writ.

And if one makes Title in Assize in his plaint where he need not, yet if it
be not formal, all shall abate; and yet it was abundance, and more then he was
compelled to do. So in the principal case. And where it was said, That the
Defendants by their Demurrer have confessed such Act of Parliament as the
plaintiff has declared, they held, that admitting this to be a confession, yet
this binds nor the Court, which is a third person; as appears by 10. E. 4.
Wherein Trespass of Cattle taken, brought by the Lessee for years; the
Defendant said, That the Lessor held of him by Rent, which was Arear, and he
took the beasts for it the Plaintiff said nothing Arear, and there although the
Defendant had admitted the Writ good, yet the opinion of the Justices was, That
the Writ should abate, for that the Lord was Defendant. And so if the Defendant
will admit good an appeal brought by the wife of the death of her Father, yet
the Court ought to abate it, although the party affirm fol. 236. and he has
many other prerogatives, yet shall he be bound by misrecitall, or by misusing,
or misconceiving of his Action, and there shall abate the Writs where he is
sole party: as in the case of a common person a fortiori where another is party
with the King, as here; the Plaintiff ought to show certainty of the Lease here
by Cook, by other Justices not.

In Decies tantum, certainty of the Sum received here, because he shall not
recover ten times as much, and may not without showing in Champerty, the
certainty of the first plea here, because privy to the Record.

So in Trespass, if the Defendant pleads Franck-Tenenemt; the Plaintiff
intitles himself by a Lease made by him; the Defendant will show that he made a
Feoffment, and that he entered for Forfeiture; he ought to show the name of the
Feoffee, and certainty of the Feoffment, because he is privy, and in all cases
of privies, he ought to show the certainty, as 2. H. 7.6. in Bar of Dower, the
Heir pleaded detainer of evidences, he shall show certainty, for he is privy to
them, that he affirms to appertain to him; of a bag sealed with Charters not,
18. H. 8.1. because the bag sealed is certain. Indictment cujusdam ignoti,
good. Stamford fol. 95. and after fol. 129. Statute penal here not taken by
equity by all the Justices, as an Attaint shall not 14. H. 7.13. nor the
Statute which augments bread by evil making, nor things out of the words shall
not be taken by equity. But the words may be expounded beneficially, as Treason
by the Statute 25. E. 3. for killing of a Master, so of a Mistress, are of one
effect. 19. H. 6.47. but not by equity, but rather within words. Plural number
contains singular, by Hales. So here pretenced Rights and Titles as shall be
punished for forging one false Deed; yet 1. H. 5. cap. 3. speaks of false
Deeds: So for Entry into one Tenement; yet 5. R. 2. cap. 7. speaks of Entry
into Tenements, H. 6.10. prohibits that a Sheriff shall Lease his County to
farm in any manner, shall not Lease part thereof (after fol. 124.) contrary by
Hales. This Lease here made by one in possession, is out of the Statute,
because it is not averred to be a pretenced right, viz. the bargain and Lease
to be made for maintenance (contrary Cook) for this was the point of the
Statute H. 6.26. if published only; yet the Stat. is in the Copulative, for
forging and publishing this within the Statute, but ought to aver, That it was
published to trouble the possession and Title of the Plaintiff for this is the
point of the Statute. So here the Lease ought to be averred for maintenance,
for this is the point of our Statute.

Montague, Chief Justice. He that is in possession, may buy the pretenced right
of another, he which is out of possession, if he promise or bargain to depart
with the Land, when he shall get the possession, is within the Statute, and
makes it void by the Common Law, wherefore the Statute affirms it, and adds a
greater pain to the thing done against the Common Law; and the Statute shall be
meant to avoid a bargain of Right, when out of possession; he which has
possession but one hour, always may sell, or it shall be a hard Exposition.

Acts expounded against the words of the Statute, because Law and Reason allows
it. As Tenant hanging a Precipe, Infeoffs his Son and Heir. 6. E. 3. fol. 274.
after fol. 204. good, contray to the words of the Articuli super Chartas, cap.
2. because the Son may not maintain to the Father, but is bound to aid his
father. So an Heir may abet his Mother for to bring an appeal; as W. 2. Cap.
12. So a Trespass in a Park without hunting, shall not be punished: by a year
before refers to the Clause before only; so that the Clause being in
possession, Reversion, or Remainder, are absolute, viz. if for one hour only,
it suffices, and there he Statute, and here no offense is showed to be made
against the Statute.

Pollards Assise of Freshforce.
7. E. 6. In the Guild Hall London, in the Hustings in time of Tent.
AN Assise of Freshforce upon a plaint of Intrusion, or of Novell Diseisen, was
brought by John Pollard Esquire, and Mary his wife, in the Hustings of the
Guild Hall London, against Bartholomew Jekell, Ralph Foxley, and Anne his wife,
and eleven others. 10. of them appear by Baily, and nultiel in rerum natura, as
one named in the Writ; this shall abate but for him only, and shall stand good
for the others. It was adjudged so in the quare impedit against the Bishop of
Carlisle, and many others: where the death of one of the Defendants was pleaded
by abatement for speed in avoiding of delays therein. For voucher lies not in
it, unless the party himself be present in Court, and Protection lies not,
because excepted in an Assise; therefore it suffices, if Tenant and Disseisor
relinquish; and the Land is the chief and Original cause of the Action,
otherwise in Trespass, for there the person is chief; and the death of one
shall abate the whole Writ, by 29. Ass. fol. 62. adjudged; but the contrary was
held, 44. E. 3.18. 47. E. 3.18.

The Parson of Honylanes Case.
AN Assise of Freshforce against Moore, 7. F. 6. Panel Parson against Moore and
the Mercers of London.
and a Corporation. The Corporation may not appear by Baily without Warrant,
for that it is to defend their wrong; otherwise it is to justify a Trespass,
which is but a personal thing. And although the Assise Pone per vadios, and
salvos plegios predict. Defend. vel Ballivum suum si ipse inventus non fuerit
generally, yet he shall be intended a Lawful Baily by Warrant. And the
Defendant pleaded that the Plaintiff has entered after the last continuance,
and Issue taken thereupon, the Jury gave a special Verdict, That he entered for
to see the antiquity of the buildings at the request of the Defendant, which
had invited him to dinner, and adjudged no entry to abate the Writ; for that if
he were a stranger, he should not be a Trespasser

The Jury may give a special Verdict, and find the matter at large, upon every
issue by equity of the Statute of Westminster, 2. cap. 30. if this tends to
prove the part of the Issue only per curiam.

Woodland against Mantle, and Redsole.
THe 5. and 6. E. 6. Replevin.
The Tenure shall be Traversed and not the Seisen: otherwise it is if he
encroach more of the same nature; as where he holds by 12. d. to encroach 2.
s. etc. There the seisen shall be Traversed; for the quality of the Tenure is
Traversable, and not the quantity. But to avoid the incroachment of the
quantity, the Tenant is put to a Writ of Customs and Services, or contra formam
Feoffamenti; and this is an Estoppell between true Lord and Tenant only in
Replevin; and the Tenant may make Rescous, if he Distrains for this
incroachment. And the Lord may not make Title in Assise for this incroachment.

And also this encroachment is intendable only between true Lord, and true
Tenant, and not Donor and Donee, Lessor and Lessee; for there they ought to
avow upon the Reservation, which the Tenants may Traverse, notwithstanding the
encroachment, by Plowden.

The Lord may Seize or Distrain for Heriot Service, adjudged; because he has
property in this by the death of his Tenant, and the certainty thereof
appears by 6. E. 3 277.

Matters of the Crown at Salop.
IF one be present, and abet a Murderer, he is 1. Mar. at the Sessions in
Salop.
and shall be indicted although that the Murderer flies, and be not attainted,
because both are principals in the first and same degree. And he which abets,
is not only principal in the second degree, but if one be Indicted as
accessory to two, he shall not be arraigned with the abettor, until he which
flies is also attainted, and adjudged, which agrees with 40. Ass. 25.7. H.
4.29. and 36. b. And if the abettor be found guilty by one Verdict, and the
Murderer by another Verdict, is acquitted; now Judgment shall be respited
against the abettor, for the Court will give more credit to the Verdict, which
was charged directly upon the principal act, then another which is charged
implicitly and oblique.

1 Mar at the same Sessions.
FIve were Indicted of Murder of a Servant of Doctor Ellis's, and one venire
facias awarded against all, and they severed in peremptory Challenges; yet the
Jurors which were challenged shall be drawn against all upon the Challenge of
one, although that the others challenge him not, but allow him.

1. Adjudged, for that the venire facias is entire, that the Court in
discretion at the prayer of the Attorney of the King, may sever the Jury and
Tales thereupon.

2. They may make one Jury serve severally against every of them by himself.

3. The evidence given against the prisoners prove, That the Servant was killed
upon malice prepenced to Doctor Ellis himself, which was in company at the time
of the Murder. And the Court resolved, That this Malice to the Master, extends
to the Servant, and all others which defend the Master, and resist the malice
of the Murderers.

4. Resolved also, That if two are fighting of malice prepenced, and a stranger
which has no malice takes part with the one, and kills the other, this is
manslaughter in him, and Murder in the other.

5. Resolved, if one be indicted of Murder, and found guilty of Manslaughter,
and acquitted of the Murder, yet Judgment shall be given against him that he
shall be hanged; for that the death of a man, which is the substance, is found,
although that the circumstance is not, yet he was reprieved by the discretion
of the Justices.

Fulmerston against Steward.
M. 1. and 2. P. Mar. in the kings Bench in trespass.
PLeading that the Masters and confreres of a College was seized in fee, is
good without saying in the right of the College; for it shall be so intended,
for that they are named by the name of corporation; otherwise it is, if they
were named by their particular names.

2. If one plead a Lease of a Manor, with an Statute of 31. H. 8. ca. 13. he
ought to aver in pleading, that the exception extends not to this parcel; For
otherwise it shall so intend strongest against him that pleads it, and then
pass not to the first, nor cannot pass by the second Lease, for that is severed
for the time by 38. H. 6. fol. 38. That a thing in possession may not be parcel
or appendant to a thing in Reversion, as a Lease for life of a Manor, except
the services of I. S. it is not parcel of the Manor, But is a signiory in
gross, and the Land shall be demanded at the common Law, and not in the Court
of the Lord (by Bromely) But here (quere) if the acceptance of the second Lease
be a surrender of the first, and the severance by the second Lease, and then
the severance by the exception is determined; and so the Manor passes entire,
as it was at the commencement.

3. If the recital of one part of the Statute, which makes for him which
recites it, be sufficent.

4. If the pleading of a surrender or grant to the King, by deed enrolled
generally, without showing of the enrollment specially, be good.

5. The King is seized Jure Coronae, of Lands coming to him, by the dissolution
of Monasteries, the Tenant pleads a Lease for fifty years in Bar, and after by
his rejoinder pleads, that the said Lease is made good for twenty one years by
the Statute of 31. H. 8. this is a departure, for that the state comes after
the Lease; otherwise it is of a thing pleaded in affirmance of the Bar, which
precedes it.

6. That the second Lease made by an Abbot within the year of the making of the
Statute of 31. H. 8. to one which has a Lease for years of it before, without
the reservation of the Ancient Rent, then it shall be good for twenty one years
only from the making of the second Lease per curiam.

Bromley, The Lessee for years accepts of a new Lease within one year after the
making of the Statute of 31. H. 8. cap. 13. Admitting this second Lease to be
good by the same Statute; yet it is a good surrender of the first Lease, for
that the second Lease was once good, and shall be expounded to be viod by the
Statute, as to the King; and after the Land comes to the Kings hands, and not
ab initio, and so he shall not avoid the operation of the Common Law in the
Surrender; And by the Common Law, the taking of a second Lease, is a surrender
of the first; for both Estates may not be in one and the same person, at one
and the same time; For if the Lessee for forty years takes a new Lease for
twenty years, upon condition that it shall be void if he does not such an Act;
the condition broken, avoids the second Lease; But not with such relation, that
it shall take away the Surrender of forty years, because it was once executed
absolutely. So if a recovery is had of Land, the which is afterward reversed
by error, which avoids the recovery, yet it does not so avoid it, that the
Recoveror shall be punished by Trespass for the issues taken in the mean time;
two points upon the Statute here; first the second Lease is not so void by the
first Statute; so that at the time of the second Lease made, the first Lease
has his continuance, but was determined, and the Statute is in the copulative,
and then it is not determined by the making of the second Lease, which then had
his continuance, and then was not determined, finished, or expired according to
the words of the Statute. Secondly, the second Lease for fifty years, is
abridged to one and twenty years, by the second branch; for contrary to equity,
it will destroy the former Lease and the second also; And so, that the same
Lease exceeds not twenty one years express in the Statute, extends to the term
abridged, and not to the entire new term to make the clause conditional, but to
make the State abridged, good for one and twenty years, and shall be as a
double repetition of the first clause only, and be also a declaration of the
State, and expounded in the future tense, that it shall not exceed twenty one
years, Ita quod nullus adea manum apponat. And in the Statute of Gifts
conditional, Ita quod non habeat potestatem alienandi. The word (So) is not
conditional, but makes a plain declaration of the thing before, by the words
of the Statute sometimes expounded contrary to the text, to make this agree
with reason, as by 25. E. 3. cap. 16. after fo. 205. by the exception of
non-tenure of parcel, no Writ shall abate but for the quantity of non-tenure
which is alleged, expounded by 5. H. 7.7. where the thing demanded is
several, as Acr^s; for in a precipe of a Manor, if the Tenant pleads
non-Tenure of parcel, all the writ shall abate, because an entire thing, and
there the demandant ought to have an exception in the writ, because it is
contrary to reason that a man shall demand the entire manor against one which
is not Tenant, but of parcel of that which he endevors to recover. So
Praerogativa Regis is for the Tenure of him in Capite, where the King shall
have Primer seisen of all his other Lands; yet 30. H. 8. and after fol. 204.
for Soccage in Capite, he shall not have, because it is contrary to reason that
such a small W. 2. cap. 21. gives entry to the Heir, yet he shall not have the
arrerages in the life of his father, old natura brevium 138. and this
exposition is contrary to the text, because the text is contrary to reason, to
give an action to the Heir for a thing in consideration of another thing not
due to him. So Glouc. cap. 3. for warranty with assets 21. H. 7.10. and 11. H.
4.21. the things taken by equity is expounded contrary to the principal,
Perveyance, Instans est unum indivisibile in tempore quod non est tempus nec
pars temporis, ad quod tamen parts temporis copulantur.

Townsends Case.
A Woman Tenant in tail takes husband who makes a Feoffment in 20. H. 8. to
the use of

1. For that she cannot avoid the discontinuance by entry, as she might after
32. H. 8. cap. 28. but has an action (viz.) cui in vita given to her to
recontinue the possession, which she uses not, but comes to the possession by
another mean, she ought to take it in such order, and with such appendances as
the Law limits to such mean, and the mean which she uses here is 27. H. 8. and
as the Statute appoints the possession to her, she shall be adjudged in, and
not otherwise, although she be a Fem Covert; For Coverture or Infancy is not
material here; for it is not excepted in the Statute, And the Statute of 27.
H. 8. of uses in the first branch of it, executes the possession according to
the quantity of the State in use; And the quantity of the State in use was for
that Term of the life of the husband and wife; ergo the Estate executed by the
Statute, shall be to them also for their lives according to the use aforesaid.
The second branch of the Statute executes the possession according to the
quality of the Estate in use; But the quality and manner of this Estate was by
purchase; for they shall be purchasers of the use; therefore she shall have the
Land as a new purchase, and in no other manner: for the words Affirmative in
the Estate includes a Negative, for that where the Statute appoints or limits
order or form, in things which shall not be by the Common Law before by words
Affirmative, in the Statute includes a Negative, and shall not be in any other
manner then the Statute appoints, as execution of uses hereby 27. H. 8. and of
voucher, as if he were Tenant by W. 2. cap. 4. 14. H. 7.18. and after fo. 206.
and entry for forfeiture by Jointures, by 11. H. 7. cap. 20. before fol. 56.
but contrary, and its words in the Negative, viz. and not above twenty one
years, and the continuance of the State shall not alter the possession in other
degree then the continuance made it at first, where the entry is taken away;
contrary it is where the entry is lawful, as if the disseisor makes a
Feeffment to the use of the diffeisee, and is in possession by 27. H. 8. but
until his reentry is not remitted, yet after he shall in respect of the first
disseisen, and not by possession transferred by the Statute.

3. The wife here is not remitted, because the Statute of 27. H. 8. executes
the possessions of the remitter, etc. And if it should be a remitter, the
remainder shall be defeated and void thereby, contrary to the words of the
Statute. And although that by the Feoffment, the freehold passes to the wife,
and she remains Tenant thereof after the death of her husband, and is Tenant to
the precipe of a stranger until her disagreement or disclaimer; yet she may
use her action against him in the remainder, which is a disagreemen in Law, to
the use and possession conveyed by means thereof, and then the possession vests
in the next remainder, as if the wife had not been named, or had been a dead
person in Law. So if it were to the use of the wife in fee, if she refuse it,
she may use her Action of Cui in vita against the Feoffor or his Heir; for by
her refusal they are Tenants to her Action, and the use reflects to the
Feoffor or his Heir; for upon a Feoffment to the use of one which refuses,
which is as to the use as a dead person, or of the thing insensible, as Paul's
Steeple, there wants considerations, and then the Feoffment shall be to the
use of the Feoffor, and by using of her Action she may purge the incombrance by
her husband; and so no inconveniency, if she were not remitted as was objected.
It is not a remitter as the case here is, if the Estate had been made by
immediate Feoffment, because the husband survives the wife ( Littl. here
presently fol. 150.) she is Tenant to the Action of the Heir of the wife; and
therefore in 21. E. 3.26. and Ass. 2. that the Heir in like case enter upon the
husband, brings an Assise, and good, no Law now by Brook, Remitter, 41.

The Earl of Darby against Newdigate.
THe Earl challenges the Array of the Panel, 2 Ma. in the Common pleas.
Aslise.
and no Knight is named in it, and adjudged a good Challenge according to 13.
E. 3. Fit. H. Title Challenge 115. Challenge by the Bishop of Exeter was taken
in Quare Impedit, because he had not a Knight named in the Panel, and it was
allowed.

Buckly against Rice Thomas.
DEbt upon the Statute of 23. H. 6. by Buckly Knight, M^. Mar. in debt.
against Rice Thomas, the Plantiff counts, that although he was returned a
Knight of the Parliament in a County in Wales, whereof the defendant was
Sheriff, by the greatest number of Freeholders of the County; yet the defendant
returned not it, But that another was chosen Knight, and recites how by the
Statute of 27. H. 8. Wales was incorporated and annexed, and made parcel of
England, and the Welsh Nation by this enabled and made inheritable to all
liberties, franchises, rights, privileges, and laws of England, as other the
subjects of the King of England had, and adjudged that he should recover.

1. For that the allegation alleged under the [licet] is a precise
affirmative by the Rules of great authority; the Latin Authors by the
Register, and opinion of Doctors of the Civil Law, by Brook.

2. That the Plantiff need not to show the number of choosers in certain, for
the Infiniteness of it, and for the impossibility that he should take notice of
it.

3. That the penalty of the Statute of 23. H. 6. for false returns of Sheriffs
upon election of Kinghts of the Parliament, and all other Laws of this Realm,
extends to the Welsh Nation, by the last clause of the Statute of 27. H. 8
which enables them to it, and not by the general words of this, which makes it
parcel of England.

The most voices in the upper house shall be numbered by the Clerk of the
house; for every one there shall be severally demanded; Otherwise in the
Commons house; for there the assent is tried by the voice and are all at one
time; So in Election of Coroners, fol. 126. a.

Stamford Justice. Declarations ought contain the material points pertaining
by apt words of affirmation, H. 6.14. for debt for a salary declare upon retain
in all occupations the defendant shall have his Law; howbeit that the generalty
imply husbandry, in which Law lies not, which is not expressed plainly, but by
implication, that he was retained in Husbandry. The Law of England prays aid
of other faculties and Sciences in matters appending to it; as of Grammar for
the exposition of Latin words, as of a renuntiavit toti Communiae 9. H. 63. So
adjudged imaginavit which was amended in the writ, because no such Latin, 9. H.
6.35. So of Penticosts 11. H. 6.2.9. H. 7.16. of Latin for fine Gold by Sanders
fol. 125.7. H. 6.11. aid of the Civil Law for difference of Compulsion precisa
and causativa, 21. H. 7.35. of Surgeons for maihem of the Canon Law, 20. H.
6.25. Of vigor of an appeal pleaded against an excomunication, the usual form
shall be observed and good, as in debt, when the defendant acknowledges
himself to be bound, etc. So in forgery quod falsa conspiratione habita, good
11. H. 6.2. because the usual form, where a man may not have by common
intendment precise notice of the certainty of a thing, it suffices to allege
this generally, as 21. H. 6.9. and 9. H. 7.15. that executors have administered
to B. without showing what things, good; because he may not know that another
has administered, and that he is not privy. So 5. E. 4.8. Obleige to discharge
the Sheriff of all things touching his office, he said that he had discharged
him generally, good; because for the infiniteness of it. Talbot and Corbets
case tempore H. 7. upon the same Statute 23. H. 6. where the issue was joined
that Corbet was chosen Knight for the Parliament, and he was admitted to prove
it, etc. So 2. E 4. 19. imprison to make an obligation to the defendant, and to
others unknown without naming them, good; contrary in false imprisonment. So
10. E. 4. 19. bound for to serve in all lawful commands, he said that he had
served him lawfully, until such a day without showing in what, good. So in 12.
H 7.14. he had found him meat, drink and apparel, until one and twentd years
without showing what, good. So monstraverunt homines without showing the
number, because a great number; for the Law compels not to show the certainty
of the thing which is not to be known or remembered, Brook Chief Justice so.
128. and in Parliament, the most voices in the upper house, shall be numbered by
the Clerk of the house; for every one there shall be severally demanded;
otherwise it is in the house of Commons; for there the assent is tried by
voices, sounding all at one time; So in election of Coroners, Sanders so. 126.
the County of Chester was always parcel of the Realm of England; yet Knights
and Burgesses came not from thence until the Statute of 34. and 35. H. 8. ca.
13. Statute penal extends not further then the words, and namely for to punish
others, as 21. H. 7.21. of malefactors in Parks H. 6. cap. 10. that Sheriffs
shall not let their Counties, extends not to him which Leases parcel of it 21.
H. 7.36. the contrary was held 20. H. 7.12. and before fol. 87. So treble
damages for a forcible entry in an Assise or trespass extends not to entry in
the nature of an Assise. 7. H. 4. which limit order for the election of
Knights, extended not to the false return of the Sheriff, until 11. H. 4. was
made; if London enlarge the Ancient custom (viz) that a villen shall not be
drawn out, which has remained there a year and a day, because Ancient
demeansne 7 H. 6.32. extends not to enlargment. So England altered not the
subjecton of Wales. Rape is made felony by W. 2. ca. 34. Abetters inquirable
cap. 12. and at one time, good 2. E. 2.22. E. 3. yet Chapter the 12. seem to
be intended of fellons before made, and not by the same Statute.

Sanders justice; the allegation alleged under the (viz.) is a plain precise
and effectual affirmation natura brevium 63.134. h. 135. b. and the opinion of
the Doctors of the Civil Law 21. E. 4.49. and after so. 143. by Catlin an
Abbot in discharge to be collector says inter Record. of such a term
continetum that R. 2. had granted to his predecessors, that he nor his
successors shall be collectors, Welsh and Scots rebels against whom war was
made by the King of England, as against Rebels, and not as against enemies for
that they were subject to England H. 3. made E. 1. his eldest son Prince of
Wales; and so it has continued to this time; which Act of H. 3. was the first
alteration of Wales. King E. 1. made the Statute of Snowdon. The third was the
Statute of 27. H. 8. the welsh may sue by quod ei deforceat in the nature of
what action they will: Statutes sometimes explaines the Common Law, Merton cap.
2. quod vidua legare possunt bluda, etc. and late Statutes aided by equity
Statutes made before; so lineal warranty Bars not the issue in tail without
assets by the equity of Gloucester made long before after fol. 78. so Land
delivered in execution by the Statute of Merchants 1^. E. 1. yet it shall be
delivered also to so high extendors, although 13. E. 1. speaks not of it by
equity of Acton Burnel, 11. E. 1. cap. 2. which gives goods prised at two high
prises in damage, and that the Connusee shall have them for the price, because
it intended to aid things, in like degree, although not in esse then.

Brown, Justice to the same purpose, and said, that in things touching Grammar,
their predecessors have consulted with Grammarians, and pursued their Rules, as
it appears in our books, that the the Judges have said proximo antecedenti
fiet Relatio, the which sentence they might take out of Grammar, and he argued
that (licet) was a plain affirmative, and that the matter contained under the
(licet) is an affirmation with greater vehemence, then it should be without the
(licet) and that the licet augments the affirmation. And he argued further that
the general words of the Statute of 27. enabled the plantiffe to take benefit
of the penalty, and in what he said agreed with Sanders in effect.

Brook chief Justice. Gavel kind commenced by the Brittans, by partition of
England, Scotland and Wales, between the three sons of Brute continued by
Bellinus, Brennus, Ferrex and Porrex, and was altered in England by the
conquest of the Saxons, and the eldest son by their Law was inheritable. But
Gavel kind continued in Wales, until 27. H. 8. for it was not conquered;
Privileges within certain precincts or Dominions followed, not the enlargement
of the place. So 38. H. 6.10. Liberties granted to the Bishop of Durham in
feedis suis extends not to the purchase after. So 21. H. 6. B. in all his Lands
in Dale, and he purchases other Land in Dale, he shall not have warren there.
So a grant of Conusans of Pleas of a thing parcel of the manor of Dale tenancy
Escheats, afterward he shall not have of it. For the grant takes execution of
his precinct, and circuit at the time of the making of it, and the services
shall be then parcel of the manor, and not the demeans which now escheat. So
grant wreck to B. in all his Lands, it shall not extend to the Land of which he
was then disseised, because not his but the disseisors pro tempore. Reference
to another thing shall be as this, to which it is referred it, As if a man make
a Lease for so many years as I. S. has in the manor of D. there he shall have
so many years as I. S. has, and shall take avermen: that I. S. had so many
issiut tale corodium quale I.S. nuper habuit. So 11. H. 4. and 20. H. 7. grant
office taking such fee as I. S. which executed the same before had, ought to be
showed what he had. So 20. E. 3. the King granted to Litales liberties, that
the Town of N. had by showing of the records or writings, prove their
liberties, the grantee shall have the like.

Browning against Beeston.
LEase 1 Mar in ba. Ray Trespass.
thirty seven pound yearly, at two feasts of the year, naming them, or within
two months after at a certain place out of the Land; and moreover Covenants
and grants, if the said rent and farm of thirty seven pounds be areare and not
paid at the time limited without any demand of the Lessor, then the Lease shall
be utterly void, extinct, and of no effect; and that it shall be lawful for the
lessor to re-enter; and after the rent was not paid, and before the entry, the
lessor makes a new Lease, and the first Lessee brings trespass against the
second Lessee, and he pleads the matter aforesaid, and pleads the condition in
this manner, as in the Indenture is contained, and says not precisely, that
the Lessee had Covenanted as aforesaid; And also said, that the Rent was arear
by the space of two months next after the said feast, and adjudged for the
plantiff for these two causes only.

1. That the pleading of the Covenant, which is contained in the Indenture,
that the first Lessee has covenanted, is not but a recital, and no express
averment, that he has made such a Covenant in facio fol. 143. by Bromly. 2.
Because that the pleading of the Rent arear for two months, varies from the
Indenture, which is after two months, fol. 143. b. by all contrary to Catlin,
for he said, that this is to be intended so if necessity.
Matters in Law are left at large, but the better opinion was for the defendant.

If this Covenant and grant of the Lessee to pay thirty seven pounds yearly, be
a reservation of the Rent or not, and by Ramsey, fol. 132 it is not.

1. For that it is not issuing out of the Land by the way of Charge; for pro
terra implies a cause of the grant and is not words to Charge the Land.

2. It is not a Rent service for default of words of reservation of the lessor,
as reddendum, reservandum, tenendum, etc. for this commences by words of the
Lessee, and which amounts not to a sum in gross, because it goes not with the
revertion, as he which has Land on the part of the mother, makes a Lease for
years by Indenture; the Lessee Covenants and grants to pay to him and his heirs
twenty shillings Rent, the Lessor dies without issue; the heir on the part of
the mother, shall have the revertion; and on the part of the father, the Rent,
for that it is a some in gross, and not a Rent incedent to the revertion.

3. It is not farm, because it is not a Rent, because they are all one.

4. It is a void condition, if it be a condition, because it refers to the farm
and Rent, where there is not any such, as a condition that the Feoffee shall
infeoffe a Corporation, which is not; or his wife, is void, because the first
is impossible, and the other against Law; but the state, because it is
Precedent in defeasans of which they are made, shall stand good.

Stamford and Walsh Justices, fol. 134. It is a Rent; first this Covenant and
grant is equivalent to reservation, and is by Indenture, in which the words are
the words of both, and taken for the words of him which most aptly speaks them,
as a Rent upon a Feoffment, Litl. 47. is a grant of the Feoffee, and in
Judgment of Law shall dispose words which have substance, formality, and words
there shall be taken indifferently; For all parties assent, and are privy to
the speaking of H. 7.8. by Brian, and the Law expounds one word in the sense of
another, as 10. E. 31. 14. H. 8.2. 21. E. 3.49. Reverter for Remainder, So it
takes a word spoken by one for the word spoken by another, and namely by
Indenture, and although it were not a Rent, but a sum in gross, yet it extends
to it, and to issue out of the Land for the Law, because it is spetially
alleged the ground of payment of a sum to be for the Land, and yearly to be
paid, and the one is executory for the other; For (before) fol. 71. if Land
recovered by an elder title, shall not pay which has not the thing which ought
to pay, as 15. E. 4.4. if he may not have the ancient Pale, he is excused to
make a new, so 9. E 4 10. if he will not give counsel, the other shall stay
the Annuity, and 39. Assise 23. Rent for equality of partition, charge the Land
parted, not mentioned because the Rent was granted and executory for the land.
So 2. H. 7 5. it shall descend to the heirs of the grantee without naming,
because it comes in respect of the Land, which should descend to the heir, and
when the ground of the matter appears, the Law supplies the fault of the
words, because the Law respects the ground of the matter and consideration.

Gaudy. It is not a rent, fol. 136. in 39. H. 6.33 all viz. The first in the
Indenture wherefore they are not the words of both, because it estops not the
other party; and an estopple discends upon the Heir of him which is Heir at the
Common Law, because he is Son by the half venture, neither Sister, or Brother by
the entire blood; and although they agree to have the same, yet how, viz. as a
rent or not, is not parcel of their agreement. So it shall not be construed a
rent, because words may have a reasonable construction; otherwise in 22. E. 4.
in the case of the Prior of Bingham, the Covenant was of a rent which shall be
intended rent service, the Fine says not predictum redditum, but was of five
acres and was for the land, and the Grantor was Tenant, so holden there to be
an annuity; so here.

Morgan, it is a rent, f. 137. b. for the assent of the

Catline. To the same purpose, because words equivalent to a Reservation; for
the Law takes words of substance, and not usual equivalent; and words of
substance is usual, and the Law regards the effect and substance more then
form; the words and substance will supply the form, rather then the intent of
the parties shall be void; as Lessor and Lessee for life makes a Feoffment, it
shall be the Feoffment of the Lessee, and confirmation of the Lessor, yet no
word of Confirmation (before fol. 59.)

And so if a Tenant for years, and the Lessor make a Feoffment in Fee, this
shall be taken the Livery and Feoffment of the Lessor, and surrender of the
Lessee; and yet there is nor any word of surrender of the Lessee, but shall be
so taken by the judgment of Law.

So a rent granted by Tenants in common, is several, because estates several;
yet words joint (after fol. 161.171. and Perkins fol. 22.) so renuntiavit
communiam, 9 H. 6.35. (after fol. 162.) it is a a Lease; because where words
are equivalent in

And therefore 21. H. 6. if the words of the Obligee make a Condition, viz. the
Obligee vult and concedit, if the Obligor steterit arbitrio, yet usually they
are the words of the Obligor for Condition, Brooks cond. fol. 58. abridge this
contrary.

So an annuity pro consilio, or a rent for Composition of Tithes, 9. E. 4.16.
enure as words Conditional, and a Covenant that the Farmor shall not be
impeached for waste, amounts (21. H. 6.47.) to hold without impeachment of
wast, 17. E. 3.9. award assigns land of greater value then the Dower to the
Widow, and the second Husband, who granted a rent by the same Deed to him, with
distress for the overplus, and the Deed recites this, the Wife Lessee after the
death of her husband, because the Grant to pay the rent for the overplus of the
land, a good reservation; for otherwise he shall not be bound contrary before
of a Grant for reasonable Dower, and no mention made that the land was more
worth then the Dower, because without consideration there, and is a Collateral
thing; and so words shall enure upon Acts between the parties concerning the
principal matter, and Collateral matter, differ also; the sum is certainly
recited, and the rent shall be this sum (for the sentence stands good, without
words, rent, or farm) where those words shall be adjudged void, rather then the
certainty expressed to be void; as 4. E. 4.29. I. is obligee to B. Solvendum to
I. yet good, and the Count shall be to be paid to B. for the intent of the
parties makes this good.

So a Grant of Remainder by the name of Reversion of the land, a good Grant,
notwithstanding the mis-terming of the thing, because the certainty of the land
appears; but by a Grant of all Reversions, a Remainder does not pass, because
the grant is in generalty; and so certainty by special Terms, and by general
differs. So where he says, if all rents shall be arear, and where the said
rent of 37. l. 3. s. 4 d. in certain.

So words containing generalty, and incertainty; and specialty, and
incertainty, differ; to pay 10 s. at Michaelmas 1599, and at the same Feast of
S. Michaelmas next ensuing other 10. s. there the sum is taken the like, for
that it cannot be the

2. That the Covenant and Grant for not payment, that the Lease shall be void,
is not a Condition by Ramsey, fol. 133. because it is not spoken by him which
gives the estate; as if two Joynt-Tenants make a Lease upon Condition, and that
then one Lessee enters, he shall not enter but into one moytie, for that he
gave no more; and the words of one, because the Law says, he speaks only for
his moytie, shall not make this Condition to another which speaks not. And also
the Condition is subsequent in time of the Statute, which was executed before,
for the Demise and habendum makes the Lease (contrary by Stamford and Walsh.
fol. 135.) for that the parties are so agreed by Indenture, and the one party
and the other assents; and therefore all one as if he had reserved the
Conditional payment, which is called Rent, and is a Condition annexed, for to
avoid the Estate Litl. fol. 70.

So here, because the sum certainly named, be it a Rent, or sum in gross; for
it is not requisite that the Lessor should speak; but if the words of the
Indenture had intendment to avoid the estate, it suffices, and the words shall
be taken agreement of every party, and not spoken by one party more then
another, as provisoes are, or si contingal; and all the words of a Deed shall
take effect at one instant, because the delivery is at one instant; and it has
not several times proved, by 10. ass. 15. where several Deeds delivered at one
and the same time, the one being a Lease for years, the other a Charter upon
Condition to have Fee, if disturbed; before fol. 34.

So 9. H. 6.35. Lease without Impeachment of Waste, provided, That he makes not
voluntary waste in houses is Conditional; and waste lies because all made by
one Deed; if by two Covenants, yet it is not spoken by the Lessor, more then
the Lessee, but shall be taken as an agreement of both the parties.

Gawdie, Justice to the contrary, fol. 137. Defeasance of a thing Executory, as
an Obligation, Recognisance, or Warranty, 43. Ass. fol. 44. good; of a thing
executed, not. As 43. E. 3. Defeasance of a release, unless delivered at one
instant; nor of a Lease executed, by Morgan it is Conditional, fol.

It is not a Condition by Brooks, because it is not restrictive and
compulsarie, as are Ita quod non if the Lessee does such an Act, or if it
happens, or proviso; but a proviso always makes not a Condition, as in
Dockwraies case, 27. H. 8.15. because voluntary; for Leessee without words
compulsary of the Lessor, Covenants and Grants, That he will remove, etc. by
Catlyn, fol. 142. is a condition, because it implies the intent of the parties
to be Conditional, yet it has not the usual words as a Feoffment, to pay 20.
s. or instruct his Son in such an Art.

For it is a Condition, because the parties purport such intent. So proviso,
That the Lessee make such a thing.

So here, it shall enure as a Condition, in whatsoever manner it be called, it
shall enure as a Determination of the Leasee because it was made at the time
when the Lease began.

If the second Lease admit it be a Condition, shall be good before re-entry, or
not. Ramsey, fol. 133. It is not good, because after the Condition broken,
until he enters, he has but a Title, because he may not grant, and the Lease
continues, and the possession also.

And therefore 22. E. 4.37. Lesser shall not have Trespass until entry, 14.3.
Ass. 11. Distress estop his entry, because it affirms the continuance of his
Term.

Where a man may enter, he ought to enter, or not have the thing; and where he
cannot enter, he ought to make claim before he shall have it As a Reversion
granted upon Condition which is broken, the Rent is extinct without Claim, for
that he may not have it by Claim; by Stamford and Walsh it is good, fol. 136.
for that the first Lease for years commenced by words without entry, it may be
determined by words without entry; Lease for life not, 2. Mar. fol. 142.
because Livery and Seisen, which gave the State and Entry, which ought to be
avoided by entry upon Condition broken, and it is expressed here how the Lease
shall be avoided, viz. by entry; and there if he enters not, or does an Act
which excludes him to Enter, as the making of an acquittance, or distraining,
there the Lease is good; But the words here, are utterly extinct, dissolving
the Lease without Entry, and no Act after shall make it good; and the words of
the entry here, are surplusage, and take away the effect of the first words.

As to 22. E. 4. The Lessor cannot punish him, because the entry was first with
his assent; and when the Lease ended, he was Tenant at sufferance; but he may
make a Lease to another, and it determines his will; by Gaudy it is not good.
Void here, shall be expounded void by Entry, as W. 2. cap. 1. before fol. 82.
Finis ipsojure sit nullus, viz. to the right; yet it is a discontinuance. So by
8. H. 6. cap. 10 Outlary shall be void in Indictment, or Appeal, if no Capias
in the County where he dwells.

Common Law, 19. H. 6.2. expounds it shall be void by Writ of Error; he that
has a possession in Law, may Lease before entry, after fol. 142. after a
stranger has abated, not, because another has possession in Deed.

So a Lease by the Husband for years, shall not be void of the Wives land after
his death before entry of the Wife; for possession ought to be defeated by
possession, and possession ought to be gained by entry.

Catline, fol. 142. b. By the not payment, the first Lease is determined
without entry, because it may be made by word without other circumstance,
(otherwise of Freehold) and therefore may make a Lease, but cannot have
Trespass without entry, as Heir (before fol. 137.) he may make a Lease before
entry, but cannot have Trespess before entry, 11. H. 7.22.

So a Lessee may grant his Term before it commence, 22. E. 4.37. yet he shall
not have Trespass before entry, 37. H. 6.18. To show two matters where both are
effectual, and answerable, makes a double plea, as 3. H. 6.32. Feoffment
up-Condition to infeoff the Heir, and averment of the Collusion in Wardship of
the body.

So 20. H. 6.7. Seisen in his Ancestor and himself, by avowing.

So 22. H. 6.37. Two continual claims, viz. by the predecessor, and the
Plaintiff, for to avoid a descent.

So 19. E. 4.4. by Vavisor, and Brian. Two discents in Fee bars not; two
discents is not double in Tail, because one answer ( viz.) he gave not, makes
an end of all; for if he cannot show one thing without the other, it is not
double; nor if the one is pursuant to the other, as fully administered, and so
nothing in his hands; for the last is but a conclusion of the former. But the
other Justices, held the aforesaid two exceptions effectual for the causes
aforesaid, and that the Rejoinder was vicious; wherefore they said, That it was
in vain to argue them, and therefore in consideration of them only, without
respect to the other matters rising upon the Rejoinder, and before debate, they
awarded for the plaintiff.

Throgmorton against Tracie.
M. Mar in the Common Plaes, second deliverance
A Man makes a Lease for life, and after Grants the Reversion of the Land
habendum, the land at Michaelmas after the determination of the first Lease for
life for one and twenty years, and adjudged a good Lease for years of the
Reversion, and of the Land Reverting, and that the Habendum stood well with the
premises, because that the land is the degree, and state of the Grantor was
included in the premises, by the word [Reversion,] and the degree and estate
excluded by the Habendum, and the other part only granted, viz. The land
Reverting, and so was the intent of both the parties.

Reversion is compounded of the remnant of the

So the Manor which is compounded of Demeasnes and Services, and of stegno
aqua priscarie, E. 3. or gurgite, which consists of water and land. The
Habendum, which is not pursuant to the premises, is void, as a grant of a
Manor Habendum, a Rent parcel of the Manor, because in the grant it was Rent
service, and in the Habendum it is Rent Seck.

So a Grant of Services, Homage, Fealty, and rent Habendum, the rent to the
Grantee in Fee, this habendum is void, because in the grant, the rent was
contained as a rent Service, but here it is rent Seck, Grant of it after the
death of I. S. void; for the nature of a Grant is; that the thing Granted ought
to pass presently (after fol. 155.) for it is a thing in possession, and is
granted as a Reversion where no Reversion was of it.

If one makes a Lease of land for years, and after makes a feoffment of the
same, without livery it passes not the Reversion by Attornment, Quere, because
the Grant of a thing which includes all interests in it, shall make the
Reversion to pass; but H. 6.34. and (after fol. 399.) The King Grants a Manor,
to which an Advowson is appendant for life the Advowson passes not; nor if he
grant the Reversion Habondum cum advocatione, it passes not, because in gross,
because it was not mentioned in the first Grant: but the Reversion of an
Advowson may be parcel, or appendant of, or to a Manor in possession, not
possession of, or to the Reversion of a Manor, the Habendum passes not; a
thing not parcel, nor appendant, or appurtenant; unless it be comprised in the
premises.

The Office of the Habendum, is for to limit the estate; as a grant, a Rent,
(and stay there) is for life Habendum for a year, is for one year, 7. E. 3.10.
by True. 7. Ass. 1. Perkins fol. 22. The Habendum repugnant to the premises,
void, and the estate before the Habendum shall stand. 14. H. 8.13. by Pollard,
Perkins fol. 34. Contrary 13. H. 7.23. by Fineux, a Grant to one and his Heirs
Habendum for Life.

So to two Habendum, to the one of them two for life, the Remainder to the
other for life, because it severs the joyncture in the estate.

So a grant of two acres to two Habendum; the one acre to one, and the other to
the other, because it includes the interest of every one in one acre. A Lease
of land reserving the profits, or two acres except one, void, because parcel of
the thing granted.

Doctor and Student, fol. 98. Reversion is a Tenement, and ought to vest
presently as a Reversion, and not at a day to come; otherwise it is of land
Reverting without estate, and agreed of land, by the Sergeants for the
Defendant.

Every here of using this word [Reversion] not in its proper signification; for
then it first ought to vest, as in Reversion presently by Attornment, and not
at a day to come; but as a demonstration certain of the land, viz. all the land
that they have in Reversion; and that they will not have the land to pass in
the degree of a Reversion, but in degree of Demeasne.

And the Law will, (That when the intent appears,) incline the words not apt
of their proper and common signification to the intent, and one word shall have
the sense of another, as Litl. fol. 121. Dedi and concessi by the Disseisee
shall enure as a confirmation.

So 17. E. 3.8. Manor pass by the name of Fee de Chivalry.

So 10. E. 44. 5. H. 7.1. plead Demise by words of license to occupy; where
one word includes in it one thing, as here Reversion includes the land, the
thing included shall pass by the word, as 11. R. 2. Piscary pass per a quam,
and 40. E. 3.45. Soil by Piscary, and by Turbary. 7. E. 3.342. So Soil and
Wear, by Gorss, for 14. E. 3. Formedon lies de gurgite.

So 6 E. 3.183. By the name of one acre cornubiensi, for Cornish acres contain
so many. A man Grants his Remainder of one acre, to have and to hold, the same
Reversion of that acre, good; because the Law respects the intent of the
matter, and applies the words to it.

So a Gift in Tail, reserving the first three

A man seized of two acres, Leases one for years, and after makes a Feoffment
of both, Livery in this wherein he has possession by Attornment, the Reversion
of the other passes, 7. E. 4.21. So 30. E. 1. Totum Molendinum suum, the
Reversion of the third of the Mill which was in Dower, pass; but Tenant for
life ought to Attorn upon the Grant, Brook grants f. 30. the Habendum explains
and corrects the words of the premises, as here the words [Reversion of the
land] to the land it self, being the same substance.

So 7. E. 3.308. A Rent Granted out of a Man nor, to take off one acre of the
same Manor, nothing shall be charged but this acre, in performance of the
intent of the parties, by the Sergeants for the Plaintiff.

Anthony Brown, Sergeant for the Plaintiff. Tenement compriseth a Reversion, as
33. E. 3. the King licenses to purchase Tenements in Mortmain, he purchases a
Reversion, good. Fitzh. grants, 402. and Cook Alienation fol. 55. is Advowson;
yet the word [Tenement] here, agrees not with the premises.

First, because that in the mean time after the first Lease finished at
Michaelmas, the land is in possession, and then it is not a Reversion, because
no particular estate; and therefore may not yest as a reversion, as 21. H.
7.11. (before fol. 25.) Remainder may not vest, but during the particular
estate, and not at the ending of the first estate up on Condition broken.

So 10. E. 3. dower of a rent reserved upon an estate Tail, good, so long as
the estate continues, otherwise it is if the Tail be altered in Tail after
possibility, or Tenancy by the Courtesy, for that the inheritance is
determined, and the rent is now in another degree. 12. E. 3. and 10. H. 7.13.
by Keeble, if a rent be granted with a cessing during the nonage of the Heir,
the Wife shall have Dower, and

Secondly, because the Reversion cannot be granted at a day to come, for then
he shall have the particular estate in the mean time, and shall be Lessor to
himself, and 38. H 6.38. a man cannot reserve the lesser estate, giving the
greater, without alteration of the Lesser, as in 8. H. 7.3. by Vavisor, before
fol. 152. A. has rent in Fee, and grants this to B. after the death of I.S.
void, because the Fee passes presenly, if ever; and then he should have
Franck-tenement of his own grant, until I.S. dies. And the Estate shall not be
so divided without alteration of the whole Estate; for a thing in esse cannot
be granted to be in esse one time, and to be insuspended, or differ from the
other: but a new rent may be granted to commence at a day to come; for there he
shall not have the particular estate in the mean time, because not in esse,
before (after fol. 197.) Time material shall void the thing in all, viz. both
the premises and Habendum not (e converso) if it may not pass according to the
limitation thereof, because time parcel of the parties intent, and if it may
not pass as to the intent, all is void.

As a man has a Rent or Term, and Grant it, if he stay there, good; if he
says besides Habendum after the death of I.S all is void, (after fol. 250.) So
the Remainder void if the Termor enter without Livery, Litl. 12. But if the
Term was to Commence at a day to come, the Remainder over there, it is void
notwithstanding Livery, because there is no estate present to which the Livery
may be annexed, so that the time of Commencement is material, and Livery
before its Commencement is void; and Livery shall not destroy the time, but the
time the Livery, and grant; every act shall be taken strongest against the
makers, and most beneficial to him to whom it is made, and he has liberty in
another sense to his advantage then the words purport prima facie; for every
Deed shall be construed to some purpose, and not to be void, because it is made
to some purpose, as 21. H. 6.8. one may plead a Lease for years, and a release
as a Feoffment.

So 7 H. 6.7. and 22. H. 6.42. The Feoffment of a Joynt-Tenant, as a
confirmation.

So 9. H. 7.2. The King by Parliament confirms the estate of the Patentee, and
dat and conceditur, he may use it as a Grant or confirmation.

So H. 7.23. Obligor may plead a Grant, That it shall not be sued before M. in
Bar, or have a Covenant for it.

So here, the party uses this as a Demise of the Land, and not as a Grant of
the Reversion; for the Reyersion of the Land compriseth the Land, as Litl. fol.
106. after fol. 161. a release of all the land to him in Reversion, is good.

So 5. H. 5.8. A Lease for years, and after a grant of the rent, this changes
the reversion.

So Litl. fol. 150. recovery of the land against Tenant for life, will divest
the reversion.

So 19. E 4.9. Writ of Covenant and the Concord, is of the land to pass the
reversion.

So Quid jur is clamat recites, That the land was granted before the reversion
was.

So before fol. 149. Formed on shall say, de uno messuagio where the Reversion
was granted in Tail.

So a Reversion in Fee Granted to a Termor, he has the entire Term presently
in Possession; for the reversion of the land comprises the land in substance;
one word will pass the thing by another word, having the same sense, yet
varying in name, because one same thing and intent of the party, as 2. H. 6.4.
before fol. 134. and afterward f. 170. reverter for remainder.

So 3. H. 6.6. makes a Testament, and commits Administration, is an Executor.

So 20. H. 7.11. Retorn for revert by the Grant; by Grant of the Church,
Advowson passes, 14. E. 4.2. by Grant of the name of a Clerk, a presentment
passes.

So before fol. 151. by Stagnum molendinum, the Soil passes, and the thing
contained in the premises named in the Habendum by another name containing the
same in substance, is good.

So a Grant of the nomination of an advowson Habendum, the advowson, good. So
Manerium Habendum the services.

So manor by Fine Habendum, one acre of this in Fee, he shall have the acre in
Fee, and the Manor for life, because it wants limitation of the estate in
the residue of the Manor.

So a Gift of a Manor Habendum, the reversion in Fee of one acre, which is in
Lease for life, good, Fee for the acre, and for life in the Manor, because no
estate is expressed in it.

So Litl. fol. 120. confirms the estate of Lessee for life Habendum, the land
in Fee, good, because in the estate land was contained.

So a Joint-Tenant confirms to another Habendum, the land to him and his Heirs,
the Fee will pass; the Habendum may limit the estate to a stranger not named
before in the premises, as 13. H. 7.17. a Devise to I. Habendum to him in Fee,
after the death of the Wife of the Devisor not named before, has an estate by
implication of the intent of the party.

So 5. E. 3.17. a man gives land Habendum in Franck marriage with a Daughter.

So a Lease to A. Habendum to him for 20. years, the remainder to B. in Fee,
good, because the intent of the parties; therefore a fortiori here the Habendum
may explain the intent of the parties in the premises.

Die^, Sergeant for the Plaintiff. A reversion is Jus sine possessio revertendi
and nomen verbale quasi terra revertens, after the particular estate ended,
proved by W. 2. of Advowsons of Churches, and E. 2. Fines says, remanera and
not revertera, where a reversion was granted, before fol. 157. a reversion
granted in Tail; Formedon in remainder lies, because the entire estate is not
given, Fitzh. not. br. 118. D. 10. E. 2. the Heir grants the other two parts
with a third part in Dower cum acciderit reversion of Dower pass. 33. H. 8.
cap. ultima the not making of Leases in reversion is expounded, That they shall
not make Leases beginning after the first ends ad firmum dimiserunt, imply that
the parties intend, that it shall enure as a Lease of the Demeasne; for
properly a man may not be Farmor of a reversion, not have an Ejectione firma of
a reversion.

No Attornment needs upon a Lease for years, because it is a Contract
interpretationem apportet esse benignam ut res valeat, as 30. E. 2. Discendera
pro Remanera, 6. E. 2. recipe pro re-entry. So a gift to one for life and post
ejus decessum to 1. in Fee, good remainder for the manifest intent; an Habendum
gives an estate which was not given before, and to a stranger not named
before, and alters Litl. 129.

So Habendum by moity, Litl. 66. makes Tenants in common, 8. E. 3.427. by the
better oppinion, a gift to two Habendum, to one for life, and after his decease
to another in Fee, the one shall have the entire for life only,
notwithstanding the Joyncture in the premises.

Otherwise fol. 153. if it be comprised within the Grant, good in the Habendum;
as a Grant De dispositione Ecclesiae habendum advocationem, grants de Soil, the
Wood habendum, the Wood defundo domus, habendum domum, Manerium habendum, the
advowson appendant, good: but a Grant of Common out of the land habendum, the
land or herbage of a Park habendum, the Park and such like are not good,
because not comprised in the premises.

Stamford, Justice; rules of Exposition. First, deeds shall be taken most
beneficially for the Grantee.

Secondly, they shall not be void, where the words may be applied to any intent.

Thirdly, words shall be applied, viz. expounded to the intent of the parties,
and not otherwise. The intent directs gifts, rather then the words, as 41. E.
3.6. 16. H. 7.10. by Fineux, Grantee of annuity pro consilio, has diverse
faculties; yet the Council shall be given in such a faculty as was intended, 9.
E. 4.22. one bound to pay Recepta and recipienda, shall not pay what he
received not, but that which he has received, because the intent is taken more
forcibly then the words. 7. E. 3.7. Lessee of of a house, which may for his
profit make houses there within, may not pull down, or make waste, for the
intent was not so.

Sanders, Justice to the same intent with the Litl. fol. 108. (before fol.
140.) two Tenants in Common grant 20. s. it shall enure as several Grants, 34.
ass. fol. 11. Grants totum piscariam salvo stagno molendini sui; yet the
piscarie passes not, for the stagno shall be excepted, and not the piscarie,
because he has a Reversion in the Propriety of the land, and possession of the
Ter-Tenancy.

The nature of an habendum, is to give in large, or qualify Malitiosa juris
interpretatio herere in verbis, etc. the words are but witnesses to the
contract, reversion includes land by all.

Brown, Justice. To the same intent of the Abbot, and Covent, and of Smith, and
his wife was to have the land pass as a Lease after the paticular estate ended,
and not otherwise; and from that hour that their intent was to have the word
[reversion] enure that way, it seemed to him, That the Law would warrant it,
for the land is included in the reversion, for if it was not; a man by Granting
of a reversion, could not have the Land in possession after the particular
estate ended.

And a Feoffment of a Carue habendum, the Manor of D. is good, if the Carue
makes the Manor. And if land is parcel of an Office, it shall pass by the
Grant of the office. Much more he said tending to the effect to make the Lease
good, and so the Plaintiff shall recover.

Brook, Chief Justice to the contrary. Estate in lands, includes land it self:
land is a general word and contains Grantor; and reversion particular words,
containing a Decree where one estate only: intent shall be inclined, and ruled
by the Law, and not otherwise; and intent nevertheless in certainty of words,
as 9. H. 6.35. Renuntiavit communium, and not to whom, void, (before fol. 122.)
13. E. 3. Husband and Wife Tenants for life grant reversion of the Land that he
holds by Homage, Fealty, and Castle guard; the Lord grants all Services,
Castle guard passes not, because he granted not the Castle. But in Testaments,
the intent shall be only observed, and rule the Law, because the Teastator had
not time by presumption to ordain all things according to the Law. In
conclusion he agreed that Judgment should be given for the Plaintiff.

Hill against Grange.
A 3. Mar in Common Pleas in Trespass.
etc. by Deed, indented the 6. of August, rendering rent yearly, payable at our
Lady day, and Michaelmas, or 10 days after, with clause of reentry, and after
Grants the reversion, and the Grantee the last instant of the 10. day after
Michaelmas demands the rent, and enters for not payment, and it was adjudged
that the entry was good, for these reasons.

1. Land may not appertain to a Message, because both are things corporate
simply; otherwise of Advowsons, ways, etc. which are things incorporate; but
things Corporate, or Incorporate, may pertain, or be parcel of a thing
compounded: as a Manor, Castle, Knights Fees, Honors, Forests, Monastery,
Rectorie, fol. 170. a. But here the land passes as appurtenant, but by the
intent and phrase of the parties (as they have said) usually occupied or let,
etc. 2. The rent shall be paid at the first Feast of M. for otherwise it cannot
be annual, notwithstanding the other feast be first named, 10. E. 3. the Abbot
of Osneys case. 3. The demand of the rent the last instant, is good. 4. That
the Gantee of a Common person is an Assignee to have benefit of a Condition, or
Covenant, fol. 173. a. and shall not be intended of the Pattentee of the King.
5. That the Pattentee of the Heir and Successors of E. 6. shall take benefit of
the Condition by equity of the said Stat. and not by the words,
Things of distinct and several natures, the one H. 7.1. by Keeble, a Warren
cannot be pertaining to a Leet, nor a Leet to a Hundred, nor one Office to
another, nor land to other land; to a thing Compounded they may, as a Manor,
Knights Fee, Honor, Monastery, Castle, and a Village; or to words general, as
are Oxgang, a yard land, a hide of land, which contains land, meadow, pasture,
wood, etc.

Message is a single word, consisting of a thing special, and not Compound,
nor a general word; for that 27. H. 6.2. Land not parcel, or appendant to a
house, and by demand of a Message in precipe, land shall not be recovered, and
therefore pass not by the Grant of a House, by the Sergeants on the part of the
Plaintiff.

23. H. 8. and 31 H. 3. by Feoffment of a Message with the appurtenances; Land
passes not a Manor, and things made appertaining to it, are made by usage, and
continuance; So 2. H. 7.28. land belonging to a Forest, and Warden of the
Fleet, and the house of the Master of the Rolls, and diverse farms to the
Guardians of the Castle of Colchester, and one Office to another; as the custos
brevium gives one of the Offices of prothonatories, and use and continuance is
cause of it. A man Leases a Message, and land rendering rent, be ought to
demand the rent at the Message, because most worthy, Perk. 166. Meadow
appertains to land 3. E. 3. by the Sergeants on the part of the Defendant.

Norwood against Read.
Action assumpsit made by the Testator, 5. Mar ^n K. Bench.
lies against the Executors, adjudged.

For that the Testator could not gage his Law, otherwise it is where he might
gage his Law; for the ignorance that the Law imputes of it to Executors, and
therefore there they ought to Demur; but if they plead in Bar, which is found
against them, they have lost the benefit of the Law, and take Conusance of it,
whereof otherwise, their ignorance shall excuse them, 39. H. 6.19. 12. H. 8.11.
27. H. 8.23.

Woodward against the Lord Darcie.
IF the Debtor make the Debtee his Executor, and leaves him assets to satisfy
the debt, 5. Mar. Reso. by the Judges of both Courts.
and dies, the Debtee may pay himself by way of retainer, by the Court, 12. H.
4 21. according.

And in such case the Action is not utterly exstinct by the Administration; for
that the Law intends that he is satisfied by retainer before; and so a thing in
Action, altered to a thing in possession by Act in Law for satisfaction of the
party, which has no other remedy: but if he has not sufficient assets for to
satisfy the debt, the administration there extinguishes not the Action,
because that he cannot retain for parcel, and have his Action against the Heir
for the residue, but ought to do the one for the other at his peril.

Wrotesly against Adams.
A Lease for 80. years of a Farm, Tr i El. in Com. Pleas. Ej. firm.
the Lessor granted the Reversion of the Farm to a stranger, to have and to
hold the Farm for 60. years after the end and expiration of the first Term of
years; the Lessor makes a Lease for life to the first Lessee for years during
the first Term, and the second Lessee Enters, and upon an Ouster, brings
Ejectione firm and by the Court it well lies.

1. By the Law, by a Grant of the reversion of the Farm; the Farm, and all the
Demeasnes of it pass, because it is nomen collectivum, and certain in its self;
and so it was adjudged in the case of Bridges, That by the Demise of the Farm,
the reversion and rent incident to it, passes.

2. That the word [Reversion] shall be intended land reverting in the
premises, and the habendum, and not the estate in reverter, which has his
continuance but in respect of the Term; and during it, it is a Grant of the
reversion habendum, the farm, or land, or reversion after the particular estate
ended, are all one.

3. That the second Lease for years commencing by any determination of the
first Lease, whether it be in Law, or in Deed; and the expiration refers to the
Term, and not to the years; Term is an estate in or for years, and is finished
when the estate is finished, and this may finish when the years remain.

If a man marry with a woman Termor, and the woman dies, her husband shall have
the Term, for notwithstanding that the marriage has not divested this out of
the woman during coverture yet by her death, this is given to the husband by
Act in Law, because it is a thing in possession, and not in Action.

The Law is the Common use in Letters, Pleas, and Judgments, and the Common
Law is but common use; by Anthony Brown, fol. 195.

Stradling against Morgan.
EXceptions alleged in arrest of Judgment, 2 El. Exchequer, debt.
upon not guilty pleaded by the Defendant, and found against him.

1. The Plantiff has showed in his Declaration, That the Defendant was then
receiver, etc. and says not, That the Manors were the Queens then, and
therefore shall be intended more strong against him, then it should be to a
common person, and by consequence the Defendant is Baily to a common person; by
the Court.

2. That no receiver or Baily accomptant of a common person, shall be within
the Statute of 7. E. 6. c. 1 but only of the Queen by the Court.

3. That the Action was not maintainable, and the matter well alleged, lies
in the Queens Courts at Westminster, notwithstanding the Statute of 34. and 35.
H. 8. for Wales; for that they are in the Affirmative, and not in the Negative.

4. That by this Statute an Action of debt by original Writ lies for the
forfeiture in the Exchequer, howbeit that the party has not cause of
privilege there.

5. The Plaintiff ought to make mention of the Statute of 38. H. 8. and 7. E.
6. in his count, for that the one is founded upon the other.

6. He ought to show expressly in his Count, That the Queen was seized, and made
him her Bedel.

7. Jeofails remedies not mispleadings in counts adjudged in Moon, and
Cliffords case.

In Debt the Plaintiff counts, That whereas he was Bedel, and Collector of
certain Manors; by virtue of Letters Pattents of H. 8. and had a Fee for it,
the Defendant being Receiver of the said Manor, in 3. and 4. P. and M. took
extortion for the payment of his Fee, viz. 4. d. for every pound, against the
form of the Statute of 7. E. 6. the Defendant pleads not guilty, and found
against him.

And yet judgment given against the Plaintiff, because the Count was uncertain
to whom he was Receiver, and shall be intended against him, then done to a
Common person, and a Receiver of a Common person, is not within 7. E. 6. yet
within the words; for the intent of the makers shall be observed in the
exposition of Statutes; and so acts general in words have been expounded to be
but particular, where the benefit has been particular.

As the King shall not have Wardship of lands which discends to the youngest
Son, but of that which discends to the heir general, 12. E. 4. Stamford, fol.
8. yet the Tenant dyed seized of others in Fee, because the Statute of
Praerogativa regis, cap. 2. intends where the land is holden of the King, and a
Common person descended to the same Heir where one is Heir to the Tenant.

And Praerogativa Regis, cap. 3. intends not that Soccage in capite shall give
to the King primer seisen of lands, holden of a Common person, yet the words
are general (before fol. 109.) Stamford Prerogative fol. 13.

So Marlebr. cap. 4. intends, where Signiory and Tenancie are in the same
County; and therefore the Lord may bring a Distress taken in one County, to a
Manor in another County, of which the land is holden, 1. H. 6.3. 30. E. 3.6.
(before fol. 18.) So Glouc. cap. 1. gives Damages to the Disseisee against him
which is found Tenant after the Disseisor, for that he is Tenant by his own
agreement; and therefore the Disseisee shall not recover Damages against him,
which agrees not to a Feoffment Litl. Remitter, fol 153. so long 5. E. 4. fol.
142. if he has view in a precipe, and afterward abates the Writ for false
Latin, or for some other cause apparent, he shall again have another Writ,
because there the Court might have abated this without motion.

For W. 2. cap. 49. although general, intends where the Tenant abates the Writ
by exception, not apparent, by 25. E. 3. cap. 16. by non-tenure of parcel, no
Writ abateable; but for the quantity intends, if the thing demanded be several,
as Acres; but all the Writ shall abate where the thing demanded is entire, as a
Manor, (before fol. 109.) and the intent of the Statute never was contrary to
the Text.

By W. 2. cap. 25. if one fail of a Record, he shall be a Disseisor; yet a
woman Covert, shall not be, (11. H. 4.50.) nor infant, because excepted by the
intent, ye in words has included all. So extenders shall not pay presently
according to the words of Acton, Burnel, which ought to answer presently, etc.
but shall be debtors presently with the duty, and chargeable with the payment,
and days payable of the rent, or Revenues receiveable.

So by Exposition it seems against the Text of the Statute, and is not, because
the intent of the makers guides them to it.

Of the part of the Defendant it was argued, Wales, where the receipt is
alleged, although that Wales is united to England, by 27. H. 8. because by
the same Statute, Wales is divided into 12. Counties, and by 34. and 35. H. 8.
four Justices are appointed for wales, viz. one for every three Counties, and
hold plea of all things within their circuit, and one seal appointed for every
circuit, and all Actions suable there by the words of the Statute. And when the
Statute appoints place, order, and form of suits, and before what person, it
shall not be altered.

As by W. 2. cap 11. an Accomptant found in Arrearages, shall be imprisoned in
the next Goal, although it be in another County, 27. H. 8. (before fol. 17.)

So by Westminster 2. cap. 3. Second deliverance shall be sued out of the same
Court, where the first Replevin was granted, and not elsewhere.

So 31. E. 3. c. 12. Error in the Exchequer shall be corrected before the
Chancellor and Treasurer, and therefore not before others.

So an Affirmative, because general, implies a Negative exclusively; so all
Actions shall be s^ed in Wales, and not elsewhere, is implied here, as by W. 2.
cap. 4. he shall vouch in Quo die deforceat, as if he were Tenant, and
included, and not otherwise; and therefore shall not vouch in scire facias,
where it is the first Writ, because he cannot vouch there, (before fo. 113)

So the issue in Tail shall not be remitted, because he has the use as a
purchaser, by 27. H. 8. for the Statute of 27. executes the possession in the
same manner as he had the use; which implies, and not in any other Manors,
(before fol. 114.) So by 31. H. 8. Leases made by Abbots after this Stat.
adjudged void, when Abbeys came after to the King by dissolution, because the
Statute says, That the King shall have it as it was then, which implies a
Negative, and therefore the King shall not have them now in Reversion by making
of such Leases, or before he has them in possession.

On the part of the Plaintiff it was argued to the contrary. And they agreed to
the cases of voucher in a Quod ei deforceat of the Execution of the use, and of
the committing of an accomptant to the next Gaol; for where an Act makes a new
thing Affirmative, and gives to them Authority to do that which they could not
before, there they shall be in the order limited by the Statute, and not
otherwise; and at the Common Law there was not any voucher by the demandant,
nor any coming to the land by the use, nor any power given to Auditors, to
commit an Accomptant to prison; and therefore there, that which is limited by
such Stat. ought to be pursued accordingly; but where the Action, which was
before at the Common Law, is given by any Statute in any case where it did not
lie before, there this Action is suable in all Courts, therefore used by the
Common Law before, if there are not express words to restrain it; for where one
Act affirms a former before, there the last Affirmative destroies not the
first, nor takes any thing from the Jurisdiction of the first, but declares
That they have power.

So 34. and 35. H. 8. hereby the Affirmative takes not away the Jurisdiction of
other Courts given to them, by 27. H. 8. for uniting Wales and England.

Sanders against Freeman.
THe Conusee of a Fine, brings a Quidjuris clamat M. 3. and 4. Eliz. in the C.
P. Quid juris clamat.
Tenants for life in the right of the Wife, and pleads that they were seized in
Tail in the right of the Wife, and show how, and thereupon are at issue; the
Jury finds a private Verdict for the Defendant, and after in open Court
contradicts it, and found for the Plaintiff; for they were charged openly in
Court, and ought to give their Verdict there openly: and the other was but
matter of courtesy to ease the Jurors, and not of necessity; for the Plaintiff
could not have been nonsuited upon it; otherwise upon a verdict given in Court,
and by this Plea, the estate for life was at the will of the Plaintiff.

A Verdict secretly given to the Justice out of Court, is not a Verdict,
because taken of courtesy, when Jurors agree for their ease, until aptly
pronounced in Court; for at every verdict the Plaintiff is demandable, and then
may be nonsuited; but there he is not, and therefore the last open Verdict
shall stand.

Also the Inquest may change their Verdict given in Court if mistaken, or not
plain in Law, or for other reasonable cause immediately perceived; as to find
not guilty, and immediately guilty, because they may be mistaken, this was
received in the Kings Bench.

So 4 H. 4.2. In Conspiracy, acquit one, and found another guilty, because it
was contrary in it self, they may find both guilty, and good.

Duchy of Lancaster.
HENRY 8. 4. Eliz at Serj. Inn^
makes a Lease for one and twenty years, under the great Seal of the Duchy,
and dies; after E. 6. being within age, makes a new Lease to a stranger,
under the same Seal for 21. years after the Determination, Surrender, etc. of
the first Lease, and dies; and by all the Justices, Queen Elizabeth could not
avoid this second Lease for the nonage of the King E 6. howbeit he was seized
of the Duchy in his natural body, because he has the imbecility of
infancy; yet this is invested, and adorned with the dignity of the body
politic of the King, which is utterly void of such imperfections.

A Lease by the King within age of Duchy land, is good, although he was
seized of the Duchy in his natural body, which has the imbecility of
infancy, because he has the natural body invested and adorned with the estate,
and dignity Royal, by conjunction of the body politic to it, which is utterly
void of such imperfections; and so when both bodies remain in one person, all
the bodies shall have the properties, qualities, and degrees of the body
politic, which is the most worthy; and no Act of the King made as King, shall
be defeasable by any disability in his body natural; and therefore the letters
pattents of the King within age, good. So a gift of the King by Thorp, 36. ass.
pl. 54. So 6. E. 3.291. the King shall have right of seisen of his ancestor
within age. So the King has by purchase, or descent, in capacity of his
natural body when he is King, or before that he was King, and being given, this
within age, good; and shall pass by the Letters Pattents only, and without
Livery, because he may not make Livery in his natural body, disjoined from the
politic body which are in one and the same body, and indivisible, and it is
contrary to the dignity Royal, for a King to make livery in proper person; and
Livery is matter in fact, and the King must have his Acts recorded. So the King
need not demand rent reserved upon his land by a common ancestor; but shall not
enter if the Condition be broken, until it be found by Office, if he purchases,
and sels before he is King, and within age (if King also, then otherwise it
is;) yet after he is King, he shall avoid it by his nonage before; but shall
not enter without Office, because his person which had right of entry before,
has now the estate Royal united, which cannot do any thing without Record.
And so Acts that the King does

Henry the 4. which was Duke of Lancaster, held his Duchy annexed to the
Crown, as parcel of it by the assumption of the Crown; and because his Title to
the Crown was defeasable, and because he would preserve the Duchy to his
Heirs if he should be removed from the Crown, he severed it from Statute made
1. H. 4. as it was before only in course of inheritance of the Land, and of
the Government of it, viz. for the manner of Conveyance, as it was before in
the hands of the Duke, as by Livery and Attornment, but not severed from the
Crown for the prerogatives of his person, as 10. H. 4. 7. H. 4. the King had a
scire facias against the Lord Le strange with a non omittas for the
Dutchieland. So 3. H. 6. Rot. 112. the Committee of a Ward has aid before
issue, and a procedendo with a Clause of not going to judgment Rege
inconsulto. So the person of the King for Duchy land taken to be higher then
a Duke, because he shall not have aid until after issue of the Duke, for that
he is a Common person, and shall make a Lease by the name of KING, because it
drowns the name of DUKE in his Realm; and therefore Officers finding that he
held of the King as of the Duchy, and not as of the Duke; of, and by 3. H. 5.
all Charters of the Duchy land shall be H. 4. so in like manner it was in H.
5. and H. 6. But E. 4. because he was lawful inheritor Duchy of Lancaster,
and made it to be forfeit to the Crown: and so he altered the course of
inheritance of it out of the natural body, into the politic body of the King
and his Successors, but not in the manner of Government, name, etc. but
separates it from other possessions of the Crown, in conveyance of it by
another Seal, and other means, viz. by Livery and Attornment, which are used
for the possessions thereof, as 21. E. 4.60. Land of the Duchy in the County
Palatine, pass by Pattent out of it by Livery, because there he has it as
Duke; and by the Statute of 1. H. 7. the Duchy was severed from the Crown,
and made inheritable to the natural capacity of the King, as it was in H. 5.
because H. 7. descended of the House of Lancaster; so is it in E. 6. the Queen
made a Feoffment of the Duchy Land forth of the County Palatine, to be holden
in Capite, the Feoffee shall hold in Capite of the Crown, and not as of the
Duchy; for that the King is not Duke within his Realm, but may be when he is
out of the

Willion against the Lord Berkly.
A Fine was levied to two, and to the Heirs of 4. Eliz. in C.P. in an Ej. firm.
with Grant and Render to the Conusor in Tail, the Remainder to King Henry the
seventh, and to the Heirs Males of his body engendered, remainder to the right
Heirs of the Conusor; the Conusor dies without issue; and after H. 7. entered,
and died seized; and H. 8. gave the land to the Queen his Wife, for her life,
and died: E. 6. Granted the reversion to one, and his Heirs, and dyed without
issue, the right Heir of the Conusor entered, and his entry adjudged lawful.

So the King shall be in a worse condition then a common person; for a common
person may bind the inheritance by a common Recovery suffered by him, otherwise
of the King, by W. 2. cap. 1. after fol. 244. a.

1. That the Writ of Ejectione firm that wants words, bona and Cattalla
ibidem inventa cepit and asportavit, is good, if the truth of the matter be so,
and process of utlarie lies in this writ by the Common Law fol. 228.

2. The Entry of King Henry the seventh is lawful without office; for that the
Law casts the Freehold upon him; otherwise it is where he takes an estate by
Office, as Ward, Perquisites of villains, etc. and the right Heir may enter
without Office, or Ouster le main, by the same reason, ( fol. 229. a.)

3. Where the parties agree upon the matter in deed, and conclude upon the
matter in Law, thereupon Nilrefert, but the Court shall adjudge according to
the Law, fol. 230.

4 Recital of one part of a general Statute is good enough, otherwise it is
of a particular Seatute, fol. 232. a.

5. Omission of the date or place of Letters Patents is not material in
pleading, not Averment. fol. 231.

6. A feoffment pleaded without entry of the Feoffee, is good; because it is
included in the liverry, fol. 232. b,

7. The fee vests by the gift before the Statute of W. 2 and is made more
perfect by the means of the issue; fol. 233 a.

8. The pleading that H. 7. had issue, and died without issue, is repugnant of
his own showing; otherwise it is where it comes on the part of the defendant,
fol. 233.

9. The pleading that one enter until that the Lessor entered upon him, and
made the Lease (is not good there) without saying, that he custed him, and made
the Lease.

The King shall be bound by the Statute of W. 2. of gifts conditional, for that
it is in preservation of an inheritance in benefit of the public good, and
restitution of the intent of the donor, and the exposition that the donee might
alien after issue, before the Statute of Gifts, conditional, has been a common
error.

As to the matter in Law it was said by the Sergeants of Counsel with the
defendant, that the capacity Henry the third gave the Manor to the Earl of
Cornwall in tail, who exchanged it by a deed for another Manor, and died
without issue, and warranty and assets descended upon Edward the first his
heir, he is barred, and therefore the assignee of the party to the exchange had
restitution, out of the hands E. 3. who had seized it, and so by this warranty
and assets which descended upon the natural body of the King, was a Bar to the
reversion that he demanded in his body politic; And as a King may take as heir
by descent in his natural body, so may he purchase. As 34. H. 6.34. and by
pleading there H. 6. seized in fee of an Advowson in gross, conveyed it from H.
5. to him who granted it to the plantiff, good; without showing in jure
Coronae, or how, and there if the King has Land, parcel of the Crown, and
parcel by purchase, and dies, having a son and daughter by one venture, and a
son by another, who enters and dies without issue, the daughter shall have the
Land purchased, and the son the other. So purchased Lands by the King shall go
to the natural body. So 35. H. 6.28. by Moyle, (after fol. 247.) Land in
Gavel-kind given to the King and his heirs, the eldest son being King, shall
not have all, because it vests in his natural body, but perquisites of a
villain the King has jure Coronae (as 41. E. 3.21.) if a Bishop who has a
villain in the right of his Church enter, he shall hold it in his body
politic, and shall be in the right of his Church, because the signiory was;
for a thing in respect, or by reason of another, shall be in the same degree, and
right, as the principal was at the Common Law. That an estate of inheritance,
viz. Fee-simple, was by the Common Law before the Statute. First absolute when
a gift was made to a man and his Heirs. Secondly, conditional, when to him and
the Heirs of his body, for that formedon in Reverter at the Common Law, if the
Donee dies without issue in Remainder, not; for a remainder cannot depend upon
a Fee Conditional until this Statute, and before this Statute the Donee might
alien after issue had, so bar the issue, because they construed the having of
issue to be a performance of the Condition, which was implied in the words, and
in the intent of the Donee, and after issue, to be as an absolute Fee, because
he had such heirs which were limited. But if before the Statute the Donee had
issue, he might alien, and good then, here 4 E. 3. and 30. E. 1. which was
contrary to the will of the Donor, for which the Statute was made, and then
Fines were of great regard; yet by this Statute, ipso jure sit nullus, (viz.)
as to them, that they take not away any of the inheritances of the subject; and
therefore the King shall pay Toll, though not for things bought, yet Toll
Traverse he shall, because it is for going over another Soil, because it
touches the inheritance to permit a way over his Soil, without paying any
thing, 46. E. 3. 23. H. 3. 35. H. 6. 26, 28, 29. So for to wave a Demurrer, or
issue; yet may not change one issue into another Term, because then it would be
infinite, which should be to the disinheritance of another. 13. E. 4.8.
Statutes general made in preservation of inheritances, or for the public good,
binds the King without naming, as W. 2. c. 5. of usurpations: but by 35. H. 6.
good, is not so clear, if an infant upon whom the King usurps, has by purchase
as well as descent. So Merton cap. 5. That ordains, that the Kings Ward shall
not pay usury, viz. That the Rent shall not be doubled during the Nonage of the
Heir: and therefore in 35. H. 6.60. by Needham, if the King gives land rendering
Rent yearly at Easter, and if he fail to pay at the day, That he shall double
the Rent; the Grantee dies, his Heir within age, he shall not double the Rent
against the King: So Merton cap. 6. That a man shall make his Attorney for to
follow his suit to the King; if it be his Lord, or at the Court of another, he
shall do it: So the Statute of 5. H. 5. of additions, L. 5. E. 4.32. of one Law
which belongs to a common person, the King may not defend the Common right,
but that every one shall have advantage; but every general Statute shall not
bind the King, without naming of him: As Magna Charta, cap. 12. Communia
placita, etc. nor such which have an intent only between subjects, and to
repress disorder between them; those here which concerns salvation of
inheritance, or public Statute of gifts Conditional binds the King, because by
Justice, and Act of Parliament, the King has submitted his will to the Donor.

The King, as Walsh says, has in him, First, power to do: Secondly, Justice
to enforce him to do it, this is as to others: Thirdly, Mercy to stay him from
doing, this is of things touching himself. And because after this Statute, the
King may not say that the estate is Fee-simple Conditional, as it was before
the Act, the case of the Tenant in Tail attainted of Treason, was alleged in
proof of it, 37. H. 8.7. 7. H. 4.32. which proves that the King shall be bound
by the said Statute: So by 26. H. 8. cap. 13. because it is some estate of
inheritance; also the Tenant of the King in Capite, gives in Tail Tenendum de
capitali domino, the King shall not have Wardship of the issue in Tail, 4. H.
6.19. because it is not now Fee Conditional, as before the Statute; and
therefore he is not immediate Tenant to the King; 4. H. 7.16. The King may
receive the Services of the Donor by his hands; 27. H. 8.26. (after fol 249.)
the King may take the Donor, or the Tenant in Tail, for his Tenant, before
License, Mortmain, for default the Signiory revolts to the King, the King
seises the Land after escheat, the issue in Tail has the land by petition
against the King, and therefore is not Fee-Conditionall, as to the King, but
binds the King, although in these cases the King claims in the right of the
Crown, yet here it is very remote from the prerogative, because here it remains
vested in the natural body of H. 7.

For the Plaintiff it was said, That the Prerogative of the natural body of the
King, because of the union of the politic, as the attainder of H. 7. discharge
ipso facto as soon as he came to the Crown, 1. H. 7.4. So R. 3. being Feoffee
to uses, when he was King the use was gone; because the King in his body
politic may not be seized to an use of another, 5. E. 4.7. and therefore it
was enacted, 1. R. 3. cap. 5. Rastal, Uses 3. That the Land should be in Fee to
him, to whom the Use was, 43, E. 3.22. Franchises extinct by purchase of the
King (yet to him and his Heirs) of a Manor to which they Fitz-nabr. f. 32. G.
because no body politic may hold in Joincture: So 44. E. 3.45. The King may
distrain in all others lands for his arrearages, where he has the signiory in
his body politic, and by Bentos, no entry shall be upon the purchaser in his
natural body, before he was King or after, for Condition broken by him: So 10.
H. 4.47. The King has a non omittas in his scirefacias, for Duchy land, and
good, (before fol. 216.) Exception in intendment of the Act here, as good as if
it had been in words, and Use is of naming of the King, when he shall be
restrained.

The King is favored in all exposiitons, because it is intended that he will
not assent to prejudice himself; the liberty and interest that he has at the
Common Law, is not taken away by the Statute, if he is not named, 12. H. 7.21.
proves it, because at the Common Law every Lord may distrain for all Services
in every part of the Tenacie, 10. H. 7.10. and after quia emptores terrar. W.
3. cap. 2. the Lord shall have pro particula, but not more; yet the King after
this Statute if his Tenant aliens part, shall have all Services by the hands of
the Feoffee, or Feoffor, Fitzh. not. br. fol. 235. A. and Westminstere 2. cap.
17. which gives the Wardship to the first Feoffor, binds not the King, for he
shall have it, albeit he held of him by posteriority. And so Prerogativa Regis,
cap. 2. affirms the Common Law in this point.

The Statute de Religiosis 7. E. 1. For Mortmain binds not the King, nor
Marlebridge, cap. 9. which Grans, That the elder percener only shall do the
suit; yet Fitzh. not. br. fol. 159. all shall do it to the King. So the King
may sue for debt in the Kings Bench, contrary to Magna Charta cap. 11. But 1.
H. 5. cap. 5. of additions binds the King, because he is included in the word
[Indictment] express, which is only the suit by (Carus) the King gives in
Tail without expressing any service, he shall hold in Capite, 29. H. 8. for the
King shall seize for his Fine, if he aliens without license, 22. E. 3.58. Ass.
fol. 1. in Capite, if he holds of the King, by reason of a Reversion, or
Manor, and not of his person, W. 2. cap. 3. gives receipt generally to him in
Reversion; yet 25. E. 3.48. the King shall not be received upon the default of
his Tenant, because then the demandant should count anew against the King, but
he ought to sue to him by Petition, 14. H. 8.3. by Fineux, the King shall not
abase himself to stand to the defense as Tenant in suit, as a Common person
shall.

Weston, Justice. A gift in Tail before W. 2. implies a Condition in Law viz:
That it should revert to the Donor, if the Donee did die without issue, and if
the words had been expressed in the gift, it had been surplusage, and therefore
there it is a condition quam diu, one shall be Abbot, or live sole when he is
removed to be Abbot, or takes Husband, there the estate finisheth; the other
finisheth not the estate until suit, or entry, as where the Lessee makes
waste, or aliens, or Tenant in Fee Cess, or Disclaims, W. 2. restrains the
alienation of the Donee; now after issue had, if the Gift had been to Husband
and Wife, and to the Heirs of their bodies engendered, and the Wife had
survived, that her second Husband, if he had issue by her, should be Tenant by
the courtesy, now this is restrained: where the estate of the Donee before the
Statute, was Fee-simple, now by the intent of the makers of the Act, the estate
is diminished and made Fee-Tail, and the Fee-simple is in the donor, and a
reversion made of it; and now the Fee-simple may be given over in Remainder,
and so the estate is divided.

The King has two capacitles, and comes to some things merely as King; as
Treasure, Trove, and Escheats by Treason (after fol. 322.) and to some, not as
King; as if Lands descend to him from any of his bodies Politic, are by
Pattents of the King; as Dean and Chapter, Major, etc. cannot purchase in
succession by the word [Heirs,] but only by the name of Successors; the body
politic at Common Law, as the King here by the one or the other, the King
purchases in his natural body, yet shall not take by Livery, (before f. 213.)
for it passes not by Livery, but by Record, and his Grantee thereof shall hold
of him by Knights Service in Capite; and none may distrain for Signiory, or
Rents in it, nor have execution of it. And 7. E.

Prerogatives of the King, are by the Common Law, by Custom, and by Statute; by
the Common Law, the Kings Grant is taken most favorably for him, otherwise it
is of the Grant of a Common person: As an Advowson passes not by Grant of a
Manor, without mentioning, 2 R. 3.4. 8. H. 7.1. 41. E. 3.4. and Prerogativa
Regis, cap. 15. is not, but Common Law in this point; the King may Grant a
thing in action, 2. H. 7.8. and 32. H 8. an Obligee Utlawed, the King shall
have the entire duty 8. E. 4.24. and 19. H. 6.47. So the entire Ox (after fol.
323.) the King Grantee of the next avoidance, or of all presentiments which
shall happen within 20. years, and a stranger presents to them all; yet the
King shall have them, and present when he pleases; otherwise, ( fol. 249.)
by.Anthony Brown: Descent takes not away the right of entry of the King. 37.
H. 6.27. The King may enter after his villain, and alien when he pleases,
Litl. s. 40. The King Counts of two presentiments, it is not double, 43. E.
3.14, or 12. Matters of Bar the other ought to answer to them, and the King
shall take issue upon which he pleases, 16. H. 7.12. by the Court, the King
may Traverse a Title, or maintain his Office if he will, 3. H. 7.3. 13, 14. 2.
H. 7.13. The King may amend his Declaration the same Term, 13. E. 4.8. The King
may wave his Demurrer, and Traverse the Plea of the other, 28. H. 6.2. The King
shall have a Non omitas in his Writs, notwithstanding any Liberty, That none
shall serve his process but his Ministers (before fol. 239.) the King shall not
answer in value, without express words, notwithstanding his warranty, (after f.
334.) the King shall not demand rent, 2. H. 7.8. The King makes a Lease,
rendering rent to a stranger, good, and the stranger may distrain, or have Debt
when it is ended, 35. H. 6.36. The King may distrain for a rent charge granted
to him, or for Rent Service in all the Lands of him which ought to pay it. 13.
E. 4.6. The Title of the King appears, yet he is not party, the Court of
Office shall adjudge for him, Stamford, cap. 29. fol. 96. Fitzh. not. br. 38.
E. 31. 6. H. 7.12. and 11. H. 4.71. by customs; the custom of London to retain
a pledge, cujuscunque fuerit until he pays, binds not the King, 35. H. 6.35.
nonsale in market overt, 35. H. 6.28. and Doctor, and Student, 40. nor Wreck,
Waise, nor Stray, binds not the King, 35. H. 6.26, 27. Custom, that all
distresses taken within his Manor shall be impounded there, binds not the
King, 21. E. 3, 4. by Statutes which binds not the King where he is not named,
yet he shall take advantage of them: As of the Stat of Waste, of 9. R. 2. c. 3.
of Error and attaint by him in reversion upon a recovery against Tenant for
life. And of W. 2. c. 7. fol. 140. If the King as Heir to his mother, brings
asur cui in vita, the Plea shall not be delayed by the Nonage of the Heir; the
King not named, is not restrained by Magna Charta cap. 10. upon which Ne
injuste vexes is founded for to avoid incroachment, That if the King incroach
more then he ought, he has no other remedy then by Petition. The King brings
a Quare impedit in the Common Pleas, good, notwithstanding Magna Charta, quod
communia placita, etc. 31. E. 3.18. E. 3.22. (before fol. 240.) Plenarty no
Plea against the King, 43. E. 3.14. Non obstante, W. 2. cap. 5.32. H. 8. cap.
2. Of Limitations, binds not the King: The King may not suffer a Common
Recovery for to Dock the Tail, as a common person may, because no precipe or
Covenant lies against him, 12. H 7.12. by Constable: So the King shall be in a
worse condition then a subject, or common person to bar the issue.

Anthony Brown, Justice. The name of King drowns the Surname of the King, and
includes it, and his proper name also: and this word of substance by it self,
may not be omitted in purchases, Pattents, or Writs. Land given to Henry the
seventh, omitting King, gives nothing to him, omitting his name of Baptism: So
a gift by him, by these words in the Pattent, Rex concessit, That the name
Politic of the King, includes his natural name; and when this name is
conjoined to his natural person, it alters the quality and degree of the
person natural in the estimation of the Law: So if that he be within age, he
shall be adjudged of full age, and his attainder frustrate when he is King,
that the greater removes the Imperfection of the Lesser (before fol. 138.) the
body King by the name of Baptism, and of King also; as to Henry the King, and
to his Heirs, this shall go in succession as the Crown, and if he dies without
issue, the Heir of the part of his mother which has the Crown, shall have the
Land also; because this name [King] being the greater, shall have the greater
pre-eminence in the purchase, and shall draw the land with him: So that his
brother of the half blood being King, shall have it; yet here the King shall
take in such body, and in such estate and condition as the Donor limits, and
not otherwise. So if a Gift had been made before the Statute to the King, and
the Heirs of his Body, he had taken Fee Conditional, as another Common person,
That if he dies without issue the Donor should enter without Office. And if the
King before the Stat. gives to one, and his Heirs of his body, there the King
shall not have the Reversion more then a Common person should have, and there
his Donee might alien after issue, because the person of the King shall not
rule the estate of the land; but on the contrary, for to make Remitter right,
and possession ought to descend to one person, simul and semel, 19. H. 6.59.58.
and 45. before the Statute after Issue; the Donee might do all E. 3. And the
words in the Statute has given prius facia non extenditur, intends not the
Donees made by the Donors before the Statute, but of alienations made by the
Donees before the Statute, and lawfully, and after issue, as a Lease for life,
and release of Tenant in Tail before the Statute, good, and barred the issue in
Formedon after the Statute, because it was not voidable, neither before, nor
after the Act, if it was according to the power that the Common Law permitted
to them. 44. E. 3. But the Statute extends as to Alienations after the Statute
where the Gift was before. So as to the Alienation before the Statute, if it
were not lawful, as a woman Tenant in Tail, takes Husband, having issue, they
alien before the Statute, the issue shall have a Formedon after the Statute,
that is a discontinuance to the wife, because Covert; and when she dies, a
right discends to the issue; but if they have aliened by Fine, it is good, and
bars the issue because there it is duly made, in respect that she is examined,
4. E. 2.12. H. 4.7. before the Statute the King might not Alien before issue
had, as a Common person might not, because the King could not do wrong, and his
Prerogative could not alter his estate, yet the person of the King might alter
the course of the King shall descend to the eldest daughter only; but if land
descend to the King, and another, or Gavel kind to him and his brother, the
King shall have but the Moity, but this Moity shall descend to his eldest Son
only, because the quality of the person may alter the descent, not the estate,
be it Fee, or Tail. So that the estate shall be in the King, as in another
(before fol. 234.) and before issue had, the Donee could not alien, after issue
he might; and this mischief, and other Acts of the Donee, the Common Law
permitted to Bar issues, and the Donor, until remedied by the Statute. So the
Common Law permits other wrongs, as Lessee to make waste. So if one
Joynt-Tenant takes all the profits of the land, the other is without remedy at
the Common Law, Doctor and Student fol. 32. So if the King kill a man: So
disinheriting of another, as here post prolem, is a wrong suffered by the
Common Law, which otherwise the issue should have had, and if the issue had not
issue, then the Donor; before the Statute the Donor had not a Reversion, yet
the land reverted to him as land escheated to the Lord, neither had he a
Reversion after the Statute of W. 2. c. 1. Yet no word in the Act divides the
Statute, but the Construction of the Statute ex consequenti divides the estate,
for to execute the will of the Donor by the intent of the act, which amounts
to so much, that the precise words and the Statute restrains the estate, and
not the person of the Donee.

And the Prerogatives are in respect of the person of the King, and goes in his
person, which the King by Prerogative, without other act, cannot enlarge; but
in taking of the estate is restrained with the estate, insomuch that the act
says Dominus, Rex perpendens, etc. It shows that the King is named
effectually, and so bound; and when it provides remedy for the mischief, it is
not to be presumed that he intended to be at liberty to do the mischief; every
thing which is the intent of the donor, shall be within the Stat as plainly as
if it had been expressed as other estates Tail, which are not mentioned in W.
2. Litl. fol. 5. Lands intailed shall not be charged against the issue for the
debt of his father to the King, by Anthony Brown, who said, That it was so
adjudged in William Browns case, which was his Father, Puttrel, fol. 240.
otherwise, which proves, that the Statute of Donis Conditionalibus binds the
King.

Dier, Chief Justice. The King only is a good name of purchase, and is the
highest name of honor, and drowns all other names of honor, and is certain
enough, but not so used without his name of Baptism. And the name King,
contains both bodies natural and politic; and Heirs, implies Heirs and
Successors, and the adding of Successors is a new devise. The Donor may limit
in what capacity the King shall take, and ^ail may be to the King as well as to
a Common person. That H. 8. entailed the Crown to him, and the Heirs of his
body; the will of the Donor is the effect of the Statute of West. 2. that every
thing which is against his will, is reformed by the Act, and every thing which
is his will is made Law by this Act; and therefore this Tail shall not be
forfeit for Felony, Litl. 169. it shall not be charged by the donee, 14. H.
8.7. by Roo 5. H. 6 14. nor alien, neither shall the second wife be endowed, 46.
E. 3.24 nor the second Tenant by the courtesy now, 46. E. 3.5. and to express
those in the Act is superfluous, because included in the proviso quod voluntus,
etc. And these three Tails mentioned there, viz. Special, General, and Free
Marriage, are but examples, and not as containing all Tails, that his will is a
law to limit other Tails, Fee after issue at the Common Law is Tail now, 12 E.
4. and 3. and Fee in the Donor by implication of the Act, because it restrains
the Donee to do the Acts of Fee, or no Fee without his properties. And
therefore it shall be intended, That the Act would not that the Donee should
have Fee, because it would not make an Act of Fee; and it is no Tail, because
the Statute is limited, Docked or cut off.

The King shall be bound by the Statute of W. 2. de donis conditionalibus, for
that it is made in preservation of the inheritance, in benefit of the Common
wealth, and in restitution of the observation of the intent and will of the
giver; and in Restitutions the King has no favor, but the party restored in
favor, as an Heir restored to a Manor shall have the advowson without
mentioning of it. So a Bishop to the Temporalties shall have Knights Fees, and
Advowson, 5. E. 3.238. 41. E. 3.5. and Brian, Townsend, Davers and Vavasor, who
took this so, or thought that the King should have but an estate tail, that
otherwise the Remainder over will be invailable; and the Exposition that the
Denee might alien after issue before the Statute, is Communis Error.

Dame Hales against Petit.
LEase for years to the Husband and Wife, M. 4. and 5. El in the ^. P. in
Trespass.
and so became a felo de se; the Wife enters, an Office is found, the Q. shall
have the whole Term adjudged.

1. The quality of the offense is murder, because that it was upon malice
prepenced, otherwise of Homicide, also it was made Nullo sciente, nullo
praesente.

2. It is an offense against nature, the Law of God, and to the King, for to
kill his Subject, and deprive him of one of his mystical members, whereof he is
the head, and by breaking of his peace, and for the ill example given to others.

3. He shall forfeit for this Felony, all Goods, Debts, Chattels real and
personal which he had at the time of the Act done, which was the cause of his
death, viz. the casting of himself into the water, and the forfeiture shall
have relation to this act done in his life, and is an Attainder in Law to that
purpose, but not to make Corruption of blood, forfeit Dower, or make
Fee-simples escheat; by the Court.

4. Although the wife be remitted to the Term by the survivor, yet this is
defeated by the office, ex post facto.

5. Where the Bishop makes a Lease for years, which is not confirmed in his
life, it needs not to be averred, in respect it is only voidable, otherwise of
Lessee for life, for that it shall be void by his death.

6. The pleading that Sir James Hales was possessed of two Leases at the time
of his death, and the Office found that he had two, without saying at the time
of his death, suffices, reddendo singula singulis.

7. Lessee for years to commence at Michaelmas, brings Trespass before the
Defendant gives color by the Lease, this is not good; yet the Plaintiff shall
not recover, because he had no Title.

Southcot and Puttrel, Sergeants for the Plaintiff. He that strikes another,
after this wound given, gives his goods to another before the death, the gift
is good.

So a Constable 11. H. 4.12. which arrests him, permits him to escape before
the death of the other, is not a Felon; the finding by the Coroner of his death
in this case, countervails an Attainder indeed, because after his death he
cannot be Attainted, and he himself is the cause he cannot. A Felon of himself
cannot make a Testament, or Executor, nor forfeit any thing, but that which
ought to come to his Executor: Instant is the end of one time, and the
Commencement of another: in Instant is priority Paramount to the Grant, 7. H.
6.1. So 18. E. 4.5. Tenant in Tail gives Trees growing, and dies before they
are cut down, the Donee shall not cut them, because the Issue and Wife are in
by Title Paramount, the gift by Southcot. So 14. H. 4.32. and Fitzh. not. br.
fol. 14.143. The Lord shall take his Ward, which is an Apprentice out of the
possession of his Master, for that his Title to his body accrued in respect of
his signiory, which is more ancient then the Apprentice, 49. E. 3.3. the Kings
Tenant in London Devises to his wife for life, and dies without Heirs, the
devise is good, as it seems by the Book, and yet takes not effect until after
the death of the Kings Tenant, and preferred before an Escheat to the King, yet
both their Titles comes at one instant, but the Title of the Wife adjudged the
elder, because some part of it Commences in the life of the Devisor, albeit it
takes effect after his death; an Obligee is a Felo de se, the Survivor shall
have the Obligation by the better opinion, 8. E. 4.4.

Walsh, Chomley, Benlos, and Carus for the Defendant. E. 3. and Stamford 19.
one is Lunatic when he gives himself the mortal wound, he forfeits nothing,
and it is not Felony if then he kills another, yet is of Sane memory when he
died of the wound. So 33. Ass. 7. Stamford 10. one kills his Master one year
after he departed from his service upon malice conceived when he was his
servant, adjudged Treason; Felonies done by others, may be punished in their
life time, in person, Goods, Chattels, and Lands.

A Felon of himself has prevented the death, by Execution and forfeiture of
his Land, which Land shall not Escheat without Attainder in Deed for favor of
the Freehold and inheritance; and the only means to make him forfeit that
which he may forteit, viz. his Goods and Chattels is by inquest which ought to
be equivalent to the Judgment given in his life, because he took away the
means of the Judgment which should have been given against him in his life, as
he should have if he had killed another; and when Judgment by the Law cannot
be given, the Law supplies it; otherwise as 3. E. 3. a Felon flies out of the
Sanctuary, and will not render himself, but is killed, he forfeits his Goods,
and the King has the year, day, and waste; and so an Inquest there shall be
equivalent to the Judgment, because he himself is the cause that it cannot be
given against him; by carus, my horse strikes A. I sell him to another; A.
dies, he shall be forfeit.

So the King shall have the Goods of a Villain which gives himself a mortal
wound, yet the Lord has seized them after the wound, and before the death of
the Villain. So the Attainder of the Husband in his life, shall be a Forfeiture
of the Term of his wife. So this Act here; and if once Title King. Nullum
tempus occurit Regi, as in 50. E. 3. the Husband Joynt-Lessor for years with
the wife, receives money of one Attainted, which by the Attainder belongs to
the King; the Husband dies, the wife her self holds it, this found after, the
King has the Term in Execution for his money, as he should have had in the
life of her Husband if it had been found then, and now found by office, shall
relate to the life of the Husband.

Curia, this is Murder here and not Homicide, because upon malice prepenced,
and is an offense against nature, the Law of God, and King, to kill a Subject,
and deprive him of one of his Mystical Members, as Brooks terms it, whereof he
is the head, and by the breaking of his peace, and for the ill example given to
others; and therefore Felo de se Forfeits to the King all his Goods, Debts, and
Chattels, 8. E. 2.3. E. 3.301 362.22. E. 3. (before f. 259.) Stamford, fol.
188. I. and Stamford Prerogative, fol. 46. 8. H. 4.2. by Tilles^y, and ex
consequenti cannot make Executors, nor have Administors, neither shall the
Bishop have them, because out of the Church is no cause of Forfeiture, 19. H.
6.63. by Paston, 8. E. 4.4. by Needham, and Litl. and 27. H. 8.9. by Montague,
and if he repents he is reconciled, and has the rights of the Church before
his death, yet he shall Forfeit those to the King for this offense.

But a Felo de se Forfeits not Lands, his wives Dower, nor Corrupts his blood,
3. E. 3. 22. E. 3. (before fol. 259.) because those cannot be without attainder
in Deed.

Appellee in Battle is killed, he forfeits his land, by Benlos, and Brown,
because this killing is equivalent to Judgment and Execution; but Weston Dier,
because the three Writs of Escheat for attainder, are (Register the 16.) pro
quo suspensus est, utlagatus, or abjuravit; if the Appellor vanquish the
Appellee in battle, there his land shall Escheat, because there Judgment
shall be given after that he shall be hanged, 8. E. 3. the husband adheres to
Scotland, and dies there, 8. E. 3. fol. 388. or is killed in levying War
against the King; here he forfeits his Lands, the Dower of his Wife, and his
blood is corrupted, for this is an attainder in Law, 7. H. 4.46. by Markham and
Stamford, fol. 198. a. this which causes the death, ought to be said
Feloniously done.

He that refuses the trial of the Law, forfeits Goods and Chattels, as 3. E.
3. 13. H. 4.13. 4. H. 7.18. Stamford, fol. 183. C. he which flies for Felony,
Stamford Prerogativae, fol. 46. A. he that challenges without cause above,
35.40. E. 3.42. 20. E. 4.5. Stamford, fol. 185. he that takes Clergy if he be
found guilty of Felonies, which refuse the Judgment of Law, 14. E. 4.17. he
that stands mute of malice, for those are the Acts of refusal of the Law. And
from the time of those which appear of Record, the forfeiture shall have
relation to the wound given against the party himself for the forfeiture
against a stranger, not for to be Felony, because in the mean between the wound
and death, he suffers himself voluntarily to escape; for if the escape should
be Felony, then that escape had been Felony at the time of the escape, by
Brown. A. and B. Joynte-Tenants for years, A. Grants to C. That if he paies 10.
l. before Michaelmas, then he shall have his Term; yet he shall not have the
Term, because the condition precedes the Grant, as 14. H. 8.22. by Brudnel,
until the 10. l. paid the Joyncture continues, and it is not but a
Communication; but if A. Grant or Lease it from Michaelmas next coming during
the Term to C. there C. shall have it against the Survivor, for there the Title
is granted in deed in the estate in his life. So here this Act in his life
gives Title to the King, and the office by relation executes the Title then,
and the Survivor shall not have it from him, because once attached in him; as
the Kings Villain and his wife are Joynt-Tenants for years, the Villain dies,
his wife has the Lease by Survivor; this found by office, takes away the
interest of the wife, as the entry of the King should in the life of the
Villain, and upon Cesser thereof, the Kings Title once vested, is not taken
away, because Nullum tempus occurit Regi, by Dier; by Weston, where Titles of
the King, and of others concur in one instant, the King shall be preferred; as
Land discends to a villain, his Lord enters after, this found, the Idiot of the
King shall have the Land, and laches of entry shall not prejudice the King; yet
both Titles at once in the Lord, because born Villain to the King, because born
Idiot by relation of office to it. So if the husband be entitled to be Tenant
by the courtesy, and his wife after this found Idiot, this takes away the
Title from the Husband for ever, for the Heir shall be in ward, therefore if
holden of the King, or shall have it out of the Kings hands, if not holden,
because the Title of the King to the Freehold of the Land by the custody of it
during the life of the wife, shall

Fish against Brocket.
TEnant in Tail Levies a Fine with Proclamations, M. 4. and 5. El. in the K.
Be^ch Error.
whereof the one was recorded to be made the seventh day of June, which day was
Sunday; and dies; the issue brings Error, and Reverses all the Proclamations;
but the Fine remains good at the Common Law, and shall be a Discontinuance
adjudged; and this Proclamation could not be made as it is Recorded, because it
is no day in Court, and the Fine and Proclamations are several Records, and
might have been avoided by Plea.

Sir John Ratcliffs Case.
IF an Infant be made Knight in the life of his Ancestor, P. 6. El. in the C.
of Wards.
and the Ancestor dies, he shall not be in Ward for his body, for by this
degree he is admitted to be able to do Knights Service, and the wardship is due
in respect of imbecility to do it, he shall not pay the value of his marriage,
but his land shall be in Ward by the Statute of Magna Charta, c. 4. (so if he
be made Knight being in Ward or before) the same Law is, if he be made Knight
when he is in Ward, 2. E. 6. Brook, Guard, 42. and 72. at the Common Law an
Infant made Knight, shall be out of Wardship for land and body.

Say against Smith and Fuller.
LEase for 10. years by indenture from Michaelmas P. 6. El. in C. P. Replevi^
That he will pay 1000. Tiles to the Lessor, or a sum in gross at the end of
the Term; the Lessor grants, That if the Lessee pays the said 1000. Tiles at
the end of every 10. years from thenceforth next ensuing, That then he shall
have a perpetual Demise and Grant of the premises from ten years to ten years
continually, and inconsequently beyond the memory of man, and adjudged good,
except only for the first ten years, for the incertainty of the beginning,
continuance and ending of the other ten years. For the second ten years begins
not until the condition (which is precedent to it) be performed, for this
cannot ever be performed; for all the ten years that ever shall be, precedes
the payment, and the payment precedes the Lease, and so the Condition
impossible. Also he cannot pay the same Tiles that he has paid at first. Also
the payment at a day after the Term ends, is good, because that the Lease
Commences from M. and so M. day is not part of the Term.

Every contract to make good a Lease for years, ought to have certainty of
beginning, continuance, and ending of the Term, all which ought to be known at
the beginning of the Lease, and if any of them fails, it is not a good Lease,
because it wants certainty, by Brown, a Lease Conditional is good until the
Condition broken, because the Estate precedes, and the Condition is subsequent.
A condition to have a Lease gains not the thing, until it be performed, as the
needle precedes the threads as he ought to marry my daughter before the time
limited, otherwise he shall not have the 100. l. which I promised: So 7. E.
3.308 (before fol. 25.) if he will hold over eight years to him and his Heirs,
shall pay twenty pounds yearly; Debt lies for the Lessor for the Rent within
eight years; because the Lessee has but a Term; for the Condition precedes the
Fee-simple, by Litl. fol. 81. Lessee for five years upon Condition, That if he
does such a thing within two years, he shall have Fee; but no law by Dier,
because he has not Fee until the Act done.

Referrence H. 8. So I make a Lease until I. S. shall be imprisoned by the
Statute of W. 1. cap. 20. So I make a Lease for years rendering 5. l. yearly,
and after I grant the Rent and Reversion to B. until he has received of the
Rent 20. l. it is all one as if I had granted the Reversion for 4 years,
because he shall receive 20. l. in 4. years, and so the referrence contains
such certainty from the time of the Lease certainly limited; for the number of
years may commence, or determine upon incertainty very well; as a Lease for 20.
years after that the Lessee shall do such an Act, good. So for 20. years, if
the Coverture between I. S. and his wife so long continue, good. So 4. E 6
(before fol. 6. and 13.) and 14 H. 8 11. A Lease for so many years as I. S.
shall name, and he names so many years in my life, good for so many years that
my Executor shall name, not because he cannot name in my life, and so it is not
a Lease in my life, and the certainty ought to be known in my life. But a lease
until I. S. who has Execution of a Statute Merchant until he is satisfied
thereof, no good Lease, because Terminus contains certainty, and there it is
uncertain how long the Lease will endure: So a Lease for three years, and so
from three years to three years during the life of I. S. is good for six years
only, because those only certain, and the end of the number of years
intended, ought to be known at the beginning.

So a person Leases for five years, and so from 5. years to 5. years during his
life, is good for 10. years only; yet he continues person above ten years.
Dier said, That he knew it Adjudged.

Graisbrook against Fox.
A Man makes his Executor and dies, the Ordinary Probat commits the
Administration to one which sels the goods, P. 7. El. in C. P.
the Executor proves his will, and brings Detinue against the Buyer for the
Goods, and adjudged lawful.

For that the Probat disproves, over-reaches, and annihilates the power of the
Administrator, and he did not die intestate, and by consequence the property is
cast by the Act of Law upon the Executor, and the Omission of the Goods of one
that has made his Testament before refusal, void by relation after probate by
seizing of the goods, bringing action, or pleading, etc. without Suit in the
Spiritual Court; but otherwise shall it be if the Administrator had employed
the money that he took for the Goods upon the necessary affairs of the
Testator, which the Executor was chargeable to do.

Weston, W. 2. c. 19. the Ordinary had the goods of the intestate, to dispose
in pious uses, because the Law adjudges him the most apt person for it; and if
he give, or aliens his goods, good at the Common Law, because he has broken
only the trust required of him, yet the Common Law makes not the Ordinary,
being a Spiritual Governor, subject to Temporal Suits of Creditors of the
intestate, but was defective in this point, 11. H. 7.12. and 9. E. 4.33. But
now Debt lies against him, by W. 2. cap. 19. and those words there Obligati
aliquibus in debito, intends all Debts that the Executor is bound to pay, by
which the Ordinary shall pay Arrearages upon a Lease for years of an intestate;
but before this Statute nor after, the Ordinary might not sue for Debt, or
thing in Action of the intestates, nor release Debts due to the intestate, but
only seize the things in possession of the intestate, and do with them at his
will; and for this mischief 31 E. 3. cap. 11. compelled him to commit the
Administration to the next friends, and gave to them an Action of Debt, and not
to the Ordinary himself; and so they were, and might be sued, and should
account as Executors, yet before 31. E. 3. the Ordinary might commit, and such
Committees should be sued before E 3 by the equity of West. 2. which gave the
Action against the Ordinary; but Committees before E. 3. might not Levy a Debt,
nor release a Debt, because they had not to do with things in Action, (but in
possession at their pleasure) as 7. H. 4.18. Executor now cannot release a
Debt, nor sue for a Debt before probate of the Will; and it seems to him, That
the sale of an administrator is good, because no notice of the Testament is
given to him, and the Ordinary, nor cannot be bound to take notice of it,
because secret, as 8. H. 7.10. 22. H. 6.34. 7. E. 4.28. and 8. E. 4.12 and 19.
H. 8. The Lord may avow upon his ancient Tenant if the Feoffee gives him not
notice of his purchase, because he is not bound to take notice. So 2 H 4.21. he
has paid the assets to another, hanging the writ against him before he had
notice of the writ, good plea for an Executor, and shall not be charged
therewith to the Plaintiff, 31. E. 3. provides, That the Ordinary shall commit
Administration; where one dies intestate, intends also, where Executors refuse
before the Ordinary, or if they die intestate, because there is no Executor
that will intermeddle.

Acts by the Administrator shall not be avoided by probate of the Testament,
where the Ordinary has authority to commit Administration in the mean time,
because there is no Executor; as where a man will, That I. S. shall be his
Executor, and dies before I. S. or that I. S. shall be his Executor one year
after his death, So 4. H. 7.14. a man makes an Executor, and enters into
Religion, if he after is deraigned, he shall not avoid mean Acts of the
Executor.

Walsh and Dier holds the Law with the Plaintiff. There are three which have
to do with the Goods of the Dead, by Walsh, viz. First the Executor appointed
by the Party himself in whom the party has reposed the properties of his
Goods, and confidence of the Executor of his will, and it takes Commencement
by act Temporal, viz. by will, and it is perfection by act Spiritual, viz.
probat^, if the party appoint none. Secondly, the King appoints the Ordinary,
and he appoints three Administrators for his ease, and in his discharge, and
they have their Commencement by Act Spiritual, viz. by Letters of
Administration, and have as the Executor has, authority of the thing Temporal;
but the authority of the Ordinary, or of Administrators, not any, except the
dead die intestate; and here by not gainsaying in his Bar he Dier, if he had
died intestate, the property of his goods comes by the Common Law to the
Ordinary, because he had not appointed them to any, and they shall be in some
body, and not in suspense, as 9. H. 7.2. by course of the Common Law; Freehold
shall be in some one, and not in suspense: the Ordinary by the Common Law was
not charged for the debt of the intestate before W. 2. for those words
Obligetur de cetero implies the same, after West 2. Ordinary is chargeable, and
his Executor 16. E. 2. 11. E 3. after West. 2. and before 31. E. 3. Ordinary
may commit Administration (and he shall be charged in action of Debt.) so
Fitzh. seems not. br. fol. 120. D. and 19. E. 3. Ordinary pleads, That he had
committed the Administration to another before the action brought against him,
good; but the power that the Ordinary himself had, or committed to the
Administration of another, not, unless a man dies intestate, but when he makes
his will; by it he has committed all his goods to his Executor, and the Law
favors a Will, for Testaments are of the same antiquity, as properties of Goods
are, and is a Testament when the Testator is dead, and from thence executors,
are executors, and before Probate; for it is not but a Confirmation and
allowance of that which the Testator has done. And by the Death, the property
of the goods which were in the Testator, is cast and vested in the executors,
whereby they may give, or otherwise intermeddle with them, and may be sued
before probat, 9. E 4.47. but shall not sue (before fol. 178.) and 36. H. 6 7.
Executor commands A. to take the Goods of the Testator out of the possession of
B. A. takes them, afterward the Executor refuses the administration, and the
Ordinary commits it to B. which brings Trespass; for the taking against A. A.
may justify by commandment of the Executor; for his refusal shall not make the
Commandment void nor grieve him which did well at the time of the Act done;
which case argues, That the Executor has interest in things of the Testators
before probat. And by him the Ordinary ought not to probat he had released a
Debt, and after he proves the Will, this has made the release good: Walsh
probat, makes the Release of the Executor made before, good, because it is a
consummation of the Will, and refers to the death.

Dier, Chief Justice. If the Ordinary commit, and after the Metropolitan commit
to another, because the intestate has Goods of the value of 10 l. in diverse
Dioces, 10. H 7.18. this disproves the authority of the first Administrator,
and avoids his mean Acts, and by Keeble, the second Administrator shall have
Trespass against the first, for taking of the first Goods, So 7. E. 4.12.
Executor pleads that he has proved the Testament, the action of the
Administrator depending against him, a good Bar, because the power of the
Administrator disproved, and mean acts avoided by Probat of the Testament, and
the Executor which is made, not knowing of it, if he agree after, good, seems
to be 3. H. 7.14. The Ordinary ought to award Process against the Executor to
come in for to prove the Testament, before he commits the Administration. The
Probat here disproves the Administration for ever, and proves the Executor to
be full Executor from the death of the Testator, and is not like to the cases
(before fol. 239.) because the mean time in which no Executor, and this time
the Ordinary has authority. The Seal of the Ordinary put to E. 3.16. A.
brings Debt against B. as administrator, and shows certainly how his Deed
was as he ought, B. says, he and another are executors, Judgment of the Writ,
and show forth the Testament to prove it; A. offers to aver that he died
intestate, B. says to it, he shall not be received contrary to the Testament
proved, and under Seal, to take the Plaintiff from his averment, but that he
shall have it, and try it by the Country; also the taking of Letters of
Administration, discharges not a Suit against those which were executors of
their own wrong (before 21. H. 6.8. 2. R. 3.20. So 34. H. 6.14.) in debt by the
Administrator, the Defendant received to avoid Letters of Administration, by
saying the dead made an executor, and taking issue upon it.

Chapman against Dalton.
A Man makes a Lease for 21. years by Indenture, Tr. 7. El. in the K. B.
Covenant.
and his Executors, to make a new Lease for 21. years after the expiration of
the first, to the Lessee and his Assigns; the Lessee dies, and the Executor of
the Executor brings Covenant after the first Lease determined against the
Lessor, and adjudged, good.

1. That the executor is an Assignee in Law, to whom the Lease ought to be
made, and so the executor of an executor by the Common Law.

2. That the Lease ought to be made to the Lessee if he were alive, or to his
Assigns in Deed, and if he die Assignee in Deed, then to his executor; and
although that the Covenant be in the Copulative in the Letter, yet it shall be
expounded disjunctive in sense, for to avoid absurdity or impossibility.

3. Admitting that the word Assignee were void, or omitted out of the deed, yet
this shall be made to the executor; for that the intent was such, which shall
be performed where the words could not.

Baber and Wray, argued for the Defendant, as Ash, fol. 50. Fleetwood, and
another [Assigned] here shall be drawn to so effectual sense for the avail of
the Grantee. And if the word [Assignee] as the Council on the part of the
Defendant would have it applied to a limitation, viz. in the sense of an
Habendum to him and his Assigns for 21. years, it is void and conveys no
benefit to the Grantee; because if I Lease to A. for 21. years, and his
Assigns shall have this as largely as I do vest this Lease in him, and his
Assigns; because the Law gives power to him to assign it to another.

Assignee has two senses; in the one it signifies the person to whom the thing
granted or given, shall be afterward conveyed by him which has the thing; as
the Lessor Grants to the Lessee for years, That he or his Assigns shall have
twenty Carts of Wood annually in such a Wood, Assignee there has the sense of
the person to whom he shall Assign the Lease.

So one warrants Land to the Feoffee, his Heirs, and assigns, there the second
Feoffee shall vouch. So I sell a Horse upon Condition, That if I pay 40 s. to
him, or his Assignees, that I shall have the horse again, Assignee there is he
to whom he grants the horse; but such Assignee is not in our case, because he
has not any estate first made, and such a one is Assignee after the thing
granted; in the second it contains the person to whom the thing which is to be
made, and is not made, shall be made: as I am bound to make a Feoffment, or
give a horse to you, or your Assignee, there the Assignee is such a person
which you shall name to me to receive; and the Assignee in this sense is before
the things done

But with this in the first sense, we have not to do here; there are Assigns
in Deed, and Law; in Deed, where you name such a one, to whom I shall make the
Feoffment, or give the horse; in Law where you name no man to receive, then the
Executor shall have it, because the Law says, That they are your Assigns to
such purpose, and present your person, as to receive any Chattels real or
personal.

So 27. H. 8 2. Executor is an Assignee in Law to take a Rental, where the
Lessee bound himself to deliver it to the Lessor, or his Assigns at the end of
the Term, a true rental, and the Lessor made no Assignee, he is an ill
expounder which confounds the Text. And therefore here [and] the Copulative
shall be taken for [or] the Disjunctive; for otherwise the sense will be
absurd, that the Lessee if he had been alive at the end of the first Lease,
should not take a new Lease until he names his Asasignee;

So in our Law, a copulative is taken as a disjunctive, and a disjunctive as a
copulative for to make words to stand with reason, and with the intent of the
parties; as the Obligee shall pay 10. l. if he infeoff not him, or his Heirs,
when he comes to I. intends (yet words disjunctive) in sense, That he shall
infeoff him if he be living; and if dead, then his Heirs; because he cannot
have an Heir during his life; so here a Covenant to make a Lease at a time to
come to him and his Assigns Copulatively, shall be taken disjunctively. viz.
to him if he be alive, and to his Assigns if he be dead.

So (4. Mar. before 171.) A. and B. Grants a Rent Charge of 20. s. out of all
lands, which they both have, the Grantee shall have several 20. s. out of both
their lands, and yet the Grant was out of the lands which were to A. and B. 19.
H 6.3. I release all actions which I have against A. and B. if he has any
actions against either of them, they are gone.

So Arbitrators 2. R. 3.18. may make Arbitrament of actions joint and several,
where one and two others submit themselves to their arbitrament, because it
literally couples them, yet in sense goes to them severally. And so in the
Common case in Indenture of bargain and sale, which Covenants to make a sure
estate, or deliver evidences to the Bargainee, and his heirs within two
months, and he dies before he ought to make the estate to his Heirs; because
impossible to be performed literally,

As if I demise, That I. S. shall sell my land, or authorize my Steward to
demise it; or my Baily to sell my sheep, which does it; so it is my alienation,
demise, and sale by him. So the second Executor shall be immediate Executor,
and in such degree to the first Testator as the first executor was, as chosen
by the first executor by force of the Authority given to him by the first
Testator, which intends the same; or otherwise all contracts would be destroyed
by the Common Law in a short time, viz. after the death of the first executor;
because administrators could not have actions given to the intestate, until
31. E. 3. cap. 11. proved by 10. E. 3.2. the executor of an executor, because
executors have not those actions by the Common Law, but by Statute; and because
by equity they were not to be extended to an executor of an executor; but the
action of Debt was put in the Act in 25. E. 3. cap. 5. not of necessity,
because the Law gave it to an executor of an executor before; but for to take
away the doubt that some had of it, and so an executor of an executor may have
all actions that the Common Law gives to the first executor, and so may have
actions of Covenant; and if not, they should have it by equity of the Statute
of 25. E. 3. cap. 5. Admitting that the word [Assignee] was void, or omitted
out of the Covenant; yet this Lease here shall be made to the executor, for
that the intent which is the chief thing to be considered in every agreement,
was such; which shall be performed so near as may be, or the words shall not be
effectual; and the chief effect of the agreement, was the estate which should
be made, not the person to whom: but if the Tenant bind himself, and Covenant
to do corporal service to the Lord, he cannot to the Heir or executor, because
it must be done to the body of the Lord; and if I perish, the thing also
perishes.

The intent performed, and not the words, good, as in the cases of Litl. fol.
82. That the Feoffee shall fol. 6.) And it is not requisite always, that in
agreements every thing ought to be performed according to the words; for if the
Mortgagee accept of another thing in another place, good, ( Litl. f. 79.) So if
the Obligee comes not to the place at the day appointed to receive his sum,
he has not lost it. 7. E. 4.4. but 19. H. 8, 12, if the Obligee sue for the
penalty, the Obligor ought to show that he was ready at the day and place, and
say that he is yet ready. So payment of a lesser sum at another place, ( Perk.
fol. 145.) or before the day 10 H. 7.14. good. So Litl. fo. 77. upon a
Mortgage, the Heir, or Executor of the Feoffer shall pay at a day certain; and
Litl. fol. 76. the Feoffee of the Feoffee pays at the day, good; because he
has interest in the Land. So 17. E. 3. ass. pl. 2. the Disseisor Grants by
Indenture, That if the Disseisee paies unto him 10. l. such a day, that one
release which the Disseisee has made to him, shall be void, and before the day
the Disseisor makes a Feoffment, and at the day 10. l. was paid to the Feoffee:
Words performed, and not the intent, as it may be in some cases, yet the
agreement is not performed, as 21. H 6.10. (before fol. 23.) one binds himself
that his Feoffees of the manor of D. shall Grant out of it 40. s. annual Rent
to the Plaintiff, he has 3. Feoffees, and two Grants, it is naught, because he
intended that all should do it; for there but two parts of the Manor are
charged. So 3. H. 7.4. one binds himself to infeoff me of the Manor of Dale;
he infeoffs an other of parcel, and afterward me of the Manor; he has
performed the words, but not the intent, which was, That I shall have all the
Manor as then it was. So (before fol. 21. and 23.) si vellet inhabitare and
residens, etc. during the Term, intends all the Term. So 10. E. 4.16. the words
of a verdict true, yet the verdict false, because he brought Annuity as Abbot,
and prescribe so without naming of him parson where he had the annuity in right
of his Parsonage, as him derived from the first Testator; and that which is
done in perfermance of the Covenant, ought to be in him in such degree as the
Covenant was in him.

So 11. H. 6.11. An Executor assigns Auditors to one which was an Accomptant
to the Testator, and he is found in arrearages; the Executor shall have Debt in
the Detinet only, because the Debt shall be in him as Executor, and has a
respect to the foundation. So 32 H. 8. and Doctor and Student, 92. One has a
Villain for years as an executor, the Villain purchases hands, the executor
enters, it shall be to the use of the Testator, and assets in his hands,
because the Villain which was the cause of it, was to such use. So here the
Covenant, which was the cause of the Lease, comes to the executors in right of
the Testator, and to the same use shall the Lease. The Court increases the
costs here.

Osburn against Carden and Jay.
A Woman guardian in Soccage takes husband, Michaelmas; M. 7. and 8. El. in K.
Bench Tr.
and before Michaelmas the Lessee makes a Lease for a lesser Term of years;
the Husband dies, the Wife enters, and being outed, brings Trespass, and
adjudged lawful.

For that the Lease is voidable by the Wife, because she has the Wardship to
another use; and by reason of Natural affection presumed by the Law to be the
nearest friend for the proximity of blood, for that the Custody of him comes
not to the executor, Litl. fol. 27. The Custody cannot be given by the Husband,
or forfeited by Utlary, or Attainder longer then during the life of the
Guardian; because no such Natural affection there, 33. H. 6.55. But the husband
has interest in the Custody in the right of his Wife, for to participate with
his Wife in all matters of interest and Prerogatives, because they are one
person in Law, but loses his interest when his Wife dies, because Cessante
causa cessat effectus. And although Doctor and Student says, fol. 13. That the
Wife cannot avoid the Act of the Husband, as to give, Demise, or sell Chattels,
real or personal, which she has to her own use; yet here she may, because she
has it in another right; and the Wardship of the body, which is the
principal, remains, which shall be maintained with the profits of the Land, and
this is in effect the suit of the Ward by the woman.

Caril against Cuddington.
A M. 7. and 8. El. in the Court of Ward.
the other in Soccage, takes husband, she and her husband levies a Fine sur
Conusans come ceo of both; the Conusee Grants and Renders to the husband and
Wife, and the Heirs of their bodies, Remainder in Fee to the right Heirs of the
wife; the Husband and wife die, their issue within the age of 14. years, the
Grandmother on the part of the Mother enters, and the Grandfather on the part
of the Father of the infant, sues as next friend in the Court of Wards, because
that the Queen has the Wardship of the acre holden by Knights Service, and of
the body: and adjudged that the Grandfather on the part of the father, shall
have the wardship of the acre holden in Soccage, as Guardian in Soccage, and
not the Grandmother; for that the Grandmother by possibility may have the
Land by descent after the estate Tail determined, and the Grandfather cannot;
but they are in equal degrees as to the estate Tail, and the wife here is a
purchaser by the Fine of the Fee-simple, and the Law is all one of land only,
as if it were of the land, and body also.

Sherington etc. against Stratton.
ANdrew Bainton by Indenture, Covenants and Edward, M. 7. and 8. El. in K. B.
Tr.
for the affection that he has, That the Lands shall descend and come to the
Heirs males of their own bodies, and continue in the blood and name of the
Baintons; and also for brotherly love and good will, That he, his Heirs and
Assigns, shall stand seized to the use of himself for his life, and after to
the use of Edward Bainton for his life, and after to the Heirs Males of the
body of Andrew, and afterward to the Heirs Males of the body of Edward, and
adjudged that every of the considerations by it self, being grounded upon
Nature, is sufficient to raise the uses according to the Limitation, although
it were without Deed. And so Covenant and Grant, That he will stand seized to
another use by Indenture, without any valuable, or natural consideration, is
good enough, for that the deed imports consideration in the Will of the
Covenantor, by Plowden Quere notwithstanding.

Fleetwood, and Wray for the Plaintiff. An use H. 7.18. and 6. E. 6. by bargain
and sale, viz. Land for money, or 36. H. 8. Covenant for marriage, because
advancement to the Daughter, and comfort to her parents. Secondly, where of one
part only, as Covenant for Natural affection from the Father to the Daughter,
or Brother to Brother, and a desire to have the land continue in his name and
posterty. For a new thing to be done

But long acquainiance, ancient familiarity, or that they have been Scholars in
their youth, no considerations to raise a use, because they are not
considerations of value, or recompense; as if I promise to pay to you 10. l.
because you are my Brother or old acquaintance, it is Nudum pactum, and so note
that a use was at the Common Law. A new use cannot be Created without
consideration, but being created, and in esse, may be granted over without
consideration as another Chattel, and Doctor and Student, fol. 99. may be
devised.

1. Bromley, and another Aprrentice, with the Defendant; and they Grant that
there are two ways by the Common Law to make a Use without Transmutation of
possession, viz. Bargain and Sale, and Covenant upon Consideration, proved by
the words of 27. H. 8. cap. 10. and Consideration arising from the one part
only, good; and it is not requisite to have Consideration, and a new thing
done by both the parties.

First Consideration.

It is natural to engender, and nourish after engendered, Litl. fol. 25.33. H.
6.55. and Trespass for taking away his Son, Fitzh. not. br. fol. 143. and 3. E.
4.12. And the Son shall have an Appeal of the death of his Father before others
for his earnest intent of revenge, and his reciprocal love. So a Feoffment to
the Son, a Suit depending, is not Champerty, 6. E 3. cap. 274. yet within the
words of Articuli super Chartas, cap. 2. because by all Laws the Son ought to
aid his Father, and so out of the intent of the Statute; and there by Herle,
the Son may abet his Mother to bring an appeal of the death of her husband, and
shall not answer Damages. And Litl. 8. The Son and Heir apparent endowes his
wife ex assensu patru^, good without Livery, because the wife of his Son is as
his own wife, for the love that the Law presumes is between the Father and the
Son, and within his Charge.

So Litl. fol. 4. the Donor shall pay Rent until and the husband from thence
forth undertakes to find his wife all necessaries; I promise 20. l. to one, if
he marries my Daughter, he shall have Debt for it in our Law, because the
Daughter is advanced, and so consideration proceeding from Nature, is a
sufficient Consideration in our Law, 22. E. 3. ass. pl. 70. Fitz. not. br. fol.
44. a. and 120. r. Doctor and Student 105. And so the Consideration here of
A.B. for provision for his issues males good, is a good Consideration to change
the use of the land.

Second Consideration.

For the continuance of the Land in the name of the Baintons, good, to raise an
Use, and Males continue their Sir names, and Females change them by marriage,
and the Male is most Sovereign, 40. E. 3.37. 2. H. 4.1. 27 H. 6.8. and the
Female, and all inheritance, is subject to the will of another, 17. E.

Third Consideration.

The good will, and fraternal love which he has to his blood, and his brothers
which is the nearest degree of blood after Parents and issues, good
considerations here; and so it seems by the better opinion, in 20. H. 7.10. but
is not there adjudged, and they that join in blood by nature, join in love; and
therefore if the youngest enter after the death of the Father, the elder shall
have no action against him, conrrary to 21. H 6.15. by Portington because the
Law intends that he entered as a friend to preserve the inheritance in his
absence, because so near in blood, the Law intends as near in love. So Littl f.
93. and 40. E. 3.24. no descent of the Puisne, or any of his issues shall take
away the entry of the eldest for the cause aforesaid. So Litl f. 160. Warranty
Collateral Bars without assets, because the Law presumes that he will advance
him as much as he has prejudiced him by the Warranty. So no battle between
Brothers or Cosens in a Writ of right. But a Nuper obiit lies against Brothers
and Sisters in Gavel-kind, where their ancestor died seized; or a Wri^ De
rationabili, part against him which enters into all, which Writs are to try
blood only. So a Juror is Brother or Cosen to one party, a good challeng in
every action; for the affection which the Law presumes the one has toward the
other, 21. E. 4.33. And Bromley said, That 11. H. 4.12. by Tirwit and
Cascoigne, by the ancient usage,

Fourth Consideration.

Consideration was the Marrige had between Edward Bainton, and Agnes his wife;
Remainder upon Natural Consideration, shall preserve the particular estate made
without Consideration, which precedes it, (but not on the contrary) if the
estate upon natural Consideration precede the other estate; as A. Convenants
with B. in Consideration that B. will marry his Daughter, to stand seized at
the time of the Marriage to the use of himself for life, after to the use of I.
in Tail, afterward to the use of B. and his wife, the Daughter of A. is a good
use to I. without consideration; for the Marriage is private, and several
Considerations for the estate of B. and his Wife; because the Remainder to I.
precedes the estate to B. and his Wife; but if the Remainder to I. had been
after the estate of B. and his wives, the estate there had been void to I. but
money might have been given in Consideration of all the estates. In Mordants
case, 21. H. 7.19. No use was raised there, because the Covenant was in the
future Tense, and also uncertain; and therefore was put to his Writ of Covenant
there.

Good and sufficient Consideration, raises an Use without Deed; so a Deed
raises Uses if there be any Consideration; for it is made to some effect, or
otherwise should be void, because you shall not have an action of Covenant
here, because an action of Covenant lies upon a Covenant only in the preter,
or future Tense, and not in the present Tense.

1. Contract, or Agreement for Lands, or Chattels, is by the Law, First, by
Writing; Secondly, by Words.

First, An agreement by writing, without Consideration, is not Nudum; because a
man has great consideration, and deliberation in passing things by Deed; and
the writing, his sealing, and delivery of it, signifies fully his will, is
sufficient consideration, that Land shall pass as his will is, and shall bind
the party without thinking what cause he has to do it. Secondly, an Agreement
by word without consideration, is Nudum, and binds not; because words passes
from a man suddenly, and without advisement many times, as 17 E. 4.4. I Nudum
pactum; if it be by Deed, you may have Action of Debt upon this Deed, and the
Consideration there is not examinable, and the cause of the Deed is not
inquirable; for every Deed imports in it self a Consideration without the will
of the party which makes the Deed. So 11 H. 4.33. A Carpenter by word, without
writing, undertakes to make a new house, and no consideration for the making of
it, is Nude; if it be by writing, it is good: So 45. E. 3.24. for that the
Plaintiff demanded a Debt upon a contract for marriage money by Deed, an action
lies at the Common Law, because there it becomes a Lay Contract by the Deed,
in Court Christian, if it had been without Deed, because the marriage which is
the consideration, is a thing Spiritual, 14. E. 4.6. 15. E. 4.32. which books
are against the opinion of Thorp in the said case in 22. ass. before fol. 35.
Nudum pactum est ubi nulla subest causa praeter conventionem; sed ubi subest
causa, fit obligatio and parit actionem.

Information for Mines.
THe H. 10. El. in the Excheq.
by the Prerogative of his Crown, and not by the proprieity of the Soil,
although it be not recited in the Treatise of Prerogative; and albeit the Oar
thereof in another land, touches others Free-holds, and inheritance, which is
proved by three reasons; First for the excellency of the matter, which being
more excellent, is appropriated by the Law to the person most excellent, viz.
the King. So the King has by the Common Law, Whales, and Sturgeons, because
they are the most excellent fishes that the sea, or water renders.

So that the Treatise of Praerogativa Regis ca. 11. which says, Rex habebit
Balneas and Sturgiones, is but a Declaration of the Common Law before.
Secondly, for the necessity of defending his people, and preserving the
Commonwealth against foreign hostility. Thirdly, for the commodity of his
Subjects, That they by the Coin made thereof (which the King only may make)
may have between them mutual Commerce and Traffic; because if the subject
shall have gold or silver found in his own land, he might convert it into Coin;
for falsifying or counterfeiting money, was Treason at the Common Law; and for
that cause, a woman was burnt, 23. ass. pl. 2. Also it would be would exceed
the King in Treasure, which would be perilous to his estate.

The second proof was by presidents of three sorts.

First, Commissions, Grants, and Demises, by which the King has Granted such
Mines in others viz. in Annis 32. E. 3.8. R. 2.5. H. 6. 15. E. primo H. 7. and
in some of them the King gave license to digg in another land without license
of the owner; and where some of them says, habita licentia fodiendi, which is
intended land subject

Secondly, Accounts of the Grantees of such Mines.

Thirdly Informations, and Impleading of them which have disturbed the
Grantees, or Imported Litl. f. 28. William Candish case in the Exchequer.

The 3. proof is upon authorities of Law, viz. The book called, Exposition of
Terms of the Law; and the reading of Hescot of Charta Forestae; and the Laws of
St. Edward the Confessor, and William the Conqueror: and so those Authorities,
and the said presidents, and the reasons aforesaid for the excellency of the
Metal, and for the necessity of it, and the public good, agreeing in one,
That the King shall have all Mines, and Oars of Gold and Silver in Land, is
Treasure found. Thesauri de terra taken for Gold and Silver in Land, is Trea.
sure Trove; the use and continuance Ratifies this Prerogative by prescription,
although that it need not be contained in the Treatise of Praerogativa regis
for the King; the Common Law has many which are not there recited, as Tenant
of the King aliens without License; it was a forfeiture before the Statute of
1. E. 3. cap. 12. 9 E. 3.26. although it be to the prejudice of another
Freeholder; yet because the Law gives those Mines to the King, it gives to
him all necessary means to have it, by digging with all incidents thereunto:
for every Prerogative contains in it self prescription, for it is in usage; and
as prescription and usage will give Title or interest to the King in the
Freehold of another, as by Prerogative the King might enter into the woods of
another, and take Trees for to repair his Castles before the Statute of Magna
Charta. cap. 22. so he might Afforest another man's woods, before the Statute of
Forresta, cap. 2. So 7. H. 3. he might break a Pond, and take the fish for his
provision. So 27. ass. pl. 49. The Lord E. 4.6. The King may distrain for his
Rent Charge in all the other Lands of him which ought to pay it. So the
Prerogative of the King, charge his other Freehold to the Kings distress.

The King shall have by his Prerogative Mines of Copper, containing Gold or
Silver in the Lands of another; because they are as a thing entire by the
Commixture; and magis dignum trabit ad se minus dignum, as 41. E. 3.32. 36. H.
6.26. and 3. H. 7.14. The Heir shall have the Charters with the Box, if it be
sealed: so Carts to which Horses are tied, if it fall upon a man, the King
shall have all. Stamford fol. 20. (before 243.) because as one thing they
altogether occasion his death. So the King shall have all the Obligations, and
Horses where one of the Joynt-Tenants is attainted; because a thing E. 3. and
17. R. 2. 7. H. 4. 17. H. 6.30. and 31. of H. 6. proved also by accounts for
Silver and base Metal; no Mine of Copper void of Gold or Silver; no Mine of
Tin void of Silver; and Devon and Cornwall, for digging in their Land, and in
other Land for Tin, and to have this to their use, derive their power from the
Kings of this Realm made unto them, and giving them such liberties as by
Charter. 33 E. 1 confirmed by R. 2. but the power given to them for to digg
Statute of 50. E. 3. Darby shire, and other places prescribes to take lead of
Mines steril, which is without Gold or Silver, without paying any thing.

On the part of the Earl against the Queen. The thing of the most in value, is
worthiest; where the Quantity of Copper exceeds the Quantity of Gold yet the
less is the most precious, Quantity for Quantity; the Gold or Silver ought to
be of more value, then the charges of separating of it from the base Metal
comes to; otherwise this aliquid nihil est if he has lost by it. Wast. of 2.
d. is dispunishable, because de minimis non curat Lex. 9. H. 6.36. 38. E. 3.7.
by this reservation upon the said Demises, it is intended a good quantity of
Gold or Silver. Also because the information shows not what value of Gold or
Silver is to defray the Cornwall, used for the digging of Tin before the said
Charter, proves by the words themselves, viz. That for the amendment of our
Stannaries, etc. and other words in the Charter; and albeit the King had some
profit of Tin, or Lead in some places, as a toll dish of Oar, that was not in
respect of the interest the King had, but for the bearing of the Charges of
Officers, as he had of Merchants of some part of their Marchandizes, for the
searchers, Controller and Waigher, because he appointed Officers for that
purpose.

By those of the Earls Council it was said, That if the Law were such that the
Mines of Copper in the lands of Subjects, shall be the Kings by his
Prerogative; yet here those Mines and Oar in question, pass to the Earl by the
Letters Pattents of King Philip, and Queen Mary. For as to the first Plea, they
take that the vain wherein the said five hundred thousand weight of Copper was
dug, could not be called a Mine at the time of the Letters Pattents granted,
nor pass by the name of Mines, for that then the vein was closed; and therefore
pass by the grant of the Soil as parcel of it. And in the second Plea, the vein
and Oar pass by the words Omnes and singulas Mineras. etc. which admit no
exception, and shall be taken strictly against the King; for those clauses,
viz. De gratia sua speciali, which pretends great favor and bounty toward the
Pattentee ex certa scientia, which excludes any suggestion; and the Great Seal
is in witness of Truth, and not impugnable in Credit; if the King gives a
Manor that he has by escheat or purchase, as entirely as I.S. held it, there
the advowson pass Trinity, 43. E. 3.22. (and agreed here) yet is not taken
there but by implication, That the King is knowing of his right; and so the
King here

The King Rents the first Grant by his Predecessor, and says, Ex certa
scientia, (as we are informed) concludes not the King to say that such grant
was made by Hussy, 9. H. 72. The King Ex mero motu, and Ex certa scientia,
pardons to B. Omnia debita and computa, it discharges a debt due by him as
Sheriff, because there is a general pardon, 1. H. 7.13. Uncertain Return, and
the King deceived, because upon suggestion, made the Charter void. As three
Kings usurp presentations, and the King reciting one of the Usurpations,
restores the Patronage to him, upon which the Usurpation was, this is a void
Charter, but adjudged good, because of Ex cetta scientia, in which case the
King shall not say he was deceived or ignorant, 3. H. 7.6. So 22. E. 4.44. The
King grants de De gratia sua speciali, to the Abbot of Waltham to be discharged
of the Collection of Tithes, which shall be granted by the Clergy of England,
and Province of Canterbury, Notwithstanding the Grant there, adjudged good; and
that the Abbot shall be discharged. So 36. H. 6.34. and 37. H. 6.31. A.
Returned upon an Exigent quarto exactus, where he was Outlawed; after the King
pardons him Ex mero motu, and De speciali gratia, all Misprisions, Offenses,
Contempts, and Deceits, there the Amerciament is released by the general words,
because the Law intends that the King is informed of the thing pardoned, as by
express De gratia speciali to S. That he may give the house whereof he was
seized in Mortmain, good; yet recites not the Tenure in Burgage holden of the
King, and the house was holden of the King in Free-Burgage.

The third point argued by the Queens Council.

First by the Kings Grant Ex mero motu, certa scientia, and gratia speciali,
Mines of Gold and Silver, or other Mines Royal, will not pass, although that it
appears, that it was hidden at the time, and appears afterward; otherwise
of base Mines, for those pass, but not Mines Royal which are Collateral things
to the Soil, as are hidden Treasure, which passes not by the gift of the King;
nor Wreck, Straies, Waifs, etc. pass not; nor do liberties pass by the Grant
of a Manor. As the King gives a manor within a Forest which escheats to him;
yet the Donee may not cut his woods within it, without license of the Justice
of the Forest; and the Manor remains subject to the Pasture of Deer; and wild
beasts of the Forest; and so thing collateral to the Soil, as are things of
Prerogative and liberty, pass not by the gift of the Soil. So Livery to the
Heir gives not Right.

The King assigns Dower to his Mother; but the King shall assign it by his
Prerogative, without the Clause ( de salva to the wife her Dower, by the King
assignanda) and upon this reason he put the case of 31. E. 3. Three Coperceners
of an Advoson, the one within age, and in the Kings Ward which Grants the ward
and Marriage of him, and the Fees and Advowsons appertaining to the viz. the
presentment of the eldest and middle Sister by his Prerogative, because entire,
and his Prerogative takes away the elder and middle Sisters to present. And the
King has three presentiments in the Wards right; and it passes by his Pattent;
but that to which the King is entitled by his Prerogative, passes not without
express mention. A Pattent Ex gratia speciali, etc. shall be taken favorably
to the Pattentee, viz. as to the thing expressed in the Pattent, which the
words show to be intended to pass; but this will not make another thing to pass
not expressed or showed to be intended by the words of the Pattent to pass. The
King had the secret Mine of Copper mixed with Gold and Silver in Land given by
his ancestors to the Prior of Wenlock, and there it passes not by the Grant of
the Soil, Ex mero motu, etc. yet it was of the foundation of the King, and
Religious favored, Fitzh. not. br. 332.

Secondly, by the Kings Grant De omnibus and singulis Mineris ex certa
scientia, etc. Mines Royal, viz. of Gold and Silver, or of base metal,
containing in it Gold or Silver, passes not; because the King has them Ratione
Cornnae, not of the land, and because appropriate to his Crown, passes not
without special words; base Mines here, as those which consist only of base
substance, viz. Copper, Tin, Lead Iron, or Coals, and not having in them Gold
or Silver, and Patentees shall have things fit for Subjects; yet the terms of
the Pattent comprehend things annexd to the Crown or of great importance; but
they shall be construed to pass the things of the basest degree, 22. ass. pl.
The King Grants to the master of S. Leonard, Omnia catella tenentium suorum
Feloniae qualiter cunque damnatorum, and his Tenant kills the Kings Messenger,
there he shall not have them, because intended of common Felonies.

So

So 2. R. 3.4. 2. H. 7.7. The Kings Grantee of Amerciaments of his Tenants,
shall not have the amerciament of his Tenant which holds of him, and another;
because it is before other Tenants, as well as my Tenant.

Charters of the King taken according to common intent, and other things which
have not common intent, shall not pass from the King by his Charters. And
therefore 3. E. 3 the King Grants to an Abbot, That he and his Successors shall
be quit of repairing of Bridges, Cawseys, and Walls, it discharges not him for
repairing of such which he has been used to repair by prescription as Lord of
the Village: but it is good otherwise of a Town to which the King has Granted
Murage, Pannage or Pontage.

So 9. H. 6.56. (before fol. 243.) The Grantee of the King with Warranty, shall
not have in value, without precise words, but he may rebutt. So 2. H. 7.6. The
Grantee of the King of all Fines and Amerciaments in such a County, he shall
not have Amerciaments if the Sheriff, Coroner, or other great Officer is
Amerced, because Royal; and a Grant shall enure for common things in intendment.

So 43. E. 3. ass pl. 15. The King Grants to his eldest Son the Duchy of
Cornwall, cum omnibus Wardis, Maritagiis, etc. And one which held of the
Duchy by Knights Service, and which held also of one which was in Ward,
because of Ward by Knights Service, dies, his Heir within age, the Prince
shall not have the Wardship of him, but the King; because a thing pertaining to
the Crown passes not without special words. So the King makes a County
Palatine, and gives to another, and Jura Regalia, and that Pleas within the
County shall be determined there; yet he himself shall sue at Westminster, his
actions arising within the County Palatine, as 3. E. 2. For an advowson in the
County Palatine of Durham, the King brings his Quare impedit in the Common
Pleas; the Defendant pleaded to the Jurisdiction of the Court, and was
compelled to answer.

So an Abbot by the Kings Grant made to him for the amortizing of Land, or
Tenements, may not purchase an Advowson holden of the King in Capite: and this
case by Wray, differs from the case in 41. ass. pl. 19. (before fol. 332.) for
there the Charter names the house, but names not what Lands; by which it cannot
be intended that the King was mistaken in the Tenure, and therefore it is good
there, and not for the cause of Ex gratia speciali. So 19. E. 3. he might not
appropriate an Advowson holden of the King by license to appropriate. So 1. H.
7 23 and 26. A sanctuary for Treason shall not be without special Words, Ex
mer^ motu, etc. will not pass other things then the nature of the words
contain. And therefore the King Grants to a man and his Heirs males, excerta
scientia, etc. passes not inheritance. 28. H. 8. A Felon may not wage battle
against the King, because dangerous for the King. Stamford fol. 180 and 182.
nor against those of London in an appeal by the Kings Grant, 20. E. 3. So if
one takes the Kings goods wrongfully, the King may seiz his goods until
restitution; and 8. R 2. if any take Toll of those of the Town of Lynn, they
may by the Kings Grant take withernam of those another time within their
Jurisdiction. And so the King conveys not from the Prerogative of his person,
to the person of another a fortiori; he may here where the thing is not, but
Revenue or profit. These words ad humilem Petitionem Comitis, deminisheth the
force of the Pattent by Catline; by Plowden, if Gold or Silver will not defray
charges, the King shall not have it, because no metal without them; but
because the party showed it not as our case is, the Queen shall have Judgment.
And this point was not put to the Judges to adjudge, because that the Defendant
confessed that it contained gold, which is intended to be of good value because
the best for the King.

Bret against Rigden.
A Man seized of 10. acres Soccage, Devises all Tr. 10. El in the Com Pl. Repl.
and after purchases 12. acres Soccage, and the Devisee dies; the Devisor
says to the Son of the Devisee, That he shall be his Heir, and have all the
Land that his Father should have had if he had survived him, and dies: Adjudged
that he shall not have the 12. acres.

1. If the Devisee shall have the Land purchased by the Devisor after the
making of his Will.

Manwood for the Defendant said, That it shall be presumed that every one knows
the Law in acts indifferent; and that the Will is of no effect until the death
of the party; for ignorance of Law excuses no man, and the date and writing of
the Will is not effectual, but the words of the Will shall be construed as they
were spoken at the time of his death.

And therefore if a man Devises a Manor in Fee, a Tenancie escheateth, and
after the Devisor dies, the Devisee shall have the Tenancy, because parcel of
the Manor at the death of the Devisor when the Will takes effect; yet when the
will made, not.

A woman Devises Land, and after takes husband which dies, the Woman dies, the
Devise is good, because she is discovert when it took effect, as she was when
she made her will, and marriage cannot countermand it, which was not of effect
in her life. Also because it intends no exception for the generality of the
words. As if she had Devised all her plate, and after bought plate and died,
the Devisee should have all his plate at the time of her death; for the
ampleness of his words declares his intent to be benificially taken for the
Devisee.

Lovelas, and all the Justices for the Plaintiff, to the contrary. That Land
purchased after the making of the Will, cannot pass by the words, nor intent of
the Testator, because he had not the 12. acres at the time of the writing and
publication of the Testament; it is no presumption that afterward he would
have, and is as if he had died when he writ and published the Will; and
therefore cannot have an intent to give it; and the death which is the
Confirmation of the Will, follows the first Acts thereof, viz. the writing and
publication of it; for every Act founded upon discretion, consists of 3. parts.

The first, Inception, which is writing of the Testament here.

The Second, Progression, which is the publishing of the Testament begun.

The Third is Consummation, which is the self same, and continues one through
all these parts, or otherwise the Act is void of discretion. And by Lovelas, it
is proved, That the Commencement is to be considered in Wills; because if a
woman Covert Devise Land by her Will, and publish it, and her husband dies, and
after she dies, the Devise shall be void. So of an infant which makes his
will, publishes it, and dies at full age, it is not of any effect; because
death without good Commencement, gives not effect. And so the Commencement,
and the intent of it is to be considered in every act. So the Disseisee of two
acres in Dale, releaseth all his right in all Lands in D. and delivers the
release as a scrowle to be delivered the first of May as his Deed; the
Disseisor before the first of May disseises him of another acre, and the
release is delivered the 10. of May, the right as to the 3. acre shall not
pass; because the first livery was void to this intent; so the consummation of
it which is the second livery. So I have a Reversion of two acres that I. S.
holds for life; after I purchase the Reversion of another acre which I. S.
holds for life; after I. S. Attourns to B. for all three, the third acre
passes not; for Attornment passes not more then was contained in the intent
of the first Grant. And so here, That which is not in the intent at the
beginning, Commencement of the grant, shall not be in the intent at the
consummation of the same; but if he had published his will after he had
purchased the new Land, there it may be all might pass; for by the new
publication his intent shall be taken, That all that which the words contain at
the time of the publication will pass: and by him, if a man Devise a thing by a
name certain, as the Manor of D. or white acre, and after purchase the same,
it shall pass; for it shall be taken that he intended to purchase it, or
otherwise the Will shall be void to all intents. 39. H. 6 18. But here when he
has 10. acres, and Devises all his Lands, they are satisfied in passing of the
10. acres; and there is no meaning by the words for the land purchased after
the Will; because the thing is not named certainly, as the Manor of Dale, or
White-acre. Also he may not Devise the 12. acres, because by Dier the Statute
32. and 34. H. 8. cap. 1. and 5. intend that the Devisor shall be seized at the
time of the making of the will, because it speaks of having Lands which he may
Devise, and here he has not those at the time of the Devise. Quaere of the
case where he Devises by special name, and after purchases it, because of the
word [having.]

Second point, if the Land vests in the Heir of the Devisor where he dies in
the Life of the Devisor.

Manwood for the Defendant. Because it is more consonant to the will of the
Devisor, and reason, That the effect shall take place, and the form perish,
rather then both should perish together; as Devisee for life (the Remainder
over) dies in the life time of the Devisor, it is a good Remainder, and shall
have the immediate possession which is the effect; yet the form was for to have
by Remainder. So if a Dean die, or a woman Covert takes another husband before
their Devisor dies, yet they are especially named; Land shall vest in the new
Dean and his Successors, and in the woman which is now the wise of another,
according to the intent, because it cannot according to the words; and if the
intent of a man in Conditions shall be performed, as 4. H. 7. by Joy, he ought
to infeoff the survivor and his heirs only where the other dies a fortiori;
the intent in Wills shall be observed where the words cannot, and the effect
Ecclesiae-Sancti Andreae in Holborn, good. And Parson shall take, because it
was comprehended in the Devise, although he was not named.

Lovelas, and all the Justices besides Walsh, to the contrary. For by the death
of the Devisee, the Devise is countermanded, for that the Devisee is not in
rerum natura, when the Devise took effect; and in all gifts, be they by Devise
or otherwise, there ought to be a Donee in esse capable when the thing ought to
vest, or otherwise the gift is void, and the word Heirs limits the estate, and
not the persons which shall take, and enables the Devisee, as well to alien, as
to permit it of Descent; for a Descent to the Heir is but a thing subsequent to
the estate of Fee-simple first vested in the Devisee, and a thing at his
pleasure. And things of sequel which ensue if the estate had been vested first,
(as are Descent, Dower, Escheat) are not good causes to make things vest in
others then those to whom limited. And therefore the heir shall not have the
land here no more then the woman shall have dower, or Lord Escheat if he had
died without heir, which should be so if it had vested in the Devisee. And
therefore if a man Devise a Lease or goods to I. S. which dies, and afterward
the Devisor dies, the Executor of I. S. shall not have them.

The speaking to the Son of the Devisee, That he shall be his heir, etc. is
void, for that the Statutes of 32. and 34. H. 8. gives license and authority to
every man to Devise his Lands by his last Will and Testament in writing, and
those are sufficient in themselves for to make the thing devised pass, and not
regard words without writing, by all the Justices; but if he had published the
Testament of new, the Devisee should have the 12. acres in this case, for that
it had been as it were a new Testament but not his heirs.

Delamer against Barnard.
A Man in 13. H. 8. makes a Feoffment to the 10 El in K B ^r.
Remainder in Fee to the brother of the husband, and after in 26. H 8. The
husband makes a Feoffment to A. which infeoffs the Brother, being in Remainder
in Fee. 2. E. 6. The brother infeoffs the Defendant, the Husband dies, the heir
of the first Feoffee enters to revive the use to the Wife, and adjudged lawful.

1. By the Feoffment of the Husband in 26. H. 8. all the estate of the Feoffee
to use, is drawn out of him, and settled in the second Feoffee, and by
consequence all the uses which were created out of the first Fee-simple, are
discontinued, and shall not be revived until a re-entry of the Feoffee after
the death of the husband, and that he may enter then, notwithstanding the
Feoffment of the Brother.

2. The Feoffment of the Brother in Remainder, is not warranted by the Statute
of 1. R. 3. cap. 5. for that he has not use in possession, nor in esse, but
only a right which he could not grant; neither shall it be executed by the
Statute of 27. H. 8. but only may pass by Livery by way of Extinguishment.
Also the Statute of 1. R. 3. extends to cestui que use in possession, and not
in Remainder, or Reversion where they are derived out of one entire estate
created by Feoffment; for although that the uses are several, yet the estate is
entire, which shall not be divided; but he may make a Lease for years, to
commence after the particular estate determined, which is Executory, and
divides not the estate; but where the estate and uses also are several, as a
Lease for life to the use of one for life, and the Reversion granted to another
for life, to the use of anther for life, etc. There he in Reversion may grant
the Reversion by the Statute of 1. R. 3. for that it is in possession by reason
of the severaltie of Estates.

Cestui que use by the Common Law cannot meddle with the Land; for if he does,
the Feoffee may punish him in Trespass. And if the Feoffee will not permit
Cestui que use for to receive the profits, he has no remedy but in the Court
of Conscience; for the land was so fully to the Feoffee by the Common Law, as
if no use had been of it. And by the Statute of 1. R. 3. cap. 5. Cestui que use
in possession only may meddle with the Land for to make Feoffment, Lease, etc.
and the Feoffee is only seized of the whole Fee to the use of Tenant for life,
Cestui que use, or in Tail, or for life, is warranted by the Statute of 1. R.
3. and pass the Fee until a Re-entry both by the letter and intent of the
Statute; for if a woman Covert was Cestui que use, the husband might make a
Feoffment, and good during Coverture by the intent of the Law, and the Statute
which gives to the husband during Coverture direction of the things of his
wife; and yet the claim of the Feoffees were not only to his use but to the
use of him and his wife, 6. H. 7.3. So two joint Cestui que uses in Fee, the
one makes a Feoffment of the moity of the Land, and good, and binds the
Feoffees, yet were not only seized to the use of him, but by the intent of the
Statute has a moity of the Use presently; and may give, or Lease the moity of
the Land where the estates are several, and uses also, every part granted by
the Statute, or several uses issuing out of one estate, the several possessions
of several uses, may not divide the estate, because there entire; yet there
Cestui que use in Remainder in Fee may make a Lease for years to Commence when
his use shall be executed, because then the lessor shall have interest in the
possession, and the Franck Tenement of the Feoffees shall not be taken away, nor
their estate will be divided; but an estate for life, or greater, he in
Remainder cannot make without the dividing of the estate, or taking away of the
Freehold, because it passes presently, and is not executory as a Lease for
years is, if the Feoffees to use makes a Feoffment, upon Consideration, or not,
to one which has notice of the first use; otherwise if Cestui que use makes a
Feoffment to such a person upon Consideration with notice, or without
Consideration and notice, there all the first estate, out of which all the uses
do rise, is taken from the Feoffees, and a new estate is made by authority of
the Statute, the which new estate shall be to uses newly expressed or intended,
and not to the first use; but by this all the ancient uses are discontinued;
the reason seems to be before that one Cestui que use to the Disseisor of his
Feoffees, good, and bars them of entry, 14. H. 8.7. and 27. H. 8.29 a Disseisor
infeoffs Cestui que use, which infeoffs a stranger; by this the right of the
first feoffees is gone, although that no use was in Cestui que use at the time
of the Feoffment, as if Cestui que use had released to the Disseisor: But
Plowden says, That the greater doubt will be here, if the estate Tail was here
determined if the first Feoffee might enter, because the right of the use in
fee was extinguished by the Feoffment of him in Remainder; But here for that
the particular estate in use continues, which may not be defeated by him in
Remainder, this is good without doubt; by some the entry of the first Feoffee
shall gain the Fee-simple by the discharge of the use in Fee to himself, for
that it was extinct in the possession of the last Feoffee, as of a rent which
he in remainder had in the land before his feoffment; this shall be
extinguished in the Land by his Feoffment; so of the use, and by others the
entry of the first Feoffee shall revive the use in Fee-simple to him in
Remainder which was the Feoffor, for that they could not have this at the time
of the Feoffment made, because not in esse, but was discontinued at this time
by Cestui que use in possession in Tail; and by Plowden and Bromley, he shall
revive the use in Fee to the last Feoffee, for that this passes to him by the
Livery, and the first Feoffee has nothing in the Land to his own use, but
only to the use of the Feoffor. And it was not his intent that the first
Feoffee should have it to his own use, but that the second Feoffee should have
it and so by his re-entry he shall revive the use to the last Feoffee by the
course of the Common Law; for that the last feoffment was by the Common Law,
and not Warranted by the Statute of 1. R. 3. for the cause aforesaid, but this
point was left at large; and if before R. 3. Cestui a que use disseises the
Feoffees, and infeoff others upon which the first Feoffees to use enter, they
shall be seized to the use of the last Feoffees, because Cestui que use had
given his interest to them; and his intent appears that they shall have it,
and the first Feoffees shall not hold to their own use, because it is a
Collateral thing annexed to the person touching the Land, and not as a Rent
issuing out of it: And use is but confidence, that the Feoffees to use shall do
for the Feoffor as he would do if himself was seized; and so it is a difference
between a use and a Rent, which Rent is only by reason of the Land, but use
also is annexed to the person.

Stowell against Zouch.
DIsseissor H. 11. El. in the common Pleas Entry sur Disseise^.
and within the five years his Heir being within age, the five years incur
after the Heir comes of full age, and within one year after his full age
enters. And adjudged that his Entry is not lawful: but that he shall be barred
by the Fine with Proclamations, and the five years notwithstanding his Infancy,
for that the five years are once attached in his Ancestor, and then they ought
to incur; for the pursuit of a Claim within five years, is a Condition in Law
which shall bind an Infant.

Those Stowell for the better intelligence of the Statute of 4. H. 7. ca 24.
which gives five years to every stranger, and of the reason of making it,
thought the Fines, and their force at the Common Law and the incidents thereof,
which consists in three points: 1. The nature of the Fine, and the puissance of
it. 2. The preservation of the ancient right by Claim. 3. What persons may make
the Claims.


1. Fines are as ancient as any Court of Record; and at the Common Law, they
bind all strangers but those which have defect, which Enters not or Claim
within a year by 17. E. 1. So Nonclaim, after the year and day, was peremptory
upon a Fine or Recovery in a Writ of Right Executory and not Executed, as is a
Fine sur Conusans de droit and Render. 7. E. 3.335. Because transmutation of
Possession gave occasion to a stranger to take notice, and to bring his Action
or enter within the year and a day after Recovery in Right, tried by Battle or
great Assise barred a stranger, if he had not defect as Nonage was for the
great notice of it, because public and more notorious then in other Actions:
And a Proclamation shall be made before Judgment upon a Recovery in right, by
default for to give notice of it: And from thence use is derived to make
Proclamation in formedon, as it is in 7. H 4.19. upon the confessing Quaere, by
what Law; and so Fines after Recovery in a Writ of Right was of the greatest
force.

2. But the avoiding of a Fine by one, defeats it against all, although their
Right was bound before by their Nonclaim, which sets at large all other Rights
above them, although they make not claim within the year and day. 16. E. 2. As
if the Lord defeats a Fine at the Common Law by deceit, he restores the right
to him which Levies the Fine. And if the state which passes by the Fine be
defeated, the right Paramount is restored; although it was barred before by
Nonclaim. As the Feoffee upon condition if an Abator levies a Fine, one year
passes the Heir, is barred by Nonclaim, the Abator enters upon the condition
broken, the Heir now shall have Mort. d' Auncestor against him; and after the
Statute of 4. H. 7. an Action brought within fives years shall defeat the Fine
against himself, and all others having right Paramount, although he has not
Judgment and Execution until Dyer, to be a Challenge of the Ownership or
Property, that he has not in Possession, but is detained from him by wrong.
There are four Claims for defeating of Fines; whereof two are by Record, (viz.)
Action Real, and Entry of the Claim at the foot of the Fine, two by Acts in
the Country, (viz.) by Actual Entry and by Claim, and so notwithstanding, the
Puissance of Fines at the Common Law, the Law has provided those Claims for to
preserve the Ancient right.

3. Those which are strangers to the Fine, and have present right, ought to
make Claim, and shall avail all in Remainder or Reversion, and their Nonclaim
binds all in Remainder and Reversion, because all of them have but one year by
the common Law after the Fine levied: And such mischief was a great cause why
the Statute of 34. E. 3. ca. 16. which out Nonclaims was made. But before this
time, W. 2. ca. 1. 13. E. 1. has provided for the Donor and Donee, that
Nonclaim shall not bind them, as it did before 13. E. 1. as it is like. But an
Infant was not bound at a time certain to make Claim by the Common Law. It is
proved by Implication of the Statute of W. 2. ca. 1. and 18. E. 1. de modo
levandi fines, observe in their Exposition, because he has not discretion to
consider of his right, nor to conceive what Action he shall bring, nor when, or
how to Enter, or Claim, or to do Acts which require intelligence; and in the
same degree are Non-sane, a man in prison and beyond Sea. But H. 7. intending
to reform three things;

First, to magnify Fines again. Secondly, to preserve the Ancient Right, if
it be pursued within a certain time. Thirdly, of not binding of persons of
defect, (nor feme Coverts) unless they are also parties to the Fines; but
favored those which had defects until their impediment removed, and then gave
them time sufficient to pursue their right.
That

The [having] in the Statute of Fines 4. H. 7. shall be expounded of them which
have right at the time of the Fine Levied, and Proclamations made, and also of
the using of the Action or Claim, etc. And not only at the time of the Action
or Entry: The exception goes not but to those before bound; The ampleness of
the Exception is measured by the ampleness of the Purview. And therefore
Stowell, if he is bound by the Purview, he is afterward excepted; and if he is
not bound by the Purview, he needs not to be excepted, and so he is at large
and out of the body of the Act, which consists of the Purview and of the
Exception. Acts of Parliament are positive Laws, consisting of Letter and
sense, which together make the Law. And the Common Law is ancient to all
positive Laws; and this is to be considered to come to the sense of the
positive Law, viz. to put such sense to the Letter which excludes all
mischiefs and inconvenience. Those which Levy Fines are Parties, their Heirs
are Privies, because there is privity of blood between them, (strangers are
they which are not Parties to the Fine nor privies:) And the Fine excludes now
Privies by 4. H. 7. before not Parties here; and therefore it is no Mystery,
that the Letter of the Act will extend to them; no Laches until all the time
is past: Because they have Election to protract time, until the last of the
five years, or last day; so that they within five years pursue, intends Heirs:
also of those of full age, for such sense stands best with equity and reason,
which most avoids rigor and Statutes, as 36. E. 3. and 4. H. 7.7. Doctor and
Student, 148. An Infant named a Disseisor, vouched a Record and failed, he
shall not be imprisoned: Notwithstanding, W. ^. ca. 25. Nor an Infant Baily or
Receiver found in ar^rage of account shall not be committed to the next Gaol,
Notwithstanding W. 2. ca. 11. Nor an Infant, which is convict of Ravishment of
another Ward, shall not be imprisoned for the Kings Fine: notwithstanding
Merton, Cap. 6. Not if a woman Infant be Ravished, and consent to the Ravisher,
within twelve years, there the Heir shall not enter: notstanding, R. 2. ca. 6.
But Infants are bound by Laches for a Title, and favored for the Inheritance,
as Doctor and Student, 148. An Infant shall be bound by Cessavit or Waste,
because an injury done by his Act, and he shall purchase, and the Law will
presume if he has policy to get a thing, that he has reason to defend
himself: So if an Infant Lord enter not for Mortmain within the year, or before
a Villain has sold, because he had but Title to the thing, that it was never
in him. But Doctor and Student, 29. and 27. Assizes, 32. Laches of Entry upon
Descent or Warranty, binds not an Infant, because they have favor for
Inheritance, for Waife, Stray, Wreck, or for Goods taken from them, and offered
to Images, or taken by Enemies, and not retaken before the Sun sets; or sold in
a Market Overt, or Acts an Infant as Executor, 35. E. 3.45. or as King, before
213 or for necessity, as an Obligation for meat, and drink, Doctor H. 7. and if
the Father dies within a year after the Fine, his Heir Infant is at large,
(fol. 372. otherwise,) and the imperfections which may happen sometimes within
five years are to be considered, as those which are at the time of the Fine or
right then: And because that the Statute provides for the Infant in the
exception, and in the Fine, it will not be amiss in the midst: And if one
which has a future right dies within five years his Heir within age, shall
have five, a fortiori, he which has a present right (as Statute of 4. H. 7.
without adding reasonable sense, will admit many absurdities, as by the Letter
of the Statute; if an Infant which has present right and is excepted, dies
within age, his Uncle being his Heir and of full age shall be barred. So if an
Infant by Entry within age avoid the Fine, and after full age, permit the
Conusee to be for five years in possession without Claim, he shall be barred by
the Letter, which says that he shall take Action or Entry within five years
after full age. So an Infant being Diseisee in his Mothers belly when the Fine
was Levied, is not accepted by the Letter of the Act (because his age is
accounted from the time of his birth,) by intent of the Act here, for every
thing which is within the intent of the makers of the Act, although that it be
not within the Letter and intent also; and of those exceptions, the Letter
binds none to five years after full age, which were within age when the Fine
was Levied and engrossed, and many years may be between the one and the other;
yet he that is born after the Fine levied, and is within age when it is
engrossed, goes not at large, but is bound to five years after full age, as
well as he which was born an Infant when the Fine was levied and engrossed: And
if the Disseisee at full age when the Fine is levied, die, before the
Proclamations, his Heir within age then, and when all the years pass, is bound
by the Letter, because the Letter excepts him which has right when the Fine is
levied. But the intent of the Exception, intended to except those which had
^ight, and are Infants when the five years commence; so it shall be if the
Disseisee comes of Non-sane Memory, or in prison before the Proclamations, and
after five years he comes to sane-Memory, or forth of Prison, he shall have
five years after this by the intent of the Exception.

Two Joint-Tenants Disseises, the one within all, by Bendlos, and several five
years shall be for several Titles. As A. disseiseth, a woman sole takes her
to wife and have Issue, A. is disseised and dies after a Fine levied by the
Disseisor, and before the Proclamations, the Issue being of full age, after the
Mother dies, the fifth year pass, the Issue is bound as Heir to his Father;
because in this respect, he has but five years together. But as Heir to the
Mother he shall have five years to be accounted from the death of the Father;
for notwithstanding it is the self-same Land, he has several rights, the one
the last as Heir to his Father, and the other the first right as Heir to his
Mother, And in respect of them has several times; So the Husband makes a
Feoffment of the Land of his Wife, upon the condition which is broken, the
Feoffee levies a Fine, the Husband dies in the fourth year, after Proclamations
having Issue by the Wife, after the Wife dies, and five years pass; the Heir
is barred to enter as Heir to the Father for the Condition, but shall have five
years from the death of his Father as Heir to his Mother for her right, for the
cause aforesaid, by Saunders. Ireland and Scotland are several Realms; But
Scotland was holden of the Crown of England, and was within the Fee and
^igniory of the Crown of England; and he which is in any of the two Realms,
shall be said out of the Realm and shall be within the Exception of 4. H. 7. So
Idiots, Lunaticks, and they which have the lethargy shall be comprehended in
the words of Non-sane-memory, as well as Madmen.

For Zouch Peace, which is the end of all Law described, and the necessity and
benefit thereof; and those Laws which carry most peace, are the most
estimable. And the Statute which Ousts Nonclaim, was to the universal trouble
of all the Realm; for the avoiding whereof, and to make Fines to have their
ancient force, the Act of 4. H. 7. was made; and the Preamble of it is to be
considered, because it is a Key to open the minds of the Makers of the Act, and
the mischiefs that they intended to remedy; and the preamble shows that the
Makers of the Act were of Opinion, that Fines ought to be of greater force for
to avoid contention, then they were before the Statute of Nonclaim, and now is
used to the contrary, viz. to the universal trouble of the Kings Subjects, and
therefore they were Enemies to former rights, because that stirred up many
Suits, and made the Purview strongly against it, Et lex si prospiciat majori
All Infants are bound by the general Purview which contains them in the
Exceptions: As an Infant levies a Fine, Proclamations pass, he shall not have
error; yet within age, for no Infant is excepted: But he that is not Party to
the Fine by Southcot and Walsh, he is excepted out of the general Purview, in
the intent of the Makers of the Act. And Stowell the Heir is not within the
Purview nor Exception of the Statute, for that he had not right at the time of
the Fine levied; but then the right rested in his Ancestor which was disseised;
for the Exception is always an exemption of that which is contained before in
the general words, otherwise could not be excepted: As a Feoffment of a
Manor, except such an Acre which is not parcel of it, or a Lease of all Lands
of the part of the Father, except Lands of the part of the Mother, is a void
exception, because this exception was not in the Feoffment, nor Demise, or
right, or not right, is not the matter; but claim, or Nonclaim within five
years is the matter where a Fine is pleaded to conclude any. And this Tried by
issue by the one or the other makes an end of the matter.

Catline, a Writ of deceit by the Lord in ancient Demeasne made 20. years after
Proclamation upon a Fine Levied by his Tenant, shall make void the Fine, and
the Tenant shall be restored to the land, because he claims signiory, and
services out of the Land, and no right to the Land when the Fine was levied,
and therefore is out of the purview which extends not from whom he claims, or
had right in possession, Reversion, or Remainder to the thing comprised within
the Fine, when the Fine was Levied upon matter rising before. The first saving
gives five years after proclamation to those which have right, and their
Heirs, with a Condition annexed etc. within five years after Proclamations; and
as the saving is general to all Heirs, notwithstanding they have their
imperfections of Nonage, Insanity, etc. So is the Condition general, and
extends to all Heirs whatsoever they are; and this was the cause of the
Judgment; for otherwise the saving shall be for all heirs, and the [So] shall
be of all Heirs within age, and then the [So] is not so large as the saving.
And so the Heir within age is bound to the Condition of the first saving, as
well as he is saved in the same, because general tranquillity is more favored
then an Infant, and no time shall be gained by exposition or equity, beyond the
words of the act, where the Act as here, to strains all men to a time certain
for the common tranquillity of the people; and Infants had been bound by the
general purview of 32. H. 8. c. 2. if they had not been excepted there: And
therefore if one of the Terms limited by 4. H. 7. be adjourned (because the
Statute says, then next ensuing) all the Proclamations before are void, until
the Statute of 1. Mar. cap. 7. Rastall, Fines, 12. because time limited by the
act, ought to be pursued, and once attached in part, ought to be continued. So
the 5. County upon Exigent ought to be the next to the fourth, or it is
discontinuance, and Allocatur Comitatus shall not aid, but is error. And
therefore an Infant at the Common law shall be bound to year and day (otherwise
f. 365.) where by the Statute of 4. H. 7. The five years Commence in the
father, being of full age, Nonclaim within the time limited by the Common Law,
shall lose right, and infancy there shall not aid the party, as 7. H. 6.32.
Nonclaim by the Lord of his villain by a year and day, which has fled into
ancient Demeasne. So 15. E. 4. 6. Nonclaim of liberties before Justices in
Eire. So wood of another within a Forest of the Kings, seized into the Kings
hand, shall be forfeited by Nonclaim within the year and day (before fol. 57.)
So if a Bastard a fortiori; time shall be peremptory where it is limited by the
Statute for the common repose of the Realm, which shall be more favored then
the private profit of any single person, be he Infant of non sane memory. etc.
by Carus and Dier, the right of a Mulier within age, is bound by descent of the
bastard, because the Law in this case is a binding Law, by Southcot and Sanders
contrary, because infancy shall excuse Laches of entry, 31. ass. 18. and 22.36.
ass. 2. and 33. E. 3.

The second saving gives new 5. years to other persons, and hoar Stowel is the
same person which had five years with his ancestor by the first saving, because
the saving, and the [so] is in the Copulative, and the word [others] is
exclusive of those comprised in the first saving, and the exception. And
because he is heir, and so within the first saving, he is excluded out of the
second saving by the word [other], by Walsh and others; if a Tenant for the
life of another, the Remainder to B, for his life, the Remainder to A. in Fee
is Disseised, the Disseisor levies a Fine, and five years pass after
proclamations, if he for whose life and the Remainder for life dies, he shall
have new five years, because it is another estate, and the first remains to
him; but by Weston and Catline otherwise, because not another person; also this
right which first Discends to Stowell here, is not such a right as the Statute
intends to give new five years by the second saving for a new right, for it was
once right in the Ancestor, and given to him before. And the word [first] is of
great purpose put into the act, and this word [joyn] as it ought to every of
the words subsequent, viz. Accrue, Remain, Descend, or Come, excludes Stowel of
the benefit of the second saving, and 1. R. 2. cap 7. touching Fines has all
the words of 4. H. 7. touching the purview and body of the Act, but the word
[First] which is added to 4. H. 7. as a thing thought very necessary, and so he
that will take benefit of the second saving, ought to prove four things, 1. That
he is another person. Secondly, That the right first came to him. Thirdly, and
that it came after the Fine engrossed, and Proclamations made. Fourthly, That
his right is before the Fine levied, as where right or Title shall first
accrue. And therefore if the elder brother be professed when the Father died
seized, and the youngest is Disseised at the levying of the Fine with
Proclamations, and five years pass, and after is deraigned, he shall be aided
by the second saving for the cause aforesaid. So if the Dissesor of a Mortgagee
levies a Fine with Proclamations, and five years pass, and after the Mortgagor
pay or tender the Money, he shall have years after his payment or tender,
because his Title first accrued after the Proclamations by the payment or
tender by matter before, viz. the condition; Plowden s^ems, that he is at
large, and not bound to five years, because at the time of the Fine levied no
wrong was done to him, nor to the estate which he claims. So a husband levies a
Fine with Proclamations, and after the five years past dies, and from thence by
this second saving, his wife shall have five years to sue out her Writ of Dowe^
for her Title accrued by the death of her husband, upon cause before the Fine,
viz. their inter-marriage, and seisin of her husband, by Plowden she is at
large and not bound to five years, because it was a real wrong done to her at
the time of the Fine, or before, because her Title accrued after the Fine, viz.
by the death of her husband. So Tenant cess one year before the Fine, and
another year after the Proclamations, the Lord is at large to have his cessavit
20. years after, for it is not within the purview of the Act, because he had
not Title at the time of the levying of the Fine; but it accrued afterward,
viz. to the end of the two years where first it should remain as to the Donee,
and to his heirs Females of his body (Remainder to his Son in Fee) Levy a Fine
with Proclamations, and die, then the Son shall have five years. So Tenant for
life, Remainder in Fee Levies a Fine with Proclamations, and dies, then the Son
shall have five years. So Tenant for life, Remainder in Fee is Desseised, the
Disseisor Levies a Fine, and five years pass, and Tenant for life dies, he in
Remainder shall have new five years: Tenant for life, and Feoffee Levies a
Fine, five years pass, entry for Forfeiture is gone; but there by Walsh he
shall have a Formedon after the death of the Tenant for Catline otherwise)
because his right accrues not first, or Remain after the death of the Tenant
for life, because he might have entered before, and therefore is excluded from
the benefit of the second saving. Tenant for years by Statute, or Elegit, is
ousted, and a Fine with Proclamations levied, and five years pass now, none may
enter, nor he in Reversion, nor particular Tenant, and shall not be aided by
the second saving, for both might have entered before the Proclamations pass,
because they all are comprised in the first saving; and therefore he in
Reversion shall not have years after the Term ended, as he shall have where the
particular estate was Freehold, and a Termor is bound by this Statute of 4. H.
7. by the word (Interest) in the saving, which word may comprehend Term; First
it shall Descend, as by Dier; Discontinuance of Tenant in Tail Levy a Fine with
Proclamations, and five years pass, Tenant in Tail dies, the issue in Tail
shall have five new years; but by him and Catline, if the Disseisor of Tenant
in Tail Levy a Fine, etc. the issue is bound there for ever, because the right
was present to the Tenant in Tail when the Fine was Levied, and he, and the
heirs in Tail comprised within the first saving, and therefore barred, because
they pursued their right within five years according to the first saving, by
Southcot, but Weston contrary; and by them every issue in Tail shall have a new
five years, but by the said Chief Justice the word (first) added (as it ought
to be) to it shall descend, will not admit every descent to have five years,
the Remainder or Reversion in Tail upon an estate for life discends to his
issue, there the issue shall have five years by the second saving after the
death of Tenant for life, by Weston, and Dier; if the Son purchase, and dies,
the Daughter enters and is Disseised, the Disseisor Levies a Fine, five years
pass, the Son born after shall have new five years by the second saving,
because it is he to whom the right first Descended after the Fine and
Proclamations. So if the Feoffee of Non sane memory Levies a Fine, and dies,
from thence his Heir shall have five years for the reason aforesaid; First
shall come, as Tenant in Tail Levy a Fine, five years pass, and then dies
without issue; from thence the Donor shall have five years for to bring his
form^don in Revertor, because aided by the second saving, because it is him to
whom the right first comes after the Fine, and Proclamations; and in all those
cases there is a new right or Title accrued, Descended remains or comes after
the Proclamations, which was not in any other before, upon cause made before
the fine; And disseisen here is no such cause which shall make Stowel to have
such right, which was not in any other but first in himself, and so it is not
here, because the right was first in his grand father, which is saved in him
and his heirs by the first saving, and therefore shall not be saved by the
second: And ths makers of the Act intended not to aid them by the second
saving which were aided by the first, nor on the contrary. But to comprehend by
the one saving those which were out of the other Stowell is not saved by the
second saving, because he entered not by his own right, nor the right Descended,
(Descended is such) not such matter before the Fine, that the makers of the Act
intended, and he shall not be aided by equity, for no equity here, because
universality is more regarded then particularity; one has two defects as to
present right, or when future right happens, all ought to be removed from him
before the five years commence, and if it happens within a month after in
any of the defects again, and so continue all the five years, or to the end of
the first month of the five years, his heir dying within age before the five
years Commence, they do proceed, and the not claim within the five years shall
bind the party, and his Heirs as well as if they had been void of all defects
during all the five years, if they had no defect when the Fine was Levied, but
had before the last Proclamation, and so continued; when all the Proclamations
incurred, he shall not be bound to five years next after the last Proclamation;
but shall have new five years after all defects removed; by Plowden, Successors
shall not be bound, by 4. H. 7. by Fine, or negligence of their predecessor, as
Bendlos would have it.

Sir Henry Nevils Case.
THe Arch Bishop of Canterbury Grants the Office ^.2. Elia Exch upon a Petition.
with a Rent charge of three pounds per annum for the exercising of it to Sir
Edward Nevil, the Father, and Sir Henry the Son; and after Sir Edward the
Father was attainted of Treason, and the Park, and the Manor out of which the
rent was Granted, comes to the King; and Sir Henry being Survivor, exhibits
his Petition to the Exchequer for the Arrearages of the Rent incurred before,
and to be paid the Rent from this time forward, and had Judgment according to
his Petition in the Exchequer, without suing to the person of the Queen.

1. If an Office of skill and confidence, which requires diligence and
attendance, be granted to one for life, as the Custody of a Park, Stewardship,
Bailywick, etc. he may not Grant this over, 21. E. 4.20. nor forfeit this to
the King for Felony nor Treason; otherwise it is if it be granted to one and
his Heirs, in Fee, 1 H. 7.28. there he may grant this over, because it is so
intended by the generalty of the estate; but where it is granted for life
only, there no other is comprehended in the Grant, but the Grantee himself; so
that he cannot make a Deputy without words, and therefore much less may he
Grant this over; but if such Grantee for life be attainted of Felony, or
Treason, or imprisoned, or go over the Sea, or becomes of Non compos mentis,
etc. so that the Grantor has prejudice by his absence or default of
attendance, this is a Forfeiture to the Grantor for the not doing or misdoing,
notwithstanding that he be pardoned after, or the other defects removed; but if
the Grantor has not any prejudice by his absence, or default of attendance,
the Grantee shall have the Office again after his Pardon, amp;c. but otherwise
it is of the Kings Grantee in such case; for the Office, Cesse, and the person
of the Officer, was once discharged by the attainder, and the King may grant
the Office to another, and he being the first Grantor, shall not be kept out by
his Officer by such Grant, but otherwise it is in the case of a common person,
for the Queen shall be unknown of her Officer by such Grant of the Kings, and
then the confidence, and other causes of the first Grant shall be broken by it,
which would be inconvenient.

2. If one Office of skill and confidence be Granted to two for their lives,
and the one is Attainted of Treason, this is not a Forfeiture of the Office,
but that the other shall keep it presently, and the Fee also.

But admitting that the King shall have it during his life, which is Convicted
of Treason, yet after his death the Survivor shall have it Adjudged; but it is
but a Transmutation from one to the other, and the one shall not prejudice the
other for his Freehold.

3. The King shall have an Office of service of an estate of inheritance by
Forfeiture, for that he may Grant this over, although that he himself cannot
use it; but otherwise it is of an estate for life, 1. H. 7.28.

The Fee here shall not be Forfeited, for that the Office shall not be Forfeit
to him, to whom it is appropriated; for the Office is appropriate to the
peeson, and the Fee to the Office; and so the Office and Fee are Concommitant,
as Estovers to be burned in such a house, or Common granted in such a place to
one for his Cattle Levant, and Couchant in his farm of D. are made appurtenant;
and Estovers cannot be severed from the house, 5. H. 7.7. Nor the Common from
the Farm, except by extinguishment, 26. H. 8.4. Annuity pro consilio
impendendo, because it is a thing by reason of the person.

Annuity granted by reason of an Office, is Determinable with the Office, and
continues with the Office as an incident, and inseparable, yet the estate in
the Annuity is one and the other in the Office, 7. E. 4.22. (before fol. 161.)
if an Annuitty pro concilio, etc. be Granted to two, and the one of them be
attainted, the other shall have the Annuity, because it cannot be Forfeited.

Empsons Case, if the King Grants the Office of Sheriff to two, and one of them
is Attainted, the entire Office is Forfeited, and the Survivor shall not have
any thing, because the Patent, and the Office are entire, and may not be
severed; and the King shall make it to extinct the Patent, and to make a new
Officer, for he cannot be an Officer, adjudged Breretons case.

The Earl of Leicesters Case.
THE Leicester was indicted before eight, Tr. 1^. El. in K.B. Tr. against
Haydon.
upon a Commission awarded to 15. and after a new Commission was awarded to the
Major of London and others, to send for the indictment taken before the 15.
whereas in truth it was taken before 8. of those only, and thereupon arraign
the said Earl; and moreover the second Commission recites. That he was indicted
before the said 15. of diverse Treasons, and express none in certain, and ex
illa causa and causis, to proceed against him according to the Law, whereupon
he was arraigned, and condemned thereupon accordingly; and after the said
attainder was confirmed by Act of Parliament, which recites the said attainder,
and confirms it, and besides ordains, That the said attainted persons, shall be
attainted of high Treason, etc. And the attainder upon the indictment and the
confirmation by Parliament, were adjudged void.

1. For that the Indictment taken before 15. is not an Indictment taken before
8. for the lesser number will not include the greater, but the contrary; and
there may be two Indictments, one taken before 15. and the other before 8. and
for that the number is expressed, there is certainty what Indictment the Queen
intended for misprision of time, place, and number, shall make the thing void,
when they are limited for certainty, and take away incertainty, as of the time
of 7. E. 3.26. one brings a Writ, and Recites that it is contained in the
Articles, made in the time of King Edward Father of the King Edward the Third,
that no Sheriff should put into Inquests, etc. and declare over according to
the Statute, and the Writ was abated by Award, for that the Articles, that is
to say, Articuli super Chartas, cap. 9. was made in the time of Edward the
First, and not in the time of King Edward the Second, which was Father to King
Edward the Third. So E. 3.25. a Statute Merchant was made to pay, 16. E. 3. and
the party sued Execution and the Writ supposed the sum to be paid, 14. E. 3.
and by the suite the Feoffee was ousted, and sued his Writ of Error in the
Kings Bench; for the Kings Bench, because it is the highest Court. shall revers
Error upon suits in the Chancery, according to the order of the Common Law: So
a defeasans which ^tes a Statute to be made the 10. day of May, where it was
the first, is void, because time certain, and that to which Acts are referred
is material, because there may be two Statutes, the one the first, the other
the tenth day. Misprision of the place, as 38. H. 6.34. one pleads Letters
Patents dated at Westminster, where it did bear date at another place, Naught;
because the place is material, and is circumstance and witness of verity and
certainty. So by Commission to arraign one upon an Indictment at Dale in the
County of C. where he was Indicted at another place in the same County there,
may not be arraigned by this authority, for the reason aforesaid. Misprision of
number, as 23. Assizes placit. 7. Writ of Redisseis^n abate, because the
Sheriff took with him but one Coronor, where Merton, cap. 3. appoint two at
the least. So in a Precipe there ought to be twelve Summoners. So 8. H. 7. pla.
ultima, the number limited by the Act, 3. H. 7. cap. 1. concerning the
Star Chamber ought to be observed: So an accountant found in arrearages, shall
not be committed to Prison, if there be not two Auditors, because W. 2. cap.
12. says, auditorum. So 2. E. 3.8. A Writ of Attaint supposed that the Verdict
passed before 4. Justices, and the Record proves that before 2. there is no
Warrant to take this Attaint. But 31. E. in the Book of Assizes, pl. 1. a
Procedendo, supposed that the Assise was arraigned before 2. where it was
before 3. good, because no falsity there, because the greater comprehends the
less, not on the contrary.

2. By Anderson which was of Counsel for the Defendant, and which in part
confessed that the arraignment was not duly made; yet said, that it was not
void, but voidable: See is not void, but voidable by Error; as 7. E. 4.3.11. H.
7.4. and 2. Mar. 1. Judgment given upon a Plea of Land, 21. H. 6. and 21. E.
4.4. and 62. where a Fine levied without Original, is voidable by Error, and
by him, and Lovelace this Writ of Error is taken away here, because a thing
defeasable confirmed by Parliament, is made indefeasable.

The counsel of the Earl to the contrary fol. 169.) A Lease of all his Lands
in D. which he has by his Mother, where 2. E. 4.27. before fol. 191.) releases
all his right in them, and has no Land there by the Mother; but by purchase
with his Father, this Lease and Release are void for the cause aforesaid: But
otherwise, it is where he leases and releaseth all his right in White acre in
because it was certain enough before; all the parts of the Commission shall be
considered together, and fulfilled as of every other Deed: As for the last
part of the Letter of Attorney, although as well to deliver seisen, as to take
by the words of the first part. So here because they have authority to arraigne
the Plaintiff upon the Indictment, only taken before fifteen, and he was
arraigned by Indictment before eight of them, all is void, and Coram non
Judice, And it is not resemblable to the Cases put by Anderson, fol. 349.)
because there they have authority upon the Cause, and the Cause was within the
Jurisdiction of the Court, and the Order is misused, in which Case the Acts
shall not be void, but voidable: But where one is assigned to do one thing,
and he does another, (as here,) this other is merely void, and without
Authotity; as 9. E. 44. by Choke, He who Arbitrates another thing then is
committed to him, makes such Arbitrament void.

Anderson and Lovelace for the Defendant, the Plaintiff shall be taken by this
Statute, to be attainted, or at least concluded to say otherwise, because the
recital of the Act is an Estoppell to all; because every Subject is party, and
ptivy to an Act of Parliament, and the Statute shall not be void to all
intents: And the Expounder ought not to make Exposition for to confound the
Text, by 27. H. 8. c. 10. A woman may refuse her Joincture, if assigned after
Marriage, implies that if it were assigned before Marriage, that she shall not
refuse, 9. H. 6.9. Recital of an Indenture of defeasans, concludes the party
to deny the Deed.

By the Counsel of the Plaintiff, the Act of Parliament cannot enure as a
Confirmation H. 5.5. One attainted of Felony may be arraigned of Treason,
because it is a higher offense, and shall forfeit Lands of whomsoever holden,
if the Treason is committed before the Felony; but where offenses are equal
he shall not be twice attainted, for one Deed shall not be a Confirmation and
Grant of one same thing. As the King recites by his Letters Patents, that he
has made J. a Denison, or has manumissed him being his villain, and confirm
it: and besides grants that he shall be a Denison or Free, all this is but a
confirmation, because the Kings Patents shall not enure to two intents, and
therefore cannot plead the second Patent for his Legitimation, or Manumission.
But the first Patent so 9. H. 7.2. before fol. 156.) and 7. H. 7.14. The King
grants Land by his Letters Patents, and reciting them, confirms the Estate of
the Patentee by the second Letters Patents, by authority of Parliament; and
says further, that he gives and grants the same Land to the Patentee; he shall
plead the second by way of Confirmation, because the Land pass by the first
Patent, not by the second, if he does not show that the Land came again to the
Kings hands after the first Patent: But if the King grants Pasture for two Oxen
in his Land, and by the second Patent reciting his first Grant confirms it;
and moreover gives and grants Pasture for two Oxen to the first Grantee,
there it shall enure as a Grant, and confirmation also: And the Grantee shall
have Pasture for four Oxen, because they are several things which are
mentioned in the Confirmation, and in the Grant. And in the other Cases before,
it is one same thing mentioned in both, and not several: Also the L. and
grants to the Burgesses before named to be quit of Toll, etc. that will take
the benefit of it, they ought to aver who is Burgess of L. And if the
Plaintiff be attainted by Act also, and the Defendant will plead this, so then
his plea shall be double, because he has pleaded an attainder by the Common
Law, and also by the Statute. But here it is not double, because it is not a
new attainder, but a Confirmation: And because he cannot plead the Confirmation
without the thing that was Confirmed. Also the Recital and Confirmation by the
Statute is not taken, but pro ut: And also the recital being false, shall be
intended to be upon Information: And therefore an averment lies against this
recital. So a License to alien Lands holden of the King, ut dicitur, there he
which has the Lisence is not Estopped, to say that it is holden of another
then the King, because the Tenure in Capite is not precisely affirmed, but ut
dicitur, which takes away all absolute affirmance, 29. Ass. 38. Also the
Statute refers to an Attainder had before: And so to a thing which is not inre^
veritate, for the cause aforesaid. and therefore shall be void; but if the
things was before, and wants force and effect, then this shall be made good
by the Statute, and there the Act is good, and has power as to the thing, 29.
E. 3. 24. Grants, Fitzh. 100. The King reciting an Attainder by Parliament of
one Mattravers, by his Charter of Pardon reverseth the same, and restores him,
and after this, all is recited in another Parliament, and Confirmed by the same
Parliament, and good for the Cause aforesaid: So J. S. the Parliament
Confirms, its a good grant: And so when the Parliament Confirms a thing which
is defective, it shall give power to it, if it be Confirmed. (as here the Act
shall be void to all purposes, as 5. E. 4.40. and 41.) If one Village has
Customs which is against the Law, and Reason, and no others, and the
Parliament Confirms their Customs, it is void because they had not Customs;
for things used merely against the Law and Reason are not Customs,
notwithstanding such usage. And if the branch of one Act recites another Act,
be it in the Commencement, or Continuance, it is void, as 1. E. 6. c. 12
repeales all offenses made Felony after the Commencement of the reign of H.
8. and by one branch in it; this Statute excepts imb^sselling of goods by
servants, made Felony in the seven and February, and continuing until the 24.
of April, whereas it finished the fourteenth of April, and so Statutes which
misrecite things, and are referred to them, should be void and conclude no man.
And so here the Statute which recites that the Plaintiff was attainted, and
confirms it, whereas indeed he was not attainted, shall be void.

Coals Case.
IF one gives to another a mortal wound, 13. Eli.
whereof he languish, the 12. of February, and the Queen by a general Pardon
by Parliament, etc. the 20. day of February, and after the party dies. Now this
murder is Pardoned; Adjudged for that the wound was a Misdemeanor, and the
cause of death, and then by consequence all that which ensues the Cause is
also pardoned.

The end of the first Book.
Newis and his Wife, against Lark and others.
A Man devise his Lands to his eldest Son in tail, M. 13. and 14. El. in the
Common Pleas.
Remainder to his youngest Son in tail, the Remainder to the heirs of his
body, the Remainder over in Fee, and moreover his Will was, that if any of his
entaylees, do wrong, vex, or molest any other of them, for the said Lands; or
should Mortgage, bargain, and sell, etc. the said Lands, or otherwise incumber
it, other then to Lease it to them, that from thenceforth every such person and
his heirs that shall so do, shall be excluded and dismissed, touching the said
intaile; and that the conveyance of the intaile of the said Lands, against him
or them, shall be of no force: But that it shall descend and come to the party
next in tail to him, as if such disorderous person had never bin mentioned in
the said Testament. And after the eldest Son levies a Fine, and after he and
the youngest Brother suffer a common Recovery, and their Sister enter; and by
the Court her entry is lawful: But the Writ was abated for that it was Coram
Justiciariis predictis, whereas there were no Justices named before.

1. That the Fine and Recovery are such acts, bargains, and encumbrances which
make a forfeiture.

2. The penalty here inflicted for the forfeiture is a limitation which
determines the estate, Ipso facto, without making any discondtinuance thereof
by the Alienation, and is not a condition by the intent of the Testator; and
hereby the determination of the est^e the Fee and Frank-tenement is cast upon
him in the next remainder (that shall not alien) without Entry, as upon an
Escheat, or dying without issue, and has the intent as if it were devised,
until he shall alien.

The entry of Scholastica the wife of Newis (because I. and F. C. her brothers,
levied a Fine and suffered a common Recovery) by the Court is lawful: (But the
Writ was abared, for that it was coram Justic' predict. where no Justices were
named before,) because the Fine and Recovery are such Acts, Bargains, and
Encumbrances, which make a forfeiture; for that they give title and occasion to
defeat the estates tail limited, to I. and F. C. For by the Fine with
Proclamations, the estate of I. is barrable, and by the Recovery, the Tail of
him and F. is defeated, and so within the words, and the intent of the penalty
of the last Will of their Father H.C. Also the penalty here inflicted for the
forfeiture, is not a condition by the intent of the Testator, which will not
that all the estates Tails shall be defeated for entry for the condition
broken by him in possession, or any in remainder shall defeat all estates, and
put him which enters in of such an estate as he had before the condition made,
as 29. Ass. pl. 7. Brook Conditions inwords in a Will, lik unto a condition,
shall not make a Condition, because the intent of the party appears not to be to
defeat all the state (scilicet) of him in remainder there, also it is not a
condition here, because then he breaks it which enters for the condition: But
this is a limitation which determines the estate, Ipso facto, without making
any discontinuance, of it by the alienation, and hereby the determination of
the estate the Fee and, Franck Tenement is cast upon him in the next remainder
(which aliened not) without entry, as upon an Escheator dying without issue,
and has the intent as was devised quo usque he shall alien or incumber. So
land given to I. in tail, so long as I.S. has issue of his body, which dies
without issue, there it shall revest presently without entry for words named
in a Will, if they are not apt shall be drawn to the intent, and the Law
submits it self to the Will, as to the Parliament, as Dyer termed it in matter,
order, and form: So a gift of Land so long as such a one is Abbot, or during
coverture, is a limitation: So Matrimonii prolocuti, there the estate shall be
defeated by the intent without express Condition in Deed, Fitzh.nra.br'. 201.
E. A man devises to a woman in London, upon condition that if she marry, the
land shall remain to his son in tail, with remainder, over the woman
marries, the son shall have ex gravi querela, by Fitzh. by Dier he may enter:
So it shall be taken as a limitation, yet it sounds as a Condition. And by Dier
a condition in deed, in a conveyance made. By Fitz-James 28. H. 8. was taken by
limitation a fortiori, where it is by last Will, where the intent shall rule
the words, and the words not the intent, and the intent shall be observed in
the exposition of Wills, and of the Testator in making of his Will, has a
Power like to an Act of Parliament, by Dier, and the intent in a devise shall
make Estates pass contrary to the Rules of the common Law in Deeds or other
gifts, as a Remainder is good without an Estate precedent. So where the
particular, Tenant entailed disagrees, see 34. E. 3. where it depends upon
condition, so upon a devise to the son, after the death of his wife, there
she takes an estate for life, although it be not given to her; so 10. H. 7.20.
Cestuy que use, devises that a woman his Executrix shall sell the land, she
sells it to her second husband, good. So a devise to a man and his heirs males
which has issue, a daughter, who has issue a son, he shall inherit, 28. H.
8. by Dier otherwise.

Bracebridge against Cook.
LEssee for years grant his Tr. 14. El. in the Kings Bench in E: Firm.
and a stranger; the wife dies, the stranger shall have the whole term and land
by survivor. Adjudged.

1. For that the interest of the husband by reason of the coverture severs not
the Joincture^, nor alters the possession of the term or other chattells,
realls of the wife, but is possessed of them in the right of his wife; so that
if a stranger outs them, the wife ought to join with the husband in Ei. firm,
and she shall have judgment as well as the husband; and therefore if the
husband charges it, or if he devise the term and dies, the devise is void,
because he had the Estate in him at the time, and before the time of his death:
But the property of Chattells personalls is divested out of the wife and vests
in the husband, because of the coverture; and therefore if one gives goods to a
Fem covert and a stranger, the joyncture is presently severed by the Law, and
she and the stranger shall be Tenants in common.

2. The immediate Fee and frank Tenement that the husband has in his own
right, shall not drown the term which he, has in the right of his wife where
she is sole Lessee, nor the moitie of the term where she is joint Lessee, as
here, and the operation of the Law shall not do a thing contrary to equity and
reason to the prejudice of another; namely, in per my et tout of the profits.
But husband and wife here cannot join in E: firm with the stranger: But the
Husband shall use his real action upon an Ouster during the coverture, because
by this he continues all his estate, but that part of the State taken from him
by the disseisin by the Eiectione Firm: And the stranger may have Eiectione
Firm for his Moity (as two) oyntenants for life, and to the heirs of one of
them looses by default, the one shall have right, and the other a Quod ci
deforceat) and the Moity of the term is not suspended, for then it shall not
survive. Parson, Patron, and Ordinary, make a Lease for years of Gleeb-land,
the Parson dies, the Lessee is made Parson and dies, his Executors shall not
have the residue of the term, because the term was extinct by the freehold of
the Land, which the Parson had in him, because both in his own right, and to
his own use; yet in several capacities: But by Dier it shall not be extinct,
because he has the term in his own right, and in Capacity of his natural
body, and the Inheritance as Parson, which is another Capacity: But where the
Lessor has the term of years, as Executor to the Lessee, it is not extinct;
but the term when the Lessor dies shall be revived.

Bracebridge against Clouse.
A Man seized in Fee of a Manor, makes a Lease of forty Acres, parcel of the
Manor for forty years, if the Lessee shall live so long, and after by Poll
makes a Lease of the said forty Acres to J. S. for seventy years: J. S. grants
his term to the Wife of the Lessor, and a stranger; the Husband makes a
Feoffment in fee by Indenture of the Manor; and moreover grants by it, all his
other Lands and Tenements in the same Village to the Feoffee and his heirs,
and this Feoffment was to the use of the Feoffor and his heirs, and dyed, his
Wife dies the first Lessee for years dyed within the forty years; the
stranger entered into the whole forty Acres, and upon an Ouster by the heir of
the Lessor brought E. Firm: And adjudged that he shall recover for his own
moity, and shall be barred for the moity of the Wife.

1. That the Lease for seventy years is good for so many years which are to
come of it after the death of the first Lessee, yet is without Deed (for that
the Lessor in respect of his Reversion in fee, may contract with another for
any estate to be derived out of the Reversion) and shall take effect then, and
not stay until the forty years are extinct be effluction of time; for the
Condition, if he shall live so long, is a limitation which determines the
estate, otherwise it is of a Collateral Condition, for although that the term
be finished by it, or by surrender or forfeiture; the second term shall not
commence until the term be incurred, for that he had not power to contract
for the possession during the first term, in respect of any such possibility
of the breach of Condition, surrender, forfeiture, etc. As upon a Lease for
life, for the incertainty of the determination of the estate by his death, and
for the possibility which was at the time of the Contract, that the Lease shall
be executed before the death of Tenant for life by his surrender, forfeiture,
etc. As the Lessor makes a Lease for life, and after makes a Lease to another
for one and twenty years to commence presently; Tenant for life dies, or
surrenders, the second Lease shall commence presently: But if one make a Lease
for forty years by word defeasible, upon Condition to be performed by the
Lessor, and incontinently makes a new Lease for forty years by word, this is
void; yet the first Lease is avoided by performance of the Condition, or is
surrendered because there is no possibility that it will be executed, in
respect of the Collateral Condition: But if the second Lease be by Indenture
it is good by Estoppell: And if it be by Deed Poll with Attornement, the
Reversion will pass.

2. By the first Lease of forty years, the forty Acres were severed from the
Manor for a time, for that the Lease was executed by entry, but the Reversion
and Francktenement is parcel of the Manor; but the Lease for seventy years
not, nor may be executed by entry during the first Lease, but is executory
after this determined, then of this Lease for seventy years the Lessor has
not any Reversion; then this is not severed from the Manor, but continues
parcel of it, because it is executory, and not executed by entry, and then
when the Lessor makes a Feoffment of the Manor, the Reversion which depends
upon the Lease for forty years, pass as parcel of the Manor, which
Reversion may be parcel of a thing in possession (But not contrary) discharge
the moity of the term for seventy years, which is extinct by the Livery that
gave the possession; otherwise it were, if the term had been executed at the
time of the Livery, except the Husband made Livery in this Land leased, for the
Land is severed by the Lease, and here the execution of the possession to the
use in an instant shall not revive the term, which was extinct before by the
Livery: Lessee for years before entry has not possession, so that a Release
to him before entry is not good, but he has only an Interest and right, which
is grantable or forfeitable before entry, the Lessor shall not have Rent until
he has waved the possession, or the Lessee enters, because presently the
Lessor is adjudged occupier, 28. H. 8.14.

3. The grant of all his Lands and Tenements shall pass the term, because it
is his Brook was denied to be Law. 7. E. 6. which is contrary: but if he had
other Lands there, then it may be that the term will not pass.

4. He had Judgment for one Moity, and was barred for the other, where he
demanded the whole, which is not good b^ Plowden, but should have been barred
for all (if exception had been taken to it) for that he might have had a better
Writ for the Moity.

Vernon against Manners.
CHallenge of the Array, because the Sheriff which M. 14. and 15. El. in the
Kings Bench.
Adjudged good he can show how he is Cosen, 21. E. 4.75. And notwithstanding
the Tenant be seized in right of his Wife, to whom the Sheriff is not
inheritable, for by reason of Cosenage, it shall be intended favorable, and
although that he cannot inherit the Land demanded, yet he may inherit other
Land, as he ire to the Tenant.

Smith against Stapleton.
LEase for life to Husband and Wife, P. 15. El. in the Kings Bench. Replevin.
Remainder in tail to N. T. their Son, a stranger levies a Fine, Sur Conusans
de droit come ceo que il ad de son done a^. N.T. the Son, which grants and
renders the Land to him for fifty four years, rendering Rent, has issue and
dies before any Proclamation made, and after the Proclamations pass, and after
the Husband and Wife dies; Adjudged that the Lease is good against the issue of
N. in tail, by reason of the Rent, otherwise it were, if the Rent had not been
reserved.

First, The Lease had not been void against N. T. the Father himself if he had
survived the Husband and Wife, if it were by words, notwithstanding it be a
present contract, because it depends upon an estate for life, which is
uncertain when it shall determine; otherwise it is, if the first had been a
Lease for years, which contain certainty, there the second Lease shall be
void for the first term except that it be by Deed poll (with Attournment) in
which case it shall enure by way of a grant of the Reversion, if the party will
use it so, or by Indenture or Fine, which are matters of Estoppell.

Secondly, The Lease is but voidable against the issue, because of the Rent
which is a recompense; otherwise it is of a charge, for it shall be void by the
Remitter: and inasmuch as this contingent Lease is not avoided, but continues
during the Proclamations, the Statute of 32. H. 8. makes this a bar against
the issue during the term.

Thirdly, Inter alia, good by the Rule of the Court. A Fine pleaded by way, De
finalie Concordia facta fuil, and not that he levied a Fine, and also pleaded
that it was acknowledged in the Kings Court, without saying in the Common
pleas, is good: and 22. H. 6.13. A Fine is a Record, although it be not
engrossed, and shall be executed.

Fourthly, How, and in what degree this Lease pass at the beginning by the
Fine.

The estate of N. not altered by the Fine of a

Leases by word, by Deed Poll, by Indenture, are to be considered how they
shall enure: As if a Lease be made by words, without Deed of Lands by one that
has see simple for one and twenty years to commence presently, rendering a
rent, and after the same day makes a new Lease by Paroll to another for the
same term, or for a lessor term, the second Lease is void, although that the
first Lessee surrenders or forfeits; because at the time of the first Lease he
has not but a Reversion and no interest in him to contract for the possession:
And he that will by contract make another possessor of the thing, ought to be
proprietor of the same himself: As if one sells a Horse upon condition that the
Vendee shall pay him forty shillings at Easter, and after he sells the Horse to
a stranger, and after the first Vendee pays not the forty shillings at Easter,
and the Vendor reseiseth the Horse, the second Vendee shall not have the Horse,
because the Vendor had him not at the time of the sale; the Condition only
inables him not to contract for the property and possession, which he then had
not; but if the Lessee for one and twenty years be, and the Lessor the same day
grant the Reversion by Deed for twenty one years to commence presently, it is
good with Attournment and he shall have the Reversion during the first Lease,
and the Rent as incident thereunto, because it is another thing then the
possession: So a Lease by word for years to commence after the first year, is
good, because it is of another thing then the first Lessee had, because the
second Lessee is to have the possession after the first possession and interest
expired. A man leases for one and twenty years in possession, and presently
maks a Lease of it for one and thirty years by word, this is good for the last
ten years, and Executory for it, for a Lease for years is Executory, and
several for every year and day, and is as to execution as several contracts:
And therefore such contract may be good in part, and void in part. So if he
Leases for 21. years, to commence 10. years after, and he makes a Lease for
31. years to commence presently, it is good for the first 10. years, and void
for the last 21. years, for that he had contracted before and was certain
although that the first Lease were forfeited or surrendered: otherwise it is if
the first Lease had bin uncertain, as a Lease for life; there the second Lease
had bin good after the Tenants life, not during his life although he surrendered
or forfeited, unless it had bin by Fine or Indenture; because Estoppels, if
the second Lease for the same years be by Deed Poll, there the reversion with
the rent pass by Attornment by the demise of the land, by the name of Land; if
the possession cannot (as a Reversion upon an Estate for life, passes by
bargain and sale of the land by Deed enrolled) and the Grantee may use his
Deed as he pleases; and therefore may use it as a Grant of a Reversion with
attornment, otherwise it is, if it be by word, because the Reversion for years
cannot be granted by word. But if Lessee for years will use a Leas Poll as a
present Leas where he has not attornment the Leas is void, although the first
surrendered or forfeited as it is if it were by word, because a contract by Deed
Poll passes not that which another then injoyes.

But if the second Lease were by Fine or Indenture, and the first surrendered or
forfeited it

If the estate given by the Fine is defeated, the Fine shall be void, although
the Proclamations pass after: for the Fine is the Principal, and the
Proclamations but accessory to the Fine, as Tenants in tail disseised, levies
a Fine to the disseisor: Sur conusans de droit, or sur release and dies, there
the issue if he enters before, all the Proclamations are passed is remitted and
is not harred, for that 32. H. 8. which says that Fines after Proclamations
bars tail, intends of Fines remaining in force until after the Proclamations,
that then it shall bar tail, because otherwise the Proclamations are in vain
for to give notice of the Fine, if the party cannot defeat the Fine before all
the Proclamations ended, by Entry, Thorneton: but if Tenant in tail of a Rent,
Advowson, Tithes, Common, etc. levies a Fine and dies, and after the
Proclamations pass, the issue is barred by the Statute, yet the Fine was not a
discontinuance, because things which lie in grant, but there he may claim
(where entry lies not,) and good for to defeat the Fine and Proclamations,
and to save the tail: But if Proclamations pass, a Formedon, depending, the
issue is barred by this Statute of 32. H. 8. otherwise it is if one if one
brings an Action within five years upon the Statute of 4. H. 7. and the five
years incure hanging the Action, because 32. H. 8. favors not estates tail,
and is stricter against them, then 4. H. 7. against a stranger, because 4. H.
7. allows benefit to a stranger to pursue his Action within five years, 32.
H. 8. before the Proclamations incurred, nor without recovery also. Lease
executory grante by the render of a Fine by tenant in tail, shall be good
against his issue after Proclamations incurred after the death of the father.
If a man makes a Lease for 21 years or for life to one, and presently makes a
Lease for one and twenty years of this to another by Indenture or by Fine,
rendering Rent, the Lessor shall have an Action of debt for the Rent, by reason
of the Estoppell for every one is Estopped against the other, to say that the
possession passes not; but if the second Lessee enters and be expulsed by the
first Lessee he may well plead this matter in Bar, against I.S. within the ten
years, and after the ten years the Feoffee waves the possession, and Lessee
enters, and pays the rent to the Feoffee, which accepts it: Now he has made
the Lease good, for by the Feoffment the Lease was not avoided; because it was
an Act indifferent and Eligible, and he could not make his Election before his
time, and then this Election affirms or disaffirms a voidable Lease; And if one
entry of the issue avoids not a Lease executory, A forlior^, a descent of the
Remainder where entry fails, shall not avoid it; but a rent charge he shall,
because there the issue has not Quid pro quo, and to his disadvantage, the
entry of the issue and Feoffment, over discharges the Rent charge granted by
his Father, 14. Ass. pl. 4. So one Statute, 9. E. 3. contrary, but no Law by
Plowden and Bromley; for that the Remitter discharges the Execution as well as
the Rent charge. Trees sold by Tenant in tail, and not severed in his life; the
bargainee shall not have them 18. E. 4.6. If the Plaintiff prays not the
Prothenotary to enter his judgment nor pay for it, the judgment shall not be

Davies against Pepys.
THe obligee may charge the Heir or Executor at his Election where they both
have assets, P. 15. El. in the common Pleas. Debt.
but not doubly; for if he be satisfied by the one, the other shall be
discharged by Audita querela

The King until 33. H. 8. could not touch Magna Charta, cap. 8. but other
persons were left at large, Advowson and other Lands were extended for this
debt: Debt upon an Obligation against one as Heir in the debet and detinet;
adjudged good, otherwise it is against Executors, for Executors are debtors,
and have their assets in one another right, (scilicet) in the right of the
said Testator, but the Heir has the Land to him descended in his own right,
and so the property which he has in the assets makes the debt his proper
debt. And therefore if he dies, his Executors shall be charged with the debt of
his Father, and not his Heir, notwithstanding he has the Land by descent for
that he claims it from his Father, and not from his Grandfather which was
debtor, as it seems by the Book of Entries, fol. 171. title Debt. Yet
inquire by Plowdon: And if the Heir comes not in and confess the action and
the truth of the Asserts descended, then he shall be charged as for his own
debt, by Capias ad satisfaciendum, fieri facias, or elegit: So if he be
condemned upon default, nihil dicit, false plea, or demurrer, as Greensmiths
Case is 15. El. or upon nihil dicit, as Killegrewes Case is, 3. Eliz. or upon
any other Plea, or not pleading, etc. otherwise of Executors which are debtors:
but in another right, there Execution shall be of the goods of the deceased
only, and not of their proper goods,

Wast by clear Haddon against Brook.
IF a man purchase Lands, and die without Issue and without P. 15. El. in the
Common Pleas.
the Heir of the the Mother of his Father shall inherit him, and not the Heir
on the part of his own Father. Adjudged For the Heir on the part of the
Grandmother on the part of his father (which conveys by the Father which is a
Male) is more worthy of blood then the Heir on the part of the mother of the
Purchasor which conveyes immediately by a Female, and not by a Male; But if
both agree in equal dignity of blood, there the nearest Heir shall be
preferred, as the brother of the Grandmother of the part of the Mother brother
of the great Grandmother of the part of the Father; for he is nearest, and the
dignity of their blood as to the Purchasor is equal for Proximitie keeps
place on the part of the Females conjoined by marriage to the Males, from
whence such blood is once derived by a E. 3.29. No woman after the Wife of the
Father purchasor, shall have the Land when once descended, because it ought to
touch this blood always. But then Heirs of the Wife of the Father purchasor
shall have it, if others fail, because Wives by the marriage after the purchase
are of Aliance to the blood, and not of the blood of the Purchasor, otherwise
it is of marriage which precedes the Purchase. And so no marriage is to be
regarded, but that of the Father and Mother of the Purchasor, and no marriage
after shall make a man inheritable to this Land: By the Court Wast assigned in
digging of Gravel, suffering Houses to be uncovered, whereby the Timber
rotted, and permitting a wall of stone to fall to ruin, and a Meadow to lie
continually overflowne, and covered with water.

Sir Thomas Wrothes Case.
KIng Henry the eight, granted and Annuitie of 20 l. to Sir Thomas Wroth for
his life, Tr. 15. El. in the Excheq. Petition.
to be Usher of the Privy Chamber to the Prince Edward his Son, without the
words, Pro nobis heredibus and successoribus nostris; And dies, and after E. 6.
dies. The question was, if the Annuity should be determined by it, or if
notwithstanding it, the Annuity shall have his continuance. And it was adjudged
that the Annuity continues during his own life, and he shall have the
arrerages.

1. If the King reciting a thing executed, which is not material, as for the
good service which he has done, grants an Annuity, etc. there the party in
pleading shall not take averment of it by 21. E. 4.48. and 26. H. 8.1. But
otherwise it is if the thing be material and executory as that he has
released, there he ought to aver that he has released it, which is in
benefit of the King.

2. The not doing of the service here to the Prince, shall cesse the Annuity as
well as if the service had bin appointed to the grantor himself, as an Annuity
granted by the King, to a Physician, or Schoolmaster, for to give Physic or
teach a Stranger, shall determine by not doing of it which is the cause of the
grant and executory as the Annuitie it self is.

3. The descent of the Crown and State Royal to the Prince, makes him King,
and alters the degree of his Person, because another Majesty there, and
requires Officers of greater Honor to do service to his politic body: And
therefore by this Act of God, the Law discharges Sir Thomas Wroth from his
service, and therefore without averment, that he had served King Edward all his
life time, is not to purpose, otherwise if the service be feaseable to his
natural body only, as Physic, Surgery, Music, Grammar, etc. for the
natural body alters not by assumption of the Royal estate from its
infirmities.

4. That the death of the King E. the 6. has not determined the Annuity,
although that the service be discharged by the death of the Person to whom it
is to be done. For this discharge comes by the Act of God, otherwise it were
if by the Act of the Party, as if he had withdrawn himself from the Princes
service, when he was Prince. So of an Annuity granted for life, pro consilio
impendendo, to the Grantee which dies; yet the Annuity remains; but shall
cesse by refusal of the Grantee for to give when he is required, because his
default, and the Grantor has not means by Law to compel him to give counsel.

5. which always continues, otherwise it is of a natural body, for there the
Heir shall not be charged (if he is not named and has asserts) as by
Obligatton of his Father, grant of Annuity or warranty, because as the body
natural which grants is taken away by death; so shall his charge be; if the
King without words, heirs and successors, grant to one license to Alien, and
die, the Grantee cannot Alien in the time of another King, 2. E. 3. and 3. E.
3.29. For that it is a license only; otherwise of a license which implies an
interest as to an Abbot of a Purchasor in Mortmaine, for there the King gives
his Signiory upon the matter as it seems 2. H. 7.6. Inheritance of the King,
or a thing in which he is entitled of Common right, as Lands, Conusans of
Pleas out of the Kings Courts, or account by a Sheriff, shall not pass
against the Heirs and Successors of the King without special words, Heirs
and Successors; as the grant of a County, Absque compoto nobis reddendo; yet he
shall account to the Successor, because it is Executory, of Common right to the
Crown, otherwise of a thing newly created, or a grant which is executed
presently in the party; yet the perception is Executory, as a grant of a Fair,
Market, Warren, etc. without words, Heirs and successors, good. Pension or
Annuity granted by the King until he be promoted Sanders, chief Baron, who
said as Plowden reported, was resolved by the Sages of the Law, 1. Mar. that
Patents without words; pro nobis hered. and successoribus nostris, granted

Eiston against Studd.
A P. 16. El. in the Common Pleas, Eiect. firm.
takes Husband, and the Husband and Wife levies a Fine Sur Conusans de droit
come ceo, the Conusee grants and renders the Land to the Husband and Wife, and
the heirs of their bodies, the remainder in fee to the right heirs of the
Wife, the Husband has issue by the Wife and dies, the Wife takes a second
Husband, and they leavy a Fine to their own uses, for the term of their lives
without impeachment of wast, the remainder to the Husband and his heirs for
sixty years, Remainder in tail to their issue, the remainder in fee to the
right heirs of the Wife, and the issue of the first Husband enters for the
forfeiture made by this second Fine, by the Statute of 11. H. 7. Cap. 20. And
adjudged no forfeiture; and yet is directly within the words but not within the
intent, for that the Joincture and advancement came not originally from the not
from the Husband nor his Ancestors, and therefore to restrain Women to dispose
of their inheritance after the death of their Husbands, is contrary to the
intent of the Statute, and the intent ought to be thought on (because the
Purviewe, extends not further then the intent of the makers of the Statute) as
the Wife infeoffs the Father of him with whom she intends to marry for to
regive the Land to them after their intermarriage for lives, or remainder in
tail to the Wife, the Father does so, they have issue, the Wife after the
death of the Husband levies a Fine to other uses, their issue may not enter;
yet it is with in the words of the Act of 11. H. 7. because the Father gave it
to them. But this comes from the Wife her self by circumstance; And the
Father was but as an Instrument of it, and therefore out of the intent of 11.
H. 7. which restrains the generalty of the letter of the Statute, and makes
the Cases within the Champarty, 19. R. 2. because he ought to perform the
bargain made upon just consideration, notwithstanding, W. 2. Cap. 49. and
Articul. super Chart. Cap. 11. So a bar fee is within the letter, but not the
intent of the Statute of 32. H. 6. cap. 10. because appointed to the Sheriff
in the beginning by the order and discretion of the Court for his labor and
attendance, when the Prisoners are brought to their delivery, 21. H. 7.16. So
Wreck if a Man, Dog, or Car, escapes alive, shall be kept, that the party may
have his goods if he claims within the year, by W. 1. cap. 4. is intended of
such things which will endure so long, and not perish in the mean time, as are
Lemans, Oringes, etc. So a rent granted by tenant in tail, for a release of
right in other Lands, is good, 44. E. 3.21. because for the benefit of the
estate tail: And W. 2. De donis, etc. intends not to restrain that which
amends the estate tail, So Parsonages and Vicarages are within the words, but
out of the sense and intent of 1. E. 6. cap. 14. which inlargeth the words of
the Statute, and makes that Cases within the like mischeife, shall be within
the Purview by equity; as by the Book of entrys, fol. 406. a man shall recover
double damages for costs sustained with force, by equity of 4. H. 4. cap. 8.
which gives this for disseisen of the Land: So that Executor which comes first
by distress shall answer by equity of 9. E. 3. cap. 5. which speaks of
Executors by equity of Gloucester, the Lessor shall have wast against the
Lessee for half a year, or for twenty weeks, which pleads years. So 1. E. 6.
cap. 12. which takes away Clergy for stealing Horses, takes it away also for
one Horse, because included in the Plural Number; and therefore Plowden
disallows 2. E. 6. cap. 33. which takes away Clergy for the stealing of one
Horse, as a superfluous Statute, and was made in vain; And so 1. E. 6 cannot
of Law but moral virtue which reform the Law, and the other equity is, Quasi
equality, because in the like reason, in the like Law.

Sobye against Molins.
TIthes shall be paid for the Boughs of Hornebeame, H. 17. El. in the Kings
Bench. Attachment upon prohibition.
Hasell, Sallows, Maple, and such Trees which are not fit for building, and so
of the Trees themselves, although that the Trees and Boughs are above the age
of one and twenty years; for they are not great Trees which are exempted and
privileged of Tithes, by the Statute of 45. E. 3. cap. 3. or rather by the
Common Law, in affirmance of which this Statute was made, as appears, 50. E.
3.10. But Tithes shall not be paid for Ashes, Oaks, and Elmes, Beech, and such
like Trees which are fit for building, and of the age of twenty years, nor for
the Branches of them which are of the age of twenty years; Quere, if the
Branches are within such age as the Timber trees which use to be lopped and
lopt if Tithe shall be paid for them; and it seems Tithes shall be paid of
them by the Book.

The use at this day is upon suggestion to King, to prefer a Bill of
attachment against the party which sues in the spiritual Court, if he requires
it, and upon it to declare and join issue, or demurr upon the right of Tithes,
and award consultation, which Plowden held vicious: First, for that the
Defendant is not Actor, and therefore may not have consultation upon such
proceedings: Secondly, For that the Judgment upon the Attachment ought to be
to acquit or attaint the party of the Contempt, and not proceed upon the right
of Tithes: Thirdly, For that the Plaintiff comes into the Court voluntarily
(Scilicet) by his Recognisans) to exhibit his Attachment, where he ought to be
brought in voluntarily by Process: Fourthly, Because the suggestion of the
Attachment is false: Fifthly, For that if the Plaintiff will not proceed, the
Defendant has no remedy, but a Recognisance forfeited to the King; But Plowden
held it to be the best course after the prohibition, that the Defendant sues
out a Scire facias against the Plaintiff, Quare consultatio concedi non
debeat: And upon this the Plaintiff may declare, and the matter shall be
tried, and the Defendant may have consultation; and then he will be an Actor.

Sanders and Archers Case.
ARcher gave Poison to Sanders to Poison his Wife, H. 18. El. the Report of the
opinions of Dyer, Chief Justice, and Barham, Justices of Assizes in Warw.
Sanders gives this to his Wife in a roasted Apple, which did eat part of it,
and gave the residue to their daughter, being an Infant, and after the Wife
recovers, and the Infant dies, and it was adjudged Murder in Sanders, for which
he was hanged, but not in Archer for he was acquit to be no accessory to this
Murder.

First, For that Sanders had an evil intent of Murder at the beginning of his
Act to kill his Wife; and therefore the consequent of his Act by which the
Daughter dies, shall be adjudged according to the commencement; So if a man
shoots at one, and kills another, or lies in wait to kill one, and kills
another; otherwise it is where he has no ill intent of killing any, as to lay
poison to kill Rats, and one eats of it and dies.

Secondly, The consent of Archer to kill J. S. and he resists, and you kill
him. So if I command you to beat him, and he dies of the battery: So if I
command you to burn the House of J. S. and you do it, and by the fire the
House of J. D. is burnt, I am accessory to both, because the commandment
reaches to all the sequel thereof, and is the cause of it; and therefore I
shall be partaker of what ensues this ill Act commanded by me; otherwise it is
if I command you to robb J S. as he is going to Sturbridge Fair, and you rob
his House in Cheapside, for this is another manner of Felony, and there are
several Acts: As if I command you to steal a white Horse, and you steal a
bay Horse, or an Ox, or burn the House of J. whereas I commanded you to burn
the House of B. there I am not accessory; for that my assent may not be liable
to it, because it is a thing distinct and contrary to my commandment directly:
But if I command you to kill J. and you kill him by another mean or Instrument
another day or place then I command, there I am accessory, because the death is
the principal matter, and the others only the manner and form, and the
variance in the manner and form of his commandment discharges not me to be
accessory: But if I countermand this before you kill, I am not accessory, for
the mind of the accessory ought to continue to do evil at the time of the
act done.

If this Felony is discharged against the King, but remains as to the Wife,
per Catlin: But Popham held otherwise, because that at the time of the receipt,
there is not any offense continuing against the Crown and Dignity of the King,
for that he was pardoned before, and one cannot be accessory without offense to
the Crown. But Plowden held, that if the Jailer suffer him to escape after the
Pardon, this is Felony in him, because he suffers a Fellon to escape; for that
he was in for Felony, for he was detained in Prison at the suite of the Wife
appellant.

Nicholls against Nicholls.
THE Lord Lovell, M. 17. and 18. El. in trespass.
18. E. 4. Lease for life to Thomas Wtright, and moreover grants that if he
dies without issue, that then the Lessee shall have fee: And the Lord was
attainted of high Treason by Parliament, 1. H. 7. and all his Land forfeit to
the King: saving to every stranger such right, title, and interest, which they
had, as if the Statute had not been ever made; and after the Lord dyed without
issue, and in 11. El. an Office was found. The question was, whether the Lessee
should have the Fee by the Condition and the saving. And adjudged that he
should have the Fee.

1. That all the Fee Simple passes not out Lovell, but continues always in
him until the Condition which is precedent to the estate be performed. 14. H.
8.17. Wheelers Case 10. Assi. 15.6. R. 2. Plessingtons Case and 12. R. 2. That
Action shall be brought against Lessee for years, upon condition to have Fee
and the Lessor together, a Condition precedent shall have relation to the
Livery for to avoid encumbrances for vesting the Fee which was at the time of
the performance: Husband and Wife

2. That the estate in Fee appointed by the Condition, nor Reversion, because
it commenceth at a day to come, nor a Remainder, because in its vesting it
drowns the particular Estate; but shall enure by way of enlargement of his
Estate.

3. That E. 4.22. the Lord Hungerfords Case, for then the Statute of 33. H. 8.
cap. 20. which now gives Actual possession to the King; for Treason without
Office should be made in vain and go to attainders, happening after this
Statute of 33. not to those before as our Case is. And if one be attainted of
Treason, the Freehold and Fee remains in him and shall not be in the King
until Office found by the course of the common Law; for if he has capacity
to take by new purchase, so he shall retain the ancient, and shall be Tenant to
the Precipe; out when he dies the Land cannot descend to his Heir, because
the blood is corrupted but it shall Escheat to the Lord, if it be holden of a
common person, or to the King in the nature of a common Escheat if it be holden
of him, and not as an Escheat by Treason, until Office by Barham and Dier. To
the first Objection it was said, That the Condition performed which is a real
agreement, shall divest the state in Fee out of any stranger which has the
Reversion without privity as by grant, Escheat, etc. For that the Land is
charged with this agreement real, in whose hands soever it comes, and
therefore the Fee shall vest in the Lessee by the performance of the Condition
discharged of all encumbrances made after the Condition, and the previty there
is destroyed by the Act of the Lessor, So 6. R. 2. Plessingtons Case, where a
man leases for years upon Condition performed to have Fee, after levies a
Fine; the Lessee performs the Condition, he shall have Fee of the Conusee, but
by Belknap there he shall have the moneys which the Lessee by his Condition
ought to pay: otherwise it is if the privity be destroyed by the Act of the
Lessee, as where the Lessee grants his Estate, there the Fee shall not vest in
him nor his assignee 4. ( fol. 483.)

5. For answer to the second Objection, it Rents, Profits, or other things out
of, or in Land, and the saving of the right of him which has not offended
shall be taken beneficial. By some, right is where a thing is taken away from
another by wrong Title, is where a man has cause to have the thing which
another has, and has not Action. Condition is a possibility to have Title.
Action is a suite given by the Law. Interest is part of the Estate of the Land,
as a Lease for years: or execution by Statute, ( fol. 484.)

6. The answer to the third Objection, The Lessee ought not to show in pleading
that he is not excepted in the Statute, for that he gains not any new thing,
but will retain the old; and also because the Statute is to his disadvantage,
but that he shall take benefit of a Statute showing it.

7. For Monstrans de droit, by some, but Quere thereof; for otherwise it shall
not vest at the time of the death of the Lord Lovell, it shall not vest at all,
for it is appointed to him, as if the Lessee here had entered into Religion,
and the Lessor without being attainted, had died without issue, after the
Lessee is deraigned he shall not have the Fee, because it may not vest in him
at the time of the Condition performed. So if he was disseised at that time;
And so here for to avoid the inconveniency by the operation of the Law or
former agreement, a thing shall be divested out of tho King at the instant of
the Condition performed without any such circumstance, As Tenant in Tail
discontinues; the Discontinuee infeoffs the King by Deed enrolled, the King
Leases to the Tenant in Tail for life, with the Remainder to his Issue for
life, the Lessee dies, the Issue, is remitted by the remainder falling to him,
and the Fee devests out of the King without any circumstance. And so a Remitter
shall defeat the Estate of the King, and an Office of the King shall defeat the
Remitter, ( fol. 488.) as 3. E. 4.25. in the Earl of Northumberlands Case, by
relation or if the Disseisee enters after the Attainder of his Disseisor.
Possession of the King by Office, shall not be removed without Petition; Capite
makes a Lease for life, rendering Rent with clause of Re-entry for not payment,
and dies, his Heir within age enters for the Rent arere: An Office is found,
the entry of the Heir for the Condition broken is avoided by Lovelace for the
possession of the Heir, by force of which he entered, is utterly defeated by
Relation, which intitles the King to the Grant. And so the entry of the Heir
for a thing not due to him, shall be adjudged Tortius by relation. So if
Trespass, 19. E. 4.2. where for things coming of the Land, as Grass, etc.
Office avoids the punishment against those which do the wrongs and takes it
away by relation of the Office (which Intitles the King, because of the Escheat
before the Trespass) an Action once good: But for the entry into the Land, or
breaking his Fences, which arises not from the Revenue of the Land, the Action
is not gone by the Office.

If an Office, virtute Commissionis, be pleaded, he ought to show the authority
given by it, and the execution thereof accordingly; because persons appointed
by Commission, have not any other then what is appointed to them by the
Commission: otherwise it is of an Inquisition taken, virtute Officii, before
the Escheator, Sheriff, Steward of a Leete, etc. for that their authority
appears to the Court judicially, because it is known by the Law; for that
they are Officers of the Common Law.

A Remainder ought to vest when it is appointed, otherwise it shall never vest.
The Kings Pardon shall not excuse any man for the repairing of a Bridge which
ought to do it, because it shall not take away the Interest that the Subjects
take therein. So a man pledgeth a Jewel for ten pound and after is attainted,
the King shall have it without paying of the ten pound. So 13. R. 2. the Earl
of Kent had return of certain Cattle in Replegiari and the Proprietor of them
is attainted, the Earl shall keep them against the King, until he be
satisfied of the thing; because the Prerogative will not give any prejudice to
another.

Ludford against Gretton.
A Warrant to make Letters Patents, M. 18. and 19. El. in the Kings Bench,
Trespass.
was directed by H. 8. to the Chancellor, which entered not the day of the
Receipt of the Watrant in the Record according to the Purview of the Statute of
18. H. 6. cap. 1. And yet the Letters Patents made thereupon were adjudged
good. For that the Purviewe of the Statute makes Letters Patents void only,
for the variance between the date of the Patent, and the day of the entery of
the Warrant. And the Court held three manner of Patents good upon the Statute.

1. If no Warrant be made at all, it is good by the Common Law, and not void by
the Statute, because there is not any variance. 2. If there be a Warrant, and
the day of the delivery of the Warrant be not entered, as in the Principal
Case. 3. If the day of the delivery of the Warrant be entered, and the Patent
dated after the day of the delivery, for this variance is out of the mischief
of the Purview, which was in antedating of Patents before the delivery of the
Warrant, and not after dating, and yet is within the words, but out of the
intent of the Act.
Records shall have Relation to their date, and cannot be averred contrary to
the date, not to vary from it, because it tends to the discredit of an Officer
of Record. Deeds relates to the Livery, and date in Deeds concludes not any to
aver the contrary.

Grendon against the Bishop of Lincoln.
HENRY the eighth, being seized of an Advowson in the right of his Crown, P.
19. El. in the Common Pleas. Quare Impedit.
presents J. S. and dies, E. 6. by his Letters Patents, grants the advowson to
the Dean and Chapter of L. and their Successors in Fee; and also grants to them
License and Liberty, virtute authoritatis sue Regiae supremae and Ecclesiae qua
fungimur, that they shall retain the said Advowson, and all the Profits thereof
for ever to their proper uses, whenever the said Church shall become void.
And after the death of the said Incombent, the said King E. 6. present his
Clerk to the said Church, which was Admitted, Instituted, and Inducted; and
adjudged no usurpation, which shall put the Dean and Chapter out of possession.

If the Plaintiff allege matter effectual, as descent, etc. and the
Defendant show a matter in Law, which upon the Law discussed, proves the said
matter alleged by Plaintiste, true or false, there he ought not to take a
traverse, for then the Jury shall try this matter in Law, which properly
belongs to the Court to discuss, Per Curiam.

1. Appropriation of an Advowson ought always to be made to a body Politic,
or Corporation Spiritual, being Patron of the said Advowson, and such Parson
only is capable of an Appropriation, and no other; and by the Law such Parson
in Parsonee may not grant over his Incumbency, no more then an Incumbent of a
Parsonage presentable at this day, nor any other shall have it, because it is
appropriate to his Parson, 3. E. 3.1. The Case of the Templers, that by their
dissolution, the Appropriation was dissolved, And yet was first ordained, when
such Parsons by incroachment and sufferance were made Parsons in Parsonees,
which could not say Service, nor Administer the Sacraments, as Deane, and
Chapter, Nuns, Abottesles, etc. which was a thing horrible by the Lord Dyer.

2. Every Appropriation shall be made by Dyer said,: But here the Appropriation
made by the King, which is also Supreme ordinary by the Statute of 25. Hen. 8.
which transfers to him the Authority of the Pope, is good. As the Deane of
Wells Assign to the King good by the Court; because he is Supreme ordinary by
the Statute of 25. Hen. 8. in Sir John Pollards Case against Waldron, and here
the King does three things. First, he grants the Advowson. Secondly, he makes
the Appropriation as Supreme Ordinary. Thirdly, he gives his consent as King,
fol. 501. if time of Lapps be devolved to the King, he shall present as
Supreme Patron, in respect that the Advowson is holden of him mediately, or
immediately.

If the Appropriation be made without License of the King (be the Advowson
holden of him, or of a common Parson) the King shall seize the Advowson, and
shall have the Presentiments, until he be satisfied of the Fine by his
Prerogative, and as in the name of a distress. 21. E. 3.5. And there it is
said, That the Appropriation is not Mortmaine, because it is not any
transmutation of the possession, nor Substraction of Services, but the Tenure
remains, as it was before.

3. (scilicet) that he shall be incumbent, when the Church shall be void: For
that he has not Title to Present before the avoydance. If the King presents to
an Advowson, and appropriate the Church to a Deane and Chapter which makes a
Lease for years in the life of the Incumbent; this is a void Lease after the
death of the Incumbent, by Plowden, for that at the time of the making of it,
they had nothing in the Rectory, and the Appropriation was not executed until
after the avoydance.

4. An Usurpation may not be upon a Parson H. 14.39. H. 6.21. and 27. and there
cannot be ousted by wrong, nor have right of Advowson, for he is not out of
Possession, and if one presents to such an Advowson Appropriate, and the Clerk
is admitted, Instituted, and Inducted, by six months, yet the Church is not
become Presentative, nor by any other Act, except only where the Parson in
Parsonee himself presents; for there, volemi non sit injuria, by Manwood, and
Dyer the dissolution of the Corporation, to which the Advowson is Appropriate,
is a disappropriation of the Advowson, and the Lord, of whom it is holden may
Present. If a Deane and Chapter seized of a Manor, to which an Advowson is
Appendent, and the Church is Appropriate to them, and after they make a
Feoffement of the Manor, with the Appurtenances, this disappropriates the
Advowson; for by some it passes Appendent by the common Law, because the
Appropriation destroys not the Appendency: But now by the Statute which makes
lay Persons capable of Parsonages Appropriate, they are severed from Manors by
the intent of the Act, and by the grant of the Parsonage Appropriate, which now
may be granted to a common Parson, and the Advowson shall pass.

Four answers to the four exceptions of the Plea.
First, The first exception is because the Patent is not pleaded with a Non
obstante, of the Statute of Mortmaine, and therefore not good by Dyer.

But Plowden held the contrary, for that the Grant is good until Office found,
and then he may well plead a license for that time; also the Patent is
Excerta scientia, which countervailes the clause of Non obstante, for that
implies that the King was knowing of the Law; for ignorance indeed may be
allowed in the King, ignorance in Law not: So if the King grant Lands to his
Villain, the Land passes until Office; but it is no infranchisement, because
if he was his Villain or not, is a foreign matter, and not apparent to the
King. And the Kings Grant shall not enure to two intents, where one is foreign
matter. The clause of Non obstante, is requisite in a Patent, to be Sheriff
for life, 2. H. 7. because the Statute says by precise words, That he shall
not be Sheriff above one year. So a Patent to a Murderer for pardon; and
that he shall not find sureties, for his good behavior ought to have a Non
obstante, 10. E. 3. because this Statute avoided the Patent by precise words,
without such surety; But the Statute of Mortmaine does not so here, but gives
entry or seizure for a pain, admitting the Grant to be good.

The second exception was, that the Patent made not them Parson by express
words by Dyer.

The second exception was answered by Plowden, who said, because the words
amounted to Ex gratia and mero motu.

The third exception made by Dyer, was, that they did not plead that they
entered.

But Plowden answered that, because the Patent granted them power to retain,
etc. And also they pleaded that they were seized, which implies an entry, and
in the Common Pleas, use upon possession executory shall say seized only,
without saying, that he entered and was seized.

The fourth exception that was made by Dyer, was, for that they pleaded that
they were seized of the Rectory of the Parsonage of the Deane, in the right of
their Cathedral Church of Worcester, whereas it should be in the right of the
Church of the Deane.

Plowden answered the fourth exception thus, That they plead the seisen of all
the entire thing, otherwise if it were of parcel of it; or things pertaining
to it, for there they should plead that they were seized of it in the right of
the Church of the Deane.

But Judgment was given for the Bishop.

Ear against Snow and others.
TEnant in tail and his Wise Hen. 8. to his own use in Fee, H. 20. El. in the
Kings Beuch. Fiect. firm.
the Husband by his Will in writing, devises the Land to J. S. and after the
Statute of 27. H. 8. is made, and after that he publishes his Testament of
new, and dies, the issue in tail enters, J. S. dies, his heir within age, the
issue in tail dies, the heir of J. S. enters upon the Son of the issue in
tail: And adjudged lawful. And no Remitter, but that the estate tail shall
be barred by the Recovery, notwithstanding the overliving of the Wife; for the
Wife was named only to be barred of her dower, and forasmuch as she had not
any estate, nor no loss, she shall not recover any estate, nor any recompense;
and besides, the estate recovered is an estate tail, as the estate

Welkden against Elkington.
LEssee for years devise that H. 20. El. in the Common Pleas. Trespass.
and after her death he gave and bequeathed the residue of the said years of
the said Lease, then not expired, to his Son, and his assigns, and made his
said Wife his sole Executrix, and dyed, the Wife entered, agreeing to the
Legacy, and after aliened the term, and the alienee granted it again to the
Wife, and the Wife died within the term: And adjudged that the Son or his
Administrator shall have the residue of the term.

Assent to the particular estate shall reach to the Remainder also, but an
assent to the devise of a rent shall not extend to the devise of the term, and
the devise is made of a rent, or common out of the term, and after of the Land
it selse; payment of the rent by the Executor or his sufferance for the Devisee
to use the common, is not execution of the term, because the term is one
thing, and the profit out of it is another; but where sour years of a term
is devised to one, and the remainder to another; there otherwise it is because
all is of one same thing, fol. 621.524. so the same fol. 541.

First, The devise to the Wife for her life is not an absolute devise of the
entire term, but conditionally, or upon limitation (if she lives so long) for
if she dies, her Interest is determined by the limitation, and devise to him
for his life by implication (because the residue of the term is devised to the
Son after the death of the Wife, in which is implied that the Wife shall have
it for her life) and also determinable by the limitation as above said, and the
devise to the Son shall be expounded to precede the devise of the Wife, and so
both shall stand, fol. 522.523. and 624.

Secondly, The devise to the Wife and Son is of one same thing (setlicet) Of
the Land it self, and the Wife shall have the Collateral occupation only of
the Land by the devise; but the very Interest and term of the Land, she shall
have conditionally, and so two parties of one term, the one to the Wife, and
the other to the Son, and then the execution of the devise

Thirdly, The Alienation of the Wife has not divested the interest of the Son,
which is accrued to him by the Condition or limitation, nor extinct the
Condition or limitation which shall transferr the interest to him.

Executor being legatory of a term by the devise of the Testator enters
generally, he is possessed as Executor, because it is his first title, until
he makes election to agree to the devise. Popham, because for life which is a
greater time then for years: But Quere, if he dies, if the Grant be
determined. As Lessee for years grants a rent to one for his life, he shall
have the rent during all the years if he shall so long live, which time of
life includes all the years which is a lessor term; yet if he dies, the rent
shall be determined by Plowden, fol. 525. and the Grantee has but a Chattell
in the rent, for he may not have freehold out of a Chattell. Lessee for years
grants all his term which shall be arreare after his death, this is void for
the uncertainty; for by the reservation of the term for his life, he has
reserved all the term, and therefore the Grant which is but one sentence
without any Habendum, is void, 7. E. 6. (by devise good) otherwise if he had
granted his term habendum, after his death, there the Grant is good, and
passes the term presently, and the habendum is void fol. 156. it is void, 9.
H. 58. A man makes a Lease for ten years, after makes another Lease for six,
to commence the same day, the second is void, and he shall not maintain an
action of debt against his Lessee, although the Lessee for ten years upon
render, because during the ten years he may not contract with another, for a
Lease to take effect during this time. Implication in a devise gives an estate
for life to the Wife, 13. H. 7.17. profit to be taken out of the Land is a
distinct thing from the interest of the estate. Execution of an occupation of a
thing not of property it self, as in a devise of a Book to use, as 37. H.
6.30. Condition Circum locution in a devise, or Lease, is equivalent to a
direct Grant, as to have from day to day during life, is all one. Intent shall
be observed in the Exposition of Wills, as if one devise his Land by the
premises to one, and after devises the rent to another out of the same Land,
by the said Will this is a good devise of the Rent first, and after of the Land
in sense, and so by exposition the words shall be altered, and so marshaled,
that the intent may take effect: So a termor devises all his term to his Son,
nevertheless his Will is, that his Wife shall have it for her life, holden a
good devise to both by conversion of the words. So a Remainder to the Church of
Saint Andrew in Holborne, good by devise, 21. R. 2. although the Devisee is not
capable, because the Testator intended that the Parson shall have it. Cestuy
que use, at this day devise that his Feoffees shall be seized to the use of one
A. in fee, this is a good devise of the Land: Adjudged in the Case of Lingen:
(yet after 27. H. 8. he cannot have Feoffees to his use, because the intent
was, that he should have the Land: So the Executor shall not sell the Land
according to the devise, but take the profits for two years to his own use,
the heir may enter, because the intent of the Testator makes this a
Condition, 38. Ass. 31.

Incertainty in Contracts reduceable to certainty by contingent, stands good:
As if I lease to one habendum, from the death of J. until such a Feast, which
shall be in the year, 1620. good, if J. dye before that, otherwise it is void.
Two properties of a term, as where Lessee for years which grants over his
term, enters for not payment of Rent, and retains until he be paid his
Arrerages thereof: So of a Conusee of a Statute, which has the Land extended,
so upon a Lease for years of a Mill, except the Profits to the Lessor, for his
life, and adjudged a good Exception: And if the Lessor enters, he has a
property uncertain, and the Lessee another, 39. H. 6.37.8. So it is of Sheep
letten for to compester, or a Chain of Gold pledged, 5. H. 71. they have one
Property, and the owner another.

Cestuy que use devise the Profits and Issues of his Lands, fol. 509. b (
Cestui que use, before the Statute of 27. H. 8. Devise his Land, and after the
Statute, publishes his Testament of new, the Land passes by the Statute of 32.
H. 8. See fol. 514. yet he was once countermanded by the Statute. Cestuy que
use, devises that his Feoffees shall stand seized to the use of himself for
life, with remainder over, this is a good Declaration of the use during his
life, yet the Will cannot take effect until his death, Quere of this Case,
fol. 508. b.

Bransbie, against Grantham.
AN Executor having a Term, P. 20. El. in the Kings Bench E. firm.
as Executor devises the Term to a stranger, and makes his Son Executor and
dies, the stranger enters into the Land by the Assent and Consent of the
Executor. And after the Executor enters: And adjudged that his Entry was
lawful, and the devise void: And by consequence, the assent given to a void
thing, shall be also void, and shall not enure as a new grant; but only and
assent to the thing devised.

1. Because that the Executor cannot devise any thing which he has as Executor.

2. For that the Executor has the Term here, to the use of the Testator, and
no man can make a devise of any thing, except that he has it to his own use:
And therefore the Husband cannot devise the Term of his Wife; And then when
the Executor dies, his Executor has it by Title before the devise as Executor
of the first Testator, and the property that the Devisor, had as Executor is
determined hy the determination of his Office of Executorship, which is ended
by his death; and the last Executor has it by Relation, as immediate Executor
of the first Testator: (So an Executor cannot devise the goods of his Testator)
and therefore the goods of the first Testator in the hands of the last Executor
shall not be taken in execution for the debt of the last Testator, because the
last Executor has them as immediate Executor to the first Testator, and to his
use, as if they never had been in the last Testator by Relation.

Hare against Bickley.
A Prebendary after Admission and Institution,

Induction gives to the Probendary the possession Temporal, and Freehold,
(and the Confirmation is nothing without the Possession:) And therefore without
Induction, a man shall not have a Writ of Right nor Spoliation, Trespass nor
Assise; otherwise, it is of a Quare Impedit. For in the first he alleges
Esplees, but not in the last, 26. H. 8.3. But by the Admission and Institution
he has care of Souls, and is enabled to administer the Sacraments, etc. And
the Archdeacon shall make Induction to the Parson and Vicar, but shall not
make Installation to a Prebendary; but the Deane and Chapter shall do it. No
Plenarty against the King before Induction, for that it is corporal seisen and
possession, 38. E. 3.10. So the King confirms to the Collatee of a Bishop,
before he is inducted the Confirmation is void, 11. H. 4.7.1. H. 5.1. He which
presents is his servant, Induction is triable by the Country. So if Parson or
not, and it shall be tried where the Church is, 21. E. 4.7. and 33. A woman
recovers in Dower, she cannot enter, but ought to have seisen delivered to her
by the Sheriff; as a Copyholder ought to be admitted by the Lord of the
Manor, if it discends to him, before he shall have seisen in judgment of Law:
So a Prebendary, Parson, or Vicar, before he is Inducted, or Installed, has
not seisen, nor is full Incumbent for to charge the Possessions of the Prebond,
Parsonage, or Vicaridge.

Cross against Howell.
THe Cooks of London were interrupted in 22. E. 4. Tr. 20. El. in the Kings
Bench E. firm.
by the name of two Masters and Governors of the Communalty of the Mystery of
the Cooks of London, and in the 21. H. 8. they bargain and sell certain Land
by the name of A, B, C, and D. Master and Wardens of the Craft, or Mystery of
the Cooks of London, to R. D. for money without naming his Heirs, and the
Barganee enters and levies a Fine, with Proclamations, and five years pass.
And adjudged that the Corporation shall be bound by the Fine, and Nonclaime;
and therefore the entry and delivery of the Deed of their Lease to the
Plaintiff as their Deed, by him which had their Letter of Attorney so to do,
is merely void.

1. The bargain and sale was made for the variance of the Indenture from their
name of Corporation, for they were incorporate Masters, and the Indenture is
Master. And in the Indenture four are named and their Charter Warrants but two
Masters. Also the Charter is Masters or Governors, and the Indenture Masters
and Guardians. So it varies in Guardians for Governors, and in (et) for (or)
and the words, Craft and mystery are surplusage, and therefore void words, and
do not prejudice the Deed; but for the other variance the Deed

2. The Fine with Proclamations and five years bars this Corporation, and
all other Corporations, as Major and Communalty, Deane and Chapter, Colleges,
etc. Which have absolute Estates in their own right, and their Successors for
ever, by equity of the Statute of 4. H. 7. Notwithstanding, that the Statute
speaks only of Men and their Heirs, for that this Statute is taken largely
for possessions of Lands by the Fine, and strictly against the ancient right,
if they be remiss in their claim for five years, and the Act ought to remedy
all the mischief; otherwise, it is of Corporations which have not any absolute
Estate without others, as Bishop, Deane, Parson, Vicar, and Prebendary, etc.
But every one of them shall be barred by Nonclaim by five years, and every
Successor shall have new five years: So every Officer who has Land
appertaining to his Office, as a Parker, Forrester, Keeper of a Jail, etc.
shall be barred of Nonclaime after a Fine levied by his disseisor, and five
year past after Proclamations, his Successor not, if he do not also permit 5.
years Pass in his time.

3. A Corporation cannot be seized to another use, but only a Natural body,
because they are not imprisonable to be compelled to perform the confidence,
and a body Natural shall not be imprisoned for the offense of their body
Corporate, which is another body.

4. A bargain and sale without words, Heirs shall give a Fee simple: But upon
those two Points the Court was not resolved, because that the other two made an
end of the Case.

An authority given by a Corporation to enter into Land, and claim it to their
use, and after to make a Lease of it in their name is good, fol. 535. b.

Paramor against Yardley.
A Termer devises all his Term to his Son, H. 21. El. in the King^ Bench.
Trespass.
and besides says, that his will and intent was that his Wife should have the
Occupation and Profits of the Land during the Minority of his Son, to the
intent that she with the Profits of it shall educate his children, and see his
Will performed, and made his Wife his Executrix, and dies; the Wife proves the
Testament, and educates his Infants accordingly, after sells the Term to one,
to whom the Testator was indebted, having then sufficient of the Goods and
Chattells of the Testator to pay all his debts, besides the said Lease, and
after she dies, the Son at his full age enters, and his Entry was adjudged
lawful, and his grant to the Plaintiff good.

1. Because that the devise to the Wife is good during the Minority of the
Son, and by the exposition of the Court, shall be intended to precede the
devise to the Son in sense and intent, and the devise to the Son, to
succeed. 540.5^1. a.

2. For that the devise of the Profits and Occupation of the Land, is a devise
of the Land it self, for that is the benefit and fruit of the Land; otherwise
it is of the use of a Chattell personal as of a Looking-glass, Map, Globe,
or Book; for there the use is a distinct thing from the property, fol. 541. b.
and 541. a.

3. For that the Term shall be executed in the Wife as a Legacy certain,
until she disagrees to it, because it is more for her benefit, and she may not
have an occasion against her self as another may, otherwise it is of a Legacy
certain.

1. The Common Law to make the intent habendum in Fee: The Law adjudgeth the
Estate of the Tenant first to pass for to make previtie, upon which Release
that of him in the Reversion may enure to enlarge the Estate. fol. 523. because
it shall be taken first devised, although it be subsequent in words. As the
Will repeales the first, so the last part of the Will repeales to the first
part of the Will which is contrary to it, because he had such Intent last, As a
devise of Land to one in Fee in the premises, and in the end of the Will to
another in Fee: But here is not any such contrariety.

2. By H. 7.1. License to enter and occupy Land for one month is a Lease, and
so shall be pleaded. So that Land shall return redibit, or descend, or to a
stranger after the death of Tenant for life, shall be pleaded as a Remainder.
So a grant of the nomination of the Advowson is in substence, a grant of the
Advowson; because the profit of it rests in the Nomination. So here words of
Nomination, and Profits of the Lease, is as much as the Lease it self for the
time, and not of distinct Profits to take also, because the Executor here has
not remedy at the Common Law for the Profits if she be ousted of it; and for
this Legacy, she has no remedy in the Spiritual Court, because she cannot sue
her self there; also the Estate it self of the Term shall be in the Wife,
because the Son shall not have it until fu^l age, and then might drown his
Profit, if she has but profit to loose.

3. Alteration made by Operation of Law, where the Party has not any, against
whom to bring in his action, which is equivalent to a Suite, and Execution
given to a Stranger, as of a Remitter: So a Debtor of twenty pound is made
Executor, he may pay himself by way of Retainer, and has property in the debt
it self presently; because he cannot sue himself, and the Law gives to him
the like advantage as a Suite should be, which performs the charge of the
thing thereby, he claims the commodity annexed to the charge, because he ought
to perform all the Will (scilicet) Debts and Legacies, if there are assets. If
the Executor disagree in Deed to a Legacy certain this shall be presently in
the second Devisee H. 4.21. because he is nearest to himself, And therefore the
Execution of the Term devised here shall not be hindered by the not payment of
the Legacies to others, nor Lease given to his Executor, ought to be sold, and
then in Legacies it is reason that Executor shall have preferment. A gift to
his Executor of all his goods for performance of his Will is no devise, and a
void gift, because the Law gives them without these words: As if a Man devise
in Fee his Land to his Son, and Heir, it is void, because he shall have it
without the devise by descent: So for to prescribe, for to distrain for Rent
service void, because he may distrain without prescription; A devise of Fee
tail to his Heir is good, because it is another Estate then he should have by
descent: So here the Estate devised to the Wife, which is but percell of the
Estate (scilicet) during the Nonage of the Heir is good, because severed from
that, which the Law would have given to him, and the Clause for educating his
Children, is not a thing Testamentory, nor Legecy to the Children, but is an
intent annexed to the devise made to the Wife, by which she by her entry has
the Estate devised to her as Legatory; And the Execution to the Wife is also to
the Son, because a devise, although the Estates are several, and is of the
same effect, as if her Estate had bin devised to another, with the Remainder to
her Son, and agreement or assent shall not be apportioned, as attornment by
Tenant for life to the Grantee of the Reversion for life extends to him in
Remainder. So notice given by Tenant for life to the Lord, shall serve to him
in Remainder in Fee, to compel the Lord to avow upon him after the death of
the Tenant for life; So Rent accepted by an Infant at full age of his Lessee
for years has made good the Remiander over.

An Intruder, cannot gain such Possession against the King, upon which he may
maintain an Action of Trespass, because the King may punish him, 19. E. 4.2.
and be shall not be doubly punished; but against the Lessee of the King, one
may gain such Possession, that he may punish a Stranger trespassor, yet he
shall not gain no Estate from the Crown for the Freehold, which irremoveablely
rests in the Crown; And the King shall not allege Intrusion with a
continuando, but diverse days and vicibus; because he gains not any
Possession by wrong, ( scilicet) by the Intiusion against the King.

Walsinghams Case.
H. 15. El. in the Excheq Intrusion.
TEnant in tail of the Kings gift, makes a Feoffurent in fee to a stranger,
and after is attainted of Treason, and executed, having issue, and after this
attainder is confirmed by Parliament with several rights and interests of
Strangers: And it was adjudged that the Feoffee continuing his estate by the
Feoffment, after the attainder shall be an Intruder, and this Judgment was
afterward affirmed in a Writ of Error brought in the Exchequr Chamber; But the
contrary was adjudged in the Common Pleas, 17. El. between Conway and Moulton,
that tenant in tail shall not forfeit any thing.

First, That the Feoffment of tenant in tail had not discontinued, nor divested
the estate of fee in Reversion out of the King, because it is but a matter in
Deed, which is tortious, otherwise it is of a rightful matter of Record, as a
Recovery upon a good title or rightful matter in Deed, as a Remitter or
Condition performed; As Alienee of tenant in tail of the gist of a common
person infeoffs the King by Deed enrolled, which regives to the first tenant in
tail which dies, the issue euters, it is a Remitter, and therefore the
Reversion in fee is divested out of the King, and restored to the first doner,
because a former right; matter in Deed and in Law concur together: So Lessee
for life to have fee if he does such an act, after the Lessor grants by Deed
enrolled, the Reversion to the King, the Lessee for life performs the
Condition, which is older then the title of the King; this older title, matter
in Deed, and operation in Law thereupon, shall take the Reversion out of the
King, without other Suit or Circumstance, because bound with the Condition, and
the fee simple ought to vest in him at the same instant that he performs the
Condition or never. But no tortious act, as Disseisen, Intrusion, etc. may take
the Reversion out of the King.

Secondly, That by the Feoffment he has not given the fee determinable,
because he had it not, nor an estate for life of the Feoffee, but only an
estate for his own life, and so the Reversion in tail continues in him, which
shall be forfeit by the Attainder, and by consequence the estate of the Feoffee
determines by the death of the Feoffor; but the Feoffee has an estate for the
life of the Feoffor discendable, and his heir shall be a special occupant of
this estate in base fee simple.

Thirdly, That the King shall have the estate tail in point of Reverter, for
that he had the pure fee before, and two fees of one thing cannot be together
in one person (otherwise in several persons) and then the King shall have the
Land discharged of the estate tail, and by consequence of all estates,
charges, and encumbrances, derived out of it, as Leases warranted by the
Statute, and then the laving in the Statute for a thing before determined is
void, as of a Lease voidable, made by such tenant in tail, which the issue
has made good by the acceptance of the rent, and after of the estate tail
Escheated for Treason, or is determined for default of issue: So that the King
has in point of Reverter there, the Release shall be void, and he has nothing
by the saving of the Statute: Adjudged in Austins Case, otherwise it is when
the King has it in point of forfeiture, as if the Reversion be to a stranger,
fol. 559. b.

What Livery and Seisen is, and the validity of it, fol. 554. a.
Estate tail shall not be in abeyance, nor any thing which another cannot
have, for abeyance is only for the benefit of a stranger, because it cannot
vest immediately, 556. a. 562. a.

Estates in fee are three: First, Pure fee: Secondly, Fee determinable:
thirdly, Base fee, which shall be in one when the pure fee is in another, fol.
557. a.

An estate tail shall not be to another use, fol. 555. a. yet if tenant in
tail bargain and sels the Land by Deed enrolled, the Bargainee shall have see,
executed by the Statute of 27. H. 8. which cannot be, except the use shall be
raised first out of the estate tail, and so the estate tail shall be to
another use, fol. 557. b.

A Disseisor or Intruder upon the possession of tenant in tail of the Kings
gift, gains not, except the estate for life of tenant in tail, and therefore
if he dye seized, the issue in tail shall enter upon this descent, as I
believe, fol. 558. a.

The Father makes a Lease for life to his Son, the Remainder for life to her
which shall be his Wife at the time of his death, this is a good Remainder, and
shall be in abeyance until the Wife be known, fol. 562. a.

Saving in a Statute contrary to the Explanation is void, Puton and Hides
Case, and Austins Case of a Lease, and the Duke of Norfolks Case, fol. 564. a.

The possession shall be awarded upon a Bill of Intrusion, which is but Trespass
in its nature, 561. a.

Tenant in tail grants his estate, there waste is dispunishable, during the
life of tenant in tail, because it is not but only a privilege annexed to
it. Estates pass to the Grantee, and amount to words of dispunishable of
waste, and not because he has a greater estate then for the life of tenant in
tail. So 42. H. 3.21. waste dispunishable in tenant for life (because the
Lestor released all his right that he had in the same Land, and that he or his
heirs would not demand any right in the same, nor claim, nor challenge for
the term of the life of the tenant) for that it amounts unto a Lease without
impeachmeat of waste, fol. 556.

A Writ of Error abated by the death of the Lord Chancellor, because his
Christian name and Surname, and Keeper of the great Seal, were put into the
Writ, fol. 564. b.

FINIS.

