THE PLOT DISCOVERED AND COUNTER PLOTTED Commended in a Letter to a private
Friend, from a true-hearted well-wisher to great Britains happiness.

Psalm. 124.1.-6. If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, may Israel
now say.

If it had not been the Lord who was on our side when men rose up against us.

Then they had swallowed us up quick when their wrath was kindled against us.

Then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul, then
the proud waters had gone over our soul.

Blessed be the Lord who has not given us a prey unto their teeth.

LONDON Printed for Tho. Underhill, and are to be sold at the Bible in
Wood-street.

A Letter to a private Friend.
Sir,
WHiles I look on the Lady of Islands, I mean great Britain, and see her
clothed with the mourning weed of so many sad, strange, and dishonorable
accidents which have fallen out in these latter times, mine eyes run water, and
my head is a Fountain of tears. So that one while the unhappie occurrences of
State do make me desire a sequestered and contemplative life, that I may with
freedom bewail the sin and dishonor of our Nation; another while I seem
transported with zeal for God his Church, and glory of our Nation; pressed in
spirit with renewed thoughts of indignation against the instruments of this
present distraction.

Sir, In my retiredness, me thinks I have discovered the plot of Britains
ruin (as you may perceive by the ensuing discourse) together with the
contrivers of it and their principles.

Afterward I shall propound unto you the way for the Counterplot, which may be
well contrived in these times, suiting that high and honorable Court of
Parliment, whose wisdom is sufficiently able to discover the ill intentions of
enemies to Church and State, and provide means of prevention seasonably.

Sir, When I look on that illustrious Assembly, I consider it as a well
constituted body, having right symetrie in all parts, the humors well
tempred, so that there is no fear of any excessive predominancie of one above
an other; their senses internal and external active, fancy nimble, intellect
profound and serious, memory strong and retentive, besides their hearing,
seeing, tasting, smelling, and feeling very good and quick; so that it seems
presumption for one that moves in the inferior orbs to present objects to
such accurate and high intelligences; Yet Sir, whiles passion, judgment, sense
of mine own insufficiency, together with loyalty to my God, King, and
Country, struggle thus in the womb of my conceptions, I am at a stand, and
almost resolving to dash my thoughts in the shel, and crush them in their
embrio, but at last considering these present Halcyon days, wherein the
Kings-fisher begins to make his nest upon the waters, I cannot but promise my
self serenitie in bringing forth my conceptions, especially having so fair
opportunity to put them to nurse, and education in your bosom, whose wisdom,
learning, tenderness, and particular faithfulness, I value as sufficient
obligations of trust and confidence.

Nevertheless Sir, it is not mine intentions, so to confine my conceit unto
your private acquaintance and tuition, but if it find favor in your eyes you
may present it to the view of Sr. Edward Deering, Sr. Walter Earl, Sr. William
Bruerton, Sr. Nathaniell Barnardiston, Mr. Pim, Mr. Hambden, Mr. St. John, Mr.
Purphry, or others of the Commons house, whose names are precious with me, and
their minds so stored with the grounds of all true nobility, that I doubt not
but they will know how to give a favorable acceptance, or else to pardon the
errors of well intended fancy.

In the mean time I commit the tuition and administration of my conceptions to
your self, if you see cause, to strike them in cunabulis before they be
presented to any further view, yet be pleased to give them a burial, beseeming
such as are descended of one of your faithful friends, of Christian and true
English parentage.

In my discourse I shall describe, first the Plot, secondly the Counterplot; in
the Plot I have considered the Plot it self, the Contrivers, the Principles.

First for the Plot it is Mahomets, the introduction of a new form of
government; wherein Mahomet borrowed a Judais, a Gentibus, a Christianis, from
the Jew, from the Gentile, from the Christian, so our last years have borrowed
in their imaginary form from three several Places, Sodom, Egypt, Babylon:
From Sodom, pride, idleness, fullness of bread, inordinate lusts,
intemperance, etc. From Egypt, cruelty, oppression, tyranny over Gods Israel,
and ruling in Church and State without any rule, but will, like Pharaoh in
Egypt. From Babylon the Merchandise of Gold, Silver, precious stones, and
Pearls, Revel. 18.12. besides these, Beasts, Sheep, Horses, Charriotts,
slaves, and souls of men verse 13. without question Sir, Sodom, Egypt,
Babylon, or Rome, were the presidents or coppies of our latter times, according
to which they have drawn upon our State, to the life, the Atheism of Sodom,
the tyranny of Egypt, the idolatry of Rome or Babylon. A most hellish device to
squeese the Juice of three such vicious governments into this of ours, which
before the late times of degeneration was the fame and glory of the whole
World. The truth of this will appear by the voluminous Testimonies of the
grieved party, before the high and honorable court of Parliament.

Secondly, the Contrivers of the plot, whom I shall refer to these seven
heads. First the scandalous Minister; Secondly the corrupt Magistrate; Thirdly
the innovating Prelate with his officer; Fourthly the professed Papist; Fifthly
the Popish Protestant; Sixthly the rigid Arminian; Seventhly the Libertine.

First, the scandalous Minister, I mean such as preach very seldom, and then
very coldly, happily far above the capacity of the hearer, or if he preach
often, his preaching and practice cross the one the other, he preaches
against swearing, and yet is a common swearer himself, against drunkenness,
and yet is a common drunkard himself, at leastwise a common bibber, an
intimate friend and ordinary acquaintance of the common Tospots, making the
Sackshop the chief place of Study and contemplation; accounting those the
finest fancies which are begot over a sparkling cup, and those divine raptures
which are occasioned by exhalations drawn from the good Ale and Sack; my
meaning is not Sir, to wound any moderate man, who upon just occasion of
business may look into a Tavern, or sometimes to express humanity or
courtesy to a friend may sometimes take or give a cup of wine, provided it be
inoffensively carried, in reguard of time, persons, or company, place,
moderation, and the like. Such only I intend Sir, who delight more in chirping
company in the Alehouse or Tavern, then they do in Communion with the
Saints, or their Wives and Families at home; that account their own houses
prisons, and taverns paradices, whose defaults in this kind, such Ministers own
wives, and Tavern Boys are best able to discover.

Besides these such also I reckon amongst scandalous Ministers as do fill
their Neighbors ears, and eyes, with obscaen and wanton words and carriages,
making lascivious ribaldry the fittest music at a table-meeting, Tom Trinkilo
was never more acted to the life, then by many of these, who go under the name
of the Angels of the Church of England, and by their mimicall, apish, and
ridiculous cariages, seek to please the humor of the brave sparks and gallants
of our times.

Lastly such also are scandalous ministers as are carried with bitter and
malicious spirits, against the strict and more exact practice of Religion,
which can scarcely forbear to disgorge their foul stomachs in the pulpit
against them who walk closer with God then themselves, which can find more
Rhetorike to advance ceremony then substance, which can find no honesty in a
man that practices in all the maine points of Religion, if tender in conscience
about a ceremony, but copious and full in testimony of a good fellow, a boon
companion, a common swearer, if zealous only in matter of ceremony, such as
cannot suffer a pious conscientious man to pass without a jeere, nay happily
persecute him, out of his parish, if he conform not in folio to all indifferent
ceremonies, such bitter spirits as these give great offense, whiles they
arrogate the names of Christ's Ministers, and Ambassadors, and in their lives
show neither humility, nor supernatural charity and love of their Master:
These and such like are they which pull down more by their practice then they
build up by preaching. These are the watchmen on the wall which meeting with
the Spouse of Christ pluck her veil from her, wound and buffet her, Cant. 5.7.

Secondly, the corrupt Magistrate, such I mean as buy, and therefore must sell
Justice, which makes the face of his prince, not the laws, the rules of
Justice, which in a trial consider more the person then the cause, such as
delays or hastens an hearing according to his satisfaction of the sense of
feeling, such as wry Justice upon a great man's letter, or private information
that the person before him is a Puritan, as if he that were a Devil should not
have his due.

Thirdly, innovating Prelates with their Officers, whether Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Commissaries, Officialls, etc. such are they which
manage jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, whether Excommunications, Visitations,
Synods, Corrections, and other Courts, ad collectionem nummorum non ad
correctione^ morum. They rather visit men's purses then their persons, spinning
their Cannons and Articles like the Spider his web, where little flies are
caught but great ones break through, these are such as have learned in these
latter times, the art of commutation, they had rather have a hundred
commutations then one public satisfaction and acknowledgment. They will
connive, dispense, and what not, so that they may have Dr. Argent to make the
motion; Lords, Knights, Gentlemen and others, may whore, be drunk, and what
not, so that the fat of their sins may come ad culinam Episcopi, to the Bishop
and their Officers Kitchen. Such I suppose are our corrupt Prelates as know how
only (if they preach at all) to speak placentia, to sow pillowes under the
arme-holes of Prince and People, such as use Rhetorike to screw Prerogative as
high as Tyranny, and conclude as much to belong to the King in way of command
as to God Almighty.

But, O wonder of ages, I mean our gracious King, whom God has preserved so,
that he has no more been poisoned with Episcopal flattery.

Examine all ages, was there ever president for so many suspensions in these
Christian Churches, as by our late Bishops? was there ever such a fire kindled
as in these our days by Prelates, to the hazard of three Kingdoms at once?
were there ever Prelates and their officers so gross for notorious lusts, for
oppression, extortion, rasing fees, picking advantages, preaching seldom or
never? Were there ever any Bishops since the time of Edward the sixth, and the
reformation in those days, that have brought us so far back to a violent
necessity of such usages as might more nearly conform us to the Romish
Religion and Ceremonies, bowings, ducking, cringings, Images, etc. These Sir
and such like are they who have improved all opportunities and diligence to
discourage and supplant all Scholars in the Universities, and Ministers in
their several Diocesses, who have been orthodox and industrious, Queen
Elizabeth's Protestants, if moderate about the ceremonies, and have planted
right men (as they call them) in the room of Orthodox and Pious men, happily
learned, but ambitious, Simonicall, scandalous, and inclining to all Romish
corruption, whereunto their Ecclesiastical Patrons, I mean the Bishops, have
invited them, either by their precepts or examples. These Sir and the like are
those who are the innovating Prelates, and have quantum in illis brought ruin
upon Church and State, and laid the Plot for an universal alteration of both.

Fourthly, The professed Papist, I mean such whether convict or not convict as
acknowledge the Popes supremacy, never come to our Churches, admire their
Popish priests, especially their Jesuits (those infernal Locusts which have
come out of the bottomless pit) as their holy fathers, such as account
Protestants Heretics, and it a sacred point of devotion to kill Protestant
Princes, though in a barbarous, base, and treacherous way, such as serve God by
Images, and account ignorance the mother of devotion, costly, unnecessary, and
uncommanded ceremonies the glory of the Church. These are they who are fallen
into the great conspiracy against great BRITAINS prosperity.

Fifthly, The Popish Protestants, I mean such as are excessively charitable
concerning the professed Papist, they love not to come to Church oftener then
the laws enforce, if the State will give them leave they will conform to any
Popish usage, and are indeed Papists in every point but Supremacy, and prests
marriages, and in these likewise in their judgments they are very favorable to
the Romish way.

Sixthly, The rigid Arminian, who accounts no Doctrine sublime but what
advances his own opinion about predestination, free will, falling from grace,
and the like.

These account all men unsound, not rightly informed, or very dunces, that are
not of their opinion, these find no music in a Sermon, where the Minister
gives not a touch upon the Arminian string.

These pretend the advancing of good life by their doctrine, while in the mean
time if you observe them generally, there are none more dissolute, proud,
vain, and scurrilous, then they that prate most in the Arminian cause.

Seventhly, the Libertine, such I understand to be the swearer, drunkard,
whore-master, profaner of the Sabbath, scorner and despiser of others,
following no calling but their sinful lusts, harsh and cruel in their
dealings, as though God had granted them a charter to do what they list, for
these and the like does the land morn, many are the Princes thereof, and a
fruitful land does God make barren, for the sin of the inhabitants that dwell
therein.

Sir, I can never look on these seven sorts of men, but I call to mind that
Septemfluus Amnis the River Nilus which swelled and overflowed all EGYPT.

Yet if it please his Majesty, and this high and honorable Court of
Parliament, that three sorts of the seven, viz. the scandalous Minister, the
innovating Prelate with his Officer, together with the rigid Arminian be well
disciplined, you shall observe the other four, the corrupt Magistrate, the
professed Papist, the popish Protestant, and the Libertine presently brought in
by the power of the Gospel, and if it please his Majesty with the Parliament to
plant in the rooms of the sca^dalous Ministers and Arminians, approved
ministers for doctrine and life, it would be a true piece of policy beyond the
Bishop-craft practiced in these later times for the advancing of their
Hierarchy.

And if it so please the wisdom of the State to bestow the Lands and
Impropriations belonging to the Bishops and great Churches (besides what shall
be thought fit to settle on the Crown) upon Ministers conscientious,
industrious, able, and learned, where means is most wanting, to make some
provision for Ministers widows and children, as they do in the French
Churches, to maintain Scholars in the Universitie, and enlarge Schoolmasters
allowance, I dare confidently undertake, that learning would not be
discouraged, but the present generation would pray, and posterity for ever
would rise up to praise God for such a blessed King and such a happy
Parliament.

In the mean time, Sir, Three discouragements whisper in my ears, all
pretending that this alteration is not safe nor fecible.

Ans. First, there is more general grief, and desire of alteration in the
Ecclesiastical government then in the Civil. Secondly, the conscience is more
concerned in the one then in the other, the purse is pinched in the one, the
conscience in the other; examine this well you shall find something worth
notice. Thirdly, the Scripture seems to prescribe more for Ecclesiastical
government then Civil, leaving all Nations to liberty for their several
laws, provided none cross his own eternal commands.

Ans. I am confident no moderate wise man would desire such a level as to have
all Ecclesiastical grounds ly in a flat, high Mountains are fitter for barren
Wales, then fruitful England, little hills do not disparage the most fruitful
grounds. If some Minister have one, some two, some three hundred pounds per
annum, happily more, such hills will not be complained of, only let the
Mountains be thrown into the Seas, I mean the greater promotions, then shall
the little hills skip like lambs, when the World is more equally divided one
grain of faith may remove these Mountains into the midst of the Sea.

Israel before the Priesthood of Levy, Commonwealths were before Apostles,
Pastors, or Teachers, seniority usually gives dignity, though Rachell the
younger sister was fair and more admired by Jacob, yet Leah the elder sister
was preferred, for it was the custom of the Country (said Laban.)

Thirdly much advantage may come by levelling the Church, but unconceiveable
mischief by levelling the Commonwealth, sandy Hills may be easily levelled,
high stony Rocks cannot without difficulty. Verbum sapienti.

Ans. Sir, I fear it not, never was better King upon the Throne then our
gracious Sovereign, never any more deeply engaged to maintain Episcopacie,
but I am confident that God who has given him a gracious heart, will give him
a discerning spirit, to see the evil consequences of degenerate Episcopacie by
the clear information of his great Counsel.

Sir, excuse me for that my Remora has stayed my ship a little longer among
the projectors then I did intend, I will now come to the principles by which
they have wrought.

First no ceremony no Bishop, no Bishop no King, a principle it is true, which
(it may be) pleased the palate of a wise man, but as it has been used and
applied it has opened a gap to destruction, schism, ruin, and danger.

It has been used as though a King could not rule without the help of a
Bishop, whereas Kings swayed their scepters before the Episcopal dignity was
ever known in the World, and as like themselves as ever since, and as though a
Bishop could not subsist without a ceremony, whereas the Bishops of the
Apostles and primitive times (as they were then called) had few or no
ceremonies at all. The further you come from Christ, the Apostles, and
primitive times, the more ceremonies you shall find, in Augustines time there
were but few in comparison of after times, yet he complains of a Judaisme, and
multitude of ceremonies, above that which is meet, that in a few hundred years
were crept into the Church.

I conceive the Apostles and primitive Bishops were more pious, more
conscientious, more industrious, and did more good, in feeding and governing
the Church of God then our late Bishops, and yet they used few or no ceremonies
in comparison. Sir, these Septemvirated conspirators if you observe, have all
admired this principle, witness their inordinate zeal for the ceremonies as
though there were no Religion but in the practice of these; have not the laws
of God, I mean the express moral Commandments, been slighted and
neglected, the breaches of it easily dispensed withal? The fundamental laws
of the Kingdom shaken, while these ungodly projectors have advanced their
Ceremonies and Canons? for my part I have ever took a King for a beam of the
Deity cast into an angle of the Earth, and that Judgment and Justice make the
throne stable, ruling according to Law is the greatest honor and safety of a
Prince, and therefore God requires by Moses, that the King shall read in the
book of the Law night and day; there are two sorts of Laws, Gods own Laws,
and the fundamental laws of a Kingdom or State, the King is to see the
execution of both these, and it is most safe to preserve them with all
tenderness, so that if a King have a care of these, he may be sufficiently
supported without the help either of Bishop or Ceremony; methinks it is a
disparagement to the Crown to be supported by Bishops; sure I am Solomon's
throne was supported by Lions; and for Ceremony to support Bishops, It seems
such a sandy foundation, that with a violent storm the foundation may be
washed away, and the whole building may easily fall. Go through all the seven
sorts of men whom I have charged for the conspirators of State, you shall
hardly find a man but working a great deal of trouble, by virtue of this
principle; I will close all with crossing and thwarting of the proverb, A King
may be without a Bishop, and an Apostles Bishop without a Ceremony.

The second principle, that a papist is much honester then a puritan, and much
more to be favored; a damnable principle according to the intention and
application of it, and of the effects that have followed in this Kingdom. No
question Machiavil, Ignatius, or the Devil began to apply this old Heretical
name in such an extended and general way. For in these latter times every man
that subscribed unto the Doctrine of the Church, if he was tender in matter of
ceremony has been reputed a Puritan, nay, every man that will not swear, be
drunk, wanton, scoff and jeere others, he is a puritan, though conformable to
the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, so that the late
projectours have united together in this principle and by it have much advanced
their designs: upon this ground, the Papist has been cherished as the
honester man, men of most refined life, and exact godliness and have showed
forth eminent virtue in practice, have been brow-beaten, discountenanced, and
persecuted, drunkards have been the good Sons of the Church, temperate men
the stubborn children of their mother; O Tempora, O Mores, what strange times
were we fallen into, when light was called darkness, and darkness light,
sweet sower, and sour sweet, good evil, and evil good, when the wicked
shall be justified for a reward, and the righteousness of the righteous shall
be taken away from them? This principle has been followed with such hellish
zeal that Religion and Virtue are almost bereft of life and sense, for this
principle has put out the eyes, cut off the legs and hands of Religion and
Virtue, Help Lord for faith and truth are almost perished, and discouraged for
looking amongst the sons of men.

Thirdly, liberty is sweet, a principle which is acknowledged most true,
provided it be not extended in longitude and latitude above the true natural
dimensions of it; If it had been stretched no further then Gods service it had
been perfect freedom, but let it be only understood of the satisfaction of
the carnal will and sensual appetite then liberty is dangerous, and of bad
consequence. Now Sir, survey seriously the latter times, you shall observe the
scandalous Minister, the corrupt Magistrate, the innovating Prelate and his
Officers, the professed Papist, the Popish Protestant, the rigid Arminian, and
the Libertine, all sailing in one and the same channel of carnal liberty, and
crying out, Te, te, nos poscimus omnes, all of them with one consent desire
liberty, not freedom of conscience in indifferent and undetermined things, for
this you shall scarce have one hand amongst them, but liberty to sin, to have
their lusts, their heterodox and unsound opinions, liberty to cast off the
bonds of truth. This principle does cement their affections one to an other,
and unite them more strongly against all divine obedience, and has hitherto
made the late conspiracies against Church and State more formidable and
dreadful. These and the like diabolical principles our late projectors have
managed with what faithfulness they can, against the God of order, the law of
charity, the rules of piety, so that the beauty of these glorious Islands by
these and the like devises is much defaced and obscured. Sir, having thus
surveyed these Projectors and their principles, methinks it seems our duty,
and the duty of all good Christians and true English hearts, to Petition unto
the high and honorable Court of Parliament against these, as underminers of
State happiness, either for their reformation, or else punishing or
discountenancing of them; for so long as these have public encouragement in
our State, neither can religion be secured, nor the throne and tranquillity of
the Kingdom well established.

Its true, whiles we look upon the numbers of these confederates, upon their
strength (for they look like the sons of Anak) or upon their union, for they
seem like the scales of a Whale which a sword cannot pierce and divide easily,
they render themselves to our eyes like the Moabites and Amonites to Jehosaphat
in a very terrible form, and for our parts we seem a little flock of sheep,
and like grassehoppers in comparison: Yet me thinks (under correction of your
better judgment, unto whom I render my self as a learner) there is hope in
Israel concerning this thing provided the countermine be well wrought and
managed, I shall therefore crave your assistance to make up by your mature
thoughts what is wanting in my conceit of a Counterplot.

THE COVNTERPLOT.
SIR, there is no better Counterplot to the workers of iniquity then for the
opposite side to work contrarily, to countermine errors with truth,
unrighteousness with righteousness, uncharitableness with charity, violence
with moderation, and all sin with a sincere practice of piety. This for a
general will hold as the great mine which the Church of God is to raise
against the enemies of it.

But besides this there are three particular mines which I conceive are most
fitting at this present, to raise against the aforenamed confederate projectors
against great Britain.

The first a well managed Commission, the second is a well constituted and
orderd Church-assembly, the third is a right frame of Ecclesiastical
government. First a well managed Commission, I understand by that, first
Commissioners chosen by the house of Commons, approved by the House of Lords,
which shall be no parties nor delinquents as far as can be discerned, these
chosen out of every Shire or Dioces. If the Shire be barren of able and
sufficient men, then to appoint strangers rather then delinquents, and those
qualified with integrity, wisdom and resolution.

Secondly when the Commissioners are thus chosen for both the houses, to move
his Majesty for sufficient authority for the managing of the said commission.
That the Commissioners may be enabled to give oaths, to call before them any
parties offending or others for witnesses as they shall see cause, and to have
as large power to punish contempts, non aparences, or abuse of the
Commissioners, as the Archbishops Visitors were wont to have, in their
Metropoliticall visitations.

Thirdly, when the Commissioners are thus chosen and armed with authority, then
to have a book of Articles according to the tenor of what I shall propound in
the latter end of the discourse, and the said Commissioners to have power to
admonish, to enjoine recantation, and to deprive Ministers, or else to return
their names into the House of Commons to be censured there, and happily it might
conduce well to the work, to have a Register allowed to the Commissioners for
every Shire or Diocese, and some small fee to be paid to the said
Commissioners toward the charges of the said Commissioners and Register, by
every delinquent, as in like cases has been allowed in Bishops visitations.

Secondly a well constituted assembly or Synod, I mean an assembly of godly,
orthodox, learned, wise, and well tempered Divines, gathered by the singular
prudence and providence especially of the House of Commons, which happily might
be done most opportunely, when the commission has first discovered the
innovating Prelates, the scandalous Minister, Arminians, and Popish Protestants
within these Churches, and disabled them from judging, advising, or determining
in any Church affairs till their reformation be eminent and well noted in the
World.

In an assembly or Synod thus constituted, me thinks Sir it would do well to
have the Doctrine of the Church well determined and explaned, so that in matter
of Doctrine we might consent with all Protestant Churches, and (if it were
possible) that an agreement might be labored for betwixt us and the Southern
and Eastern Churches, and al Churches to be accounted Christian, which shall be
found to agree in matter of Doctrine; who knows but the singular industry and
wisdom of such a well constituted assembly, may fetch in the Asian, African,
European, and American Churches into greater unity and brotherly
correspondencie, and happily to the incredible strength of the Christian party
against all the sworn enemies of Christ Jesus, Nay, who can tell but that such
a reconciliation wrought in matter of doctrine may be a special means to
undermine the walls of Babylon, to bring under the Mahumetan, and to render the
Lord Christ as a more acceptable Messiah, to his old and forsaken people the
Jews. But now, Sir, I cannot but pause, being transported with such high
thoughts, and designs; but are not we the tools and instruments to serve
divine providence? Does not Creation, Redemption, and the constant benignity
of Gods providence engage us to serve God in his highest and greatest ends? Is
there any part of the World where God has ground better furnished with men of
parts, Learning, Tongues, Arts, Sciences, brave and Noble Resolutions, Ancient,
and Renowned Valor, and Honorable Achievements, then in these British Isles?
Has God so honored and qualified Great Britain, with such sufficiency and
eminency in all things? And shall not Great Britain reach out its Virtues to
serve her Lord and Master in his greatest and highest Designs? Well, Sir, Let
us not be discouraged, let us do, quantum in nobis, for our God has often
honored himself by the weakest Instruments.

Secondly, I desire the old boundaries and meeres, between actions necessary,
and indifferent, may be searched out, well viewed, restored, and determined;
the loss of Mere stones oftentimes occasioneth quarrels betwixt nearest
Neighbors, and dearest Friends, for many hundred years bypast, the
Meer-stones betwixt necessity and indifferency have been (for the most part)
lost and buried under ground, so that necessity has encroached upon
indifferency, or indifferency upon necessity.

Heavens help us in this, for in earth we could never find, for many hundred
years, men of such moderate and temperate spirits as would allow necessity and
indifferency their own, without wrong to the one side.

Sir, I profess, I would not have God to lose one foot of his own ground, nor
the Conscience its Christian privilege, neither yet the Magistrate the least
due that God allows him; only I could wish it well determined in a competent
and impartial Church Assembly.

First, whether the Conscience be tied to obedience in any thing, but what God
requires in his Word, by way of precept, or natural and necessary inference,
and whether it be fit to strain an inference too far and too curiously?

Secondly, whether all things be not indifferent, wherein the Scripture has
not determined, and the Conscience free to use them or refuse?

Thirdly, whether the liberty of Conscience in indifferent things was not
purchased by Christ?

Fourthly, If it be the Churches privilege what man, or civil Magistrate,
has power to take away my privilege by Christ, without my own consent,
testified by my self, or others trusted in my behalf?

Fifthly, whether a National Synod (after the Church is well purged) be not a
fit way to conclude our liberty in indifferent actions, especially there being
some to represent the people (happily a Committee of the House of Commons,
assisting in the Work) for the finding out of the bounds of indifferent
actions, and the prescribing Laws concerning them?

Sixthly, whether any such assembly may make any Law for indifferent actions,
but with a Protestation of Revocation upon inconveniences observed, and
general scandals?

Seventhly, whether charity be not as necessary together with other general
Rules, Phil. 4.8. and as order or subjection to Magistracy, and how these can
be all managed without crossing, or violence to some side?

But now (me thinks) whiles I look into the Arc, I cannot but tremble and
cry out with the Apostle, O the depth; these are arcana Ecclesiae, or fitter
for a well constituted Synod, then for any particular, or private person to
search into them, neither are they fit to be discussed in such a Synod without
singular moderation, charity, humility, profound judgment, and integrity.

And now Sir, I have done with my second Mine, which being well wrought, will
blow up many of the abovenamed Conspirators. Only Sir, Let us encourage the
work to the utmost for the reconciliation of all Christians in matter of
doctrine, who knows but that God, Great Britains Lord, will account the Indies
too mean a recompense for her faithfulness in erecting the Kingdom of Christ
through the World, and making the light of the Gospel more glorious? Sure I am,
the opportunity for the West Indies is fairer then ever, for my part I dare
undertake to clear it, and for nearer Kingdoms, who knows but they may say to
us, as those in the Prophecy of Zachary, We will go with you, for God is
with you.

Thirdly, A good frame of Church Government, which may represent the new
Jerusalem, coming down from Heaven, wherein the Lamb may be the light, and
that unerring Truth of Gods Word the only Rule whereby to work this frame of
building.

Sir, I am confident, we shall never be free from scandalous Ministers,
Arminians, Innovators, and Popish Protestants, till a new frame of Government
be determined, which may more certainly find out, discover, and suppress the
Enemies of God and his Church, then this of ours.

Sir, my meaning is not to assign any particular form or way for
Church Government, that is fitter for a National Synod, then my self, only
into your bosom I dare vent my conceit in some generals; I wish the three
several Governments to be well surveyed, the Episcopal, the Presbyteriall,
and the Independent ways in New England, to refine them all in a Church
Assembly, And wherein all or any of them may conform us, more nearly to the
Word, and suit with the disposition and necessity of our church, so much, Sir,
desire we may follow in any one or all of them, but where these several
Governments, or any of them, do cross the Word, and are inconsistent with the
present and distracted condition of our Church, I humbly pray to God Almighty,
they may be reprobate, so that Christ only may rule in his Church, according to
his commission from his Father.

Sir, I believe you will find upon the examination of the three several
Governments, some thing worthy of admiration, and imitation, in every one of
them; None of the three Governments but may have their several defects or
superfluities, one out of all would do well, yet so as nothing be taken but
what agrees with the Word.

Sir, by this time, I am afraid I have spent your patience, but if you please
well to consider the premises, you shall happily find some Gold, though much
dross; some sparks of Virtue, and such notions as being cast abroad, in the
World, may beget some Noble and brave thoughts in the minds of our Nation;
though I give but hints, profound heads can make larger commentaries, your
judgment I know is able to fan away the chaff, and to keep the pure grain to
your self.

Sir, It were damnable presumption in me to think the Parliament should be
bound to my directions, per omnia, yet if such or the like ways were held, I
doubt not, but Great Britain would be the wonder of Ages, and a great
contributer to the greater light and glory of all Christian Churches in the
World; who knows, but God has humbled us in the eyes of the World, to raise us
to higher honor, and that the Northern glory, I mean the Scots, and we
should be near a breach, to make way for a stronger, and nearer Union? bones
broken and well set are stronger afterward, so the Scots and we with our
brethren in Ireland, may with more constant, and cordial Union, advance the
glory of our God, our King, and Country, to make their names famous amongst
Christians, Jews, and Mahumetans; the blood of Richard the First, and Edward
the First, is not wholly lost amongst us, neither of our Progenitors, whose
names were terrible as far as the Holy Land; the near Union lately made with
the brave, ingenious, and warlike Hollander, I look on as the first fruits of
a greater Union, and a Reconciliation in Doctrine and affections amongst
Christians through the whole World.

Sir, I know you are active, Let us stir and set forward Gods great works in
the World; who knows what God would have done? happily in the midst of these
great designs, the distressed Palsgrave unto whom our Nation owes much for
neernesse in blood, may be relieved: mistake me not, let all be deliberately
surveyed, my end is not movere quieta, sed quietare motum.

Sir, we are all Gods tools to work with all, let him be the end of all, we
may wish and will, but the Kingdom, power, and glory is Gods, let him have the
honor unto all Eternity. Amen.


