A Memorial for Reformation of England by (...) 1596

De Monarchia Hispanica

Campanella Robert Parsons Adam Contzen C^d^ Richelieu


Ex. Sump: M. Sp.


THE PLOTS OF JESUITS: ( Viz. of Robert Parsons an Englishman, Adam Contzen a
Moguntine, Tho. Campanella a Spaniard, etc.) How to bring ENGLAND To the Roman
Religion Without Tumult.

Translated out of the Original Copies.

Printed for Mich. Spark at the Blue Bible in Green Arbor, London, 1653.

The Stationer to the Reader.
MEeting with two Editions of a small (but very learned and pious) Treatise,
highly commended by the most eminent Ministers in France (to say nothing of
some in England) Entitled, An Apology for the Reformed Churches, against
those who accuse them of Schism. with the Judgment of an Universitie-man,
etc. And finding in the Preface of each Edition some mention of the Plots of
Parsons, Contzen* and Campanella, and other Jesuits, and of their Directions
how to bring England to the Superstition and Idolatry of the Church of Rome,
but seeing far more in one Edition of the said book than in another, I conceive
my self obliged in Conscience, and faithfulness to my Religion and Native
Country, not to suffer a Discovery, of which very excellent use may be made
(for the preservation of both) to lie hid any longer: which in brief is the
cause of this puhlication. Adieu, and Be watchful.

Mich. Spark.

Contzens Plot, to cheat a Church of the Religion established therein, and to
bring in Popery without noise or tumult; which was mentioned in the Preface to
the Apology and is taken out of the second Book of his Politics, chapter 18, 19.
p. 103, 104, etc.
MOst of the things before spoken touching the conservation of Truth and
Religion, are profitable to reduce wanderers into the way. Yet they must be
diversely applied by Politic men. It Is difficult to find out truth, but it is
more hard to persuade him that erreth: Yet it is the duty of a Prince even in
this to bestir himself earnestly, that wicked opinions be taken away.

The first means. What Musicians observe in tuning their instruments, gently
setting up the strings by little and little; and what in curing diseases,
Physicians practice, abating noxious humors, by degrees and pauses, the same
must be done in a Commonwealth, laboring under the malady of errors.
Although I approve not lingering bootlesse proceedings, since they often beget a
desisting from the design. What ever means can be used, my counsel is, that
they be attempted; but in a soft and sure pace, for fear of a precipice. Here
mild commands and admonitions do very much further the work.

The second this. It Is no hard matter for any Prince in Europe, to call back
men's minds to the Ancient rites of their Predecessors, if he list. A matter
heretofore held impossible to be effected: but now men begin again to love the
old Religion. Nor can they be so held in by their Ministers, but that many do
every year turn to the Catholic unity. What they once most greedily desired,
they now cast aside with disdain. This levity of the vulgar to admire new
things, and contemn old, is fatal. Many Provinces in Germany have endured many
Religions: now they retain none, being intent on the will of their Governors.
One cause of this is, as I said but now, Levity and Ignorance of the Truth.
Another, the impossibility of holding people long ignorant of the lewdness of
heresies; and that they find heretics to shift t^^^r opinions every year.
It Is as if you should set a company of blind men to run a race; sooner will
all miss then one get to the mark.

Thirdly, Arch-hereticks are to be banished the Commonwealth; at once, if it
may safely be done; if not, then by degrees. Boisterous winds being sent
packing, the sea will become calm: and error which wants a protector, will
soon be ruined.

In alterations I have observed these twelve things following, for the most
part out of the History of the change of Religion in the Palatinate, the Acts
of Marpurg, and the Edict of Brandenburg. 1. They concealed their purpose of
altering Religion, and rooting out Lutheranisme; not so that the wiser sort
could not perceive it, but that the common people might not see it, and raise
tumults. 2. By the art of the Zuinglians some were suborned, who should crave
the exercise of the Reformed Religion, and that with many sugared humble words;
That the Prince might not be thought to be of his own accord inclined to odious
novelty, but only graciously indulgent to liberty of conscience, and to love
and cherish that. Facility in a Prince is commonly extolled; even when he
yields to those things which are fitter to be denied. 3. One Church, or so (
and not above) was petitioned for: That this suit might not seem harsh to the
multitude, who in the mean time were to have many more, and were not very
solicitous of any. 4. Notwithstanding the jealousy of the Lutherans did here
oppose it self, seeing that with the Church the maintenance would be withdrawn;
therefore they think of a conference and pacification. They assemble in the
Court, the matter is debated before the Princes Council: a notary and witnesses
are denied them. [But this course is by no means to be approved, for each part
ought to have liberty. Otherwise, if men be born down with the power of the
stronger side, the Victors shall ever be esteemed to have had the worst cause.
This was the case of the Arminians in Holland: whereas they who had the
advantage of the Princes favor, if they had indeed believed the goodness of
their cause, ought to have entered the lists upon equal terms.] 5. An Edict was
published that none should cast aspersions upon another, but by all means
cherish peace and concord. This proved an effectual engine to further the
mutation: for hereby none durst contradict the Calvinists, no not so much as
name them; and the Prince was not traduced as a Patron of heresies, but
applauded as a Lover of peace. 6. A Disputation was appointed in the
University. 7. All this while there was no open show of making Zuinglianisme
heir to Lutheranisme; but only this, that peace might be settled: for nothing
was desired but that the Lutherans (retaining all their dignities and revenues)
would vouchsafe to sit in Consistory with the rest, and consult as Brethren;
which when they refused, they were accused as proud and disobedient to
Authority, and seemed to deserve a dismission. Hitherto things were thus
carried, that trial might be made what the people would bear: for if any tumult
had arose, a fair excuse might have been made for all things hitherto. 8. When
the people of Heidelburg petitioned for the continuance of their Lutheran
Preachers, the matter was passed over in silence, without answer; and care
taken, that those men who were petitioned for, should be traduced as too
furious and heady. And the people were fed so long with hope, till at length
they laid aside all care of Lutheranisme and hope together. 9. When all things
now seemed ripe, the Lutherans were commanded to depart from their Parochial
charge, and all the Churches bestowed upon the Calvinists: Nor durst they
complain, for if they did, they were banished. But now betaking themselves to
domestic cares, they only sued for a pension, immunity from taxes, and the
like: The Calvinists in the mean while laughing, to see a matter of such height
and consequence, brought so low as to make such humble and abject petitions.
10. Whereas the young Scholars of the Universitie were Lutherans, upon them
also they practiced with diverse arts. Stipendiaries, such as were maintained at
the Elector's charge) were put to their choice; whether they would be
Calvinists or be expelled. And thus an exceeding great alteration came on a
sudden without any tumult; for the Country Preachers followed the motion of
the superior wheels. 11. When the Lutherans (Professors in the Universitie,
and Country Preachers) refused to yield up their dignities, the Prince told
them, He wondered at them, seeing he had never taken them into his protection,
nor given them any new possession of their places. (For in that Country, all
places and offices become void upon the death of the Prince, and the power of
bestowing them is in the Successor.) 12. In Hassia they went on very slowly,
and by little and little. Nor was Calvinisme offered them at once, but only a
small part of it. And the people come on much more willingly, if at the same
time they be whistled another way, as to Arminianisme, or some other Sect which
may seem more odious. Lastly, both sides fell to writing; but that party which
was most favored at Court, quickly prevailed. And the wickedness of the
Lutherans (which upon all occasions was made known) did much advance the cause
of their Adversaries.

The fourth means which I have seen put in execution heretofore, and still kept
on foot, is this: viz. That such as are adverse to the Romane-Catholick
Religion, be put by their honors, dignities and public offices. Nor is this
unjust, That he who hinders the welfare of the Commonwealth should be kept
from the honors and commodities of it. Men guilty of great crimes are thrust
from their dignities; why then should blasphemers, and contemners of Truth be
admitted thereto?

A fifth means. Let those particular Tenants which hear ill among the vulgar,
and at first sight seem absurd, be culled out, and load laid upon them.

A sixth. Make profit of the quarrels of erring men.

A seventh. Let all secret Conventicles and public meetings be strictly
forbidden.

Eighthly. By the severity of Laws and punishments compel the obstinate to
duty; but let the rigor of laws be slowly drawn out, unless where there is
danger of a contagion. Let those which be most dangerous be taken away, the
rest by the Authority of the Prince will soon be brought into order. Within
these few late years, a hundred thousands have been converted to the Roman
Religion in France; in Germany more. Not one of the Germane Princes that has
assayed to draw his Subjects on to the Catholic Religion, has ever met with
any power, resisting his Decrees in that behalf made and executed. Only the
Netherlanders broke out into Rebellion: but the cause thereof was not Religion
alone, nor was that pretended; but their privileges and liberty. The Dominion
of a forain Nation over them (a thing abhorred by ingenuous men) and the
exaction of Tenths stirred up that people to sedition.

It Is I confess the opinion of some Politicians, That men are not to be
compelled. But those which so advise are in an error, and give counsel not
against the safety of Religion only, but even of the Commonwealth. For by a
wholesome Law men may be overruled, that they shall not do evil. And a good
Law will soon reduce those, who being of tender years, are either not at all,
or very little tainted with heresy. And so if a compulsory Reformation should
not do good upon old men, it may make the younger Catholic. And I know many
Children have been a means of converting their Parents. There are many examples
of this in Bavaria, Stiria, Carinthia, and the Low Countries.

Ninethly. Care is to be taken for integrity of manners, and purity of life.
For the filthy lives of Roman Clergymen, have made, augmented, and still do
uphold heresies. And oftentimes in my disputes with Heretics, I have observed,
that after very weak arguments they fall to accusing the ill lives of our
Clergymen, and speak of things which can neither be denied nor defended. If
the Bishops be not able to amend this, God will send an avenger, who will take
away the wicked men and their wickedness both together. Thus have the Turks
got possession of Asia, Egypt, Greece, etc. And Religion will be rooted out of
Europe, unless the manners of men be answerable to the sanctity of their
Doctrine.

CHAP. XIX. Other helps there be, which wisdom may suggest, according to the
variety of time and place. The Sinenses are taken with the Mathematics; the
Japonians with Ethics; the Americans with Ceremonies and Music: All ways are
to be tried.

And first Music. Paulus Samos^^enus turned certain Ecclesiastical hymns
into obscene and enticing rimes. Thus the Arians and Pelagians destroyed the
faith and discipline of the Church. Why then should not an Orthodox Prince make
use of that for curing, which Impostours have found out to be a means of
destroying?

Secondly. Before the banes of Matrimony be publicly asked, Let both the man
and woman be ordered and compelled to yield an account of their faith. Upon
this occasion they may be instructed in the true [Romane] Religion: and so
while they promise to continue in the Church, and ever to hold fast the Ancient
faith, they are by degrees fastened to the truth, and cannot but love it.

Thirdly. To this of Marriage other things are to be adjoined. Let no
Ceremonies, but those of the Catholic Church approach the Font. Let none have
the honor to be Godfathers, unless they have given good testimony of their
sincerity in the faith. Let no man have the honor of Christian burial,
unless he has been a partaker of the Sacraments of the Church.

Fourthly. If it fall out, that wandering souls must be leisurely reclaimed, and
by art; and that the Propators of perverse opinions cannot be put from the
places they once enjoyed; then let an Orthodox Magistrate so bring it about,
that the instituting, presenting, confirming and examining of such men be
committed to him. For so he may chase away every one that is apt to do
mischief. Some wrangling Fellows that regard not controversies between
Romane-Catholicks and Protestants, and study only to enrich themselves or to
comply with the Prince, he may (safely, now and then) set over those Churches.
So shall he be able to abate the rage of heresy, and yet not be troubled to
remove the unlearned: For by that means error will grow into contempt. And
because unskilful men are wont to err often, all constancy in errors will be
taken away by this means.

Fifthly. Likewise, let him nourish the differences of Preachers which are in
error: and let him so work, that they may often confer and wrangle. For by
this means, when all shall understand that there is nothing settled and certain
among them, they will join in truth.

Sixthly. Many other means there be, which prudent care will dictate to a
Prince of its own accord. All those things which draw love and honorable
esteem to the Prince, are of use, to fetch over the people easily to embrace
his opinion in matters of Religion. Of this sort are, his easing them of taxes,
excise, speedy supplies to any part of the Country spoiled by fire, provision
of victuals, and other necessaries. Hereby it will come to pass, that what
ever they esteem distasteful to the Prince; they will hold in detestation. If a
Prince make use of these means, he may in a short time root out the Protestant
Religion, although in the beginning it seem too strong for his Laws or Him.

Campanella his Plot.
CAmpanella in his Book de Monarchia Hispanica (printed in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth) showing the King of Spain how to bring England under his own
subjection, and to the Roman Religion, has these words, The same advice that
Cardinal de Richelieu gave the late King of France; a little before his death.
c. 22. Instiget Primores Comitiorum aut Parliamenti ut Angliam in formam
Reipublicae reducant; that is, Let the King of Spain instigate the leading men
of the ( English) Parliament, to bring England to the form of a Commonwealth.
And, Omnino id agat ut Anglorum vires infringat, ad quod efficiendum Naves
Hollandiae and Frisiae sufficerent; si nimirum Classi Anglicae opponerentur; ut
infra palam fiet, etc. that is, By all means let him make it his business, to
break the strength of England. To effect which, the ships of Holland and Frisia
will be enough, if they be set against the English; as by and by I will show,
etc.

This 25 chapter begins thus, Quamvis Anglus, etc. Although the English does
of all Nations seem least to effect an Universal Monarchy, yet they do much
hinder Spains attaining it; Queen Elizabeth has given us examples, for she
has cherished corrupted humors, and helped Protestants with advice and
supplies in the Low Countries against the Catholic King, and in France against
the most Christian Prince; For she is Queen of an Island which abounds with
Ships and Soldiers, and makes a prey of all that Spain has in the North, and
ramble even to America, where though they cannot erect a new Kingdom, yet they
do the Spaniard very much harm; for Drake the English man has gone round the
world more than once, though Magalanes did it before him. And it may come to
pass, that all the Kingdom of Baccalaos (which is nearer the English, and
more commodious to them, by reason of the temperature of the air) may some
time or other be pulled into their possession: Certain it is, and evident
enough, that if the King of Spain could conquer but England and the
Low Countries, he would quickly become the Monarch of all Europe, and of the
greatest part of the Newfound world

Campanella goes on, advising the Spaniard to erect some new Schools or
Colleges in Flanders, and to usher a new Religion into England; first, with a
new Philosophy (himself has furnished us with one) Anglorum Religio facile
restingui non potest, There is more to the same purpose in the 10. Chap. which
begins thus; Omnes Magnates Monarchiam, etc. All great men, when they have
gone about to set up a Monarchy, have altered the Sciences, and sometimes
Religion it self, that they might be admired. In the same Chap. his 7.
direction is, to shut up all Schools wherein the Greek and Hebrew Languages are
taught, because they are (says he) the causes of heresies, and so destroy
government.
nisi aperiantur Scholae in Flandria; interventuque illarum spargantur semina
Schismatum in scienti is naturalibus, Stoicis videlicet, Peripateticis, and
Telesianis. The Religion of the English cannot easily be brought to nothing,
unless Schools be opened in Flanders, and by help of them, the seeds of
Schisms in Natural Sciences, and Stoic, Peripatetick, and Telesian Philosophy
be scattered abroad.

The last page of this 25 Chap. is as follows; Insula haec reducetur in
formam Reipublicae, quae perpetuas inimicitias cum Scotia gerat, actionesque
suas non nisi lent perficiet, etc. When this Island shall become a Republic,
it will be at perpetual enmity with Scotland, and move very slowly, and so do
the less harm to Spain; whereupon, the King of Spain, as soon as the throne is
empty, may step in, pretending to help the English: But let him be sure to keep
correspondency with some English Noblemen, who have power over the adjacent
Islands, and let every one of them have full and absolute dominion in his
several place, as we read it was in the days of old. Then let him tamper with
the Nobility of Ireland, that when the Queen is dead, that Nation may be formed
either into a Commonwealth, or (at least) into a Kingdom distinct by it self,
then let him promise supplies to each of those Noblemen apart, and so much the
more, because in that Kingdom or Island, Catholics (especially Monks of the
ord^r of St. Francis) are very much beloved. Now the Irish agree better with
the Spaniards than with the English, either because their manners or climates
are alike, and because their Countries are near one another. And there are in
Ireland many vagabond persons who cannot endure to be in subjection, and yet
they are good Catholics and able to do the King of Spain excellent service in
the matter which we now speak of.

These and the like things may easily be prepared, that when Queen Elizabeth is
dead they may be put in execution; for every one knows what bloody Civil
wars, what alterations and changes have been oftentimes in England. So that
what I have propounded will not seem strange or impossible.

To conclude: The same Campanella in his 8. Chapter of the same book lays down
this rule or maxim, That the way to keep up or increase the King of Spains
Monarchy, is, To keep his own Subjects in peace, and his Neighbors in
contention.

Tho. Campanella having thus given the King of Spain directions how to get and
keep the English Nation;

Rob. Parsons goes a step further, and will help him to a title to the Crown of
England: For in the year M.DXCIII. he published a book under the name of ^.
Doleman, Entitled, A Conference about the next Succession to the Crown of
England, divided into 2 parts. Concerning this book (being condemned in
Parliament, Ann. 35. Eliz. when it was enacted, that who ever should have it in
his house should be guilty of high Treason, and the Printer was hanged, drawn
and quartered) See a book entitled, His Majesty's Messages for peace. p. 125.
Printed by R. Royston, 1648. Or see Mr. Prynne's Speech in the House of
Commons, Dec. 4. 1648. p. 109. Where Mr. Prynne affirms, That he himself and
others complained of this book, but that nothing was done to vindicate the
Houses from this gross imputation.
The first part was for ch^stising of Kings and proceeding against them, etc.
And was lately reprinted by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, and called, Several
Speeches made at a Conference.

The second part was to prove that the Infanta of Spain was the legal Heir to
the Crown of England, the penning whereof did much indear him to the King of
Spain, the Pope and Cardinals, as Roman Priests relate.

Not to repeat any thing of Parsons Memorial which was mentioned p. The same
that Gu^damore wished a Roman Catholic to expect, and then (and not till then)
a toleration of the Roman Religion.
13. of the Preface to the Apology, wherein he advises to destroy the Common
law of England, etc. And to have no Preachers but Itinerary: I shall only
transcribe a few lines which you may read in an ordinary book, Entitled, A
Reply to Fa. Parsons Libell, written by Will. Clark a Roman Priest, where p.
74. are these words Such as have read [Parsons Memorial for Reformation] being
Priests and men of credit, unto some of whom Fa. Parsons himself showed the
said book (as secretly as now it is kept) do report, That his directions, are
that the Municipal Laws of our Country [England] shall be so altered, that the
Civil Laws must bear the sway. And a little after, For our Clergy also they
say, that all men should be put to pensions in the beginning; and the Colleges
both in Oxford and Cambridge in the same sort deprived of their Lands and
Revenues, and become Pensioners -- All Religious orders (except only one, i.e.
Jesuits) he excludes out of England (as they affirm) for the first seven
years and more; that Master Jesuits in the mean time may have the sway of all,
and enter into the houses, livings, and possessions of other religious Orders,
etc.

And now Robert Parsons friends knowing what an excellent cloak pretenses of
sanctity are to the greatest impieties, and how probable a means to make them
pass without discovery or suspicion, printed a book, Entitled, A Christian
directory (often beyond the seas) under Parsons name; whereas indeed he was not
the Author of it: for as you may read in a book, Entitled, A Dialogue between
a Secular Priest and a Lay-Gentleman, printed at Rhemes, MDCI. p. 107. The
credit thereof was due to Granada, who laid the platform to Father Parsons
hand, and gave him the principal grounds and matter of it: which also was
deserved by Mr. Brinckley for the Penning (as diverse report.) And this book was
printed in London 3 years ago, with this Title, A Christian Directory written
by the R. Father Rob. Parsons, Priest of the Society of Jesus; and is one of
the chief books that the Roman Priests in England commend to their
Penitentiaries. A fit preparatory to his other doctrines*

He that would read more of such Jesuiticall Plots, may read (besides the books
which were cited* p. 13. of the said Preface to the Apology of the Reformed
Churches) a book, Entitled, Jubileum sive Speculum Jesuiticum, printed 1643.
and Alphousus de Vargas de Stratagematis politic is Societatis Jesu, 1641. and
Hispanicae dominationis Arcana. All in 16o. Or, Cardinal d' Ossat's Letters:
Or, Sir William Boswel's particular Discovery, printed at large in Mr. Prynne's
Romes-Master-peece, p. 13. Where the plot was TO DESTROY THE KING AND THE
ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY, and then to bring England to the Roman Religion,
and (as Parsons in his Manifestation phraseth it) make it an example to all
other Catholic Countries; which book was printed in the year 1644. by

Mich. Spark.

FINIS.

