THE SOUL OF FASTING: OR AFFECTIONS Requisite in a Day of, solemn Fasting and
Humiliation.

According to the Pattern,

Neh. 9.5. etc. By H. P

Imprimatur.

Charles Herle.



LONDON; Printed by M. Simmons for Thomas Underhill at the Bible in Woodstreet.
1644.

Christian Reader,
FRom the Experience, that oftentimes a little thing helps the Weak, and
specially the Willing; and from the Desire to prevent the great Evil of
Formalitie in our solemn Humiliations; These few Advertisements are offered to
thy Eye and heart. Confident that the Substance of them is beyond Depising,
except among those, who not only Deny, but Despise all the Power of
Godliness. I have ventured to send them out, thus naked and alone. If they
Profit thee any thing, thy Prayers may help to quicken to Some further
endeavor for thy Good, him who is devoted

November. 20. 1644. Thine and the Churches servant in Christ altogether, H. P.

The Soul of Fasting. Nehem. 9.5, etc.
1. AN Awful Regard and Reverence of the Glorious Majesty of the Great God,
with whom we have to do by a through Apprehension of His Infinite and
Incomprehensible Perfection, in all His Attributes, and of His Absolute
Soveraigntie, as Creator, Preserver, and Ruler of Us and all things in the
World, ver. 6.

2. Thankfulness for all the Goodness of GOD vouchsafed to us, by a Large
Apprehension of all His manifold Favor, General to His Church, to Our Nation,
Particular to Us, and our Friends, Temporal, Spiritual; Illustrated
marvellously by our Deservings, not only of no good, but of extreme ill, ver.
7. etc.

3. Sorrow for Our Sins, and our Nations, and Forefathers Sins, by a deep
apprehension of the cursed Nature of Sin in General, and vileness of such
Sins in Particular; Aggravated by all circumstances that may be; Specially by
GODS Mercies and Chastisements, ver. 16. etc.

4. Sense of Our Misery, Felt and Feared, all proceeding from GODS Hand, from
His Displeasure, Provoked by Our Sins, and Impossible to be avoided, but by
His Favor, which is not to be presumed upon, if We continue in Our Sins,
ver. 32. etc.

5. Faith in the Covenant, Truth, Goodness, and Power of GOD, for all times
and purposes, ver. 32.

6. A Covenant renewed with GOD of all Observance and Fidelity, specially to
Amend what we have acknowledged amiss in our selves, and professed Sorrow for,
and Fear of, before GOD or Men, or both, ver. 39. and Chap. 10. throughout.

Directions about these.
1. IN the Word read or preached, those things are to be most carefully
observed, which may quicken and confirm any of these.

2. All these are to be presented in Prayer, Summarily in every solemn
Supplication such a day, private or public: but the enlargements may be
varied, and one while more of one; and another while of another.

3. Beforehand it would be greatly helpful to have written by us; 1.
Amplifications upon GODS Attributes; 2. Catalogues of Choicer Mercies; 3.
Catalogues of Sins; 4. Aggravations of Sins.

4. The Day is to be begun with those thoughts, specially which relate to our
selves, though taking in others also.

5. And it is not to be ended without some secret, yet solemn review of the
souls behavior, from first to last; and an earnest Laboring to fasten all
the good thoughts it has had, upon it, and to reinforce the suit to GOD, to
settle them upon it, firmly and lastingly.

The GOD of All Wisdom and Grace, teach us to practice and improve these
Remembrances, to His Glory, and Our Eternal Good by Jesus Christ.
FINIS.

