THE Newest and Best News FROM IRELAND.

Being a true Relation of a bloody Battle, wherein 18000. of the Rebels were
slain by the great Valor of the English and Scots, under the Command of the
Right Honorable, The L. Dungarvan. General Lesley. Sir Simon Harcourt. Sir
Will. Coortee. Sir Charles Lucas. Mr. Francis Moore.
Expressed in a letter sent from Colonel Plunquet, Lieutenant general of the
Province of Lemster, to the Lord Phelim O-Neale, General of the Rebels.

Lemster, February 13. 1641.

The number of our men there slain, is not yet certainly known.

LONDON, Printed for R. C. 1642.

THE Relation OF A Victorious Battle fought near Dublin, by an Army of
English and Scots, to the great terror and overthrow of the Rebels.
I Render your Honor right humble and hearty thanks for your good opinion of
my merit and deserving, and promoting me so far incapable and unworthy of that
honorable place of trust and authotity, to be your Honors Colonel Lieutenant
general of the Province of Lemster; which place of trust so committed to my
care and fidedlity, I will to the best of my ability discharge, with all
diligence and integrity. I am commanded humbly to present to your Honor, the
present estate of the Army; and what has passed since I had the honor and
favor to be Lieutenant: When first I came to my charge, I mustred the Army,
and framed to a posture of war, to defend that Province from the invasion of
our enemies, and to be in a readiness upon occasion to take the field against
them. Since which time we have made many incursions and sallies out upon our
Adversaries, by which good service has been done. After which, according to
your Honors directions we led forth our Army into the Province of Dublin,
where we encamped near Dregheda; of which Town, Charles Lord Moore is Lord
Vicount; where at a Crete or Cottage, we placed Colonel Art Roe Mac Mahon,
with about two thousand men, a mile distance, or thereabouts from the Town,
and quartered the rest of our Army near adjacent about the Town: during the
time of our encamping there, a Captain of the English, Mr. Francis Moore, with
a Troop of Horse, and a company of Foot, made out of the Town; and the day
being very gloomy and misty, we could not discover them; by which opportunity
they passed by us, and marched toward the Crete wherein was the said Colonel
Art Roe Mac Mahon, and his company, where they assaulted the same, and by
misfortune took the said Colonel, whom the said Moore with his own hand at an
advange, slew, and diverse other^ they took prisoners: which was the gre^test
loss we have sustained since I was there Commander, we having obtained far
greater enterprises against them.

From this place we withdrew our Forces, and marched to join with the whole
body of the Army in the Province of Dublin, under the command of the right
Honorable and noble Colonells and Captains, the Lord Mount Garret, Mount
Delvin, Don Luci, Mount Cargena, Mount Limbrey, and Captain Oneale, and others,
which we happily achieved, and were willingly and nobly entertained Then fell
we all that were Officers into Consultation of drawing up heads of our desires
and demands to the King concerning our Religion and the government of this
Kingdom, which we at length concluded upon, and agreed to present the same to
the Lords of the Council in Dublin, by them to be considered of and
transported by them into England, there to be ratified and confirmed by the
King and State there, as well as the State of this Kingdom, which since has
been rejected; whereupon we took the field, and ranked our Army in good
order for battle, and then marched toward Dublin; but in the way were met
with an Army of English and Scots, under the Command of the Lord Dungarvan,
General Lesle, Sir Simon Harcourt, Sir William Cootre, Sir Charles Lucas, and
others, which we could not avoid, but took the field, where was a most cruel
battle fought between us, lasting two days, where we lost Eighteen Thousand
men; but justly we cannot yet tell how many were slain on the enemies part,
which misfortunate slaughter much weakened our Army; yet were we again much
comforted, when we heard of aid and Assistance coming to us from the King of
Spain, of Men, Ammunition and Money, in Seven ships of the Dunkerks; we also
have intelligence that aid is coming from France, to help us, which we
earnestly desire; It also rejoices us that his Holiness the Pope is not
forgetful, or unmindfull of our sufferings, and the justness of our cause,
and our prayers are daily for his increase in honor and glory, for his
presents sent your Honors, and for his Banner sent us to display, which we to
the loss of our lives and fortunes will fight under, for the defense of our
Religion, instituted and professed by his Holiness, and Saint Peter.

And thus may it please your Honors, I have informed you of the proceedings of
us since I had the honor to be employed in the service of God, and the defense
of our rightful privileges and Liberties, under your Honors Wisdom and
Prudence, whom I wish and pray long may continue in your Honorable place of
Government, to be the chiefest instrument of reducing our Religion and Laws to
their ancient glory, fame and renown,

Tudcaster, Febr. 12, An. Dom. 1641. Your Honors Most humble and obedient
Servant, Plunquett.

FINIS.

