THE CONFESSION OF THOMAS PJTS: Who was Executed in Smithfield, on Saturday
last, being the 12. of October; for endeavoring to betray RVSSELL-HALL To the
Enemy.

Which Confession he desired to be Written from his own Mouth, at the place of
Execution: That it might be a warning to prevent others for offending in the
like manner.

Published according to Order.

London, Printed for John Raworth, October. 14. 1644.

The Confession of Thomas Pits, Farmer, in the County of Stafford, A little
before his Execution in Smithfield, the 12. of October, 1644.
I desire that one would write down my Confession, whereby others may take
example.
GOOD PEOPLE,
I desire the Lord to bless you all, and I desire all your prayers to Heaven
for me. I desire to speak to you all in general. I am here justly brought to
this place, for mine offense, by seeking to betray a Garrison under the
Parliaments command: In that Act I was made an Instrument, betwixt two
Commanders; of which Treachery, I was not ignorant: And for that fact, I
confess, That I deserve this death; and desire all Spectators to take notice
of it. I for my own part, have been bred up under a powerful Ministry, and
have had good education, and have been a great Professor; but the Lord knows my
heart, I have been a dissembling Hypocrit, And now I here do heartily confess
the offense; and the Lord bless you all, and give every one grace to take
notice thereof, and to be warned thereby: And the Lord bless this great City;
and the Lord bless the Country likewise; and the Lord make every man
faithful. I have been a great Professor, but I have not done my Masters will.
I have been a great sinner, and I now call to mind a Text in the first of the
Romans, from the 27. verse to the end, of 17 or 18 sins which I am gui^ty of
all: therefore I suffer justly. I desire all men to take notice of my saying;
and I desire, that if any Magistrates, or Parliament men be here, or if not,
those that have most relation to them, would take notice of it, 1. That great
offenders may be brought to condign punishment, as well as lesser: For my part,
I desire to justify that good Council of War, and the Lord bless them, for
they have dealt justly with me; and there be still many Achans in the Camp. The
Lord bless the Parliament, and keep them from Treachery; and the Lord bless
the King; and I desire every honest man to honor Him, as He does honor God: I
desire the Lord to bring Him home to His Parliament, and to remove far from
Him, evil Councillors; and the Lord bless His Friends, and Well-willers: I
am persuaded, that the Kings heart is honest, but only misled; and I hope he
will return to His Parliament: That though I am now a dying man, yet you that
hear me this day, may enjoy a happy Peace. And now you that hear me, and are to
celebrate a Sabbath to morrow, I beseech you all to prepare your selves for it;
and labor to rise early to fit you for the Lords Work: If any of you be to go
to a Country Market, though in the depth of Winter, yet you will be up before
day to go to it; therefore I beseech you to make use of the time, for the
Market of your souls: Labor to hearken to this Word of God, and labor to
carry it home with you, and to practice it. I have lived in a Country where
few powerful Ministers are; and you that have slighted the Word of God
formerly, take heed of it: I have been a great offender in this particular, and
I have played the Hypocrite exceedingly; I have been very zealous outwardly,
and I have kept many Fast days very strictly, both public and private; I have
enjoyed the company of the best Ministers, and I have associated my self with
most religious people, and yet have played the Hypocrite exceedingly: The Lord
forgive me, and good people pray for me; and now lift up all your hearts to God
for me: I have known much, and done little, I pray God give you all grace to
labor to know much, and to practice it.

Now concerning my being in Garrison in Russell-Hall in Staffordshire, being
urged by Master Smart, Minister of Gods Word, to deliver my opinion concerning
them. For their profession, they do all profess God; but I never heard nor
saw, so much swearing, and drunkenness, and other prophanations, as was in
that place: For the Martial of that place, he would swear and domineer, and
was so discontented, as if he would cause the stones to fly out of the Walls.
Now the Lord amend that and other places, under the Parliaments Command; and
good people pray for me, and help me in remembering me to utter what I have to
speak: The Gentleman that employed me about this Treachery, was the Governor
of Dudley Castle, his name is Luson, he is my Landlord, and I hold a Farm of
him for my life which this day I must surrender: he sent to me to come to him,
and asked me what I did so often at Russell-Hall, I told him I had several
occasions, sometimes to receive money, and sometimes to pay money; he told me,
he desired me to do one message for him to the Governor, that was to bay that
Garrison of him, and he would give him eleven hundred pounds for it; I told him
of it, and he sent me with Letters back, and so I carried messages from one to
the other: but Captain Tuckhill did not de^iver it up; yet offered me, if I
could make the match, he would give me one hundred pounds of it; yet I never
asked him for any money, neither had any, but one forty shillings which he gave
me without demand: And I thank God, that the d^livery up of that Castle, is hid
from my eyes. Luson did give me no money, but he promised to be as good to me,
as seven years Rent. I desire you that write it, to take notice thereof, that
it may be published, that all the world may take warning of such false
heartedness. I confess my offense as great, and far greater then others,
because that I have been a great Professor, and have stood for this Cause now
in hand, and have always held it to be just and right; and all my Friends, and
Children, have stood for this Cause; and we do verily believe it to be the
Cause of God: but it is for my sins, and the sins of other Hypocrites, that
Gods Cause has been so much dishonored and beaten down. I desire you all,
that Religion may not be stained by my suffering, nor good men slighted, nor
Gods Cause fair the worse for my Hypocrisy. I never read, but there was some
wicked amongst the most godly: There is some Chaff amongst the finish Wheat,
and one Judas amongst the twelve Apostles: there was one in Gods Camp, and
therefore, I beseech you all judge not ill of the Cause of Christ for my
offense. One thing I desire to speak again to you that are Magistrates, and
intimate with them, I desire you to speak these last words of mine to them; I
mean to the Lord Mayor, and this Honorable Council of War; and tell them,
that I beseech them, That great offenders may be brought to trial, as well as
lesser. Now for you that are employed in Gods Cause, and are called forth to
fight his battle, go courageously, and know, that you are never without God for
your Captain, as you may read, 2 Chronicles. 14.8, 9, 10, 11. and Judges 5.23. For
the Earl of Denbigh I hear, is going out for Staffordshire; the Lord bless and
prosper him. I hear and hope he is an honest man, I pray God increase it, and
bless him: I could wish he were now with his Forces there; for that Country
is in great want of them: And I could wish that he would take with him, some
good and faithful Ministers, to plant in that barren Country.

And you Master Smart, I beseech you be an Instrument of helping faithful
Ministers amongst your Countrymen.

And now good people, I beseech you all pray for me, and hear me once more: I
wish I could be heard of all, ^^at are to enjoy a Sabbath the next day; Labor
to prepare your selves for Gods Service, and to hearken diligently to Gods
Word; Labor to renew your Covenant, that of late you have made with God: Let
these last words of a dying man prevail with you, To stick close to God and his
Cause. I confess, I heard of the Covenant, but I never took it: you that have
taken it, be careful to renew it and keep it. And so the Lord bless you all,
King, Parliament, City, Country, and all.

Now being desired by the Ministers that stood by, that if he found any
spiritual comfort before his last breath, that he would give some token of it;
and immediately after his turning off the Ladder, he lifted up his hands
toward Heaven, and gave three strokes upon his Breast, which we take for a
Testimony, that his soul is now at rest in Heaven.

FINIS.

