THE SHARPNESS OF THE SVVORD: OR, ABNERS PLEA FOR ACCOMMODATION.

A SERMON Lately Preached BY JOHN PIGOT, Curate of St Sepulchers, LONDON.

(...) ESAIAS 9.5. Every battle of the Warrior is with confused noise, and
garments rolled in blood.

2 SAMUEL 24.14. Let us fall now into the hand of the Lord (for his mercies art
great) and let me not fall into the hand of man.

Jan: 2d LONDON, Printed for JOHN CLARK, and are to be sold at his shop under
S. Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1643.

TO THE Christian Reader, And all those that pray for the peace of JERUSALEM,
Grace and Peace be multiplied.
Christian Reader,
I Am not ignorant what uncharitable censures are cast upon these innocent
Meditations and the Penner of them, by some turbulent spirits: I am forced to
complain, as the Psalmist did in his time, Woe is me, my soul has long dwelt
among those that are enemies unto peace; I labor for peace, but when I speak
unto them thereof, they make them ready to battle.

Some have scoffed at the whole Sermon, as a discourse unseasonable, borne out
of due time, 1 Cor 15.8.
as the Apostle speaks; as if a Sermon of Peace in these times of wilful
distraction, were like snow in summer, Pro. 26.1.
or rain in harvest.

Others have wrested and set their own glosses and interpretations upon some
passages of the Sermon, as if they tended to the discouragement of those that
have showed themselves willing to the work, to the enfeebling their hearts and
hands. Psalm. 56.5.
They daily mistake my words, all that they imagine is to do me evil.

But blessed be God who comfort us in all our tribulations: 2 Cor. 1.4.
I have delivered my message, and so discharged my conscience. And though I
have not every where met with the son of peace, Luke 10.5, 6.
yet my peace is returned to me again, I have it in my bosom.

As for their unjust censures, I weigh them no more then I deserve them: Male
de me luquutus es, Seneca.
quia been loqui nescis, Some men speak evil of their neighbors, because
they know not how to speak well of any man. Hoc facis, non quod merear, sed
quod soleas, This they do, not because their neighbor deserves it at their
hands, but because it is their custom so to do; The poison of asps is under
their lips, Romans 3.13.
and their mouth full of cursing and bitterness. Virg.
Et si non aliqua nocuisses, mortuus esses, And if they should not spit out
some of this venom, Psalm. 52.5.
and speak some words that may do hurt, they were not able to live. 2 Timothy 3.8.
Jannes and Jambres are so full of the spirit of contradiction, that they
cannot contain themselves. Ambitious Diotrephes (that looks for the
pre-eminence) will be prating, 3 Ep. John ver. 9, 10.
and darting out malicious words against those Disciples that preach love and
peace. That nickname which the Philosophers gave Saint Paul at Athens, Act.
17.18.
must be his livery that preaches any thing dissonant from these men's fancies,
(...), What will this babbler say?

Well, Psalm. 12.3
let them go on, their tongues are their own: Let Shimei curse (says David)
who can tell if the Lord will look upon my affliction, 1 Samuel 16.12.
and do me good for his cursing this day? However we in these days are not the
first that have tasted of this cup, we may take the Prophets and Apostles for
patterns of patience, Ja. 5.10.
examples of suffering in the same kind, and the Lord of the Prophets too, for
in the days of his flesh, Luc. 16.14.
when he was upon earth, some derided and carped at his Preaching, as many do
at his Prayer now adays.

Beloved Christian, into whose hands these thoughts of Peace shall come, read
them over without prejudice, Act. 21.24.
and thou shall see that the things whereof thou have been informed concerning
them and me, are nothing. My desire in publishing these Meditations, is to give
thee satisfaction, and withal direction also to lead thy life in peace, Psalm.
34.13.
that thou may see good days, and at the end of thy days, when thy
pilgrimage shall be expired, thou may with old Simeon depart in peace: Luke
2.29.
And so the God of peace, Phil. 4.7.
and the peace of God which passes all understanding, keep our hearts and
minds through Christ Jesus.

Thine in the Prince of Peace, Jo: Pigot.


