A PLEA FOR MODERATION.

Printed in the year 1642.

To the READER.
READER, I conceal my name, for two reasons; both derived from the
consideration of thee: from thy approbation, thy dislike: thy approbation,
because, having what I aimed at, I expect not the ceremony of thy thanks; thy
dislike, because my supposed crime shall not injure my name. As for
mis-constructions, I shall neither value them, nor wonder at them.

Farewell.
A PLEA FOR MODERATION.
TO plead precisely for Moderation, it is very necessary to be well acquainted
with Extremes, and the ill condition and consequence of them; which, like the
counterfeit Mother, would have the child divided, but not aright: for indeed,
as in every extreme, the Agent, which ought to be free, is hurried on with a
kind of violence, so that it operateth not properly; therefore a sound and well
ordered judgment, which is ever deliberate, can never be conversant in such
extremes, but is ever wanting to give its true weight and measure to all
proceedings. This age is much like weather we have had of late, Aguish,
therefore distempered; many fair and foul days in one, many good and bad ages
in one. There was a time when she was extremely frozen, both in her Religion
and Laws, and almost lost by scarce feeling where she was, the cold had so
benumbed her: Every one might then guess that this was not only a symptom of
her disease, but an absolute Ague-fit, fit to be purged. And let not any man
think, that the glowing fire and fierce zeal of some now (I had almost said of
most) in this twilight age, is an extirpation of that cold; but rather a
consequent of that former chillness: Contraria contrariorum sunt consequentia.

And now, I pray, take a little view how these contraries do meet; but not in
uno tertio, yet (though that is my prayer) but in resemblance.

Before the beginning of this (happy I hope) Parliament, the Pulpit and Press
were stuffed full of that doctrine of caeca obedientia, and prosecuted with so
much excessive violence, as no man could reckon otherwise, then that they
intended a deluge of ignorance to overwhelme the greatest part of this
Commonwealth. That made Scholars angry at the heart; since, e contrario
verum, as high a plea for ignorance is set up; and let me tell you, with more
zeal, but less wit, by Preaching and Pamphleting against humane learning.
This, I confess, troubles Scholars, but they know not how to help it.

Before the beginning of this Parliament, the practice of men and the Pulpit
were full of having the persons of men in admiration; since, e contrario verum.
I am afraid men are deified and adored: only before it was idolatry, or
superstition at the least; now it is neither.

Before, many painful and pious Ministers were had in obloquie and
dis-respect, I wish I could not say that since, e contrario verum; those very
men are become the subject of slandrous tongues.

Before, men preached for so much liberty, as it was indeed justly stumbled
at; now e contrario nimis verum, men preach for such a kind of liberty as we
would feign be quit from, for fear of danger to soul and body.

These extremities I may not unfitly compare to two pictures, fixed in a frame
of like resemblance, and made to look directly one against the other, but never
approach nearer one unto the other then where they are fixed.

What strange distractions, what variety of opinions does this monstrous error,
Extremity, produce into the world?

Because I would not be a Papist, a Consubstantiate Lutheran or Ubiquitarian,
an Arminian, a Socinian, etc. therefore I must be a Brownist, a Separatist, a
Familist, etc. nay an Atheist; that some hold to be the best Religion, if they
could but prove it one.

Because I infinitely dislike to be less then what a Subject ought to be,
and am a real lover of my Country, and would have the Laws established be
put in execution, and do assuredly think that they who go about to shut us
out from this, and deny us to be Magna Charta-men, are, and have been, great
disturbers of the true peace and tranquillity of the Kingdom; therefore I must
not give Caesar his due.

Because I do from my very heart detest and abhorie the Hierarchicall power of
Bishops, so far as it is suitable to that power which, by degrees of
usurpation, was gained to the Sea of Rome to make it so therefore I must have
no Bishops at all, therefore I must contemn and slight the function; who,
although they were in the ancient Church gallant Conduit-pipes to convey the
sense and meaning of the Scriptures to us of the later age, nay the Scriptures
themselves; yet we dwarfs, notwithstanding we are necessitated to creep upon
their shoulders, if we mean to look further then they, will never
acknowledge them to be our props and guides; who, although some of them, as
may be well proved, had a deciding power both in Temporal and Spiritual
matters, some of us now would have them enjoy neither; all which before Popery
was thought of.

Because I in particular did much reprove, and that openly, those over grown
ceremonies of the Church in the time of this Hierarchicall power, both for
their quantity (although admit them all good, yet not expedient) and for their
quality, by reason that, in very deed, what they added were most of them (if
not all) bad; therefore we must not have those ceremonies used which by Law tie
our conscience, until the wisdom of the Parliament shall constitute others
in their room, and do fasten upon us that constraint which we cannot wave; and
by a better reason I will do those things which in themselves are indifferent,
because public authority enjoines them, then not to do them, because they
are enjoined: Nay, some there are who would not stick at the performance of
them, were they not enjoined at all; it seems that is their impediment. A
strange spirit of contradiction! but me thinks a stranger doctrine to be
preached in this ill-independent age. If this be not a way to introduce a full
height of libertinisme, I know not what is: I name not atheism, but it is an
easy matter to guess what kind of Daughter such a Mother may and will bring
forth.

Now, this let me add by the way, that when men shall be admitted to cavil at
the performance of former Laws, which certainly the gravity of that time framed
with due advice and caution (although peradventure many of them are but
temporary, and may admit of alteration suitable to times and occasions) I say,
when men shall (out of I know not what kind of neglect of authority) dispense
with these, how can it be expected, that those Laws which hereafter shall be
made, shall find any better success at the hands of those, who do most
naturally reject Government and Rule?

But I have bin told, they are not of a considerable number; the Papists are
the great danger in the Commonwealth. I confess them to be dangerous men,
especially those that are Jesuited: their practice has been very factious, and
their doctrine is venomous, and distressed Ireland has too-too-much felt the
smart of it; but (God be thanked) they have neither claws nor teeth here, that
I know of. But as for that unconsiderable (I may say inconsiderate) number, I
wish they may be always so in the first sense, so long as they continue in the
second: And for once, let the Papists and them go together for the malignant
party.

By this time you may partly discern the scope of my intended discourse: It is
A Plea for Moderation, a Plea for a Medium. And I persuade my self I shall, at
one instant make two contrary sorts of people glad and sad, the Papist, the
Separatist; that whilst by this means both think to enjoy their Religion
still, their Opinion I would say, both miss of what they aim: for this
Moderation, this Medium, shall give neither of these the least satisfaction.

I have learned by way of diversity, what a Medium may be thus distinguished,
into Medium
Participationis. Abnegationis.


The first is that for which the Laodiceans received such a sentence from the
mouth of God in the Revelations, to be a Repudium for their luke-warmnesse:
This is the only principle whereby the Temporizers of every age walk and
steer their course; a blind guide, an Iguis fatuus, which very frequently
leaves them in the mire: This is such a principle as proposes to it self no
other end then the present advantage; and truly his halting in jest betwixt
two, makes men often become lame in earnest; and when they are grown such
Cripples, no wonder if they close in the Hospital of fools.

Machiavell never lost himself so much as in this particular; for, if it be
once found out that there can be two several men in one, ten to one but he
shall ever after have the hard hap not to be trusted in either condition. A
Puritan is an unlucky name thrown into the world; but if ever there were such a
man, this is he who justly may assume that title, He is like the feet of
Nabuchadnezzars Image, part of iron and part of clay, an ill mixture, therefore
not likely to be of any long perpetuity; this is not the Medium I plead for.

It is the Medium abnegationis I plead so strongly for. Albeit I am neither
Papist nor Separatist, yet by Gods help, I trust I may be of a true Religion,
and maintain Orthodoxill verity; and, indeed, I branch my Medium: first, into
Religion, because that is of the highest concernment, and most of all justled
at in this clay-iron age. It is true that of Aristotle, Qui ubique est nullibi
est, and may be made good by the medly of so many opinionative Religions now
set on foot by the step-mothers of sound Religion; who so much magnify their
bastard issue before her, as indeed she scarce undergoes any thing at their
hands but nips and pinches: I confess she has been of late dressed in too
gaudy, too garish an attire; and therefore now, to make her do strict penance
for how long God knows) she is left stark naked, exposed to summer scorches,
and winter colds; and I pray God when she puts on any thing next, it do not
prove her winding sheet. As I would not have her go like a painted strumpet, so
I should be glad to see her in a comely dress.

I remember, I did even now take the Bishops by the hand; but my intent was not
so to take my leave of them: I have somewhat more to say of them before they
go; I seriously wish they had been careful to keep my last medium, the want
of that has exceedingly prevented me of something I would have said: but thus
much I will declare, There have been Bishops, Diocesan Bishops, Lord Bishops,
all good Bishops, not Jure divino (pardon me for that) but Jure Ecclesiastico
vel civili, and ex favore Principis: Ancient Histories will warrant me for
that; and they are so copious and so well known, I hope no man will request a
quotation; yea all this the Ministers of the Gospel were made capable of:
therefore (in my judgment) not incongruous to the function; and if the
government must down, because some are bad, why should not the government
stand, because some are, and primitively have been good? For ought I can
perceive, it is as good an argument. I deny not but the way of a Presbytery
may be good in a State, not here; but however, durst I presume to beg, or think
of begging the least stem from sacred Majesty that is due to it, our
Bishops, peradventure, might be much better then they are, if the Ministers of
every County, by a majority of voices, did, out of themselves, choose their
Diocesan Bishop, and there be settled for his life: but then I conceive it is
fit, for maintenance, that the least should be a thousand pounds a year to
live upon, and the greatest no more. In this particular I am for a parity; nay
I would have none of them Lords, but such on whom his Majesty should by his
more especial favor be graciously pleased to bestow the title, who is the
undoubted fountain of honor and dignity. And if I hit aright in the
understanding of that Text so severely urged against that, which is, Be you not
called Lords, the meaning is, Be not ambitious, desirous, covetous of that
Title; otherwise, perhaps, some one might call them Lords in spite of them, and
so, against their wills, incur the breach of our Saviors precept. And as
concerning that of Saint Peter, Be not as Lords over Gods heritage, the meaning
is, You shall not have absolute rule over them; for so the word (...)
signifies, which hinders not but that they may have it subjugated to the chief
Prince and State under which they live; for, indeed, as it is admirably well
observed by that English Seneca, Sir Edward Dering, in a Treatise of his, when
our Savior tells his twelve Apostles that the Princes of the Gentiles, and the
Kings of the Gentiles, etc. exercise dominion, etc. (...), It shall not be so
with you; that is, You shall not be as the Kings and Princes of the Gentiles,
who assume an absolute and independent power: No, this I conceive is clearly
prohibited them: and (although by the word (...) be not meant, as some would
have it, domineering or tyrannizing in a bad sense, but governing and ruling in
a good sense, and seemly for men duly authorized thereto, as Gods Vicegerents
on Earth; yet) I hold Clergymen totally incapable of it: and this I conceive
to be the meaning of that worthy Knight, which (I say) does no way hinder, but
that they may, nevertheless, have a subordinate power limited them by a
superintendent authority above them of the King and Laws of the Kingdom; and
with this caution I take the word.

I add a further Plea in behalf of Common Prayer, or a set form of prayer,
which is our Church Liturgy. I grant that there may be some things in it (if
the great wisdom of the Parliament so please) fit to be expunged; but if
this Kingdom should be so unhappy, as to lose such an ornament of her
Religion as this; for my part, I should not grudge to die a Common Prayer
Martyr: but I shall not wonder if the set prayers of our Church be so slighted
as they are, when a number (of I know not what sort of people) cannot relish
the chiefest of prayers, the Lords prayer; and yet our Savior in one of the
Gospels gives us a plain direction, When you pray, say, Our Father which art in
heaven, etc. And as for the Doctrine of the Church of England, grounded upon
the infallible Testimony of Holy writ, which a man would bless himself to
hear stumbled at, (I hope) none dare be so impious as argue against it: if he
be, I cannot see how he can avoid Saint Paul's Anathema.

Now let me apply my Medium to mixed and civil affairs, and see if we can
fall into an uno tertio there; nay see, that if we fall not there, we are
either split or sunk. Prerogative, admirable in it self, provided it have its
due bounds and limits, has by some been so expatiated, as indeed, in their
apprehensions, it was unfathomed: I would those men had either well understood
what it was, or, not understanding it, would have been hushed in their own
ignorance by a silent humility.

The liberty of the Subject, an excellent strengthening of our meum and tuum in
the world; but by some so diameterly opposed to Prerogative, that, with them,
Non been convenient, nec in una sedemorantur Majestas and libertas. I think
this Commonwealth much happier, if they go (like Hippocrates twins) hand in
hand: And it was a good speech, though from a band man (I shall believe the
Devil when he speaks truth) This Kingdom will never be well, unless there
be a right understanding between the King and his people Mordecay's advice to
Hester, concerning the deliverance of the Jews, has been mis-applied by
diverse; for, as I take it, there was King in the case, and that King bowed and
sued to; I hope with us he shall be esteemed a third Estate in Parliament.

Rehoboams loss of ten Tribes was a very strange and sudden falling off, and
seemed for the present an exceeding great blow to Rehoboam himself; yet we
see no express reason alleged in Scripture, either in respect of Rehoboams
sin in particular, or of the Peoples in general; but the Text says, it was
of the Lord: nevertheless those revolting Tribes are plainly charged with
rebellion for it, and a commendation is given to Judah for sticking close to
their true and lawful Prince. Nay see what became of those revolters ever
after; amongst all their Kings that reigned over them, I do not read of one of
them that was good, whereas Judah had diverse; for Jehoram, one of the race of
the Kings of Judah being wicked, had this brand upon him, that he walked after
the Kings of Israel. Nay observe how Abijah the son of Rehoboam does, in this
very particular, tax Jeroboam with rebellion against his Lord; and so having
addressed his prayer to Almighty God for victory over Jeroboam and all his
rebellious troop, Abijah with 400000. men of Judah and Benjamin, had the
conquest of Jeroboam with 800000. men of Israel, full twice so many, and at
that time kept them under due obedience. Here may you see a most remarkable
judgment of God for their rebellious undutifulnesse. Observe further how many
several and sundry ways they were punished, both with idolatry and other
enormous sins, which crept amongst them, and perpetual wars and troubles
abroad, and in a short time brought to captivity; whereas Judah on the contrary
had still a greater measure of peace and tranquillity. And one thing I cannot
but take notice of; It is said that those of Israel who sought the Lord their
God, went up to Jerusalem to worship: 1 Kin. 12.27.
which begat a great jealousy in Jeroboam, fearing lest if the people went up
to do sacrifice in the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, it would be a means to
turn their hearts back again to their Lord Rehoboam; and what follows? So
shall they kill me (says he) and go again to Rehoboam: there was his
jealousy, as he had good reason; wherefore he prosecuted one wickedness
with another, as it is indeed the usual way in all rebellions; they cannot be
thought safe, but by attempting and heaping up a load of higher and greater
crimes.

Princes are like the bond of Wed-lock, once make them the Fathers of our
Country, and we take them for better for worse: we may persuade them, we
cannot compel them without breach of divine precept; once let them be the
Lords anointed, and it is sacrilege to touch them, I mean unfittingly. The
common people made Caesar's, but being once made, it was utterly out of their
power to unmake them again; nothing could do it but death. And if a King
should break an oath, made by him to his people, for a right governing
according to his Laws; yet, under favor, his breach quitteth not his Subjects
of their allegiance: and if this stand not for a truth, for my part, I do not
know by what principle any man can walk; for, destroy but this foundation, and
then your Anti-governists will always find starting holes, upon the least
dis-content, to shake off that yoke which is undoubtedly laid upon every
Subject, as a necessary tie of their obedience and loyalty to their Sovereign,
and that even as they tender the peace and quiet of a good conscience.

Therefore you shall read in the Chronicles, though God permitted the people to
work treason against King Amaziah, because, as it is there said, 1 Chro. 25.27.
he turned away from the Lord his God; yet, I trust, no man can deny but that
it was reckoned treason still in the people. But it may be objected, Quorsum
haec? we have a King (God be blessed for him) far otherwise; otherwise
indeed, and one who may well be an exact pattern of piety to all his
Subjects; Nay what a happy peace and contentment have we enjoyed under our
most gracious Sovereign, till we our selves, I know not which way, have
quarrelled with our selves?

I answer, that I urge not this but only as an argument a minori ad majus; if
Princes are not to be rebelled against, neither by the real sword, nor by the
metaphorical one, the tongue; that is, neither by speech nor action, though
they should be Nero's or Caligula's; in how ample and high an estimation should
we then have those, who are revera good ones, and not dipped with the least
color or resemblance of such Tyrannists? Therefore Bracton expresses it
admirably, where he said, Omnis quidem sub Rege, and ipse sub nullo nisi
tantum sub Deo: And in another place, Si autem aliquid ab eo petatur (cum breve
non currat contra ipsum) locus erit supplicationi, quod factum suum corrigat
and emendet; quod quidem si non fecerit, satis sufficit ei ad poenam quod
Dominum expectet ultorem; nemo quidem de factis suis praesumat disputare, multo
fortius contra factum suum venire: thus far Bracton.

It is not for naught that the Apostle does so inseparably knit these two
together, fear God and honor the King: as if he should have said, there is
none can give that honor to the King as he ought, except he be one that
truly fears God; and none can truly fear God as he ought, if he give not
the honor due to his Prince. And if Saint Paul could check himself with a
scriptum est, Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people; what can be
thought of those that would infringe his legal Prerogative, which is as
undoubtedly his, as our estates are ours, and by as firm a Law, until he
shall please to give way to the altering of it, by his own free and willing
assent and consent first had and obtained, which must not be drawn from him
by the least constraint or forcible persuasion whatsoever? That of the Proverbs
is a sure rule, Fear God and the King, and meddle not with them that are given
to change.

And I pray tell me, what is the cause why such mistakes and heart-burnings
arise in the world, but only the great want of charity in a number. Love
covers a multitude of sins, says the Scripture: Ex consequenti, what do you
then call that which rips them up, and lays them open? Indeed love gains a
multitude of good; good to others, to themselves who use it: and where can we
better manifest it then to those whom God has placed in eminency above us?
Would it not grieve us much if our children should prove Chams unto us? If
therefore there be truly that relation (as we are bound to believe it)
certainly their wounds must needs pierce through our sides, and their contempt
must needs be our reproach.

I am not ignorant that this is a very hard lesson to take out; but, to come to
my Medium, it must be done: for, to speak the truth, while we want this
Theological virtue, Love, we are very apt to do injury to them we love not;
and it argues a great partiality to our selves. What says Saint Paul? to
repeat him a little, Though I speak with the tongues of men and Angels, etc.
Though I had the gifts of Prophecy, etc. and knew all secrets: yea had all
faith, etc. Though I feed the poor, nay though I give my body to be burned,
and have not love, all is nothing: And yet (God he knows) what an innumerable
company of pretenders are there to all these, but it is without Love. The
Apostle goes on to tell the nature and condition of Love: and do but view what
characters he puts upon it.

Love suffers long. is bountiful. envieth not. boasts not it self. is not
puffed up. disdaineth not. seeks not her own things. is not provoked to
anger. thinks not evil. rejoiceth not in iniquity, but in truth. suffers
all things. believes all things. hops all things. endures all things. never
falls away.


Here is a chain consisting of fifteen linkes, all of them most expressive
and emphaticall. What a hard task have the men of our age to imitate all
these? what a brave Medium were here to fall upon? Let me once, for all, speak
boldly, and it will easily be found to be true upon due search and sad
examination, that there is not one the least tumult or distraction in a Nation,
not the least discontent in a family (by which, as by Hercules feet, may be
measured the proportion of the whole body) but it arises from the want of due
observation of all these. I might expatiate my self in these particulars; but
my care is, as much as I can, to save time and trouble to the Reader. I
profess not my self a Divine, it is not my way; therefore I leave peculiar
applications to the ingenious.

Now, by the rule of Contraries, I might illustrate unto you what is opposite
and repugnant to Love; but diverse men's practice now a days will in this point
instruct you better then I.

There is much to be said, but I shut up all in Love; and I wish from my very
soul all mistakes and misbeleefes might end there; which will never be, while
they so be; for unless they vanish, no room for Love: That (...) is extremely
mistaken abroad, for it is often made but the bait, whilst the hook lays
hold on private interests.

And truly, as my hearty prayers shall be ever bent for a most prosperous
event of proceedings in these instant great Assemblies: So it shall still be
one prayer of my Petition, that there may be Love at the end of every thing;
and I am confident such a Petition as this, needs neither clubs nor swords to
force its admission.

FINIS.

