A PIOUS AND SEASONABLE PERSUASIVE TO THE SONS OF ZION Soveraignely useful
for Composing their Unbrotherly Devisions.
PHILLIP. 3. 15, 16. LEt us therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded: and
if in any thing yea be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you.
Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same
rule, let us mind the same thing. Romans 15. 1. We then that are strong, ought
to bear the infirmities of the weak and not to please our selves. 1 Cor. 8.
9. But take h^ede, lest by any means this Liberty of yours become a stumbling
block to them that are weak. 11. ver. And through thy knowledge shall the
weak brother perish for whom Christ died. 12. ver. But when ye sin so
against the brethren, and wound their weak Conscience, ye sin against
Christ. 1 Cor. 12. 4. 5. Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same
spirit. 5. ver. And there are differences of administrations, but the same
Lord. Ioh. 13. 34. A new Commandment, I give to you, that you love one another
as I have loved you, that you also love one another. 15. ver. By this shall all
men know that ye are my Disciples if you have love one to another. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
9. For ye your selves are taught of God to love one another. Ephesians. 5. 1. 2. Be
ye therefore followers of God as dear Children: and walk in love as Christ
has loved u^, and has given himself for us. 1 John 3. 11. For this is the
message that ye heard from the beginning, that we should love one another. 1
Pet. 2. 1. Wherefore laying aside all malice and all guile, and hypocrisies,
and envies, and evil speakings. 1 John 4. 7. Let us love one another: for love
is of God, and every one that loves, is born of God, and knows God. Ver. 8.
He that loves not, knows not God, for God is Love.
a godly desenting Brother a godly Brother of the Presbyterian way The right
hand of fellowship A Romish Prelat an English Jesuit Let not the world divide
those whom Christ has Joined



WHEREAS it is very apparent that one chief cause of the distempers, fears,
and dangers, wherewith these three Kingdoms are tossed, as in a storm,
arises from the unkind jealousies, misprisions, and mutual distances of good
men differing in their judgments, whereby their hearts and affections also are
much alienated from each other; It is earnestly entreated that all those to
whom the prosperity of Gods Cause, the establishment of Truth and Peace, and
the welfare of Zion is precious and desirable, would for time to come lay
aside all unnecessary disputes about matters of controversy, (a thing
extremely prejudicial to the present indevours after a thorow-Reformation) and
in their occasional meetings and visits, wholly apply themselves to Practical
Discourses of Jesus Christ, and whatsoever may tend to holiness, or Spiritual
Edification; Never taking leave of each other, if opportunity of time and place
will permit (though it be but for a quarter of an hour, or less) without
pouring out their hearts in some solemn petitions to God. The matter of which
Petitions principally may be such as these, Viz. The Victory of Truth, The
embracing of it with Love, Christ's own method in suppressing Errors, Union
among Saints, Sincerity of Hearts, Faithfulness to public Interests,
peaceable Subjection to the Civil Magistrate, a conscience void of offense
toward God and man, Love to godliness wheresoever found, Subduing of
passions, Meekness of Spirit, Improvement of Graces, Exemplary Holiness,
Heavenly conversation, Dying to the World, Living to Christ, and by all these a
sweet conformity to the will of God revealed in his Word; If such a spirit as
this be diffused abroad, we shall hope to see in our Days a binding up our
wounds, an healing our Breaches, a composing our Differences, a strengthening
our hands against the common Enemy, a settling these miserable Kingdoms in
Peace, a preservation of our Gospel, a facillitating of difficulties in all
Blessed undertakings, and an Hastening of Jesus Christ into the Glory and
Splendor of his Kingdom, Amen.

By a Lover of the Truth, and all those that live godly in Christ Jesus.

LONDON Printed for HENRY OVERTON, 1647.


