THE MODERATOR EXPECTING SVDDEN PEACE, OR CERTAIN RUIN.

Directed by Reason, Arising out of the Consideration of what has already
happened, Our present Condition, and the most likely Consequents of These.

-- Tales Casus Cassandra canebat.
-- Quem tum vates Cassandra moveret? Virgil. Aeneid. Lib. 3.

Cedamus Phoebo, and moniti meliora sequamur.
LONDON, Printed Anno Domini, 1642.

THE MODERATOR EXPECTING Sudden PEACE, OR Certain RVINE.
A Amongst the many complaints posterity may justly take up against us, it
shall never be said, that we did all wilfully blind the eyes of our reason, and
would not see the Evils, which with an unveiled face showed themselves, in
their full horror, before they came upon us. For my part, if I must perish, my
fate and want of prevention not of foresight shall betray me to it; whilst the
results of our designs, and the miseries that must necessarily befall us,
offer themselves so easily to our apprehension, before we feel them. But it is
not our mere contemplative providence, but a discreet exercise of it, that can
be able to rescue us from the ruin that attends us. And though it is not the
pious care of a few single men, that can save even themselves, much less the
perishing state, whose decayed Fabric is on every side undermined, and ready
to fall in (...) yet surely it is every man's duty to lend his best assistance
to the common safety, because if we perish it must be by our own hands. And
since it is at out own election what shall become of us? Let us call reason to
advise with, let us thoroughly look into our condition: And these sad and
serious considerations, may perhaps reclaim many of us from the eager pursuit
of things, which we have too violently fancied to our selves, out of
convenience, necessity, or some other politic reaches, to advantage our
selves or the public. We are now arrived almost to the extremity of ill; and
yet some believe that there is a way to grow better, by growing worse. I pray
Heaven this Paradox may not undo us.

But before we set one foot forward, and march on to the considerations which
are before us, let us make a stand, and take a review of the actions and
success, which we have already had, in the high contestations between Prince
and People.

VVarres, like diseases, are a long while working upon the humors, before they
discover themselves: And there are indeed many things of conse quence, that did
secretly fore run and usher in this War, which I shall at most but touch
upon. The curious searching into these things may perhaps inflame, cannot
qualify our distempers. Our proper interest now is to get out of these
miseries, to which we seem to have been unhappily betrayed, by endeavoring
without success, (says one,) or providence, (says another,) or enough of
both (says a third, for thus boldly men discourse now) a high and Imperious
refo mation; which by the cunning use that Delinquents, the Prelacy, and the
Agents for Prerogative have made of it, has in stead of removing, created new
opposites: and those have so fasted themselves, that they cannot be overthrown
without more then endangering the very foundations of the Commonwealth. And we
are making so much haste to the Ruin, which that grand Engineer the Jesuit
has this many years been designing for us, that we have two Armies fighting
against themselves, for the common good: and they are now grown both so
considerable, that it is almost impossible that any good can be effected by
them, until very many thousands more shall fall by the Sword; and, how we
shall call any thing good, that shall be bought at so bloody a price. I know
not. Let us but trace the footsteps of our misfortunes, and we shall see by
what degrees we are grown into these extremities. And how we have (is it were
by inches) engaged our selves into new and desperate mischiefs. How one
extreme has begot another: And whilst we have had one design to overcome a
prevailing evil, we have by that raised up a worse. I have heard that Poison
has sometimes been wrought out by a contrary poison; but the wary Physician
holds the cure but desperate, and scarce can tell, which is most destructive
the Medicine or the Disease: For where the contestation is so violent, it
seldom happens that it does not destroy the Patient. To come closer: It seems
our peace was so corrupt, that it was held requisite it must be lanced with the
Sword. I pray Heaven our Chirurgions cut not so far, that instead of letting
out Putrefaction; they let not out our very Vitals, by too deep, too wide a
wound. But I shall make haste to my promise, which is to make it evident, how
destructive this kind of Decision has been and must be to us; which will
appear from the first Overtures of it, and in every thing that has happened
since.

When the Militia, the Navy, and the Ports (which were the common strength of
the Kingdom) were first put into new confiding hands (whether out of
prevention or preparation) I looked upon this action, as like to that Cloud,
which first showed it self to the Prophets sanvant, to be as big as a man's
hand; and I feared that I should afterward see it darken all our Heavens, all
our happiness: and at last fall into fatal and bloody showers. Jealousy of
this nasure is the Forerunner and Inflamer of all Mischief; when this
discovered it self so plainly in the King; and had so divided not only the
Head from the Members, but the Members amongst themselves: he that did not then
fear consequences of a high and dangerous nature, was too secure; and surely
never considered, that a Parliament is the Genius of the State; and when that
was poisoned with jealousy: it subtly mingled it self with every County as
deriving it from the Representatives. Here the people might take the first
notice of the contestation; And from that time they encountered each other with
invective Declarations (worse then Gunshot) which heightened the quarrel, and
invited the amuzed people to lay aside their peace; and show themselves, on
which side they would rather choose to hazard their fortunes. Here began the
first eager Division: for by this means, the discountenanced Gentry (who were
removed from their Commands, and so, from the usual respect they had in their
Country) fastened themselves in opinions opposite to the Parliamentary
proceedings: And the common people, disputing over earnestly of these things)
did at last, according to the reason they were able to see, discourse
themselves into a resolute conceit of things, which as their passions and
humors led them) they have all this while prosecuted.

The Subjects being now stirred, and divided: The great Gamesters of the State
go higher; The more active of the Parliament are accused by the King of
Treason: The Kings Advisers, to whose Councels He seemed most to adhere are
impeached by the Parliament for Traitors. And now they hold themselves
concerned to stand, or fall, with those that both sides aimed at. So that it is
time that they be further asunder: for distance affords many advantages to
work a Design higher, or else may be a means to compose those differences,
which are still renewing, whilst the Antagonists are together. The King
therefore removes Northward, to find out that safety, which (he says) is
denied him here: and to gain a party to balance those, whom already he
accounts his Enemies.

Thus the Scene begins to alter; and instead of reforming (the proper work of
Parliament:) we shall see it busied and almost puzzled in saving (for so they
call it) a distressed Church and State. And from henceforth, we must look upon
it as a Council of War, and must not expect to find it punctual in the
observance of any fixed Law: but that Common Law, called Salus populi, must be
produced as a general warrant for all their undertakings: And that Statute Law
enacted even by Nature it self, called Lex necessitatis; must be made to
justify all manner of severity and violence. And this must be all the
satisfaction, the complaining Subject shall be able to obtain.

The most eminent discovery of this War; which openly offered it self to the
consideration of the People, was that great contention about the Town of Hull.
And although it cost not much blood; yet was it made an occasion to engage the
business very far. The War was sooner seen to the people, then the Reasons
of it: and though they could not define what the quarrel was; yet they begin
to find that they must end it, and seele the effects of it. And, to startle
them the more, their doubts are nourished and increased by the well penned
papers from the North: and in a few months, are persuaded to unbelieve that,
which the Actions, and the sense of many years before, had almost confirmed in
them. Thus, the King perceives, that to defend the property and liberty of his
Subjects, (though but with the shadow of them) with promises and protestations,
catches the affections of his credulous People; and almost recovers and fixes
them in their obedience. How much then, will they be his, when these promised
blessings shall be theirs in earnest?

And what advantage have we had by any thing has yet been acted by the sword?
what present reparation or what likly hopes, has the abused subject for the
expense of so many millions? for the loss of so much blood? and for dangerous
hazard of their peace? that jewel which indeed we know not how to value,
until it be lost? Some of the Malignants blood has been had, though bought
with as much of the adverse party. Our Towns have been yielded and recovered
on both sides; whole Countries have been plundered; thousands have been undon;
Skirmishes we have had in many places. A set Battle (the wish of our Sons
of Mars) has been fought with almost equal loss and success; as if Heaven
had told us we are both in fault; both worthy of an overthrow, but neither of
us of victory: the best part of a year has been made up happy whilst every
day saw new Tragedies. And after all this, how much nearer, nay how much
farther of, are we from the Peace, or from the Ends we seemed to aim at? The
quarrel by all this, is but inflamed; jealousies grow higher; Malice grows
stronger; Poverty comes upon us like an armed man: Humanity is almost turned to
cruelty, and Nature and friendship, are not able to restrain our inconsiderate
fury. The Sword must hereafter become chief Justice; and will dispense with
and control all Law. From henceforth Robbery shall change its name, and be
called no more a crime then borrowing: the killing of our Country men must be
called valor, and a service to the State: the opposing our selves against the
chief Fort and strength of the subject, the great council of Parliament, must
be called Allegiance and duty: disobedience to the commands of our Prince, must
be called Loyalty: and in brief, (such is the tyranny of War) we must see an
inversion of all order, Consusion in all our services to Heaven and Earth; and
a Chaos, in stead of that admirable composure which many years of peace had
ere now fixed this state in; if those that have of late times been over us,
had done their parts: How like to these calamities the miseries we have felt
already, are, the sad experience of too many may witness; who have drink deep
of this bitter Cup: But the dregs are as yet behind; in which every surviver
must have a share, if Heaven will have us to pledge its vengeance farther.

Although such times as these will searce give us leave to call any thing our
own; yet I hope they will let us enjoy the use of our reason still, which shall
always lead my Faith, and expectation in such open affairs as these. And when
that shall tell me how requisite the prosecution of this War is, and how it may
advantage the state, I shall be convinced; but until then. I shall be
obstinate in this opinion (hoping that it will not a^^ out to to be against the
sense of the Parliament: That a peace warily conclud^d by an Accommodation must
be the happiest issue that can be given to these Differences.

But, ere I lettled my self in this opinion, I enquired out (as far as
possible I could) all the conveniences and inconveniences, that W^r or P^^ce
may beget, and as well as my reason would give me leave, have weighed, which are
likely to be the heaviest. And I hope I shall be excused by every one, that
shall descend into these following Considerations.

First, what probably this War aims at, in this conjecture, it will befit us
to be very modest, and rather to think, then to speak out: we shall not
therefore examine what all yance (I mean in the birth of it) there is betwixt
this, and that with the Scots. Now whether the prerogative commenced it, to
protect it self against an invading power, which seemed to threaten it, (as
some would have it) or to perfect the design of many years before, to be
absolute master of the people, (as others conceive) or whether the Parliament
begun it to secure themselves, and fetch in Delinquents, (as we are bid
believe) or to confirm that by the sword, which no other assurance could ever
make good unto them; and to bring the government somewhat near to an
Aristocracie (as some have suggested;) Or whether indeed this reason of the War
be a Miscelany of all these. But how justifiable, how necessary, and on which
side this War was defensive or offensive, I shall not undertake to debate or
determine. These are dangerous mysteries, not to be pried into. It will be
enough for us to enquire how far it tends to the general good; by what has
already happened, and what must happen in the prosecution of it.

We must believe (where ere this War began) that it was levied by well weighed
policy, and upon considerate grounds; and we must not conceit but the design
was only to secure the Kingdom, and rescue it, from some Enemies that are in
the bosom of it, which have malignantly thwarted the long-looked for blessings
of this Parliament. And it is confessed (though not agreed on) by both Armies,
that our Religion, Laws, Liberties, and whatsoever is or should be dear unto
us, lies at the stake; and that they wear their Swords only to defend these:
and that these cannot be safe, unless one of them prove victorious.

Thus our cause is much like a riddle; It were surely better for us, to have it
understood by the deliberation and wisdom of a parley, then by such means as
Alexander used to unty the Gordian knot, the violence of the sword. If Religion
be the principal reason; how few hopes have we to see it rectified by War
which is the nu^ce of barbarism. The Soldier the instrument of this kind of
reformation (after he shall be a little more ve sed in his rude profession we
shall scarce ever find devoted to any thing of Religion besides the pretense
and noise of it, in their talk, only to set a gloss upon their quarrel: from
them we must look for little else, but profanation and sacrilege. And
suppose these men of War prove more civil and pious then all other Soldiers
before them what religion shall we expect to be exercised during this War,
which will be a continuing Holy Day to all licentiousness? when as in this
necessitated intermission of strict government how many new fancied religions
boldly discover themselves? how little reverence, and how much profanation
have we seen? Religion is a child of peace, and if an aged peace have the
fostering of it, it will be hard to keep it clear from innovations, and
superstition, (the endeavors of the idle Clergy) and that state that cannot,
or will not remove these mischiefs without the sword, endangers the very body
of it, whilst it would only lop off the extravagancies.

Such effects as these, we can only look for, when a lasting War shall
undertake to compose a divided Church: it may (some have thought) happen
otherwise, if the design be so advisedly laid and so rigorously prosecuted
that the execution of it shall be sudden.

But, it will be told me, when the Parliaments Army has gotten the victory,
and all oppositions, shall be removed, so that they may without interruption
reach their ends, such a Reformation will be effected, as shall recompense the
disturbance in the gaining of it. Any man that consults with his unbiassed
reason, cannot well promise this to himself: for we shall find such a victory
and such a reformation very doubtful. But we will suppose them conquerors. It
has been the opinion of some; that success may somewhat heighten their
religious designs; and suggest such things as easy, and convenient, which
before their very imagination durst not reach at. Then they will have time to
consider all their opposites, even those, who (before this reformation grew so
violent) were accounted Puritans. Then it is likely, neither root nor branch,
of our old Church order shall be left nor any sign where it grew And though
perhaps themselves could be contented with a more even and moderate
reformation; It may be seared that the loud people, delighting in change, and
grown insolent with their success will call for a mutation in every
circumstance and when they have found their strength, will think nothing
enough if they have not all that their wild and unlimitted Zeal approves of.

And (if some mistaken not) the interest of the Parliament will then be, to
settle a more tigid government (to say no more) in the Church, then will now
satisfy them and all modest Protestants.

And on the contrary, our condition cannot well be such as we could wish it, if
the subjects of England make the King a Conqueror whether he will or no (nor
is this impossible.) Do we believe the prelacy and the other ambitious Clergy,
will then be any whit less insolent then they have been? will they not rather
add to, then diminish their ceremonies? will they not pretend that preaching
has seduced the people, and begat heresies? that the Pulpit was the late in
cendarie to the great mischiefs, and therefore take a pious occasion to be
Idle, and make the abused people believe, that the Common Prayer tends more to
their salvation, then the frequency of preaching? will these men of the
cassocks be less vicious in their lives? less corrupt in their Doctrine?
less exacting in their Tithes and pretended dues, then heretofore? And, to
conclude, will it lie in the interest or the power of the King, (when he shall
be busied to settle the confused Commonwealth for his best advantage,) to
bridle his Clergy, which ever were, are, and will be the most considerable
sticklers when any bustle or mutation happens in a state; we must then look to
find these sort of men still like themselves, so busy as if their employment
were rather to improve prerogatives, then salvation. Their predecessors
(History tells us) were almost always opposers of their Prince. And, (some are
of opinion) that they do otherwise now not because their Religion, but their
interest is altered. And (it has been always unhappily observed) that, their
conscience follows their dependancy; and that they put their cases, and state
their questions, as much by the motions of the latter as the former.

And if there were ever any reason to be jealous of the incroaching power of
papists, it will be then: for if the King (for his preservation, and through
necessity, the reasons now urged upon this occasion) be driven to make use of
them to do his business and by their help become victorious; the Common
people may sear that they shall hereafter see as much popery mingled in their
worship as in their Armies: and those of better judgment, cannot but conceive,
that when Papists have merited so much from the King that they will be more
modest with him, then with God, from whom they dare challenge a requital for
their merits: and upon such a turn as this, it will be to their great
advantage that the people (to whom the reputed Puritans and Roundheads must by
all means be made ^dioas,) will be less troubled, if some of those severe
statutes against them, be repealed, or despensed with, and some other things be
done in their favor; for being Bustier Subjects to the King of England (the
first time, it was ever thought they could be so) then many of his Protestant
Subjects.

Such consequences as these we must look for on both sides, if the partial
sword, and not the indifferent Synod must be the Ecclesiastical reformer.

The Religion which all moderate men (and I think most, and best) desire, is
that which both sides promise; and yet that which we cannot well expect from
either side, should it become absolute. It is such a one as may be found out
betwixt them both; and (we may hope) may make all men happy, if it be tempered
with a reasonable yielding on both sides. But if the decision must be by blood
and victory, the prevailers are then bound, and perhaps, necessitated to
gratify their party with that kind of discipline which their humors call
for; they must look to fasten themselves by that power, and those principles,
by which they gained it. When as it is like to be quite otherwise, if peace
suspend these differences; both sides must then go on in an even and well
tempered course, that they may politiquely hold fast that party, which their
promises and fair protestations won to them. It will then be hoped, that the
contention will be, which shall be most plausible; and it will be better for
the people to have their affections invited then forced.

Thus we find that Religion will look most comely, dressed in the white
garments of peace, rather then the purple robes of war. And seeing Religion
is many times but a servant to other designs, and goes before, only to usher
in some great affair of State, in the same order it shall be followed now; and
we shall in the next place examine how the State shall be bettered by a mastery
of either side.

Would we have the Laws better exercised which our Predecessors left to us?
how much out of countenance Law is, when the sword domineers, we need not be
informed by History. And when this war shall see an end, with how much
difficulty shall we be rendered capable of the usual course and benefit of it?
And we know not who by that time, may become Patron and Master of our Law and
Nation: or would we have new Laws to serve our turns now? or confirm those
we have gained this Parliament? If that the sword shall draw up new Statutes;
it is likely they would be but short lived, or useless: for no politic ties;
no, not the most sacred assurance of an oath, could ever make Princes observe
the execution of them.

And it may be feared, that such violent gaining upon the Crown, may be an
occasion hereafter, to wrest from us all those advantages which the Subject
has dearly bought this Parliament, under pretense that violence was the
mother of them all.

Our liberties are not like to be much enlarged or secured by it, martial Law
will ere long disseize us of our Possessions, our Estates and Lives; and what
Judge shall be able to redress us? and we must run a hazard, what kind of
freemen or slaves we must be hereafter.

So that upon all this inquiry, it is hard to be satisfied how our Religion,
Laws or Liberties shall be improoved by such a war as we are engaged in,
unless the more pious and well-meaning party will promise certain and sudden
success, both of which will be necessary to make it any thing likely; but of
these more in the close of all.

But when we have suposed, that we shall be bettered in all these when the
war is ended; let us with an intentive eye, look upon the miseries which
must be our entertainment whilst the war continues: That which we have seen
or heard already of it, is no more then a sad Prologue to an ensuing Tragedy,
which only tells us what we are to expect; but the following acts thew us
those bloody passages at large.

As yet the Soldier has not devoured the Husband-mans store; but, without
much trouble finds Bread for himself, and Provender for his Horse; but where
will he seek it, when he has spoiled the springing grass, and trampled
down, or eaten up the growing corn? The Husbandman will be afraid to
venture his seed in the ground, not knowing who shall reap it; or, if he
would be so hardy, perhaps, he wants his Horses to plough, or his Hindes to
help him.

And such will be our grief, that we must not look for succor from our
neighbor Counties: for every one of them is like to be the Seat of war; and
so many Armies must needs consume Cattle and Sheep, and the Farmers stock, and
so beget a famine. A famine never comes without sad companions; as the Plague,
small Pox, Flux, and many more such servants of death.

Thus Provision, the chief support of this populous Kingdom, will be suddenly
wasted; and thus, those whom war spares, want or violent diseases will devour;
and so we shall many ways perish without the sword, yet by it.

It is to no purpose to demonstrate how the treasure of this Land, heaped up by
a long lived peace, will be suddenly powered out, and be seen no more: thus
many times does a careful and aged father leave a hard gotten Patrimony to a
scattering son. And, how certain the utter decay of trade (the livelihood of
the State) will be; how Art that was coming into such a perfection amongst us,
will be lost, and, as it were, unlearnt; how learning, the glory of our Nation,
will be disesteemed and useless, and changed into martial Discipline: how
poverty will so generally seize almost upon all; that the violence of it will
every where create us new enemies (if the Soldier spares us) which will take
away our goods by the authenticke Law of necessity, and snatch away the meat
from our mouths, making hunger their warrant.

But I will pursue this common place no further; these are the general
consequences of war; we will therefore reflect more closely upon our own
more peculiar mischiefs.

If we must put off Peace until another time, how desperate are we? For,
those that engage us in a war, are not able to tell us, when, where, how, and
by whom it shall end, (this the late and sad experience of other people may
tell us.) The question hereafter will be, not so much, where is the Right? But
where is the Power? For the Right of Power must carry the business. And then
it will be beyond Probability that this Kingdom ever recover the purity of
it is Religion, it is Laws, it is Customs, it is Government, which have been
settling about five hundred years; nor let our present Superiors be angry at
the conjecture; for I cannot assure my self, who shall live to strike the last
blow. And it has in all ages been observed, that designs in war change
like Scenes in a Masque, where we see new apparitions ere we are aware of them:
And the events of one year, may, beyond all expectation, vary, or heighten the
quarrel. And it is always found, that success lifts men up above themselves;
for a prevailing power seldom knows any bounds or modesty, the Subject will
want his old sanctuary then, which our Predecessors provided; for, Laws are
but the ligaments of Peace, and the Soldier will break them like threads.

But I shall be asked, why my bold imagination has phansied such terrible
things as these? We will therefore see now gradually we must come to such a
condition as this.

And first, because we will not undertake to define the quarrel as it now
stands, largely, nor sawcily; we will conceive it thus: A working jealousy,
fixed in a divided Kingdom, both sides choosing rather to die then to trust
one another. From this root must necessarily spring these inconveniences.

The most uncharitable mischief that a Commonwealth can be engaged in, is,
That we must execute the designs of our enemies upon our selves; that the
King may receive his death from the hand of a Subject whilst it is reached
forth (if you will believe his Vows) for his good and safety: that the father
sending his bullet at a venture, may kill his son, or the son his father;
this is probable enough: but it is impossible, that brothers, kindred and
friends should not mingle in one another blood, (and, perhaps, purposely) we
see such an eager division in all Families. And it is so universal, that no
County, scarce any City or Corporation is so unanimous, but they have
division enough to undo themselves. And it is evident enough, that this Rent
will increase until we shall be quite torn in pieces: For, when the fatal
sluice of blood shall be drawn up higher; in all probability, the veins of
the remaining People (swelling with revenge for their battered party) are
likely to be drained dry thorowout the Kingdom. If we will leave our,
differences to the dispute of the Sword, we shall not want an Umpire; one that
will come in to part us, or part stakes with us. Let this Mediator chance to
be of a Religion like ours, or of one quite opposite unto it; who shall pay the
Soldiers for their journey-work? Must money be raised for them? It must be
dug for them; I believe little will be found above ground. Or must promises
serve the turn? The Soldier seldom returns with such pay. Or most plunder
satisfy them? This may stay their stomachs, although it be but the Relics of
our own men of war; but will not be able to send them back again. No; we
shall find that the interest of that State must be satisfied either with our
Ruin, or with mingling themselves in our Estates and Government.

Or suppose our neighbors will wink on purpose, and neglect their advantages,
though it were mere sottishness to conceit so; upon whose purse shall our
enemies at home, our own Armies live? Must the Countries maintain them? It
must be then by the Farmer: but he can neither sow, nor reap, nor breed up,
nor repair his stock, in the heat of such a war as ours. Else must the
Clothier do it? whence shall he have his many necessaries, and how shall he
vent his clothes? If these fail, the Countries cannot be long considerable, in
enduring the burden of Armies? Is it expected the City must do all this?
That little which they have got before hand, and make their store, is so
impaired, that it will scarce maintain themselves, unless it be by a
continued course of trading; which, as it is now languishing, so it will be,
ere that time, quite dead and buried. The City is as it were the stomach,
which digests the trading of the whole Kingdom; and afterward returns to
every several part of it, that nourishment which supports it: if weakness
and obstructions be found there, a consumption soon steals upon the whole
body. But suppose it were rich, and full enough to serve the turn; yet they
will not let down their milk to a violent hand: they must be stroked and
humoured, else they will be stubborn. If they chance to be at discord, it will
be hard to collect any considerable sums; and if that discord be heightened (by
the cunning practice of any) into a mutiny amongst themselves, they will be
able to undo one another, without the help of a draining Army. Thus we may
see, our necessities will encounter and overcome us, if we must live and dye
(and living thus is worse than dying) in this lingering war. And after all these
horrid executions of Fire, Sword, Famine, Pestilence, and those many other sad
consequences of war; what face at the best will this Kingdom have? what a
ruinous Nobility, what a decayed Gentry, what a beggarly Commonaltie will it
be peopled withal? And what age shall ever see those Fewds eaten out, which
these Civil Broils will beget? For we shall find, that as Jealousy was the
mother of them, so Malice, Hatred, and Revenge, will be the issue. And when
shall a State so distempered, look for a quiet, or a safe composure? For War,
like a strong disease, leaves many dregs and relics behind it, which (though
the maine Forces be disbanded, and it be no more an Army, a Fever) will punish
the uncleansed body with several fits and distempers.

We shall find that men nursed up in war grow sick of peace, and are like
Tinder, ready to be inflamed into sedition, or high attempts, by every spark
which Ambition, or any other exorbitant desire lets fall. And if it shall be
held a necessary policy to hold up a war in any other place, to spend their
fiefie spirits, the State will be as good as beggered to be thus rid of them:
And it may be feared, that the meaner sort will forget the usual toil of
their former professions, by the licentiousness in the war; and will never
after be brought to endure order, or labor: and so will return to corrupt the
Commonwealth, with their lawless manners.

I could add many more Instances; but I think there needs no more to be urged,
to show us how miserable we must necessarily be. Yet I must not omit the
Motive which distressed Ireland offers unto us: which now represents the very
Condition we must look for; if a sudden Peace do not happily prevent it.

If we could look upon it, as ready to be undermined, and falling into the
Ocean, so that no footing would be left there for our Adversaries, though we
could not but pity it, and our selves; yet then all our fears would be
drowned with it: but we must consider it, as one of our maine Bulwarks, gained
and fortified not without infinite expense of the treasure and blood of our
Ancestors: and that it is now ready to be possessed by a dangerous enemy, who
from thence will for ever batter our Peace; and it is likely, may make such
breaches, as may let in hereafter (if we escape them now) as many miseries as
Ireland now groans under. Nor are all these mischiefs which I have summoned
up, more certain, than the success of either side is doubtful; so that if we
do grant to satisfy such as will on both sides have it so, that nothing but
the good of the State is intended; How shall we be assured, that that pious
Party (which truly has the most right) shall have the success? and how soon
they will be able to accomplish it. For as I have proved, there will be nothing
left us to be preserved, if it hold out long. But upon consideration, we shall
find that both the success, and the conclusion of it, are very uncertain.
We know that God many times uses the Sword, as well to avenge himself upon
his People, as his People upon one another: and, that neither side have
deserved so well, as to promise themselves the masterie; although they dare
aver, their Cause is best. So that I shall rather direct my judgment by
Reason, than Presumptions; and shall therefore weigh these great Opposites, to
find out which of them hitherto has had the greater success, and which has
the most probable advantages at this time.

It is scarce a year since all affairs, of what nature soever, received their
enlivening Influence from the King, through his Parliament: which like a
Burning-glasse contracted the Sun beams into it self, and was able to give
fire to almost any Design it pleased to reflect on; but those Rays which did
then display themselves beside it, did spend themselves in vain. During this
full Authority, they furnished themselves with all means that might defend
them from the Counter-plots of those, who they had reason to believe, could not
endure the strict Reformation which was suddenly intended.

Therefore, ere the People are aware, or know why, they see all the
considerable Ports and Ports of the Kingdom, the Navy, the Militia, and all
the strength of the State sequestered from the immediate commands of the Prince.
And because there is little strength in these things, unless they be manned
and maintained with the affections and assistance of the People, such courses
are taken as may encite the most.

Therefore the first Remonstrance (the unhappie History of the foregoing
times) opened the eyes of the People (not used to see so far into such
Mysteries) and discovers enough to heighten a dislike against such, as must
own those mis-carriages, and a fear, that those that heretofore contrived so
many mischiefs against the State, had not yet laid down their Design. And
that this danger should be more apparent, a concurrencie of plots and
conspiracies, both from abroad and home, is discovered by many several
Intelligencers: so that scarce a day passes, in which the State seems not to
be delivered from some eminent treason.

By this time their Fears are not less than their Dangers, and their
Resolution grows as great as their Fear: so that any reasonable man could not
believe that the Enemy that must do all these foretold mischiefs, could
lodge within us and rise against us, without being suppressed in the very
infancy of the Design. Yet we have found, that notwithstanding all these
Politic Ground-works, and Preventions; the Prophecy of the Parliament is
thus far come to pass, that we are likely to be destroyed; but it wounds us
deep, when we consider, who seem to be partly the occasioners of it.

He therefore that shall consider all circumstances, cannot but think it
almost impossible, that the King, lately so much out of favor with the People;
so divested of all things that conduce to the making of a war (but Resolution,
and the discontents of a few others) should be able to get together so
considerable an Army, and such a party as dare show themselves in every
quarter of the Kingdom: Nor had he done it, had not his agents gathered
infinite advantages which were let fall to them by some whose interests should
have made them more wary. Some do infer out of this, That the King of
England cannot complain (though but in mere policy) but the passionate people
will pity him, though they sight against themselves. If these find themselves
oppressed with the effects of such a war, they are easily invited to change
their party (as discontented men do the air, and sick men their beds) though
they be never the more eased by it; and had rather submit themselves to the
natural obedience of their Prince, then to the severe and unusual commands of
any other power, though they are told, that they tend to their preservation.
Thus, by weighing these passed considerations we find that success does
often coozen out experiences; and will not always follow humane designs,
thongh they seem to be grounded upon the most right and certainty; and after
all this struggling and weakening of the Kingdom the opposion grows stronger,
and the event still more dangerous and doubtful. Yet we will see as far as
we can at distance, on which side advantages lean most.

The ground of such a war as this, is the affections of the People; and upon
this, both Armies are built, and kept up: we will therefore guess which of
them has the surest foundation. It has been observed, the Parliament has
made little difference, (or not the right) between the Gentry and Yeomanry,
rather complying and winning upon the latter, then regarding or applying
themselves at all to the former. And they may be thus excused; they did not
think it justice to look upon any man according to his quality, but as he
was a Subject; I hope this was all the reason: but howsoever, it appears not
that they yet have, or are likely to gain by this policy. The common people,
could they be fixed, were only worth the courting at such a time: but they are
almost always heady and violent, seldom are lasting and constant in their
opinions; they that are to humor them, must serve many Masters; who, though
they seem, and indeed are, their inferiors; yet grow imperious, upon many
occasions: many actions; of merit, how eminent soever, shall not prevail with
them to excuse one mistake; want of success, though that be all the crime,
makes them angry, murmuring and jealous: whereas a Gentleman is better
spirited, and more resolute; and though he suffers by it, had rather stick
to that power that will countenance him, then to that which makes no difference
betwixt him and a Peasant. The Gentleman follows his Resolution close, and
wins of his silly neighbors many times, either by his power, by his example,
or his discourse, when as they have an easy Faith, quickly wrought upon, and
upon the next turn will fall off in sholes.

They are a body certainly of great consequence, when they are headed and
ribbed by the Gentry; but they have a Craven or an unruly courage, (which at
best may rather be called Obstinacy then Resolution) and are far less
considerable, when the most part of the Gentry, or chief Citizens divide
themselves from them.

We shall find the Parliament has nothing to cement it self, to increase and
fix their party, and keep it from staggering, but a little temporary
reputation, and a resolution to hold fast to the public good; and this (if
things run so high as they do now) will be called rebellious stubbornness, and
be branded with the foul imputation of Treason. Whereas the King (as the
chief Master and Dispencer of the Commonwealth) is able to fit the humor of
every man that he has a mind to take of: he has honor for the proud, places
of trust for the ambitious, inferior offices for the busy man; favor and
promises, and a possibility of several preferments, to invite all sorts of men
to him: He has the power of a Pardon to hold out like a Lure, to fetch in such
as have turned tail; yet, perhaps, would come in again, but dare not stoop
till that calls them in.

The humor of changing is epidemicall; as infectious to the next neighbor as
the Plague; and if it should spread forth about London, whence shall the
supplies come? A Prince by his Agents will keep off the aid of foreign
States from them, but is seldom denied some contribution toward his own
defense. And if they contribute any thing, it will be just so much as shall
serve to hold up the war; and will give it as fuel to maintain the fire,
not as water to suppress and quench it: For they never yield assistance where
their advantage shall not largely recompense it. And if it so fall out, that
the interest of an adjoining State shall chance to be mingled with the actions
of their neighboring subjects, their Prince will use all arts (having the most
expert instruments for it) to disable or take off that party: he may quallifie
that State before hand by parting with some thing he has right unto; or may
do it, by corrupting some eminent Engineere there; some great officers, and
some of the most popular men; or by kindling some divisions amongst them, so to
busy them at home, that whilst their own house seems to be on fire, and
like to burn further, they may not be at leisure to quench their neighbors
flames.

There is a President that seems to encourage very much the prosecutors of
this war; and that is the late success of our brethren in Scotland. But, I
fear, if we parallel our present condition and theirs together, we shall
find, that we shall differ point-blancke in most circumstances, but the war
of the cause.

1 When their great work first began, the three Kingdoms were generally
discontented; and they all did as it were conspire to its assistance, either in
secret or openly, conceiving it to be their own business, their own
quarrel.

Secondly, amongst our great men here, there were very few stood near the
stern, and those not at all plausible with the people. And our chief
Nobility and Gentry had no countenance showed them at Court, and could not on
the sudden be so far engaged on that side as the service required, but joined
together at the Treaty in the North to get easy conditions for them.

Thirdly, though the Kings Counselors had been long practicing to make their
best advantage of a Peace, yet they knew not how to bestirre themselves
properly in a War. Very few of them being fit to be Military statesmen.
Because until then, Soldiers had never been countenanced; A man in Buffe was
a rare sight in Court.

Fourthly, the Papists (although their Agents and their Purses were busy)
never showed themselves in a body.

Fifthly, the Cavalry, both at home, and from abroad, (whence many came to a
more uncertain service,) did believe, that they fought for their Country, and
not against the King, whilst they opposed themselves against his Army.

Sixthly, they fought against another Nation (an old Enemy scarce quite
reconciled) and had no Reluctancie, no fear of killing a Father, a Brother, a
Kinsman (scarce a Countryman.) They (being always as politic as charitable)
would hardly have accounted us as Brethren, had we thwarted their Designs, we
being to be thought so far dear to them, as they may be benefited by us.

Seventhly, The seat of the War was out of their own Confines; and they had
so ordered it, that if their business could not be done without the
prosecution of it: It should be acted in another Country, the spoil of which
would make no tender conscience amongst them to recoile, they being to make
their advantage both by enriching themselves, and weakening us.

Eighthly, they had not the controling presence of lawful Majesty, which takes
off, prevents, and counter-plots the Designs of any that are working near to
it.

And lastly, (not to look into more private Reasons which perhaps might be
urged) we shall find that the condition and temper of the People and Government
of Scotland, well weighed with ours (at this time) will be very different, and
may well divert us from levelling at the same ends. And this also may be a
general answer, they being a People watchful for their own advantage, had the
luck (with the Diseased in the Gospel) to step first into the waters after
they were troubled, and found the benefit of it: Whereas those that came after
tried the Cure in vain.

But to go on in our Argument of Advantage or Disadvantage: When once the
people show themselves to be sensible of the smart of War, nothing can so much
wipe away the remembrance of former injuries, and ingratiate any party, as to
be forwardest (though but in mere show) to an Accommodation. The People (not
being able to see far into the secret consequences of War, and Peace) will
begin to look upon those as their enemies whom they shall find most averse to
Peace. And therefore though a Treaty may bring many weighty Inconveniences to
one side more then the other; yet the humouring of the people is of so much
consequence that it is too great an advantage to let it be often pressed and
not received with the same seeming eagerness. Who has made the best use of
this policy, may be seen by the effects of it.

The King is the more likely to draw to him the affections of the people, in
that the pressures and miscarriages of his late Government are passed, and
almost expiated by his acknowledgement of them, and a promise of redress, and
are as it were forgotten by them, who resent more their present Grievances (not
considering the difference and the quality of them) then a thousand overpassed
transgressions, which are driven out of their Remembrances by aggravating every
mistake, every circumstance of injury and violence, which the Parliament,
either against their will or upon necessity (the common excuse of Statesmen)
does commit.

The King (a Syllable, of as much advantage as another Army) in his very Name
is sacred and powerful, and shakes the consciences of many, who would else
have willing hands, and ready Purses to oppose his Army. He has the advantage
of the written Law, which he can use now, in his defense; and by the Authority
of it, joined with the Power of his Sword, can thunder out Accusations, and
perhaps the Penalties of Treason against those whom he shall call his opposers.
He has a Counsel so well mingled, that he has some versed and cunning in
the Law, and that know how to turn it to the most necessary use: Some crafty
in all the windings of State; some experienced in all the Designs of War.
His Intelligencers are in the very Bosom of his Antagonists, or else his
Agents conjure: and his own counsels are secrets, till he thinks fit to
divulge them. The Commanders of his Army are many and expert, and are not
clamorous for pay, as if they served him to make him great, rather then
themselves immediately rich, and seem to be fixed in their Faith to his
service: The Nobility and Gentry about Hirn, bear their own charges, and
assist his: His Army is big enough to defend it self until the Spring, the
time of Action appears: and what it is likely to be by that time, let every
man judge that considers His party abroad, and almost in all Counties. And it
is a fond thing certainly to think his Army can want Ammunition, having any
Port open: or that it will want Money more then the other; If the Kingdom has
it, the Soldier will not be without it: if it have not, they must feed on
free-cost.

Thus we find by these many Circumstances, that the Parliament has a
considerable opposite. It will now be in vain to sum up all the strength and
advantages which surely are very many, that the Parliament has got together
for its defense, and to go through with its Designs; We hear so much of them
every day, of their power, of their success, that I shall not need to enlarge
them. My endeavor is not to magnify the Powers of one above tho other, but to
show how considerble they both are to undo one another, and the whole State.
Our Bells and Pamphlets have told us of Victories that have been given at
Winchester, at Chichester, in Yorkshire, and all this while I cannot see any
reason to rejoice, or to hope the business is any whit nearer an end: for by
all this it only appears, that they are able to maintain the War, not
finish it. These petty conquests do not so much improve the affairs of the
Parliament; as the certain noise of the thriving forces in the West, and that
yet dangerous Army now in the North, does shake them. Which may be feared (as
things are now every where) may grow able to master those parts of the
Kingdom, and we know not how soon may be ready for any other service that
emergent occasions shall require.

The Result then of all that has been said, is but this, We have seen that
our Peace has been abused, that the abuse of it has begot a War; That the
War has already brought in many Miseries, that those miseries are ready to
increase, even to our Ruin: And that this Ruin will be certain, if a sudden
Peace interrupt it not. Thus we now seem to have before us a Fatal choice,
Peace or Ruin. It is time then that we look about us: and although we hear
these struglings to be called Sedition and Rebellion on the one side, and
Malignancy and Treason on the other, yet I hope it will be none of these, for
the subject to look after, and secure his endangered Being. It will surely be
somewhat excusable, if we deal a little familiarly with both sides, whilst we
judge of our conditions according to the light we have, from the Results of
their Actions, and their many Declarations, which we have reason to look upon
as so many appeals to the people, who (as matters now stand) are like to be
the Judges, the executioners, and sufferers in this Bloody Trial.

And whilst we are to consider our own Interests, let us lay aside
partiality, and those passions and conceits which will not give us leave to
seek Peace the nearest and the best way: Let us own Reason, on which side
soever we shall find it. It is worth a man's wonder to see on both sides men
that have been always reckoned (and deservedly) amongst the most wise and
sober; to see these bent to such extremes, that they will justify their Party
in every circumstance and so fix their opinions to one side, as if
infallibility were inherent to it, and, as if they were not at all concerned
in the Actions of the other party. I shall for my own part rejoice, that I am
not so wise as these men, and shall be glad if I shall be of their Form, that
have indifferent wits, and middle judgments. And shall argue (as I have
hitherto done) if Reason offer it self on both sides, unless some mighty
Politician shall be able to persuade me that this State may subsist in its
wonted Glory and Eminency without a King, or in its happy temper of Freedom
and Subjection without a Parliament. When either of these Paradoxes shall be
proved. I shall silently hear extremes maintained without a reply. But I
look presently to be cried down as guilty of that heinous crime, which this
exorbitant Age calls Moderation. Yet ere I be condemned, let us go to Issue,
and we shall find upon the Trial, how justifiable my how necessary this kind
of Transgression (if it must be so styled) now is.

The true Character of a Moderate man I conceive to be this; He is one that
loves his Country so well, that he grieves to see it destroyed out of a saving
policy, one that is not a friend to this War, not because he is afraid to die,
but because he would hereafter live in an even and well poyzed Temper. One,
that could never be so well satisfied of the necessity why this War began, as
he is now, why it should see an end; which though he longs for yet knows not
how to pray for a Victory. One that in earnest loves the King, and thinks him
Essential to the Being of a Parliament, and the life of this, to the
well-being of all hereafter. One that honors, not adores the Parliament
because he sees they also are but men: and rather wishes them safe, and what
they should be, then Omnipotent. One that would have his Religion nor gaudy nor
stripped stark-naked. One that loves both Law and Gospel, and would gladly
have those that meddle with either, to hold themselves closer to their Text.
One that is equally as much afraid of the meddling severe Clergy of New England,
as of the Ambitious pragmatick Clergy of old England. One that is sorry to see
it more seasonable then safe, to speak truth. One that would have Peace not as
an effect of War, but of an Accommodation. To conclude he is one that is yet an
admirer of Peace, and is earnest to see a farther Trial who avoids it most and
so hinders him of it: you shall then perhaps have him leave his Center, and
betake himself to one side, as if by that he had found out his enemy.

We might take this man in pieces and examine in how many circumstances, he can
(is yet) be hurtful to the State, but we will not tie our selves to any
particulars, yet we shall find all or most of these Notions to be requisite in
every one that will consider and follow his Interest as he is an English
subject.

Our contention in general seems to be like theirs that have gone to Law for
some Royalties, some Privileges in a Manor, and have consumed all the
Demesnes to maintain the suit, and at last after great expense, and with much
ado, have perhaps left to their posterity an enlarged title, but an empty
estate.

We can laugh at such folly as this in others, and yet will not see it in our
selves. It will ere long be our own case, if we will not come to composition.

If we could have thought it safe to have closed, when the King seemed to open
his Arms, by his offer the twentieth of January, 1641. (or since when He
invited to a Treaty by his Message from Nottingham) or to have gone so far in a
Conference, as to have known what was really the Difference on both sides: It
is very likely our Divisions now had been less and fewer: and though perhaps
some scars would have yet been left unworne away, which must be the Work of
Time; yet our gaping wounds, the wide breaches which now make us Miserable, had
certainly been better closed, then we can ever hope to see them hereafter.
Heaven has given us leave to see another January, another offer to a
Reconciliation: Let us consider how many Mischiefs have thrust themselves upon
us since the last year; and how many worse then those, will crowde in, if
another year must go round in such Distractions.

To the earnest prosecutors of this War, that had rather loose themselves then
their expectations, this may be said. When the General marched out of London,
there was some Reason to hope that he might be able to perform those
Instructions which the Parliament furnished him with. And although if success
had gone along with the Design, if some skirmishes, or a battle might have
finished his employment, it might perhaps have turned to the quiet and
advantage of the estate; yet seeing that without infinite and dangerous
difficulties, that which was aimed at cannot be reached by the sword; it is
good reason that it should be sheathed; and this Rule is sometimes worth-holding
unto; seeing we cannot have what we would, let us have what we may: for
perhaps even that which might now be obtained, may be denied us at the next
parley. For some are persuaded, that more favorable conditions might once have
bin agreed on then can now be gained.

But let me not be mistaken: I cannot find yet any considerable number of men
to be so far in love with peace, as to entertain it on any conditions. For most
men know, that such a Peace may cut our Throats; or if it be soft, and want an
edge to undo us so quickly as the Sword: yet it may stifle all our Liberties;
we may be murdered with a Feather-bed, and smothered with Roses. Nor would I
believe, that such an overreaching Peace as this, is urged upon us. The
subject is told that nothing is pretended to, which may make for his good; but
it shall be granted. And I am drawn to hope the best, for these following
Motives.

No Prince ever gave such engagements to his People of a succeeding happy
Government, as he has done by his several Remonstrances: And if experience
had delivered half that to us, which Eloquence would now persuade us to
believe: He were envious to himself that would not make Bon-fires for every
Declaration: yet some, (and wise men to) advise us, that whilst we are showed
these fetters of Gold, we should not so admire the glistering of them, as to
desire to be bound by them: but though we may thank them for their advice, yet
it is hoped we shall not need it: For, besides the many Vows registered with
Heaven and Earth, we have other assurances offered to us: the first, are only
to inform and win our Reason, or our Affection, not to lead our faith; which
shall be more really convinced, (as it is good reason it should) when he shall
agree to such propositions, as all reasonable men shall be satisfied with. This
(if I mistake not) we are promised. And besides; I would not be such an utter
opposite to the Cavaliers, (I mean to the most disengaged Nobility and Gentry
of the Kings party;) as to believe that they can be so far transported with
vanity, as to sell all the rest of the Kingdom into slavery; to purchase to
themselves some strange immunities: seeing their children if not themselves
must be slaves, as well as the issue of the Roundheads; surely these will
join (laying aside all Malice and Passion) because Posterity is concerned in
it, to get safe conditions for this Parliament; and easy conditions for the
Subject in general. This I hopefor, although we have seen in many the
metamorphosing power of a little private interest. But if it so unhappily fall
out, that any very high things be proposed, and stood upon, on the one side,
without complying a little with necessity (which our Statesmen have hitherto
been contented to make their Mistress, and have obeyed very far) or that
reasonable and necessary things, shall not be granted on the otherside; so
that, that peace, which is prayed for by so many, must be still held from us:
how wretched a condition will this State at the best be reduced to? For though
his Majesty make us gracious Promises, and has perhaps contrived in his just
Thoughts, an equal and easy Government, yet if this War continue it is Revels,
He may not be left in a capacity to make us so happy, as he would do: For
the most constant men, must be contented to change their Resolutions with the
alterations of time. And, what unexpected effects attend on War? Suppose the
lengthening of this War, so shake the Estates of the Nobility, and Gentry about
the King, as that there will be little left to mayntain them like themselves,
when the War is ended: Who do we think is, as it were, bound to repair their
fortunes? And whether will not they (reduced to such Necessities) be contented
to enlarge that Power; that may be so enabled to Revenge, and requite them,
making the Public Interest, to bend a little to theirs? And that amongst
these, there will not be some Chiefs, some that unseen; and closely will wind
up Prerogative, to make themselves greater? And do we believe that the Nature
and Disposition of the People will not be altered; who being tired and almost,
worn out with the Contentions of the King and Parliament, will more easily
undergo such things, as they would heretofore have called Slavery. And although
the Prince have no aim at it, yet before he shall be aware, he shall find
himself engaged, (by the Concurrencies of so many Circumstances that conduce
to it,) in a higher and more absolute Government: so that the Constitution of
this State, will become a little unlike it self: and th^n, we must know that
Princes, and all such as have the Government of a Commonwealth, are compelled
sometimes by a kind of Necessity; to disence wit^^he settled Rules of Law, for
Reason of State; and it cannot be expected th^^ a Prince, if he be wise, as
well as Pious; shall be so superstitious to the strict sense of any
Protestations, as to neglect his Interest, and the present condition of his
State; which may (as it may happen) suffer very much whilst he makes a
conscience to do things fit and requisite: And there will not then want Men of
both Cownes that will prove, that convenience and necessity shall excuse the
conscience in such a case. Would we avoid these inconveniences? Let us not then
run the hazard of them. Let us prevent a delayed Victory by a sudden Agreement.

But, I seem to guess too confidently of the Success so far off; for there
is another considerable Army in the Field; and after infinite bloodshed, it is
possible enough that this may be Victorious. What must we then expect?

It is likely the nineteen Propositions will be very reasonable things then: It
will seem requisite then, that Monarchy, or that which is called Prerogative,
should be circumscribed within more popular Limits. That some Wiser, some
Honester, some more Pious Men, some that are Unbyased with private respects or
opinions; some that have hazarded themselves (and more) for the common good,
should be Supervisors of the State; and settle it in such an order as should
better please and benefit the People (such rare men as these are, the State
has had need of; I pray God a competent number of them may be found, if such
an ocasion should call for them.) And who knows, whether they will be able to
stay here? For, it may perhaps so fall out, that some other Politic security
(not to be guessed at) may seem necessary to be innovated; (which this State
has wanted: yet perhaps not needed for many hundred years.) And Innovations
come not alone: Rules of Government are like links in a Chain; they hang one
by another, and require proportion, and Evennesse; if a new one be added; it
must be warily fitted to the rest; or the rest reduced as near as can be to the
Resemblance of the other. And what do we believe will satisfy the numerous
Victors, the People? Will not their ends and desires be as various, as their
humors are now? Will they submit in their Opinions to that, which the
Judgments of those in the Parliament (as many as the War and the consequences
of it, will leave) shall agree upon? Or, will it lie in the Power of the
Parliament, when the State shall be in so general a confusion, as an expiring
War must leave it in, to order the government so, that the King may Rule; and
the People obey, as beseems them? I would fain assure my self that they might
be able to perform all the good that they intend and promise; but, some thing
like Reason, will not give me leave. I have considered, that those that
undertake to stand at the Stern, though their wills, and their Ends direct them
a straight course; yet they must be contented to steer according to the
weather, the Wind, and Temper which they shall find the Seas in.

Good God^ will it not then be madness to fight on, if such as these are like
to be the Effects of Victory? But Victory is such a word, as I know not how to
use it in such a Discourse; for there can be truly no such thing in this
Action: Loss will be all the gain we can expect from it: and we find that
the prevailing Sword must wear such a Power, as can scarce be prosperous to
the State: and our next Government must have a Tincture at the least of the
humors of those that shall become Masters of the Field; which may perhaps be
of our own Nation, or of another, so uncertain are the issues of War, It
being an observation that the diffention of any people has always bin an
invitation to their Neighbors. If this War be defensive on the Kings part,
and if his Council has no other Design in the holding it up, then merely his
Safety, and so much honor as may reach to the good of the People; and so far
only the Affairs of the King: We have good reason to believe that a Peace
would be welcome to him: And to hope that as he is resembled to Divinity, so he
will reflect upon his Mercy as well as his Justice: and believe that he may be
as much honored in forgetting the injuries of any; as he can be in the Revenge
of them; especially, seeing he shows his Grace to his Subjects, whose Ruin
would indeed be his weakening; though I believe this be none of Machiavils
Principles. I would say more, but that I would not be so bold, as to give
Instructions to a King: yet the affixing this line here in the middle, to look
both ways, can surely do no harm.

Arma Tenenti, omnia dat, Qui Justa negat. Nor shall I undertake to be wiser
then my Teachers, and give Rules to the Parliament. I shall only advise them
to remember what they are; of whom they are made; and why they are met. And
because they want the wind (the Auspicious Gale of Complying Majesty) and
enough of the Tide (the full stream of the Peoples affections,) and seeing the
storm grows high; and it is fowl weather, it may be better to hale-in, and
betake themselves to a Harbor, lest the State suffer Shipwreck, whilst the
Helm seems to be in their hands.

But I may be a little bolder with my Fellow Subjects, and shall enquire what
truly is their Interest now, whilst their safety is thus far endangered.

Slavery (the fear of which is accounted worse then death, by such as have been
born Freemen) could never befall us, if we did not help to bind our selves by
our own hands, and admit it by our own Divisions; The People while they hold
together, are like a cast Ocean; an absolute Power cannot possibly wade through
to it is ends, unless they fall back one from another, and become like those
wonderful Walls of Water, which gave the Israelites leave to pass through on
dry Land: Should then fond English thus far severe themselves, we should also
be a wonder to Posterity. This is feared on both sides, and avoided rightly by
neither. We fight to make one side Great; which being done, the other must
needs be too little: If the inferior parts of the Body, the Members of it, be
made to swell beyond their due proportion, we presently dislike the Symptoms,
and fear a Dropsy; And that body whose head is swelled, and made greater by
ill humors, then it should be, is of a diseased Constitution, has but weak
Limbs; and almost nothing but leanness every where else.

There may be Reason to be as well afraid of an extravagant popular Power, as
the exorbitancies of Monarchy. But, whilst we endeavor to avoid the one, Let
us be careful that we do not engage our selves in the other: It were well
therefore, That when Propositions shall be tendered to His Majesty, That the
Nobility and Gentry, (for I hope the former Delinquents, and Papists do not
advise, though they assist) which have separated themselves from the
Parliament, should discover themselves without Passion, according to their true
Interests, how far they would have it stoop in their Requests: Let them
consider how great, or how little they would have had the Power of Prerogative
to have been, when they groaned under the large Extent of it, and when they had
nothing in their Eye, but the mere good, and safety of the Commonwealth, which
is now in the same, yet in more danger, then ever they saw it. How far they
would then have had, the abusers of their Princes Power; The destroyers of Law
and Justice; The cutthroats of the State (the Monopolizers;) How far I say,
they would then have had these punished, and made Examples; How much of the
insulting Clergies wings, they would then have been glad to have clipped. Let
their zeal for a Reformation both in Church, and State, be such, in every
circumstance, as it was then; and more need not be defired. Let them not,
Because they are angry with themselves, (I mean with their Fellow Subjects,)
Revenge themselves upon Posterity, by setting up against themselves, not only a
larger Power, but an Authority also, even by their own Grants, by their own
Swords. It lies not in the Power of the Subject to confer more toward their
slavery, then to pull down a Parliament (upon what necessity or pretense
soever) with their own hands: This shall be a lasting President, and
Disparagement in all Ages; and a warrant to all Princes to discountenance them,
since they work not better effects upon the State; and that side must be sure
to own all the guilt, which shall be overthrown. A Parliament will be said to
be the sole Author of these Miseries; Thus, It will become the disdain, which
was always hitherto the Darling of the People. Thus a perpetual Prejudice
shall stick upon all hereafter; and then what use shall the overborne Subject
have of his Sanctuary? If it want Reverence, it will want Power; If it want
Power, it will only serve to give away our Estates, not amend them. And is it
not likely when the Improvident People shall inflame their Prince in a
Contestation, where themselves are so nearly concerned, That it will instruct
such a one, as shall by Himself, or His Councillors hereafter, have an aim at
an absolute command; to struggle with them, at any time, when they ask in
Parliament for things covenient, or necessary; and to call it a Beam of His
Prerogative, though it be indeed but a false Reflection of an Usurped Light?
Let them seriously consider, to which side they ought in right Reason to give
the most advantage, in these Propositions. When a Prince wins any thing from
His People (much more when they urge it upon Him) He will be sure to hold fast
what He has, and many times Improves, never diminishes it; whereas, if the
Subject gain any extraordinary thing from the Crown, (how necessary soever)
with what difficulty is it enjoyed? How many Tricks and Invasions have the
Instruments of State to cozen the People of the benefit of it?

Our Predecessors have been as much afraid of the greatness of their
Sovereign, though over other Nations, as of the Diminution of their own Estate;
and therefore did their best to diminish His Power, or Fortunes, lest by
enlarging Himself upon a Neighboring Adversary, He might forget Himself, and
become too high for them. Surely then, some such care is due to the Affairs at
this time; yet it must be averred. That he that robs his Prince of His honour^,
impaires the reputation of his Country; and he that would fix any honor in
Him, which cannot be communicable to the Commonwealth, sins against both.

The Punctuallity and Nicity of the Honor and Greatness of the King, has
seldom been enough to hold up a War, with wary Subjects, especially among
themselves; Let them take care to do things safe and honorable for the
Commonwealth (of which He is chief,) and it will be impossible, That the Kings
Honor, and safety, should not be mingled with it. I hope He will find as much
Honor in saving a perishing Kingdom, as if He were gaining a new one. And
whilst He thus makes a Conquest on His Peoples hearts. He renders Himself
greater, then His driving Counselors could make Him, were they at the end of
their Designs. It were worth our joy to see Him return triumphing, with, but
not over His People.

And as that Party should do their duty; so is there Reason, That they on the
other side should do theirs. Let them remember that they have a King; That
whilst He is in a Cloud, we are in the shade, and want that Influence which
may revive the State, and make it flourish. Let no man so dote upon a
Parliament, as to think it wants errors; nor conceit there can be any
Government contrived so proper to the Nature and Constitution of this State, as
Monarchy, so circumscribed, and quallified as ours is, by the Wisdom and care
of our Predecessors, the providence of this Parliament. Let them lay aside
violent conceits, and expectations; and let them believe, (having so good
Reasons for it) That they will sooner reach, their Destruction, then that
thorough-Reformation, which by many is aimed at. The Speech of the Chan: to
Hen. 5.
Let every man value the blessings of Union, by the Miseries we have undergone
by Division; Let us seek Peace earnestly, but let it not, as yet, be by this
Argument; Bellum faciamus, ut Pacem habeamus, nam finis Belli Pax est: but,
here it will prove too true, That Finis hujus Belli Ruina erit. Yet, let us
know, That Peace (lest we be overreached in the match) must now be woed with
circumspection: That the Managers of Treaties, are State Jugglers; and that the
most Interessed men are likeliest to be employed in it: That those therefore
that never had any mind to the War, have Reason to be careful how the Peace
be concluded: That it is requisite, both sides should make themselves as
considerable as they can at such a time: That to pay the Army now, is to
improve the benefit of a Peace; which, at best, by this kind of conclusion
will yield less advantage to the Subject, then to the King; though it be now
absolutely necessary for both.

And we have Reason to make the best use of this nick of Time, and not defer
it an instant farther.

For after all this endeavor of both sides: after every one has done his
best, toward the great cure of this languishing State; the disease has been
let run so far, That it will almost be beyond all hope, that we shall ever
see a recovery: Into so desperate a Consumption are we fallen, partly by their
fault, that should have had more care of our health; in whose Power we all
thought it once lay, to prepare such Preservatives for us, that we might have
been settled in such a healthful Constitution, that none of these evils could
now have vexed us. Our sad Case is now such, That we have an Incensed God; an
angry King; a threatening Council; a heady Clergy; a divided Nobility; a
discontented Gentry; a distempered People; a distracted Religion; an unhinged
State; a confused Government; undermining Adversaries; a Civil War; an
increase of Soldiers; consumption of Treasure; disunion in united Kingdoms;
lost Reputation; an unniversall Jealousy; a defection from the Principles of
sound Policy; a Parliament which should be the Redress of all these, made
quite otherwise, to us, by some that have abused it: and generally such a
conspiracy; such a complying of ill Symptoms; that even Miracles must be
wrought, or else we perish. In a word, Such is our doubtful condition; That
even a Peace, may destroy us; But a War, must. We had not need then, neglect
any opportunities of being happy, seeing we are so beset with misery. And we
shall find now, That both sides are somewhat evenly balanced: And it concerns
the Subject on both sides, (especially one fide) to keep them so, until the
Parley shall be concluded; which if it shall now take no effect, may justly
make us despair of such an other Hint to a Reconcilement; For we shall scarce
ever again see them so well poysed, so fit for a composure; seeing now their
equal Powers may make them afraid of each other. It may be now hoped (if ever)
(so that both sides will do their parts, according to their Interests;) That
Truth, and Peace may conclude the Treaty. I do not mean such a Truth, as the
Rigid Antagonists of both sides, intend.

Nor am Lable to give you the Character of this Truth; since it is yet to be
agreed on: Yet I thus conceive of it. It is a Medium betwixt the two Extremes,
which both sides seem to aim at, whilst they are at this distance: by which
(if we are not decreed to confusion) Religion may be so settled, That our Clergy
may no more be Statesmen, and better Churchmen; That our Laiety may not
intermeddle with Ecclesiastics; That our Formalities and Ceremonies in
Religion, may not drown the substance of it; and that we may not quite loose
the substance, to make sure not to be any more troubled with the shadow; That
to Preach often may not be counted an offense; and that to apply themselves to
schism and sedition, may not be called Preaching: that the resolved Protestant
may not see his Religion so altered, so meanly dressed, as not to be like it
self; Nor the weaker Protestant, see it so Gay, so full of Trym, that his
humble Conscience dares scarce own it: Thus we may provide, On the one hand
against the increase of Papists, And on the other for the regaining of
Separatists.

And for that other Truth, which we would have in the State: I think we can
make a nearer approach to it, by no other way, then an Accommodation.
State-Truth is the Brat of Imagination, and never had any real being: no
Government was ever so refined, by an innovating Reformation, but it had
defects, or extravagancies; and by the miscarriage of the succeeding
Statesmen, quickly settled into as much (though not the same) corruption: when
Ambition, and Interest shall be weeded out of the hearts of men, I will look
for this Purity, this Truth. But we have heard long since. That Terras Astraea
reliquit, Therefore I shall hope only to find it in Heaven: In the mean time,
we shall in vain look for Purity, in that which we call Truth, if it must be
dyed in more of our Blood. I had rather see a little, contributed to the Weal
of the State, by the hands of both; then a great deal accumulated by a single
Power: the one I shall hope to enjoy with Peace; the other will never be kept
without strong contention.

But if both sides will obstinately keep their distance: If the one cries out
for Peace with Honor; the other for Peace with Truth; and scorn to entertain
Peace, unless they may have so much of both as they demand: Surely, this
unhappy Nation, betwixt these their great Champions is like to loose it is
Peace, Truth, and Honor.

I will now Ramble no further into their contemplations; I was big of these
Thoughts, and could not be quiet until I was delivered of them, though in my
private Papers. Thus, many times does a mind filled with grief, find ease by
emptying it self in Complaints, though it can meet with no other Redress.

This Discourse, being grounded upon our immediate condition (if things must
run on in their old Carere,) may in many things, perhaps be out of date, ere
a few days pass, and be like an Almanac, calculated for the last year; and
it is very possible, (and yet not out of Levity) that ere long, I may also vary
from some things, that seem now to be my opinion: For, where Reason discovers
it self, I am resolved to go along with her. And there may be many Respects, to
make an uninteressed man, to change his opinions; and the party, to which he
seemed nearest in his Affections. The discreet, or politic carriage of a
business, may make it worse, or better.

That cause which was the most dangerous at the first, and had the least merit
in it, may through the extremities of the contrary Party, be safest, and most
deserving at the last. And though an Even, and Moderate Man be unwilling to
engage himself in War, on either side; yet, if it shall appear by the
Perverseness of any, That no hope, No possibility of Peace be left him, but by
the Sword: It will then be held the best Piety to be a Soldier. Nam Pia Arma,
quibus nulla, nisi in Armis, Spes est.

Difficile est Satyras non scribere.

FINIS.

