Spiritual Salt: OR, A SERMON On Matthew. 5. 13.

Ye are the Salt of the earth --

Preached in Whitchurch at an Ordination of five Ministers, Febr. 20. 1649.

By Tho. Porter, M. A. Minister of the Gospel there.

Luke 14. 34. Salt is good, but if the Salt has lost his savor, wherewith
shall it be seasoned?

35. It is neither fit for the land, nor yet for the dunghill, but men cast it
out. He that has ears to hear, let him hear.

Origines interpretatur illud, Ezekiel. 16. -- Neque sale salita --

Et hoc crimen (inquit) Jerusalem, quia non fuerat digna Sale Dei. Ego si
credidero Domino meo Jesu Christo, ipse me Salem faciet, dicetque mihi; VOS
ESTIS SAL TERRAE --

Chamier. de Baptismo. 1. 5. c. 16. n. 32. Scimus sacrificia quae Deus
mandaverat fuisse condita ejus verbo tanquam SALE. Erant igitur boni odoris and
bonae fragrantiae coram Deo. Quod and sacrificia, quae offerebantur Idolis,
spectat, erant foetida Cadavera, erant mora putredo. Atqui Caeremonia prorsus
erat similis.

Calv. Prael. in Jer. 16, 18. London, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Ralph
Smith, at the sign of the blew Bible in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange. 1651.

To my Reverend Brethren in the Ministry, of the Classical Presbytery in
Bradford-North.
REverend and Dear Brethren in our Lord Jesus Christ; At your command this
Sermon was preached, and at your request its printed; and to your Patronage its
now presented. Litera scripta manet; Quod scriptum habetur semper v^cat ad
legendum, cum vacat legenti; Ne onerosum sit praesens, quod cum voles sumitur,
cum voles ponitur. Aug Epist 1.
it may lie by you, as an hearty Memorial of my Respect, and as an humble
Monitor of your Duty, to continue and double your care (as there is occasion)
concerning Spiritual Salt. Ex quolibet ligno non fit Mercurius. Salt is not
made of every sort of water; Though (almost) every Mechanic thinks he can
shape a satisfactory Answer to the Apostles Question, (...). 2 Cor 2. 16
Who is sufficient (fit or meet) for these things? Yet 1 Timothy 5. 22. Probem ego
de ordinatione accipi -- Diu explorandus est qui praesicitur Ecclesiae. Ne si
quod vitium liabe^t i^ dogmate aut vita, veniat ordinator in culpae par^em,
tanquam obfirmator. Gretius loc.
lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partakers of other men's sins. Keep
your selves pure. Its too true; the children of your people still are talking
against you -- as God said to the Ezekiel. 33. 32.
Prophet; But let not their foolish prating, hinder your faithful practicing;
Rather imitate the Emperor Severus, of whom its reported, that (...). Melch.
Adam de vita Jo. Bugenhagii. p. 316.
he was careful of his own carriage, and careless of the peoples calumny
concerning himself. Austin Agrigentinum Siciliae Salem perhibent, cum fuerit
admotus igni velut in equa fluescere: cum vero aquae adjungitur, velut in igne
crepitare. Aug. Epitom. per piscat. Tom. 1. p. 283.
mentions a Salt in Sicily, that when its put into the fire, it swims as if it
were in water; but when its put into the water, it sounds as if it were in the
fire. Retain your saltness in all conditions and estates. Mark 9. 50. Habete
intra vos salem, qu^ inter caetera (...), coagulat, stipat, ac jungit, h. e.
(...) pacem colite: Paces enim symbolum sal ae vitae. Hims.
Have Salt in your selves, and peace one with another. While the Enemy is
sowing Tares, be you sprinkling Salt; while others are throwing bones of
dissension, be you fastening the Bond of brotherly union. If the bundle of
Arrows remain fast bound together, it is not easy to break them; if the bond
be loose or broken, its no hard matter to break them one after another. I am
therefore bold to conjure you in the words of the Apostle. 1 Cor. 1. 10.
Now I beseech you brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak the same thing, and that there be no Divisions among you, but that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment. What an
honor and happiness will it be to say with Myconius Concurrimus, certavimus,
pug navimus, VICIMVS and VIXIMVS semper conjunctissime, ut admiratione
afficerentur plurimi super illa rara fratrum (...), and conjunctione. Melch.
Adam de vita Frid. Myconii p. 177.
We have run and wrastled -- conquered and conversed together always
unanimously, even to the admiration (I will not say the envy) of others. But
if in these distracted and divided times there cannot (or will not) be oneness
of mind, yet let there oneness of heart. Oh! let not difference in judgment
produce difference of affection. Now the good Lord enable you to exert the
power and property of good Salt; and the blessing of heaven go along with your
holy labors, which is the continual and cordial prayer of

Your affectionate friend and fellow laborer in the Gospel, Tho. Porter.

SPIRITUAL SALT: Or, A Sermon on Mat. 5. 13. Ye are the Salt of the Earth.
THE Evangelical Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 52. 14.
speaking of Christ, tells us, That his Visage was so marred more then any man's,
and his form more then the sons of men; yet the Prophet David Psalm. 45. 2.
tells us, that, He was fairer then the children of men. Never was there more
dung thrown upon the face of Christ's Ministers then at this day, and yet the
Function is not in it self any whit the less venerable, though to some it be
more then contemptible. Christ himself disdains not the office of a Minister; A
Mountain was the first Pulpit wherein he preached, and my Text is part of the
first Sermon which he preached. He comes like Noah's Dove, with an Olive Branch
of Peace in his mouth, or Grotius.
rather imitates David, who begins his Psalms with the Description of a
Blessed man; So Christ in certain Paradoxes to flesh and blood pronounces them
blessed, whom the men of the world commonly count, and call wretched. Thus like
a skilful Artist he first propounds the end, [Happinesse] from verse. 3. to 13.
and then prescribes the way, [Holinesse] and that under a threefold metaphor.
1. Of Salt, verse. 13. 2. Of Light, verse. 14. 3. Of a Candle, verse. 15. From the
coherence something may be noted briefly by the way.

1. They who would be happy, must be holy, Heb. 1. Muscul.
12. 14. -- Without holiness no man shall see the Lord. The men of the world
are much mistaken, who (if you believe them) would be happy, but scorn to be
holy; But what is holiness, but happiness inchoate? and what is happiness,
but holiness consummate? They say, there is a natural desire in men to be
happy. I am sure there is a natural antipathy in men to be holy. If carnal men
had leave to peep into heaven, and to see what holy spirits and what holy
services are there, they would loath no place more; As a Beggar would dislike
no place more then the Court, where he sees the King in his Majesty, and the
Nobles in their gallant deportment, -- as unsuitable altogether to his sordid
spirit and base behavior.

2. If the text be referred to the last beatitude, v. 11, 12. 2. Pareus.
Christ does encourage his Apostles to duty, from a consideration of their
dignity. What need they care for an Earthquake, who are the Salt of the Earth?
or the darkness of this world, who are the Light of the World? The greater
dignity, the greater duty, 1 Timothy 3. 1. -- A good work. The Ministry of the
Word is a work, there is the duty; And its a good, or (as e (...). Practarum,
ac proinde arduum, si quod aliud usquam est. Beza in 1 Timothy 3. 1.
Beza) an excellent, fair, honorable work, there is the dignity.

3. Christ might have expressed himself in proper terms, as well as
figurative, but these are more powerful and prevalent. Away then with that
unsavory Paradox; That Figurative expressions become not Christ's Sermons,
belong not to a Ministers preaching.

But I come to the Text, which (were I pleased with crumbling of a Text,) I
might divide into these parts, 1. The Subject, [Ye] 2. The Copulate, [Are] 3.
The Predicate, [Salt] 4. The Extent or Object thereof, [Earth] Ye are the Salt
of the Earth.

Ye] Some perhaps may say to me, as the Eunuch said to Philip, Acts 8 34. I
pray thee of whom speaks the Prophet this? so of whom does the great Prophet of
his Church speak this? Its certain of the Apostles; but whether of the Apostles
as Ministers, or as Disciples, is the question? Camer. Praelect. in Mat. 13.
15. p. 103.
This notion may help much to the genuine understanding of many places. For,
because Christ said, Drink ye all of this. Papists would have it said to the
Apostles as Ministers, and so sacrilegiously rob the people of the Cup. Most
Expositors whom I have met with, understand this of the Apostles as Ministers;
But I am almost overcome with Grotius his reasons, that there is no reason of
such a restraint. For 1. Those (...).
Beatitudes are common to all the Disciples of Jesus Christ. 2. The Expression
in the two uses immediately preceding, concern all Christians who suffer for
the truth. 3. Its very clear, that the same persons who are called here, The
Salt of the Earth, are called The Light of the World, verse. 14. which is the
property and praise of all Christians, Phil. 2. 15. -- Ye shine as Lights in
the World; and so (...).
Justin Martyr accordingly, Look what the soul is in the body, that are
Christians in the world. 4. To put all out of doubt, that which is here said of
Salt, is spoken to the multitude, Luke 14. 25. And there went great multitudes
with him, and he turned and said UNTO THEM, -- verse. 34. -- If the Salt has
lost his savor, wherewith shall it be seasoned? Though I think without
wronging the Text, it may be understood generally of Renatis in Christo dicitur
vos estis sal terrae. Hierin Luke 16. 4.
Christians or the Disciples of Christ, but specially of the Ministers of
Christ, according to Ad ipsos PRAECIPUE loquitur. Chrysostom. in loc. Hom. 10.
Chrysostom; Therefore at this time I shall speak to the Text, as relating to
the Ministers of Jesus Christ, not excluding the other Members of Christ.

Are] i. e. by my calling ye are set apart, as Mea vocatione delecti and
destinati estis. T. C. Harm. Evang.
some expound it, or, ye ought to be the Salt of the Earth, (as Pareus,) for
here Christ instructs the Apostles in the execution of their Ministerial
Function.

Salt] (...). The Article is emphatical and demonstrative (as Piscat. notes)
That most eminent Salt, with which all other kinds of Salt are not to be
compared; ye are to put forth the vigor and virtue, the power and property,
the efficacy and excellency of Salt, as you shall hear anon more fully.

Of the Earth] i. e. The world, (as it seems) verse following, namely mankind,
or man inhabiting the earth or world. Nothing is more frequent in Scripture, 1
Kings 10. 24. All the earth sought to Solomon, -- And so it seems to hold forth
some Privilege peculiar to the Apostles, and a distinction between the
Ministry of the Prophets and of the Apostles, q. d Chrysostom. and Chemnitius.
They were the Salt of a poor patch of ground, a corner of the world, viz.
Judaea, But you are the Salt of the Earth: The whole earth is your Diocese or
Province; But as the words are restrained to Christ's Ministers, so they hold
out that they are to season the minds of them, who savor earthly things, (as
Bed. Bonum est cum Apostolis sal terrae fieri i. e. eorum qui adhuc terrena
sapierat mentio imbuendis sufficere. Beda in Mark 9. --
observes) The difference (if any) is not much.

The words thus opened, afford to us this Doctrinal Truth.

Doct. The Ministers of Christ are, or ought to be the Salt of the Earth.

For the clearing and confirming of this, I shall propound and answer a few
questions.

1. Who are the Salt? -- Answ. without doubt, 1. God in Christ by his Spirit is
the principal efficient, as to the seasoning quality of Salt. 2. The holy
Scripture is the primary instrument. 3. The Ministers of Christ are the
secondary instrument, and so here.

2. How are Ministers Salt? Answ. Interpreters unanimously assert, according to
their Function rather then their Persons. Calvin Intelligit Christus eorum esse
Munus salire terrum. Calv. in toc.
says, It is their office to Salt the Earth. Gualt. says, -- Non tam ad
personas q ^am ad Munus* Gualt. Injunctum Evangelizandi Munus. Muse.
The words relate not so much to their Persons as to their Function. It is
their work and business so to do, where (in the Text) Pareus Sc. Synechd. and
Metaphora. Pare.
notes a double figure, Earth is put for the inhabitants of the earth; and Salt
for them who perform the office of Salt.

3. Wherein? Answ. 1. Inrespect of Purity of Doctrine, dispensing aright both
Law and Gospel; (as there is occasion) to the people, i. e. (as Theophilact)
notes (...). Theophil.
by instruction and reprehension, distinguishing between the precious and the
vile. I am notignorant they are called Ministers of the Gospel, not that they
may not preach the Law 3.
at all, as the Antinomian dreams (for in this first Sermon preached by Christ
in the Mount, the Law was preached by him, and must our Savior be a legal
Preacher in the phrase of the times?) but because they are to preach the Gospel
chiefly. --

2. In respect of Piety of Life. Most of men live by examples; They therefore
are to be ensamples to the flock, 1 Pet. 5. 3. Sapientia docere -- moribus
edificare, (as Austin speaks) to preach both by Doctrine and Life. What is the
meaning of that? Lev. 2. 13. -- Salt of the Covenant; but to remind us of the
Covenant which we have made, Piscat.
and wherein we have engaged our selves to an hearty endeavor after
incorruption in life and conversation. You have both these together, 1 Timothy 4.
12. -- Be thou an example of Believers in -- conversation -- in faith; and Tit.
2 7. In all things show thy self a pattern of goodworks, in doctrine,
uncorruptnes, else as a great Divine Qui been docet and male vivit, is sinistra
plus destiuit quam extruit dextra. M. Adam. de vita Conrad. Summer hord. p. 12.
said in the dawning of Reformation; He that preaches well and lives ill,
ruins more with his left hand, then he rears up with his right hand.

Why are they compared to Salt?

1. Because of the piercing or pinching quality. Salt (we know) bites and eats.
So Ministers by the doctrine of the Law, pinch the conscience of a sinner till
he be convinced of sin. Thus did Christ himself with the woman of Samaria, John
4. 18. Thus did Peter with those hearers, Acts 2. 37. yea, they do it by the
Gospel too; which discreetly preached, bites the people till some of them bite
their lips, and gnaw their tongues for pain. The Spirit in the Gospel Ministry
of the Apostles, convinced the world of sin, of righteousness, and of
judgment, John 16. 8.

2. Because of the purging quality, Salt (we know) scoureth and cleanses;
Leeches are scowred with Salt, before the Physician applies them to his
Patient, to take away the rank humor. Glasses are rubbed and scowred with Salt
too. So Christ cleanses his Church -- by the Word, Ephesians. 5. 26. The Disciples
themselves were clean by the Word, which Christ spoke to them, John 15. 3. How
may a young man cleanse his way, but by the word? Ps. 119. 9.

3. Because of the preserving quality; Salis praecipua vis est adversus
putredinem. Grotius.
The chiefest virtue of Salt, is against Putrefaction. Hence that of Varro,
Suillo pecori animam pro Sale datam ne putresceret; borrowed from Cleanthes.
Id.
Nature has given to a Swine a soul or life, in stead of Salt, least it should
rot above ground. In former times it was an ancient Rite in making a Covenant
to use Salt, therefore called A Covenant of Salt, 2 Chronicles. 13. 5. i. e. an
authentical, inviolable, and incorruptible Covenant; because Salt dries up the
superfluous humors which are the ground of putrefaction. Mark, its a Covenant
of Salt, and not a Covenant of Sand. Godly and learned 4 last things
Master Bolton mentions some texts of Scripture, of which (he thinks) we shall
not understand the genuine meaning, till the day of judgment, to which I may
boldly add, Mark 9. 49. For every one shall be salted with fire, and every
sacrifice shall be salted with salt; If the words relate to the damned,
Maldonate.
they show the perpetuity of their torments, because every one, i. e. of THEM
shall be salted with the fire of hell, i. e. They shall burn as fuel in the
fire, and yet be preserved as flesh or fish pickled in Salt; and so the
particle And is not copulative but comparative, sc. and i. e. as every
sacrifice in the Law was to be salted with Salt. And what is more frequent in
Scripture, then to term people slain or destroyed, by the name of a z
Sacrifice? or if the words relate to verse. 47. then they seem to be an argument
to persuade the plucking out of an offending eye, because every one is to be
salted Isa 34. 6. Jer. 12. 3. and 46. 10. and 51. 40. Eze. 24 9, 10. and. 39 17.
with the fire of Gods wrath, or of Gods grace. The phrase to salt with fire,
is no more improper then to baptize or wash with fire, Mat. 3. 11. whatsoever
the sense is, all agree, the words hold out the preserving property of Salt; --
So Ministers preserve people from rotting in sin, and stinking in the nostrils
of God and good men --

4. Because of the pleasing quality; Salt makes meat pleasant to the palate,
Ludovic. de Dieu. -- Si non jam igne Divinae gratiae, certe aliquando igne
divinae irae.
it renders it savoury? Thus when Elisha threw Salt into the spring, the water
became savoury, Sale inest sapor and acor. Sapore cibos insipidos reddit gratos
and nutritios. Acore carnes a corruptione and putredine conservat. Par. in loc.
2 Kings 2. 21. though I confess that proceeded not from the natural property
of Salt, but from the supernatural power of God, yet that refers to Gospel
times, Ez. 43. 24. the Priest shall cast salt on the offerings, etc. -- So
people came to savor spiritual things, Romans 8. 5.: Hence came that Proverb
among the Martyrs, Brown bread and the Gospel is good fare; and is not any meat
and this Salt good cheer?

Use 1. It informs our judgments. 1. Mankind naturally are altogether
unsavory; There is in men nothing but insipidity and insulsity, till they be
seasoned with the Salt of heavenly doctrine, and the grace of Christ's spirit, e
Ratio non sinit naturalis, ut quicquam insulsum comedi possit. Hier. in Job 6.
6.
Job 6. 6. Can that which is unsavory be eaten Insipidus est omnis cibus, fi
non hoc sale conditur. Bern. in Cantic. Sermon. 15.
without salt? or is there any taste in the white of an egg? And some think
that Sycomore tree, Luke 19. 4. is so called because of its unsavory fruit.
All men are fresh men in the University of this world, till they be thus salted.

2. Nay, Mankind naturally stinks in the nostrils of God and good men, as
tainted flesh, or carrion in a ditch. Flesh unsaulted is quickly tainted. This,
man has from Adams sin, Psalm. 14. 3. -- They are altogether become filthy,
(or stinking, (...) Faetere putresc^re, tantum in Niph. invenitur, Job 15. Ps.
14. Pagnine
as it is in the Original.) which word (as Piscator notes) is used but once
more in the Scripture, viz. Job 15. 16. How much more abominable and filthy is
man, -- Hac metaphorica ^ocutione fatuam and corruptioni obnoxiam hominum
naturam indicat quae -- magis est foetida and rejectanea in oculis Dei, quam
sint rancidae and putridae carnes in hominum conspectu. Parc.
Its observed to my hand, that it holds forth, that man's nature, unless it be
salted with the Ministry of the Word, is more filthy in Gods eyes, then putrid
flesh can be in the eyes of men. The best natural man has no reason to be
proud of his best natural parts.

3. All men out of Christ are obnoxious to destruction and rejection; if liable
to Putrefaction, then to Perdition; Therefore called children of Perdition.
That poor Infant which resembles man's natural condition, as well as Ierusalems
is said to be not salted at all, Ezekiel. 16. 4. -- i. e. in a sad perishing
condition. Solent infan tium tenera corpora, dum adhuc uteri calorem retinent,
sale contingi, ut siccentur and stringantur. Hier. loc.
It was a custom among the Jews, to use Salt about infants while they retain
the heat of the womb, to dry up, cleanse and strengthen the body of the child.
The want of this was sometime the death of the child.

2. It confutes. 1. Some high flown Saints, (Nominal, I dare say not real,) who
proudly and vainly conceit themselves Use 2.
to be above all Ordinances, and so above the Ministry of the Word: But I would
ask them where are they? Above in heaven? or below on earth? Perhaps in
affection they may be in heaven, but in Person on earth; And are not Ministers
the Salt of the earth? Its a good caution of Chemnitius, Illis etiam qui
justificati sunt, opus esse hoc sale, ne denuo occupati putrefactione cecidant
in corruptionem and perditionem Chemnit. Harm. c. 51. ^eric. 2.
That even justified ones have need of this Salt, lest putrefaction expose them
to Perdition. A just judgment of God who sets a visible scarre and brand on
some such seeming Saints, by giving them up to their own hearts lusts, who thus
contemn the Ministry. While we are in the wilderness of this world, the best
will stand in need of Manna and Salt, Ephesians. 4. 11. Christ has given Pastors and
Teachers, -- v. 13. Till we ALL come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God unto a PERFECT man. --

2. The vulgar rabble, a sottish people of a perverse judgment, who think,

1. That the Ministers of the Word are not necessary; Of any calling, that may
be best spared; You have heard out of this place by a godly Mr P.
Brother, on the like occasion; You must have a Farryer for your Horse, etc. A
Physician for your bodies, and no Ministry for your sick souls? I am bold to
add, You cannot live without Salt, and can you live without the Ministry of the
Word? Christ says, Mark 9. 50. Salt is good; necessarily good. -- Its truly
alleged by Pareus, Tam necessaria est veroi Praedicatio ad salutem nostra^
quam Sal -- ad carnes a putridine servandas.
The preaching of the Word is as necessary to save the soul from corruption, as
Salt is to preserve flesh from Putrefaction. The Philosophers say, nothing more
needful or more profitable then the Sun and Salt. I have read of one
Consideration of the Doct ine of the Synod of Dort and Articles reduced to
practice. p. 7.
that was strongly opinionated, that a man might live without fire, for any
thing he was to use, till one asked him how a shoe for his horse, or a nail
for his horse-shooe could be made without fire? So some distressed condition
may bring a conviction on these men's spirits, concerning some necessity of the
Words-Ministry; of which we may say as he of Friendship, Fire and Water (to
which add Salt) are not more useful; my Text holds forth the necessity
Ecclesiastici Ministerii NECESSITATEM indicat. Pare.
of the Ministry.

Secondly, That the Ministers of the Word are not venerable. There is no
excellency to be found in them; therefore in scorn call them Parish Priests,
parish-Ministers, etc. I know the word Parochi is no Scripture-name, (neither
are the Ministers of the Gospel termed Priests in the N. T. Nomen Sacerdotis
Evangelium NVLLI praeterqua^ Christo in sua and propria significatione tribuat
Whitak. contra Dec. l. 9^
which belongs to all the faithful,) yet the rise and use of it seems to be
reverend; For if we may believe Polyd. Virgil, De Invent. Rerum. l. 4. c. 9. p.
362.
he says, They were certain Magistrates among the Romans, whose charge was to
provide Fire and Salt for public Ambassadors. -- Et Parochi quae debent ligna
salemque Horat. l 1. Sermonum.
-- Now because also among the Hebrews no Sacrifice was made without Fire and
Salt, therefore Ministers of the Word, providing for their Parishioners things
necessary for their souls salvation, its not without cause that we call them
parish-Ministers. But let that name go, who doats on it? yet it hints the
necessity of their calling, and excellency of their Persons. Homer calls Salt
(...) some divine thing, and that which Livy says of Grecia may more truly be
said of them, Sal Gentium, The Salt of the Nations, or, as my Savior here, The
Salt of the Earth, i. e. That most excellent See J. Down. on Tit. 2. 15. p. 2
Salt with which all other kinds of Salt are not to be compared, as you heard
even now out of Piscator opening the Text; I am sure its no disparagement to
call them (as they are) spiritual Salters. Nay, other Salters keep flesh from
Putrefaction, but cannot make putrid meat sound and sweet, if tainted. But this
Salt can make a corrupt soul to become incorrupt, as Chrysostom well observes.

3. That Ministers are not men of a peaceable disposition, but turbulent
spirits, where they come, as Luther was called, Tuba Seditionis, the Trumpet of
sedition, so was Paul called by Tertullus, -- (...), pestem Beza. Annot. in
Act. 24. 5.
A pestilent fellow, the Pest and plague of a country, as the word signifies,
but as they are the Salt of the earth, so they are bidden to have Salt in
themselves, and peace one with another, Mark 9. 50. Locus elegans and eruditus.
Inter praecipuas Salis facultates, est quod unit densat and q. coagulat -- unde
and in Foederibus tanquam unionis tessera Hebrae is usitatum. Heins. in Mark 9.
50.
an excellent text (as Heinsius observes) Among the properties of Salt, this is
none of the least, that it unites and as it were coagulates, -- therefore used
among the Hebrews in making Covenants as a Symbol and Badge of Peace and
Union, Numb. 18. 19. -- A Covenant of Salt. Ministers serve to unite scattered
and divided affections.

4. That, Art, Schollership, or Learning, is not requisite in a Minister. Some
speak broadly, that as Ministers are not necessary for the people, so learning
is not necessary for a Minister. But is there no Art in making Salt? Go to the
Wyches Namptwich and Dirtwich where Salt is made.
on both sides this town, and see and be convinced. That sweet perfume made of
sundry fragrant spices is said to be a Confection after the ART of the
Apothecary, tempered together, the word is (...) Exodus 30. 35. Salitum ex
simplice vacis Etymo. Jun
SALTED, which shows not only Ministers excellency and peaceablenesse (as
before) but Art also; yet (alas!) what crying out against Universities,
Learning, Arts and Tongues? It was a cursed piece of Policy in Julian (that
Apostate) by Edict to forbid the Christians the public schools and study of
the Arts and Tongues; justing away (as my Author says) Speeds Hist. of great
Britain. l. 6. c. 48. p. 168. n. 8.
the reason of his injustice with scoffs, saying, that Aristotle, Isocrates,
and Plato, (who must be their guides in such liberal learnings) adoring Mercury
and other gods, he held it absurd that they should read and learn of their
books, that loath and rail at their religion. Thus would these men do that
decry learning, if they had power in their hands answerable to the malice in
their hearts, and to the ignorance in their heads. Its strange to me that your
children must serve an Apprentiship of seven years, before they can with skill
drive on a Civil trade, and yet if any pretend to the spirit one quarter of an
year and perhaps less, he is fit to step up into the Pulpit, and to debauch
the learned Orthodox Minister, Mic. 2. 11. If a manwalking in the Spirit and
falsehood do lie, saying, I will prophecy to thee of wine and of strong drink,
he shall even be the Prophet of this People. Speeds Hist. ibid. l. 9. c. 4. p.
462. n. 43.
Our Henry the first, (who for his learning was surnamed Beauclerk) was wont to
say, An unlearned Prince is a crowned Ass, what then are the late swarm of
unlearned Preachers?

3. It teaches, 1. Ministers their duty, which lies in Use 3.
three things.

1. Perform Sal profacientibus officium Salis. Par.
the office of Salt, show forth the vigor and virtue, the efficacy and
excellency of Salt. Season the hearts of your hearers with the wholesome truths
of the Word, 2 Timothy 4. 2. Preach the Word, be instant in season and out of
season, reprove, rebuke, etc. Chemnitius has observed to my hand, that here
all Ministers are put in mind of their duty, that they diligently sprinkle the
Salt of the Law and of the Gospel on their hearers, bring them to repentance,
and preserve them from corruption of sin and death. Some are impotent and
cannot, like those Isa. 29. 11. and 56. 10 (Gods house is prettily well swept
from such unsavory Salt.) There are others who are idle and will not; drawing
down apace on themselves that judgment of Lots wife, of being turned into a
pillar of Salt, Genesis 19. 26. Some of the Hebrew Writers say, the reason was,
because she denied to give Salt to her Guests at a feast the day before; Pareus
justly censures this for a Jewish fable, an idle d^eam; But its neither
uncharitable nor groundless to assert, that many are become pillars and
monuments of Gods wrath to the present and future age, for not providing this
spiritual Salt, for the people committed to their charge, of whom I may say as
Austin Ut nobis quoddam praestaret condimentum quo sapiamus aliquid, unde illud
caveatur exemplum. Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 16. c. 3.
of Lots wife, who became a pillar of Salt, that we being seasoned, may grow
savoury and wise by her example. Therefore Christ says, Luke 17. 32. Remember
Lots wife.

Quest. How must this be done?

1. By preaching your Sermons first to your own hearts and souls, Mark 9. 50.
-- Have Salt in your selves, -- in your hearts, as well as in your heads and
hands, in your persons as well as in your papers. If you your selves be not
seasoned kindly with Salt, how can you season others, except like Lots wife as
before? If your spirits be unsavory, how shall the spirits of others become
savoury? Ier. 23. 13. I have seen folly in the Prophets of Samaria, -- Folly,
-- or (as the word is, u that which is unsavory -- Lam. 2. 14. Thy Prophets
have seen vain and foolish (or Cambd. Rem. p. 248.
unsavory) things for thee (...) Insulsum pro insulsa. i. e. irrationabilia --
R. D. rem evanidam, cui non est sapor. Pagn. Thesaur.
-- Sprinkle therefore some salt on your own souls

2. by Powdring your words with salt, Col. 4. 6. -- let your speech be --
seasoned with salt -- i. e. be savoury, such as may be holily pleasing to the
palate and taking the people. If Christians speeches in private, must be such,
what then must (...) fatuus, infipidus, inconditus insulsus. cibus -- Schindl.
Pentaglott.
Ministers Sermons in the Pulpit be? Eccles. 12. 10. The Preachers sought to
find out acceptable words -- Junius reads, he studied to find -- not utter
quicquid in buccam venerit, as they say. True, a man must study more for matter
then for words, but apt words are not to be neglected, I mean not so much witty
words, as weighty words, sound words, not a mere sound of words, which tickle
the ear, but do not touch the heart. Some stomachs cannot but nauseate good
meat, when it is not well dressed or dished, what unsavory expressions, nay
paradoxes, drop from some men's mouths, for want of this salt? Season therefore
your Sermons with this salt.

3. by Putting it on the consciences of the people, Speak (as much as may be)
to the heart. Bring the word home to the soul. Salt is for use, and
application, as you must render tribute to whom tribute is due, etc. Romans 13.
7. so you must reach out terror to whom terror is due -- Be not afraid of
that bugge, in being accounted a Leagall Preacher, let the law be seasonably
pressed, as well as the Gospel preached. Salt implies both. Herein it is good
to imitate Sal optimum and utilissimum est ciborum condimentum, si MODERATE
adhibeatur. Eflius in Col. 4. 6.
Simon Deane of Lincoln, who being called to Court and becoming a favorite of
King Henry 7th, was wont to say; I am cast among Courtiers, as salt among quick
Eeles, for that he made them stir with his sharp and salt speeches. The
powerful sprinkling of this salt, will startle Conscience, and make a sinner
stir, and look about him for a Savior: only take heed of misapplying, as
Luke 19. 22. -- Meat may be marred with too much or too little salt.
Brokenhearted sinners may become desperate by unreasonable application of the
Law, and Brawny-hearted sinners may grow more dissolute, by unseasonable
amplification of the freegrace of God in Christ; Scatter wisely this Salt.

4. By practicing in your life, what you preach in the Pulpit, that he that
runs may read your doctrine in your doing; Your Sermons preached in the
Congregation, must be printed in your Conversation, else you are not the Salt,
but the slime and sand of the earth. Some take this to be the meaning of the
words, Sensus est qui ab ipso Christo, veram ac salutarem doctrinam
percepissent, non exemplum videndi ab aliis hominibus, petere sed aliis exemplo
esse debere. Grotius in loc.
that they who receive from Christ true and wholesome doctrine, must not fetch
from others a Copy of their life, but be an example themselves to others. Its a
good caution of blessed Calvin, Videant Salitores ne mundum in sua fatuitate
foveant multo etiam magis ne pravo eum and vitioso sapore. inficiant. Calv. loc.
Let these Salters takeheed says he) lest they cherish the world in its
unsavourinesse, much more lest they corrupt and taint it with some naughty and
vicious savor. Set forth therefore this Salt in your life; but I have spoken
somewhat to this in the explication of the doctrine. I shall only press it
with some motives, and only from this text of Scripture; and the rather because
intrinsecal arguments are the most convincing, as that is (they say) the best
myrrh that naturally flows, and is not violently extorted.

For that end consider,

1. The Vitiousnesse of such a Minister, whose practice is not answerable to
his preaching. The disease is incureable, and the man incorrigible. If the Salt
has lost its savor (the word is, be infatuated, (...). Sicut insulsum in cibo
transfertur ad hominem, it a vicissim fatuum in homine transfertur ad cibum.
Chemnit. ibid. --
The Evangelist Mark has it, lost its Saltnes, (...) Mar. 9. 50.
or be without Salt) wherewith shall it be salted? -- If some other things have
lost their savor or saltnes, they may be amended, but if the Salt has lost
its saltness, that loss is irreparable and irremediable. If a Minister be
naught, by whom shall he be instructed? If he be bad, by whom shall he be
amended? Therefore Chrysostom does sadly propound a question, who ever saw a
bad Minister a repenting man? Not that its simply impossible, Maldonate.
but because it rarely falls out so. Sad and late experience shows, that among
the Prelates and their Party, who appeared against the cause of God, where is
the man that has smote on his thigh, and said, what have I done Ezekiel. 22. 30.
? The Lord sought for a man AMONG THEM, (mark it) that should make up the
hedge, and stand in the gap before him for the Land, -- but found NONE.

2. The Vanity of such unsavory Salt, or rather unprofitablenesse. -- Its good
for nothing, or (Luke 14. 35.) Its neither fit for the Land, nor yet for the
dunghill. Some things which are degenerate, and have lost their natural
property and use, are yet good for something. Maldonate.
Clipped silver and washed gold are not good for the Merchant and Tradesman to
traffic withal, yet may serve the Goldsmith to throw into the Furnace; but a
scandalous Minister is like Salt, and like Ieremiahs Girdle, c. 13. 7, 10.
good for nothing. A Ragge, if it be not fit to wear, is fit for the dunghill,
but unsavory Salt is hurtful to very dunghils, -- Sterquiliniis quoque
sterilitatem inducit, (as Calvin speaks,) It makes a very dunghill barren. Torn
flesh might not be man's meat, but dogs meat, Exodus 22. 31. -- Cast it to the
dogs, but tainted flesh is good for neither. A Vine, if it be not for fruit,
its for fire, Ezekiel. 15. 2, 3. -- This unsavory Salt is good for nothing, but
to be cast into the fire of hell. Unholy Ministers do a great deal of hurt Vivi
mordent, mortui faetent. Austin
alive and dead.

3. The Vilonesse of it, -- Good for nothing, but to be cast out and tyoden
underfoot of men. As we that cast any thing out of doors into the streets or
high ways, all that* pass by, tread on it as a thing of no account: so said
he, Calcate me tanquam Salem insipidum, tread on me as unsavory Salt, its the
language of a Ministers lewd life, and a just reward too. 1 Samuel 2. 30. -- They
that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed, Mal. 2. 9. Therefore I have also
made you contemptible and base before all the people. -- If Mr. Brightm. be
right, Jesus Christ has made that good, Rev. 3. 16. -- I will spue thee out of
my mouth, -- Its a true maxim in Philosophy, Corruption optimi est pessima.
the better a thing is, the worse it is when it is corrupted, and as true, and
an excellent saying of Salvian; Vbi sub limior Praerogativa, ibi major culpa.
Salv. de Gub. dei l. 4 p. 128.
The greatness of the Privilege, adds to the greatness of the fault. The
Papists do so prodigally and prodigiously abuse Salt, that as (P. Martyr P.
Martyr loc. com. Class. 4. c. 9. p. 839.
says) they discover themselves to be Salem infatuatum, i. e. unsavory Salt.
So Cardinal Cajetan ingenuously confessed, when the Spaniards sacked and
spoiled the City of Rome under Clement. the 8. Because (said he) wear now
become unsavory Salt, therefore we are cast out and trodden under foot. And is
it not as true of some Protestant Ministers?

2. Be not troubled at the envy, hatred, malice and reproach of the world.
Chrysostom. notes, that it is not to be wondered at, if the men of the world rail
and revile, oppose and persecute Gods faithful Ministers; for its the nature of
good and right Salt to bite, which is unwelcome to the flesh; when therefore you
are bespattered with reproaches, and pursued with persecutions, its an evident
testimony that your Salt retains its acrimony and virtue. And its observable,
after our Savior Christ had spoken of persecution, he adds presently, ye are
the Salt of the Earth, as if he would discharge a warning-peece. Thus your
Ministry will be very unpleasing and ungrateful to the corrupt world, and the
rather, because your office is to declare, that all men out of Christ, though
never so worldly wise or morally honest, are unsavory before God, but be not
discouraged, Salt will make the greatest sound in the fire, yea Salt will keep
best by the fireside, when the moist or dank weather of peace may melt it, Vos
estis Sal terrae, quid igitur terrae-motum ad versum, vos curabitis Par. in loc.
Ye are the Salt of the Earth, what need ye quake at an Earthquake?

3. Comfort your hearts in the conscionable discharge of your duty, (these
words are not only a warning-peece, but a gracious cordial n or sweet promise,
whereby Christ engages himself m Verba illa (vos estis Sal terra)
reaccipiuntur par tim ut commone factio, partim ut promissio. Chemnit. in loc.
to make the Ministry fruitful, q. d. I will be present in your Ministry by the
blessing, grace and efficacy of my Spirit, that your labor shall not be in vain
in the Lord; Nay, I will work so, as by your Ministry, the putrid humor of sin
shall be purged from some, and the Regenerate by the use of this Salt, shall be
preserved, as that they shall not totally and finally fall away from the grace
of God, 1 Pet. 1. 5. They are kept by the power of God, through faith unto
salvation --

2. It holds forth the duty of the people too. Are the Ministers of Christ, the
Salt of the earth? Then 1. Be willing to take salt, Jer. 22. 29. O earth,
earth, earth hear the words of the Lord. This repetition implys a vehement
Increpation for their dulnes this way, Grande opus est insaliri, qui sale
conditur, g^atia plenus est. Nam and in communi Proverbio, salsus dicitur
gratiosus, and insulsus qui non habet gratiam. Orig.
Heb. 13. 22 -- Suffer the word of exhortation; you shall part with nothing but
what you may best spare, even those superfluous humors, which, if they be, let
alone, will be undoubtedly the bane and putrefaction of the soul. What is it
you can do better, Nihil melius est quam condimentum admittere, quo solo,
nostra insul fit as corrigitur. Calv.
then to admit of that seasoning, whereby your unsavourines may be amended? Oh
that you were of Baldassars mind, writing to Oecolampadius; Veniat, veniat
verbu^ Domini, etc. Let the Word of the Lord come, let it come, and if we had
600. necks, we would put them all under the yoke of Jesus Christ. Of such a
temper was Cornelius and his company, will you say so to your Minister, as they
to Peter? Act. 10. 33. Now are we all here present before God, to hear all
things that are commanded thee of God.

Obj. We cannot abide it. Ans. 1. A wounded soldier can and will endure a
little salt, lest his wound should fester and rankle; Salt is a means to heal a
wound, as those waters mentioned 2 King. 2. 20. 21, 22. 2. If not, you shall be
given up to Salt. Ezekiel. 47. 11. But the miry places and the marshes shall not
be healed, they shall be given to SALT. For the sin of barrenness, God will
smite you with the curse of barrenness; so Salt sometimes imports, as Judge. 9.
45. with Zeph. 2. 9. 3. Nay, hereafter you shall have Salt with a vengeance,
Mark. 9. 50. Every one shall he salted with fire -- i. e. every one of the
damned in hell, shall be salted with fire, (as some expound it,) or every one
must be salted with the grace of God, or with the fire of Gods wrath, as others
expound it. 4. I will tell you a word of comfort, if you can take comfort in
it, the time will come, that all this Salt shall be taken from you, the presence
of this Salt troubles you now, but the absence of this Salt shall trouble you
more hereafter. Dives desired but one Negavit guttam ei, qui negavit micam. --
Aust.
drop of water to cool his tongue, and it was denied him, you shall desire but
one grain of this Salt to season your soul, and it shall be denied you: Not a
Minister dare peep out of heaven to comfort you.

2 Make it to appear, that you have taken Salt, by sweetness, etc. For want of
this, many stink above ground, like carrion in a ditch, or like Moab, Jer 48.
11. -- his taste remained in him, and his sent is not changed. Its a great sin
and shame, there should be any tainted piece of flesh under a powerful and
faithful Ministry. In Baptism, Salem volunt consecratum in os ^a^i, ut --
conditus, iniquitatis foetore careat. i. e. carere significetur. etc. Chamier.
de Baptis. l. 5. c. 16 n. 11.
the Papists will have Salt put into the mouth of the party baptized, to
signify a preservation from the worms of sin, and a preparation to the savor
of wisdom. This, which is a brand of their superstition, will be a badge of
your Religion, to evidence it by an unspotted and untainted life, that you have
kindly taken Salt.

3. Maintain your Ministers willingly and liberally. They are as Salt to
preserve you, why should not you preserve them? in their Names, in their
States, in their Bodies in their Liberties etc. as much as in you lies. Salt
anciently was a sign of an inferiors duty, whereby he was bound to a superior;
whence comes the word Diod. in Levit. 2. 13.
Salary or wages as some think, Gal. 6 6. Let him that is taught in the Word,
communicate to him that teaches in all good things. Preaching Presbyters are
worthy of double honor, 1 Timothy 5. 17. sc. Videtur duplicem honorem dicere and
alimenta, quae and ipsa illis cum honor dantur ut Regibus tributa. Grot. in 1 Timothy 5. 17.
honor of maintenance as well as of reverence. We have had a Century of
scandalous Ministers, I hope we shall never see or hear a Century of pious
Ministers complaining of a scandalous maintenance. Do not mistake me, I preach
not for Tithes: In the Prelaticall times, I can say (and that truly) I could
never be molded into that opinion, that Tithes now under the Gospel are Jure
Divino; yet I cannot but relate a remarkable passage, A Vindicaon of the
Presbyterial Government and Ministry. p. 81.
published lately by the Reverend Ministers and Elders met together in a
Provincial Assembly at London, November. 2. 1649. That the design of taking away
Tithes from the Ministry, was first invented by that cursed Apostate Julian,
who (as Mr. Stock, Mr. Stock on Mal. c. 3.
that Reverend, Pious and painful Preacher has observed) by this means is
noted more to have overthrown the Church then all the persecuting Emperors
before him. Because they took away Presbyters, (and the Martyrs blood was the
seed of the Church) but he took away Presbyterian, the Ministry it self, in
withdrawing the maintenance from the Church, and so overthrew the worship of
God. Let me be bold to add hereunto an expression of a good old
Nonconformist, (on Prove. 20. 25. Its a snare to the man who devoureth that
which is holy) I mean learned and religious M. Cartw. Illud est sacrum quod
sacris usibus vel Dei instituto and jussu, vel hominum voluntaria and spontanea
largi^one addictum and devo^um est. -- I am sub Evangel. tametsi primitiae and
decimae necessariae non sunt tamen quicquid aut lege, constitutum aut hominum
liberalitate collatum ad hos usos est, illud omne sacrum habendum est; ob
tamque causam horum aut SVRLATIO, aut etiam diminutio sacrilegii cri^i^e
damnatur. T. C. loc.
who says; That is holy, which is set a part either by the command and
institution of God, or voluntary donation of me^ for holy uses, as the ministry
of the word, etc. Now, though First Fruits and Tithes are not necessary under
the Gospel, yet whatsoever is established by Law, or conferred by men's bounty
to such uses, all that is to be accounted holy; and therefore the taking away or
diminishing of these things is no better then Sacrilege, Deuteronomy. 23. 21, 22, 23.
I shall conclude this with that famous place. 1 Cor. 9. 11. If we have sown to
you spiritual things, is it a great thing, if we shall reap your carnal things?
13. Even so the Lord has ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should
live of the Gospel. Which words are part of a comparison between Levitical and
Evangelical Ministers, both in their work and in their wages. The Protasis or
Proposition is set down in v. 13. and the Apodosis or Reddition in v. 14. Even
so -- The Gospel (in the end of this verse) is taken for a reward for some good
tidings, if Mr. Mede Medes works in 4o. 1. Vol. p. 329. etc.
may be believed, who shows abundantly, the sense of that word out of many
Greek Authors -- yea out of the Hebrew, Chaldee, and Septuagint Languages,
wherein St. Paul was brought up. Nay, makes it more then probable, its so taken
ver. 2^. This I do, for the Gospels sake, that I might be partaker thereof with
you. What (...), Gospel should it be, that Paul here aimed to be partaker of
but some Non tanquam venale sit Evang. ut istud fit pretium ejus, quod sumunt
qui annuntiant unde vivant. Si enim sic vendunt, magnam rem vili pretio
vendunt. Aug. l. de pastorib. c. 2.
Praemium or Reward? for it immediately fol. lows, v. 24. Know ye not, that they
which run in a race run all, but one receives the prize? -- But perhaps I have
made an unpleasing digression, I proceed to the fourth Use.

4. Mourn for the loss of Christ's Ministers. The taking away of Tithes, is
nothing to the taking away of Truths, or Truth-preaching Ministers, whether by
death or otherwise. A godly Mr. W.
Preacher at Prees-Exercise told us, that when the Salt falls toward one at
table, its counted ominous. That is but a toy said he, and a piece of
superstition; but if this Salt fall from you, that is truly grievous and
rightly ominous, it bodes no good, but evil; Nay, I tell you its one of the
greatest evils, Mic. 2. 6. -- They shall not prophecy to them -- Salt commonly
is the last thing taken away from the Table, and when that is gone, dinner or
supper is quite ended. Oh! if this Salt be taken away, there is an end of
Sabbaths, an end of Sermons, an end of Sacraments, etc. So that we may say with
the Prophet in another case, Ezekiel. 7. 5, 6.
An evil, an only evil, behold it is come. An end is come, --

5. Pray frequently and fervently, that God would send this Salt, where it is
wanting, and bless it, where it is sent. I say to you, as Christ said to his
Disciples, Mat. 9. 37, 38. The harvest truly is plenteous, but the Laborers
are few. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest that he would send forth,
(or (...). Significatur non sola divinae providentiae dispensatio sed collatio
specialis potestatis cum peculiaribus donis and mandatis. Grot.
thrust forth) Laborers into his harvest, not out of, but into his harvest;
implying Ministerial Authority, as well as Ability. You can hardly eat a bit of
meat without salt; if it be wanting, you will cry, at least, call for it: Me
thinks all your enjoyments should be like the white of an egg, unsavory,
without the Salt of the Ministry. And let Gods promise be the ground of your
prayer, Is. 30. 20. And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and
the water of affliction, yet shall not thy Teachers etc. And when you have this
Salt beg a blessing. Your Ministers preaching does much-what depend on your
praying, perhaps he is dead and dull in preaching, because ye have been so in
praying. Its not the Apothecaries drug, but Gods blessing on and with it, that
makes it work kindly. How often does Paul (a man of a high pitch of holiness, of a
tall stature in Christ) beg the prayers of others? Ephesians. 6. 19. -- And For Me,
q. d. pray for all the Saints, but for me in special; If you should forget
others, yet do not forget me. Bernard desiring a friend to pray for him, when
he had nearest communion with God, then (said he) remember me. I Will say no more,
but take up the words of holy Bradford in this juncture of time, O pray, pray,
pray.

6. Be thankful, you that enjoy this Salt. When Salt was wanting in some of our
Garrisons, how unwholesome did Beef prove to some fo our Soldiers? and how glad
were they when they could get some Salt? Micah, a very Idolater, could
conclude, Judge. 17. 13. Now I know, that the Lord will do me good, seeing I
have a Levite to be my Priest; much more may you conclude, that God intends
good to you, since he has set and sent this Salt among you; nay, this is an
argument of Gods Love. Anciently Salt Symbolum amicitiae fuit Commutatio Salis.
Chem. and Diod.
was a token of freindship, and it went for a common proverb, familiar friends
do use the same Salt; i. e. feed at one and the same table. The Saints may
conclude, as David in another case, Ps. 41. 11. By this I know thou favourest
me --

To wind up all in one word; Providence has pitched my thoughts on this
Subject, that whenever you see Salt on a table, whether Minister or people,
you may remember your duty respectively. And let me beseech you to take what I
have said, cum grano Salis, with a grain of Salt, and then all will relish
well, which that you may do, let us pray --

FINIS.

