The TRUE Every Man and Woman THEIR OWN DOCTOR: OR, A SALVE for every SORE.

Being a Book full of Rare Receipts for the most dangerous Distempers incident
to the Bodies of Men, Women and Children; and is very fit to be in all Families
against any time of Sickness, Gathered out of the Library of that famous
Traveller Dr. Ponteus and now published for the good and benefit of the
Kingdom; and being nothing but what is experienced by many thousands of people
in City and Country, doing good to many. Don't read only but practice also,
then speak as you find; and give God the praise in all things.

D. John Ponteus.



With Six most Excellent Receipts for all sorts of Cattle whatsoever. Licensed
according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by F. L. for Matthias Drew, Bo-(...)

Living in St. Sepulchers Church yard, and sold by himself, and (...) Living in
Red-Lyon Court in White-cross-street. 1676.

Every Man and Woman their own Doctor
I. For the pain in the Head.
TAke the grease of a Heart and mingle with Oat-meal and So^ and temper them
well; then lay it Plaister-wise to thy temp This is proved.

II. To Purge the Head.
TAke the juice of Primrose, and Milk of a Cow; and with a Q^ blow it into thy
Nostrils: and this will Purge thy Head.

III. For the Megrim in the Head.
TAke sour Bread and Chickweed, and bray them together, amboyl them in Vinegar;
and so bind it to the grieved place: ^ take Barley and sees it well in water,
and put in Betony, and oth^ good Herbs for the Head, and when they be well
sodden, bind the^ to thy Head: For it is good.

IV. For a Scald Head.
TAke the Liver of a Thorn-back and boil it by it self; and eight Elecampane
Roots, and sees them by themselves in Spring Water two hours; and put that to
four handfuls of House-leek, stamped and strained through a Cloth; and make an
Ointment thereof; then anoint t^ Head therewith; and if the Hair be gone, take
a handful of Wood and bray it hot to powder; then take two spoonfuls of Honey,
and anoint the Head therewith where it is pill'd, and thy Hair will soo^ ^ome
again as thick as ever it was before, This has cured many hundred.

V. For sore and blood shot Eyes, or Rhume, hot or cold.
TTake Allom burned, beaten to fine Powder, then take as much as will lie on a
Groat; So mingle it with half a Spoonful o^ Honey, then drop one or two drops
into the Eye when you go to Bed, and you will find help to great admiration:
This has Cured many in all my Travels, Probatum est.

VI. A Water to clear the sight.
TAke Fennel, Vervain, Roses, Salendine, and Rue, of each two ounces: and
Distill them and wash thine Eyes therewith: this is good for all manner of sore
Eyes.

VII. For a Pearl and Phlegm that grows over the Eyes.
TAke the Gall of an Hare, and boil it with as much Honey as the Gall. Probatum
est.

VIII. To help the Hearing.
TAke and Distill Sorrel, or Wormwood, in a common Stillary; and take four
drops of either of the same Waters, which you will; and put into thy Ear
Lukewarm.

IX. For the Rickets in Children.
TAke as much Jet as will lie upon a Shilling, and steep it in half a pint of
^ack 4 or 5 hours, then stir it about and drink it off, half in the morning,
and the rest at night. This has done good to many.

X. For stinking of the Mouth.
TAke the juice of black Mints, and of Rue a like much, and put it to thy
Norstrils; and this will help thee. This is proved.

XI. For a Mouth that is staid with heat.
TAke Ribwort and sees it in Red Wine; and hold it in yo^^ Mouth hot: do this
often, and be whole.

XII. To recover a Man's Speech.
TAke the juice of Sage and Primrose, and put into the patients Mouth, and he
shall speak strait, or within a while after.

XIII. For a Canker in the Mouth.
TAke nine Leaves of Sage, and stamp them with a little Salt a^ Verjuice; and
make thereof a Plaster, and lay it thereto, and will be whole: but you must
dress it twice a day.

XIV. To make Teeth white.
TAke Vinegar of Quinces, and dip a Cloth in it, and rub the Te^ and Gums
therewith: this same fasteneth the Teeth and Gu^ comfort the Roots of the
Teeth, and makes sweet Breath.

XV. To take away the Toothache in half an hour.
TAke Henbane seed, Smallage seed and Poppy-seed, of each (...) weight of a
Penny; and make Pellits, with a quantity of Aquavi^^ and lay it to thy Teeth
that ache: and the pain shall cease strait.

XVI. For a Red Face.
TAke Sow-thistles, Burrage, Purslain, Sorrel, Barley, Parsley Ro^ and
Liquorish; and boil all together in running-water: and d^ it first and last.

XVII. To make the Face fair.
TAke the Flowers of Rosemary, and boil them in White Wind; the wash thy Face
therewith: also the Water of Bean flowers will as well.

XVIII. For boarseness in the Throat.
TAke Penniroyal and sees it in Running-water, and drink a go^ draught two or
three nights somewhat hot, with a little Loas-Su^ (...) it; this will make you
clear again.

XIX. For sore Breasts.
TAke a handful of Figgs and stamp them, then take a little fre^ Grease, and
temper it with the Figgs, and make a Plaster there and lay it as hot as you
can endure it; this will take away the anguis^ and if it be apt to break it
will, or else not.

XX. For the Spleen.
TAke the Roots of Nettles and stamp them well together with Vinegar: and lay
it unto the Spleen when it swells: also the Lungs of a Fox dried and made in
Powder, and cat in a Figg in the morning is very good.

XXI. For a stinking Breath.
TAke three ounces of comin in powder, and sees in Wine, from, 1 Gallon to a
Pottle; and drink of it as hot as you can, first and last; and in ten days you
shall be whole without doubt.

XXII. To stay Vomiting.
TAke and make a Toast, and temper it with Vinegar, and Mints; and so hold it
to your Nose: this stays Vomiting.

XXIII. For the Running of the Reins.
TAke Venice Turpentine, so make it into Pills, so roll them in Cinnamon, and
Ginger, and good Loas-Shugar, so swallow them down first and last.

XXIV. For the heat of the Liver.
TAke Liver-wort, and five-leaved Grass, Endive, Bugloss, and Borrage: and
sees all these in Whey: and drink of these as often as you will, and this will
help you.

XXV. For the Black Jaundies.
TAke Enula Campano Roots, and sees them in Milk; then take the Milk and
strain it through a piece of Cotton; and give the Sick to ^ink thereof this did
help a Gentlewoman that has been troubled six o^ Years with it, and could not
be helped.

XXVI. For the Yellow Jaundies.
TAke Elicampane Roots, and the Inner-bark of a Barbary, of each eight ounces,
of Salendine Roots as much, of Saffron the weight of ^oat; sees all these in a
pint of White Wind, strain it, drink four ^onsuls morning and evening, warm.

XXVII. For the wind Cholick.
TAke Winter-savory, stamp it and strain it, with strong Ale; the drinkwarm,
and immediately the pain will cease, as if it we swept away: there has been
diverse helped with this which has swoured away two or three times in a day,
with the pain thereof.

XXVIII. For Worms in the Belly.
TAke the Pills of Oranges and dry them; so make them into Powder and drink it
in Malmsey, or state Ale, there is nothing better.

XXIX. For Griping in the Guts.
TAke Tansey, Rhue and Sothern wood; and eat it with Salt fasting and be whole.

XXX. For the stone.
TAke Acorns that grow on an Oak, and dry them, and make Po^der thereof; and
drink it in the morning fasting, with Rheni^ wine and Sugar: this will break
the Stone. Probatum est.

XXXI. For the Scyatica in the Hyp.
TAke a Pottle of Wine-lees, and Wine dregs, and Sour bread Cow Dung; and boil
these well together, so make a Plaiste hereof and lay it to the pain as hot as
you can suffer it: and this will heal you.

XXXII. For the Gout, and all manner of Aches.
TAke of Clot Roots two pound, and sees them in Piss till they (...) tender;
and then bray them, and strain them through a Cloth ^hen take six Ox Galls, or
Neats, and look that you have a Pottle o^ Urine, or more, well strained; then
put a quart of Oil of Olive in, an^ sees these together till it comes to the
quantity of the Oil: for this w^ work wonders in the Gout.

XXXIII. To kill Corns on Feet or Toes.
TAke Roots of white Lillies so boil them in Vinegar, then make it like a
Plaster and lay it on the Corn, 3 or 4 days and nights and it will make it
fall off. But the only thing in the world for Corn is this, if you can take it;
which is a black Snail wrapped up in a linne^ Cloth, laid before a fire and well
roasted, So bind it as hot as you c^^ endure it to the Corn and keep it supplied
with fresh Snails Roasted 2 ^ 3. nights as need requires, and it will make it
dye, and peel off like a Scal and never come again. Proved.

XXXVI. To drive out the small Po^
TAke Malmsey, Ginger, and Treacle, and mingle them well together; and when
thou go to bed, drink a good drought, and ^ill drive out the Pox.

XXXV For the Cramp.
TAke two spoonfuls of May-butter and two spoonfuls of Rhue juice; and temper
them well together till they be a Salve; and anoint the place therewith.

XXXVI. For the Ague and Fever.
TAke the Buds, or Leaves of Willows, Red-sage, and Fetherfow, of each a
handful; sees them in a quart of Milk till the Herbs be well ^odden: then
crush the Herbs, and wring them in a Cloth, and lay them to your Pulse as warm
as you can suffer it: and this will help you.

XXXVII. To make one sleep well.
TAke Ground Ivy. and Sengreen, of each a like quantity; and stamp them, and
temper them well with Woman's milk, and lay it to thy Temples; and this will
make thee sleep well.

XXXVIII. For the biting of a Mad Dog.
TAke Mints, a Clove of Garlic, and Salt; stamp them together and make a
Plaster thereof and lay to the bitten place, and this will real it.

XXXIX. To kill a Tetter or Ringworm.
TAke Fetherfew, stamp it and strain it with Vinegar; and rub the Tetter
therewith and this will kill it in a short time.

XL Against the Plague.
TAke three ounces of the Liquor of the Inner-rind of an Ash Tree, and Still
it, with three ounces of White wine; and give the Patient of every three hours;
and within twenty four hours, he shall be well, by ^e Grace of God.

XLI. For a Cut on the finger or Hand.
TAke some green Hysop, and stamp it well in a Mortar, with some Sugar; and so
bind it to thy Hand.

XLII. For a Consumption
TAke the Heart and Lungs of a Call new killed, a Capon; let these be bruised
in a Stone Mortar, and boiled with an hundred Snails, till the ^oth be as thick
as Pottage; put to it Hearts tongue, Maiden hair, Hysop, ^bias, Sage, of each an
handful, with China Roots sliced, and beata; two ounces of the Juice of
Coltsfoot Roots, eight ounces of Blood ^ a Pig newly killed, and Conserve of
Red-Roses one pound; these being ^ll mixed, let them be Distilled with a gentle
fire, and reserve it.

Six most excellent Receipts for all sorts of Catt^
For faint Cattle, as well Cow, or Ox. Bull or Steer.
ONly Vergis is the Remedy given them to drink, and then present into a good
Pasture: Or else thus, take for every one a Pint^ Verguice, and put thereto a
handful of Bay Salt, and therewith rub the tongues, then let them drink the
rest. This is proved.

An excellent Drench to be given to Cat-tle at the Spring or fall of the L^
TAke hard Soot that commonly is upon the posts of a House or R^ where the
Smoke has its issue, which being beaten into Pow^ with Bay Salt, sees the
same in Running Water, and give it them to dr^ or Rank Ivy, with the Soot and
salt; and when the Ivy is soft, w^ out the juice and strain it and let your
Cattle drink thereof blood-w^ Often proved.

A Sovereign Drink for all manner of Cattle that you suspect to be Lung (...)
TAke the Herb that is called Cowslip, or Lung-woort, and sta^ it and put
thereto Fenerere and mudded with good Ale: and w^ a Horn, or pretty Tunnel
Drench either your Horse, Ox, Cow or Sw^ and it shall yield present Remedy if
there be any Disease in the Lung.

Against the Murren.
DWarf-Gentian, of some called Mock-gillofer, small chopped an^ven to Swine and
all other Cattle, it preserves them wonder ^ from the Murren, and all such
contagious Deseases as happen to Catt^ corrupt time.

The water which stands in the hollows of Beeches does perfe^ Cure the
naughty Scurfe and wild Tetters or Scabs of Men, Ho^ Kine, Sheep, if they be
washed therewithal.

For a Gald Horse Back, or Fistula, a present Cure.
TAke a quantity of Allom and burn it, also a handful of Bar^ more and burn it,
then take the powder thereof and mix it ^ the Allom, and pour it upon the Sore
morning and evening: But i^ Sore be corrupt and full of dead flesh, then use
more of the Roch Al^ than of the powder of Barley, and when it begins to
heal, use the both together, but most of the powder of Barley. This is a most
exce^ Remedy.

The Price of this Book is Twopence.


