THE KEY OF WEALTH: Or, A new Way, for Improving of Trade: Lawful, Easy, Safe
and Effectual: SHOWING HOW A few Tradesmen agreeing together, may both double
their Stocks, and the increase thereof, WITHOUT 1. Paying any Interest. 2.
Great difficulty or hazard. 3. Advance of Money. 4. Staying for Materials. 5.
Prejudice to any Trade, or Person. 6. Incurring any other inconvenience.
In such sort, as both they and all others (though never so poor) who are in a
way of trading, may 1. Multiply their Returns. 2. Deal only for ready Pay.
3. Much under-sell others. 4. Put the whole Nation upon this practice. 5. Gain
notwithstanding more then ordinary. 6. Desist when they please without damage.
And so, as the same shall tend much to 1. Enrich the people of this Land. 2.
Disperse the money hoarded up. 3. Import Bullion from beyond Sea. 4. Raise
banks of money in diverse places. 5. Settle a secure and known credit. 6. Make
such credit current. 7. Extend such credit to any degree needful. 8. Quicken
the revolution of money and credit. 9. Diminish the interest for moneys. 10.
Make commodity supply the place of money. 11. Ingrosse the trade of Europe. 12.
Fill the Land with commodity. 13. Abate the price of commodity. 14. Provide
store against famine. 15. Relieve and employ the poor. 16. Augment custom and
Excize. 17. Promote the sale of Lands. 18. Remove the causes of imprisonment
for debt. 19. Lessen the hazard of trading on credit. 20. Prevent highway
thieves. 21. Multiply ships for defense at Sea. 22. Multiply means for defense
at Land. 23. Incorporate the whole strength of England. 24. Take away
advantages of opposition.
All which in this Treatise is conceived by judicious men to be fully proved,
doubts resolved, and Objections either answered or prevented.

Eccles. 9.10. Prove. 8.12. and 13.4. and 20.4. and 22.13. and 24.30, etc. and
26.15. and 28.19. Matthew. 25.14. etc.

LONDON, Printed by R. A. and are to be sold by Giles Calvert at the black
spread Eagle near the West end of PAUL'S. 1650.

TO THE SUPREME AUTHORITY OF ENGLAND, The present PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED.
Noble Senators,
THat in the Frontispiece of this Treatise, there are humbly presented to your
Honors and this Nation, a Collection of those many desirable consequences,
which will follow upon the practice of this enterprise; is not, that I (so
inconsiderable an instrument) do delight in professing things strange or
unusual, (which to do, were neither rare nor difficult) being very sensible,
that great undertakings do many times weaken the credit of the best Authors,
far more of such as my self, even to the rendering of their Proposalls by
prejudice, to be cast off as impossible, before any due trial or deliberate
examination thereof.

But observing, that in regard of the diversity of your weighty affairs, the
multiplicity of books, and the vanity wherewith they are generally fraught,
your Honors have just cause to be discouraged from taking notice of any books,
except such as (at least) seem to be of some special concernment, I thought it
necessary (though with much wariness, least I should exceed in expressing the
particulars) to premise a summary of the several advantages, which would, as J
conceived upon solid grounds, appear to be the necessary effects of this
attempt, as it may be managed in a way, that is not only practicable, but free
from much difficulty and danger to the Undertakers, or any damage at all to
others.

In confidence therefore, that your own wisdoms will direct you to suppress
all prejudice, that might arise from the consideration of the great desparity
betwixt any such as my self, and that which is here professed, until by a
serious perusal of the whole work, your Honors be able so far as need shall
require upon just grounds, to reject what is amiss.

And having nothing to expect, but (which to crave would imply a greater
willingness in me then in your Honors) even a furtherance of this work, so far
forth as in your discretions ye shall judge the good of this Commonwealth to be
therein concerned; there remains only the reasons for making public, and
thereby exposing to the view of all Nations, a work of such a Nature, as if
being first set on foot by any other people in the world before our selves, may
through multiplying their strength put them into the better capacity to disturb
the peace of those who not having also embraced the same, are the less able to
defend themselves; as was well objected by a member of Parliament, truly
honorable.

In answer to which, it is to be considered, not only that this argument
tends (if I may in this allude to those words of the Apostle in another case)
to provoke to emulation those who are my flesh, and thereby to save them; but
that the undertaking it self is of such a nature, as to have attempted any
thing therein, without first preparing the minds of men, by publishing a full
and free description of the whole enterprise, with the mysteries thereof, the
manifold reasons for the same, the solution of doubts, and answer to
objections, would through the subtle insinuations of those who desire not the
prosperity of this distressed people, have occasioned (without question) many
fair pretenses, to have been spread abroad, for stifling the same at the very
birth.

And the rather, in regard that as innocence needs no corner, so ingenious men
desire to be guided by their own light, in things which themselves are to
practice, insomuch as the want of full satisfaction to all men (which without
printing could not easily have been given) might both amongst your Honors, and
those that should engage in this undertaking (besides others) have been
interpreted a just ground of jealousy.

Whereas an account of the whole being first divulged, if this Nation should
then slight that, which other people make a profitable use of; the guilt which
otherwise truly (I being persuaded in conscience of the reality of the thing,
would have been heavy upon my self) does no longer lie at my door, whatsoever
the event should be.

But to remove this danger of being prevented by other Nations, I have yet (as
by the sequel does appear) concealed one principal Adjunct, the ignorance of
which, will make fruitless the endeavors of any, that without further
direction, should either here or in any other part of the world, undertake this
practice; wherein, notwithstanding when need requires, I shall not fail (God
willing) to give full satisfaction.

And although upon publication thereof, I conceive it not neeessary, to seek
any Privilege, Pattent, Broad seal or the like, as other Authors upon such
occasions (in reference to the satisfaction of their manifold expenses of time,
pains, trouble, charges and hazard, which in such enterprises are not usually
small) apprehend they have just cause to do.

Yet (Renowned Patriots) it is not, for that in this endeavor, I have been
less necessitated to any of all these inconveniences, then others in such
cases generally are; but rather being confident (from experience) that if any
within your Honors Jurisdictions, offer so great an affront to Justice, as
(endeavoring to reap what others have sowed) should thrust themselves into
those employments, which are pertinent to this undertaking; your Honors will
assuredly vouchsafe, upon an appeal, to interpose your Authority, whereby to
suppress all such attempts, and that in as ample and effectual manner, as if
the same had been desired, before any publication of this Enterprise.

All which, was in duty thought fit, to be humbly submitted to the judicious
and grave consideration of your Honors, By him,

Who is as much desirous, as unworthy to be publicly useful. WILLIAM POTTER

To the ingenious Reader.
AMongst the many sad calamities wherewith God has been pleased to exercise
this Nation of late, the great decay of Trade, with the manifold evil
Consequences depending thereon, is not one of the least.

Upon serious consideration whereof, I being desirous so to improve my mean
Talent, as it might tend to the most seasonable and necessary advantage for the
public; have according to my ability bestowed much time and pains to find out
some safe, lawful, easy and effectual Expedient, not only to prevent the
aforesaid evil Consequences, but to improve Trade to a higher and more solid
degree of prosperity, then ever England yet enjoyed.

And for attaining this end, in such a way as the same might conduce most
speedily, and with least difficulty and hazard to the enriching of the people,
with the outmost accomplishment of all earthly comforts, that either Land or
Sea could afford; I endeavored to bring the same to pass (if possible) by
that, which in all respects might be equivalent to a Mine of gold, discovered
within their own Territories, yet without the inconveniencie of being a
temptation to any other Nation or people in the world, to invade the Land,
either for surprising such Treasure, or enabling them to maintain a war
thereby, in case they should.

Now, as amongst all other objects that center in this earth, the pitching my
thoughts at this season upon this, was not without a special providence; so
neither could it be without the same special direction (which usually in
greatest matters employeth the weakest means) That I (so unlikely an
instrument) should in a thing of so great importance, be carried on from time
to time, until now at last, to discover even as much almost as in this
particular I could have wished, viz. how all things which may be got for gold
throughout this earth, are obtainable in all respects as happily and
effectually, (yea and in a way tending to as great improvement of Trade, as is
before mentioned) even by a means, though with some difficulty and hazard, yet
in reference to the advantages thereof, so easy as may be admired; and (as a
worthy Member of this Commonwealth well observed thereupon) may serve to
demonstrate the vanity, not only of gold, but of all Worldly Wealth whatsoever.

Yet being very sensible of the prejudice of people against any thing that is
new; and which (though never so needful) does not agree with their own
fancies; I have been often exceedingly discouraged herein, and almost dissuaded
from going on in the work: But on the other side, taking into due
consideration, how fully not only mine own conscience, but the judgment of
diverse judicious men, (who have had some knowledge thereof) are convinced and
satisfied, that it is no Chimera or Dream, but really that which wants nothing
but mere performance of some things, which to be done, are as fezible and
facill, as in reference to a thing (I say) of such great concernment and
advantage can be expected, to make it prove an effectual remedy against the
present sad calamities of this Nation, almost in all particulars; I was
persuaded, and therein found abundant comfort, to hazard much precious time,
with other the advantages relating thereunto, in the not only perfecting of
this invention, but digesting it into the fittest words for other men's
understanding, and prosecuting the design so far as possibly I could, for the
setting of it on foot.

Yet, whether God will grant such success to my endeavors in this enterprise,
as the thing it self does seem to promise, though otherwise for mine own part,
I shall (for ought I know to the contrary) suffer great prejudice, I am not
much careful about it, nor dare I make it my dependence; but this is my
comfort (which the uncertainties of this life cannot deprive me of) that at the
worst, I shall but suffer in doing some part of that work, which I am confident
I was by eternal providence, brought upon the Stage of this world to act.

This one thing notwithstanding, I could beg with tears of all my Countrymen
the people of this Land, that (laying aside prejudice, pride and fancy) they
would judge, and act in this particular, no otherwise then as they shall by
sound and sufficient reason be convinced; and then I am certain, that as by
thus judging, they will be forced to acknowledge a remarkable hand of God, in
profering so seasonable a mercy; so by thus acting they shall be safe, from
dashing upon the dangerous rock of refusing such profers.

And truly to the proud humor of man, the means may seem strange and
despicable, but being effectual, it appears to me that there is the more of
God in it, who though (in his very essence) he be bounty it self, yet his
bounty being also justice, it delights him to tender the greatest of his
blessings in such a way, as it requires true humility in us, to be willing to
accept what is freely proffered by him.

Now, forasmuch as this discovery extending it self naturally unto all things,
which relate to outward good, cannot be made clear to the different
apprehensions of men, without anatomizing (or as it were, ripping up to the
very bowels) the principles and methods of that Fabric of Devices, which some
thousand years experience (promoted by the unlimited desires and innumerable
motions of mankind) have produced, for the obtaining, preserving and increasing
of riches, peace and safety to themselves and Posterity, in reference chiefly
to that principal means conducing thereunto, viz. [Trade,] which is indeed
the main policy whereby people are not only, either enriched, or impoverished,
the poor maintained or destroyed; but even all Estates and Commonwealths,
either established or undermined, as I shall hereafter have occasion to observe.

In this respect therefore, though the book be somewhat large, I desire it may
be considered, that the Subject is no less copious; and (so far as I perceive)
has not been (in reference to Trade) fully treated heretofore.

I have endeavored to express my mind, in as few words as conveniently I
could, yet so as (being for the most part to trace an untroden path) I presumed
to be rather somewhat ample, then any ways deficient, either in leaving out
things necessary, passing over things superficially (without a full and clear
proof thereof) or not preventing any objection material, which I could
imagine, might (possibly) in the least measure lie as a scruple in the minds of
any.

I have studied to proceed in order, beginning first with those things which
are most liable to vulgar observation, being as the grounds and foundations
whereupon the whole Edifice is erected; which I observed not only for Method
but necessity.

Considering, that in teaching any Art or Faculty, it would be very
preposterous to begin with things most difficult, and furthest from common
reach; As in teaching Arithmetic to begin with Fractions, Cossick Numbers, or
the finding of Square and Cube Roots, before the learner be skilled in
Addition; Or as in teaching Navigation, to begin with showing the nature of the
Rumbes, in respect of the various Circulation of those Lines, which each Rumbe
(by making equal angles with every Meridian) does describe upon the
superficies of the earth and Sea, even before the Student be perfectly grounded
in the clear and distinct knowledge of the several points of the Compass: or
in brief, as if in teaching the word of truth, the Preacher should immediately
go forwards to perfection, as the Scripture says, without first laying the
foundation.

Now (courteous Reader) for these reasons, not having put that in the first
place, which happily thou might have expected, I earnestly desire thee to
exercise so much patience and diligence as to read this book throughout, in
such order as it is composed; otherwise, I cannot but fear that by
misapprehensions, through want of necessary preparation, (in things as
essential to this discovery, as the principles, rules, and beginnings of any
Art, are to the utmost perfection thereof) thou will be ready either to condemn
(or at least to slight) what else upon due consideration thou will be forced to
acknowledge, is amongst earthly things one of the most necessary, and
desirable both to thy self and thy Country.

Yet in regard, that (according to what has been already hinted) many men look
upon all Inventions, whilst they are new (though never so needful or
profitable) as mere conceits or whimsies, as they are pleased to call them; in
respect whereof, I conceive it necessary, to vindicate this and all sober
attempts from such aspersions, before I proceed to the matter it self: I must
therefore in few words, intimate some things here, which may serve to
demonstrate the folly of all those, who suffer themselves to be infected with
this strange kind of humor.

In order to which, let it be observed, that Arts being no other then the
fruits of human reason, applied to the discovery of things profitable, cannot
receive their birth without Invention; so as whatsoever is spoken to the
disparagement of Invention, does tend to blemish not only any one Student or
Professor, together with his enterprise; but even lays the axe to the root of
Art it self; and by consequence, to all manner of learning.

Which brings to my memory, what a worthy Author testifies concerning such as
did profess themselves to be skillful and experienced Navigators; that it was
usual with them (in a jeering manner) to call those men Sun-shooters, whom
they perceived to observe the Latitude at Sea, by taking with an instrument the
Suns Meridian Altitude, before the practice thereof was common: yet not long
afterward, (to their great disparagement) they were forced to proclaim their
own folly, (a punishment not unsuitable to the offense) by submitting to
practice themselves, that which at first, they so unadvisedly scoffed at, in
others.

And what think you, would even the same Seamen have said, if they had been
privy to his device, who first thought of the making of Ships, like houses, to
ride upon the Sea, with such huge Masts and Sails, as to abide therein, would
seem (if the contrary were not daily experienced) a far more desperate
adventure, then to dwell in Mansions, built with high and large extent in the
upper parts, upon a foundation more fickle then that of Sand? Yet how not only
practicable, but profitable, the use of shipping is to the service of mankind,
would require a volumne to explicate.

And if Invention, whenever it produces any thing New, must needs be
condemned, for presenting the world with Toys and Guegawes, what shall we say
then of him who first busied his brains to devise that admirable and
fundamental Art, the reducing of all articulate sounds to Letters, and Letters
to writing; the rare effects whereof (as is reported) makes the savage Indians
to be exceedingly amazed.

In brief, were it not madness to condemn either the finding out of Printing
and Weaving, or of those curious instruments of Art, such as Clocks, Mills,
Cranes, Pumps, with many such like, (diverse whereof cost men addicted to
Invention, no small pains to make practicable) because at first, the use (no
doubt) of such artificial devices (amongst those, whose dull capacities (like
Carriers horses) are unwilling (though the case be never so extraordinary) to
be beaten out of the common road of such apprehensions, to which they have
been long accustomed, seems for the most part strange, if not idle and
foolish: who having their opinions in these particulars, not governed by sound
and solid reason, must needs (herein) be left to the misguidance of such
fantastic dreams, as they Father upon the Authors of those excellent Arts.

For, is it not manifest, that the only reason, why we in these parts of the
earth (so long inhabited) do so much despise the rude kind of life, incident
either to the first ages of the World, wherein Men differed little from Beasts,
(living upon Roots and Acornes,) or now to the brutish people of America: Is it
not (I say) merely because we are by Art furnished with those Accommodations,
which nature alone, (without improvement by the use of man's Reason) could never
have affoarded unto us?

But (Courteous Reader) having too long detained thee in the Entry, I therefore
abruptly desist, and refer thee to the Treatise it self; being really

Thine, as thou art the Commonwealths VV. P.

In Commendation of this Enterprise.
AS Stories feigned by wit, delight the Ear,
and Shows without the substance, please the Eye;
So, Music may the Fancy something cheer,
but these to means of life, are not set by.
If Art, by which the Quantity is known,
of Land, be Judged a skill of high account;
That Art, which mak's such measured Land men's own,
must needs then sure, the other far surmount.
What does the Practice of Physic avail,
Though Doctors do in knowledge much exceed,
If persons sick, for want of means should fail,
Bread to obtain, in their extremest need?
So Logic, Grammar and Philosophy,
Arithmetic and Rhetoric also;
How fruitless, if such Learning never be
applied, as means some further good to show?
So that, if Arts derive their Worth from such
effects alone, to which they be ordained;
And if the end, excel the means so much
as that without such end, there is nothing gained:
Then truly, may I style this rare design,
(which shows at full, how Peace and Plenty each
Are got with ease, passing a Golden Mine)
The worthiest Art, attained by human reach.
Therefore, let all such men whose livelihood,
does on the fruits of this Device depend,
Encouraged be, to praise the name of God,
For this and all his Gifts, world without end.
DAVID BROWN.

Another.
AS God still pleases, when the straightned hand
of want, does threaten to devour a Land,
To raise some worthy Persons, to procure
Help, for the crying and the dying poor;
So here, He prompts an Instrument to show,
a way to live, by which the poor may grow
In Riches, and the Rich may Wealth increase,
and both enjoy such Wealth, in settled Peace:
By Rules, which are so Just, so Plain, so True,
as none but must confess, excel they do
All Forms of Trade before: so none shall need,
(who now will Work,) to want their daily-bread:
That, all such Mercies they who shall possess,
may evermore, the name JEHOVAH bless.
Idem, D. B.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Four Books, belonging to the ensuing Treatise.
LIB. I. Showing,
Sect. 1. THe Causes or Means in general, which tend either to further or
hinder a Peoples comfortable subsistence, by their industry. Sect. 2. The
Causes or Means tending to continue or increase amongst a People, either
Riches ( being already Rich,) or Poverty, being already Poor. Sect. 3. The
Causes or Means, to make a Poor People ( though in a Barren Land) Rich, and a
Rich People ( though in a Fruitful Land) Poor. Sect. 4. The effect of the
aforesaid Means more fully, for making a Poor People Rich. Sect. 5. That
nothing can be alleged against the aforesaid Means, for enriching a Poor
People, but what argues as strongly against an increase of Trade amongst them.
though it be at present never so dead. Sect. 6. How the aforesaid means for
enriching a poor people, is fully cleared from all scruples and objections.
Sect. 7. That where Commodity enough is to be had for money, quickness of
Trading does occasion a considerable fall in the price of Commodity, and
deadness of trading the contrary.
LIB. II. Showing,
Sect. 1. (Or representing) in a parable the nature of the intended enterprise
for increase of Wealth, by improving of Trade, according to the Title. Sect. 2.
How inconsiderable the disadvantages incident to this Undertaking, are. Sect.
3. How one of the least of the Advantages proceeding from the intended
Enterprise, does much more then countervail all the said disadvantages. Sect.
4. What further means are requisite to make this undertaking prove effectual,
for the producing of all the properties essential to a thriving Trade. Sect.
5. How the maine (and as far as does appear, the only) obstruction, that
otherwise might hinder the speedy effect of this enterprise, may be totally
removed.
LIB. 3. Showing,
Sect. 1. (In order to the unfolding of the aforesaid parable) the only
(feasible) means, whereby both to revive and multiply the decayed trade, and
riches of this Land. Sect. 2. The excellency of the aforesaid means for
improving of Trade, by comparing the same with the ordinary way of Trading upon
private credit. Sect. 3. That the means last propounded for Improvement of
Trade, will come to one and the same effect, with that which was mentioned in
the aforesaid Parable. Sect. 4. How the aforesaid means for increase of Trade,
may be effectually accomplished by an agreement, amongst some few Tradesmen of
known and sufficient Credit. Sect. 5. That although this Enterprise being
attempted, should not suddenly take effect, yet the damage in continuing the
practice thereof would not be considerable. Sect. 6. What great probability
there is, that this Enterprise being set on foot, will suddenly take effect,
if the Rules already prescribed (with some other here laid down) be dueby and
carefully observed. Sect. 7. What great probability there is, that this
Enterprise being once set on foot, would suddenly take a good effect, although
none of the Rules prescribed in the precedent Section, should be observed.
LIB. IIII. Showing,
Sect. 1. How and in what sense, this Treatise is called, The Key of Wealth, or
wherein it does discover a new way for improving of Trade, lawful, easy, safe
and effectual, according to what is expressed in the title page. Sect. 2. How,
and where it is demonstrated, that a few tradesmen agreeing together, may both
double their stocks and the increase thereof, Without 1 Paying any interest, 2
Great difficulty or hazard, 3 Advance of money, 4 Staying for materials, 5
Prejudice to any trade or person, 6 Incurring any other inco^venie^ce.
According to what is affirmed in the Title page. Sect. 3. How it follows that
the Agreement of the said Tradesmen, may be ordered in such sort, as both they
and all others, though never so poor, who are in a way of trading, may 1.
Multiply their Returns. 2. Deal only for ready pay. 3. Much undersell
others. 4. Put the whole Nation upon this practice. 5. Gain notwithstanding
more then ordinary. 6. Desist when they please without damage.
According to what is affirmed in the Title page. Sect. 4. How it follows,
that all the aforesaid advantages may be effected, so as the same shall tend
much to 1. Enrich the People of this Land. 2. Disperse the money hoarded up:
And so forwards to the end of those 24. particulars mentioned in the Title page.
With a Conclusion to the whole Treatise.
The KEY of WEALTH, Or a New Way for IMPROVEMENT Of TRADE, etc.
LIB. I. SECT. I.
Showing, The Causes or Means in general, which tend either to further or
hinder a Peoples comfortable subsistence, by their Industry.

THough heavenly things should beyond all proportion, be preferred before
earthly, yet where they are both consistent, neither of them ought to be at all
neglected; for as the Earth since the Fall, requires much skill and diligence
to be improved, to the best advantage for outward subsistence, so until matters
be ordered in such sort, as all men that are willing to take pains in an honest
Calling, may be put into a capacity of enjoying a Livelihood thereby; No man
can be excused, who (knowing any means tending thereunto) does neglect either
to discover the same, or endeavor the effecting thereof.

Having therefore, in reference to the duty I ow to this Nation, determined to
demonstrate those remarkable things (for less I cannot justly call them) which
by many degrees, and at several times, were by Divine Providence dictated unto
me, as most pertinently conducing to the end before expressed: I find it
expedient, to begin with A Discovery of the means in general, which tend either
to Further or hinder a Peoples comfortable Subsistence, by their Industry.

In order to which, it is to be observed, that as in the Body Natural, no
Member can subsist by it self, without both serving the whole Body, and
receiving (as a reward of such public service) a competent nourishment from
it; So in the Body Politic, no Artificer or Tradesman can accommodate
himself, with all things necessary to a comfortable subsistence, by his
Industry in any one Calling, without transmitting the over plus of the fruits
of his endeavors therein, to other the Members of the said Body Politic, and
from them receiving instead thereof, a proportionable reflex of the surplusage
of their labors and commodities.

Hence it is evident, that though a Land be never so fruitful of it self, and
ly never so fit for the Trade of Fishing and Traffic with other Nations, yet
Commodities therein cannot be improved and multiplied, without the Industry of
men in their several proper Callings; nor can any man afford this Industry
faster, then he can find means for the Exchange of the fruits, of his own
labors ^ possessions, instead of such other necessaries as for his Trade or
Family, he stands in present need of; and consequently in case of deadness in
Trading, he is forced to slacken his endeavors, lest by taking in and
preparing more Ware for sale, then he knows how quickly to dispose of, it ly
upon his hands, till it be quite out of fashion, grow stale, or be otherwise
spoiled, to his great prejudice.

For, if Trading be so obstructed, as men cannot put off (possibly) the tenth
part of that Ware in the yeet, as for money or valuable consideration they
could procure and prepare for sale: In this case as the Merchant cannot afford
to bring in Commodities ten times faster, then the Retayler can take them off
his hands; so neither can the Retayler take them off faster, then he can find
sale for what he has already; in so much, as if either the Wholesale man or
Retayler should have a stock of goods, as great as when Trade was ten times
quicker, it must needs follow, that they would be ten times as long in selling
it: whence (as I said) it would be spoiled, by lying upon their hands.

Whereas, if there were a way found, whereby men might put off their
Commodities for valuable consideration, even as fast as they could prepare
them, it would occasion their returns to be so quick, and suddenly so great,
and likewise so encourage all men, to employ the utmost of their Stock and
Credit, in such a thriving way, as the store and plenty of all sorts of Ware,
would soon amount to the greatest extent, that the Land and Sea by the Art and
Industry of men, could possibly be made to afford; and each man (I say) being
in present capacity to put off the same for valuable consideration, it would
not only prevent the damage of having so great a store of Commodity spoiled,
by lying upon his hands; but by multiplying his riches through such quick
Returns, enable him to bestow a comfortable maintenance upon Himself and
Family, whereby the Commodity thus augmented, is (through the enlargement of
men's expenses) distributed amongst them, toward their comfortable subfistence,
as fast as it is thus increased in quantity.

For, seeing that the effect of all Trading, is but the parting with Commodities
for such Money, Credit, or valuable Consideration, as procures other
Commodities or Necessaries instead thereof; whereby each man's Ware being
transmitted from himself, he in conclusion receives other Ware or Necessaries
for it; it follows that the more Commodity they after this manner transfer each
to other (seeing upon one man's parting with it another receives it) the more
they receive each from other.

And again, it being hereby handed from one to another, till it be at last
transmitted unto persons for their private use, toward the comfortable
maintenance of themselves and Families, it comes to pass, that if by this means
they exchange each to other, every year as great a quantity of Commodity, as
the Land and Sea by the utmost endeavors of men can be made to afford, they
must needs receive one year with another toward their subsistence, no less; so
as the Earth affording but Commodity enough, both the fruits of their Industry,
and as a reward thereof) their enjoyment of outward good, shall be
proportionable to the open and stree passage that is made, for speedy putting
off their Commodities one to another.

These things being duly considered, it is manifest, that if there were (I say)
any possible means, whereby men might put off their Commodities even as fast as
they could prepare them, and that for valuable consideration viz. in such a way
as whereby in lieu of the Commodity so parted with, to receive each from other,
that which will procure such other Commodity of like or greater value, as for
their Trade or Family they should stand in present need of.

Seeing that in this case, (they being (I say) able to put off their Commodities
as fast as they can procure them, for valuable consideration, and it being so
much for their profit so to do, (they would not spare to improve the Earth to
the utmost that it could be made by Wit or Industry to yield, it could not
produce any other thing, then to occasion that all this plenty of Commodity,
(multiplied by the joint endeavors of so great a number of men,) would be in
such sort transferred from one to another, as by that means it would be
distributed to every industrious man, as the reward of his labors, toward the
increase of his Stock, and comfortable Maintenance of his Family, even
proportionable to his diligence in the Multiplication, Improvement, or
Distribution of such Commodity, amongst the rest of Mankind.

Seeing therefore, that men's increased endeavors are in this case rewarded, by
the increased quantity of Commodity, which hereby they are in capacity to share
amongst them, it follows that (especially in a Land which is not only
plentiful of it self, but lies fit for the Trade of Fishing and Traffic with
other Nations,) nothing so much hinders a peoples comfortable subsistence by
their industry, as when matters are ordered, so as they cannot find a way to put
off their Commodities, as fast as they could procure or prepare them for sale;
and that the contrary, would tend as much to further their comfortable
subsistence by such industry, which were the things here to be discovered: and
though perhaps generally observed, yet (the causes, grounds, and nature of them
not being so obvious) the clearing thereof, could not be omitted, in the sound
handling of a subject of this kind.

LIB. I. SECT. II.
Showing, The causes or means tending to continue and increase amongst a
People, either Riches being already rich, or Poverty being already poor.

AS he alone is said to be wealthy, who has not for the present only, but for
some time to come, means of subsistence for himself, and perhaps for his
posterity; so he that has greatest possessions for the present, if for want of
good Improvement, he spends out of the main Stock is not like to enjoy so much
of his wealth, as he whose Estate though as yet but small, is in a fair way of
thriving.

Seeing therefore, little wealth would serve, if it were only for present
subsistence, and considering that continuance of wealth, consists chiefly in
the improvement thereof, it follows that except the said improvement, do but
just maintain the charge of the Improver, (which seldom so remains long in an
even balance;) it does either more then maintain that charge, whereby it is
not only continued but increased, or less then maintain it, whereby it is not
fully preserved; so that it is with wealth much as it is with fire, which
cannot lightly be upheld, but by the same means by which it is increased.

And even as (I say) with fire, the greater it is, (a sufficiency offewel being
added to it) the more violently it does increase it self, by the excessiveness
of its heat; so it it is with riches, for the greater a man's estate is, (he not
wanting means to improve it) the faster does such estate multiply, by the
super-abundancy of his profit.

And contrarily, when a man's estate is so small, as the improvement thereof
will not serve to maintain his charge, it follows, that spending out of the
main stock, such wasted stock is like to yield the less improvement upon the
second return; whereby he being forced still to spend, so much the more out of
the principal, his estate must needs decay so much the faster, by how much the
less it is.

Now, though this be a thing that happily has come, within the compass of most
men's observations and experience, yet I thought good to mention it, for that
being applied to the purpose hereafter expressed, it serves to demonstrate the
fickle condition not of particular persons only, but of whole Nations.

For as the wealth of a Nation is greater or less, according to the value of
the estates, (whether in goods, money, lands, or whatsoever else) of those men
that live therein; so the end to which the riches of a Commonwealth serves,
being not so much the present, as future preservation of earthly enjoyments
(which cannot be without the improvement thereof, by the profit of the yearly
return of their stock;) it follows that except this return, do yield exactly
so much increase, as does but just maintain their charge, out of the profit of
each return, (which seldom happens to be of long continuance) it must either
increase their wealth, (and consequently put them into a capacity by their
increased stock, to increase it yet more then formerly) or diminish their
estates, by forcing them to spend out of the main stock, so as their profit
upon their lessened stock, being every year less, and consequently their
expenses out of this stock every year more, (and therefore also their profit
yet less) such a people must without effectual means of prevention be used, be
inevitably brought to utter beggary.

And whereas it may be supposed by him, who has not duly weighed the matter,
that the decay of some persons in a Commonwealth, is so much the greater
advantage unto others, and the thriving of many a prejudice to the rest, yet if
the particulars following be well considered, it cannot but be granted, that
(contrary to this mistaken imagination) as on the one side the decay of rich
men, and the multiplying of the poor, is by the impairing of trade so much the
greater prejudice unto all that cannot live, but by their pains in some
calling; so on the other side, that the multiplying of the rich, and the
diminishing of the poor (which is effected by a quick Trade) does (by
increasing the annual expenses, consequently the trade of a Nation) occasion no
damage to any, but much advantage to all.

And the truth of this, will appear to such as shall consider, that when a
people by the abundance of their trading, are become generally so exceeding
rich, as those who now need no trade to maintain them, are perhaps ten times as
many as the other; their yearly expenses (in not only family maintenance, but
feastings, Journyes for recreations, and all such like comforts and delights,
therefore also their trading) is perhaps ten times greater, then of those,
amongst whom the major part do live upon the charity of Tradesmen, and few or
none rich enough, without a trade to live.

For, (I say) according to a people expenses, such is their trading, (seeing it
is impossible their should be more ware put off in the year, (exept what is
sent to other Nations) then the people do one time with a another, spend amongst
themselves, Families and Friends; whereby it comes to pass, that if a Nation be
so extreme poor, as they are not able to affoard themselves a competent
livlyhood; in this case though the land wherein they live be never so fruitful;
yet, the revolution of commodities through the hands of Tradesmen, that is
Trade, (and consequently industry) being hereby obstructed; it follows that
both Tradesmen are ruined, the people as much distressed as if they lived in a
barren soil; and (for want of the many employments occasioned by Trade) the
generally of them, enforced to spend all their own Stock, and perhaps more,
which they have borrowed of others, for their present subsistence, whereby the
poverty of such a people, being by such poverty so much the more increased, and
consequently (I say) their Trading and employments, so much the more
diminished, they are, (without some effectual means be used to remedy the
same) put out of all hopes of recovery.

Contrarily, though a people through the superabundancy of their riches, should
spend upon the comforts of this life, never so many thousands in a day one with
another, yet by this means, there is the more commodity sold, whereby Trade is
the greater, consequently each man in much better capacity to gain abundance of
employments, with competency of lively hood thereupon, then if there were not
in that Land, (by the universal poverty of the people) sufficient practice for
one man in an hundred: so as by the riches of the generality of men, not only
the rich themselves, are put into a capacity to enjoy the fruits of the earth,
but by the current of commodities to such rich persons through the hands of
Tradesmen, such Tradesmen are enriched, and by a multiplycation of
employment, (by reason of the abundance of Trade) the poor maintained.

Now from all this, that which I said before is evident; viz. That the same
means by which for the most part, the wealth of a Nation is preserved, is no
other then that, by which it is increased, so as it is almost impossible that
it should continue long at one stay, without growing either greater or less.

For, if a people be at once generally so poor, as their yearly expense in a
competent maintenance of themselves Families and Friends, is not great enough
to make Trade such, as whereby Tradesmen one with another, may get so much as
will maintain them, such a people (nothing preventing) must needs grow every
year poorer then formerly, till both Trade and Stock be reduced to nothing; and
that so much the faster, by how much the more their riches, and consequently
their trading is hereby decreased.

But, if the generallyty of a people be once so rich, as their yearly expense
is such, as makes Trade to affoard something more then a mere subsistence to
Tradesmen; the Stock of such a Nation, that is their Riches, therefore their
Trade does yearly increase; and each increase making a greater addition to the
Stock, and by consequence to the Improvement, it goes on, nothing
interrupting, till, like fire that wants no fuel, it be able to drink in, even
so much commodity yearly, as all the Merchants that live upon this Globe of the
Earth, are able to procure, and willing to afford for money,

And this when once Trading comes to be something quicker then ordinary, much
the faster, for that Tradesmen by reason of their great and quick Returns,
growing suddenly very rich, leave off their practisce, and others from nothing
falling into employment, and from employment to stock, and from stock into a
way of quick trade, do soon arive unto the same condition; whereby the number
of such who are so poor, as not being able to follow a trade, must live upon
the charity of others to the burden of the Commonwealth; being daily
diminished, and the number of such as become so rich, as they need no trade to
maintain them; being daily increased; the charge of the Commonwealth in
maintaining such poor, is not only lessened; but Trade, by the increase of
such rich, so much the more multiplied, the number of such rich, by such
quickened trade, so much the faster increased; and Trade thereby again so much
the more multiplied: and so ad infinitum.

So then, the causes or means tending to continue and increase amongst a
people, either Riches being already rich, is their present riches, with the
consequences thereof; or Poverty being already poor, is their present poverty,
with the consequences thereof; which were the things here to be discovered.

LIB. I. SECT. III.
Showing, The causes or means, to make a Poor People, though in a Barren Land,
Rich; and a Rich People. though in a Fruitful Land, Poor.

THat Security for making good, Men's Estates, which is usually called Money,
being given to Persons for their Commodities, upon no other account, then as an
Evidence or Testimony, to signify how far forth men (by their joint Agreement
to take it, being otherwise of no worth, for Commodities of real value) are
Indebted for, and engaged, to recompense the fruits of their labors or
possessions, in some other Commodities or Necessaries instead of those, that
for such money they parted with; it comes to pass, that he who hoards up this
public Obligation, without demanding present satisfaction in one way or
other, does (as he well deserves) grow every day poorer then formerly, by
living upon the principal Stock.

For this reason, it is, that there are very few, who though they be of no
Trade, and though the times be something dangerous, can afford to keep their
Estates, or any considerable part thereof by them in money, but either, they
let it out for Interest, buy land with it, or some other ways employ it, so as
the principal may yield an advantage; and much more, must men that live by
their Trades, the improvement of whose Stock is their maintenance (being
generally not long able otherwise, to defray the charges of housekeeping) rid
their hands of money for Ware, as fast as they receive it.

Now, from this confideration, it is evident, that in reference to a
Commonwealth, or any Society of men, the greater quantity there is amongst
them, of money, credit, or that which is taken by them for Commodities, the
more commodity they sell, that is, the greater is their Trade: For whatsoever
is taken amongst men for commodity, though it were ten times more then now it
is, yet if it be one way or other laid out by each man, as fast as he receives
it, it must needs come to pass, that (resting no where) it does occasion a
quickness in the revolution of Commodity from hand to hand, that is Trade,
proportionable to the greatness of its quantity.

Hence it follows, that if the Stock of moneys, which drives a Peoples Trade,
should every day increase, yet (granting that matters were so ordered, as men
would not hoard it up; and then (it must needs follow, that by every man's
continual putting off such money from himself, (endeavoring always to keep
his whole Estate, if possible, in Ware or Commodity) they (as by a Sluice) do by
degrees draw in such a flood of goods amongst them, from Land and Sea, as their
Wealth in other things, will far exceed their Stock in moneys, if none of them
do rest (as it is supposed they do not) until each of them has so converted
his estate into goods, as the money he has in his hands, is not considerable
thereunto; for when once it is so, it must needs follow, that what they are
worth in money (though never so much increased) is not valuable to what they
are worth in goods.

Hence it is, that in any Nation where money is not hoarded up, that if all the
Houses, Ships, Goods, Lands, and whatsoever else is any part of any man's
estate, were prized but at an ordinary rate, the total sum would no doubt,
exceed the value of all the moneys, that is in their whole Land an hundred
fould; whence it necessarily follows, that though money be never so much
increased amongst them, yet by each man's endeavoring not to keep any
considerable part of his estate by him in money, their estates in Ships,
Houses, Goods, or the like, are multiplied proportionably.

And this increasing of goods in a Land, by the increasing of money therein,
comes to pass by this means, that one man's putting off of money from himself,
for Ware, is not only the furnishing himself with another man's commodity; but
the putting that other man in present capacity, to refurnish himself from Land
or Sea, with some new commodity, by parting with that money which will produce
the like effect, for a third person, and so perpetually.

Hence, when the stock of a people in moneys does so fast increase, as
Tradesmen have (as I may say) much a do to keep the current of moneys, which
then runs amongst them (it growing daily greater) at that low proportion, in
reference to their goods, which by each of their constant endeavors (upon
their recieving moneys every day anew) is pursued; In this case then, they so
strive (as it were) to put off the money one from another in such great
proportion, as trading becomes so quick, that Tradesmen returning and
consequently gaining, as much perhaps in a month as otherwise in a year (and
this gain being converted into goods, by each man's putting off the money for
it) they daily increase their wealth ingoods, if not immediately proportionable
to such an increase of money; yet until this be effected (in regard they never
rest striving, to put off the money one upon another (to the drawing in of new
commodities and increasing their trading, consequently their Wealth in goods,
so as all the money they have amongst them, will not be considerable to the
value thereof, their estates must needs (if not totally arive, yet) perpetually
hasten toward the aforesaid porportion, and that (the world affoarding but
commodity enough for money) so much the faster, as by reason of such swift
increase of moneys, it wants time to comefully up thereunto.

But contrarily, in a time of Civil or Intestine wares, rich men as fast as
they receive money upon any occasion, knowing not how to dispose of it, either
by laying it out in Land, commodity, or otherwise; so as whereby to secure
their estates from the danger of surprizal, do usually keep it up in their own
possessions, and by consequence, obstructing the revolution thereof, do thereby
hinder Trade, by preventing the sale of so much commodity, as by the current of
such money from themselves, through the hands of others, must needs have bin
returned: and Trade being once obstructed by what means soever, does make men
find by sad experience, that if they keep as great astock of ware by them now,
as when trade was quicker, it must needsly much longer upon their hand, till
hapilily it be grown stale or out of Fashion.

Hence it comes to pass, that when through hoarding up of moneys or any other
means, the quick current of trade is suddenly and considerably abstructed,
though a people be at that time never so rich, and live in never so fruitful a
Land; yet such as have their stocks in commodity, much more then proportiable
to so decayed a trade, do upon their recieving moneys keep it, or the most part
of it by them, without maintaining their stock in goods, to the same proportion
as formerly; by which means, the current of money, and consequently of Trade;
being yet so much the more obstructed, does occasion (men keeping still the
less ware by them) to convert so much the greater part of their estates into
moneys, whereby, the revolution thereof, and by consequence Trade, is yet so
much the more abated; therefore men induced to hoard up moneys so much the
more; and so on, till the estates of all rich men, being in a manner wholly
converted into moneys, and the generallity of the people drained of it, they
must needs in the end (if this course go on amongst them) expect such a total
obstruction in the current of moneys, as they may well wait in their shops,
without receiving one with another, near so much as may serve to preserve them
alive, though they spend all they take, both Principal and Profit.

Hereby, the quantity of goods that is amongst Tradesmen diminishing, not
only in the hands of the rich, by their daily endeavors to convert their
estates into moneys; but also in the hands of the poor, by their being
perpetually forced, to spend out of the main stock, for their mere subfistance;
(if this course (I say) go on) men who were formerly worth (perhaps) one with
another 20. times as much in commodity as money, shall scarce have any thing
but money amongst them; and yet their money no whit increased, so as they must
needs be so much the poorer, by how much their estates in goods are diminished.

I conclude therefore, that as on the one side, men's endeavors to post off
money one upon another for commodity, by a constant striving to keep their
whole estates (if possible) in goods, (especially, if such money daily increase
amongst them) do multiply their trading, and by consequence their riches, so as
the world affoarding but commodity enough, and that from other nations, though
their own soil be never so barren, their estates in goods, will soon by many
degrees exceed the value of all the money, that is so revolving amongst them,
though never so much increased; and on the other side, men's hoarding up of
moneys, or endeavoring to convert their estates into money; does by
obstructing trade, make men spend out of the main stock, more and more, till
suddenly, though never so rich formerly, and living in never so fruitful a
Land, they have scarce so much commodity left amongst them, as is equal in
value to their stock of money, which being also for the most part hoarded up,
by the richer sort, affords no advantage to the generallity of the people.

Thus, the causes or means to make a Poor people, though in a barren Land Rich,
and a Rich people though in a fruitful Land Poor; do manifestly appear, which
were the things here to be discovered.

LIB. I. SECT. IIII.
Showing more fully, The Effect of the aforesaid means, for making a Poor
people Rich.

BEcause, the full force and virtue of that Expedient for enriching a poor
people, which I shall hereafter propose; depends chiefly upon the Effect, which
money being not hoarded up, but multiplied in a fruitful Land, does produce
amongst them; that it may the better appear in what proportion, an increase of
money not hoarded up, does increase trade, and multiply men's estates in any
land, where Commodity enough by the fruits of its own soil, and Traffic with
other Nations, is to be had for money; let it be supposed, that there is a
people amongst whom there is now, ten time as much money as formerly (or rather
that money might be multiplied amongst them to any quantity required) that
matters were ordered so, as none of them care to hoard up this money, that
their land being fruitful and fitly situate for the trade of Fishing, and
Traffic with other Nations, there is commodity enough to be had for money,
though trade were 100. times greater then now it is; and then I say the
consequence will be, that both trading and riches will increase amongst them,
much more then proportionable to such increase of money, and that without
increasing the price of commodity, as I shall prove in place convenient.

And first, for Trading (I say) though their money be but ten times more then
formerly, their trading shall be near 100. times more then formerly: for if
this multiplied stock of moneys, would in this case revolve, about in near the
tenth part of that time, as their former small stock would have done, (which I
shall prove it would) it follows, that there is a double advantage in it: The
first is, in that being ten times greater then the former; each revolution
thereof (commodity not being dearer) causes full ten times as great a sale of
commodity, that is full ten times as great a Trade, as each revolution of the
former small stock would have done.

And therefore further, if this multiplied stock revolve about, in near the
tenth part of the time as the former small stock would have done (that is near
ten times about for the others once) it follows, that men receive near 100.
times as much money, in the same space as formerly; consequently, that
commodity not being deerer, their trade is near 100. times as quick as formerly
if at least, there be not a greater number of Tradesmen then formerly; which
if there be, then (seeing it is supposed, that money may be multiplied to any
quantity required) let it be increased accordingly, and the effect shall be
still the same.

So that, what is here supposed being granted, and it being proved, that in
this case commodity shall not rise in price, there remains nothing to be
cleared, but that hereupon it would follow, that this multiplied stock of
moneys, shall revolve about in near the tenth part of that time, as the other
small stock would have done.

In order to the demonstration whereof, it is evident, that if the quantity of
money amongst a people in any Nation, be once so great as being dispersed, that
which they have one with another, is a sum very considerable to lay out in a
way of Trade; in this case, every of them thinking to employ his whole stock,
lays out that confiderable sum, which he already has without intermission;
and their doing this without delay, is that whereby they receive each from
other, the same sums again with as little delay, and by that means do put
themselves into present capacity to do the same, the second and third time, and
so perpetually.

For seeing, their thus putting off the money one upon another (though they
perform it with never so much speed) cannot make the quantity of money that is
amongst them the less, it must needs follow, that they have in their hands
still one with another, ten times as much money as formerly, that is, a
considerable sum, to lay out immediately in a way of trade.

Whereas, when all the money amongst any number of men, is of so small a
quantity as being dispersed, that which they have one with another, is not
considerable to employ as a stock in away of Trade, (and much less to purchase
Land, put out to enterest, and the like) in this case, every man deferring to
lay out that little which he has, does in a manner totally obstruct the
current of that small stock, which is amongst them; whereby it is manifest,
that this inconsiderable stock of moneys, shall not revolve about in the tenth
part of that space of time; as (by each man's striving at once to put off his
own share from himself) that other great stock does.

Therefore, (I say) this multiplied stock of moneys, shall revolve about in
near the tenth part of the time, as the other small stock would, and
consequently trading be in this case near 100. times as quick as otherwise;
that is increased much more then proportionable to such increase of money,
which was the first thing here to be proved.

The second thing to be demonstrated was; that they shall hereby suddenly
multiply their riches, to be more then proportionable to such increase of
money, (I say) suddenly; for though (I confess) it is impossible, that by an
increase of money men's estates should be increased proportionably, in the same
instant without any intermission, yet money being increased to be now ten times
more then formerly, (seeing that hereby trade could not choose but be near 100.
times more then formerly, as is already proved) it must needs follow, that men's
returning 100. times as much commodity in the same space as formerly, would so
exceedingly hasten the increase of their stock, and consequently their estates
in commodity, as their wealth in Goods would quickly reach to the utmost
extent, that the world for money could affoard.

And having ten times as much money amongst them as formerly, though they had
also already ten times as much Goods as formerly, yet that is no argument to
prove that they would be content to keep, such considerable sums by them as
through this means (every man's proportion one with another being multiplied by
ten) would be dispersed amongst them: for though their stock be but yet ten
times as much as formerly, yet they find sale for 100. times as much commodity
as formerly, whereby they would stand in need of a stock of commoditys
proportionable, so as until (at least) they had increased their stock
proportionable to their Trade, they would never rest posting off the money each
upon other, with the greatest speed possible; which as I have already proved is
the very means, whereby a Commonwealth though never so barren of it self, is
suddenly enriched with plenty of Commodities.

And seeing again, that though the money thus multiplied should stand at that
stay, without being further increased, yet Trade once quickened (as is already
proved) having a property by multiplying the number of the Rich, and thereby
the expenses of the people, to increase it self like fire, to the utmost extent
possible; it follows, that a stop in the increase of money, would no more
occasion a stop in the increase of Trade, then forbearing to blow the fire
after it is sufficiently kindled. would prevent its further increasing, seeing
it is evident, that (as it is with fire in this praticular) by how much the
more it should be hereby increased, by so much the faster it would still go on
to increase.

Therefore, the second thing which was here to be proved, does follow, viz.
That in the case before premised, men's wealth in goods as well as commodity
would soon be above ten times more then formerly, that is, more then
proportionable to such increase of money; and that so much the sooner, if money
also should in the mean time be yet further multiplied: for then, though Trade
like (I say) as fire, when it has gotten strength) is apt enough to increase
it self, yet will do it so much the faster, if it be (as it were) intended and
forced (like the same fire with a stiff and feirce wind) by the multiplying of
money still to a greater quantity, (I mean) that though, by the perpetual
increase of money amongst men, their estates might possibly never come to be
above ten tims more then the money, which they at present have amongst them;
yet by the said increase of money, their estates would so much the sooner be
above ten times more then all the money, that lately they had amongst them.

By all which, the efficacy of this means, for making a Poor people
(suddenly) Rich, does more fully appear, which was the thing here to be
demonstrated.

Hence therefore, as it is no wonder why there is so much care taken by all
States, to prevent the exporting of coin, who have not any mine of gold or
silver at their own command, so the truth of what is affirmed by one Mr.
Robinson of late, in a book of his, called Brief Considerations, concerning the
advancement of Trade and Navigation, is here evidently demonstrated, his words
are these, I conceive (says he) it will appear upon inquiry;

That, in whatsoever Country, the greatest Stock of money and Credit shall be
raised, there will the greatest Trade of the world, be established.

Which being in Effect, the same with what I have already affirmed, I shall
pass from that point, as sufficiently cleared; and here insert, (as no less
pertinent to the scop of this Trea tise) what the same Author in that place
further adds; viz.

That, the greater Trade of one Country, has a capacity of undermining and
eating out the lesser Trade of other Countries;

That the greatest Trade will be able, to make the greatest number of Shipping.

That what Nation soever can attain to, and continue the greatest Trade, and
number of Shipping, will get and keep the soveraygnty of the Seas; and
consequently the greatest dominion of the world.

The truth of all which, will be proved in their proper places.

LIB. I. SECT. V.
Showing, That nothing can be alleged against the aforesaid means for
enriching a poor People; but what argues as strongly against an increase of
Trade amongst them, though it be at present never so dead.

FOr that happily, the means of which has been hitherto discovered, to make a
poor people rich, may be liable in the apprehension of those, who have not
seriously considered thereof, to some material objection; which to remove, is
so essential to the main scope of this Treatise, as the Enterprise it self
hereafter proposed, cannot otherwise be vindicated; I thought fit, before I
proceeded any further, to insert such considerations, as might tend either to
the preventing, or answering of those objections.

Which therefore to do, with as much brevity as possible, I shall in this
Section (before I come to the full clearing of all other scruples in the next)
prove that nothing can be alleged against the aforesaid means, for enriching
a poor people; but what argues as strongly against an increase of Trade amongst
them, though it be at present never so dead.

If then, in opposition to what is thus undertaken to be proved, it should be
objected, that an increase of money would occasion an increase in the price of
Commodities, proportionable to such increase of money, (that is, if the money
were twice as much, Commodity would be twice as dear) consequently (going
never the further in Commodity by the increase thereof) would not occasion any
increase in the sale of Commodity: therefore not any increase of Trade; and yet
(by causing the price of Commodities to rise) incur an inconvenience, contrary
to what is before affirmed.

I answer, that the Objection, (though for the better clearing of this point, I
thought it not fit to be omitted) implies no less then a contradiction; seeing
it is evident, (or at least by the sequel, shall be put out of all doubt:) That
an increase of money cannot possibly occasion an increase in the price of
Commodity, otherwise then by increasing the sale thereof, and that (as has
been already alleged) if such money being doubled, the price of Commodity be
thereby also doubled, such increase of money does not in this case increase the
sale of Commodity: It follows, that it is no occasion of increasing the price
of Commodity at all: Therefore, to say that an increase of money, does by
occasioning a greater sale of Commodity, occasion so great an increase in the
price thereof, as not at all to occasion an increase in the sale thereof, is (I
say) a plain contradiction: whereby it is manifest, that an increase of money,
cannot occasion an increase in the price of Commodities, fully proportionable
to such increase of money.

Again, if it were so, yet this would incur no inconvenience, as in the
Objection is intimated; For seeing, though Commodities should be upon this
occasion twice as dear, yet there is also twice as much money dispersed amongst
men; whereby they are in as good a capacity to purchase as great a quantity of
Commodity, as if, having but half that money, it should go twice as far; so
that the inconvenience, is no whit greater then the advantage.

But to admit, that an increase of money, must needs occasion a proportionable
increase in the price of Commodities, as it is already made evident, that it
would imply a Contradiction: so it is manifest, that there is a great absurdity
in it: For either a people, having now ten times more money amongst them then
formerly, though they have also ten or 100. times more Commodity, yet in this
case, Commodities must needs be now, ten times dearer then formerly; or else a
people, though they have now ten times more money amongst them, then formerly,
cannot possibly have more Commodity amongst them then formerly; either of which
to affirm, is (I say) absurd, and contrary to the truth of what, will fully
appear in the Section following: Neither indeed, if this were truth, could the
hoarding up of moneys, which is equivalent to a decrease thereof in quantity,
occasion a decrease of Commodity (as by what has been said, appears that it
does) and by consequence, an increase in the price thereof.

If it be replied, that since the discovery of the Mines in the West Indies,
(whereby the world has been filled, more full of money then formerly,
Commodities are likewise grown, much dearer then formerly.

I confess, that if there be now ten times more money, in the World then
formerly; seeing it cannot be conceived, that the whole world is capable of
affording, ten times more Commodity then formerly, it must be granted, that an
increase of money in the whole World, may occasion an increase in the price of
Commodities, (though not fully proportionable, neither to such increase of
money; for it does not appear, that Commodities are so many times dearer, as
money in the world, is now of late years multiplied) yet seeing matters may be
ordered so, as the whole world may be able to afford, ten times more plenty of
Commodity to any one Land or Nation then now it does, (and especially if the
same Land might be improved so, as to yield much more Commodity out of its own
Bowels, then for the present through the extreme poverty of the People, and
deadness of Trading, men can find sale for:) in this case if the money in that
Land, were ten times more then it is, it might soon come to pass, that there
would be ten times as much Commodity to be sold for money; whereby the price
thereof, (as I shall have occasion hereafter to observe) would be kept from
rising: And thus, this scruple ( I suppose) is fully removed.

To proceed therefore, to the proof of what is before asserted: I say first,
that an increase of money, cannot possibly occasion an increase in the price of
commodities, (or any other Inconvenience) but by increasing the sale of
Commodities For an increase of money can produce no evil, but what it does by
augmenting the quantity of that, which is either kept by or laid out: The
quantity of that which is kept by, being Augmented, does (indeed) imbolden men
to spend the more freely, through which as people live the more Comfortabely;
so the sale of Commodity (that is Trade) is so much the quicker; but besides,
this (I say) the Increase of that which lies by, occasions no Inconvenience,
other then if it were so much Brass or Lether lying by, except what it does by
hindering the sale of so much Commodity, as by the current thereof would be
returned; yet this Inconvenience is not to be imputed to the Increase of money,
but rather to the contrary, for that so long as it is kept by, it is all one,
as if it were not increased.

Now, that on the other side, by increasing the quantity of what is laid out,
it produces no evil, other then what it does by increasing the sale of
Commodity (that is Trade) this is most evident and unquestionable, Therefore,
this first thing to be proved, viz. That an increase of money cannot possibly
occasion, an increase in the price of Commodities, (or any other Inconvenience)
but by increasing the sale of Commodity, is true.

Now then to proceed, from hence it follows, that if it were impossible for
money to increase in any place, without increasing the price of Commodity, it
would be as much impossible for Trade to increase in any place, but the price
of Commodity, must needs also increase in that place; Seeing it is here
proved, that an increase of money, cannot possibly increase the price of
commodity, or incur any other inconvenience, but by increasing the sale
thereof (that is by increasing Trade) consequently, nothing can be alleged
against the aforesaid means, for enriching a poor people, but what argues as
strongly against an increase of Trade amongst them, though it be at present
never so dead; which was the thing here to be evinced.

And for a further proof of this; though if I should say, that when trade is
once decayed in any place, there is no means to quicken it, but by an increase
of money not hoarded up, I should not only deny the truth it self, but the
validity of that other means, which this Treatise, by the whole scope thereof,
is designed to demonstrate; yet when it shall be seasonable to discover what
this other means is, I shall then manifestly prove, that without an increase
of money (not hoarded up) or the use of this or such like means, it cannot be
expected; that when trade is once decayed in any place, it should possibly be
quickened and revived: and seeing an objection against the use of that means,
without which this or that enterprise at all can be effected, does by
consequence argue, as strongly against the enterprise it self; that which was
here to be proved (needless any more to be repeated) does follow.

LIB. I. SECT. VI:
Showing, How the aforesaid means for enriching a poor People, is fully
cleared from all Scruples and Objections.

HAving already proved, that nothing can be alleged against the aforesaid
means, for enriching a poor people; but what argues as strongly against an
increase of Trade amongst them, though it be at present never so dead: it is
now to be considered, whether any thing can be materially objected, against an
increase of Trade amongst any people, where (I say) it is at present dead; for
if it appear, that there is not, then it is manifest, That the aforesaid means
for enriching a poor people, is thereby fully cleared, from all Scruples and
Objections.

Now, if (all things considered) there were less inconveniency to a
Commonwealth, in the continuance of deadness of Trading amongst them, then in
the removing thereof, (seeing of two evils, the least is always to be
chosen,) not only my labor in order to this enterprise, is frustrated; but
the means to continue such deadness of Trading, (in case there were any danger
of its being quickened) ought with all diligence in this respect to be pursued;
which yet if to do, would in the judgment of all men, be both a ridiculous and
pernicious practice, then it is manifest, that (seeing I say again of two
inconveniences, the least, if either is to be chosen) nothing can be
materially objected, against an increase of Trade amongst any people, where it
is already dead, which was the thing to be proved.

And although, happily upon this ground, it may be conceived by some, that
there needs not any more time nor labor to be spent, in the further proof
of this point; yet because upon the serious discussing thereof, many things
very material will appear, which must have been somewhere suggested; it will be
necessary for those, that would fully understand the scope of this Treatise, to
take cognizance thereof, before they proceed any further.

As that (therefore) is a quick Trade, which by a reasonable profit in the
pound, does more then maintain the charge of the Tradesmen; so that is a dead
Trade, which by the same profit will not serve to maintain that charge; whence
it necessarily follows, that if Trade amongst any people be dead, such a
people without an extraordinary profit in the pound, being forced to spend
every return, something out of the main stock, are, (as I have already more
fully proved) so far from being in a way of thriving, as till Trade be made
quicker, they must (of necessity) grow every year poorer then formerly, even
until they be reduced, to the outmost extremity of want.

And if to remedy this, the Whole-sale-man, Retayler, and all others that are
to have allowance, out of the price of any Commodity, do take an extraordinary
profit in the pound; to the end, that such their profit, may something help
toward the slowness of their returns; they make all sorts of Commodities so
dear (as according to what is proved in the Section following) it cost's them
(near, if not altogether) as much extraordinary charge, to maintain their
Families, as such increase of profit, which by this means they advance, does
amount to: Whereby, still they come (near, if not altogether) as far short of
being able, to maintain a Family Charge by a dead Trade, without spending out
of the main stock, as if none of them had raised the price of their Commodities
at all.

From all this it is evident, that there is no objection can hold, against an
increase of Trade it self, if it be at present dead; but what argues as much,
not against the enriching alone, but the mere preserving of a poor people, from
falling by degrees, into the extremest want and beggary; whereby also for want
of means to defend themselves, they are made liable to be inslaved by other
Nations.

Now, considering that amongst earthly evils, incident to any Nation, these
two are the worst that can be imagined, (so as there being nothing fully to
counterpose these inconveniences,) it follows, that nothing can be materially
objected, against an increase of Trade amongst any people, if it be at present
dead, which was the thing here to be proved.

Yet further, seeing it is manifest, that nothing can with any color be
alleged, against an increase of Trade amongst any people, except this, that it
may tend to increase the price of their Commodities.

To this I answer, that if it were so, that increase of Trade, did necessarily
occasion an increase in the price of commodities, yet the Inconvenience
[especially to those whose Trade is at present, in a declining condition] would
not countervail the advantage; Seeing, that for a people [whose Estates through
the deadness of their trading, does daily decline] to have their riches
increased, though the price of commodity, should also thereby increase, is a
greater advantage then though commodity should be never so cheap, to have their
estates in the mean time to wast and decay; the rather, for that an increase of
Trade, does occasion an increase in the current of commodity, whereby a greater
quantity thereof being [as is already proved] distributed amongst men, for
their more comfortable subsistence; in this case, if plenty of commodity [which
is the effect of a quick trade] were not consistent with cheapnesse in the
price thereof [though the contrary be most manifest] yet to have a plentiful
share of outward comforts, though dear, is an advantage above that of enjoying
a less proportion thereof, though never so cheap, as much every whit as the
end is more excellent then that means, which without such end serves to no
purpose at all, therefore nothing can be materially objected, against an
increase of Trade.

Lastly, and chiefly, it is to be observed, that in any place where both
Intestine and Foreign commodity enough, is to be had for money, an increase
of Trade does not at all occasion an increase in the price of such commodity:
For though trade in any place do increase never so fast, yet tradesmen cannot
make the price of commodity to rise, except [trading not being now so dead, as
whereby to discourage men from bringing in much ware] they can order matters
so, as it may not be brought in fast enough, to supply the present Market; for
otherwise, if one Tradesman will not sell his commodity at a reasonable rate,
another [glad of the opportunity] would suddenly furnish the Market; and [to
make his returns the quicker] sell it as cheap as he can afford, that is [as I
shall prove in the next Section] nuch cheaper, then in case trading were dead,
he could.

Hence, as there is a quicker Trade in London, then in any other City in
England; So this (occasioning more commodity to be brought to London, then
otherwise there would) does prevent such excessive dearnesse thereof in that
place, which otherwise could not choose but follow, upon such quickness of
Trading.

And there is no doubt, but that if any Nation (through the abundant expenses
of the people, by means of their riches) do become unto the rest of the world,
as London is to England, the Chief Seat of Trade, the reason for bringing in
commodity to that place, more then to any other part of the world, is the same,
for that of bringing in more commodity to London, then to any other place in
England; Because, whenever in any Land, there is but sale for commodity,
before there should want commodity in that place to supply the Market, as fast
as need requires, all the Merchants inhabiting here on earth, would cheerfully
entertain the opportunity, to post it thither in great proportions, whereby (I
say) the dearnesse of such commodity in that place, would be prevented, so as
there remaining no other imaginable scruple, against an increase of Trade, I
conclude, that the thing to be discovered in this place, does sufficiently
appear, viz. How the aforesaid means for enriching a poor peeple, is fully
cleared, from all scruples and objections.

LIB. I. SECT. VII.
Showing, That where commodity enough is to be had for money; quickness of
Trading, does occasion a considerable fall in the price of commodities, and
deadness of Trading the contrary.

BY what has been already said, (which yet in the conclusion to this Section,
shall be more fully cleared) it does appear, that where commodity enough is to
be had for money, men are forced to sell the same at as low a rate, (I mean as
small a profit in the pound) as with reference, to the quickness of their
returns they can afford; so as the main Question is; Whether if Trade be
extraordinary quick, (Commodities being sold as cheap as they can well be
afforded) they will not thereby fall to a far lower rate, and yet tradesmen
gain much more per annum then otherwise.

In order to the solution of which doubt, let it be considered, that if when by
reason of extreme deadness of trading, the Whole-sale-man cannot live, in case
he have not 2. s. 6. d. per l. profit, upon each return, he of whom the
Whole-sale-man procures his ware, nor yet the Retayler to whom he sells it,
under 5. s. each; that is in all 12. s. 6. d. amongst them all three.

Yet if their Trade were ten times as quick, they might all gain twice as much
in the year, upon the fist part of that profit, that is, upon 2. s. 6. d. in
the pound amongst them, which coming short of 12. s. 6. d. by ten shillings,
commodities might hereby be afforded at ten shillings in the pound, (that is,
one half part) cheaper then otherwise.

But besides, if trading be (suppose) ten times as quick as formerly, and that
hereupon commodities of all sorts, should be sold at half the rate as formerly;
Tradesmen in this case, would not only gain twice as much per annum, but out of
that doubled profit maintain their Families, at half that rate as formerly; And
consequently, might still afford to sell their commodities at a far less
profit, which less profit of all the several sorts of tradesmen put together,
(as before is observed) would make commodities, yet considerably cheaper, so as
men might maintain their families still at less charge, consequently live by
the less profit; and so until that which cannot now be afforded under twenty
shillings, might be sold at twelve pence.

And further, we have here only reckoned the price of commodities as they
might be afforded, by abating the profit only of three several sorts of
Tradesmen, thereupon, and that but in the half of the proportion, as is
correspondent to the quickness of their trading, and we find it very
considerable: But for Merchants, or such as traffic with other Nations, it is
to be observed, that they buy their ware of those Tradesmen, who usually
procure it of such handicrafts men, as make it fit for sale; who have their
materials possibly of the Farmers, or some other ways out of the cattle or
fruits of the earth; so as each commodity goes through two or three hands,
before it come to the Merchant.

Again, the Merchant having exchanged it beyond Sea, for some foreign
commodity, usually sells the same to the Whole-sale-man, or at least to a
Shopkeeper in some chief City, that many times sells it (or the most part of
it) to the Country Mercer, or some other retailing tradesmen; and they in
great part to the Peddler, before it be sold out to each one, for his private
use.

Now, if we take out of the price of foreign commodities parts of the profit
of all those Tradesmen that prepare domestic commodities for the Merchant, and
also parts of the profit, that the Merchant does gain by exchange of domestic
for foreign commodities; and parts of the profit of all those tradesmen that
hand this foreign commodity from one to another, until it be sold to each
man for his private use; assuredly the commodity it self might in this case, be
afforded for little more then a fifth part of what otherwise it could; and yet
(men having now one with another, ten times more trading then formerly) gain
twice as much per annum as formerly; and as hereby they get double to what they
did formerly, so they might maintain their charge, at near the fifth part of
the rate as formerly; whereby the aforesaid doubt is fully resolved.

And to illustrate this yet more clearly, Seeing the worth of all commodities
must needs consist, either in the principal and original value thereof, or in
the profit of those that have to do therein, or in both; and considering that
(as will appear to him; who shall duly weigh the same) there is no principal
value in any commodity, besides the profit of every one that has to do
therein, (I mean the profit of the Whole-sale-man, Retailer, Artificer, Farmer,
Landlord, and such like) it must needs follow, that if you make the profit of
every one that has to do therein, only the fifth part as formerly, you make
the commodity it self to be worth, but the fifth part, as formerly.

Now as this is most evident, that if every one who is to have an allowance out
of the price of any commodity, takes but a fifth part of the profit as
formerly, the commodity it self will thereby be afforded at a fifth part of the
rate as formerly; And this also is clear, that if tradesmen sell ten times as
much in the year as formerly, they gain twice as much per annum, by the fifth
part of that profit upon each commodity, as if otherwise they had sold, for
full five times as great a profit: So this also is manifest, that if men gain
twice as much per annum, as when formerly commodity was five times dearer; they
may now maintain their charge, upon the tenth part of that yearly profit, as
well as before upon the whole profit.

So as though in this case, they should afford Commodity at the fifth part of
the rate as formerly, yet the Landlord for his Rent, and all others that are to
have any allowance, out of the price of any commodity, taking but a fifth part
of the rate as formerly; their advantage by maintaining their Families so much
the cheaper, would be the same as if they had full five times as great a profit.

Yet, if in this case, the Landlord should have the same rent as formerly, as
his own advantage would be, that it would go in housekeeping five times as far
as formerly; so the price of commodities in reference to the allowance of rent
alone, would not be much the dearer thereby.

Although in truth, the Landlord, in this case will not easily prevail upon the
Tenant to value his land, at a higher rate, then the present worth of the
commodities it yields, for that if commodities be now worth but the fifth part
as formerly, it is clear that he who paies as much rent as formerly, will not
in this case be able to make so much money of the fruits of such Land, as the
rent thereof does amount to.

These things considered, it follows, that (at least) if matters could be
ordered so, as by quicking of Trade both the value of men's rents, and profit of
men's trades, could be made to fall by degrees, every day more then other, those
things which now cannot not be afforded under 20. s. might at last be sold at
12. d. and yet no person prejudiced thereby, for that each man (being hereby
able to maintain his charge at the twentieth part of that rate as formerly)
might now as well live upon the twentieth part of that profit as before upon
the whole profit: And as the Landlord would receive no prejudice, by such fall
in the value of his Rents, in regard, that the price of all other things do
hereby fall proportionably, so the Tradesman would notwithstanding, be by this
means a gainer more then formerly, in full as great a measure as trade should
hereby be increased, above what it was formerly; From all which in answer to
the aforesaid doubt, it follows, that where Trade is extraordinary quick,
commodities may be afforded at much less rate, and yet Tradesmen gain much
more per annum then otherwise.

Now, that in this case commodities shall be sold at as low a rate, as they can
well be afforded, will appear from hence, That as when trade in any place is
very dead, the Merchant is careful not to bring in any commodity, which [as
far as he can probably foresee] will not go off at such a rate, as may
something answer the charge of housekeeping, the skill of a trade, and hazard
of a stock, which [in case returns be very slow, seeing an ordinary profit will
not countervail] if he does not apprehend some hopes of a greater profit, he
does forbear to bring in any considerable quantity of such commodity, till it
be grown so scarce as (the price thereof risen) his profit may become at least
a means of necessary encouragement.

Hereby it follows, that as Tradesmen cannot afford to live, at near so little
profit in the pound, when trade is dead as otherwise; so they make a shift by
degrees, through their forbearing to bring in a competency thereof, to raise
the price of each commodity in some measure correspondent; Though by making
them pay so much the dearer, toward the maintinance of their Families; the
inconvenience is [I say] almost, [if not altogether] as bad as the advantage.

So contrarily, where trade is extraordinary quick, men are encouraged to bring
in the utmost that the Market will take off, though the price thereof do fall
thereby: For, that if through the quickness of their Returns, they can have
but such a profit in the pound, as whereby to make (yearly) some considerable
increase of their Stock (besides the defraying of their family charge) it comes
all to one effect, whether their profit in the pound be greater or less.

So as hereby, every one striving (I say) to take the most money, such as will
not sell at a reasonable rate, must keep their commodities upon their hands,
whereby not only commodities (I say) fall in price, but men save almost, if not
altogether as much (in the maintenance of their charge) as they seem to lose by
the abatement of their profit in the pound.

From all which, it may be concluded, that where commodity enough is to be had
for money, quickness of trading does occasion a considerable fall in the price
thereof, which was the thing to be proved.

Here ends the first Book.
LIB. II. SECT. I.
Showing, (or representing in a Parable) the nature of the intended enterprise,
for increase of Wealth, by improving of Trade, according to the Title.

OBserving that it is no unusual thing, for men to give a more upright and
impartial sentence in matters, which are in such sort propounded, under some
figurative and parabolicall sense, as they discern not to what particular
cases, such their sentence may be applied to the unexpected convincing them, by
their own agreement, unto things which otherwise they would never have
consented to.

That many things are of such a nature, as they cannot so easily be obviated
and illustrated, to the understandings of those who have not bin exercised
therein, as by some familiar similitude, taken from examples, with which
through frequent experience, they are well acquainted.

And that according to the Rules dictated by those, who have made it their
design, to propose the most clear and compendious Method of Argumentation; the
Major proposition of a Syllogism, ( viz. that such a consequence or inference
does naturally follow, from a thing only supposed,) is before the supposition
it self to be demonstrated; which order of proceeding has the same ground in
reason, when something instead of such supposition, will appear fully to make
out the same effect and consequence.

In these and some other respects, I concluded, that to discover the nature of
the intended enterprise, for increase of Wealth by improving of Trade,
according to the Title (in the most plain brief, and effectual method that I
could devise) there would be a necessity (before the proposal of the matter it
self,) to represent (by way of parable or supposition) some case, that (being
as near as possible, parallel to it, in reference both to the inconveniences
and advantages following thereupon,) I might (thus in a mystery) prevent all
material objections, before I came to the plain discovery of the thing it self.

These things premised, I shall give you the sum of all, in few words.

Admit a certain MINE of GOLD discovered in this Land, were wholly resigned up
to the dispose of such men, as should become engaged by Bond to restore within
six Months warning, both the use and possession of the said MINE: together,
with so much of the said GOLD, as should be coined, or any ways disposed of:
And (I say) that this would incur more inconveniences, and yet not afford
greater advantages, (to those that should have the disposing thereof, or to any
other persons) then what would follow, upon the enterprise hereafter proposed,
as by what does ensue will appear: In the mean time I proceed to represent
something of the nature of this undertaking, by an explication of my meaning,
in the words before rehearsed.

A certain Mine of Gold, That is metal of such real worth, as will yield (with
little or no loss) the money, if it should be sold to the Goldsmith.

A Mine, That is not a Treasury which may soon be exhausted, but which may
afford such a quantity of money, as whereby the same may upon occasion be
multiplied to any proportion needful.

Again a Mine, For this being not money ready coined, requires some charge of
defending, digging, coining, and such like; yet as the charge of this
enterprise, shall not be near so great, as that which is incident to the
ordering of a Mine of Gold, so I shall show how the said Company, may be wholly
eased of this Charge, without prejudice to any.

In this Land, I confess (as I have already intimated,) the discovery of a Mine
of Gold in this Land, could not choose but be a great provocation to all
Nations, to conspire together against this people, for the surprising of it,
and would enable them in case they should, to maintain sufficient forces,
whereby for ever to inslave us, as the Spaniard does those, whom they call
Nicrolians or Natives in America; But (as is said) this enterprise shall not
incur the least appearance of any such inconvenience.

Were wholly resigned up to the dispose of such Tradesmen, That is, so as
whereby they might not only be able to multiply money enough amongst them, for
the increasing of their Trade and riches; but likewise to lend of the same,
upon the terms hereafter expressed, each to other, as much as need requires,
without paying any Interest: which will be the more seasonable, for that by the
increase of Trade, (through such a multiplication of money amongst them) they
will have so much the more need to increase their stock.

Of such Tradesmen as should become engaged by Bond, That is, as Sureties each
for other; so as if any one fails to restore the proportion by him borrowed,
the rest must make it good; And therefore it must be supposed, that they
always take sufficient security, each from other, for what is so lent unto any
of them.

To which end, let it be admitted, that they (I mean the whole number or
company of them, this Mine not being at the dispose of any one of them without
the rest) do lend of the said money being coined, unto any one person amongst
them, no more then for borrowing of which he shall put in sufficient security,
(by producing Sureties, Morgaging Lands, or (if the company please to accept
thereof) pawning Commodity of valuable consideration,) to repay within five
Months after the demanding thereof: And do likewise renew such security as
often as need shall require, for as long time as he intends to borrow of the
said money: And also that he stand bound with the rest of the Company, for
making good his proportion toward either the loss (in case any amongst them
fail to repay what is by him borrowed) or any charge incident to this
undertaking, if need require.

Yet to prevent such Fayler each person besides his security,) which the
Company (no doubt) will in this case take care shall be very sufficient)
produce an Ensurer, (such as the Company shall accept of) who for some small
matter, in the pound, (to be paid by him that borrowes the money) will insure
the Company against any prejudice, that can happen to them by the loan of the
said money, upon such security: Whereby it may come to pass, that in case not
only any one who borrowes this money, but his Sureties (though judged very
sufficient) should fail of being able to make good the debt; yet such Insurers
bearing the loss, the Company may for this small charge in the pound, be freed
from hazard.

Restore within six Months, That is, what they have so borrowed, but not any
Interest, or any part of their profit, though never so much, and for never so
long a time.

And though I speak here of Restoring, yet it is to be observed (in reference
to the case, which I shall propose; that as there will be no advantage (I say)
to an enemy to surprise this Treasure, so there will be no benefit, but rather
prejudice to the owners (if any were) to have it Restored: so as it is not at
all probable, that any such thing will ever be required.

Both the use and possession of the said Mine, together with so much of the
said Gold as should be any ways disposed of; That is, this Company must make
good, not only the money lent each to other, but all the Gold (whether coined
or otherwise,) that shall be imbezzelled, if they use not some effectual means
to prevent the same.

To which end, let it be granted, (for how much soever seemingly impossible, it
shall be fully made good,) that there were a way found, whereby not any dram of
this gold, whether coined or uncoyned, could possibly be disposed of, to any
though employed in or about digging, defending, etc. the Mine, coining the
money, or howsoever, otherwise, then by the consent and express order of the
said Company, without being presently discovered.

And for defraying the Charges of this undertaking, let the said Company cause
such a considerable quantity of Gold to be coined, as wherewith to purchase so
much Land, as the rent thereof may fully defray the said charges, which charge,
in regard (I say) it will not be near so great, as that of digging, defending,
etc. a Mine, and yet the Treasure as great as need can require, may the more
easily be done.

And for securing them in their thus disposing of the said money, the Land so
purchased being in the possession of the said Company, will be sufficient.

Thus, (seeing by what has been already discovered, it is evident, that Trade
and riches through an increase of money, may be multiplied to the utmost degree
possible; and that by means of such a Mine, money might be augmented to any
quantity needful thereunto) I have in a Parable, represented the nature of the
intended enterprise, for increase of wealth, by improving of Trade, according
to the Title, which was the thing in this place to be discovered.

Yet, least by what is here suggested, I might seem to bestow my pains in
building Castles (as they say) in the Air or upon the sand, where there is no
foundation, and not to be indeed in good earnest, I shall before I come to the
end of this second Book, make it appear, that what is here represented in every
particular, (though seemingly never so impossible or impertinent) will prove no
other then like to that Parable of Nathan, nearer David's own case then he was
aware of; and therefore desire, that every clause in this Section may be the
more carefully observed.

LIB. II. SECT. II.
Showing, How inconsiderable the disadvantages incident to this undertaking are.

HAving in the aforesaid Parable, represented the true nature of the intended
enterprise, and thereby given a brief touch, as well of the Inconveniences as
Advantages following thereupon, it will be needful in the next place, that both
of them be seriously considered; In handling of which, I shall begin, first
with the Inconveniences or disadvantages, which, if we take in order, as they
are expressed in the former Section, it will be found, that the first
particular, (which does but seem like an Inconvenience) is that of the charge
incident to defending, digging, coining, and such like; yet seeing that this
charge, (yea, and for a need much more then this) may be wholly defrayed by the
rent of the Lands purchased with the money so coined, it follows, that this
supposed disadvantage amounts to just nothing.

The second seeming disadvantage does consist, in that the said Mine of gold,
is Situate in this Land; yet (in a word) it being of such a nature as it is no
benefit to such as should surprise it, this is also no disadvantage.

The third (and indeed, only) Inconvenience is, that those who undertake the
dispose of this Mine, must be engaged by Bond, as Sureties each for other, to
make good what they borrow thereof, in manner aforesaid: Which implies first
some hazard, because if any of them fail, the rest when the surrendering of the
said Mine is required, must make it good. Secondly some difficulty, for that
each member must produce security to the company for repayment, both of what is
by him borrowed, and his proportion also toward the charge and loss, incident
to this undertaking, (if any be) which security to procure may not be very easy
to all men: And therefore (it may be remembered, that) in the Title page some
both difficulty and hazard, is acknowledged to be incident to this
undertaking; yet (I say) when all things shall be duly pondered, neither the
one nor the other, will be found considerable.

First, not the hazard: For though (I confess of all others, this comes
nearest to the nature of a disadvantage; Yet I am confident, it will be
granted, that it is not valuable, especially, if compared with those desirable
consequences, that will follow upon this Engagement.

For this hazard, is no other then that which it is well known, the several
Companies in London, do frequently undergo, by lending out their moneys to
young beginners, merely to do them a courtesy.

And if the Company, that shall undertake the dispose of this Mine, be careful
that they accept of no security each from other, but what shall appear very
sufficient, the hazard will not be so great as that which men usually incur, by
letting out moneys to interest; for in this case, if both the Principal and
Sureties fail, the Lender (that is usually one man alone) must bear all the
loss; Whereas, when money is lent out by a whole Company, if one in two or
three hundred fail, (the loss being borne by all the whole Company
proportionably) each man's share will not be much considerable; For that, as it
is accounted a far greater hazard, for a Merchant to adventure his whole Estate
as Sea, in one Bot^om, rather then in many: So there is the same reason for
like difference of hazard betwixt the lending of money by any one person, over
what the lending thereof would be by a whole Company.

Yet, as those that let out moneys to Interest, do not usually trust any,
without taking such security as they (at least) Judge very sufficient; (whereby
it comes to pass, that there is not one case in very many, wherein both
Principal and Sureties fail, of being able to pay the Debt;) So, if they did
not conceive their Security sufficient, and if out of the profit of their
Interest they could afford to Insure against hazards, as those of this
Engagement, (not taking any Security, but such as (if they please) not only
one Insurer, but a certain Company of them shall approve of;) may for less (I
believe if they think it needful) then one in the hundred per annum. In this
case, though perhaps one amongst two or three hundred, might possibly fail both
in himself and Sureties; yet this Company of Insurers, must make good the debt.

Whereby, seeing that such Insurers would (as they do by Insuring of Merchants
adventures upon the Sea,) get one time with another more then they loose, it
follows, that what is thus paid to the Insurers, would of it self more then
defray the losses, incident to this kind of hazard; which (I say) by the rent
of the Land purchased in manner aforesaid, might be fully discharged, so as,
this which is indeed the main and only Inconvenience, being duly weighed,
amounts but to a very inconsiderable Charge, and that also defrayed without
Charge.

Again, seeing that if men put their moneys out to Interest, the hazard is
greater then that which is incident to this undertaking.

That if they employ it in a way of Trade, as the profit in good times, so the
hazard at all times, is much greater, then that of putting out moneys to
interest, as is found true by experience, and acknowledged by all.

That if they purchase Land, (considering as the profit of rent is so small, as
it requires a great Stock to obtain so much, as will afford a maintenance, so)
an Estate in Land, if an enemy prevail, is more liable to surptizal or
sequestration, then in any movables.

And lastly, that besides one of these three, there is no other way, whereby
men can ordinarily dispose of their moneys; It follows, that (except men could
generally afford to keep their stock by them in money, without Improving it,
and so by spending out of the Principal, run wilfully upon speedy and certain
ruin, for fear of incurring hazards, and losses some other way,) there is no
possible means whereby they can dispose of their Estates, to be totally free,
whilst they live in this World from all danger of losses.

And considering that notwithstanding there is (as I have already proved)
greater hazard in letting out moneys to Interest, then in this undertaking,
though (I say) the hazard of that (amongst all other means hitherto used for
improving men's Stocks, is one of the least) there are so many thousands, who
not valuing the hazard, in reference to the advantage daily practice this
course, in hopes but of a small profit of Interest, and by that small profit,
do one time with another, gain more then they loose by such hazard, as is
evident, by men's continuing this practice.

These things premised, it must needs be granted, that though this undertaking
were liable to far more hazard then that which may be Insured, or the loss
thereof sustained, for less then one in the hundred, yet in regard it will
appear that the profit of this undertaking, will be far greater then that of
the ordinary way of Trade;) and especially in respect that this charge of
Insurance, may be defrayed without any burden to the Company, it follows that
such hazard,) though it were more then it is, is in this case not worthy to be
accounted a disadvantage, to those (who take what course they will,) cannot
avoid greater danger; except (I say) by keeping their moneys in their own
hands, they are resolved, in hopes to escape some fears of loss, to incur
unavoidable ruin, rather then engage in a course, which (though liable to so
little Inconvenience) will (as I shall prove) afford far greater profit, then
any that otherwise the generality of men, can expect to enjoy.

If it be objected, that the danger of the times makes the hazard considerable;
I answer, this argues as strongly against men's disposing of their stocks, in a
way of Trade, or any other way of improving their estates; whereby (as I have
already observed,) through the prevailing of an enemy, they may the more easily
be surprised: so as although this danger of an enemies prevailing, were far
greater then (through the goodness of God) it is at present: yet seeing men
could not afford generally, to forbear all Trade and Commerce, those that
account of these considerations as valuable, may choose whether they will
meddle in this undertaking; For there is no question, but the generality of
men, are sufficiently convinced that those, who forbearing to employ their
Stock spend out of the Principal, do run a far more apparent hazard of utter
undoing, then they who in fear of an enemies prevailing (though no man knows
when or how) would endeavor to avoid, as is evident by the practice of most
men; in that they continue still in some measure, not only to Trade, but
purchase Land; lend and borrow moneys upon Interest, and such like, as it is
said in another case, men will still do, until the consummation of all
terrestrial things.

Thus much as to the hazard; Secondly, for the difficulty, this being no other,
then of procuring good and sufficient security, for the due payment of what is
borrowed, is no more then that, which is required by the several Companies of
London, when they proffer (as is said) to lend moneys to any young beginners,
or others of their own Company; And yet few men having such a proffer made
them, (esteeming the use of the money no small advantage) but will make hard
shift, to procure friends one where or other to be bound for them (though they
have perhaps little estate of their own,) rather then they will lose the
opportuniof such a proffer; but to those who have great Estates, this is no
difficulty at all.

And to clear all scruples, seeing that notwithstanding the present, not only
danger of the times, but deadnes of trading, diverse men still continue this
practice of taking up moneys upon Interest, to employ in a way of Trade,
otherwise, how could such as let it out find any to deal with them:

That by this means trading (as I shall prove) will be so multiplied especially
to the Undertakers) as they shall have much more reason to employ the utmost of
their Stock and credit, in a way of Trade, then now they have.

And lastly, that neither the hazard of lending, nor the difficulty of
borrowing that money, which is thus lent without Interest, is any greater, then
that of borrowing money upon Interest. There is no objection can possibly beat
any color against the one, which does not argue far more strongly against the
other.

And further, let it not here be forgotten, that though the procuring of
sufficient security, for the borrowing of any considerable sums of money, may
be too hard a task for the poorer sort of Tradesmen to perform; yet there will
be nothing required of them, in order to the putting themselves into a capacity
of multiplying their trading, and that with ready pay (as is in the Title Page
mentioned) which has any, either hazard or difficulty in it.

The next and last thing (which seems like an inconvenience,) is, that this
Company are bound to make good, not only the money lent, but the Gold, (whether
coined or otherwise) that shall be Imbezzelled; yet having taken it upon my
credit, to discover a way, how this danger may be totally prevented; so as upon
this, there will follow no inconvenience at all. I may conclude, that all
things duly weighed, the disadvantages incident to this undertaking, are not
considerable; which was the thing here to be demonstrated.

LIB. II. SECT. III:
Showing, How one of the least of the Advantages, proceeding from the intended
enterprise, does much more then countervaile all the said disadvantages.

HAving in the last Section fully and freely declared, the greatest
Inconveniences incident to this undertaking, with all the circumstances
thereof, whereby (as I conceive) it may appear to all rational men, that the
same are not valuable; though the profit of this enterprise were but ordinary;
how much less considerable will those Inconveniences be, when it shall be
found, that one of the least Advantages proceeding from the intended
enterprise, does much more then countervaile all the said disadvantages; which
is the thing that in this last place, I am to discover.

Now, as there is nothing can be named, which is essential to a thriving Trade,
but one of these four, viz. Competent Stock, quick return, reasonable profit,
and ready pay, or good security; (all which by means of this undertaking will
be obtained in a plentiful measure;) So the first of these four (though not
equal to any of the other,) will be found of value, much more then sufficient
to Counter-poyse all the said Inconveniences.

For the said Mine of Gold, affording money enough whereby men may borrow
without paying Interest, as great a sum, and for as long a time, as they shall
put in sufficient security to make good, they may thereby increase their Stock,
two manner of ways.

First, By having so much of that money lent them at present, as they are able
to put in sufficient security, in manner aforesaid to borrow; whereupon, seeing
according to men's credit (which is esteemed equal to their Estates) such is
their ability for procuring Sureties, it will be no difficult thing for men
ordinarily to produce such security, as whereby at least to double their
Stocks, and perhaps much more; which was my meaning in the Title Page.

The second way is, that if by trading with this doubled Stock, any one of this
Company does increase his estate, he may upon like security have so much more
lent him, as whereby to double such increase.

The consequence of this, is very great, as may appear by this instance;
Suppose a man be worth in Land one thousand pounds, and Morgaging that Land
borrows one thousand pounds to follow a Trade, if from hence through such great
trading, as must necessarily follow upon this course, he do at the end of one
twelve-moneths, gain clear two hundred pounds, (which gain is much within the
compass, of what in respect of the said quickness of trading, we might reckon
upon) that two hundred pounds so gained, shall be his own; and so (supposing
that the profit of his Land has maintained his family,) he is now worth in all
one thousand two hundred pounds, (besides the one thousand pounds borrowed)
therefore if now upon putting in further security, he be trusted with two
hundred pounds more, his Stock for Trade shall be one thousand four hundred
pounds, viz. One thousand two hundred pounds borrowed, and two hundred pounds
gained, by which Stock of one thousand four hundred pounds, (his trading not
falling to decay.) he cannot gain less, then three hundred pounds, for the next
year, whereby his estate is now worth three hundred pounds more, that is in
all, one thousand seven hundred pounds; And therefore be may now upon putting
in further security, be trusted with three hundred pounds more, And so his
Stock for Trade, will now at the end of two years, be no less then two
thousand pounds, that is just double to the Stock first lent him.

So that by this means his Stock at the end of every two years, shall be double
to what it was two years before, that is, at the end of four years, it shall be
four thousand pounds, at the end of six years, eight thousand pounds, at the
end of eight years sixteen thousand pounds, at the end of Ten years, thirty two
thousand pounds, at the end of twenty years (by the same proportion of
increase,) above one Million, and at the end of forty years, above one thousand
millions, the one half whereof only being borrowed, the other half is his
proper Estate.

And yet in this instance, we make no allowance (I say) at all for any
extraordinary quickness of trading, but that which makes the sum so suddenly
arise, to such a vast and unexpected hight, is merely the perpetual doubling of
the increase of his estate, by new money lent him without paying interest;
which is not unlike unto that of doubling the number of Buttons on a man's
Suite, or Nails on a horse Feet, where though you begin but with the worth of
one Barley Corn, yet proceeding to double the value of every doubled sum,
according to the number of such Buttons or Nails, it quickly amounts to a
greater value, then the worth of a Kingdom.

If it be here objected, that except men (by the quickness of their trading)
can put off their commodities in some reasonable time, it will be to their
prejudice to trade with so exceeding great a stock?

I answer in a word, that men being once rich enough, may (if they please)
leave trading, and give place to others; yet if their trading shall be hereby
multiplied, even proportionable to such an increase of stock, few in this case
will suddenly think their stock too great, which brings me to the second
Property essential to a thriving Trade, viz. Quickness of returns.

In order whereunto, it may be observed, that it follows by what I have
already declared, (in Lib. 1. Sect. 4.) that where commodity enough is to be
had for money, an increase of money not hoarded up, does occasion an increase
of trade, and that much more then proportionable to such increase of money; so
as hereby men being in capacity to lend moneys each to other, till for a need
the money that is amongst them, be even equal to what their estates are
otherwise worth, (that is, till there be about one hundred times more money
amongst them then ordinary) their trading by the revolution thereof, (that is,
the quickness of their returns) must needs be multiplied, much above one
hundred times greater then otherwise, if (I say) commodity enough can be got
for money; or rather indeed, it is manifest, that by this means such money not
being hoarded up, they might multiply it by purchasing of land, and lending the
same gratis upon security, so as to improve trading to the utmost extent
possible.

Now by such quickness of returns, men's yearly profit (which was the third
thing essential to a thriving trade) must needs be increased in no small
measure, although their gains in the pound, and consequently the price of
commodities in the mean time fall considerably, as is manifest by what is
proved in Lib. 1. Sect. 7.

Again, when by the current of this multiplied stock of moneys, their takings
in ready pay are such as makes their trade as great, as they can possibly
manage, they may wholly refuse to deal any more upon credit, and so enjoy also
the last advantage requisite to a thriving trade, viz. ready pay, or good
security.

Seeing therefore, all tradesmen would rather be without a great stock then
quickness of trading, reasonable profit, or good security: And that this
interprize opens the door, not only to an increase of stock, but to so great a
multiplication of trading and yearly profit, and that with ready pay, it is
evident to all understanding men, that this advantage of being in capacity to
borrow as much money at any time, as men are able to put in security to make
good without paying interest, is (though very great) amongst those other things
least of all considerable.

Yet if it be observed, that the hazard which men usually undergo, when three
or four in a company take up commodities upon trust, (whereby each of them
becomes engaged for the rest to pay the whole debt) or rather the aforesaid
hazard of selling ware upon the particular credit of some one man, is a thing
so ordinary, as it does manifest, that notwithstanding such hazard, and the
allowance of interest in the price of their commodities, the advantages thereof
are generally greater then the inconveniences, as I shall have further
occasion to observe.

That the hazard of this undertaking, (besides which there is no inconvenience
worth the mentioning) may be insured, for that which is not considerable to
interest.

That such hazard is much less then that of putting out moneys to interest,
and therefore far less then what is incident to the said ordinary way of
trading on credit.

That this new way of trading, puts men into a capacity of buying commodity (as
with ready money) without allowing interest in the price thereof, which trading
on credit does not.

All these things (I say) considered, it follows, that all the inconveniences
incident to this undertaking are so inconsiderable, to those which proceed from
any other way of Improvement, as that the aforesaid one advantage of doubling
the stock with the increase thereof, though put in the balance against all the
inconveniences incident to this attempt, will notwithstanding be found to
outweigh them an hundred fold.

Therefore that which was here to be demonstrated does appear, viz. That one
of the least advantages proceeding from the intended interprise, does much more
then countervaile all the said disadvantages.

LIB. II. SECT. IV.
Showing, What further means are requisite, to make this undertaking prove
effectual, for the producing of all the Properties essential to a Thriving
Trade.

TE four things premised in the former Section, as essential to a thriving
trade, being all concluded as effects of this attempt; and having found (by
comparing one thing with another) that the least of these four does much more
then countervaile all the inconveniences incident to this enterprise, we are
now to consider what further means are requisite to make this undertaking prove
most effectual, for accomplishing all the aforesaid properties essential to a
thriving Trade.

For, whereas in the last Section it was alleged, that men were in capacity by
having the aforesaid Mine of gold at their dispose, to lend moneys each to
other, until for a need, there be a hundred times more money dispersed amongst
them then was formerly; whereby their trading through the revolution thereof,
(it not being hoarded up) must needs be multiplied more then proportionable to
such increase of money, according to what was proved, Lib. 1. Sect. 4.

Against this it may be objected,

First, that perhaps as fast as such money should increase by the loan of it
to some, it would be hoarded up by its passing through the hands of others,
especially if [which I hope God will prevent] new grounds of fear, in
reference to any further public disturbances should arise; so as the current
of this and all other money being obstructed, by the hoarding of it up, this
interprize for the increase of trade, would be frustrated.

Secondly, that happily the number of those who will think fit to undertake the
dispose of this Mine, may be so few at first, as they shall not be able upon
sufficient security to borrow a sum equal to the hundredth part of the value
of all the moneys that is already in the Land, whereby the quantity of money
dispersed amongst Tradesmen, will not be increased considerably, and
consequently the increase of Trade by so small an increase of money, will be as
little discernable.

Now I must acknowledge, that both these Objections do carry some force against
what has been as yet proposed.

To remove therefore the bad effects of that which is suggested in each of
these two cases, let it be admitted, that the gold which this Mine does afford
being coined, were first not at all acceptable to be hoarded up, though the
times were never so dangerous; Secondly, through some prejudice or
misapprehension of the generality of men, were current at present only amongst
a few.

And then (I say) being true gold, that is, (according to what is already
intimated) metal of such real value as (though not current with all, nor
acceptable to be hoarded up by any) would yield the money it is taken for,
without any considerable loss, if sold to the Goldsmith; as in this case there
could be no hazard in taking it; so by the increase thereof, it would further
trading much more then the increase of any money apt to be hoarded up would do,
because (as I have already sufficiently cleared) it is the speedy passage of
moneys from one to another, [without resting any where] that quickens the
revolution thereof, and by comsequence trading.

If therefore matters can be ordered so, as this money shall not be at all
acceptable to be hoarded up, it will serve not only to answer fully the former
of these two Objections, but to discover what further means is requisite to
make this undertaking prove effectual, for the producing of all the Properties
essential to a thriving trade.

Now, in reference to the second of the said Objections, if this Company [and
all those that are willing of their own accord to take this new kind of money,
though not current by Law] should agree to put out some flag, sign, or the
like, whereby they might be distinguished, and publicly known from others, it
would follow, that those who in this case should be thus known for such as are
agreed to take it, as their hazard [though they could not procure any to take
it for ware] would not be considerable, in regard if they sell it to the
Goldsmith they may have ready money for it; so the advantage they shall reap by
its being current only amongst a few, over what would accrue unto them in case
the same were universally acceptable, [like other money] would be much greater
then can easily be demonstrated.

For, this money not being generally current, will by those who [upon
consideration of the true value thereof] have accepted of the same for their
ware or labor, be [for the most part] brought to such men as are known by the
aforesaid flag or sign, whereby both their acquaintance and their takings in
ready money, [that is, their trading] must needs be multiplied proportionable
to the quantity, that is dispersed amongst them of this new kind of money;
which, though laid out upon others never so often, will still be retorted upon
themselves, [like stones cast up in the air by force, which will naturally
return toward their center; and consequently, the more shall be thus thrown
up, the more will come down again,] so the more they have of this kind of
money amongst them, the more will their takings be multiplied.

Whereas on the other side, if this new kind of money being once lent to this
Company, should [like other money] be dispersed throughout the whole Nation
indifferently, it would [as to them] be little otherwise then as water spilt
upon the ground, which returns no more to the place from whence it came.

Now therefore let it be supposed, that the quantity of this new kind of money,
borrowed by the said Company, were equal to the worth of their own estates,
and that to the end they might multiply the same to a greater proportion, if
need should require, they had employed as much of it in the purchase of Lands,
as is equal to the value of the estates of all those that [by hanging out the
said flag or signe] have made themselves noted for such as are agreed to take
it; so as the sum of this money [floating [I say] amongst such persons chiefly,
who have thus published themselves willing to take it] being hereby made equal
[or if need require, far more then equall] to the Estates of all such persons
(though never so many) it must needs multiply their takings in ready money in
such sort, as trading might by this means be as much increased to them, as it
would to the whole Land, in case any money generally current could be extended
to the utmost quantity needful.

And hereby not only the last of the two aforesaid Objections is fully
answered, but a further means [discovered] requisite to make this undertaking
prove effectual for the producing of a multiplied Trade, even to the utmost
degree possible, (at least to those who are willing to use the means) and by
consequence a capacity of gaining much more per annum, upon much less profit
in the pound then ordinary, [as is proved, Lib 1. Sect. 7.] and all this with
ready pay; so as the aforesaid way of doubling the stock, and the increase
thereof, being already declared to be of so vast concernment, there seems to
remain no further means undiscovered, that is requisite to make this
undertaking prove effectual, for the producing of all the four Properties
essential to a thriving Trade, (already mentioned) which was the thing here to
be demonstrated.

And this will appear the more evidently, if it be considered that as those who
shall thus agree to take this new kind of money, may hereby increase the
quantity thereof in such sort, as to multiply their trading to the utmost
degree possible; so by means of such an extraordinary quick Trade, it follows
(I say) from what has been demonstrated [Lib. 1. Sect. 7.] that they shall be
able both to buy their ware much cheaper, and sell for much less profit in the
pound then others, yet gain much more per annum, and consequently undersell
them, and that in no small proportion.

Which seeing (as may appear by the sequel) it will be for their advantage to
sell as cheap as they can afford, it must needs come to pass, that all others
who are not minded to sit still, must use some means whereby they may be able
to sell as cheap as they; and they in the mean time having got the start of
them, being every day able to sell cheaper then formerly, shall thereby enforce
others to sell yet cheaper, and so on perpetually, whereby the price of
commodity must of necessity fall from time to time, so as all sorts of ware
must needs be every day cheaper then other.

Whereas contrarily, if trading were not increased remarkably to some persons
publicly distinguished from others, no company of men would be in so fair a
capacity of making an advantage by selling still cheaper then others; so as
though by an increase of trade, the price of commodity might fall, (according
to what is already in Lib. 1. Sect. 7. demonstrated,) yet not so speedily and
effectually as by this means it must.

Therefore in this respect also, seeing a fall in the price of commodity, is an
advantage not only to the people in general, but in many respects (as I could
prove at large) unto trade it self, it is requisite that this new kind of
money should be current at the first only amongst a few, whereby to enable
them, through the quickness of their trading, to undersell others.

Neither can this their being able to undersell others, by the quickness of
their trading, be any just ground of exception against their practice, seeing
any person that does but put out the same flag with them, will (by being
publicly noted for one that is agreed to take this new kind of money,) thereby
multiply his takings therein, that is, his trading, and consequently put
himself into the same capacity of underselling others, which flag to hang out
will not be any trouble or charge worth the naming; and therefore (seeing this
new kind of money will yield the sum it is taken for, without any considerable
loss) he that will not take this course, if others [thereby underselling him]
do ingrosse the trade to themselves, the fault is his own: Thus in brief, to
prevent an Objection, and so I refer you to the Section following.

LIB. II. SECT. V.
Showing, How the maine, (and as far as does appear the only) obstruction that
otherwise might hinder the speedy effect of this Enterprise, may be totally
removed.

HAving already discovered all the Inconveniences that are incident to this
attempt, in case it should take effect, and found them to be little if at all
considerable; especially, if weighed with the Advantages that follow thereupon;
(in reference chiefly to those particulars mentioned in the last Section,) We
are now to consider, what (in probability) is most like to hinder the speedy
effect of this Enterprise, and how the same may be removed?

Now, if the Loan of Money upon sufficient security, were proffered gratis to
all Tradesmen that would borrow it, though like other money it were so
generally current, as being laid out by them, it would not return unto them
again, to the multiplying of their trading, as (according to what is proved in
the last Section) this new kind of money will; yet there is no question, but
that more then ten, or twenty men (a number sufficient to begin this attempt)
would be glad to accept of the terms.

But the only thing remaining to be cleared is, whether this money, being as
is already intimated, such as the generality of the people may possibly have a
prejudice against; will become so far forth Current, as is necessary for the
carrying on of this undertaking.

Yet considering that those who borrow of it pay no Interest, it follows, that
if they cannot make it to be taken for Commodity, all they are Engaged unto, is
but to return it again at the time appointed; although indeed if it be
remembered, that this money is such as will yield the Value without any
considerable loss, though sold to the Goldsmiths; it cannot be doubted, but
that all wise Tradesmen, will take it much rather then turn away a Chapman;
though happily many at the first, may not be willing to hang out such a Flag or
Sign, as is before mentioned.

The truth of this cannot be questioned, if we do but consider how common a
thing it is, for men to deal each with other, upon the bare Word or Bill of
such as they judge sufficient, and upon this Credit, to sell for three or six
Months time; wherein besides the hazard for want of sufficient security, there
is a loss both to the Buyer and to the Seller; seeing he that Buys pays for
his Commodity so much the more in price, as if he had paid Interest after the
rate of eight pound per Cent. for the time the money is forborne, and he that
sells has for that time no profit of his Stock, more then if he had put his
Money out to Usury; which one time with another, must needs be less then what
men generally gain by their Trades.

And besides, this loss to both parties, men by dealing upon Trust, do so
intricately involve their own Credits and Stocks with other men's, as few do
certainly know what their own Debts and Estates are worth, much less what
degree of safety or danger there is in trusting others; so as many thousands
that begin with a good Stock, loose by this means not only the profit but the
Principal; as is hereafter more fully declared.

Yet, seeing all Tradesmen do frequently part with their Ware upon Credit, (I
say) rather then turn away a Chapman; how much more willingly would they take
that money for their Ware, which though not current by Law, will yield the
value without any considerable loss, if sold to the Goldsmiths.

In case it be objected, that possibly every man will fear that he shall not
meet with such as will take this money from him again, and consequently no man
at all will take it.

I answer, that though any man should be subject to this Fear, yet he will
judge it greater wisdom in him to take it, then to sell his ware upon credit;
because that for a need he is able to sell this money to the Goldsmiths, (if he
cannot make it to be taken,) and yet in the mean time is never the less able to
take up ware upon Credit, then if he had sold his own ware upon Credit.

From hence, it may be concluded upon safe and solid grounds; that for as much
as every man (though he should not know where to put off this money, for
Commodity) would find much more reason to take it, then to sell his ware upon
Credit, therefore very few (if any at all) would refuse it; (at least some one
or other of most Trades would take it) and consequently, men would be yet the
more willing to take it, because they know where to procure Commodities of all
sorts for it.

So that it is now discovered, how this suppsed prejudice of the people, which
seems the main, and as far as does appear the only obstruction, that
otherwise might hinder the speedy effect of this Enterprise, is or may be
totally removed, viz. by making this new kind of money (though the people be
never so much prejudiced against it,) to be of such real value, as may yield
the sum it is taken for, without any considerable loss, if sold to the
Goldsmiths, for that in this case, few (I say) will refuse it.

Which Expedient must needs take place the more effectually, the rather for
that the fewer there be, who have made themselves publicly noted, for such as
are agreed to take this new kind of money, the greater will be their advantage,
who shall put out the said Flag or Sign, in multiplying their trading thereby;
And besides the putting out of the said Flag or Sign, they may (if they please)
cause their Names, Trades, and Places of abode, to be published in print, that
such as please may know where to send unto them: both which for that they may
be done without any considerable trouble, hazard, difficulty, charge, or
Inconvenience to counter-poise the same, will be a great inducement unto all
rational men, to strive who shall be the first in this attempt; so as this
money being current with at least some of every Trade or Calling, there can be
no occasion to dispose of it (I say) in any Commodity, but it will be thereby
known where such Commodity may be had for it: Upon which ground, I might again
conclude a more full discovery of that which was here to be demonstrated.

And to make this new kind of money the more current if need require; those of
this Company may agree to affix unto all their Commodities, a Note expressing
the price at which they are minded to sell the same; binding themselves neither
to take less, nor ask more then that price, except paid in this new kind of
money, and to abate two shillings on the pound of that price, for so much as
they shall be paid in such new kind of money, and not otherwise.

Now in this case, if the rate thus affixed upon their Commodities, be but as
cheap as others can afford, whereof they abate two shillings on the pound, if
paid in this new kind of money; then it must needs follow, that (seeing none
can afford to sell their Commodities so cheap as those of this Company, and
they not so cheap by two shillings on the pound, as if paid in this new kind of
money) those who have occasion to buy Commodity, and are willing to obtain it
at the best hand, must of necessity first procure some of this new kind of
money, wherewith to pay for the same; and may afford to give ready money, with
above 12 d. in the pound advance, rather then be without it.

Thus, if there be but a place and hour of the day appointed, whereby such as
would Exchange of the one sort of money for the other, may meet together; it is
evident, that this will invite most of those who have any occasion to buy
Commodity, (whose number is never small) to attend at the said time and place
appointed, and there to proffer of the ordinary sort of money for this new kind
of money, and that with some advance, if it cannot be otherwise obtained, as
shall be more fully cleared hereafter. And consequently if this course be
taken, it will be no more difficulty to procure of the one sort of money for
the other, then it is to get half a crown exchanged for two shillings and a
sixpence; in which respect it is manifest, that all wise men, will take the
onesort of money as freely as the other.

Therefore I conclude, that it is sufficiently demonstrated, how the supposed
prejudice of the people against this new kind of money; which is the main, (and
as far as does appear the only) obstruction, that otherwise might hinder the
speedy effect of this enterprise, may be totally removed; which was the thing
in this place to be discovered.

LIB. III. SECT I.
Showing (in order to the unfolding of the aforesaid Parable) the only
(feasible) means whereby both to revive and multiply the decayed Trade and
Riches of this Land.

TO the end this Enterprise might appear to be of such importance, as indeed it
is; I have in the former part of this Treatise premised several things,
necessary to be suggested, and seriously pondered by way of preparation to the
discovery thereof. And therefore if any who perusing the same, should turn
first to this place; supposing to find therein the sum of all that elsewhere
is discussed, and so intend to save themselves a labor of reading the
precedent or subsequent parts thereof; I earnestly desire such persons to spare
the pains of reading any part of this Discourse at all. For this Treatise being
as it were a discovery of a new Art, cannot choose but require (as all other
arts, at the first learning of them do,) more pains to the clear understanding
thereof, then that of once reading it over, and therefore much more then the
viewing of some few parts or parcels here and there disorderly: So as I am
certain the first reading of it, can at the most but prepare men for a more
clear understanding thereof, upon the second and third perusal.

He therefore, who shall think it too great a task to read this Treatise twice
or thrice over, for gaining the knowledge of that Art whereby to live
comfortably in the World; (for that I am certain it does effectually discover)
may (as I said) rest contented as he is.

In the mean time, if any doubt whether their labor in thus doing may be lost,
I acknowledge it is impossible, that men should be freed from this doubt,
except they would be persuaded to run that hazard, which at the worst can but
prove so much lost labor.

Certain it is, that the pains (besides other things) which the devising and
publishing of a work of this nature does necessarily require, cannot choose but
be much beyond such labor of reading thereof, which being done, will
(assuredly) render much more then a proportionable recompense.

And therefore (not to detain you longer) I proceed (In order to the unfolding
of the aforesaid Parable,) to show the only feasible means, whereby both to
revive and multiply the decayed Trade and Riches of this Land.

Now considering, that if Tradesmen should be forced to defray the Charges of
Family-Provision, Rent, and other things in the Commodities properly belonging
to their own Profession, (that is the Shoemaker in Shoes, the Habberdasher in
Hatts, and the like,) it must needs produce many great inconveniences, (they
being to pay the same to those perhaps that have no need of such Commodities)
it follows that such exchange of one Commodity for another, cannot be
ordinarily and frequently done, without the mediation of some other thing,
which being accepted instead of the goods parted with, ought to be a firm and
real Security to the Receiver, for obtaining other goods of like or greater
value, upon the Credit of such Security.

And there is no doubt, but that the due consideration of this, (together with
men's daily experience of the necessity thereof,) did occasion at first that
excellent Expedient of a general and joint Agreement ( mentioned Lib. 1. Sect.
3.) to put a certain value or estimation upon mettalls, (out of which, money or
coin is formed,) and accordingly to accept thereof, which otherwise is of no
worth, instead of such firm Security before specified.

So as it is to be observed, that there is not at all any true worth (I say) in
the best money or metal that this Earth can afford, further then as by being
generally accepted for things of real value, it gives to him that so accepts
thereof, security for obtaining some other. Commodity of like or greater value;
seeing otherwise (I say) such metal would be of no advantage to the owner.

Hereby, that which I noted before in the place last cited is manifest, namely;
that money, is given to men for their Commodities, upon no other account then
as an Evidence or Testimony (that is as it were a TOKEN or TICKET) to signify
how far forth, other men are indebted for, and engaged to recompense the fruits
of their Labors or possessions by Commedities of some other kind, instead of
those that for such money they parted with.

And from hence it is evident, that if matters can possibly be ordered so, as
any thing else besides money, (whatsoever it be,) may give as good security to
the possessor, for obtaining Commodities thereupon at pleasure, as so much
ready money would do (the same being both as difficult to counterfeit, and
easy to transfer from one to another) it must needs) giving I say as good
security, etc.) be in all respects as good as money.

Now it being clear, by what has been demonstrated, Lib. 1. Sect. 3. and 4.
That without a greater sale of Commodity, there cannot be a greater Trade. That
without men's receiving a greater quantity, either of Money or Credit,
(Commodity not falling in price) there cannot be a greater sale of Commodity
amongst them. That without increasing the quantity or Current, either of Money
or Credit, men cannot receive a greater quantity thereof in the same time.

And it being evident, That in any place where there is no Mines of Silver or
Gold, it is not easy to increase the quantity or Current, either of Money or
Credit, upon all occasions to any proportion needful, and that besides Money
there is nothing except Credit, upon which men can frequently and conveniently
sell their Commodities: It must follow, that as the case now stands with us,
the only feasible means, whereby both to receive and multiply the decayed Trade
of this Land, is by increasing amongst Tradesmen some firm and known Credit or
Security, equal to that of the Chamber of London, Bank of Amsterdam, or any
Bills of Exchange, which being given in written or printed Evidences, may be
fit to transfer from hand to Whereby the multiplication thereof throughout the
Land, may produce the same effect in order to the Increase of Trade, as the
increase of so much Money amongst them would do.

And this the rather for that (as is clear by what has been already
demonstarted Lib. 1. Sect. 4.) money, though it should never so much increase
amongst us at this time, yet either the fears of War (though they were
groundles,) or the present deadness of Trading, would occasion it to be hoarded
up even as fast (perhaps) as it should so increase to the great obstruction of
its revolution, through the hands of Tradesmen; which will not at all hinder
the quick current of such Bills, or evidences as are before mentioned; whereby
Trade being once revived, it shall both encourage and necessitate as quick a
revolution of money as of such Bills, and this not without a great Increase in
the quantity of Bullogne brought from other parts, as shall hereafter be showed.

Therefore seeing (as I noted before) an objection against the use of that
means without which any enterprise cannot be effected, does by consequence
argue, as strongly against all endeavors for attempting that enterprise; it
follows that nothing can be alleged against the multiplying of such a firm
and known credit amongst a people, whose trade is at present dead; but what
must carry a sufficient weight against any endeavor, of reviving their decayed
Trade; which as I have already proved no earthly Inconvenience is able to
Counter-poise.

I say therefore, that if matters can by any means be ordered so, as these
Bills or Evidences, may give as good and firm security to the possessors, for
obtaining Commodities thereupon at pleasure, as so much ready money would do,
(or for obtaining ready money if need require as any Bills of Exchange) and be
made as difficult to Counterfeit and as easy to transfer from one to another,
as money, (all which I shall hereafter demonstrate) they must needs be in all
respects near, if not altogether as good as money; And consequently (in order
to the unfolding of the aforesaid Parable) will prove the only feasible means
whereby to revive and multiply the decayed Trade and Riches of this Land; which
was the thing here to be discovered,

LIB. III. SECT. II:
Showing. The Excellency of the aforesaid Means of improving of Trade, by
comparing the same with the ordinary way of Trading, upon private Credit.

IN regard the greatest part of men's returns, in most places of the World, are
either upon the Credit of particular persons, as here in England, or else, by
means of some Brass or Copper money, made current by a Law, as in Spain,
Holland and other places, both which are bad enough, though the former much
more liable to hazard then the latter, as I could prove at large.

And considering, that notwithstanding the so many and great Inconveniences, of
Trading upon such private credit, so long experienced by men of all trades and
Nations, it still continues so common a thing amongst them, to make use of
their own words and credits, instead of money, for transferring goods to and
from one another, (though not constrained by Law thereunto.) This constant
practice of it, by the most wary, skilful and prudent men, is an undoubted
argument, that all the aforesaid Inconveniences put together, do not fully
outweigh the Commodity and necessity thereof.

For it is in this case, as with Merchants adventuring beyond Sea, who though
sometimes diverse of them lose their whole Estates, and perhaps much more, by
surprizal or Shipwreck; yet if there were not one time with another, more got
then lost by such adventures, we might confidently conclude, that none would
inter meddle therewith at all, much less would any take so small a matter in
the hundred, for insurance.

This way therefore of trading upon private credit, being the main hinge, upon
which the much greater part of ware, is returned in most places of the world,
is in such sort useful to us here in England, as if it should be left without
introducing some other way instead thereof, must needs occasion our already
decayed Trade, to be yet much worse then it is.

Now, having in the foregoing Section, given some light to the discovery of
that other way; it will not be amiss here, to show the excellency thereof, by a
comparison of it, with the aforesaid ordinary way of dealing upon private
Credit.

In reference whereunto it cannot be denied, but that this usual way of Trading
on private Credit, is through men's losses by desperate debts, a far greater
prejudice to the generality of men, then the payment of taxes, excise, and all
other assessments; Seeing it appears by frequent experience, that not one
Tradesman of any considerable dealing amongst an hundred, could ever with his
best discretion prevent the danger of some considerable loss first or last, by
this means occasioned.

Whereas, if it could be devised how all such Credit which men shall need to
inter-meddle with, in a way of trade, might be made as sure and firm, as that
(I say) of the Chamber of London, Bank of Amsterdam, or any Bills of Exchange
(which how to effect, I doubt not to discover,) certainly men would not look
upon such hazard, as at all considerable.

And though it be ordinary, for men to esteem of money much before the Bills
or Bonds of such whose Credit is not good; yet it is no unusual thing for them,
to part even with ready money, in hopes of a small profit of Interest, upon
those private Bonds of particular persons, to which the Sureties are esteemed
sufficient, accompting themselves in this respect, not prejudiced but
advantaged, by accepting of such Bonds instead of money, and consequently would
much rather accept of them instead of Commodity in a way of Trade, if the
Security thereof were known.

Yet, if it be considered, that such private Bonds cannot do the service of
ready money, by being generally accepted for Commodity, though never so good a
bargain be proffered; because the security for making them good is not
publicly known (the rather for that the party who makes such proffer, knows
not where to find one, to take them of him again for ready money, or such
Commodity as he stands in present need of;) it follows, that in case the
security for making them good, either in money or Commodity, shall appear not
only firm and sufficient, but as publicly and generally known as the said
Chamber of London, etc. It must needs be much more acceptable to all wise men
in lieu either of money or Commodity, then otherwise; therefore much above the
usual way, of trading upon the Credit of private persons.

Again, The ordinary way of dealing upon Credit here in England, being to take
men's worder promise for the debt; it come's to pass, that though a man has
sold never so much Commodity upon Credit, yet he cannot upon such word or
promise go and re-furnish himself with new commodity, without engaging his own
estate to pay the debt, (as in Flanders, upon the Bills each of other, to the
great Improvement of their Trade they usually do.)

Which incovenience if it be not remedied here in England, it must needs come
to pass, that though credit should be increased never so much amongst us, (and
that upon the most secure terms that are consistent with things on earth) yet
men could not afford to sell more commodity upon such credit, then one year
with another they receive ready money for; because in this case, look how much
ware is parted with, and is not at one time or other paid for in money, is
totally lost.

So as if it happen that any considerable quantity of money be hoarded up, our
trade for want of the revolution of so much money in the year, as formerly
must needs be obstructed proportionably; notwithstanding such multiplied
credit: And oftentimes it happens, that the generality of men fail of being
able to pay their debts, at the time appointed (and thereby lose their credit)
by reason of some sudden obstruction in the revolution of moneys: So that
trading on credit (if it be not otherwise ordered then now it is,) cannot but
be destroyed, (and by that means trade also) if the current of money be not
maintained amongst us; which current of money (I say) is prevented usually
either by deadness of trading, whereby men find no profit, or fear of war,
whereby they find no safety in laying out their moneys, from neither of which
we in this Nation, as things now stand, can expect to be suddenly freed,
except by some such means as is here proposed; which by the blessing of God
does tend effectually to both.

To sum up all therefore in few words, Seeing for that we cannot increase
money at pleasure to any quantity needful; we have no feasible means whereby
to quicken Trade, (as I said before) but by multiplying a firm and known
credit amongst Tradesmen, fit to transmit from hand to hand.

That all the worth of money it self, consists in being as it were a token or
Ticket for obtaining goods at pleasure, which otherwise would be of no
advantage to the owner.

That though Bills and Bonds, if the security for payment of them be not good,
are slighted in comparison of money; yet if such security be made
unquestionable, they are so far forth esteemed, as that men (I say) part even
with money it self upon such security.

That there is nothing can be named wherein credit comes short of money, but in
one of the three respects before insisted on; viz. That the security it gives,
is either not so good, or not so well known, or not so easy to be transmitted
to others, all which by the use of such Bills, as are before mentioned, will be
prevented.

Hereupon at last, I reduced all my diversity of thoughts unto this firm
conclusion, That if the mutual agreement of men, could by any lawful means be
made effectual, for laying a Foundation, [as I said before] of the best and
most known security that things on earth are capable of; no whit inferior to
that of the Chamber of London, Bank of Amsterdam, or any Bills of Exchange;
which given in such printed Evidences, might like money be transferred from one
to another.

And that some way were found, whereby such to whom these Bills are proffered,
may be enabled as easily to discover any counterfeit, as they can any clipped
or counterfeited coin in of money.

It would beyond all controversy, not only tend effectually toinerease [even
to the utmost degree possible] the Trade of those that should make use thereof,
but much exceed in all the aforesaid particulars, that kind of slender credit,
upon which men (I say) do frequently transmit considerable proportions of their
Estates one to another (to the utter undoing of many thousands that begin with
a great stock) And in all the three aforesaid particulars, be near, if not
altogether equivalent to money it self, and indeed prove both to the
Commonwealth in general; and especially to the persons that deal therein, a
far more effectual means for improving of Trade, then so much ready money;
[which I say men are apt to hoard up] And that therefore the means thereunto is
not to be slighted, but encouraged.

All which things, in order to the discovery of the Excellancy of this means
for improvement of Trade, by a comparison thereof, with the ordinary way of
trading upon private credit; were thought necessary to be here inserted, which
was the thing here undertaken.

LIB. III. SECT. III.
Showing, That the means last propounded for Improvement of Trade; will come to
one and the same effect, with that which was mentioned in the aforesaid Parable.

HAving in the second book discussed what the several advantages would be, in
case a Mine of Gold discovered in this Land, were resigned up to the dispose of
such as should become engaged by Bond, to restore within six months warning,
both the use and possession thereof; especially if matters were ordered so as
the said Gold, might not be generally current at the first, nor ever at all
acceptable to be hoarded up.

We are now to consider, whether the free Loan of such Bills as are already
mentitioned, would not be altogether as great an advantage to the Borrowers,
and to Trade in general, as if the same were such Gold. In case that first
security equal [I say] to that of the Chamber of London, etc. were given to
make them good in money within six months after the demanding thereof; and,
that secondly there were a way found whereby any Bill, either counterfeit or
added to the number, for which there is security given, might be discovered, as
easily as clipped or counterfeit coin in receiving of money.

Now, that such Bills as are already mentioned would not at the first, be so
generally current, as our ordinary sort of money, nor yet at all acceptable to
be horaded up by any, does of it self sufficiently appear; Whereby [as is
demoustrated lib. 2. Sect. 4.] they must needs prove a far more effectual means
for multiplying the Trade of all those that deal therein, then if it were
otherways.

But the chief question is; whether they would become so far forth current, as
the aforesaid Gold would have been: For it was demonstrated [ Lib 2. Sect. 5.]
That if Gold were dispersed amongst men, or any Metal of such real value as
[though not current by Law, nor acceptable to be hoarded up by any] would yield
the money it is taken for, without any considerable loss, if sold to the
Goldsmith: In this case, (because there could be no great hazard in taking it,
whether it were current at all or no) therefore no wise man but would take it,
much rather then continue the practice (which is so very common) of selling his
ware upon trust, and consequently it would become sufficiently current for the
carrying on of this Attempt, especially if this Company selling their Ware
cheaper by 2. s. on the pound then ordinary, when paid in this Gold, and not
otherways; it should thereby come to pass, that Commodity could not be had at
the best hand without it.

Now, to prove that these Bills would be altogether as current as such gold,
let it be considered, that men (as is declared in the precedent Section) do not
spare to part even with gold it self, or any money whatsoever, upon Bills,
Bonds, or such like; in case the security for making them good be sufficient;
So, as if there be any means whereby to settle a security equal to what is
already expressed, and to prevent the counterfeiting and multiplying of such
Bills as shall be given out upon such security, these Bills must needs (in
respect of their security) prove equivalent to Metal of as real value, I say,
as any which the Goldsmith will give ready money for.

And from hence it is evident, that if such security be given to make good
these Bills in ready money, within six months after the demanding thereof; in
this case, though no Interest should be allowed for that six months time, yet
those that put their money out to Usury (represented by the Goldsmith) will
upon such security advance ready money for these Bills, in case they be allowed
a rebatement of Interest for six months, which though reckoned to ten per
centum, amounts but to 12. d. in the pound.

Now, if men should refuse to take these Bills for commodity, at a higher rate
then 19, s. in the pound, yet seeing those that put their moneys out to
Interest will give as much and more for them at any time in ready money, they
might (I say) in this case have ready money for them, without any loss at all;
and this must needs make them prove to all those that deal therein, as good as
any Metal which sold to the Goldsmith would yield the money it is taken for,
without any loss at all; Consequently, as far forth current as any such metal
before spoken of would be. viz. Abundantly sufficient for the carrying on of
this Enterprise; especially (I say) if this Company (selling their commodities
above 2. s. on the pound cheaper then ordinary, when paid in these Bills) it
should thereby come to pass, that commodities could not be had at the best
hand without them, the Consequence of which shall be declared hereafter.

Therefore I conclude, that the free loan of these Bills (the security being
such as is formerly declared) would be altogether as great an advantage to the
borrowers, as if the same were such gold as is already mentioned, concerning
which secrrity I shall in the next Section demonstrate the sufficiency of it.

In the mean time, if it be questioned whether these Bills may not be
counterfeited, or rather whether those who are entrusted therein, may not add
to the number for which there is such security given; I say in this case, as
before concerning the said gold: Let it be admitted, (for how much soever
seemingly impossible it shall be fully made good) that there were a way found
whereby not any person whatsoever, (though employed or entrusted in or about
the printing or making of them) could any ways add to the number for which
there is such security given, [much less counterfeit any, but even those who
are to receive such Bill, might easily discover the same not to be within the
said number; yea, [I say] more easily then they can clipped or counterfeit coin
in receiving thereof; And if what I say in this particular besteemed impossible
to be done; men may forbear to intermeddle in this Undertaking, until the
truth thereof be demonstrated unto them for their full satisfaction:

Object. But debts cannot be made over to others without Assignments as money
may.

Answ. If these Bills be made payable not to this or that man by name, but
only in general to the bearer thereof; (except security be proffered to prove
he has no right therein) and withal, he that accepts of them be required to
give a full discharge to him of whom he receives them, (depending for his
satisfaction upon the said company) then [by the Law of this Land] he can
recover nothing from the person of whom he received them, and yet [though he
have no Assignment] may enforce the Company to make them good upon producing of
the Bills, because they have so engaged themselves; so as there seems to be no
necessity of Assignments.

And again, [though as matters might be ordered, such assignments may be made
as little trouble some as receipts upon the payment of money] yet I doubt not
but the Parliament [upon address by way of Petition] would make an Act, for
the removing of any obstruction that might hinder the successful effect of
this Undertaking, the practice thereof being so unquestionably lawful in
respect of the Law of God, and profitable to the Commonwealth.

Object. But such Bills cannot be divided into small parcells, to the value of
shillings or sixpences, as occasion may require.

Answ. No more can gold, yet there is silver enough to serve for exchange upon
all occasions as are needful; neither can this prove any greater an
inconvenience then is incident to those Bills, which [as I noted before] they
use in Flanders in a way of Trade.

Yet [when opportunity serves] I shall discover a way, how any one may take up
ware of several Tradesmen, to the value of two or three shillings, or less,
upon one and the same Bill; and how this may be done with ease, and as much
security, as if the same were paid for in money.

Object. But these Bills will not be current beyond Sea?

Answ. It is so much the better, for the exporting of money, or that which
goes for such, is so great a prejudice to trade, as all States do generally
use their best endeavors to prevent the same, for as we see by experience the
late exporting of gold, has been no small prejudice to England: Yet they
passing currently here, will procure such Commodity, as being exported beyond
Sea, will be never the less worth for being bought with those Bills.

All which when discovered, it will follow; that the means last propounded for
improvement of Trade [being placed upon such security as aforesaid] will come to
one and the same effect with that which was mentioned in the aforesaid Parable:
Which was the thing here to be demonstrated.

Now, as to those particulars left uncleared in this Section, or elsewhere, I
wish I may see as great a forwardness amongst men to further this design, as I
shall be willing [upon observation thereof] to discover at large, what may give
them full content, which oherwise to do at this time would cost much pains, and
yet perhaps prove fruitless.

LIB. III. SECT. IV.
Showing,How the aforesaid means for increase of Trade, may be effectually
accomplished by an agreement, amongst some few Tradesmen of known and
sufficient credit.

THat Bills or Bonds, if the security for making them good, were no whit
inferior to that of the Chamber of London, Bank of Amsterdam, or any which on
earth can be given, would be much more acceptable in a way of Trade to all wise
men, then the ordinary manner of dealing upon Trust, must needs be granted by
such as have duly weighed the many considerations, already suggested to that
effect.

I shall therefore in the first place, show how by the agreement of a few
Tradesmen of known and sufficient credit, a security for making good such
Bills as they themselves shall borrow each of other, may be made equal to that
which was formerly required of the said undertakers, for making good the gold
of the said Mine, and then shall make it appear, that such security will be as
good and sufficient as any which on earth can be given, which if it prove so to
be, it will fully demonstrate how the aforesaid means for increase of Trade,
may be effectually accomplished by an agreement of some few Tradesmen of known
and sufficient credit, which is the thing here to be discovered.

Admit therefore that several Tradesmen of known and sufficient credit, do
cause a certain number of Bills to be printed, and putting a value upon them,
as suppose ten pound the piece, do lend the said Bills each to other, upon no
less security then if the same were so much ready money, or gold out of the
said Mine, and bind themselves jointly to make good the same according to the
terms following, viz.

That they engage themselves upon delivering in of the said Bills, to an Office
appointed for that purpose, (by those that have accepted of them for ware, or
by whomsoever) to give a a Bond for payment of them in money within six
months.

That a Ticket expressing the total sum of the Bills, so brought in to the
said Office in a months space, [the total sum of each month being put
distinctly by it selfe] be by an Officer appointed for that purpose, sent to
the dwelling houses of the several Members of the said Company.

That each of the said Members be bound to take notice thereof, and within four
months after the date of the said Ticket, to pay in to the said Office, so
much in money as his proportion for that month does amount unto; in lieu of
which, he is immediately to receive as much in Bills, as was so brought in to
the said Office, to be made good in money.

And to the end, that as few of the said Bills may be brought in to the said
Office as possible, the said Company having affixed a note to their
commodities, in manner as is already directed, expressing the price thereof,
that they bind themselves upon a certain penalty, not to take less then that
price if paid in money, but to abate 2. s. in the pound thereof, if paid in
Bills.

Now, not to detain you here with other things less considerable, though meet
to be agreed on by the said Company,

This Engagement for making good these Bills, is in effect the same with that,
which was formerly required of the said Undertakers, for making good the gold
of the said Mine, as will appear by comparing them together, which was the
first thing thing here to be discovered.

And in order to the proof of the second particular, [viz. That this security
is as good as any which on earth can be given.]

I say, that if a Company of Insurers [being proffered one per centum for
Insurance of the Bills so lent] be permitted to have a Negative voice in the
Loan of those bills; It must needs follow, that they as well as the said
company, will do their utmost endeavor to take sufficient security, from each
one that borrows of these Bills; because by insuring the same, their own
estates lie at stake, to make good that which the Principal and Sureties
cannot.

Now, seeing if the said Insurers do take care, that each particular member of
this Company, do put in sufficient security to make good his own proportion,
they need not Incur a hazard greater then that which the said Companies
belonging to the said several Halls at London, do incur by lending moneys to
young beginners, merely to do them a courtesy, who without doubt are wise
enough to order matters so, as not to lose one per C. one time with another
thereby; it follows, that the said Insurers and Undertakers, may if they be
careful, make the said one per cent. to be more then sufficient, to defray one
time with another the losses incident to the Loan of these bills; which, if at
any time it do not, then seeing the whole Company of Insurers are bound to make
good the rest of the loss [which cannot be much] out of their own estates, it
must needs make them so much the more careful, to take good security of each
Member that borrows of the said Bills.

And considering, that both these Insurers and Undertakers, are all subject to
the Law of the Land, to imagine that they would [as I may say] be so free and
prodigal of the loan of these Bills, as not to take competent security from
each one that borrows of the same, [when I say they may as well preserve
themselves from danger therein, as the said several Companies in lending
moneys gratis] is to suppose that men are generally so void of understanding,
as to neglect the doing of that which is both possible and practicable, when
the safety of their whole estates depend thereupon.

On the other side, grant that the said Insurers and Undertakers, (being
subject I say to the Law, for the recovery of these debts] be but so far forth
careful in taking sufficient security, as about one per C. may defray the
charges of Insurance, and consequently more then defray one time with another,
the losses incident to the loan of the said bills; then the said Company of
Insurers securing the said Undertakers with their whole estates [if it prove
otherwise] there can scarce in this case be any appearance of danger, incident
to the said Undertakers; and how much less to those that accept of these
Bills, according to the terms proposed, who cannot fail of obtaining those
terms, except not only the whole Company of Insurers, but also the whole
Company of Undertakers, and not they alone, but all their sureties do at once
become unable to perform the terms proposed; and how this should happen without
some general confusion, by surprisall of an enemy, or such like cannot be
imagined, to the danger of which the security of the Chamber of London, Bank of
Amsterdam, or men's trading on credit without these Bills, is no less liable.

For, if the generality of the members of this Company, have been caused each
man for himself, to put in good and sufficient security for the Bills so
borrowed [the contrary to which must not be granted] it is not the failing of
some few, that can make the loss so considerable, as that the estates of all
these able and sufficient men, together with their sureties, besides the
estates of all the Insurers [which must be supposed also to the generally very
able] should not much more then countervail such loss; neither can it be
imagined, that those few can both in themselves and sureties fail so, as not to
be able to make good, the most part of what was so borrowed.

All which considered, I may confidently conclude, that this security, as
matters may be ordered, will not be any whit inferior to that of the Chamber of
London, Bank of Amsterdam, or any which on earth can possibly be given, which
was the second thing to be proved.

And thus much may serve to discover, how the aforesaid means for increase of
Trade, may be effectually accomplished, by an agreement amongst some few
tradesmen, of known and sufficient credit.

LIB. III. SECT. V.
Showing,That although this enterprise being attempted, should not suddenly
take effect, yet the damage in continuing the practice thereof, would not be
considerable.

HAving laid down in the last Section, a way how sufficient security may be
given, for making good of the aforesaid Bills, either in money at the end of
the six months, or in commodity, at a cheaper rate by 2. s. on the pound, then
for money can be procured, and all this to the end that the said Bills being
established upon such firm security, might (going about currently for commodity
in the place of money) not only prevent the trouble of making them good in
money, but tend to the abundant multiplication of the trade of all those that
deal therein.

Let us now consider, what the damage in continuing the practice of this
enterprise would be, in case being attempted, it should not take effect so, as
to occasion that these Bills should become any ways current.

In order to which, it is to be considered, that the members of this Company,
having received such proportion of the said Bills, as they have put in security
to make good, according to the terms proposed, if they cannot make them to be
taken for Commodity; in this case, the prejudice only is, that they have lost
their labor in troubling themselves so far, as to attempt the setting of this
enterprise on foot.

If having found out such as are willing to deal with them upon this Credit,
the said members or any of them have received Commodity, and parted with their
Bills, to those that bring them in to the said Office, to be made good in
money, according or agreement: yet in regard the Company have taken six months
time for the payment of them, and sufficient security from each particular
person, to make good his own share, it is no more then having thus [as it
were] taken up Commodity upon trust in Company with others, they must procure
money in due time for the payment of the debt.

If any of those that have received these Bills for their Commodity, shall
bring them to any of this Company, and lay them out in Commodity again, so as
they go about for any time in stead of money, then seeing this Company do not
give Bond to make good these Bills in money, until the delivering of them in
to the said Office, and from that time take six months for payment of them, it
follows that so long as any of them shall go about for Commodity [as in this
case they are immediately made good to the Creditor, by being accepted for
Commodity in the place of so much money, so] the debt otherwise due in money,
is during the time of their going about forborne.

For that the said six months does not commence, until the exchanging of them
at the said Office for bonds, which if this course take effect, will, as to the
most of them never be required, as by the sequel does appear.

If it happen, that some of this Company having got their Bills to be taken for
ware, such Bills are immediately brought in to the said Office, to be made good
in money, when others of the same Company having their Bills still in their
hands, cannot procure Commodity upon them, and are yet notwithstanding to pay
their proportion toward the making good of those that are so brought in; In
this case, if they want ready money, it is but selling their Bills to those
that put their moneys out to use, and upon rebatement of Interest they may have
money in hand, either to buy commodity, or pay any debt as they have occasion:
For it cannot be denied, but if this undertaking be ever like to come to any
thing, the security must be such as those who put moneys out to interest may be
willing to accept, which [I say] will be no hard matter to bring to pass.

If it be objected, that the members of this Company, having engaged themselves
to take these Bills for ware, will receive little or no money upon the sale of
their commodities, wherewith to discharge those that are sent in to the said
Office.

I answer; the more Bills the said Company receive for their ware, the fewer
they have to make good in money; and therefore it will be so much the easier
for them, to provide money so to do, by the sale of those which they so receive
for ware.

On the other side; if all these Bills be brought in to the said Office, before
they be returned to any of the said Company for Commodity, then in order to the
making of them good in money, there will be this advantage; that all the said
Bills being lodged in the said Office for six months, those of this Engagement
cannot in this case be proffered any thing but money for their commodity; and
therefore may as well make good these Bills at the end of six months (by the
sale of their commodity for money) as if they had taken up so much ware upon
their private credit, for the like time.

But, if they be not all delivered in to the said Office, before those of this
Engagement receive them for commodity, then the difficulty of making them good
in money, will be so much the less: For (though in this case some of this
Engagement, may be caused sometimes to accept of these Bills for their ware,
who else might have been proffered money, Yet) these Bills being (I say,
established upon such firm security, will yield those that have received them
for ware present money, upon rebatement of interest, if they have necessary
occasion for the same.

And if those to whom these Bills are sold for ready money, do immediately
bring them in to the said Office, so as they are still all for the most part
lodged there; yet (I say) again, it is manifest, that if these Bills were
wholly lodged in the said Office, the worst that can come, is but to make them
all good in money, once in about half a year with interest, that is, about the
end of each halse year, receiving the Bills, and procuring commodity thereupon,
to have them all lodged in the said Office for the next six months succeeding,
and so perpetually.

For, if never so few of them be for any small time stirring abroad, there is
so much the longer time above six months given, for making good those few in
money; and for the rest, it is (I say) no more then as if men had taken up ware
upon trust, to be made good in money at the end of six months.

Therefore, though this enterprise being attempted, should not suddenly take
effect, yet the damage in continuing the practice thereof, would not be
considerable, which was the thing here to be demonstrated.

Now if it be objected, that in putting off these Bills at 19. s. 2. d. for
commodity, and making them good at 2^. s. in money, they do in effect pay
interest, which is a great prejudice.

I answer, that those who take up ware upon trust, do allow interest in the
price of their commodities, so as the damage in this respect is no greater then
that of the ordinary way of dealing on trust.

But how to make this course take effect, notwithstanding what has been here
premised, so as the said Bills may go about without being brought in to the
said Office to be made good in money, not only for the preventing of this, and
all other inconveniences, but for accomplishing of all the desirable
consequences depending thereon, I doubt not but the way thereunto is fully and
satisfactorily discovered in the two Sections following, to which therefore I
refer you.

LIB. III. SECT. VI.
Showing, What great probability there is, that this Enterprise being set on
foot, will suddenly take effect, if the Rules already prescribed (with some
other here laid down) be duly and carefully observed.

THese Bills being placed upon such firm security as is already mentioned, and
sufficient means used for preventing the multiplying or counterfeiting of them,
there needs no more to make this Enterprise take effect, but that matters be
ordered in such sort, as none can buy commodity so cheap by 2. s. on the pound
with money, as with these Bills, the way whereunto is already discovered.

For, from hence it will follow, that the full worth of these Bills in ready
money, is no less then 22. s. on the pound, because he that has occasion to
buy commodity, and does first purchase of these Bills, paying but 21. s. for
them, does gain the other 12. d. by the bargain; Seeing, that if he had been to
pay for his commodity in money, then instead of 21. s. which his Bill cost him,
this Bill has procured that commodity, which in money would have cost him 22.
s. and that at as low a rate, as in money alone could have been procured, in
any place whatsoever.

Now, let us observe but the consequence of this: Hence it must needs follow,
that if any man has a mind to part with his Bills for ready money, there being
a place appointed where he may meet with those who (willing to procure their
commodity at the lowest rate, which without these Bills cannot be obtained) do
attend there to give ready money for them; it is not likely that he will part
with them for less then 20. s. in the pound, when he knows that the buyer
being convinced, it will save him two shillings in the pound, will be glad to
give it, seeing a little saved is better then nothing.

Again, seeing as I said before, few or none will refuse them for commodity, at
the rate they will yield in ready money, it follows, that few will trouble
themselves to profer them to sale for money, when (I say) men will not refuse
to accept of them instead of so much ready money for debt or commodity; and the
fewer number there is of those that profer them to sale, the more will they be
sought after and esteemed; especially considering, that all those who have not
received of these Bills for their ware, if they intend to buy commodity at the
best hand, must be forced to purchase them with money, although they find few,
or none that care to sell them: So as to be proffered them for ware at the rate
they will yield in money, will be a courtesy.

Yet further, seeing by this means they will pass for at least 20. s. in
ready money, (and that so as the number of those that would give that price,
will be greater then of those that will take it) it is not to be supposed that
in this case, any will trouble the Usurer with them at all, who cannot afford
to give full 20. s. for them, because he must have allowance of Interest for
the six months forbearance; and much less is it probable, that any will send
them in to the said Office; where after they have stayed six months they are
to have but 20. s. in money, viz. no more then they might have before they
deliver them in.

And as by this means the members of this Company will have little or no
occasion to procure money for the satisfying of any of these Bills, so if
having any of them in their hands, they should have occasion for money, how
easy would it be for them to get it, without either troubling the Usurer, or
allowing any interest in the sale of them, by selling these Bills those that
(willing to buy commodity at the best hand) are content to give ready money for
them: So as (in a word) this being done, it is manifest, tthat these Bills
would be no whit less, but rather more acceptable then money it self.

Thus you see what great probability there is, that this attempt being set on
foot, will suddenly take effect, if the rules already prescribed, (although no
other were propposed) be duly and carefully observed.

But for the more effectual prosecution of this Enterprise, let it be
supposed, that those of this Company [rating their commodities [by a note
affixed thereon, in manner before said] at full as low a rate as others can
afford] do agree, to sell their ware at that rate, though paid all in money,
but to abate 2. s. on the pound, of that price, for so much as they shall be
paid in bills, the same not exceeding the one half of the sum; That is to say,
they expect for their commodity half money, and half Bills; at least, that they
will not allow the said 2. s. abatement upon above the one half, though paid in
Bills, yet that they will abate the said 2. s. on the pound, upon so much as
they shall be paid in Bills, not exceeding the said half.

I say 2. s. on the pound, for that to abate 2. s. on the pound upon the one
half, is no more then 12. d. on the pound upon the whole, which yet will make
these Bills as well worth 22. s. on the pound, as otherwise; For he that having
occasion to buy commodity, though he should pay full 22. s. on the pound for
these Bills, to make up the one half of his sum, does lose nothing by the
bargain, seeing he is allowed 2. s. on the pound, upon that half in the price
of his commodities; so if he paies but 21. s. he saves 12. d. in the pound
upon all the Bills so bought.

Therefore, by this means, although the said Company undersell others but 12.
d. in the pound, these Bills will be sold in money at as high a price as
otherwise, if they undersell them 22. s. and no doubt will go currently for
commodity, at that price they will yield in money.

By this means also, they shall receive half the price of their commodities in
money, whereby they shall not only be the better enabled to discharge such
bills as are to be made good in money, but have their takings double, to what
they would otherwise be; seeing these Bills will not in this case pass through
their hands, without bringing as much in money, and yet those of whom they
procure their commodities, will be as well content to take all their pay in
bills, (if need require) as otherwise, because they are not engaged to make
them good in money, as those of this Company are.

This being considered, it will follow, that those of this Company must needs
have more money, then to pay what are so brought in immediately, even much
faster then it would be demanded, which if they should perform accordingly, not
being engaged thereunto, it would not only be another way, whereby ready money
might be had on these Bills for the labor of fetching, but so maintain the
credit of this Company, as none would trouble themselves to demand money on
their Bills, but accept of them as freely, if not more willingly, then money.

All which, does tend to show what great probability there is, that this
attempt being set on foot, will suddenly take effect, if the rules, already
prescribed [with those other here laid downe] be duly and carefully observed;
which was the thing here to be demonstrated.

LIB: III. SECT. VII.
Showing, What great probability there is, that this Enterprise being once set
on foot, would suddenly take a good effect, although none of the Rules
prescribed in the precedent Section, should be observed.

FOrasmuch, as in all things that are first propounded, it is meet before the
attempting of them, to propose the worst that can probably happen in the
prosecution thereof; Let it be admitted, that those of this Company at the
first beginning of this Enterprise, being not able to afford Commodity at an
under-rate, it should not be true, that Commodity could be got with half money,
and half Bills, at a less rate then with money; as was taken for granted in
the former Section.

Now, if from this ground, it should be objected, that they would not suddenly
go about for commodity, but be generally sent in to the said Office to be made
good in money.

For the answer of this [besides that it is already proved, that in case they
should not so go about, yet the damage would be no greater then if men had
taken up so much ware upon credit] Let us call to mind [as briefly as possible]
what was noted before, viz.

That the Usurer upon rebatement of interest, will give ready meney for these
Bills: That men rather then lose the sale of their commodities, are (generally)
willing to trust the another: That therefore none would refuse these Bills for
commodity at the rate they will yield in ready money; That if few men will
refuse them at that rate, most men would take them at that rate, much the
rather because most men are willing so to do.

From all this, it may be concluded, that men knowing that they will be taken,
at that rate, for commodity, (and rather then fail for money it self) few or
none would trouble themselves to seek out the Usurer, for procuring money
thereupon; and much less would tradesmen send them in to the said Office,
where (having taken them at the same rate the Usurer will give in ready money)
they must stay six months for no greater profit then the interest of their
stock, which tradesmen cannot generally live upon.

Now, these bills by this means, going about without being carried in to the
said Office, shall not only prevent the trouble of making them good in money,
but so multiply the trade of those that deal therein, as they shall soon be
enabled to undersell others, whereby they may be in capacity to sell commodity
(being paid in these bills) much cheaper then for money can be any where
procured.

And though (if the better to effect this) they should for a while sell the one
half of their ware at the same rate it cost them, the consequence [by
multiplying their trading] would soon recompense their loss an hundred fold;
but I need not insist on this, seeing the speedy success of this attempt does
not much depend thereupon.

If it be objected, that although it cannot be denied, but matters may be
ordered in such sort, as those who put their moneys out to interest, may be
willing to advance ready money on those bills, upon rebatement of Interest, for
six months, which at 8. per cent. amounts not to 10. d. on the pound; yet if
the Usurer will give but 19. s. 2. d. for these bills in ready money, then it
is not like, that any will accept of them from those of this Company for
commodity, at a higher rate; and seeing the said Company are to make them good
at 20. s. within six months, it follows they do in effect pay interest for
them.

I answer first, that although the Usurer will not accept of these Bills but at
19. s. 2. d. yet it does not follow, that others will not accept of them for
commodity, from those of this engagement at a higher rate.

1. Because at this rate, they will (no question) go about, without being sent
in to the said Office, and consequently the revolution of them, with as much in
ready money, must needs occasion such great trading to the Undertakers, as they
may meet with persons enough, who for their constant custom, will be glad to
furnish them with commodity at above 10. d. in the pound cheaper then ordinary;
which is all one as to have the full interest due upon these Bills abated.

2. Men expect but 8. per cent. when they sell their ware upon private credit,
but would (no doubt) be glad of half that allowance, if the security were as
good as that of the Chamber of London.

3. Those that sell ware upon trust, cannot always furnish themselves with new
ware, upon their own credit, and therefore take an allowance of interest upon
consideration of the forbearance of their stock: But these bills being such as
few or none will refuse, do therein supply the place of ready money.

4. When men have sold their ware upon trust, their own estates lie at stake to
pay for the new ware, they procure in stead thereof; whereas if they accept of
these Bills for their ware, they may procure new ware thereupon, and have as
full a discharge, as if they had paid for the same in ready money.

And if notwithstanding all this, these Bills should not pass without a full
allowance of interest, yet assuredly in reference to all these great
advantages, no man but would prefer them much before private credit, which does
abundantly demonstrate the great probability there is, that this Enterprise
being once set on foot, would suddenly take a good effect; although none of the
rules prescribed in the precedent Section should be observed; which was the
thing here to be discovered.

2. For a further answer to the aforesaid Objection, (I say) that though this
Company were not able to put off these Bills, at a higher rate then 19 s. 2 d.
yet if they refuse to accept of them for Commodity, otherwise then at the same
rate, then in case they should at this rate go about, without being brought
into the said Office; it follows, that they are not put to make them good in
money, at any rate whatsoever; and consequently in this case, have the use of
them without paying any interest at all. Now (as I have already proved) it is
altogether unlikely, that any number of them should be sent in to the said
Office, to be made good in money; neither (I say) do they pay the interest of
any more, then what are so sent in.

3. It is supposed in the objection, that the interest of money is 8 per cent.
whereas if these Bills become current in the place of money, and are proffered
to be lent freely unto all that will borrow them, it must needs follow, that
none will give any considerable interest for moneys, nay, that by this means
the interest of moneys shall suddenly fall to nothing.

Now to conclude, men parting (I say) with their ware upon private trust, at
the same rate of interest as money, suppose first, they should accept of these
Bills, but at the same rate, that no less then the one half of them, were one
time with another brought in to the said Office; and that interest of money did
by this means, fall but to half the rate as formerly, yet all these things put
together, this Company would not pay above two per cent. for interest, which
must needs make interest (and consequently such their charge of paying the
same) fall yet so much the more, and so perpetually.

But if it were not possible, to avoid the payment of some small matter for
Interest (yet these Bills going once about for Commodity) both that, and all
other charges incident to this Undertaking, yea and much more (if need should
require) may be defrayed by the Land purchased, upon the Credit of these Bills
in the manner proposed, Lib. 2. Sect. 1.

Thus having demonstrated, that though this Company should not sell Commodity
at an under rate, yet these Bills would suddenly go about without being sent in
to the said Office, whereby not only to prevent, either the trouble of making
them good in money, or the charge of allowing Interest upon them, but to
multiply the Trading of those that deal therein, and consequently to the
inabling of them to under-sell others; and putting them into a capacity of
purchasing Land therewith, it does thereupon sufficiently appear, What great
probability there is that this enterprise, being once set on foot, would
suddenly take a good effect, although none of the rules prescribed in the
Section preceding should be observed, which was the thing here to be discovered.

LIB. IIII. SECT. I.
Showing, How and in what sense this Treatise is called, The Key of Wealth or
(wherein it does discover) a new way for improving of Trade, Lawful, Easy,
Safe, and effectual, according to what is expressed in the Title Page.

THe immediate causes and consequences of a quick Trade, being the or matter
contained in the first Book of this Treatise; The speediest and most feasible
means for accomplishing thereof, represented by a Parable in the second book;
the said Parable interpreted, and applied to the discovery of the means it
self, in the third book; There now remains only (as the scope of this fourth
and last book,) an application of all, to a full demonstration of the truth of
those many particulars asserted in the Title Page, as they lie in order.

In pursuance whereof, I shall declare in this first Section, How and in what
sense this Treatise may be called The Key of Wealth, or wherein it does
discover a new way for improving of Trade, lawful, easy, safe, and effectual;
according to the first words in the Title Page.

In the second, I shall lay open several considerations, Showing how and where
it is demonstrated, that a few Tradesmen agreeing together, may both double
their Stocks, and the increase thereof, without 1 Paying any Interest. 2 Great
difficulty or hazard. 3 Advance of Money. 4 Staying for Materials. 5 Prejudice
to any trade or person. 6 Incurring any other Inconvenience.


According to the following words in the Title Page.

In the third I shall show, how it appears, that the agreement of the said
Tradesmen, may be ordered in such sort, as both they and all others, though
never so poor who are in a Way of Trading, may 1 Multiply their returns. 2 Deal
only for ready pay. 3 Much under-sell others. 4 Put the whole Nation upon this
practice. 5 Gain notwithstanding more then ordinary. 6 Desist when they please,
without damage.
Which are the particulars in the Title Page immediately succeeding the former.

And (in the fourth and last, I shall show how it sollows, that all the
aforesaid Advantages may be effected) so as the same shall tend much to 1
Enrich the people of this Land. 2 Disperse the money hearded up. 3 Import
Bullion from beyond Sea. 4 Raise Bancks of money in diverse places. 5 Settle a
secure and known credit. 6 Make such credit current. 7 Extend such credit to
any degree needful. 8 Quicken the revolution of money and credit. 9 Diminish
the interest for money. 10 Make Commodity supply the place of money. 11 Ingross
the Trade of Europe. 12 Fill the Land with Commodity. 13 Abate the price of
Commodity. 14 Provide store against Famine. 15 Relieve and employ the poor. 16
Augment Custom and Excise. 17 Promote the sale of Lands. 18 Remove the causes
of imprisonment for debt. 19 Lesson the hazard of Trading on Credit. 20 Prevent
highway thieves. 21 Multiply ships for defense at Sea. 22 Multiply means for
defense at Land. 23 Incorporate the whole strength of England. 24 Take away
advantages of opposition.


Which are the 24 particulars mentioned in the said Title page.

Now, I desire it may be observed, that in what has been here rehearsed, the
words of the Title page are expressed Verbatim, and distinguished from the rest
by an Italick print, which if read alone by it self, and compared with the said
Title page, they will be found to agree so, as in making good what is affirmed
in the said Title Page (as the sum of all) I shall need only to take the words
(thus distinguished) in order; And after an explication of my meaning therein,
where need requires, shall either refer you to those places where the truth
thereof, has been already sufficiently cleared, or proceed to further proof as
there shall be need; To which purpose, because the end of all writing is to be
understood, it will be necessary to repeat sometimes in brief, the sum of what
has been already at large insisted on.

The first words therefore in the said Italick print, are

The Key of Wealth:

That is, an effectual means, by which the door (or rather a wide-gate) is
opened unto the storehouse of Riches.

The storehouse, is the whole world, which affords us riches, either by the
Fruits of our own Soil, the trade of Fishing or Traffic with other Nations.

The Key, is the peoples being in capacity, to bestow upon themselves the
Comforts of this life; For to give you in brief, the effect of what I have
already to this purpose observed; though the Storehouse of the world be never
so full of Commodity, yet seeing the Tradesman cannot afford to take it in,
faster then he can find sale for what he has already, it follows, that if the
people through their extreme poverty, are not able to take it off from the
hands of the Tradesman, the door in that respect is shut against Trade, and by
consequence against Wealth; For without Trade, men's Wealth and Estates, are so
far from being increased, as they are in a way of decreasing; and the rather,
because by growing daily poorer, their expenses and consequently their Trading,
is daily less then it was before, to the further increase of their poverty, and
so perpetually; so that hereby the Storehouse of Wealth is (as it were) locked
up against such a people.

On the other side, let it be supposed that money (or that which goes for such)
does increase amongst them; it follows, that (they not hoarding it up but
laying it out in Commodity, as fast as they receive it,) the more their hands
are filled with such money, by the increase thereof, so much the more does the
sale of Commodity, that is Trading, increase; and this increase of Trading does
increase Riches, and that so much the faster; because such Riches increases
men's expenses; therefore their Trading, therefore their Riches, and so
perpetually; by which means then, you see the door is opened to the Increase of
Wealth: (all which is at large demonstrated in the 5. first Sections of the
first Book) Therefore increase of money, or that which goes for such, not
hoarded up, is the Key of Wealth, according to the Title.

Or,

The Key of wealth, or a new way for Improving of Trade: I make that which
tends to the multiplying of trade, to be the Key of Wealth; for that as without
Trade it is impossible but a people should grow every day poorer then formerly;
So trading being very quick, it is likewise impossible but they should grow
daily richer, as appears Lib. 1. Sect. 2.

A new way,

If against this it be objected, in the words of Solomon, that there is nothing
new under the Sun; I answer, his meaning is that there is no new matter,
though there be new forms; no new Genus, though the species of each kinds may
be new.

As to instance, mankind have been from the Creation, yet this or that man
never was before, so Invention has been from the Creation, yet this or that
Invention as of Printing, etc. never was till of late years; all this is so
evident, as it cannot be denied.

Yet the way of Trading upon Bills, is (I confess) used in Flanders, and other
parts of the world, though (as I hope I may speak without boasting or offense)
not in near so convenient a manner, as that is which I have here proposed.

For Improving of Trade;

That is, Not only to recover our decayed Trade to its ordinary measure, but
to multiply it, to the utmost degree that can be needful, or in just reason
desirable; as appears by the precedent part of this Section, and morefully
(as is said) by the five first Sections of the first book.

Lawful;

For, as there is nothing (which I know) proposed, that is any way derogatory
to our duty toward God, so for our duty toward our Neighbors, I shall prove
by and by, that this practice does not tend (in the least measure) to prejudice
any trade or person, therefore it is lawful.

Easy;

There being no greater difficulty therein, then in that which is incident to
the lending and borrowing of money upon security: viz. that he or they who
borrow, must procure good security, and he or they who lend, must be careful
to see that it is good; and that this is all the difficulty attending this
enterprise: See Lib. 2. Sect. 2. and Lib. 3. Sect. 4.

Safe;

The hazard being not so great as that which men undergo, when they take up
Commodities in company with others, wherein each man is bound to make good the
whole debt, in case his partners fail: when as usually they take no security
each from other, to make good his own share, much less from a whole Company of
Insurers to run the hazard: Both which in this case they do, as appears Lib. 2.
Sect. 2. and Lib. 3. Sect. 4. Therefore this course is safe.

Again, it is safe, because it is such as whereby men may totally free
themselves from hazards, (and great suits) incident to desperate debts,
(besides the loss of time by the forbearance of the money) which are the
ordinary effects of the usual way of dealing upon trust; and yet have as much
trading with ready pay in these Bills, as can in reason be desired, Lib. 2.
Sect. 3. Therefore this course is far safer then the ordinary way of trading.

Effectual;

It being such, as I am confident man's reason cannot imagine any way without it
(or something to the same purpose) whereby either to recover our lost Trade,
and enrich the people, as is evident, Lib. 2. Sect 1. or any scruple that may
be alleged to make it appear that this way does not tend most vigorously and
effectually to produce the same, which he must needs acknowledge, who shall
duly consider the said five first Sections of the first Book.

The Conclusion.

These things considered, it does fully appear, how and in what sense this
Treatise may be called, The key of Wealth, or wherein it does discover, a new
way for improving of trade, lawful, easy, safe and effectual, which was the
thing here to be demonstrated.

LIB. IIII. SECT. II.
Showing, how and where it is demonstrated, that a few Tradesmen agreeing
together, may both double their stocks, and the increase thereof, Without 1
Paying any Interest. 2. Great difficulty or hazard. 3. Advance of money. 4.
Staying for Materials. 5. Prejudice to any trade or person. 6. Incurring any
other inconvenience.
According to what is affirmed in the Title page.

IN prosecution of this, let us take the words expressed in the said Italick
print, in order.

Showing how a few Tradesmen;

Tradesmen; because they must be such as have ware to sell for these Bills.

A few: Yea for a need one man alone, being of sufficient estate and credit,
may both begin this attempt, and though none join with him, continue the same:
For let that one man have but so much credit as to take up ware for six
months, and assuredly the giving of a Bill to make good the debt, either in
commodity immediately, or in money, within six months after the demanding
thereof, can no whit weaken such his credit, or make it less acceptable;
especially if he be caused to put in sufficient security, for making good the
terms so proposed, and should procure the same to be insured also, by such as
are sufficiently able to pay the debt, in case both he and his Sureties should
fail so to do.

And if the credit of one man alone would in this case be acceptable, how much
more that of a whole Company of sufficient men bound each for other; though
they were but about 10. or 20. in number, amongst whom though one or two should
fail, yet to the whole Company it would not be much considerable: Of this see
more, Lib. 3. Sect. 4. Therefore, I say, a few tradesmen would serve both to
begin and continue this practice.

On the other side, though a few (for a need) would serve, yet in case the
whole Nation should join therein, the number would not be too many, nor hinder
the profit each of other, as I shall demonstrate, when I come to show that they
would notwithstanding gain more then ordinary.

Agreeing together;

Though their credit may be acceptable, as they are so many single persons, yet
their agreeing together as a Company to be bound each for other, must needs
make such their credit more firm and unquestionable.

1. Because (in a word as being formerly noted) if one amongst many fail, the
rest must make it good.

2. Because it puts them upon a necessity of taking each from other, such
security, and so insuring that security, as may (if possible) totally free the
whole Company, from the least appearance of danger, and much more all others
that shall deal with them upon this credit, Lib. 3. Sect. 4.

May double their Stocks;

I do not say double their estates, but double their stocks without paying
Interest; which clearly intimates a capacity only of borrowing in money, viz.
as much as their estates and credit can extend to give security for, Lib. 2.
Sect. 1. and Lib. 3. Sect. 4.

And this, seeing it shows men the way how by renewing such security, to
continue the borrowing thereof to themselves and posterity, even to the end of
the world; is upon the matter equivalent to the doubling of their estates: For
to what purpose serves an estate better then as a stock to be improved?

The increase thereof;

That is, if by trading with this doubled stock, any one does increase his
estate, he may upon like security, have as much more lent him, as whereby to
double such increase; the extent of which advantage, is incredible to those who
shall not read the demonstration thereof, in Lib. 2. Sect. 3.

Without paying any Interest;

How the paying of Interest may be prevented (or at least defrayed by the rent
of the Lands purchased with these Bills) is sufficiently demonstrated, in Lib.
3. Sect. 7.

Without great difficulty or hazard;

I have proved in the last Section, that the Undertaking is easy, therefore
without difficulty; safe, therefore without hazard; and for a more full
demonstration thereof, see Lib. 2. Sect. 2.

And yet these two things of difficulty and hazard, are as I said before, the
total sum (as it were) of those Inconveniences, that can with any color of
reason be alleged, to counterpoise the manifold advantages issuing to the
Undertakers, (besides others) from this attempt.

Without advance of money;

Great attempts do usually put men upon vast expense of money, before there be
any certainty whether their undertaking will prove or no, but here is no such
advance required, Lib. 2. Sect. 1.

No danger though the attempt should not take effect, Lib. 3. Sect. 5.

Nor any question but (being wisely managed) it will, Lib. 3. Sect. 6, 7.

It may at the first Undertaking, happily cost such as shall profit thereby,
some small matter out of such their profit, toward the maintaining of an
Office, which yet will not be required of any, who shall upon their oaths
testific, that they have not gotten more then seven times as much thereby.

Yet if this practice be continued, this charge (as I said before) will be much
more then recompensed by the rent of the Lands, purchased upon the credit of
these Bills; neither is this any advance of money, seeing it is only required
of those, that after proceeding therein, have profited thereby; so as being
only out of the clear profit by this means occasioned, it cannot properly be
called a charge, much less an advance of money; though the gains of this
undertaking be thereby some small matter the less: Therefore this enterprise
may be attempted and prosecuted without advance of money.

Without prejudice to any trade or person;

When that rare invention of Printing began first to be practiced, how
exceedingly was it opposed, and that with some show of reason; being alleged
that it tended to deprive a considerable number of the race of mankind, of
their daily bread; who indeed at that time had no other way to live, but by the
use of their pen, in writing those books which since are used to be printed.

Whereas in reference to this enterprise, it is most apparent, that the
unquestionable consequence of it is, not to lessen, but to multiply employment
upon men of all trades and callings, (except Usurers, Brokers and Lawyers) and
that in such sort, as neither any trade, nor yet any particular person can be
(in the least measure) prejudiced thereby.

I confess it tends to the lessening (if not annihilating) of Interest, and to
remove occasion for pawning of goods, or suits in Law: Neither need I dispute
whether the practices, much less the Professions of Usurers, Brokers, and
Lawyers, be lawful or not; seeing this is undeniable, that if there be any
means whereby a people may be accommodated, with a sufficient quantity of
money, (or that which goes for such) without paying interest for it, and so as
they shall not need to pawn their clothes for food; and likewise matters so
ordered, as Law suits may be prevented; In this case, though both Usurers,
Brokers and Lawyers lose their customers, not any one of them can justly
complain of prejudice.

For I must confess, that if the practice of any thing may be truly called a
prejudice to any one person, then though the consequence thereof were otherwise
never so good, it were not lawful to be done; seeing it would be the same (at
the best) as to do a small evil, that a great good might come of it: but for
a people to use means to enrich themselves, and that in a way as may be most
free from occasioning suits of Law, can by no means be denied to be lawful,
though both Usurers, Brokers, and Lawyers lose all their customers thereby.

Now seeing it is beyond all controversy lawful, therefore it can be no more
a prejudice to any, then the doing of just things can properly be called
prejudicial, which would imply a contradiction: Consequently this practice
does not tend to the just prejudice of any trade or person, which was the thing
to be proved.

Without incurring any other Inconvenience;

A Negative is hard to be proved, but this I say, that other Inconveniences
then what are already mentioned, I cannot imagine any.

The Conclusion.

Thus have I showed, how and where it is demonstrated, that a few Tradesmen
agreeing together, may both double their Stocks, and the increase thereof,

Without 1. Paying any Interest. 2. Great difficulty or hazard. 3. Advance of
money. 4. Staying for Materials. 5. Prejudice to any trade or person. 6.
Incurring any other Inconvenience,


According to what was affirmed in the Title page, which were the things here
to be demonstrated.

LIB. IV. SECT. III.
Showing, How it follows that the Agreement of the said Tradesmen, may be
ordered in such sort as both they and all others, though never so poor, who are
in a way of Trading, may, 1. Multiply their Returns. 2. Deal only for ready
pay. 3. Much undersell others. 4. Put the whole Nation upon this practice. 5.
Gain notwithstanding more then ordinary. 6. Desist when they please without
damage.
According to what was expressed in the Title Page.

HEre (to follow the method already prescribed) the first words in the said
Italicke print, are,

In such sort, as they

They, That is the said Undertakers: For not only those others that are
hereafter mentioned, but even the Undertakers themselves may by this means
double their stock, with the increase thereof, multiply their returns, deal
only for ready pay, much undersell others; put the whole Nation upon this
practice, Gain notwithstanding more then ordinary, desist when they please
without damage; All which is clear by the whole scope of the premises.

And all others

That is, not only the aforesaid Undertakers but others, (though they being
not in security to borrow of the said Bills, whereby to double their stock with
the increase thereof yet) by hanging out the said Flagge shall be in capacity
to multiply their Trading, deal only for etc. to the end of all the aforesaid
six particulars.

Though never so poor, who are in a way of trading,

That is, though they be in Debt more then their stock is worth, and have not
any Credit to borrow of the said Bills; yet if they be in a way of Trading so
as they have but Commoditys to sell; they may by hanging out the said Flagge,
multiply their returns etc.

May

That is, it is at their own choice, for it requires neither trouble, charge
nor hazard considerable to hang out the same Flag with others, whereby they
cannot be hindered from enjoying the effects thereof, as it tends to multiply
their returns with ready pay, whereby to undersell others, etc.

Multiply their returns,

I say the returns, both of themselves and all those that hang out the said
Flag; even to the utmost degree, that they are all possibly able to manage.

For if these Bills be current but amongst a few, the takings (that is the
trading) of those few will be so much the more Lib. 2. Sect. 4. if they be
current amongst many then the number of such Bills may be multiplied
proportionably; by purchasing Land with them, and lending them Gratis upon such
security as is already mentioned, yea until they have increased the number of
them, and by consequence their takings according to their desires Lib. 2. Sect.
1. and Lib. 3. Sect. 4.

For it follows, by what has been already demonstrated Lib. 1. Sect. 4. that
the more of these Bills be stirring, the more will the takings be, of those
that hang out the said Flag; it is also manifest by what has been declared
Lib. 2. Sect. 3. that by this means, these Bills may be multiplied to the
utmost quantity that can be needful, for increasing their trading to the
greatest measure, that they are possibly able to manage.

And therefore, I may safely conclude, that it is in the power of those of this
Engagement, to multiply the trading both of themselves and of all those that
hang out the said Flag, and that to the utmost degree that they are possibly
able to manage; which was the thing to be proved.

May deal only for ready pay,

That is they may if they please, have (I say) as much trading as they are able
to manage, and yet deal only for ready pay; I do not say ready money, but
ready pay, either in Money or Bills.

This follows from what was last demonstrated, where it was made to appear,
that if it was in their power, to order matters so, as to have as much trading
as they could possibly manage; yet it is manifest that it was no otherwise then
either in money or these Bills; that is, in ready pay; and consequently may
(without prejudice) refuse to deal any otherwise then for such ready pay.

Much undersell others,

That is, they may affoard (if they please) to sell cheaper then others of the
same trade can buy.

For their Quickness of trading will occasion their buying much Commodity at
once, their buying much at once will enable them (as it does whole-sale-men) to
buy it cheaper by one or two shillings on the pound then other men can and
their Quick returns will enable them to live by much less Profit then others;
so as buying their Commodities above 12 d. in the pound cheaper then others,
they may through such quick returns live better upon that 12 d. Profit, then
those others can do though they gain 5 s. on the pound upon all the Ware they
sell; All which is more fully demonstrated Lib. 1. Sect. 7. Therefore they may
(if they please) affoard to sell Cheaper then others of the same Trade can buy;
which was the thing to be proved.

If any man should account this a prejudice to himself, what hinders but he may
take the same course; or else show a reason why he cannot justly do so, which
if he can, I shall then think it my duty to join with him, in an endeavor to
prevent all others that should attempt the practice thereof; In the mean time
if men complain of Prejudice, when the mendes (as they say) is in their own
hands, (whereby (merely) to hinder others from doing that, which tends to the
preservation of themselves and the whole nation,) God and the whole World will
witness against them.

If any should say, that a fall in the price of Commodities (which upon this,
must needs follow) is a Prejudice to a Nation; I answer, not except it occasion
a fall in the price of their own Commodities in Foreign parts, whereby to
prevent the importing of Bullion, as does appear more fully where that
particular is handled, to which I refer.

May put the whole Nation upon this practice,

That is, they may by this means suddenly, both necessitate and encourage all
Tradesmen in the Land to follow this practice; viz. if not to borrow of these
Bills, yet at least to hang out the said Flag, whereby to declare themselves
willing to accept of them.

First I say necessitate: For seeing few or none will buy Commodity but of
those that are apparently known to affoard much the better penyworths; it must
follow that all those who will not take this course, whereby they may be able
to sell their Ware as cheap as others; will suddenly loose their Customers:
so as all the trading being hereby as it were engrossed, by those that have put
out the said Flag, they will be yet so much the better (if it were possible)
enabled to undersell others, and others so much the more necessitated for their
mere preservation to hang out the same Flag, whereby they may be in capacity to
enjoy some Trading with them.

Secondly, Encouraged: for so long as there is neither hazard, charge nor
trouble in hanging out the said Flag or taking the said Bills; and yet the
Advantage by multiplying men's trading to the utmost degree possible, is so
exceeding great besides the removing of those many hazards and delays for want
of ready money, that are Incident to the ordinary way of dealing on Credit,
these things must needs (to all rational men,) be such strong encouragements,
as arguments taken from necessity, will no doubt to them be superfluous.

Therefore those that practice this course, may thereby suddenly both
necessitate and Encourage all Tradesmen in the Land to do the like; which was
the thing to be proved.

May gain notwithstanding more then ordinary,

That is, though all the Tradesmen in the Land should join in this practice,
yet they may notwithstanding (if they please) order matters so, as whereby to
have one with another, as much trading as they are possibly able to manage, and
consequently may gain notwithstanding more then ordinary.

For though all the Tradesmen in the Nation, should at once join in this
Practice; yet by the free loan of those Bills and by purchasing Land with them
(morgaging that land to make them good) those Bills might (I say) be multiplied
so, as to be equal to what men's estates are otherwise worth, though never so
much increased by such quick trading; which will amount to a sum at least ten
times greater then all the money in the Land; and consequently make their
trading one with another one hundred times greater then now it is (as is
demonstraed Lib 1. Sect. 4.) if men were possibly able to manage it; therefore
what was to be proved does follow.

May desist when they please without damage,

That is, not only those who only hang out the said Flag, may after some
trial of the consequence thereof, take it in again if they see cause, without
damage either to themselves or any others; but even the Undertakers themselves,
(if they be willing so to do,) may by repayment of the total sum of the
Bills thus borrowed; viz. By delivering in, all the Bills they have in their
own hands to the said Office; and a sum in money equal to the total sum of
the Bills dispersed in the hands of others, I say by this means they may
desist when they please from this practice without damage to themselves or
others.

For whereas according to what was noted before, most undertakings that seem to
promise any considerable advantage, are of that nature as requiring a
disbursement of great sums of money from those who attempt the same, do
thereby necessitate such as would desist from further pursuing such attempt, to
lose all the money so disbursed; yet this design requiring no such
disbursement, but being carried on by a borrowed Stock, may at any time be
laid down, by repayment of the Stock so borrowed, seeing that to lay down the
practice of this enterprise, is no more I say then to pay the debt due upon
those Bills.

Considering therefore that for men to pay their Debts cannot be a damage to
themselves, (and much less to others) it may truly be said, that those who
attempt this Practice, may desist when they please without damage; which was
the thing to be proved.

The Conclusion.
And thus I conceive it is fully discovered, how it follows that the agreement
of the said tradesmen may be ordered in such sort as both they and all others
though never so poor who are in a way of Trading, may First, Multiply their
returns. Secondly, Deal only for ready pay. Thirdly, Much undersell others.
Fourthly, Put the whole Nation upon this practice. Fifthly, Gain notwithstanding
more then ordinary. Sixthly, Desist when they please without damage.


According to what was affirmed in the title page.

LIB. IV. SECT. IV.
Showing, How it follows that all the aforesaid Advantages may be effected, so
as the same shall tend much to 1. Enrich the people of this Land. 2. Disperse
the money hoarded up, and so forwards to the end of those twenty-four
particulars mentioned in the Title page.


HEre wants (I confess) in the said Italicke print the word

And,

Yet [And] being no other then a Conjunction Copulative, signify; only thus
much; that this enterprise tends to make good not only what went before, but
that also which follows according to what I am now about to demonstrate.

So as the same,

The same; That is, the very same thing which affoards all the aforesaid
advantages to the Undertakers, and those that hang out the said Flag, tends
also to produce to the Generality of the people (viz by Encouraging and
necessitating them to the same practice) all the accommodations hereafter
expressed, without any diminution to those Advantages, though the whole Nation
should join in this Enterprise, as has been already demonstrated.

Shall tend

That is, as necessarily as natural causes, to produce their proper effects;
which appears by the sequel.

Much,

That is, Many of the aforesaid 24 particulars; unto the utmost extent that in
reason may be wished or permitted; and the rest in very great measure; as will
be clear by what follows.

First, To Enrich the people of this Land.
That is, to put the Generality of the people into a capacity of bestowing
comfortable maintenance upon themselves and Families, relief of Indigent poor,
entertainment of Friends, Journeys for recreation, Physic and attendance when
sick, and such like; as much as can in reason be wished, and yet be in capacity
to lay up plentiful proportions for their posterity besides.

By bestowing as much (upon the comfortable maintenance of themselves etc.) as
can in reason be wished; I mean, either as much as they would though they were
one hundred times richer then they are; or at least as much as from year to
year can be procured for money and the best Credit, either out of the fruits of
our own soil, the trade of fishing or traffic with other Nations: for all this
must needs be the consequence of Trade and riches, when in creased to the
uttermost, the way whereunto this enterprise does discover, as is proved Lib.
1. Sect. 4. and Lib. 4. Sect. 1.

If it be questioned, whether the utmost improvement of our own soil, the trade
of fishing and traffic with other Nations would yield every year so great a
quantity of Commodity as might in reason be wished?

I answer, If the Tradesmen cannot with money and the best Credit, viz. ready
pay in the aforesaid Bills procure commodity, so fast as by reason of the
abundant riches of the people, they spend yearly upon themselves, it argues
that his trading is such as Commodities go off his hands faster then he is able
with such ready pay to procure them.

Now if it were once come to that pass, that men could sell their Commodities,
and that for ready pay, as fast as by their utmost industry they were possibly
able to procure them; it can scarce be estimated, either how much such ready
pay would encourage Industry, or how much such Industry, with such quick
returns, would increase men's wealth and stock in abundant plenty of Commodity;
by making the Land wherein they live (though the soil were never so barren,) a
kind of Storehouse or Warehouse to the whole world; seeing that if men could
find sale for one hundred times as much ware in the month as formerly, it is
not to be believed that they would fail to store themselves proportionably, in
case the whole world could but be made (by the Art and Industry of men) to
affoard it.

And to this purpose it will be needful to note what I have once observed
already; viz. That if there be but sale for Commodity in any place accessible,
all the Merchants throughout the world would be sure to send it thither in as
great proportions as could be needful; whereby such place though never so
barren of it self, being (as it were) the seat of trade, might become as full
of commodity in respect of the rest of the world, as London is to other parts
of England.

The Hollan. have put this truth out of question, by their own experience whose
Land, though so barren as it yields in a manner nothing; yet it being their
constant practice to hearken unto all Proposals, encourage such as are good,
and set on foot all that tends to the advance of trade, Industry and riches (as
conducing amongst other advantages to the increase of Custom, excise etc.) and
in all these things to use dispatch; they have almost engrossed all trading
into their own custody, and notwithstanding such Barrenness of their own soil,
are as it were the Storehouse of Europe for plenty of Commodity.

In which (by the way) that they should so much exceed, (nay that they should
come near unto) us, (in regard of the great fruit fullness of this Land in
comparison of theirs) what reason (seeing they have bin exercised with War much
longer then we) can be given, but our want of Industry and watchfulness to
take all opportunities for advance of trade amongst us?

And this does indeed demonstrate, that we in England are (as one says) like
those prodigal spendthrifts, who being Heirs to a reasonable estate; waste and
consume their sustance for want of good husbandry, till they reduce themselves
to extreme want; whereas they in Holland like those young beginners that have
little or no Stock, nor any friends to depend upon, do so seriously apply their
minds to all the methodes of thriving, as they quickly become exceeding rich.

Wherein seeing it cannot be denied, but that the many sad effects of those
amongst us, who perish for want; will leave without excuse, such as shall
neglect (in their places and calling) to husband natures liberal gifts to the
best advantage (when an easy means thereunto is discovered) I hope the fear
of God, will prevent all those whom it concerns, from sinning so much against
the light of nature, as to neglect in any measure possible, the furtherance of
that means.

But to return from whence we have digressed; as to the fruitfulnes of our
native soil; it is well known, that before our late troubles, this Land did
affoard us plenty enough; that there is like to be much of it far better
improved, both by the sale of that which has not been plowed up for these many
generations (if ever at all;) And by many excellent ways lately discovered for
improvement of Land, against the practice whereof there is no greater
discouragement then that of a high rate of interest, (as has been long since
demonstrated by those who have writ of that subject) which by means of this
enterprise will be exceedingly lessened, if not annihilated, as I shall show in
its place: To which purpose if any desire further satisfaction concerning the
improvement of Land; I refer them to a Book put forth by Captain Walt. Blithe
called the English improver; and especially to the second edition thereof which
I am informed (being now coming forth) will present the world with many
excellent discoveries never before observed: I would advise those who are
concerned therein to speak with the Author himself; who if he be able, as I
hope he is, to give a rational account of his undertakings to those that shall
converse with him: it cannot but give much satisfaction.

His lodging I believe, may be found by inquiring of him that prints his Book.
Thus much I thought good to intimate, not for any skill I have to judge of this
Authors Works; but out of a desire that all things tending to public good,
might be inquired out and furthered here, as much as they are in other parts of
the world.

Now as the Land, so no doubt the Sea, would be as helpful to us, as it is to
the Hollander; through the Trade of fishing which is of no small importance, by
reason of the many several trades that depend thereon: the much employment for
the Poor that it would occasion, and the great increase of victual which will
by that means be produced; whereby not only Fish but Flesh would fall in
price: For else the generality of the people might, (and especially the Poor
would) feed so much the more upon Fish, till the price of Flesh did thereby
fall considerably.

Add to all this that the number of persons amonst us, are (though a thing
much to be lamented) exceedingly lessened, by the abundance of Blood that has
bin so unhappily spilt in these late wars, besides the multitudes that by
reason of the new Plantations, and especially by reason of our late troubles,
have forsaken this their Native soil.

Now I say in all these respects it must needs be granted, that though the
People of this Land were generally rich, whereby they might bestow upon
themselves and families a comfortable maintenance; yet this fruit full Land, by
the help of the Sea through the trade of Fishing and traffic with other
Nations, would affoard from time to time a store as much as at each time would
be needful, or in reason desirable.

And consequently that by the use of the aforesaid Bills, in a way of Trade,
trading may be increased, and by consequence riches, and that so as whereby, to
put the generality of the people into a capacity of bestowing upon them
comfortable maintenance of themselves and families, relief of Indigent poor,
entertainment of Friends, Journeys for recreation, Physic and attendance when
sick, and such like; as much as can in reason be wished, and yet be in capacity
to lay up plentiful proportions for their posterities besides, which was the
thing to be proved.

Secondly, To disperse the money hoarded up,
The aforesaid Bills not passing about but with half money, (in case there be
money enough in the Land to double them, otherwise not but with a convenient
proportion of money;) must needs by the revolution of them, draw forth all the
money in the Land, to as quick a current through the hands of Tradesmen as the
Bills themselves, the rather for that when men find trading quick, (though they
have never so much money by them) they will (for their profit) be ready to
convert all their stock into ware or commodity; whereas otherwise rich men, are
forced to keep the most part of their estates by them in money which tends to
the destruction of Trade, and thereby to induce men to hoard up moneys so much
the more, to the greater obstruction of Trade, and so on, till all be brought
to ruin, as is demonstrated Lib. 1. Sect. 4.

Whereas whatsoever tends to the quickening of Trade, producing (for the same
reason,) the contrary effect, it follows that this enterprise tends in both
the aforesaid respects to disperse the money hoarded up.

Again, some men engrossing moneys, as others do Commodities, to the end that
moneys being scarce, the rate of Interest might be raised, if therefore (as I
shall prove hereafter) Interest by this means will come to little or nothing,
it must needs follow that such money-mongers will be prevented, and
consequently, that in this respect also, this cause will tend much to disperse
the money hoarded up.

Thirdy, To Import Bullion from Beyond Sea.
That is, to cause Silver, Gold and Foreign coin in either, to be brought
from Beyond Sea, and coined in the Tower of London, to the great increase of
money, and consequently trade and riches amongst us.

For as I shall show hereafter; by means of this enterprise it shall come to
pass, that Foreign Commodities will be cheaper here in England then in the
places from whence they are brought.

I say cheaper, by which I mean, when the Foreign Coin that such Commodities
do post our Merchants Beyond Sea, is of greater value (weight and finenesse
considered) then the price in English coin, which those Foreign Commodities
will yield here, whereby such Foreign Coin or Bullion (being brought hither)
would yield more in English money (being coined at the Tower) then such
Foreign Commodity it self; so as they who should return such coin or
Bullion, without laying it out in such commodity, would gain more then by the
return of such commodity.

Now from hence it must needs follow, that Merchants would use all means
possible to Import Bullion rather then any such Commodity; Therefore if by
means of this enterprise, it shall come to pass, that Foreign Commodities
will be cheaper here in England, then in the places from whence they are
brought (as I shall prove in its place) it cannot be denied that this
enterprise does tend much, to cause bullion to be imported from Beyond Sea,
which was the thing to be proved.

Obj. But if English Commoditys fall in price as well as Foreign, Merchants
would sell our English Commodities at so much the lower rate Beyond Sea, which
would by the same reason, occasion moneys to be exported.

Ans. Though English commodities should here fall in price never so much, if
Foreign commoditys fall here also, it does not follow that Merchants could
affoard to sell our English Commodities ever the cheaper beyond sea.

For suppose, both Foreign and domestic Commodities, were but the twentieth
part of the rate here as in other places; yet if in this case Merchants should
sell our Commodities beyond sea; at near the twentieth part of the rate as
formerly, then seeing (beyond sea) they must pay as much as ever for their
Foreign commoditys, and sell them here but at the twentieth part of the rate as
formerly, they would lose about nineteen parts of twenty by the whole return.

Whereas on the other side, if they gain 20 s. for 12. d. by the Commodities
exported, then though by the cheapenesse of Foreign Commodities here, they
lose 18 s 6 d. per l. by Importing of them, yet they gain 50. per 100. by the
whole return; and would in this case, gain no less then 20 s. for 12 d. if
they should return the Foreign coin it self, without buying any such commodity.

It is clear then, that though domestic as well as Foreign commodities, do
fall in price here in England; yet Merchants cannot affoard to sell our English
commodities ever the cheaper beyond sea, so long as Foreign commodities
continues beyond sea, at the same rate as formerly; because by paying dearer
beyond sea, for those Foreign commodities then they sell them for here, they
sustain a loss, which they must make up with some profit upon the whole
return, by selling our English Commodities there, as deer as ever. And for the
further clearing of this mystery take one more instance: suppose they lose
tenpounds in the hundred by the Commodities imported, then though they gain
thirty in the hundred by the Commodities exported, yet by the whole return they
gain clear but twenty pounds in the hundred; whereas I say again, if they could
return the Foreign coin or Bullion, they would save the said loss of ten
pounds in the hundred, and consequently gain a thirty in the hundred by the
whole return.

If it be objected again, that in this case, men would Import no other
commodity but Bullion, because it would be most profitable to them.

I answer, this Nation does scarce stand in need of any Foreign Commodity
except Sugar; yet if our Merchants cannot procure their return in Bullion, they
must return other Commodities whether they will or no; for other States, using
their best endeavor to prevent the exporting of Bullion, Merchants cannot with
safety make (frequently) their returns therein.

If it be questioned, whether these Bills serving in the place of money, would
not occasion that money being in this respect of less necessity, would be
exported?

I answer; that money (I confess in this case) would not be so necessary, nay
if we had not one dram of money or Bullion in the Land, yet having a sufficient
quantity of these Bills amongst us, I do not see what considerable
inconvenience could follow in any respect whatsoever; for whether a Nation have
any Silven amongst them or no, yet if they can Trade as well without it, what
need they care? for their estates in Vendible Commodities, (and consequently
their Credit) is of as real value as if it were in money.

If it be replied, that money would be necessary for the retale of commodities,
payment of Soldiers and such like.

I answer, this might (for a need, as I have already in effect intimated) be
done by these Bills without money; yet rather then want money for such an
occasion, I will not say we might coin Farthings and halfpence that should be
worth in sine copper about the value they are taken for; But we might purchase
Bullion with some of our commodities; a law being made that Merchants shall
make, at least the twelsth part of their returns in Bullion; which would
enrich the Nation, more then such slight and Tall Commodities as are usually
returned at deer rates, in stead of those many and excellent Merchandises that
this Nation yields.

But I answer again; that though in this case money would not be so necessary
as formerly, yet that would be no motive at all unto the exporting of our coin;
for it is well known, that particular persons in their dealings in a way of
Trade, do not look so much at what is most necessary for the Commonwealth, as
what is most Profitable for themselves, now certain I am, that as the
multiplying of these Bills amongst us (according to what is already proved)
would in one respect make the importing of Bullion, more profitable then any
other commodity; so it is clear, that upon no consideration whatsoever, it can
make the exporting of coin more profitable to them, then otherwise it would be.

If it be said that it may make money and Bills so plentiful here, as in other
countries where money is scarce, men will give higher rates for it, and
consequently, it will be exported to those parts.

I answer, the scarcity of money in those other parts, cannot proceed from our
plenty of Bills in England.

Secondly, they must give such higher rates either in money, in commodity, or
in exchange by Bills of exchange; if in money, then they lose more Bullion then
they gain by the bargain; if in Commodities, that is no otherwise, but to sell
their commodities so much the cheaper, upon condition they may have their
returns made them in money, and not otherwise; and why, if money be scarce
here, may not we in England take the same course, much rather then any other
Nation, having in our own hands, all Commodities that are merely necessary for
man's subsistence? And thirdly, if in exchange by Bills of exchange (if I say in
this) they give a higer rate for our coin then formerly, it will be the
occasion of importing their coin hither, and not of exporting ours to other
parts.

As to instance, if any Nation do give for any sum in English coin, a sum of
greater value in their own coin; it follows, that they who having such sum in
Foreign coin due to them, should receive it by exchange in English coin they
should thereby receive a sum of less value, then that which was due unto them
in Foreign coin; and therefore, (aiming at their own profit) would endeavor to
import such Foreign coin hither, and not to receive it by such exchange in
English coin.

By all this then you see it is not with money, as it is with commodity, that
the scarcer and (by consequence) the deerer it is in any place, the more like
it is to be sent into that place; but the contrary.

If it should be yet further objected, that such increase of Bills amongst us,
may occasion Foreign Nations to enhance their own coin, and by consequence, to
undervalue ours; whereby it should follow, that a Merchant having an hundred
pounds due to him here in English coin, cannot get so much in value, returned
beyond sea in Foorreign coin, so as if he could export his 100 l. English coin,
it would yield him more beyond sea, then by Bill of exchange he can get there
paid him in Foreign coin.

I answer, the increasing of these Bills amongst us here in England, can be no
motive to other Nations to enhance their money; they being every whit as like
to do this, whether we take any such course of trading with these Bills, or no;
which yet if they should, it would do us so much the more prejudice, by how
much the greater a damage it will be to this Nation to have their moneys
exported, when they have no other means to maintain Trade amongst them.

Yet in a word, and so to pass from this, why may not we Inhance our monis (in
order to exchanges abroad, though not to rents and debts amongst our selves) as
well as other Nations do theirs? and why should not we be as careful of our
own preservation, as the very Persians, Turks etc? by applying our selves to
the use of some effectual means, whereby the price of our exchanges may be so
high, as to occasion that no Merchants shall return their moneys, by exchange
without great loss; so as then having no Trade amongst us by exchange for
moneys with other Nations, but merely by Importing of moneys or commodities,
and that of moneys being (by means of this enterprise) made most profitable of
the two, this undertaking shall, (in this respect) tend to much the more, to
the importing of Bullion from beyond sea according to what was here to be
proved.

4. To raise Banks of money in diverse places.
That is, when this Enterprise shall be practiced not only in London, but in
most of the chief Cities and Towns in England, if those of this Engagement
shall think fit to cause any considerable sums of money (payable to them) to
be paid in to the said Office there to lie in Bank for exchange of those Bills
when need requires, it must needs occasion the raising of so many Banks, as
there are of such Offices.

Yet, because the greatest Banks of money whatsoever, could affoard no one
advantage, but what will follow in as full a measure, from the use of these
Bills alone, though no such Banks were raised (as appears by the particulars
in the Title Page and because Banks (being in money) are liable to hazard,
through the unfaithfulnes of Officers entrusted therein, and diverse other
ways; whereby thousands are in danger of ruin at once, (to any one of which
hazards, this enterprise is no ways incident,) I shall not put any stresse
upon this, but refer it to the consideration of others.

5. To settle a secure and known credit.
That is, both as safe and public as that of the Chamber of London; Bank of
Amsterdam or any which on earth can be established, as is demonstrated Lib. 3.
Sect. 4. The great advantage whereof is the Argument of the whole Treatise.

6. To make such Credit current.
That is to pass by Bills from hand to hand in the place of money, which (I
say) may as easily be effected here as Bills of far less credit in other parts
of the world are made Passable there; these being such as will yield the money
they are taken for in hand, if the possessor of them has a mind to sell them,
as is evidently cleared in Lib. 2. Sect. 5. and Lib. 3. Sect. 3. 5, 6. and 7.

7. To extend such credit to any degree needful.
That is to multiply the number of the aforesaid Bills, so as to equalize in
value men's estates in Commodity, if that were needful; Lib. 2. Sect. 3. And
by consequence, to make men's trading one hundred times greater then formerly,
as is demonstrated Lib. 1. Sect. 4. and Lib. 2. Sect. 3.

8. To quicken the revolution of money and credit.
That an increase of money (not hoarded up) or that which goes for such, does
occasion an increase of Trade, that such increase of Trade, does quicken the
current of such money (or whatsoever is taken in stead thereof) by encouraging
men through such quick returns of Commodity, to lay out in such commodity all
they receive, with the utmost speed possible, whereby the same money, resting
no where, must needs occasion a quick current thereof; is sufficiently
demonstrated in Lib. 1. Sect. 3.4.

9. To diminish the Interest for moneys.
To diminish it (I say) so as to make it suddenly fall to very little, and at
last to nothing.

For who will put in security to borrow money upon Interest, when he may upon
like security, have such Bills as will pass in the place of money lent him
gratis, and that in such a way, as whereby to be brought into a capacity of
multiplying his trading to the utmost degree possible?

This advantage will be of great concernment in many respects, as passing from
one particular to another, I have, (partly already noted) and shall further
note, where occasion is offered.

10. To make Commodity supply the place of money.
Commodity supplies the place of money, two ways; either when by reason of an
extraordinary quickness of trading, it is (as they say) every man's money; and
becomes so Vendible, as men could not lose to take it for money it self, at the
rate of the Market; and this is no more then the effect of trade, when quickened
to the utmost period-Secondly, Commodity supplyeth the place of money, when
money (or that which goes for such) is so plentiful as any man that has
commodity, and consequently Credit, may upon morgaging thereof, borrow such
money without paying Interest, and so may obtain new ware, and yet keep the old
commodity (which gives him this Credit) still in his custody.

Now, both these are the undeniable effects of this enterprise, and being put
together, do like two fummes not added, but multiplied each by other, produce a
third, much greater then the total of both: For the more saleable commodity
is, the better security it is for borrowing money thereupon; and the better
security it is the less are men constrained to undersell it, for procuring
such money, and consequently the more saleable it is; hence it is yet so much
the better security, therefore also yet so much the more saleable, and so ad
infinitum; hereupon, (I say) these two advantages being put together, do tend
to multiply each other, whereas either of them alone, makes good what was
affirmed, namely, that this enterprise tends to make commodity supply the
place of money.

Now, whereas I here speak of Commodities being security for the borrowing of
money, (by which money I mean the aforesaid Bills) yet I would not have it to
be understood, as if the Company before mentioned, should ordinarily accept of
Commodity for their security; but my meaning is, that those who have an Estate
in Commoditity, if they make over that estate to such their friends or
acquaintance, as being of sufficient ability, are willing to become bound as
sureties for them, to the said Company, for borrowing of the said Bills; those
sureties causing themselves to be insured against hazards of Fire, theft, and
all such like sudden and considerable losses, and also engaging the principal
to permit them to take a frequent account of their ordinary gains and losses;
hereby if the sureties find the stock of the Principal to be at any time
diminished, they may cause him to return a proportionable quantity of the Bills
thus borrowed; so as from time to time to equalize the Bills borrowed, to the
rest of the Principalls estate.

All this being done, I do not see that such sureties can incur any loss, but
what they might easily have been able to prevent: for all sudden damages and
disasters being insured against, it is not possible for a man to lose above the
one half of his stock so sudainly, as not to be foreseen; in which case, the
other half, will serve to pay the debt, due upon these Bills.

All which things for that they tend to show how commodity may be made
equinalent to money, (by being sufficient security for borrowing of that, which
goes for money) were meet in this place to be inserted.

11. To ingrosse the Trade of Europe.
The Hollander, (having a great stock) will sometimes ingrosse a commodity
from the Merchants of all other nations, in what land soever it is to be found;
and then agree not to part with it again, but at their own rate.

I commend not this course, in all cases; yet for a people to be in capacity to
practice it when need requires, whereby they may be able to repay other Nations
with their own coin, if for their necessary defense they be justly provoked
thereunto, is very fit and requisite.

Now, as it is clear, that the greater stock a people have, the better they
shall be enabled to Vye with others at this kind of Game; so it is already
demonstrated that by the multiplication of these Bills men's stocks and estates
may in short time be extended to the utmost degree needful.

But further, according to the words of Mr. Robinson before cited, the greater
trade of one country, has a capacity of undermining and eating out, the lesser
Trades of other countries, that is, by buying cheaper and selling for less
profit; And so selling the same commodities as cheap perhaps, as other Nations
can buy them, it must needs tend to Ingrosse all the Trade into their own
hands; as the Hollander has by this means done by the Trade of fishing:
Therefore this enterprise tends much to ingrosse the Trade of Europe.

12. To fill the Land with Commodities.
When matters are so ordered, as men do not generally keep their Estates by
them in money, their Trading, consequently, their Stocks and estates in
Commodity, must needs increase the faster, by how much the more such money does
increase amongst them.

Now, by means of this enterprise, the aforesaid Bills; Therefore also
Trading, consequently men's stocks and Estates, in Commodity, therefore
Commodity; may be increased to the utmost degree that can in reason be wished;
as is already sufficiently demonstrated.

13. To abate the price of Commodity.
This Enterprise tends effectually, to abate the price of Commodity, four
ways; 1. By increasing the plenty thereof, Lib. 1. Sect. 6. 2. By quickening of
returns, whereby men are enabled to live upon less profit per l. Lib. 1.
Sect. 7. 3. By reducing Interest to nothing; whereby men's bargains in a way of
Trade, purchase, planting, Building etc. are rated accordingly. 4. By inabling
some to undersell others; whereby others are necessitated to sell as cheap as
they; and so on, till this practice does become universal Lib. 4. Sect. 2.


Now, if the price of Commoditys fall never so much in England, yet such fall
does not hinder a further fall: for though, (as is already noted) both Foreign
and domestic Commodities, should fall till those things which are now sold at
20 s. may be had for 12. d. yet seeing he that receives this 12. d. can procure
as much new Commodity therewith, as formerly with his 20. s. it must needs come
to pass, that by the same reason as Commodities fell to this low rate, they
may fall still more and more perpetually.

Further, in case Merchants (who export our English Commodities) should
purchase them here at the twentieth part of the rate as formerly, then (though
by such a fall in the price of Commodities in England, Foreign as well as
domestic Commodities be sold at the twentieth part of the rate as formerly,
yet) they may affoard to sell their Foreign Commodities also at the twentieth
part of the rate as formerly, and still gain as much per l. as ever, by the
whole return.

And therefore, that which occasions in England, a considerable fall in the
price of Commodities in General, must needs occasion a fall in the price as
well of Foreign as of English Commodities, although they should come to that
low rate, as to be sold cheaper in England then they were bought beyond sea;
and from hence follows one thing, that in the particulars touching the
importing of Bullion was taken for granted; viz. That this enterprise tends
to occasion Foreign Commodities to become cheaper here, then in the places
from whence they are brought; Therefore This enterprise tends to abate the
price of Commodity; and that still more and more perpetually.

14. To provide store against Famine.
That is, when corn (or any provision fit to be store up) is cheap in any Land
or Nation whatsoever; it may by this means be bought up, and pawned for Bills
(according to such quantity as shall be allowed by authority) with which Bills
(as with a new stock) men may continue to Trade, keeping their corn or such
like commodity, till a time of scarcity; And this will both affoard advantage
to those that store it up, and help much to mitigate the dearth, which
otherwise would sometimes ensue.

For though, such storing up of corn or other provision, as it is managed by
men looking solely at their own private advantage, is a practice much abused to
the oppression (and not relief) of the poor; yet that should not debar men
from the right and lawful Use thereof, in regard that (if honestly managed) it
tends as much, to the releife of the poor in a time of dearth, as any one thing
whatsoever; Thus then it appears that this enterprise, tends to provide store
against Famine.

15. To relieve and employ the poor.
To relieve them, viz. First, by occasioning a fall in the price of
Commodities. Secondly, by providing store against Famine. Thirdly, by enriching
the generality of the people, through which means both the number of those
that stand in need of relief, are decreased, by growing rich; and also those
that should relieve them are so much the more increased, both in number and
estate. Fourthly, by erecting Pawne-houses, through which, matters may be so
ordered, as these Bills may be lent without Interest for some small charge per
Cent. toward the maintenance of an Office; And that not only for
inconsiderable sums, in the manner of Bridges in Flanders, but for sums of
great value to accommodate Merchants and others. And hereby also it must needs
come to pass, that not only extortion, but even Interest of moneys must needs
come suddenly to nothing. But of this (God permitting) more hereafter, if need
require.

Therefore, this enterprise tends much to relieve the poor, which was the
first thing to be proved.

Secondly, to employ them. First by increase of Trade; for without trading
there cannot be sufficient employment for such poor, as are willing to take
pains, much less for others. Secondly, by enriching the people, whereby they
are enabled to maintain more Servants and Attendants, both in reference to
their Trades and Families, and that both in their health and sickness.

Thirdly, by men's putting their nearest Friends and relations that are
destitute of any means of livelihood into some credible way of employment:
For men that are rich themselves, will be loath to see their nearest relations
perish, (or to maintain them at their own charge,) when through a general
quickness of Trading, the means of putting them into a thriving Condition, is
made Feasible.

Fourthly, through the abatement of Interest, whereby those monied men who are
destitute of the skill of any Trade (of which there are very many) would be
glad to lend their stock upon reasonable conditions, to such honest and
wel-governed persons, as having skill in a Trade are out of present employment,
for want of stock of their own; And this no doubt would occasion such men to be
sought after, and put in a way, not only of livelihood, but of thriving.

Fifthly; such Officers as shall at any time be employed in setting the poor on
work, and entrusted with a stock to that end; may by only hanging out such a
Flag as is before mentioned, find sale for their Commodities, and that with
ready pay in money or Bills, though they should prepare them never so fast;
without which it is manifest, their attempt would be both a prejudice to
themselves, and to those poor that are willing to take pains for a livelihood:
and likewise these Officers, if they put in security may also double such their
stock with the yearly increase thereof; Therefore this enterprise tends much,
and in many respects to employ the poor; Which was the second thing here to be
proved.

16. To augment Custom and Excise.
According to the increase of Trading, such is the increase of Custom and
Excise; which if Trading were multiplied proportionably, might serve in the
place of all taxes, with a sufficient over plus besides, to the great advantage
of the State, and ease of the People.

17. To promote the sale of Lands.
1. It is a rule that the decrease of Interest, does increase the price of
Lands.

2. Who will not buy Land when by morgaging the same, he may have his stock
restored in Bills, whereby to follow a Trade?

3. It will be for the advantage of this Company, to purchase Land, in manner
as is declared Lib. 2. Sect. 1. Whereby they may increase the number of the
said Bills, until they have multiplied their Trading, unto the utmost degree
possible.

Therefore this enterprise tends in diverse respects, to promote the sale of
Lands.

18. To remove the causes of imprisonment for Debt.
Seeing by this means, all men that will but hang out the said Flag, may have
as much Trading as they are able to manage with ready pay, in the aforesaid
Bills; (the truth of which I have already sufficiently demonstrated;) It must
needs tend to occasion that trading upon private credit, (which does occasion
many men's running in Debt, further then they are able to satisfy) will soon be
laid down: Therefore this enterprise tends much to remove the causes of
imprisonment for debt.

19. To lessen the hazard of Trading on Credit.
For seeing by this means all Trading on private Credit, will be laid down and
that the hazard of Trading upon the Credit of this Company, will not be
considerable, in regard that the Security for making good what they undertake
is (matters being ordered as is declared) no less then equal to that of the
Chamber of London, Bank of Amsterdam or any which on earth can be given, as is
fully cleared Lib. 3. Sect. 4. Therefore this enterprise shall tend to lessen
(and in a manner to annihilate) the hazard of Trading on credit; which (in a
word) will be no small encouragement to trade.

20. To prevent high-way-Thieves.
If matters be ordered so, as these Bills though surprised in the highways,
shall neither be any benefit to the surpriser, nor any loss to him, from whom
they are taken (which how it may be done, I shall show hereafter if need
require) it will occasion that men will seldom (if ever) send any considerable
sums, from one Town to another in money; but exchanging their money for Bills
(such Bills being as good (I say) as any Bonds whatsoever) will rather send
those Bills in stead of money, whereby such robers as aim at the surprising of
money, will be disapointed.

Now, seeing such Robbers will not find it at all worth their time, much less
so apparent hazard of their lives and fortunes, to make a common practice of
stealing goods, which in regard they must speedily sell them, before they could
meet with a chapman (that would give them any thing worth the labor of
carriage,) could not choose but be in great danger to be apprehended especially
(I say) if they continue this practice.

Hence, then it follows, that this enterprise tends to remove all
opportunities of advantage from high-way-thieves, by that course of life; That
is, to prevent high-way-thieves, which was the thing to be proved.

21. To multiply Ships for defense at Sea.
It is a rule that the more Trading does increase in any place, the more Ships
multiply in that place; especially if Interest fall to little or nothing; For
by this means, men may procure money as well to build ships, as to improve
Land or Build houses at a low rate; now the more ships any Nation has, the
more strong they are at Sea; Therefore this enterprise tends to multiply ships
for defense at Sea; And whether to this purpose it might not be meet there were
an Act against employing any Ships, but our own, I submit to consideration.

22. To multiply means for defense at Land.
A people being generally exceeding rich, and in a thriving way of Trade, the
charge of maintaining a considerable Army (with full and due pay,) is in
comparison of a Burden, but as a Fly upon the Back of a Camel.

Now, this full and due pay, is in such sort the sinews of War, that (as it
is very hard keeping soldiers together without it; so) there is no great fear
of wanting soldiers, where such pay is to be had; Hence, it is clear, that
riches is the principal means of a peoples defense; and consequently, that
this course tends to multiply means for defense at Land; as does more fully
appear upon a due consideration of the particulars following, concerning taking
away advantages of opposition.

23. To incorporate the whole strength of England.
By both encouraging and necessitating the generality of men throughout the
Land, to join in this engagement, it will follow, that the most considerable
part of the whole Nation, will be incorporated into this one secrety or
company; which (as matters may be ordered, will tend so to resolve all their
Interests into one, as men will not be in capacity though they would, to side
with parties, so as there will lie a kind of necessity upon them for their meet
subsistence, to stick together as one man for their mutual defense; therefore
this enterprise (at lest as it may be ordered,) shall tend to Incorporate the
whole strength of England; Neither can this be accounted a thing of small
concernment.

24. To take away advantages of opposition.
When a people are very poor, the maintaining of a small Army, is accounted a
great burden. And that together with the want of employment and other means of
subsistence, does exceedingly increase men's discontent, and vexations of mind,
which do much dispose men to turbulency and commotion, especially having most
of them, little other business or hopes, any other ways then by fishing n
troubled waters (as they say) to preserve themselves from perishing, for want
of maintenance; Whereas if men had generally as much Trading as they were able
to manage, it must needs multiply such a heap of businesses upon them, as
wereby to take off their minds from assisting such, as would pursue advantates
of public ^isturbance.

2. Men having generally little or nothing except a miserable life to lose,
they care not how often the Land wherein they live, be exposed to Plunderings
and public confusion: Whereas if the generality of them, had great estates in
the same Land (like several Merchants that had great adventures in the same
bottom) with a thriving Trade and much employment, whereby to divert and
delight their thoughts, though the profits, pleasure and necessary occasions
thereof, they would be so far from promoting, as they would be deeply engaged
to endeavor the preventing of all occasions that might conduce, to the
stirring up of new troubles, as tending to deprive them of that which most men
account their chiefest happiness, viz. the riches and pleasures of this life.

3. That all Vagabondes and idle Runnagadoes, should be not only reduced to
some order and discipline, but also put in some way of employment is no doubt,
one excellent quallification of a wel-governed Commonwealth, as being a
principal means to prevent occasions of public disturbance: But how this
can be effected with near that advantages to the Undertakers, or without
prejudice to such poor, as are willing to take pains for a livelihood, in any
place where trade is so dead, as it will not affoard sufficient employment,
even for such poor, who are of civil behavior and good quality; How (I say
this can be done except by some means that must tend to quicken our decayed
Trade, is beyond my present apprehension

For certain Iam, that if there be not sale for any considerable part of the
ware, that might be wrought even by such poor, who are willing to take pains
therein; Then to set others upon the work, and find no other means to vend
the same, is but to take the means of livelihood out of the hands of those
that best deserve it.

Yet, except some way be found whereby such idle persons as aforesaid, may be
reduced to Order and employment, it cannot (I say) be expected, but the
Commonwealth should be Subject to much disturbance thereby.

For, as it is the want of Lively-hoode, that multiplies Men's discontents and
vexations, so it is the want of employment that not only deprives them of
Livelihood, but increases the number (as by Swarms) of Roagnes and
Cut-Throates in the Highways and other places; Who not being Engaged in
employment, (but being wholely at their own dispose,) are in their Wandering
Progress, ready pressed upon all occasions for any mischevious design, that
may tend to disturb the peace of a Commonwealth.

4. Money, is of that nature, as the multiplycation thereof amongst a people,
does not only encourage an enemy, in hopes of surprising considerable sums
thereof, so much the more easily, but being seized on tends both to maintain
the enemies War, and to diminish the means of their own defense: And
therefore to enrich a people, with such money as will do the enemy no more
pleasure though it were taken, then so much waste-paper, nor yet the loss of
it be any damage at all unto those from whom it is taken, is a very great
advantage, and does discourage an Enemy from attempting designs upon such a
people.

But that in reference to those Bills, matrers might easily be ordered so as to
effect this, I could evidently show, if it were not too large to be at present
insisted on.

All these things considered, I conclude, that this enterprise tends much,
and in many respects to take away advantages of opposion, which was the thing
here to be proved.

And thus in brief, (to avoid repetitions) are all the perticulars in the
title page fully demonstrated, and most of them in a far greater measure, then
was therein exqressed.

The Conclusion to the whole Treatise.
HAving thus discovered as much as for the present, I conceive needful in
relation to this enterprise with the consequences thereof, and how all the
perticulars in the Title Page are made good by this undertaking, and most of
them to a far greater extent, then is there expressed, it was my intention here
to have put a period to my labors, in order to this work for the present.

But meeting in the very close thereof, with a book called consuetudo vel lex
Mercatoria, or, the Ancient law Merchant, wherein the Author takes special
notice of the way of Trading used in Flanders, already by me mentioned, which
is by accepting of the Bills of particular persons, in stead of money, which he
calls Bills Obligatory, it being, as in page 71 line 19. He affirms, the most
usual way of buying and selling Commodities beyond the seas, viz. At Amserdam,
Middleburrow, Hamburrow, and other places, I cannot but desire it may be
observed how exceedingly he (being a Merchant) not only commends (in several
places of his book) this way of Trading but also does plead for the use of the
like practice here in England, as that which tends to many great and
considerable advantages, chiefly to the benefit of Merchants, in order to the
increase of their Trade.

For to use his own words in page 73 line 1. If (says he) this Man (viz. one
who should accept of these Bills, for Ware in stead of money will not ride out
(as they say) the time of the payment of the said Bills, he may go to another
man and buy other commoditys therewith, as if it were with ready money the time
only considered; nay more, if he will have ready money for these Bills, he may
sell them to other Merchants that are monyed men, and abating for the Interest
for the time, and commonly one month over, according to the rate as they can
agree, and as money is plentiful, they shall have money at all times to employ
in Commodities, or to deliver by exchange, or to pay debts withal, or to carry
home in specie, or for any other purpose at their pleasure, which (says he) is
Commodious for many young Merchants, having small stocks, as also for all men
upon all occasions; for it is properly as money paid by assignation; whereby
great matters are compassed in the Trade of Merchandise, the Commodities are
sooner vended in all places, the Custom and imposition of Princes do increase,
the poor and Mechanical people are set on work, men are better assured in
their payments, the counterfeiting of Bills, and differences are prevented, the
more Commodities are sold, the less ready money is transported, and life is
infused into traffic and trade for the general good; And herein (says he) we
see and may observe, that things which be indeed, and things which are not
indeed, but taken to be Indeed, may produce all one effect; and every man is
enabled with his own means and credit, to augment Commerce.

By many such arguments in diverse parts of his Treatise he labors to press
the use of this practice here in England, to which purpose see page 48.
beginning at line 53. page 71. line 49. page 73. line 43.

I find in this Author likewise, many other things concerning exchange of money
by Bills of exchange. (as in Page 277. line 24. and page 275. and 276, and 277,
and 278, and 279.) enterest for moneys, (page 223, and 224) Pawning of goods
(page 227, 228, and 229.) all tending to confirm the truth of what I have
asserted in these particulars.

Neither, do I find any thing at all by him affirmed, that does seem (in the
least measure (to contradict what I have here purposed, save in this, that he
takes the Vulgar opinion concerning plenty of money (that it makes things deer)
for granted, without distinguishing of circumstances or considering where, when
or how, it may become the occasion of increasing the plenty of Commodity, and
inabling men by their quick returns, to take less profit in the pound, and by
consequence, to sell there ware cheaper then formerly.

Now, I Confess, it must needs be granted (as I have already observed) that
where an increase of money does not occasion a proportionable increase in the
plenty of commodity, it does tend to cause an increase in the price thereof;
Yet the same Author in two several places where he says, that plenty of money
makes things deer, viz in page 45. line 5. and page 177. line 7. does also
acknowledge; that plenty of commodity makes them cheap: Now by his own
confession, increase of money does increase Trading, which yet would be to no
purpose, if it did not increase men's Stocks and estates in commodity; that is,
if it did not increase the plenty of commodity in a Land; and besides, it is
already proved that it is a rule amongst Tradesmen to proportion their Stocks
in commodity, according to the quickness or slownesse of Trading; so that
plenty of commodity (in any Land where Commodity enough is to be had for money
or the best credit) must needs be the effect of a quick Trade, which is
occasioned by plenty of money.

This, if he had duly weighed, and had withal considered that scarcity of
money is the means whereby obstructing the sale of Commodity, men through
their slow returns are forced (for their mere subsistence) to take a more then
ordinary Profit in the pound, to the raising of the price of their Wares, the
rather for that scarcity of money causing a high rate of Interest, does enforce
Tradesmen to advance their gains per l. proportionably, as this Author
himself urges in diverse places viz. page 177. line 43. and Page 2^2. line 50.

These things (I say) if he had considered; he would without question, have
fully agreed unto what I have formerly observed to this purpose; besides that
this Enterprise being ordered so, as I have proposed, tends to put some men
into a capacity of thriving by underselling others, which of it self alone must
needs be a most effectual means, to occasion a considerable fall in the price
of Commodities.

Yet if his bare affirmation without any argument, wherein he appears to be
merely swayed by the vulgar opinion, and the seeming probability of the thing
(not diving seriously into the matter do bear more weight in the eye of any
man's reason, then those arguments which I have aleaged to the contrary, let
such men take it for granted, that Commodities would by means of this
Enterprise rise in price; And yet nothing can be inferred from thence, to prove
any, damage considerable to be incident to this, undertaking.

For, though (as I have already observed,) Commodity were now ten times deerer
then formerly, yet if a people have ten times as much money (or money worth) to
purchase the same, the advantage in this case, must needs be as great as the
inconvenience; especially such deernesse of commodity being (as the same Author
affirms) a principal means to occasion the importing of Bullion; by making
the price of our English Commodities to rise beyond the Seas.

And yet further, let it be remembered to this purpose, what I have already
demonstrated, viz. That it is a mere absurdity to imagine that an increase of
money should occasion an increase in the price of commodities, fully
proportionable to such increase of money, because in this case, such increased
Stock of moneys would go no further in the price of commodity then the former
small stock did, and consequently would not increase the sat thereof, therefore
would not at all increase the price thereof.

And as to the price of English Commodities beyond the Seas, it is clear, that
they are deer or cheap in Foreign parts according to the rIches or poverty of
the people of this Land; for if the people of England be very poor (so as not
being able to bestow upon themselves the tenth part perhaps of those
Commodities, which the fruits of our native soil would affoard, and which if
their Trading and by consequence their riches were multiplied proportionably
they would gladly spend amongst themselves in a Comfortable subsistence, in
this case, the overplus of Commodities are sent to other Nations, which does
occasion such plenty of English commodities, in other parts, as the price
thereof beyond the seas must needs fall accordingly; Whereas if through the
expenses of the people of this Land, there were little of our own commodities
to be spared for Transportation, it must needs be acknowledged that the
scarcity of our Commodities beyond sea, would make them dear in Foreign parts,
and by consequence would be as means to occasion the importing of Bullion, as
follows from what I have already proved to that effect. In which respect,
whether commodities grow deerer, or cheaper here in England, then now they are;
it will be no more considerable then whether we agree to measure our cloths and
stuffs by the yard or by the ell, in ease we can but procure wands enough, of
an ell long to measure them by.

Seeing therefore, that something to the same purpose which I here propose,
has bin and still is practiced by Merchants in Foreign parts, to the great
improvement of their Trade, and would (as this Author testifies) tend as much
to the benefit of this Nation, as I am confident, all judicious men must needs
acknowledge.

And considering that this Enterprise may (according to what I have proposed)
be both begun and carried on, by a very small number of men agreeing together; I
hope the people of this Land, (and chiefly the Merchants of London, whom it
most concerns) will not show themselves more negligent of the means of their
own necessary preservation, then all other people in the world besides, when it
is well known, that as things now stand in England, we are in as much need of
using our utmost endeavors, for husbanding matters to the best advantage for
increase of Trade, as ever any people were.

And if for the stirring up of this endeavor, amongst the people of this
Nation, God shall make use of these my poor labors; I shall think my self
happy in being so far forth serviceable to the public: Howsoever, having now
discovered that which I am certain, would tend effectually to the introducing
of all those particulars declared in the Title Page, and cleared the several
consequences thereof so, as it does manifestly appear, that there wants
nothing, but the mere consent of men, whereby to invest themselves with the
full accomplishment of those considerable advantages, which to all lovers of
their Country, (yea of themselves) cannot choose but be (in referrence to
riches, and in great measure to peace,) the most desirable and important
amongst all things that are earthly, in regard especially, of the state of
affairs in this Nation at present, I could judge it no other, then my duty to
lay down the same to public view, leaving the issue wholely to God the Author
of all goodness; unto whom alone all glory (as in duty) be ascribed, for these
and all other the tenders and proffers, which he makes of any favors, Benefits
or blessings, conducing to the inward or outward weal of Mankind.

To the Honorable COUNCIL, for Advancing and regulating of TRADE.
HONORABLE GENTLEMEN,
I Cannot but acknowledge it worthy serious consideration, that the same
providence which has thus far carried on my weak endeavors, should at the
very time of publishing thereof, put it into the hearts of the Parliament, by
an Act for Advancing and regulating the Trade of this Commonwealth, to
Authorize Commissioners, in order thereunto; that (amongst other things) they
might advise, how new ways may be found out, for the better venting of
Commodities, and report the same accordingly.

And for that a great part of this Treatise, was printed diverse months before
the coming forth of the aforesaid Act, when there was no Authority under the
Parliament, to whom I could properly address my self, for the furtherance
thereof, I thought no means more effectual, to make way for the promoting of
these my endeavors, then to dedicate the same to the Parliament, and present
diverse members thereof, with several of the title-pages, wherein the effect of
the whole treatise is comprised, to the intent that if they thought it
convenient, they might be instrumental for the advancement of Trade, and the
procuring of some Act in order thereunto; unto whom therefore I acknowledge my
self, in this particular much obliged.

Yet I must confess, that if I had not intended this work, chiefly fotr he
satisfaction of the vulgar, and confuting (if possible) all gainsayers,
(endeavoring the proof of those things, which otherwise I should have thought
evident enough of themselves) but had prepared the same merely for the perusal
of such, as (doubtless) are better acquainted with the grounds and principles
of traffic, then I my self, much of this pains might have bin spared, and the
particulars said down with greater brevity.

But being sensible, that this Treatise (as it is at present) is scarce ripe
for public view, in respect of some impertinences (besides diverse remarkable
escaps, through negligence of the printer, both in words and sentences) which I
must needs say, might have bin (by a more retired and deliberate revisall, in
great measure) prevented, and the whole matter better digested, had not my
proceedings therein, been by much other public employment, interrupted.

Yet, considering the necessity of a speedy promoting some such effectual
course as this, in regard of the languishing estate of Trade in this Land, and
especially seeing God by his good providence, does now make inquiry after
things of this nature, even from Authority; I have resolved in relation to my
duty, rather to let it thus escape in this rough draught, then merely for
concealing mine own private imperfections, either to omit or defer, the first,
or least opportunity of doing good to the public.

My only request therefore, of this Honorable Council is, that ye would
vouchsafe so far forth, to testify your acceptance of my real intentions in
these my poor endeavors, as notwithstanding either the prolixity thereof, or
the multiplicity of your other public affairs, to spare a little time and
pains in some serious manner, for perusing the fame; and then I hope, that God,
by your due consideration of, and sympathizing with the distressed condition of
this Nation, through the decay of Trade,) will move your hearts to improve your
present call and trust, by the speedyest and utmost promoting of whatsoever
just proposals, shall conduce to public advantage, for the relief of this
afflicted people.

And if I may here, ad some few lines by way of digression, I am much the
rather encouraged, to expect a blessing upon your actings, in order to the
advancement of Trade; in regard that the generality of the people of this
generation, have made such an Idol of him, who was guilty of the blood of so
many thousand Saints and others, as I am confident many of those wretchs,
though they had certainly known, by testimony from heaven, that God had hated
his proceedings, yet they would still rather have bin on his side then on Gods.
So that if God by his just providence, should now (in spite of all their
maledictions, for that which they would have as murder, to be revenged from
heaven, by evil success) bless this nation with greater riches and
prosperity then ever before, even under that very same Authority, who were the
instruments of doing justice upon him, what a testimony would it be of Gods
high displeasure, against such obstinate Idoliters?

Whereby, though (in that condition) they have no hope but in this life, yet so
great is their malice, as they would account all their own shar in earthly
blessings (proceeding to them by means of such instruments) to be more
greevous then the greatest adversity whatsoever: which (amongst many other
arguments) does induce me verily to believe, that God as he has with a high
hand justified the Parliament (against such vain expectation of heavens
revenge, upon their pretended murder) in the late unparrelleld successes of our
armies; will not fail still marvellously to prosper the same Authority, by
making them the Instruments of wealth as well as conquest, to the yet greater
vexation and astonishment of all such unplacable and malicious enemies, to God
and his people. If therefore in this hopeful attempt, God shall see good to
make you thus Isntrumental, it will be a special means, whereby (amongst a
multitude of other considerable advantages, mentioned throughout this
Treatise,) the Parliament, to the honor of this Counsel) will in great
measure gain the Peoples affections: And by encouraging such undertakings as
this, every one willing to spend time, strength, and estate, upon things
publicly useful, will find it not to be in vain; which that it may effectually
appear is my earnest desire, who, I trust am with all due respects to this
Honorable Council, no less in affection then duty.

Devoted to the public, W. P.

FINIS.
THe mistakes in printing being many (whereof, most such as every man's reason
will enable him to correct in the reading) I shall here for brevitys sake, note
only those which do either alter or much darken the sense.

Errata.
Page 2. line 22. for bring read bring in: p. 13. l. 6. exclude, of and l. 33.
exclude thereby p. 15. l. 26. for, at all can, 1. cannot at all, p. 19. l. 40.
for 5 r. near 5. p. 20. l. 26 for bad r. great. p. 26. l. 20 and 21. for they
who, r. that which: p. 27. l. 24. exclude, left: p. 39 l. 3 for his r. this: p.
42. l. 3. for of money, r receiving of money: p 44. l 32. for when r being: p.
47 l. 2. for the r. be and l. 35. for or r. to: p. 50. l. 50 for 22 s.r. 2 s.
p. 67. l. 40. for them r. the: p. 68 l. 23 for cause r. course: p. 69. l. 29.
exclude, a: p. 70. l. 5. for tall r. trivial: p. 74. l. 20. exclude the whole
parenthesis beginning ( though) p. 77. l. 29. for secrety r. society.

Page 60. line 3. read
4 Without staying for materials. There being no materials necessary, except
paper and other things useful for printing, with fit place and accomodations
for an office; all which may be easily and speedily procured.


