COLONEL POWELL And COL. POYERS LETTER To His Highness the Prince of WALES,
With their DECLARATJON, for Restoring His Majesty, the Protestant Religion,
the Laws of the Land, and the Liberty of the SVBIECT.

To which is Added An exhortation to the People OF ENGLAND And the CITY of
LONDON.

By A Welwisher of His Majesty, The Kingdoms Peace, and the Peoples Freedom.

Printed Anno Dom: 1648.

May it please your Highness.
WE Hope our Declaration, (which we have now sent unto your Highness) will
give you ample satisfaction, as well of our Integrity heretofore, as of our
Intentions for the Future, to serve your Royal Father, and Your self, as
far as we are able, to make you both great and glorious, as the Parliament
promised, and we ever intended, and did till of late, conceive that they did
so too; but as soon as we clearly saw that they went clean contrary ways,
we addressed our selves to his Majesty, and had a promise to have speedy
directions from him, which we have not yet had: the reason whereof, (as we
conceive,) is, because of the close restraint upon him, in regard whereof, we
do now apply our selves unto your Highness, we have sent Propositions, which
(we hope) will prove reasonable to your Highness, to confirm us in our
endeavors, and that your Highness will please to sign them, and some
Instructions, concerning our wants and supplies, to which we hope your
Highness will give us a speedy answer, that so, we may go on the more
cherefully, to restore your Royal Father, to his Greatness, that He may long
reign over us, and when it shall please God to give him a Kingdom of glory in
heaven, to leave all his Kingdoms on earth to you his successor, in peace and
Happiness, which shall ever be the prayer of

Your Hignesses faithful Servants Powell, Poyer,

The Declaration of Colonel Poyer, etc
IT is notorious enough upon what grounds this War was by us undertaken, how
the faults of Government precedent were laid open, and reformation promised,
wherein the true Religion should be advanced, the King made great and glorious,
and the Just privileges of Parliament, the Laws of the Land, and the Liberty
of the People maintained: But now how much our expectations have failed us, and
how we have run into those evils which we fought against, is at last too
apparent unto us, who would not at the first believe the things we now see,
insomuch that the Errors of the former Government, are now so far exceeded
both in Church and Commonwealth; that they are either Justified, or at least
so much excused, as that it is desired by the most and best of men, rather to
enjoy the former again, then to suffer such a Reformation, wherein the Public
good is pretended, and the particular ends of the Reformers intended.

For although our Party have prevailed almost these three years, and the King
in the power of the Reformers almost these two years; yet the things promised
to be reformed, and which we sought for, are scarce so much as entered into, or
debated but clean contrary things now Acted.

The King instead of coming to his Parliament to treat personally with his two
Houses, Jmprisoned; instead of being made Great and Glorious, is become the
most unfortunate in the World, and great and glorious only in Piety, Patience,
and Pity: our Religion, Laws and Lib^rties so much trampled upon, and
destroyed, and the greatest Tyranny, and Arbitrary Power set over us, that the
wit of man, or malice of the Devil can invent, and all this but to satisfy
the Avarice and Ambition of a few men, who by accusing their Brethren have
already gotten too much power into their hands, and do now labor to disband
us, not to ease the Country (as is pretended) but as we are able to prove by
their own Letters and words to bring in other Forces, such as may execute
their Wills, and make the Gentry subject to Sequestration, inslave the People,
and (to use their own words) Roll the Country before them: and to establish
Excise, Taxes, and other intolerable charges, not to be avoided, without the
effusion of more blood, then has yet been shed in this Quarrel, unless God
of his infinite mercy please to direct it by some means not appearing to us:
And that they might (as much as in them lies) destroy our Souls as well as our
bodies; They go about to put down the Book of Common Prayer in these parts,
as they have already done in the rest of the Kingdom, which will be more
wanted here, then in other parts, because the Book of Common Prayer is the
sole comfort of the People here, and their way to attain the knowledge of the
Principles of Religion, and to serve God: these things, though evident in
themselves, yet we shall be ready to make proof of, as occasion shall require:
And therefore that the whole world may see our integrity, as well in the
undertaking this War in the beginning and our Carriage hitherto, as of our
intentions for the future, we do now declare:

That we do still continue to our first Principles, to bring the King to a
Personal Treaty with his Parliament with Honor, Freedom, and Saftie, that so
the just Prerogative of the King, Privileges of Parliament, Laws of the Land,
and Liberties of the people, may be all established and preserved in their
proper bounds, that we will as much as in us lies protect the people from
Injury, and maintain the Protestant Religion, and the Common prayer as it is
established by Law in this Land, and therefore crave the Assistance of the
whole Kingdom therein.

An Exhortation to the people of England, and to the City of London.
HEre you have a glorious example before your Eyes. You have a door opened
unto you for the recovery of your peace, your liberty, your Religion, and for
the deliverance of your gracious King, from that horrid and Traiterous
oppression, under which he has so long suffered for the maintenance of your
rights. Whose restitution will be the recovery of the Honor of your City, and
of this Nation. Neglect not so gracious an opportunity as God has now offered
you, least you have cause to repent it for ever, when it is too late. You see
now the vizour of this vile Rebellion pulled off. That you may no longer doat
upon such an ugly impiety, you have a clear discovery of the falsehood and
treachery of those that with fair promises, and specious pretenses drawn over
their base and traiterous intentions, seduced many simple and well-meaning
people of the Land, and engaged them in the pursuit of their own ruin, for
the serving of the turns of their Private designs. Do not therefore render
your selves so inexcusable as to adhere unto a bare faced wickedness. least you
make your selves bare unto the Judgment of the Almighty. Separate your selves
speedily from the Tents of these wicked Korahs and their company, least if you
partake with them any longer in their sins, you be swallowed up together
with then in their Judgments. Delay not the prosecution of your own saftie
aad happiness. Remember those great and high obligations that lie upon you to
defend the truth of God, to recover the beauty and order of his Worship to
repair the breaches and Divisions of his CHVRCH. Remember the sacred Oaths of
your Allegiance and fidelity to your pious and gracious Prince, and the Common
duty and bond of Conscience that lies upon all Subjects, to protect him whom
God has ordained to protect them; you find by sad and lamentable experience,
how in the ruin of his Throne, and of his regal and just power, Your
freedom, Your trade, Your peace, Your security, Your Religion and all are
fallen under foot. In his repair under God, you may repair them all. If you
will be happy by Gods help you now may, your timely and General Appearance in
this work may prevent the shedding of much blood, if you will be miserable,
thank your selves. You of the City have had a late experiment of the kindness
of those toward you, whom you have bin too forward to serve heretofore in
their ungodly designs. Be wise now at length, and let it not be your eternal
reproach, that you can be valient in nothing but Rebellion; make amends for
your former miscariages, and do not lay your necks any more under the feet of
such unthankful Masters. If they use you thus, when the assistance they have
had from you is, so fresh in memory: and when their power is yet so
questionable. Imagine what they are like to do when your services are
forgotten, and they established in full power. Consider what an ease it will be
to you to maintain a perpetual Parliament and Army. Go then immediately in the
first place unto God; Humble your selves before him for what is past; Implore
his pardon, his direction, his assistance; Set his Glory before your eyes. Be
of good courage, and let us play the men, for our people, and for the Cities
of our God. And the Lord do that which seems him Good.

FINIS.

