The poor VVise-mans ADMONITION UNTO All the plain People of London, and the
Neighbour-Places.

To strengthen them in the hour of temptation, that they may be happy and
exemplary instruments to all other People, in preserving the City, Parliament,
and whole Nation, from imminent and sudden destruction.

Eccles. 37.16. Prove. 16.20. Eccles. 7.21. Prove. 1.32, 33. Let reason go
before every enterprise, and counsel before every action.

He that is wise in his business, shall find good, and he that trusts in
the Lord is blessed.

Wisdom shall strengthen the wiseman, more then ten mighty Princes that are in
the city.

For ease slays the foolish, and the prosperity of fools destroys them.

But he that obeys me (says wisdom) shall dwell in safety, and be quiet
from fear of evil.

Printed in the Year 1647.

The poor VVise-mans Admonition unto all the plain People of London, and the
neighbor Places.
Dear Friends;
ALthough ye and your families, are they who in all public calamities do
suffer most, yet seem ye altogether insensible of your own danger until it be
directly upon you, ye look not into public affairs your selves, but trust
wholly unto others; and if they either through weakness, wilfulness,
corruption or treachery fail in their trust or turn oppressors and tyrants,
ye remain liable to be deluded and betrayed by them into tumults, wars,
miseries and bondage.

But believe it, ye have need to look about you, and that very quickly, to
see into affairs your selves, and understand how things go, for ye are likely
very speedily to be put upon the greatest trial of your wisdom and
faithfulness that ever men were put upon; which if ye withstand or get clear
through with an upright mind, your peace, freedom, and happiness will
certainly be continued, but if ye yield ye will involve your selves, your
wives, children and servants into far greater miseries and extremities then
those ye have already past through.

The case is briefly and truly thus, ye remember in what a languishing
distracted condition ye were in, before the war was betrusted to the present
Army, then called, The new Model, and with what faithfulness, diligence,
expedition and courage they have vanquished the enemy, restored you to your
trades and livelihoods, which ye cannot with any conscience, but thankfully
acknowledge and remember.

But what they by their fidelity and activity gained abroad, is through want of
care utterly destroyed at home; for whilst they supplant the enemy in strength,
he is supplied with authority, and so in effect made Master of that strength by
which he has been vanquished.

Ye will wonder how it should be so, and yet if ye shall judge the tree by the
fruits, which is so infallible a rule that it cannot deceive you, ye shall find
nothing more evident.

For, what Authority now extant can ye name, that affords this Army any
countenance or encouragement? nay, that has not manifested a jealousy and
hatred of them, and that most unjustly, seeing the Army is still the same it
was, minding the safety, peace, freedom and happiness of all peaceable people
without any difference at all.

But herein it consists, Authority is changed and has proposed other ends to
it self now at last, then when this Army was first raised; those men that saw
a necessity of their raising, which appeared from the languishing condition of
the Kingdom under the former Forces, had then the major Vote and the opposite
party were esteemed disaffected favorers of the enemy, Remora's to the honest
proceedings of the House at that time, but are now become by the addition of
diverse ill affected men of known malignity out of the quarters redeemed from
the enemy, the swaying party weigh down the balance and decree all.

From hence proceeds this different aspect upon the Army; the late bitter
Declaration against them for endeavoring to petition their own General in an
orderly and peaceable way, for that which many by their loss of health, and
all of them by enduring the hardships and extremities of war, and hazarding
their lives, have dearly earned; these are now judged enemies to the State,
disturbers of the peace, even of purpose to turn the faces of honest men
against them, and all to maintain the unjust cause, and work out the wicked
designs of tyrants and oppressors.

Diverse men by corruptions are grown rich, from small estates or nothing to be
very wealthy; and finding that this Army and such as love them, because they
love their Country, are inquisitive and unwilling to see the State abused, and
the people defrauded, fearing that the mountains of wealth they have raised,
may be yet returned to the right owners, or the common stock, and that their
unjust actions may undergo scrutiny and trial, have for prevention thereof,
desperately resolved to embroyle us in a new war, and bring all to the former
confusion, if not utter desolation; finding by experience, that they can fish
best in troubled waters, and escape best in the press; that corruption and
injustice is no otherwise mantainable, but by might and force, and for that
very end and purpose have contrived to engage you against the Army, and those
that wish them well, by which policy they suppose all your thoughts will be
diverted from thinking upon them and their corruptions.

In order to this, the Army and their friends are made odious to you, as
Secretaries, even as heretofore the well-affected party were rendered hateful to
you as Puritans; they provoke the Army what they can, by declaring them
disturbers of the peace, molesting diverse of their Officers and Soldiers,
sleighting petitions of many thousands of good and godly people, and burning
some of them by the common Hangman, and by many other signs giving them to
see what they and their friends are like to suffer after disbanding, hoping
hereby to put them upon extremity, and enforce them to stand upon their guard,
and capitulate for their safety, which they will interpret rebellion, and hold
forth to you as a true ground of destroying them, inciting you from thence to
take up Arms, and engage in their unjust quarrel, even for the maintenance of
their exorbitant wills, and ambitions ends, yea and defense of their lives and
ill-gotten estates.

The heads of this design are the corrupt men in the House of Commons, even
such as have been formerly of the enemies party abroad, and done him services
here at home, by discovering our counsels, (as appears by the interception of
some of their letters,) partaking with conspirators in the City (as in Wallers
plot) opposing the raising of this Army, (by which the work has been so
speedily ended) appearing cross in all debates of the House for redress of
grievances, or relief of the oppressed and much abused people, constantly
manifesting, That they have proposed other ends to themselves, then the common
good of the Nation.

Assistant to these is the Mayor of London, hitherto past over, (when the
well-affected party had most sway in the City) as a man favoring the enemy,
and never manifesting any affection to the Parliament, in their undertaking to
make us a free people; also many of the Aldermen and great men of the City
whose interest depends upon Prerogative, and is supported by the subjection of
the plain people.

The City Militia likewise in reference to this project was altered, because
the former men who had showed themselves faithful to the Commonwealth and
City, were not (it seems) judged fit instruments for this secret work; and ye
the Commoners of London likewise, they hope, will by some deceitful trick or
other follow, though to the destruction of your selves, your wives and families.

This makes them so confidently give out, that if the Army will not disband,
that ye the plain men of this City, your sons and servants shall make a new
Army to compel them; they verily think ye are not so well principled as to
collect your thoughts (on such a sudden as they intend to surprise you) and
consider what a dangerous business to the whole Kingdom ye go about, but that
ye will do it for no other reason, but because they bid you: that ye will
forget the good services that the Army have done, the speedy overthrow of a
powerful enemy, the so sudden recovery of trading by the ending of a long and
languishing war, which if continued, had in probability utterly wasted your
Traine-Bands, and hazzarded the ruin both of City and Kingdom.

These benefits (they think) they can easily make you forget, with old tales of
private men's preaching, Conventicles, rebaptizing; and now by clamours of
rebellion, and contempt of authority, which both the present necessity, and the
common safety of the People requires as a duty, and is purposely procured by
themselves, for the maintenance of their tyranny and corruptions.

But look back unto what is past, and survey the actions of these men, their
weekly donations of great sums amongst themselves, their pride and
Lordlinesse: Compare them with the Army; see if the Army have not made
themselves poor, to make the Commonwealth rich, whilst these men have made
themselves rich and us poor.

Consider whether these men, and their Agents, who shall be most forward to egg
you on, and cry an Alarm, have not made advantages of your troubles, swollen
great by the loss of your Friends and Neighbors bloods, whilst they that
engaged most heartily, are dis-respected, the poor Soldiers unpaid, the widow
and fatherless by war little regarded, so small recompense made, as there is
scarce a livelihood afforded to them that have lost their limbs out of
affection to their Country, whilst those that shall appear most earnest for
a new war, are such as know the way very well how to thrive by it, have
gained thousands by the former, found the sweetness of having the
Commonwealths moneys at their dispose: And as they have been liberal every
week, in converting the Commonwealths Treasury to their own particular
coffers, so hope they (with all possible speed, and by all indirect means) to
be yet more bountiful, and for every hundred, give one another a thousand.

Consider, that wars are easily and suddenly, and out of a heat begun, but
very hardly and slowly ended: Let late experience make us wife, so to foresee
evils, as we may prevent them. The Scots will be engaged again, and foreign
Forces called in, which is already attempted by private Agents, from the
aforesaid corrupt and ill-affected party in the Parliament.

This City may avoid all their malice, and crush all their wicked designs in
the birth, before they come forth, if they will but abate their unjust and
causlesse eagerness against men of different opinions, and equally consider
the just cause, desires and intentions of the Army, and the peaceablenesse of
those people in the City and Country, who did lately petition for liberty,
and that their ends herein are evidently the good and peace of all men.

Take it to heart also, that we are in as much bondage as before this
Parliament; all sorts of men are insensible of it, and full of complaints; the
very oppressions cried out upon at the beginning of this Parliament, and
removed, are not only now again practiced, but many new ones brought upon us;
besides that which alone amounts to all the rest, the EXCISE, which (upon
pretense of paying public debts, and supplying other to-be-invented
necessities) is like to be a lasting burden upon us.

Customs are still as much inhanced as ever, without any convoy and protection
of Merchants, which is the end of paying them, and the poor Seamen and
Mariners wracked to the utmost point of extremity: Infinite sums have been
dispended, and yet debts both unpaid, and the public Treasury emptied.

Consider the grievances complained of in the late Petition which was burned,
and collect from thence what usage ye are like to find, unless ye resolve to
sit down under oppression, and expect no redress of grievances, which those
honest men petitioning for in a discreet, peaceable, and humble manner, were
abused, reproached, some of them imprisoned, the rest threatened, all termed
seditious, and what not, even as men formerly were for moving against
Ship Money, and the oppressions of those times.

In this lamentable, condition the honest and plain people being still now, as
they were then, in greatest danger, and wicked men most secure, and not only
most countenanced by Authority, but endeavored to be brought into all places
thereof; judge, ye citizens of London, and other neighbour-places, whether the
Army have not just cause, to stand upon their guard, and whether it be not high
time for them again to appear for the defense and protection of the distressed
people of this land; judge likewise what kind of enemies to the common wealth,
peace, freedom, and safety of this Nation they are that shall oppose them
herein, how inexcusable and evidently guilty of procuring their own bondage,
and maintaining abused Authority, to their own misery, if not destruction: yet
this is the strong temptation wherewith ye are likely very suddenly to be
assaulted.

The bait they will use will be the suppressing of Heretics and Schismatics,
which henceforth ye shall find to be but nicknames for any that oppose
Tyrants and Oppressors, by which they have ever endeavored to make those
odious to the rude multitude, whose honesty and conscience could not otherwise
be blemished.

Look therefore with a clear eye upon the Army and those that love and affect
them, whether in Parliament or elsewhere, and see if they be not the truest
prometers of just freedom, least advancers of themselves; and when ye are
tried, may ye prove like gold seven times fined in the fire; so shall your
wisdom, faithfulness, thankfulness and integrity appear in this sad day of
Englands greatest extremity, when a major vote of Parliament must of necessity
be disobeyed.

But this is an age of wonders: what greater wonder I pray, is there in this
Nation, then a continual Parliament, already drawing to the end of the seventh
year; or that this Parliament should begin in suppressing the High Commission,
Star Chamber, Bishops, Popish Lords and all oppressers, make a most bloody war
against them, subdue them by a faithful Army, and now act, tolerate, and
justify the same oppressions, under other notions, hate none so much as those
that abhor oppression, and likewise vex, molest, and suffer to be hanged those
very Soldiers that preserved their own lives, even in their greatest
extremities, and that for actions necessarily and warrantably performed in
prosecution of their own services.

And because all admonitions are most acceptable when the causes thereof are
cleared, and proved to be good and just, by true examples, and forcible
reasons, I will give an instance for your better satisfaction, in the things
whereof I forewarne you, and so fore-arme you, Ye cannot but remember, that as
those peaceable people who were at the beginning of this Parliament, called
Roundheads, and afterward Independents, and by such other Titles as best
please the Clergy to devise, and the rude multitude to express, did adventure
their lives voluntarily day and night, in guarding and defending the Parliament
against all their enemies, who were like to swallow them up, before they had
either guard or Army to take their part; and did not this worthy Army the like
unto them, when no other Army could do the business?

Did not ye your selves, and many thousands of others, bestow a great part of
your estates freely and voluntarily to help, further, and assist the Parliament
in all their public affairs for the Commonweal, and safety of the people:
and yet now, who are more despised, hated and persecuted by means or co^nivance
of the Parliament, then both ye, they, and the Army, who have been their
truest and best friends? And likewise, who have been more assessed and extorted
in advancing more and more sums to fill their Coffers, then those who gave
them most freely and liberally at the first; yea, and too many of them more
then they could well spare.

Therefore, dear friends, remember this seasonable and loving premonition,
while it is yet time, that when ye have done all ye can, and perhaps past the
bounds of your abilities, ye may easily perceive both by former experience
your selves, and infinite discontents, murmurings and outcries of others, that
if ye do not persist both in fulfilling their wills in what they will command
concerning your bodies, and in yielding what they will demand of your Estates,
yea, or refuse them in any jot, or trifle they require, though never so unjust,
ye will be subject to loose all ye have done, and their favor too.

These are wonders indeed, besides hundreds of others which might be expressed;
but these if well weighed, will put you upon examination how it is possible
such things as these should be.

The Army doubtless does highly esteem the authority of Parliament, being
rightly constituted, and intending the welfare and safety of the people, and
such a Parliament both the Army and the well-affected of the Kingdom thought
this would have proved; for which they have fought, as for their own and the
peoples liberties.

But when through the policies, feastings, private letters, making use of
interests and relations, with many other indirect practices, elections shall be
corrupted, and not freely made by the people, but in effect the one part of the
Parliament procure the election of the other, when by means hereof the ill
affected party is grown most potent, and the peoples faithful friends are
over-powred, when their courses shall tend evidently to make themselves great,
upon the peoples ruins, even to prevent the end for which a Parliament is
called, is there any just cause to the contrary, but the same necessity and
public safety that justifies the Parliament against the King, will also
justify the Army against them, by the same rule of right reason, and law of
equity, as the soldiers of an Army may oppose the General, when he turns
the mouth of his Cannon upon them.

And all this the Army do not against, but for Parliaments, as the only
orderly means for the peoples safety, and freedom now in such a high time of
extreme danger, after the trial of all other lawful and possible fair and
submissive means.

It is not to be imagined, that the Army means in any wise to usurp the
government, or give laws to their brethren; nothing can be more odious to
their spirits, or further from their thoughts: their ^yme is only to rescue and
succor the people that are oppressed, and defend themselves from the malicious
plots and practices of wicked men, until such time as the right constitution
of Parliaments be recovered, the Account of the Kingdoms treasury required,
and the Authors of our miseries according to justice punished.

The obstruction whereunto is a great number of tyrannical and oppressive men
in the House, against whom just exceptions will be evidently made appear to
all the world; if upon offer of proof, all these enormities should be set into
a way of trial, this great and much threatening design, may be prevented,
without trouble, war or bloodshed, wherein it rests in you at this time to do
very much.

If ye forbear to engage against the Army, whom God has made his instruments
to deliver you, and withal, second their just desires for purging out the
corrupt Members of the Parliament, ye will not only herein be an example of
wisdom, fidelity, and integrity to the whole Nation, but prevent a world of
mischief and inconvenience, which otherwise might come to pass by your
negligence, or rather slavish obedience.

Ye cannot but perceive, that in the (...) alteration which is made of the
Committee of the Militia and the removal of your known Commanders in the
forces of London, that they intend to engage you against the Army. Is not this
evident to all judicious men? For what need is there of any such change now at
this time, and that only of such persons as are affected to the Army?

Let not fair shows or pretenses of zeal, religion, or reformation of
whatsoever kind any longer delude you, but observe him for a traitor to his
Country, that would now entangle you in any unjust war against a most worthy
Army, whom God has so exceedingly blessed, yea and you also and all of us, by
their faithful means and effectual endeavors.

Look wisely and narrowly to your Officers of trust in all places, and see
that they bring forth fruits su^able to your peace, preservation, and freedom,
or else shun them as serpents, whose property is to destroy you.

Be not deluded into a groundless belief, that the Army do intend any kind
of prejudice to any just interest, or propriety in the Common wealth, seeing
they have manifested both by word and deed to the world, in despite of the
malice of all their treacherous enemies (though pretended friends) that the
outmost extent of their desires, is only to see equity and justice flourish in
all Estates, so that no man may be punished under the color of law or
otherwise, without a just cause.

Allow the Army to be as free Englishmen as any whosoever, and your worthy and
beloved brethren; have not many of you fought, shed your blood, and advetured
your lives in the very same just cause for which they most courageously do yet
(through Gods goodness) stand. And would ye now unjustly resign both that
good cause, and so renowned an Army, into the treacherous and bloody hands of
such as maliciously hate both them and you, howsoever they may flatter you at
this time for their own base ends, but neither for your own nor the Kingdoms
good.

God forbid that so just a cause which hitherto has been so valiantly
prosecuted, should escape so many and violent storms, and cruel tempests in
the main Ocean, and yet perish in the Harber, and that only for want of
prudence and timely care.

But our hope is, that the same just and good God, who has hitherto preserved
you, the Army, City, Parliament, and just cause, will also in his due and
appointed time, to his own everlasting praise, and the comfort of all that
trust in him, perfect his great work in justice and righteousness, if in the
mean time ye will be so truly wise, as to be thankful for mercies received,
and not forgetful of the worthy instruments he has employed for your
preservation, but do them good to your utmost abilities in the day of their
visitation.

So shall God crown all your labors of love with peace, and both your selves,
the whole Nation and posterity with freedom. Amen.

The Printer to the Reader.
I Desire thee to amend with thy pen, one fault escaped in the printing, by
negligence, and the Authors absence, which is in the 3. page and 10. line,
namely, secretaries, for sectaries: and if there be any more faults (as none
lives without some) I also desire that thou will show thy patience by thy
silence, and that thou may rather make a profitable use of the sense, then any
wise strive about word; even as thou would except the like favor of me or
any other in thy absence, if thou be one that show thy self thus careful
and zealous for the public: especially now in such extreme need. Farewell.

FINIS.

