To The Right Honorable, THOMAS FOOT, Lord Major of the famous City of
LONDON: Together with the Right Worshipful, the Aldermen and Recorder thereof.
Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful,
IN this plain Sermon (Preached, and published by your Call, and Command;) You
have presented unto you the two principallest points in all the Scripture, viz.
The glorifying of God, and the perfecting and finishing of that great, and
ever-admired work of men's Redemption, and Salvation by Jesus Christ.

In the former of these two, (to wit, in glorifying God) you are to strive to
be followers of your Sovereign, and Savior: And in the latter; you are to
stoop and submit to his Majesty and Excellency, 2 Pet 1.16. Isa. 35.2.
and to be humble Seekers, that you may be happy sharers of this precious
price, and purchase. He that was a Soune, became a Servant, and he that was
equal with the highest, became inferior to the lowest, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8.
that GOD might be exalted, and lost, undone men, redeemed, and saved. The
great business acted by CHRIST in time here below, was contrived, Zach. 6.13.
and 9.11.
and agreed upon (between GOD and CHRIST) before time in Heaven above. If you
would see all in one, and one in all, then cast your eyes upon Christ, Col.
3.11. Col. 1.19. Ephesians. 1.10. Col. 2.3.
who is all in all, in whom dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.
What can you think on, speak of, delight in, or desire to have, but you may
find them in Jesus Christ. If you would know God, as a reconciled God, and as
a Father, you may know him, and must know him, (for there is no other means
but in and through Jesus Christ. If you would go to GOD, or have GOD come to
you, there is no other way but by him. He is that Ladder that Jacob saw, Genesis
28.12. with Joh. 1.51.
which reached from Earth to Heaven, upon which the Angels of God ascended and
descended. If you would climb up this Ladder, then must you begin in the
lowest steps and staves thereof, even in the sufferings of this sweet Savior.
Christ crucified is the first lesson you must learn, 1 Co. 2.2.
and that being well learned, it leads by the hand to all the rest. To see
your sins laid on Christ, and your selves virtually in Christ, when he
suffered, (as you were in Adam when he sinned) is the first sanctified, (and
soule-satisfying) light.

Nothing humbles, nor melts the heart more, then to see the bloody wounds of
this loving Lord: if then you would be penitent, our, Phil. 3.10.
self-denying, and weaned from the world, get a sight of Christ upon the
cross, and a feeling of that fellowship between his person, and your persons
in his death. Meditation upon the intent of Christ in dying, faith to believe
the extent of of his death to you, and a feeling of the efficacy of his death
in you, will raise up your hearts to a high measure of admiration, estimation,
and affection of him, and to him. After you have known the death of Christ,
and the benefits thereby (viz. the putting away of your sins, Heb. 9.25.
Ephesians. 2.14. First labor to be Gods sons, and then his public servauts, as
Christ was.
making peace betvveen God and your persons; and making sure your salvation)
Then consider, and study the goodness of his nature, the goodlinesse his person,
the greatness of his love, the freeness and riches of his grace, the
sweetness and preciousnesse of his promises, the beauty and comeliness of his
Church, and people, and the transcendency and eternity of his glory.

The best, next, and surest way to become sound and true Christians, is to know
that Christ has done all for you, Isa. 26.12. Phil. 2.12, 13.
and without you, and that he must do all in you, and by you. And being true
Christians, (which is the wel-being of men) to live on him, and walk to him,
who has given you the name, and the nature, which makes you to be so
accounted. And seeing God has honored, and glorified his Son, after he had
finished his work, let that encourage you (Honorable Senators) to go on in
the work that God has called you too: Christ has done, and suffered much for
you, Oh be you willing to do, and to suffer for him also. Doubtless if you own
his cause and cross and choose his will, and do his work, as he has put
chains of gold about your necks here, so he will put crowns of gold upon your
heads hereafter. Luke 16.2, 3, 4.
Remember you are Stewards entrusted with your Masters treasure, and must give
an account you know not how soon, be sure therefore you lay out all for your
Lords glory, and the good of his Family. Persevere in the way you have begun,
and prosecute the good work you have entered upon (especially your late and
excellent Petition.) Stand far, (and strive together) to obtain the pure
Gospel, to guide men's souls in spiritual things, and plain Laws to direct men
in civil things. Be for Christ resolutely, and for true Christians really:
execute justice impartially, regard, and relieve the oppressed and needy
speedily, Neh. 6.3.
and say as Nehemiah said, I am doing a great work, why should the work cease
whilst I leave it? Do not take off your hand from the Lords plough this year,
for this may be the year of visitation, and the next of jubilee. The greatest
honor is like to be lost or got this year: the Lord be honored by you, and
honor you in himself. Which is, and shall be the prayers of him that craves
your pardon for his boldnese, rudeness of speech, and for adding one use,
which time prevented me then, to deliver.

Your Master Christ's servant, in his, and at your service, VAVASOR POWELL.

GOD the FATHER glorified: And the work of men's Redemption and Salvation
finished by JESUS CHRIST on Earth.
John 17.4. I have glorified thee on the earth, I have finished the work which
then govest me to do.


THE last Lords day, Right Honorable and Beloved, By Mr. Thomas Goodwin.
you had presented unto you the Dedication of Christ (or Christ dedicating
himself) to the work of men's Redemption and Salvation. I have chosen this Text
(and I hope by the guidance of Gods spirit, it comes in seasonably) to make
known the work it self, even that great work or business which Christ did
(and none else could do) upon earth. Christ tells you in this Text what it
was, and wherein is did consist.

Before I come to the Text it self, I must first acquaint you, how that our
blessed Lord and Master Jesus Christ, being to take his leave of his Disciples,
he expresses at his departure most of his affection to them. As Joseph before
he took his leave of his brethren Genesis 45.1.4.15.
, made known himself unto them, kissed them, and wept upon them: So Jesus Christ,
he as it were gives kisses of love, and shows more expressions of
endearednesse, and rendernesse toward his Disciples at the time of his
departure from them then he had done before, though he always loved them; and
there were four special expressions of Christ's affection then showed to them.

The first was his carriage, his humble carriage; ye know how he humbled
himself, to John 13.12.
wash his Disciples feet: an expression, and greater expression of humility we
have not in the Scripture. And this adds unto it, if you consider the person
that did it, and the persons for whom it was done. The person that did it, was
Psalm 24.7.9, 10.
the King of glory. The persons for whom it was done, they were poor
Fishermen; this is a good example, and is was done that it might be an example
for great men, and high Christians, to condescend to them of low degree.

The second expression was his heavenly counsel. In the 13, 14, 15, and 16.
Chapters, he gives them many sweet John 13.14.17.19 34. and Chap 14.1.11.27, 28
and 15.89, 10, 12.17.20. and 16.33.
exhortations, many spirtuall admonitions, many heavenly counsels, and cordial
advices and directions.

The third expression of his affection to them, was his soule-staying John
14.2, 3.13, 14 16, 17, 18, 20.21.23.26.28. and 15.7 26 and 16.7. 23, 24.26.
promises; mark how many, and what suitable promises he makes to them, he says
that he will go to prepare a place for them, and that he will come again unto
them, and that whatsoever they should ask in his name, he would do it: Also,
that he would pray the Father for the spirit the Comforter, that he might abide
with them. Further he promiset that they should know that they were in him, and
he in them: and that he would love them, and manifest himself unto them, and
fetch them to himself, and take them up into his glory. These together, with
many other promises, were very powerful to stay the drooping spirits, and the
sinking hearts of his Disciples.

The fourth and last expression of Christ's affection to them was his prayer,
and his prayer you have in this Chapter: where you are to consider, 1. To whom
he prayed. 2. For whom he prayed. 3. When he prayed. 4. For what he prayed. 5.
How he prayed.


I shall only touch these things because they are in the way to the Text.

First, to whom he prayed: He prayed to his Father, and to him only.

Then secondly, For whom he prayed, he prayed, Chap. 17. v. 1.


First, for himself. Secondly, for his Apostles. Thirdly, for those that
should believe in him. First, for himself in the 5. verse of this Chapter;
then for the Apostles in the 9. verse; then for those that should belive, in
the 20. verse, that is the second thing.
Then thirdly, when did he pray this prayer? Its observable that Christ, though
so near to his passive obedience and sufferings, yet did not neglect his active
obedience, and that in themidst of his care for himself, he did not omit in
slew his care of his Disciples. Verse 1.
it was a little before his agony came upon him, a little before Judas came to
apprehend him, as you shall find in the 3. first verses of the next Chapter,
when Jesus had spoken these words, viz. his counsels, promises and prayers, he
went forth with him Disciples ever the brook Kedron, where was a garden; into
which he intred, etc. whether Judas with his base band of men came to
apprehend him. Then

Fourthly, you have the matter of his prayer here, or what he prayed for: He
prays for himself, that he might be glorified. He prays for his people that
they might Verse 15.
be kept from the evil, i. e. the evil of sin especially, that they might be
sanctified and Verse 21.23.
made one, or made perfect in one, and that they might be Verse 24.
with him to behold his glory; these are the main things in his prayer.

The fifth and last thing confiderable,

First, he prayed very familiarly and confidently, he calls God his Father;
Verse 1.5. 11:21:24, 25.
six times in this one prayer he calls him Father: One while, Oh Father,
another while, rghteous Father, another while, holy Father, all words of
affection and confidence, and expressing much of the spirit of Sonneship, a
good See Isa. 63.16 and 64.8. Mat. 6.9. Romans 8.15. Gal. 4.6.
example for Saints.

Then secondly, as he prayed confidently, so he prayed compendiously. Christ's
prayer was not a very long prayer; and I confess this, that I think it to be
contrary to the Gospel to make very long prayers: The Scribes and Pharisees are
Math. 23.14. Its true, that Christ did not so much reproves them for their
prayer as their hypocritical end and prex nor in praying.
noted, if not reproved for it: And Christ when he teaches the Mat. 6, 7, 8,
9. etc.
Disciples to pray, he gives them a short form; Solomon also Eccl. 5.2. Thou
can not be too frequent and spiritual in prayer, but thou may be too lone,
and pump in thy own dry, heart when the water of the spirit (...).
says, let thy words be few. I find Jesus Christ's prayers, the Apostles
prayers, and the Prophets prayers all to be short. I say not but there is a
difference between time, and time; occasion and occasion: Again, I say not
this to give advantage to graceless men that pray not at all, and condemn
others; neither do I say it to take off men from praying, or from being long
in prayer when the Spirit abounds in them. Sometimes people may pray longer
then ordinary, as particularly when people seek God by fasting.

The third thing in his prayer was this, that he did pray argumentatively, he
used arguments John 17. v. 1.4, 5, 10, 11.24.
answerable to every petition that he prayed for: not that he needed to use
such arguments, but doubtless to leave it upon record for all believers.

Thus having made way to my Text, you are to consider it as an argument that
Jesus Christ used when he prayed, that he might be glorified; and it may be
joined either to to the first or 5. verse. I have glorified thee upon the earth,
I have finished the work which thou gave me to do, and now O father glorify
thou me; as if so be Christ should have said, Father, thou did send me into
the world to glorify thee, and to work Redemption, I apprehend that Christ
prais here for a double glory, viz. the glory due to him as a Son, which was
his natural and birthright glory; and the glory due to him for his service as
Mediator, v. 1. and 5. compared together.
and purchase Salvation for as many as thou gave me; these things I have
done, and now I am upon leaving the world again, and returning to thee,
therefore glorify me as thy Son, with that glory which I had with thee before
the world was; also glorify me as a Mediator. Righteous Father, I desire thee
to consider that I do not ask any thing that is unreasonable; for seeing I
have glorified thee upon Earth, glorify thou me in Heaven: Seeing also I have
finished the work thou gave me to do, glorify me thy Son with thy self.

The words contain in them three things.

First, redemption and salvation.

2 Then secondly you have in the Text, I have finished the work which thou
gave me to do.

Then thirdly, Christ to do this work, the work which thou gave me to do.

There be but two things in the Text to be opened and explained, and then I
come to the Doctrine.

Q. The first is this, How does it appear, that this work spoken of by Jesus
Christ, The two difficulties in the Text explained.
was the work of men's Redemption, and the work of (...) salvation?

A. By comparing it with other Scriptures, and we have several other
Scriptures, Hab. 1.5 with Acts 13.41.
that speak of this work of redemption and salvation, as Hab. 1.5. I will
work a work in your days, which ye will not believe though it be told you.
If you compare this with Acts 13.41. you will find it to be the work of
Redemption and Salvation; this is that work, or the work, the (...), the
maine and chief work that Christ was to do, and this work he calls his
Fathers work, in John 4 34. My meat and drink is to do the will of him that
sent me, and to finish his work.

Obj. But there are many works of Christ spoken of in the Gospel, as his work
of miracles, his work of preaching, and the like.

A. It is true, Math. 11.2 and 13.54. John 5.20. and 10.25.32.37, 38.
the working of miracles, and of preaching, were the works of Christ, and
distinct works; but those were comprehended (as afterward I shall show) in
that of glorifying God, and carrying on men's Redemption.

Q The second thing here, is, How could Christ say he had finished the work,
seeing he had not yet suffered? surely the work of men's Redemption, and the
work of Salvation was not finished, till Christ had suffered; how then says
Christ here, I have finished the work.

A. 1. I shall clear that by another Text, which is in the 2d of Timothy the
4th and the 7th, where Paul says, I have finished my course; and yet you know
Paul was not dead then, he did live peradventure some years after that; at
least he did live some what longer, and did some service afterward, though he
says. He had finished his couse. 2 The word that is in the Creek (for it is
but one) and translated, I have nished, it signifies not only perfecting of a
work, but it signifies a going on with a work, also it signifies to offer,
consecrate, and sacrifice; yea it signifies a going through with a work, though
it be not finishe; The John 17.4. (...) 2 Timothy 4.7. (...).
same word that Christ uses here, Paul used (though it is not in the same
tense) and doubtless the meaning of it is this, that Jesus Christ he had
undertaken and proceeded very far in the work of man's redemption, and in the
work of salvation; he had also resolved fully that he would not lay aside that
work, till he had perfectly completed it, and so you are to understand it; as
often times men use to speak when they purchase a thing that they have bought it,
and ended that bargain, though they have not paid for it.

Now having openned the words, take notice of this special and spiritual
observation from them.

To glorify God, and to work the work of men's redemption and salvation, Dact.
was the business of Jesus Christ upon earth and this business he has
finished.

Beloved, I know not any subject in all the word of God, that is so necessary
to be spoken of as this subject is, the glory of God, the work of Redemption,
and the work of Salvation; every man is concerned therein, and it behooves
every man to know this truth, not only Magistrates, but also other people; yea,
every man that has a soul, he ought to be acquainted with this truth and
doctrine. To proceed herein,

I shall first prove this Doctrine to you by the Scriptures.

Secondly, clear it and explain it.

Thirdly, give you some reasons to confirm it, and teach you what uses you are
to make of it.

For the proof of this Doctrine, that the work of Jesus Christ upon earth was
to glorify his Father, and work the work of man's redemption and salvation, and
this he has finished.

There are two things to be proved.

First, That to glorify God was his work; for this take one Text in the 7. of
John, verse. 18. He that speaks of himself seeks his own glory; John 7.18.
but he that seeks his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no
unrighteous ness is in him. Here Jesus Christ tells you, that he did seek the
glory of him that sent him, which was God the Father.

Then to prove that he has wrought man's Redemption; you have a Text in the
first of Luke, verse 69.70. Luke 1.69.70.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his
people. Mark, he says he has redeemed them, though they were not as yet
actually redeemed, and has raised up for us a horn of salvation out of the
house of his servant David. He speaks here of Jesus Christ that was the
strength of salvation, or one that was to work it by power and might, and
therefore called here the horn of salvation.

Then to prove that Jesus Christ came to save, or to work men's salvation: that
you have in the 18. of Matthew, the 11. Matt. 18.11.
I came (says he) to seek end to save that which was lost; and,

Secondly, That the work is finished, the text it self is sufficient for it.
You have also other texts where he says that it is finished. As in the 19. of
John he says these words, It is finished. John 19.30.
What is finished? Why all the Prophecies concerning me are now finished, the
work of man's redemption is now finished. When he was upon the Cross. Christ
asserts this truth, that all was finished.

Now having proved the Doctrine, I shall in the next place come to clear it,
and for the clearing of it, resolve these three questions.

First, what it is to glorify God. Secondly, How did Jesus Christ glorify
God? Thirdly, How did Christ finish the work of men's redemption, and the work
of men's salvation? these are the three things to be opened.
Q. First, What it is to glorify God?

A. You must consider that the Scriptures, What it is to glorify God?
speak of this under several words, and notions; as sometimes, it is to Exodus
15.2. Esa. 25.1.
exalt the Lord, sometimes it is to Psalm. 34.3. Luke 1.46.
magnify him, sometimes it is to 1 Timothy 1.17. Heb. 2.7.
honor him, sometimes it is to Psalm. 30.1. Dan. 4.37.
extol and advance him, and all these words they are synonima's, and of the
same nature and signification, and hold forth the same truth to us.

But to answer it more particularly, to glorify God is this, it is to set
forth God in all his excellencies, or to make known God in all that he is, and
to acknowledge him in all that he does, this I say is to glorify God, to set
forth God in all his excellencies, thus did the Lord Jesus Christ do, ^^one
did ever set out God, like unto Jesus Christ; God was never seen in any man, as
he was seen in Christ, neither in any man's words or works; And therefore it is
said in the first of John, the eighteenth verse, That the only begotten son,
John 1.18.
who is in the bosom of the Father he has declared him. John 17.26.
And in this 17. Chapter and the twenty sixth verse, says Jesus Christ, I have
declared unto them thy name, and I will declare it, that the Love wherewith
thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them. I have declared unto them
thy name, If you ask me what is meant there by Name? I answer, Name, it is
taken variously in Scripture, sometimes for person. Acts 4.12.
There is no other name given under heaven whereby we must be saved, i. e. no
other person. Besides, Christ's name is also sometimes taken for for Exodus 3.18.
and 20.7. and 33.19. Psalm. 8.1.
Gods attri-butes, as his wisdom, mercy, goodness, power, and it is taken
also for glory and excellency, and here peradventure may be meant all these. I
have declared unto them, Oh Lord, thy being, thy power, thy properties, thy
grace, thy goodness, thy excellency and thy glory, I have declared all these
unto my people in the world. Psalm. 76.1.
And so we have the word Name in 76. I salme and the first verse. In Judah is
God known his name is great in Israel, that is, his power is great, his glory
is great, his renown, and dignity is great in Israel; amongst his own people
of any other, there the Lord is more specially present, and more clearly
known; Exodus 23.21.
So the Lord in the 23. of Exodus, and the 21. ver. bids the Israelites fear
the Angel that he sent before them, beware of him (says he) and obey his
voice, provoke him not, for he will not pardon your transgression, for my Name
is in him. This Angel was Christ, this name that was in him, was his fathers
honor, power, and glory: well, thus you hear the first thing opened.

Q. The second thing to be opened is this, How did Jesus Christ glorify his
father, or glorify God: For he says I have glorified thee upon earth?

A. Three ways Jesus Christ glorified him upon earth, (for that's the thing I
am to speak of, How Christ glorified God?
and not how he glorifies him in heaven,) I say three ways, he glrorified him,
negatively, positively, and passively.

First negatively, Jesus Christ did glorify his father, these two ways,
negatively.

1. In that he did not sin, for as sin is Romans 2.23.
a dishonor unto God, so non-sinning is an honor unto God. Jesus Christ did
glorify his father very much in this he did never sin against him; no,
Christ did not sin.
he did never commit the least evil. The Apostle Peter 1 Pet. 2.21.
says, he did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth, not the
least fraud, not the least vain word, not the least hypocrisy found in Jesus
Christ, and this did tend much to glorify God his father.

2. Jesus Christ did glorify his father negatively, Christ did not seek
himself.
by not seeking himself, and this is a special way to glorify God, and this
special way did Christ glorify him, John 8.50.
as you may find in the eigth of John, and the fifty verse. I seek not my own
glory, there is one that seeks and judges: hete he denies his own glory. So
you find when the people would have made him a King, he John 6.15.
would not be made a King, he knew that his father was God and King, and did he
deny himself, and this did tend much to the glory of God. As a child when he
is bare-headed and silent before his father, Vide Heb. 5.5.
when he reverenceth and respects his Father, and does nothing but what he
commands, and seeks nothing but what he gives him, you know the child thereby
honors his Father, thus did the Lord Jesus Christ do, and that's the first way
negatively.

The second way he glorified God, Second way.
was positively, and this he did also two ways. By his words, and by his
works. Christ glorified his Father, by his words by his preaching.
by his praying, and by his confession; he did glorify God mightily, by his
preaching, when the people heard him they wondered at the gracious words that
proceeded out of his mouth, and its said he (or God in him) Luke 4.15. By his
Prayer.
was glorified of all. Then by his prayer he glorified God. John 12.28.
Glorifiethy name in one place, Mat. 26.39. By his confession.
and not my will but thine, in another place; thus his prayer tended to
glorify God. His confession also did glorify him, John 10.29. and 14.28.
My Father (says he) is greater then I, John 5.19.30.
again, I can do nothing of my self, but the works that my Father does,
those do I; thus by his words he glorified him. works he did glorify God very
much, and I pray note this, that when Christ wrought miracles by the power of
his Father, the people did wonder, and give glory to God. You have this eight
times at least in the New Testament, I shall only give you two texts Matt.
9.8. and 15.31. Mark 2.12. Luke 7.16. and 13.13. and 17.15. and 23.47.
, the first is in the ninth of Matthew the eigth verse, when the multitude saw
it, they marvelled, and glorified God. So when they saw how Christ cured the
man sick of the Palsy, its said they glorified God. These great and mighty
works that Jesus Christ did upon earth, they had a tendency in them to exalt,
and glorify the Lord, and this is the second way Jesus Christ glorified his
Father.

The third way was passively, that is, Third way.
by his sufferings, Christ glorified his Father, I say he glosied him by his
sufferings, as much as any way else, Christ glorified his Father by his
sufferings. John 13.31.
and therefore says Christ in the 13. of John, the 31th. verse, Now is the Son
of man glorified, and God is glorified in him, when was that now? then when
Christ was going to suffer, in the sufferings of Jesus Christ, his Father was
very much glorified.

Obj. I, But you will say, Sir, how was the Father glorified in Christ's
sufferings, one would think that the Father should be rather dishonored then
glorified thereby, in suffering his Son to fall into the hands of such cruel
enemies, as the Jews and Heathens were to God, we cannot see how this did tend
to the glory of God?

Ans. I answer, By his patient sufferings.
it tended to the glory of God thus, 1. By Christ's patience under his
sufferings, to see Christ so patient, under such a great measure, and so heavy
a weight of affliction, this glorified God very much; he did not so much as
Esa. 53.7.
open his mouth, to complain of his condition, nor of his enemies cruelty; as
the young men in Dan. 3.
Daniel, when they were cast into the fiery Furnace, they acknowledged the
only true God, and they would own no other, also they would not be freed, if
they might not be freed without sin: so Jesus Christ would go through the
work of his father, and glorifye him, as the expression is, even, in the
fires, even in the fire of affliction, yea, in the Furnace of affliction.

Secondly, Christ glorified his father in this, when he was delivering up the
Ghost, The veil of the Temple was rent in twain, Mat. 27.51.
and the earth did quake: Yea, the heathens said, when they saw this, that
either the God of nature was now dying, or else that the end of the world was
come upon them. This tended much to the glorifying of God; the Jews and
Gentiles that would never glorify him before these sufferings of Christ, and
this act of his death; yet doubtless, this, did work upon them. As you know
when a Comedy is played, people are not so seriously and deeply affected, as
when a Tragedy is acted: so when Jesus Christ was upon the earth; they were not
so much affected with him, neither did they so much glorify God in him: but
when he was acting this Trygiccall part, or his sufferings, doubtless then
many of the Jews were convinced; and that's the meaning of that text, John
12.32.
in the 12. of John the 32. When the Son of man is lifted up, he shall draw all
men (or many) unto him, this speaks he of his death; when Christ was exalted
upon the Cross, many were persuaded that this was the Son of God. Truly, say
they, this was the Son of God. And again, Christ says in the 12th. of John,
John 12.24.
ver. 24. Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and dye, it cannot bring
forth. Showing, that except Jesus Christ, that was that corn of wheat, should
die and suffer, there should little profit come unto men, and little glory unto
God. And thus is the next question answered, how Jesus Christ glorified his
father, First negatively by not sinning, and not seeking himself.

Secondly, positively by his word, and works.

Thirdly, passively by his sufferings.

The next and the last question for the clearing of the text is this:

Q. How did Jesus Christ finish the work of men's redemption, the work of men's
salvation?

Ans. I beseech you stir up your selves, and hearken unto this, Jesus Christ
did finish the work of men's redemption, and the work of men's salvation three
ways.

First, The first way was this, The first way Christ wrought men's Redemption
and falvation.
by putting himself into man's condition, that is the first; Jesus Christ he did
put himself into the state, and condition of men, he comes from Heaven, and
takes up man's nature, he appears in man's flesh, and undergoes the state and
condition of men, (yea sinful men) and if you consider but what the Scripture
speaks of this, it will be a great encouragement for you to look for salvation
through Jesus Christ. Consider Christ therefore two ways, First as a
Mediator, and secondly, as a Surety. As a Mediator, Christ consider-as a
Mediator.
He is said to be Mediator of the New Testament, There is one Mediator between
God man, the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.4. 1 Timothy 2.4.
There was but one mediator between God, and men, from eternity. Its true Moses
was a typical mediator; but there was no real and true Mediator save Jesus
Christ only; And as the Apostle says in the third of the Galathians the 20. v.
Now a Mediator (mark this) Is not a Mediator of one, Gal. 3.20.
but God is one, what is the meaning of that? The meaning is, that Christ was
not a Mediator of one Covenant, that is of the Covenant of works only, but a
Mediator of the Covenant of grace also: Or thus, Christ was a Mediator between
one and not as a days man, or Mediator among men, for we never use a Mediator
to reconcile a man to himself, but a dayes-man goes to reconcile two that are
at variance: But Jesus Christ was a Medator of one, that is, he that was
offended; and he that was Mediator to mediate for the offense, and to reconcile
man unto himself in one person. Was one and the same God the same God? That I
may clear this a little unto you, consider what the word Mediator signifies.

The greek word for a (...).
Mediator, signifies as much as this, one that puts himself as it were
between an offending and offended party (yet not without a Call to reconcile
them, and being an indifferent person and disposed to either party: thus was
Jesus Christ, Only Christ had somewhat more to make him a Mediator, then
Mediators among men have; to wit, he was not only called to be a Mediator, but
he was made a Mediator by Heb. 7.20.
Oath, to declare that he was to do right between God and men, to give God his
due and not to undo poor man. So thus you hear that Jesus Christ became a
Mediator, a midler, or middle person, between God and man.

Now in the next place I shall show you how Christ is a surety. Christ
considered as a surety. Heb. 7.22.
He is made says the Apostle (in the 7th. of the Hebr. the 22. verse) A Surety
of a better testament, A Surety quasi Sure-tye, not an uncertain tie, but a
sure-tye, a tie that can never be broken. Indeed the tie that was between God,
and man in his Innocence, was a tie that was to be broken and untyed, but this
is a sure-tye, when God deals with men in Christ, he deals with them in a
sure way; and the word surety in the (...), as (...), apprepirquo.
Greek comes of a verb that signifies to draw near, for a surety is very near
to a debtor, because he is joined to him in the same bond and obligation; so
commonly he that is surety for another, is near to him either in relation, or
habitation. Jesus Christ he was near, he came near unto man, he came near also
unto man's nature, for he Heb. 2.16.
took man's nature upon him; he came near to man's sin, for he 1 Pet. 2.24
bore man's sin upon him; this surety was very near indeed; yea, you shall find
that he was so near, that by two expressions in the Scripture, you would
think Jesus Christ to be the very sinner: Mark, the one is in 2 Cor. 5.21. 2
Cor. 5.21.
He was made (says the Apostle) sin for us. He says not, that he was
counted a sinner for us, but he was made sin in the very abstract. It is more
then if he had said, he was accounted or made a sinner for us; for he had
indeed more then the sins of one or thousands, yea or millions upon him.
Another expression you have in the third of the Galathians, verse 13. where the
Apostle says, that Christ was made a curse for us, for it is written, Gal.
3.13.
Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree. He says not, Christ was made
accursed for us, but a curse for us.

Oh here was love, that Christ came from the bosom of the Father, and took
upon him man's feeble nature; yea, he took upon him also the burden of man's
sin, the debt that man owed to God, and came in man's stead, to satisfy it, and
was content that his Father should deal with him as if he had been the
sinner; yea he puts the sinner out of the room, and he comes into the room
himself, he blots out and cancels the name of the poor debtor, that was bound
in this bond of the Law to God, and he puts himself in the bond, in the stead
of him: only here was the difference between Christ and another surety; another
surety, (or a surety amongst men) comes in by the by, and is not content to be
the principal; but here Jesus Christ becomes (though not by desert, yet by
principal) and takes upon himself the debt; he does not say, Debtor do thou
thy best, and I will do the rest, no, he says rather thus, poor distressed
debtor, I come to take thy debt upon me, and to engage my self in thy stead to
my Father, I Will take the Law, and the Curse, and thy sin upon me, and I Will
see whether I can go through the business, which thou can not; thus does
the Lord Jesus Christ do; that is the first thing he puts himself into man's
stead and condition.

The second thing that Jesus Christ did, Christ conquered the obstructers and
enemies of men's Redemption and Salvation.
was to conquer and remove all man's enemies, that hindered man's redemption and
salvation. I shall name some six enemies that did hinder men's redemption and
salvation, and show you how Jesus Christ did conquer and remove them all.

The first enemy (I beseech you note it) was man's own sin; sin is the Romans
5.12
cause of death, and man should never have dyed, had not man sinned; now sin
did interpose, and intervene between God and man, and so did shut the door of
Gods mercy and grace, that man should not come in. But Jesus Christ he comes
and takes hold upon this enemy of mankind, sin, and says, sin, well thou
and I must have a single bout concerning these men's redemption and salvation;
thou would hinder men from being saved, I would have them saved; thou
would shut the door of my Fathers grace and glory from these men, and I
would have it open; now I will try whether thou be stronger to keep them from
glory, or I to bring them to glory; upon this, sin comes with all its number,
calls in all its forces, yea all the sins that have been committed, or shall
be committed, from Adams time to the day of the resurrection; all these sins,
I mean the sins of those that shall be saved, they came in together, and in
heaps upon the Lord Jesus Christ: Nay more (my beloved) God the Father, when he
saw that his Son would needs undertake for mankind, to save mankind, he
gathers all the sins that were committed, or to be committed by any
forementioned against him, and lays them upon the shoulders of his Son and
did (as I may speak with reverence) say thus to his Son, Well my Son, seeing
thou have so much delight in the sons and daughters of men, seeing thou will
have them saved, and not damned, seeing thou will undergo what is due to their
sins since thou will be surety for them, I must reckon with thee, if thou will
undergo the sorrow, shame, and misery that is due to their sins, (I had rather
take thy word, and have thee to satisfy me) yet look thou to it, for all the
sins of those that thou art willing to save thou must bear them, and satisfy
for them, for I intend not to reckon any more with such sinners, but I will put
all upon thy score and account. The great willingness of Christ to suffer for
men's sins, Psalm. 40 7. Heb. 10.9.
Now Jesus Christ might answer his Father thus, O Father, such is my love, such
is my delight, and such is my pity toward the Sons of men, that I had
rather undergo ten thousand times so many sins, yea ten thousand thousand
times so many sufferings for sin, then that these poor souls should be damned:
Now therefore Father bring all thy bills in, and let me see what these poor
souls owe thee; for I am resolved I will satisfy for them all, or let me die
eternally, and perish for ever. Upon this God the Father brings all men's sins
( i.e. all men's sins that believe) and lays them upon Jesus Christ, and Christ
having satisfied for them, he removes them out of the way, and this is called a
Dan. 9.24.
finishing of transgression, Joh. 1.29
and making an end of sin; and in another place, a taking away, or putting away
of sin, Heb. 2.26. (far enough out of men's sight and reach) and this was
typed out by Levit. 16 8, 9, 10.26.
the Scapegoat under the Law. Observe this, that all the sin that God did
intend to pardon, or ever will pardon, they were once laid Esi. 53 6. Ged made
them to meet upon him.
upon Christ, and are now done away perfectly, and never to be imputed either
to him or any of his. Psa. 85.10.


The second enemy was Gods justice; Gods justice till it was sattsfyed. was a
bar in the way of men, salvation.
justice in God must be satisfied, or else there was no salvation to be
expected or obtained; now Jesus Christ (since he had undertook it) must a full
satisfaction unto his Fathers justice, before he himself or any sinner could be
discharged or saved; but as soon as Christ had given satisfaction unto his
Father, you shall see how justice and mercy, or righteousness and peace kissed
together. That these like the Exo. 25.20.
two Cherubims ( with their wings and facts) did look one toward another.
Exodus 28.29.
You have another excellent type of this, in that book of Exodus, the 28.
chap. and the 29. verse, And Aaron shall bear the names of the children of
Israel, in the breast plate of judgment, and thou shall put on the breast plate,
the judgment of Urim and Thummim, etc. This Urim and Thummim, the one did
signify, (it is probable,) the Prophetical Office Christ's, and the other the
Priestly Office of Christ; Urim and Thummim signifies in the Hebrew, Lights and
Perfection. There was abundance of light in Christ, as a Prophet; abundance of
perfection in Christ, as a Priest. Ann this I would have you note, as the
Priest bore the judgment of the children of Israel, so Christ bore the
judgment of his people. Now when justice was also satisfied, and even God the
Father, to speak with reverence, had no more justice left in himself against
such men, but what he brought out against Christ; and when he had brought all
his justice out, as you know when a man stands at the bar, either to be judged
or justified, they will bring in all the matters, bills, and evidences, that
may be found, or can be brought against such a man: And when you see such a one
cleared, after all the Indictments that were brought in against him, surely you
will say nothing can be laid to such a man's charge; thus (as we may say) the
Lords Statutes and Bills were brought in against the Lord Jesus Christ, yet he
did give perfect satisfaction to the justice of God, before ever he could be
freed from that which was laid to his charge.

A third enemy (that stood up against men's redemption and salvation which Jesus
Christ has conquered, The law-hindered men's redemption and salvation.
and taken out of the way) was the Law (note that these two are distinct
things) for the Law of God and justice, they differ as much, as justice in a
Judge, and the Law by which he judges. Justice in a Judge, is not the Law,
though he is to execute justice according to the Law; now the Law of God came
in against Christ, when Christ was to suffer, and the Law said well, I must
have obedience, says the Law; Thou shall, says Christ; I must have perfect
obedience says the Law; Thou shall, says Christ; I must have perpetual
obedience, says the Law; Thou shall, says Christ; I must have such obedience,
that I must be fully satisfied, that there be nothing in me, but must be
fulfilled; Thou shall says Christ. Now, when Jesus Christ had given to the Law
its demands, and had fulfilled the Law by his active and passive obedience, and
yielded obedience instead of man, and paid for man's disobedience too, he takes
hold upon the Law, and says to the Law, Now Law be sure thou never come
against any of mine hereafter; come not and charge those that are mine with the
debt I have already paid; Law, have thou nothing to do to apprehend any of them
that are my members, they are free men; now Law, see that thou intrude not into
the consciences of any of my people; for as thou did exact from me, so I
require of thee that thou trouble not any of mine. Thus Christ having fulfilled
the Law, becoms the end of the Law, for righteousness to every one that
believes. By the end of the Law; I mean the perfect end of it, or the end of
it as it was a Covenant of works; Romans 10.4 Finis perficiens non interficiens.
requiring obedience upon pain of death and damnation. Thus when Christ had
perfectly accomplished and fulfilled th Law, the Law was laid up in Christ, as
the Tables and Testimony were put into the Arc, which signified Christ, the
Law being fulfilled and accomplished by Christ, Exodus 25.16. Heb. 9.4.
it was to continue no longer in force against such as should believe in him,
and now menare to receive the Law as handed out to them by Jesus Christ, 1 Cor.
9.21.
and not to look upon it as a Covenant of works, and as it was handed and
delivered by God to Moses, and by Moses to the children of Israel. Well, this
is the next thing, the Law is taken out of the way.

The fourth enemy that stood up to plead against a poor sinner, and his
redemption and salvation was Satan; Satan stands up as the Philistim did; and
said, who is the man, that will redeem these souls that are in my snare, and
in my power? am not I God of all the earth? who shall deliver them out of my
hands? These great, high, and big words, like the words of the King of Assyria,
were enough to terrify and dismay weak men. But the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, he comes (as David against the Philistin and says to him, ThouSatan,
that have defied the Armies of Israel, and hastcast the Gantlet to all, and
dare any man to fight with thee, and rescue sinful men out of thy hands, try
thy power, and pull down thy pride, and I will, says Christ; hereupon Jesus
Christ comes and has a single duel with him, and the issue thereof was, that
Satan wounded the heel of Christ, and Christ wounded his head, according to
that saying, (Gen.) 315.
He shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. That is, Satan
should have power against Christ's body, to overcome it, and Christ should
destroy his power. Therefore says Christ, John 12.31. Joh. 12.31.
the Prince of this world be cast out. So that now Satan's power is already
taken away; the Devil may challenge a right to many of Christ's servants, till
they are called, converted and brought from under his power; but alas! it is
but an usurped right, as a man that lays claim to a childs inheritance, when
he is in his nonage, when the child is not able, as yet, to maintain his
right; so Satan lays claim to the soul, of a poor sinner, as long as he is
in his nonoge, till he comes to believe, but when a soul comes to the years
of understanding regeneration, and adoption, then will he know that Satan has
nothing to do to hinder his salvation, and this is the fourth enemy to men's
redemption, and salvation.

The fifth enemy that stood up against men's Redemption and Salvation was the
world; All the powers of the world they gathered together to hinder this work;
First the Jews (though they did not ahink it) gathered themselves together, to
hinder this work of men's redemption; Acts 4.26.27.
but Christ tells and assures his Disciples in the 16. of John verse 33. That
he had overcome the world, John 16.33.
so that all the snares in the world, all the temptations, all the pleasures,
all the delusions, all the things in the world, and all the meu in the world
could not hinder men's redemption and salvation, but Jesus Christ overcome them
all; be therefore of good cheer, for here is ground of comfort to sinners, and
Saints.

Then the sixth and last enemy that Jesus Christ has overcome, was death and
hell, Job. 18.14.
death you know is called the King of terrors, and there had need some great
King come to overcome this King; therefore Jesus Christ comes and undertakes
and effects this work, therefore Paul could say, (when he speaks of the
resurrection of Christ, Oh death where is thy sting, oh hell (or grave) where
is thy victory? 1 Cor. 15.15.
death, come out, and let me see what thou can say against me, or believers?
has not my Lord Christ conquered and taken a way both the power and sting,
Satan has the power of death, and in is the sting of death, but Christ has
overcome qoth. Heb. 2.14. 1 Cor. 15.56.
death and hell? they may fear believers with their ghastly looks, but death is
but a bed to belieuers, it is but as a dark door out of the room of grace
into the room of glory, out of the spiritual presence of Christ into the
glorious presence of Christ. Thus I have opened the second way how Jesus Christ
finied the work of men's redemption and salvation; one way was by putting
himself into their room and place; And then secondly by removing, and
conquering was in the way to hinder men's redemption, and men's salvation.

And then thirdly, and lastly, Thirdly,
by purchasing both the persons and portions of men, or the men, and their
glory. Believers and their inheritance were purchased with an honorable and
precious price.
Now Christ did not only (remember this) remove sin, make satisfaction unto
Justice, fulfill the Law, overcome Satan, overthrow the world, and conquer
death and hell, but he did also purchase men's persons, and men's porcions:

First he did purchase men's persons, as the Apostle says in the first of the
Cor. the 6. and the last, Ye are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6.20.
or with an honorable price, (as the word signifies; to wit, 1 Pet. 1.19.
with the precious blood of Christ. The Lord Jesus has bought the very hairs
of your heads, you that are believers, or will believe, I say unto you, there
is not a hair of your head falls to the ground, but Christ has bought it,
Mark that expression of the Apostle, who loved (meaning Christ) the Church,
and Ephesians. 5.
gave himself for it; this doubtless, was typed out in Genesis 29.20.27, 28.
Jacob, who bought his wife Rachell with 14. years hard service. And 2 Samuel 3
^4.
David, who bought his wife with a hundred of foureskins of the Philistines.
These three doubtless were types (as also others that bought their wives under
the Law) of Jesus Christ in this particular.

Then secondly, he has bought also the inheritance and portion, which the
Saints are to have for ever, in the first of the Ephesians. the 14. ver. the
Apostle Ephesians. 1.14.
says that the spirit sealed them unto the day of redemption, until the
purchased possession, that is, until they come to obtain what Christ has
purchased for them.

Obj. Heaven is a gift and a purchase.
But is not Heaven a gift, how then do you say it is purchased?

Ans. The truth is, Heaven is a gift, but yet gift through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Romans 6.23.

Obj But if Christ purchased Heaven before, why does he say, he goes to prepare
a place for them? nay, what need he intercede for them?

Ans. This is as a man that goes into a Goldsmiths shop, and buyeth Jewels
there for his wife, and goes home to his wife, and says, wife, I have bought
such and such Jewels for thee, will thou go and call for them, I says she, if
you will go along with me; he goes with her, and says, deliver these Jewels
to my wife; he purchases them, not the last time, for he bought them before;
So this is the difference between Christ's death and intercession, by his death
he purchased Heaven, and by his intercession, he desires they may partake of
Heaven; Christ did not go to Heaven to indent there with his Father for it,
but he went thither as a Bridegroom uses to do, to make all ready against he
brings his spouse home. And mark, when Christ intercedes in Heaveen, he does it
by his will; for as he once said on earth, so he still says in Heaven John
17.24
I will that they may be where I am, that they may behold my glory. Now having
opened the Doctrine, I Will give you but 2. reasons (beside Christ's testimony
here) to prove that he has glorified his Father, and wrought the work of
men's Redemption and salvation.

The first reason is this, Reason 1.
because else Christ should never have entered into glory; note that, The
Apostle puts much up in this 1 Pet. 1.21.
that God raised him up from the Dead and gave him glory. When Jesus Christ had
once come down from heaven, and had undertaken this work, doubtless there was
no readmissions into heaven, till he had finished it. If you should see a Judge
take a malefactor that had been arraigned before him at the bar, and lead him
by the hand, and exalt him to sit upon his own right hand, would you not
conclude and say, surely this man is not only acquitted from all that was laid
to his charge, but he is in great favor also with the Judge. Now God the
Father, he judged and condemned his Son; for if (I may so say) man had not so
great a hand in the crucifying of Christ, as God had, mark, it is said Acts
4.28.
that he was put to death by the determinate counsel of God Now after his death
God leads him out of his grave, into his glory, and this was a sign that there
was nothing could be further laid to the charge of Christ, nor to the charge of
such that Christ did then undertake for. This is the argument of the Apostle,
who shall lay any thing Romans 8.34
(says he) to the charge of Gods elect it is Christ that dyed yea rather who
is risen, who also sits at the right hand of God: and he puts a RATHER upon
it; YEA RATHER, who is risen, and fits upon the right hand of God.

The second reason is this; Reason 2.
because that the Gospel is now published unto men; we should never have had
the Gospel, had not Jesus Christ finished the work. You know till Christ was
taken up into glory, there were two great things that were kept back in heaven
from men. First, there was the spirit of God, And secondly, the counsel of
God. Both these are wrapped up in the Gospel: These two (I say) were kept back
from men till Christ had ascended into heaven; but as soon as Jeaus Christ
went up, the spirit immediately comes down, and the counsel of the Lord
begins to be revealed in a mavelous way unto men: This is an absolute and
clear sign the work was done; for said Christ John 16.7.
except I go away, the Comforter cannot come. I say it is a sign Jesus Christ
has finished the work; for do you think the Lord would have sent his Gospel
to men to tell men, or his spirit to assure men it was done, if it had not been
done, and thus much now concerning the reasons of the point.

Before I come to the application of the Doctrine, give me leave to answer one
or two objections.

1 Object. The first objection is this; If Jesus Christ had finished the work
of men's Redemption and of men's Salvation upon earth, why then are men commanded
to work out their own salvation, if the work be already done? what need the
debtor be exhorted to pay, if the surety have already paid for him?

1. The Apostles meaning in exhorting men to work out their salvation, is this,
That they should persevere in the way they did profess, and not fall from the
truth; or as the Greek word (...) signifies a working through, and so it is to
be understood for a persevering work.

Secondly, when men are called to doing, or to work, they are not called to do
that they might have life, or be justified; but men are called to do, because
they are Tit. 3.5, 6.
justified, and because they are saved, i. e. in a state of salvation, because
they have life, and not that they may have it; for the Lord never in the
Scripture makes works the cause of Justification, or the cause of Salvation:
no, it is a subsequent, and an effect, and that which follows a man's
justification, or that which flows from a justified person. For here is the
difference between works, as they are done under a covenant of works, and
under a covenant of grace; works when they are done under a covenant of works,
they are done to seek justification and salvation; they are done to work
righteousness for man to keep him out of hell: But works done under the
covenant of grace, they are done out of 2 Cor. 5.14
love to Christ, done to the 1 Cor. 10.31.
glory of God, done to express that we are Col. 3.1.
Christians, and that we are John 8.31. and 15.8.
Christ's Disciples, and so to do works as the covenant of grace requires
works, as the duty of Christians; but to do works as the covenant of works
requires works, either upon pain of damnation, or upon promise of salvation,
this is to be shunned by Christians.

2 Object. The second Objection: It is true as you say, that Jesus Christ has
glorified the Father, and finished the work of men's Redemption and Salvation,
but you have not showed upon what grounds the Lord did this; peradventure he
might do it upon some grounds that were not advantageous to us. There were two
maine grounds moved him to do this, his love and affection to men was one, and
the great necessity of men was the other. Upon these two grounds Jesus Christ
came forth from heaven, to work this work.

1 First, it was his love and affection unto men, the heart of Jesus Christ was
toward men upon earth (you may read) as soon as ever they were made; yea
Jesus Christ his delight was with them. In the eighth of the Proverbs, (says
he) My delights were with the children of men. Prove. 8.31.
If his delight was so, then much more was it, when the time of their
redemption drew near, and most of all since he suffered. If Jacobs love were so
great, when he first saw Rachell, how much more did his heart go out to her,
when that she was neete to be his wife? If Jesus Christ's heart went out, when
he first saw men upon earth, how much more went his heart out toward them,
John 15.13. Gal. 2.20.
when the time was come to be married to them. This doubtless was the first
and maine cause why Christ did work this work of Redemption and Salvation.

The 2d was men's necessity, thy did move Christ to do it; there was indeed a
necessity for Christ to come to work this work; for had there been any other
way, doubtless that way would have been taken; the Father would never have
lost such a dear Son; if there could have been any other means of saving men
without him: No, he would never have parted with such a companion, that he had
so much content and comfort in, if Angels might have done the work; but he
looked upon his right hand, and upon his left hand, and there was no helper.
Then says God, My own right hand, or my Isa. 63.5.
arm wrought salvation. That is, my Isa. 53.1. Luke 1.51.
Son Jesus Christ, he wrought salvation. If you understand this Text in a
spiritual sense. Thus having removed the two objections, now I come to the
uses of this point; I shall make but three uses of it, and then conclude;
remember the observation, The business of Jesus Christ upon earth, was to
glorify his Father, and to work the work of men's redemption, and the work
of men's salvation; and this business he has finished.

1 Use. The first use is a use of great encouragement unto sinful men: Is the
work of men's Redemption already fulfilled, finished and already wrought; O what
great encouragement is this unto you that are sinful, and that are ungodly
men; it is encouragement unto you that cannot work, here is a work already
wrought for you, it is wrought to your hand. I may say to you, as it was said
in the Gospel to the men that were invited to the Feast, Lo all is ready,
Math. 22.4.
come, I tell you here is all ready; here is the work of redemption and
salvation wrought; every thing is prepared, come; The Spirit says, come, the
Bride says come, the saints say come, the Gospel says come, every thing
says come; Oh come, here is great encouragement for you to come. I beseech you
hear, without doubt there be this day, in this place, many sinners, and many
that stand in great need of Jesus Christ; here be many poor souls that stand
looking, they cannot tell which way to go, but like a boule, the least thing
that touches it, will make it turn this way or that way; you are looking
which way you shall be saved; some men are great and gross sinners, men that
delight in sin, and sport in the day, and make it their whole businesie to
dishonor God, as Christ made it his business to honor him. Well, what shall
I say to you; I desire to open the gate of Gods grace, and God open you hearts
that you may hear what he says unto you the door of his mercy is open to you
already; Encouragements for sinners to come into Christ and to believe on his
grace. 1 Encour.
and that I may encourage you to come in, I will give you four or five
inducements and motives.

The first is this, That God gave this work to Christ to do, The work (says
he) which thou gave me to do; note, that God the Father had his hand in this
work of man's redemption and salvation, and it could not have been effected,
but that God was willing to have it effected in this manner. This
encouragement, that God did put Christ to do this work, is a special
intentive and motive to you to believe; for had Christ done this work without
his Fathers approbation, you might have questioned whether he would have
accepted of it; but it being done by his appointment, and by order from him, he
must needs accept of it.

Secondly consider this, 2 Encour.
that there is nothing of the work left undone; no, the Lord has not left so
much as a stone for you to turn, not one thing for you to do: Christ tells you
here, he has finished the work, and you may believe it, for he would never
undertake or begin a business or work, and not go through it. Oh that you had
hearts to believe this, that Christ has done all, and that there is nothing of
that work left for you to do.

Obj. But you will say, by your favor Sir, he has not done all, for he
requires I should believe and repent, and turn from my sins, and be obedient
unto him; and surely he has thereby put enough of work upon me, and more then
I am able to do.

O poor souls (hearken to this) Jesus Christ has not left the work of
beliveing, repenting, turning from sin, or obeying upon you, but he has that
work still to do in you; he has done one work in his person, and now he has
another work to do by his Spirit, and Jesus Christ he looks upon that work as
belonging to him. Mark how he spoke (of calling sinners) in John 4.4. John.
4.4.
He must needs go, through Samaria. And why? because he was to call (and to
work faith in) some of the poor Samaritans, this he makes his work. So in
John 10.16. John 10.16.
Other sheep I have (saish he) that are not of this fold, them also I must
bring (into the fold;) he says not, there are other sheep, and I must go and
send shepherds to drive them home, or send dogs after them, to course them
home; no, but I must go seek them, and bring them home; he puts a me oportet,
(I must) up on it. Mark this, that as Christ has perfected the work of
redemption in his own person, so he will also create the work of
sanctification in your persons, as he did that work in his own flesh, so he
will do the other in your flesh. This is the tenor of the Covenant of grace, I
will do all, yea this is the nature of it, I will do all freely; God in the
Covenant of grace does no condition from me, but what he promised to work in
men. It is true, you must believe, and repent before you can go to heaven, but
the Lord undertakes this work himself. For says the Lord, Heb. 8.1^
I will put my Law into their minds, and write them in their hearts. That is,
he will teach them to know him, believe in him, and to be obedient to him, he
does not say in the Covenant of grace, do these things your selves, but he
says, I will See Jer. 32.40. Psa. 54.13. Math. 12.21. Joh. 6^.^4 45. Heb.
10.16.
work all your works in you, and for you.

Obj. I, but then Sir you will say, we must have these things wrought in us
before we go to Heaven.

Ans. Very true, you must have them wrought in you, but how, and by whom? Not
by any strength of your own, but you are to go to the Lord, and say unto him,
Lord, thou requirest knowledge, faith, repentance, and obedience of me, and
thou say no ignorant person, unbeliever, or impenitent person shall go to
Heaven, Lord, if thou will not work this knowledge, faith, repentance, and
obedience in me, thou had as good never have borne my sins, Lord Jesus,
seeing thou have wrought Redemption and salvation for me, now work
Sanctification in me, thou have done the work out of me, and for me, now come,
and work the work in me; Sue out the Covenant of grace, and if thou have no
means to sue by, then sue by forma pauperis, as men use to do that wants
money, you know they come with a white paper, and sue thereby and are heard, so
you want knowledge, faith, strength, power, and holiness, sue in that way;
take the promises of the Lord, and go with them as tickets, and say, Lord, is
not this thy hand? and is not this thy promise? is not this thy writing? have
not thou ordained this? for me to take hold on, Lord; I bring thine own tickets
to thee, Lord, do for me, as thou have said, It is thy promise, thou will open
the blind eyes, stand to thy word, thou have said thou will work faith, here
comes a poor unbelieving, at least a doubting sinner to thee; I will try
whether thou will work faith in me, go and put the Lord to his promise, and
thou shall see he will never deny his own handwriting, nor his own word,
well, there be two encouragements for you.

The third encouragement (I pray you consider it well) It is the special will
of the Lord that you should believe, 3. Encouragement.
and will not you do his special will; If the Lord command you to pray, or
command you to fast, or mourn, you will do that work, but this is the work,
or the most acceptable work to God. Mark; John 16.28.29.
When one came to Christ, and asked him, What shall we do to work the works
of God, Jesus answered, and said unto him, this is the works (or the work
that will be wel-pleasing to God,) to believe on him whom of God he has sent,
As if Christ had said unto him, If thou will be doing, or will please my Father
by working, I tell thee, there is no such way as by believing in me.

The fourth encouragement is this, 4. Encouragement.
a man that has no work at all in him, no performances, no qualifications,
nor preparations, yet such a one has free liberty to come to the Lord Jesus
Christ, yea, as free as any other man whatsoever, I tell you, Whoremasters,
drunkards, and swearers, that have dishonored God as much as you could
dishonor (...), the Lord speak this to your heart, here is an open door,
here is rich grace, and free grace, the heart of Christ is as much toward you
as any other sinners; If there be any plea for any sinner, there is a plea for
this sort of sinner, yea, such a one may say, Lord, then came not to call the
rightecus, but sinners to repentance, never was there any greater sinner then
I, thou came there to call Publicans, and Harlots, such a wicked wretch have
I been for many years, Lord receive me, I am now willing to come to thee, do
not cast me away, for thou have Job. 6.37 The greek is (...). I will not, not,
cast out, out.
said, thou will in no wise cast out such a one, What think you will Christ say
to such a one? Surely this, thou art welcome, come poor sinner, thou art
heartily welcome. I have grace for thee, and I am contented to bestow it freely
on thee, I have called thee, and thou art come, hearken what I say unto thee
Luke 15.4.
There was a certain man had a hundred sheep, and when he had lost one, he
left the rest, and went to seek that which was lost; thou art that sheep which
wast lost but now art found.

Obj. Oh but another may say, I, Christ calls sinners and Publicans, and
accepts of such; but I fear I am a Pharisee, John 7 37, 38. with Acts 2.37, 38.
a form all Professor, yea, a Hypocrite, where does he call such, or where is
there any promise made to such?

Ans. Put the case you be such, (though you do but think it) yet you read of a
call to such, a promise to such, and of the conversion of such, compare John
7.37, 38. with Acts 2.37, 38.

The fifth encouragement is this, that the greater sinners you are, when you
come to believe in Christ, the more ^^^honour Christ has from you; If a man
man that is not a great and common sinner, be converted, alas, there is no
talk of him, this man's was looked on as a good morrall man before, a man that
made some show of Religion, a man that went after Sermons, and one that had
some good will to good men, and good things. Before such an one was never
looked upon as a drunkard, Swearer, and the like, I say this man is converted,
and no notice taken of him. But as when a Monster is borne the Country rings of
him, so when a monstrous and great sinner is borne again, when a man that has
been a ring leader of others in wickedness, and that has lead and haled
others in the way to hell, and gone down the hill himself, as fast as ever he
could to his own damnation, I say when such a man is drawn out of his wicked
and miserable condition, and brought to Christ, what will others they say, Oh
did you hear the news! what news? Such a man, such a great sinner that was
given for lost is become a Saint, such a man that was so great an enemy to
Religion is now converted. Such a Persecutor is become a zealous Professor. Is
it so? yes, there is no man in the Country forward for Religion as he is, all
the Country will ring of such a sinners conversion, hearken sinner, would
thou not have the name of God ring through Heaven, and Earth at thy conversion,
would thou not have God glorified, and thy own soul saved, this day there
would be joy in Heaven, and glory to God on Earth, if thou would yield to
come in to Christ, and to be converted: The Lord say Amen to it.

The fifth encouragement is this, 5. Encouragement.
Christ has spare grace for you. that's another, alas, what shall this gracious
charitable King do with all his grace? The Lord has greatest glory from the
greatest sinner when he is converted.
what shall he do with so much gold lying by him, if poor distressed people
do not come in to fetch it, what shall Christ do with all his merits, and
sufferings, (which he has in store still to be given out to sinners) if
sinners who want it, will not have it; Mark what I say to you, if so many
sinners, as are here this day, did come to him, he has grace enough for them
and so many to morrow, and so every day, till the day of the Resurrection, yet
Christ has grace enough for them all, will you lean such stock of grace in
his hands, and not get it, since he has prepared it for you. My beloved,
suppose a man had a son, to whom he had given all his estate, this son also
is very rich of himself, and there were a poor woman, that this Son has a
mind to make his wife, he comes to her, and says, woman, my heart and
affections are gone out toward thee, to take thee, and to make my wife, will thou accept of me, she refuseing, he presses and woes her further, and says,
why, do not thou consider what a rich father I have? he has made all his
estate over to me, considerest thou not also what wealth and riches I have, do
but hear me, and condescend to my request, and say I wll have thee for my
husband, and all this shall be thine; Thus says Jesus Christ to a sinner,
poor sinner, hear thou not what my father has given me, and hear thou
not what an heir I am, do thou but own me, and take my yoke upon thee, and
be my Disciple, and all this will I give thee; As the Devil offered feigned
all the world to Jesus Christ, if he would submit to him: So Jesus Christ
offers really all the world to a poor sinner, if he will come in, and submit
to him. Again, suppose a rich man did stand in a public place, among a
multitude of poor, and should say unto them, you poor, whatsoever you are;
without respect of persons, come to me, I will bestow what you want upon you,
whether money, or meat, or clothes, all these I have ready for you, come, and
receive them, what would not these poor people think you, come to him, nay,
would they not crowde in upon him; Why thus says Jesus Christ to poor
sinners, I have grace enough to bestow upon you, come in, and you shall be
welcome; come, and look, whatever you want, I will bestow it upon you, now
what stands in thy way oh thou poor sinner? or what hinders thee to come in?

Object. Oh Sir! this stands in my way, though I know Christ has finished the
work of men's redemption, and of men's salvation, yet I do not know whether he
has finished it for me?

Ans. Hearken my beloved, what ground have you to make a plea against your
selves, he has done it for Romans ^5.8. 1 Timothy 1.15.
sinners, for the Romans 5.6.
ungodly, for Psalm. 68.18.
rebels, for (...) John 6.51.
world, you are a sinner, you are one of the ungodly, one of the world, what
plea can you make against this why object you such an objection against your
selves? If a pardon be sent from a Prince to a company of Prisoners, and the
Messenger says unto them in general, here is a Pardon for you, from my Prince
for what you have done against him, come, accept of it and you shall be free.
Now if one should ask, is the pardon for me? and another question is the
Pardon for me? he would answer. It is for you that are Prisoners, without
acception, if you accept of it. A Pardon is now sent unto you, that are finfull
men and women, who are Prisoners under the power of Satan, and sin; I say to
you all, the Lord Jesus has sent forth his pardon, which runs thus; I the Lord
Jesus, the Son of God, and the Savior of sinners, out of my free grace and
mercy, rich love, and pity am willing to pardon, and forgive the sins and
transgressions of you all; and this I will do really, if you will come in, and
lay hold of this pardon, and of my righteousness. Will a sinner now say, does
Jesus Christ mean me, seeing he says, whosoever comes unto me: I will in no
wise cast him out: and whosoever believes on me he shall be pardoned, and
saved. This word whosoever comprehends all, and excludes none, therefore object
not against your selves; neither refuse your own salvation.

Obj. Oh! but though Christ invites all and makes promises to all that do
come, yet he intends not that all should be made partakers thereof.

Ans. My beloved, think you that Christ's intentions, and his expression are
not one as real as another. I tell you (and you may believe) that he intends
to pardon all, and to save all, as he expresses it. He says not the words
only, but his heart is so also. But mark it well (and mistake me not) I do
not mean that he says absoluely, I Will pardon all, and save all, and no more,
oh no; but he speaks conditionally, I Will pardon you all, and save you all, if
you believe on me and accept of my pardon.

Obj. But alas he were as good never tender me a pardon, nor make me a promise,
upon those terms, for of my self I cannot believe, nor receive his pardon
and grace.

Ans. Its true, of your selves you cannot believe, nor receive his pardon, and
grace, though tendered to you: yet as I said before, cry upon him to give you
eyes to see him, and his grace, and feet to come to him, and hands to take
hold upon his merits, and righteousness. He promises largely and freely,
peradventure, now while the word is speaking, God will be working these things
in you.

Obj. But he does not give this grace to, (nor work this grace in) all, but to
few, therefore do I fear, least I should not be one of them.

Ans. Though he does not give grace to all, (for he has not tied himself so to
do, neither is the cause in God why men want grace, for he gave sufficiently
at first) yet you are bound to seek, and the promise is made to Seekers, nay I
may speak more, the Lord is found of some that seek him not. Prove. 18.4. Jer.
29.13. Romans 10.20. Ezekiel. 34.6.11.12.16.


Obj. But peradventure another here, may further object and say, I have long
sought, and I am even weary of seeking: yea, I am ready to conclude, that if I
had belonged to God, I should have found grace in his sight ere now.

Ans. Oh dear souls, conclude nothing, neither against your selves, nor
against the Lord, for he has sought you longer then you sought him. And you
have not yet been thirtie-eight years waiting at the waters ( Christ's
Ordinances) as that weak and impotent man. Oh soul! peradventure the Lord is
now asking thee as he did this man; John 5.^5.
Will thou be made whole? If he be so, make him answer, and say, Lord I am
weak, but yet waiting, oh help me, and heal me Lord. Thus much for the first
use.

Seeing Christ has glorified his Father, Use. 2.
and finished the work of men's Redemption, and Salvation, this then directs,
and teaches men what they should not do, and also what they should do. First,
what they should not do.

In the first place, First.
they should not go about to work their own Redemption and Salvation again,
for if Christ has wrought it already, then its in vain, (yea, its ignorance,
and folly) to think of doing any thing toward your own Instification, and
salvation.

Object. Sure there be none that think to do any thing for, and toward their
justification and salvation, unless they be Papists.

Answ, Oh yes, there be many besides Papists, thot do so, for do but ask
many Protestants, how they think to be justified and saved? they will tell you
by their good works, and well-doing, If we do well (say they) we shall have
well, and if we do ill, we shall have accordingly. Yea, this is apparent in
men, both living; and dying. In their life time they will say, if we can but
keep the Commandments, viz. to love God above all, and our Neighbors as our
selves, then we hope it will go well with us. Then at their death they think
that to build an Hospital, (or to do some such charitable work,) will save
their souls. Mark this, it is easier to do good works, then to undo our
selves from them, and to have no confidence in them, Phil. 3.3.
and to be able to say, as the Apostle said, in him ( i.e. Christ) I desire to
be found, not having my own righteousness, v. 9.

Secondly, Secondly.
on the other hand, men should not rest and sit still, and content themselves
with this bare notion, that Christ came to redeem to and save sinners; and
that if he died for them, then they shall be saved. Oh! what are you the better
that he dyed for sinners, unless you know the death of Christ in the worth and
efficacy of it, and unless you have it applied it to your selves in particular,
and be able upon good grounds to say as Paul said, Christ came into the world
to save sinners of whom I am chief: 1 Timothy 1.13. Gal. 2.20.
and Christ loved me and gave satisfaction for me, this particular faith you
stand in need of.

Object. I do believe that he dyed for me in particular.

Ans. But upon what ground do you believe it? what promise have you to build
your faith upon: there is a kind of Luke 8.12. Act. 8.13.
Hystoricall believing, or assenting unto this truth that Christ died for
sinners, which is not a lively but a dead faith, which may rather be called a
fancy then a faith, this is but a conceit that arises in your hearts, like the
dream of a sleeping man, alas! alas! be not deceived for if every one did
believe that does say he does believe, the numbers of believers would be far
greater.

Object. I am sure my faith is as good as most men's faith.

Ans. I tell you most men's faith is not worth a farthing, for it is but Copper
faith, and carnal faith, a faith that they had, they know not how, nor they
know not when such a faith as they will pawn for a penny. 2 Pet. 1.1. Act.
15.9. Ephesians.
There is a great deal of difference between your faith and the faith of the
godly, for your faith (I mean you that are (as the most are) carnal) is not a
faith begotten and wrought by the Gospel and spirit: it is not a precious
purifying, powerful working soule-humbling faith: (such as is the faith
commended in the Seriptures) and such a faith as does undo you, and strip you
naked of all you have. This is the faith of the godly, which most want, (and
which is worse), are not sensible that they want it.

Thirdly, Take heed of making your faith to be the cause of your Justification:
For thereby you may miss it as well as others missed it, by making their works
the cause. Note, that faith is but the Instrument and means, whereby you do
apprehend and enjoy your justification. Christ is your righteousness, and by
him, and his death, sufferings, you are justified: 2 Cor. 5.^9. Romans 8.33.
yea and that truly and really too (I mean virtually in Christ, and before
God) before you do believe.

Object. But does not the Act of believing justify men? Romans 4.6.3. Gal. 3.6.
for it is said of Abraham that his faith was reckoned to him for
righteousness.

Ans. 1. Its true, that Abraham's faith was reckoned to him for righteousness.
But mark, when was that reckoned to him, and what was it that he did believe?
Do but read Genesis 15.6. where this Text is first found in Scripture, and you
will find there, that this believing of his was the believing the promise
concerning the giving of Isaac, and the multiplying of his seed: Genesis 12.3. and
13.3.9. and 14.19.
and this Promise was made a long time after his first believing. Genesis 12.3.3.
and 13.3, 9, and 14.19. Also the Apostle Jamee apply's this expression to
Abraham's work, even to the offering up of Isaac. Jam. 2.21. and 23.

2. The same expression is used of Phinehas for killing Zimri and Cozby. Psalm.
206.13.
That (says the Text) was counted unto him for righteousness, will any now
conclude from hence, that the killing of these two unclean persons was the
cause of Phineas justification from sin? No; the meaning of it is this, that
this Act did testify his faith and righteousness, and God did reckon and
account it as a righteous Act.

Object. But the Scripture is clear that men are justified by faith, and by
beleoving.

Ans. So the Scripture is clear, that men are justified by Iam. 2.2.24, 25.
Works and by Mat. 12.3 Luke 18 14.
Words But you are to understand in what sense men are justified by these. Mark
therefore. By Gal. 2.1 Romans 3.24.1 Cor. 6. ^^
Christ his death, sufferings, and Resurrection, men are really, and virtually
justified. By faith men are personally, and apprehensively justified, and by
Works and Words, men are declaratively justified: In the first sense men are
justified before God, in the second sense they are justified in their own
consciences, and in the third sense, they are justified before men.

So having directed you what you should take heed of, and not do: I come in the
next place to show you, and direct you what you should do. I shall give you but
five directions and those in short.

First, Labor to eve all that Christ has done, as done for others, and not
for himself; for Christ was not like the High Priest under the Law, Heb. 7.27.
that was to offer, first for his own sins, and then for the sins of the
people: No, he had no sin of his own to suffer for (as I showed before)
therefore what ever he did, and suffered, he did and suffered the same as a
surety and Savior.

Object I know that Christ dyed for others, and not for himself, but then it
was for his elect, I fear I am not one of them.

Answ. Thou art not to enquire after (or once to question) thy election, till
thou do first believe: And so the Apostle teaches; Say not in thy heart, ^
Romans 60.1
who shall ascend into Heaven, that is, to bring Christ from above: Or, who
shall ascend into the deep? that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead
(i.e. look neither upon Election nor preterition, but look upon the word of
faith, which is preached to thee, and which commands thee to believe.

Secondly, Stay not from Christ till you set and find humiliation,
preparations, and qualifications in your selves: for this in a sense is either
to look upon Christ's satisfaction as not sufficient, or else to look upon
Christ as unwilling to make you partakers of it, unless you bring somewhat in
lieu of it, at least till you are fitted for it you cannot have it. Consider (I
pray you) where? and from whom can you have that humiliation, preparation, and
qualfication, unless it be from Christ, God the Father says that he will give
him (i e. Christ) for a Covenant unto the people, Esa. 42 6.7.
to open the eyes of the blind, etc.

Here you see Christ must open the eyes of the blind before they can see. So
Christ himself says, without me ye can do nothing, Joh. 15.5.
if men can do nothing without Christ, why then should they think to fit
themselves for him.

Object. Because that those that are so fitted and humbled are called to
Christ, and have the promise belonging unto them. As Christ says, Ho every one
that thirsleth, come ye to the waters: and in another place, Come unto me all
ye that are weary and heavy laden and I will ease you.

Ans. You and many others doubtless have been much mistaken in those, and such
Scriptures, for the meaning is not that Christ inviteth, and makes promise
only to such that are thirsty heavy laden, etc. Though it be true that he
invites those, and makes promises unto such in a more special manner, yet not
excluding others.

As a Physician that comes to two Patients to cure them both, yet if he see the
one in greater paint and torment then the other, he will take him in hand
before the other, but not him only: for he will cure the other, also that
paradventure may be less sencible, yea altogether senseless of his disease or
wound.

Object. But yet me thinks a man that is not wounded, will never desire to go
to the Phisitiam, nor have the Physician come to him. So a sinner that is not
fensible of his sins will not go to Christ, neither will he be willing
that I should come to him.

Ans. Though poor senceles sinners will not go to Christ nor desire their
Physician Christ to come unto them, yet Christ knowing their want and danger
will come to them as he went to the Samaritans and others.

Object. But he says, he is come to seek and to save that which is lost.

Ans. Very true, but he does not say those that did see themselves lost (those
I grant he comes more specially to seek here he means) See Luke 19 ^ with Mat.
9.11.1.
but to those that were the greatest sinners, and lost in the eyes of others,
as the Publicans and Harlots were in the apprehensions of the Jews: This is the
true meaning of that Text.

Thirdly, Thirdly.
Distinguish between Christ's work of Redemption that he has done without men
in his own person, by obedience, and the other which. he works in men by his
spirit. Observe that men are not to look for any thing in themselves either
before believing. or after, as causing justification. For Justification is Gods
reckoning those that were sinners to be no sinners, or those that were Debtors
no Debtors, and this through Christ and upon his account. But sanctification is
a putting forth of aholy and heavenly power, to the changing of men's carnal
principles, and making them spiritual: and to the purging of men's filthynesse,
and making them clean. So that the Apostle ascribes Justification to the name
righteousness of Christ and sanctification to the spirit or Christ. 1 Co. 11.
1 Cor. 6.11.

Fourthly, Fourthly.
When you come to Christ to look for justification (or to be justified) then
you must come as sinners, and not as Saints. As the Apostle says: If while we
seck to be justified by Christ we our selves also are feund sinners (that is in
the capacity of sinners.) Gal. 2.17.
For indeed it is improper for a man that is a Saint to come to look for
Justification (for he is justified before) unless he comes to have his
Justification cleared and renewed in his own Conscience. As a man that has a
pardon for his life, may (if his pardon be blurd or broken) get it renewed; yet
the renewing of it is not the first grant: so Saints may get their pardons
renewed, and transcribed in their Consciences, but yet when they ask pardon of
God, they must consider, that the former pardon (granted up on Christ's
resurrection, and likewise upon the first Act of believing) is recorded in
Heaven. Therefore, Saints, if you loose your Evidences, and vvritings for
Heaven committed to you, yet know they are enrolled in the Court of glory.

Fifthly, And lastly, you should get an experience of what Christ has done in
his own person, in your persons: I mean, that you should not only have a
sight, Romans 5.11.4.5
by faith, of the virtue of Christ's death to justification, but that you
likewise get a feeling of that vvarme blood of his, to comfort and cheer up
your souls. Get experience placed, as the Apostle places it, betvveen Faith
and Hope, or betvveen Justification and Salvation. So much for the second use.

The third and last USE is of Exhortation unto all (but especially unto you
that are called to do the work of the Lord) that you would be followers of
Jesus Christ. Here Christ could say, He had finished the work which was given
him to do. But many of you may say, that you have not yet begun the work,
(though you are ready to go to your graves) I would exhort you to imitate
Christ, for you cannot have a better Example. But before I come to the
particular Exhortation, Consider 3. things.

First, F^^
That every man has a work (or his work) to do upon earth. God leaves no man
Idle, but he turns all into the Vineyard and gives every man his work: Mar.
13.34.
So says our Savior in the 13. of Mark and the 34. And he gave to every man
his work. Now I beseech you consider, that the Lord has given you some work to
do; you that are Magistrates, the Lord has given you some work to do. The Lord
help you to know, what that work is: he has highly honored you, to call you to
his work, he might have left you, as you were, unworthy to have taken his work
in hand; there is none of you worthy to do the work of Jesus Christ; yet he
has so far expressed his willingness to exalt you, to see whether you will
exalt him. Joh. 1^.49.
You know, Jesus Christ he did very often look upon this work, in the 12. of
John, and the 49. verse I have not spoken of myself, but the Father which sent
me, he gave me Commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak. So the
Father has given you a Commandment, what you should do; know that there is a
work given unto you; that is the first thing.

Secondly, Then the Second thing is this, that you have but a time to do this
work in; There is a time (says Solomon) in the 3 of Eccles. the first) for
every thing under the Sun: Eol. 3.1.
the Lord has peradventure given you a long time to do the work, and you have
not don is, well, when the Lords Glass is run, you must be taken away, and the
work out of your hands. Remember (you that are in Authority,) what befell
sometimes your Predecessers that were good men, when they had done their work,
they were taken away, you know not but that the Lord has called you this year
to do his work, and peradventure after this year is out, your time is out, and
your Glass run, therefore think of that also, that every man has his time as
well as his work.

Then thirdly, every man must give an account of his work and Stewardship.
Thirdly.


Know this that from the greatest to the smalest, from the highest to the
lowest, you must come and appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, 2 Cor.
5.10.
and Christ will say to one, You that I have made chief Magistrate of London,
what have you don in that year of your Office? and say to others, Act. 26.25.27
you Sheriffs; you Recorder; what have you done? yea, this must be spoken
particularly to men, is Paul spoke to Festus and Agrippa. (I speak with
humility to you, and submission to the will of the Lord,) you will one day be
called by your names, such a man, in such a place, in such an Office, that
ruled in such a year, what have thou done? Thou must render an account to me
what thou have done, how thou have improved thy talent, what good thou have
done in thy place, what glory thou have brought to my name, what comfort thou
have wrought in my peoples hearts, what terrors thou have wrought in the hearts
of my adversaries? In the 20. of the Revel. and the 12. Revel. 20.12.
There when they are called to account of what they have done: you have both
small and great standing before God, Mat. 12.36.
many As Romans 14.12.
such Scriptures besides; now considering this, that first you have a work to
do, Hebr. 13.17 1 Pet. 4, 5. etc.
and secondly you have but a time to do that work, and Thirdly that you must
give an account of this work.

I come to the exhortation, (and I beseech you Brethren bear the word of
exhortation;) The exhortation is this, to be followers of Jesus Christ,
particularly in glorifying God; for that end, I shall but hold forth, how Jesus
Christ did his work; and parallel your work with his work; and show, you how you
are to do it; and so conclude.

The first is this, that Jesus Christ made it his maine design and business to
glorify his Father: First.
It was not a by-businesse to Christ, to glorify the Father, but his maine
business; eating and drinking, and other businesses, were but by-businesses to
him: but the maine business was to glorify his Father: as you may see, in the
4. of John the 34. says he, I have meat to eat, Ioh. 4.34.
that you know not of, and this is my meat, to do the will of him that sent
me, and to finish his work: Here he made Gods work, his design, and his maine
business. You are to imitate Jesus Christ in this; you are to make it your
design to glorify God, and to do the work which God has called you to. Has
the Lord called you into great plares? it must not be your design to make your
selves honorable, and to gain wealth; reputation and the like, to your
selves, and that the people may look upon you with esteem. This is not your
business: your business is, to honor God, and to advance his people, to
rebuke and pull down sin, Romans 13 3.4.
and to be a terror to wicked workers. Therefore glorify God as Christ did;
and make it your design to glorify him, for Christ made it Io.

The second is, Secondly, Luke 2 42.
Jesus Christ, as he made it his design: so he began in time about his work.
It is said in the second of Luke, when he was but twelve years of age, that he
was disputing amongst the Doctors. Some of you may be 12. and forty, and yet
have not begun nor gone about the work of the Lord. You have lost much time
already; now begin: peradverture now (yea this day) God looks you should begin,
when will you begin: Some were called into the Vineyard at the 6th. hour, and
some at the 9th. and some at the 11th. But it was expected when they had a call
to the Vineyard, that they should then work. Now you have had a call, in the
name of God begin the work, Math. 22.3.
delay it not: before the time you appoint to go about the Lords work, you may
be taken away. David for his sin, though he had an Intent to build a house to
the Lord, yet he was taken away before it was built. And Moses was likewise
taken away, before he came into Canaan; Be therefore careful to do the work of
the Lord; though while God grants you an opportunity, 1 King. 8.19.
some may do part of the work remaining in the Wilderness, yet some others may
partake of that work in Canaan.

Then thirdly Jesus Christ did not only glorify God himself, Thirdly.
but he was a means to make others to glorify God. Christ did not in his own
person only, honor his Father, but he was a mean's that others might glorify
him also. For their Master Christ chose such Disciples (the poor mean Fisher
men) that would glorify him in doing his work: They were not drunken, covetous
servants, such as did mind money, and means more then their preaching. You
great men that keep servants, here is a good example for you, Also there is a
pertinent instance in Ne^emish the fifth Chapter, and the 10. and 15. verses,
(where says he) I likewise, and my brethren, Neh. 5.10.15
and my servants might exact of them money, and corn, I pray you let us leave
off this Usu y. So in the 15. verse, you find his servants here, not as the
former Governors servants, that to e rule ever the people; but why so; Mark,
in the next words, because of the fear of God. Get servants (like his) that
fear God; and by that means, you will clear your selves from that odium,
cast upon many Gentlemen, that if the Master will not take bribes, yet the
servant will; The Proverb is commonly too true, like master, like man.

The fourth thing, that Jesus Christ did observe in doing his work, was this,
that he did neglect to opportunity of doing it, but did always take hold upon
every opportunity. When any people came together, presently, he fell to teach
them; you should never have him idle. Math. 5.1. Mat. 4.23, 34, 25. Mat. 9.35,
36. Mat. 13 2, 3. Luke 8.4, and 5.1. and 12.1. Act. 10.38.
But as it is said in the 10. of the Acts, he went about always doing good.
You should be like Christ in this also, observing every opportunity. It may be,
you loosing, and neglecting an opportunity, may loose your hearts to do the
work. If a man be a Parliament Man, he should not loose one day of being
there, to see what may be done for Gods glory. And if a man be a Magistrate of
the City; he should observe all opportunities of glorifying God; as Christ did.
In the 7. John 7.6.
of John, says he, your time is already, but my time is not come. He did
observe, what was the best time, and season to do every thing in, this is the
fourth.

Then fifthly, Jesus Christ did do his work in his Fathers strength, and in
his fathers name Joh. 5.19.43. John 6.47. Joh. 18.42.28. Joh. 12 49.50. Psalm.
22.1.10.
he did not go out in his own strength, to do the work, but always in his
fathers strength, As Psalm. 22.1.10. (which evidently is a Prophecy of Christ,
speaking thus:) Thou have caused me to trust in thee from my mothers womb. And
so when you go about your work, labor to go about it, in the strength of the
Lord: Be Ephesians. 6.10.
strong (as the Apostle exhorts you) in the Lord, and in the power of his
might. When you go forth to judge people, do you go before by prayer? and
say Lord, I am going to do such a work thou call me to do; shall I have
thy spirit, and thy slrength, thy power, and thy might, to judge the people
which thou ask me to judge, Consider it: you have a heavenly Law and
Charter, as well as an earthly to judge by; and a supernatural power, as well
as a natural you want.

And then the sixth is this, Jesus Christ he did deny himself in the work that
he did do, John 8.5. and 7.18.
I seek not (says he) my own glory, but the glory of him that sent me: you
are to deny your own glory, yea note that; to deny your own glory, is glory,
as to seek your own glory is not glory; that is a blessed word, he 1 Cor. 1.31.
that glories let him glory in the Lord; It is better a man should not do a
good work, (for himself I mean) then that he should do a good work, and
take the glory of it to himself. The Angels we find in Isa. 6.2. Ezekiel. 1.11.
Isaiah, and Ezekiel, they did cover their faces, their feet, and their body;
why their faces? because they would not see their own beauty and excellency,
(which is seen in the face) their feet because they would not see their own
Actions. That That is a precious saying, in the 15. of the first of the
Corinths, the 10. where the Apostle says, by the grace of God I am what I am,
Here he takes not to himself the honor, but he gives it unto God. 1 Cor.
15.10.


And then seventhly, and lastly, Jesus Christ his last works were his greatest
works; he went on still in greater works: he begun as a child, but as he grew
in stature, so his works were greater; you that are great and Ancient
Senators, that have had a long time to study the Laws, now you should act
more, and appear more for God. Now you are ready to go to your graves, what
good works will you leave behind you, that you may be had in remembrance? what
will your children say, our fathers were in a good time, when they might have
glorified God, but they did not; Children will be ready to blame (I wish they
may not be ready also to curse) their fathers, that they did not better then
they did. God has put an opportunity now in your hands, improve it to glorify
God; and let your latter works be better then your former; Oh that is an
honorable thing.

Quest. But it may be you will ask me, What works in particular do you think
we should do?

Answ, Though it be best known to God, and better known to you then to me;
and my work is to study the Gospel, rather then Law; and to study my own
work, then to teach you what belongs to your offices; yet give me leave,
humbly to propound three, or four things, and so I will conclude.

First, One maine work that Christ did, was to work Reconciliation.

And this is one maine work I would humbly desire you to take in hand, to see
whether you can work reconciliation amongst Gods people; You may remember when
Moses saw an Israelite and an Egyptian fighting together, Act. 7.24.26. Exodus
2.11.13.
he took part with the Israelite, and slew the Egyptian: but when he saw two
Israelites fighting together, he says, wherefore smitest thou thy fellow? He
takes not part with the one against the other, as before, but labors to
reconcile them.

In the same way walk ye, labor to reconcile those that are at variance now,
especially brethren. Oh! what a sad thing is it to see brethren scratching the
faces one of another? Solomon says, that contention amongst brethren, it like
the bars of a Castle; Prove. 18, 19.
stronger then other contentions. Difference amongst brethren, of all
differences, is the hardest difference to be reconciled; and yet it is that,
which we should endeavor to do. Give me leave to offer this to you. There is
now in the Nation some difference between Godly persons of the Presbytery, and
Independency (as they are called,) and some of other opinions.

Shall I entreat you from the Lord, to do what you can to reconcile the
differences between them. And, if you find any men that are irreconcilable in
their minds, then as the Apostle commands, Note those that Romans 16.17.
cause divisions; But if you find men that are reconcilable, and willing to
be reconciled; endeavor then to close them together in affection, and
communion, I beseech you try the work.

Obj. But Sir, it is such a difficult work, it is impossible to a^e it: for
many ways have been assayed, and it could never be done, what ways would you
offer now to do it?

Ans. There are two maine things, (or causes) if they were removed, the
business were soon ended. The one is, that they would lay aside those rigid
Principles (you may call them dividing and disuniting Principles) or seting up
more institutions then the Lord has set up.

As for instance, to begin with the Independents, they hold such a Principle as
this, (which I think to be too rigid) that a man must be of their Church, or of
such a Society, as theirs is, or else he is not to have fellowship and
communion with them, in the Lords Supper, though he be a Saint.

Peradventure some hold this, (but they are not all of this opinion.) This is
too rigid a Principle, for doubtless, Communion is grounded upon union; and if
such a man has union with the Lord, he has right to have 1 John 1.3. Romans
14.1, 2, 3. Acts 15 8, 9. Acts 9.26, 27. 1 Cor. 1, 2, 9, 10. chapter 11. 18. 8. chapter
14. 23.
Communion with the Saints. Then for the Presbyterians, they have this opinion,
that there is, and must be a Classical, a Provincial, and a National
Assembly: and all these jure Divino, though the word of God never has such
Names, nor things. And this is to set up New Institutions; and things which the
Lord has not ordained; Now if men would lay down these rigid Principles, that
are not of God, the business might quickly be healed.

The second is this; Let all of them practice their own principles. Mark this,
The difference between Presbytery and Independency, is not so great in the
principles (though they differ in several Circumstantialls) as it is in their
practice. As the Presbyterians, one of their principles is this, that the
people (or the Church) should choose their own MINISTER: well, let them
practice that, and not urge (or import) a Minister upon a people.

Another of their principles is this, That no persons should be admitted to the
Lords Supper, that are either scandalous or ignorant. Let them practice this;
and so they come in, and close with the Independents. I might instance in many
more, as also in other means (especialy that each give allowance to one
another: But I humbly desire of God, and desire of you, that you would see
whether you can reconcile these differences, for the case of the Nation
requires it, which to me stands thus: As a Ship that has been in a long
storm, and thereby weather-beaten, and much broken; being come under the
wind, and at Anchor: the Master of the ship is considering what course to
take to mend this Ship, and to make it again navigable: But some in the ship
having Commodities and Prizes which they are afraid should be taken from them,
they would, out of self-love, or discontent to the Master of the ship, hoist
up sails, and take in more wind, and rather return into the main sea again,
and thereby endanger themselves and it) the ship, then wait with patience, or
be crossed in their wills.

Is it not so with this Nation (or Commonwealth) that has been seven years
in the storm? and God being pleased to bring us now under the wind, and to
fasten us by the anchor of hope; And our Governors (the Master of the ship)
thinking of reforming things, some that are discontented (I name none) would
rather have another people to come in, and to drive it into the maine Sea of
danger ( i. e. war) to break it into pieces again. Oh that this were not
so! but oh! that thoughts of reconciliation might be wrought, and that if any
be irreconciliable in their principles or practices, such men were observed,
that so the saddle might be set on the right horse.

Secondly, In the second place consider how to relieve, Secondly.
and how to refresh the poor. There were two sorts of poor people that Christ
relieved, spiritual poor, and worldly poor: To speak of the last of these,
which are twofold. 1. poor priseners; you know he came to set such at
liberty, in the 4. of Luke, Luke 4.18. By poor here, is meant specially
spiritual priseners.
v. 18. will you consider those many poor prisoners that now peradventure are
for small debts, made incapable of doing any service to God or men; what a
misery is it to be kept in a prison, where they cannot come to any Ordinances
of God, and where they grow idle, and do no work, and so are unserviceable to
God and men. I know there is a course begun to relieve them, but I am afraid
the plai^^r is not large enough for the sore. Oh that these p^^r prisoners
might be set in some way whereby they might sanctify Gods name, and seek the
good of their souls, and not be estranged from God; and men. 2. There were
others Christ did supply, and they were poor beggars; we read of some that did
beg at the Temple gates, and in the streets, whom Christ and his Apostles did
commiserate. Now as God would not have you merciless to the poor, so he
would not have his name abused by them; for the preventing of both, it is meet,
you should take some course of removing and taking away this begging,
doubtless God is much blasphemed, and dishonored (and the Commonwealth much
disgraced thereby.) What a shame is it, that upon the Lords day, so many (and
it may be counterfeits) should be crying in your streets? for Gods sake, for
Christ's sake; yea do this upon their knees, yea a hundred times, taking Gods
name in vain. There should be no beggar in Israel, and in welgovern'd
Commonwealths there are not. And for want of better order, those that would
show their charity, know not how to show it rightly.

Thirdly, Thirdly.
And then the third thing is this; Labor to execute justice righteously and
impartially. Judge the cause of the poor as well as of the rich, and as
Justice is pictured blind, so be you as it were blind (I mean not ignorant, but
impartial) in executing Justice: Give to every man, and do for every man that
which is just, Ezekiel. 35.9.
and remember that word in Ezekiel. 45.9. Thus says the Lord God, let it suffice
you O Princes of Israel, remove violence and spoil, and execute judgment and
justice, take away your exactions from my people says the Lord God. If there
be any exactions (as I fear there still be) upon the people, do what you can to
remove them.

And then fourthly, Fourthly.
give encouragement to those that are good and godly, I know not well how far
the Authority and power of civil Magistrates does extend, in matters purely
spiritual; but you the Honorable Magistrates of this City, I beseech you,
further good and godly people in these days, that they may have liberty to
serve God. There are many would come into public, which now are in private,
if they might have liberty: And why not? for if their ware be good, why should
it not come into public (as well as other men's) that it might be vended? and
if it be bad and false, why should it not come into public, that it may be
known, discovered, detested, and suppressed? why should honest people be coopt
up in private houses, when as peradventure 20 or 30. places in this City are
shut up, and yet they may not enjoy them; I speak for them, and for Saints,
that hold the head Christ, (I speak not for them that are for toleration of
corruption, (or damnable opinions) but for them that walk according to the
Gospel and hold fundamentalls.

And lastly, I beseech you, Fisthly.
labor to suppress vice more; for its to be doubted, as heretofore, liberty
of Conscience, was too much denied: so now, liberty to corruption is too much
tolerated: For men come and set up new stages on these days and think that all
this freedom is to be enjoyed for their lusts, that they may have liberty to
commit wickedness again. Make it appear that your peace, and liberty, for is
not desired carnal liberty, and for the advancement of sin, but for the
advancement of God inesse. There are some people that curse and s^^^ar (the
like I think, were never heard of before) publicly in the Pulpits, instead of
preaching, which Doctrine, may be called the Doctrine of Devils; Others also
that meet to whore, and drink, game and sport, these things should be suppressed,
God has given the sword into your hands, besure you exercise it against the
evil, and for the good, for your place is to be for terror to evil works,
and for the praise of those that do well. Romans 13.3.4.
And so I conclude with that word, in the 6th. of Genesis, (I beseech you note
it:) for I recommend it as a special example to you the chief Magistrate of
this City, in particular. Genesis 6


The Text says when Noah was borne, his name was called by Lamech, Noah; which
signifies rest, and why so? Because says he this same shall comfort us, (or
give us rest because) of our labor and toil, because of the ground that the
Lord hah cursed: Oh! that the Lord would make you a Rest and comfort to the
people of this City and Commonweal; your Predecessors have done well, do you
follow them, yea excel them if you can; they have rould the stone far, do
you roll it further. Also you that are come into other men's places, as Mr.
Recorder, you have the failings and the falls of other men, before you, be
therefore wise, and watchful, many eyes are upon you (but especially the eyes
of the Godly) and so desiring you to bear with my plain and particular
speaking, (for it is out of true respect and love to your Honors) I will leave
this word with you, hoping that the Lord will direct you, to make a right use
of it, to his praise and glory.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader,
THis Sermon being copied out of short hand, and my not being able to attend
the Press, has caused many mispointings and literal faults, besides several
greater faults. As some words mistaken, for example. Intentive for Incentive.
page 32. l. 16. together for each other. p. 20. l. 20. etc. So some words left
out, as page 10. l. 5. so consent, p. 18. l. 8. Likewise some words that alter
the very sense, as p. 23. l. 17, 18, 19. Psalm 19.12. Who can understand his
errors.


