A SERMON Preached upon Psalm 22, the former part of the first Verse.

WHEREIN Is showed, how, when and wherefore God does desert his Children, Unto
which is also Annexed, certain Symptoms Of a Deserted Condition; with
Directions unto those who have lost God's favor, how to get it; and directions
likewise unto those who have gotten God's Favor, how to keep it.

By T. P.

Matt. 27.46. (...). Printed in the Year 1674.

To my much Honored and Este^^^d Friend, Mr. Joseph Holden of London Gent.
Worthy Sir,
SInce God (by divine Providence) has been pleased to exercise me, with many
strange unparalled afflictions, which you (above all) have been privy too;
and since your Favor and unmerited kindness (both as to external and internal
things) has been so frequently and bountifully vouchsafed to me in my
deplorable condition. I thought my self obliged to offer up the first Fruits of
my Laborious Studies to your Patronage; humbly beging your Acceptance thereof:
The ensuing work has been delivered (verbatim) in a Public Auditory, in
London; it treats of Spiritual Desertions, with which I my self have been
greatly exercised, so that what comes to the view of your Candid Eye, has been
Operated and wrought by my own Experiences, and consequentially not so fully
Fraught with Rhetorical Expressions. I might indeed have dressed it in a more
curious Garb, but that I affect plainness; only desiring it may be effectual
for a public Good: But however, my tender years (I hope) will Appologize for
the homely Style and confused matter, and though it be so raged and unhandsome
a Flower, yet if any can but such sweetness and Spiritual benefit therefrom, my
desire is accomplished. But lest I should exceed the limits of an Epistle, I
only beg your continued Favor, and Subscribe my Self,

Your much Obliged Friend and Servant in the Work of the Lord, T. Powel

Psalm. 22.1. My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me.
THis Book of the Psalms receives its name from (Psallere) which signifies to
sing; being styled by the Ancients, to be a Solloloquie: because it is as it
were a discourse managed and carried on between God and the Soul: St. Chrysostom.
calls it the Bed of Roses, because a Saint by Divine Meditation does receive a
fragrant scent from thence, its likewise called (parva Biblia) because in a
brief manner, there is contained in it as in a Bible, viz, Hystory, Law and
Promises. Concerning this Book of the Psalms, there are many divisions, some
calls them Hymns, some call them Psalms, some divides them into five Books,
some divides them into these following Sections, viz. 1. Prayers, 2.
Thanksgivings, 3. Consolations, 4. Prophesies, 5. Doctrines.

First, all those Psalms are called Prayers, wherein any thing ^s desired or
petitioned of God, as (Miserere mei Deus) O God ^ave mercy on me, and as (Ne in
furore arguas me) Do not re^uke me in thy hot displeasure. Secondly, all those
Psalms are ^alled Thanksgivings, wherein we do return thanks unto God ^or any
benefit received, as (Benedicite) Bless ye the Lord. Thirdly, all those Psalms
are called Consolations, wherein we ^o find words to this effect, (Beati quorum
remisiae sunt iniquita^es) Blessed are those whose iniquities are pardoned and
forgiven. Fourthly, all those Psalms are called Prophesies, wherein the Messiah
is foretold and described. Fifthly, all those Psalms are called Doctrines,
wherein precepts and di^^ctions are laid down.

The use of a Psalm is manifold, there are five especial times when Psalms are
fit, meet, and suitable to be sung.

The first is, when thy Heart acheth, Psalms they are a holy preservative
against the aching of the Heart, when thy Hea^^aches, sing a Psalm, and how
will it raise thy Spirits. Secondly, When thou art destitute of humane help,
ho^ many Psalms may thou find that shall come near thy Cas^ in that same
thing, viz. thy being destitute of humane help. Thirdly, When thou art
suppressed by any Enemy, whether Foreign or Domestical, External or Internal.
Fourthly, When thou art banished and debarred from the Friends. Fifthly, When
thou art deposed out of that Office wherein God has been pleased to place thee,
all these Estates, Conditions and cases, David's Psalms does suite mighty well*
and thus much for the Introductory part.
Now this Psalm which I have pitched upon does in a mo^^ particular manner
differ from the rest, in regard that the Literal significations of most Psalms
are applicable to David and the Allegorical signification is applicable to
Christ, but th^^ not only by an Allegory is applicable to Christ, but likewise
i^ the Literal sense evidenced from the 8.16.26. Ver. of the sam^* The words
therefore which I have pitched upon, being, My God* My god, why have thou
forsaken me? are some of those last word^ which were used by our Savior a
little before he gave up the Ghost on the Cross, Eli, Eli, lamasabachthani,
which in Englis^ is, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me?

I shall not trouble you with those various glosses upon th^^ Text of
Scripture, and therefore I shall only pitch upon th^^ construction which
Ancients have given upon it, and which (...) now approved by Modern Writers,
viz. That David or ou^ Savior, did not speak these words only or altogether in
the^^ own persons, but in the persons of All mankind: the latte^ of which
Interpretation I intend to make the Subject matter (...) our Discourse at this
time. In the words then you may observe ^hese two parts considerable, 1. An
affectionate complaint in these words, My God, my God, 2. an Anxious
Expostulation, Why have thou forsaken me? in which divisions you may observe
David's distress, being in a desertion employed in this expostula^ory
Interrogation, Why have thou forsaken me?

Secondly, you may observe David's Faith, that though in a desertion, yet God
was his God still, He does not cry out, O God, O God, Why have thou forsaken
me, But, My God, my God, ^hy have thou forsaken me? not as we, when many times
in a de^ertion, cries out, God is not my God, for the which he might ^ustly
depart from us totally and finally.

The words are so copious, that Ten Sermons might be more ^xcellently Preached
upon them than one; but to square things according to time and strength, I
shall only give you this propo^ition, or Doctr. viz. That,

Though God may sometimes desert a Believer, yet he remains the Believers God
still.

Now in the carrying on of this, I shall do these several things.

1. I shall show when a Soul may be said to be in a deserted condition. 2. I
shall show you those times and seasons that God most usually deserts a Soul in.
3. I shall prove the point. 4. I shall show you those designs that God does
propound to himself in the deserting of his Children. 5. I shall close with the
Application.
First of all I am to show when a Soul may be said to be in a deserted
condition, and,

First of all thou may be said to be in a deserted condition, when there is
an intermission of thy Communion with God: desertion is nothing else but an
intermission of our Communion with God. When thou can not commune with God as
heretofore, then it is a sign there is some distance between God and thy Soul,
when that blessed intercourse (I say) which was ^heretofore between God and thy
Soul, is now obstructed, then it is a sign that God has received some offense
from thee, and so is become prejudiced through thy perverse unseeming, and
ungospel like walking toward him.

Secondly, when thou do desist from waiting upon God, in the use of means,
then thou may be said to be in a deserted condition, when the Ordinances of
the Gospel which once were pleasant to thee, are now but indifferent, then it
argues bad: when a man is sick, there are certain Symptoms by which it may be
discovered and made known, viz. His Looks are Metamorphosed, Pulses beat, and
Appetite lost; even so it is with a Sin-sick Soul, with a Deserted Soul, who
may be known by those certain Symptoms before hinted, viz. she has not that
Stomach as heretofore, once she hungered after the means of Grace, but now she
is even surfeited with the plentifulness of it, her former Appetite she has
lost.

Thirdly, when thy Faith touching God, thy Soul, and future Estate is not so
clear as heretofore, then thou may be said to be in a deserted condition.
Once thou did believe that God was thy God, but now thou art at a stand, and
do not know wha^ to think of it, thou thought that thy Soul once was in a
good estate, but now thou begins to question it; once if one had asked thee a
question concerning thy future estate, thou could have given them a full and
perfect answer; but now such a question would puzzle thee: Thus I say a Soul
when in a deserted condition, is at infinite uncertainties touching her future
estate.

Fourthly, when thy Graces are rather decreased than in creased, then it is a
sign that thou art in a deserted condition where a decay of Grace is, there the
absence of the especia^ presence of God is presupposed, when we grow rather
down wards in our Graces than upwards; it does Prognosticate no^ only a
Desertion to come, but a desertion even now, as Su^cess and Prosperity is the
effect of God's Presents, so desertio^ and distress is the effects of God's
absence.

Fifthly, When thy fear is greater than thy Faith, then thou may be said to
be in a deserted condition, as for instance, when thou art so staggering in thy
Faith, as that thou art loath to rely upon, trust in, and adhaere to Christ for
Salvation, though the grounds of thy Faith are firm and substantial enough,
when thy fear (I say) does usurp that Authority which Faith a lone does claim,
then thy condition is very suspicious.

I come now to the second thing proposed, which is, to show those Times and
Seasons that God most usually deserts a Soul in.

And first of all when God deserts, he deserts in the time of Prosperity,
because then we are mighty apt to grow high and lofty, and to aspire unto
things that are so sublime as are beyond our Sphere and Orb, for the which God
does oft-times desert u^.

Secondly, in a time of security, when we are apt to be so secure in our
selves, then God departs from us, to the end that he might shake off our
security.

Thirdly, in a time of murmuring, when we quarrel with God's providence, and
are angry with him upon no other Account, but because he does not humor us,
and do what we would have him to do.

I come now to the third thing proposed, viz. the proof of the point, namely,
that though God may desert a Believer, yet he remains the believers God still;
and herein, I shall be brief, lest I be prevented, in that which yet lags
behind: And first of all the proof is evidenced in the Text, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? Here a desertion is intimated, but still God
continues in the relation of a Father to the Soul; see that excellent place of
Scripture for the further confirmation of this, Romans 8.38. John 10.28. The
Sacred Writ does infinitely abound with Scriptures of this kind.

Secondly, God has entered into a Covenant of Life with a Believer, Jer. 31.31.
Therefore though the Lord does desert, it is only for a time, the Lord will not
cast off for ever, says the Church in Jeremiah's time, the Lamentations of
Jeremiah 3.31.

Thirdly, Those Obligations which are injoned on God and the Soul, are not
temporary, but in aeternum, that is, for ever. As soon as ever conjugal
affections are contracted between God and the Soul, in aeternum durabit, it
lasts for ever. But to conclude with this particular, further consider, God is
always the Beleivers God.

First, Because the Father in Election is Infallible.

2. The Son in his Redemption shall not be frustrated. 3. The Spirit in
Application of the benefits of Christ's Passion is irresistible, and
unchangeable. 4. Because the Regeneration of God's people is perpetual. 5.
Because that power by which God's people is upholded, is invincible and
unconquerable.
I come now unto the fourth thing proposed, which is, to show what are those
ends and designs that God propounds unto himself in the deserting of a Soul.

And the first is, Probandi gratia, for trial sake: God many times deserts us
and leaves us, to the end, that he might know how strong our Faith is, how
unfeigned our Love is, or inflamed our desires are, and how hot our Zeal is,
for him and to him; God oft-times deals with us as the Mother does with her
Child, in running away from it, to know whether the child is fond of her, and
whether it will run after her.

Secondly, God deserts us abstinendi gratia, and leaves us, to the end, that we
might leave our sins, for while we regard iniquity, God will not love us,
neither will he dwell with us; God is a holy God, and cannot see sin, with
approbation and allowance in any of his creatures. From hence you may observe,
what is the great proposition of the Covenant of Grace, which is, either take
God and leave sin, or leave God and take sin; many times we are apt to grow in
love with our sins, therefore God departs from us, to see which we like best,
he, or sin.

Thirdly, God sometimes deserts us and leaves us (aestimandi gratia) that we
may prise him the more when he comes to us again. The Presents of a Friend that
has been absent a great while, how welcome is it? even after this manner it is
between God and us, when we have not seen his face a great while, how sweet
then is his reconciled face unto us? Oh! Poor soul, the great reason why God
stays so long from thee, is, that thou might prise him the more when he
comes again unto thee.

Fourthly, God many times leaves us and deserts us (cavendi gratia) to the end
we might have a care of losing him again. The burnt child (ut vulgo dicitur)
dreads the fire; so that man or woman, who knows how bitter the absence of God
is, will take care another time how they forfeit their communion with him.

Fifthly, God many times leaves us and deserts us (anticiandi gratia) to
prevent our affections from being glewed to things here below; God many times
leaves us (I say) lest ^e should like our being here below too well. If our
com^union with God was continual, it would be a Heaven then upon Earth, if
God's presence was always with us, we should not talk then of going to Heaven:
we should even say (...) Peter did unto Christ in the transfiguration, Lord it
is good ^^r us (says he) to be here, Matt. 17 4.

Application.

I come now unto the Application, is it so, that though God may desert a
Beleiver, yet he is the Believers God still: then this may serve for a use of
comfort and consolation to you that are in a deserted condition, though he has
left you, yet he is your God still; though he has left you, yet he will come to
you again. O drooping Soul bear up then, have a good Heart, though a deserted
Soul yet a happy Soul.

Use 2.

Secondly, if so be this is a truth, then it will serve to refute and consute
such who do hold that one may be a child of God to day, and a child of the
Devil to morrow; wherea^ we deny it and affirm thus, once a Believer, and
always a Believer, once a child of God and always a child of God: if God has
been really our God, he is our God for ever.

Use 3.

If so be this is a Truth, then here is encouragement for you, to go to God in
your forlorn Estate, though he has deserted you, yet know he has not utterly
cast you off; seeing then that he is your God, gather from thence ground enough
sufficient not to drive you into despair. He is you God (I say) therefore go to
him and beg earnestly of him for deliverance: Cry out as our Lord Jesus did
upon the Cross, My God my God why have thou forsaken me? Argue i^ with God,
reason the case (I say) with God; let thy Sou^ Expostulate with God, after this
manner. Lord I am thine and thou art mine, why therefore should there be such
difference between thee and my Soul, pray to God believingly wrestle with him
in good earnest, argue with him to some purpose, until such time thou have
prevailed with him, and have gotten the blessing.

Having now almost brought my Discourse to a Period, I shall only lay down a
few directions to those who have lost God's favor, how to get it, secondly to
those who have gotten God's favor how to keep it.

First I am to lay down some directions to those who have lost God's favor,
how to get it, and first be earnest in the persuite after it; if you have lost
God's favor, give neither slumber to your Eyelids, or rest to your souls
until such times you get it, because as the best White wine, when stale,
becom's to be the sowrest Vinegar, so likewise, the best love when abused,
turns to be the sorest wrath.

Secondly, you must endeavor after God's favor by pleading the Promises, when
thou go to God in a way of Duty, say unto him, Lord, thou have promised such
and such things, therefore I am resolved in the strength of Christ not to go
away till these Promises are fulfilled in me.

Thirdly to get God's favor, is by weeping, lamenting, and repenting over that
which has been the occasion of losing it. Physicians reckon that when they have
found out the cause of the Distemper, the cure is half done. So soul when thou
know what that particular thing is for, which God has departed from thee,
then there is hopes; O therefore loath thy self, cry shame of thy self, in
regard of carrying thy self so frowardly and disobediently unto God who has
been so good unto thee.

I come now to give some directions unto those who have gotten God's Favor,
how to keep it.

And first of all be sure you prize it: value you it at a high rate, you that
have gotten God's Favor are rich indeed; nay further, if you have gotten God's
favor, you have gotten that which a Thousand Worlds cannot purchase.

Secondly, if thou would keep God's favor, endeavor to live answerable unto
it; have a care of sinning away God's favor, make a good use of it, grace the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus, with a pure and blameless conversation. The way to
get mercies continued, is by getting them Sanctified.

Thirdly, if thou would keep God's favor, wait then upon him in a
conscientious use of means; pray more sincerely than heretofore, pray more
ardently then heretofore, pray more believingly than heretofore, pray more
perseveringly than heretofore: So in like manner, when thou come to the
Sacrament, let thy love be unfeigned, thy Faith increased, thy Repentance
renewed; be frequent, I say, in the use of those means which God has appointed
for the increase of our graces, so as that you may live like a people that have
a Hell to escape, and a Heaven to obtain.

Fourthly, to keep God's favor, is by considering that if thou losest it, thou will thereby lose thy soul; if God's Favor is kept, thy salvation is sure, but
if God's favor is lost then thy salvation is lost.

Fifthly and lastly, to keep God's favor is by believing that it is the
principal thing in Heaven and Earth, which indeed it is, what will it profit
you, if you should gain the whole world and lose God's favor: is there any
thing here below that can do you good in another World, besides the favor of
God?

Money will buy (ut alii dicum) all things but not the fav^ur of God.

Finally, (my brethren) there is nothing to be compared with it, Oh then! what
now does remain, but that you should so prize it, the favor of God is an
excellent thing, do you so account it; which that you may so do, the Lord God
say Amen.

Laus Deo.

