DE NON TEMERANDIS ECCLESIIS.

Whereof, The Name and Sacredness of CHURCHES (against those, who in Contempt
call them STEEPLE HOUSES) proposed, by way of Conference.

By P. Panter, Doctor in Divinity.

printer's or publisher's device

July.22. LONDON: Printed for Thomas Vere, dwelling at the upper end of the
Old-Bayly. 1650.

DE NON TEMERANDIS ECCLESIIS.
THE Doctor having formerly maintained a Dispute, concerning Baptism of
Infants of Christians, against Master Brown, Preacher to the Anabaptists,
lately Printed: Upon another occasion, meeting with one of the same Profession,
and using the Name of Churches, according to the common use of speech (which
has authority and arbitrament in the like case, according to that of the
Poet; Si volet usus, quem penes arbitrium est, and vis, and norma loquendi:)
The other being impatient, said; What? Do you call your Meeting Houses, and
Steeple Houses, Churches? The user of the word asked; If either the Name of
Ecclesia in Greek or Latin, or of Church in the English, was so unfit, or
insolent? Was it not an ordinary Metonymie, or transferring of Names, to give
to the place the Name of the thing placed, or meeting in the place, and
haunting the same? Was not Synagoga properly an Assembly, and yet most usual
for the place of Assembling? Hence the Master of the Synagogue, Christ, taught
in the Synagogues of Galile; Paul and Barnabas having entered the Synagogue on
the Sabbath day, sat down, Act. 13.14. So Ecclesia, albeit first it signify
an Assembly called together, yet fitly is used for the place; as Proseucha
properly signifying in the Greek a Prayer, or Petition, is transferred to
signify the place of Petitioning: whence Juvenal has, In qua te quaero
proseucha? In what common place shall I seek you?

But as to the English Name, Church, there is not so much as a Metonymie, or
figure in it, but a proper speech, as the Affirmer offered to prove by this
Reason:

That use of Names, which is according to the Etymon, and native force of them,
is most proper;

But the Name of Church (as it is given to the meeting places of Christians) is
used according to the Etymon, and native force and virtue thereof:

Ergo, The Name of Church, so used, is most proper.

The Assumption, or Minor, he thus proved: The Etymon of Church, is (...),
Curiace, that is, a place belonging to the Lord, as Basilica to the King his
Palace: now Churches are the Lords Houses, therefore the Name of the Church is
according to the Etymon of the word.

Here the Adversary replied, That no place was peculiarly the Lords, more then
another. To whom it was answered, That sure some places were; he granting, that
the Temple of Jerusalem was, which God had chosen to put his Name in. It was
asked, If none other? What say you (said the Affirmer) of Psalm. 83.12. Let us
take the Houses of God in possession; there is the Plural number: and of Psalm.
74.8. They burnt up all the Houses of God throughout the Land. Where the
Synagogues are understood, not only many years later then the Tabernacle, or
Temple, but also having no mystery in them, but appointed for use and order
allanerly, as ours are; which, why they may not, and ought not to be called the
Lords Houses, or (...), and Churches, no man can show a reason. Dic aliquem,
seeds, hic Quintiliane colorem; and whosoever either takes them in possession,
or destroys the same, commits Sacrilege, a sin ranked with Idolatry it
self, Romans 2.22. Thou hate Idols, but committest Sacrilege.

Here the Adversary of Churches asked; Is there any holiness in places, albeit
dedicated to God and his service? The Affirmer answered, by a distinction of
holiness: for, says he, it is Homonymum, and found in two Categories, or
kinds of things; in the Categorie of Qualities, and the Categorie of Relations.
Holiness in the first sense, is opposed to wickedness, or ungodliness, and
is only incident to rational and intellectual things; and it is a quality,
disposition, or habit of the mind and affections: in the second sense, it is
opposed to Common, Act. 10.15. That which I have purified (or made holy) that
call thou not common; where, literally the Vision speaks of Meats, and
mystically only of Men. So the holy City, Matthew. 4.5. the Temple, called the
holy Place, Heb. 9.1, 2, 3. So the Vessels serving for the Ministry, called
sacred, or holy, that is, not common, but holy, by a twofold relation to God,
(who as he is holy alone, so things are holy, by reference to him) either as
Lord and Possessor in a peculiar manner, or by reference to him, as the end for
whose service and glory they are appointed and set apart, and whereto he has
promised his presence; which may be reckoned a third relation. So that they are
holy, because His, for Him, and He is in them in a special manner, as to
places; for, where two or three are met together, there am I, Matthew. 18.20.

Here the Adversary did object, That these differences and relations were
taken away by our Savior, John 4.21. The hour comes, and now is, that
neither in this Mountain, nor at Jerusalem, shall ye worship the Father; but
the true worshippers shall worship in spirit and truth. For answer whereto,
take this first, That our Savior there takes the privilege of place of
worship from none, but the two places there mentioned, of whom the question
then was, to wit, that Mountain of Garizim, (pointed at by the Samaritan
woman, verse. 20.) and Jerusalem. Secondly, our Savior takes the privilege no
other ways from them, then as it was arrogated and challenged by them, that
is, to be the only place of worship in the world, whither they must either
resort, or direct their faces and prayers, 1 Kings 8. 29, 30. and Daniel 6.10.
Our Savior declares to her therefore, That henceforth not these places alone
should have the privilege of Gods presence, but also whatsoever places of
meeting throughout the world, according to that of Malachy 1.11. and 1 Timothy
2.8. Where, albeit there be an Universal, (...), in every place, yet it is to
be extended according to the intention of the place, which is in the general,
concerning Church, or public Service, verse. 1 and 2. and the behavior of
persons thereabout; men, verse. 8. women, 8, 9, 10, 11, etc. Where, as praying
publicly is permitted to men in every public place of Worship, providing they
lift up pure hands, (howsoever the place before had been impure) so he
restrains the women to silence; which cannot be understood of private places
of Worship, (for there women are licensed both to pray, and ask questions, 1
Cor. 14.35.) but of the Church, or public places, as it is expounded by the
words of the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.34. The command then, or licensing of men
to pray in every place, is to be taken also of these public places of Prayer;
so that they are not put down under the Gospel, but established. Neither do
the words of our Savior, Joh. 4.23. of the true worshipping in spirit and
truth, make against it: for if all worship performed by and with the body, or
in bodily places, thereby were forbidden, not only public but private
devotions, and Family-Service should cease, and we must go out of the body and
world too. And what should become of Malachies pure Oblation, offered now under
the Gospel among the Gentiles, from the rising of the Sun to the going down
of the same? And what of the lifting up of pure hands in every place by men,
mentioned 1 Timothy 2.8? And what of Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs,
recommended Ephesians. 5.19?

O but (say some) their melody to God in the heart is recommended. But I
answer: In the heart, (...), is with the heart, or from the heart; as Psalm.
15.2. who speaks the truth in his heart: not that the truth is not to be
spoken with the mouth, but insinuating the fountain and beginning of truth;
from the heart, or with the heart; so that the tongue and heart agree together:
and so Ephesians. 5.19. making melody to the Lord in your heart, that is, from the
heart; and Job. 4.23. in spirit, that is, from the spirit, or with the spirit;
yet not excluding the body.

But the words of our Savior are in opposition to the Jewish and Samaritan
worship (of which the woman there did speak) which was in carnal ordinances of
eating, and abstinence from certain meats and drinks, and diverse baptismes and
purifyings of the flesh, not reaching the conscience, Heb. 9. v. 10. and 13.
which, as it was opposite to spiritual worship, or worship in spirit; so being
typical, and consisting in figures and shadows, was opposite to the truth, or
true worship under the Gospel.

Others oppose the worship in Spirit to the Jewish, and worship in Truth to the
Samaritan, which was false, and of the false gods, for they worshipped what
they knew not, Ioh. 4.22. But no man of understanding will oppose it to all
service of God, to be performed by or with the body, except it end in the body,
and do not edify or elevate the spirit; as the Jewish abstinences and
ordinances, more burthening the spirit then edifying them.

Let them talk then as much as they will, of the Church of God in ones house;
yet it makes nothing against the Church of God in Congregations, and Parish s:
For the Church being totum homo geneum, a whole made up of parts of the same
kind, there are smaller and greater parts therein, and all bearing the name of
the whole, yet so, as neigher prejudgeth other; so that every one keep its
own order and place, and the lesser and subordinate parts do not lift
themselves up against the bigger and superior, and put them down.

Neither is it marvel, that their Meetings were in private houses at the
beginning; (when they neither had nor could have other places) but now (having
plenty and conveniencie of such places of assembling, and liberty and peace
to assemble as publicly as we will) to sorsake the same, and get us to private
places and wildernesses, it is not so much wantonness, as insolent and unheard
of madness: As S. Austin speaks in the like case of these, who leaving the
custom of the whole Church, follow (I know not what) private conceits of their
own, insolentissimae est insaniae.

FINIS.

