To the Right HONORABLE THE House of Commons.

THE Humble Petition of Sir HUGH POLLARD which was lately taken prisoner in
Somersetshire, and brought up to London, and committed to the Counter for
leavying War against the Parliament.

Also the Parliaments Profession to receive His Majesty with honoua and give
him true obedience

Also, His MAJESTY'S Answer to the Parliaments last petition.

With a true relation of the Earl of Worcesters raising of more Forces in
Wales, and that his Son the Lord Herbert is made General of South Wales.

London, Printed for Robert Wood, Oct. 28. 1642.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The House of COMMONS: The Humble PETITION of Sir Hugh
Pollard.
Shows,
THat your Petitioner to his unexpressible grief having justly incurred your
displeasure, comes not now to extenuate a fault, but to beg a favor, he
expects hereafter to stand or fall by your intermixed justice and mercy.

That it is true, some rash propositions had a birth and delivery by another
hand, and that it is as true that his weakness did not discern their
deformity.

That without consideration he was hurried to an oath of secrecy. That this
sealed up his mouth thorough a misinformed opinion. That upon this information
his misery is perfected, but withal, he beseeches you to remember, that as
there was nothing done, so there was nothing proposed to be done that had not
this ingredient of preserving the Laws and liberties of the Subjects. And
under this specious vizard he was led on.

His humble Petition is that considering his Father an aged Gentleman, lies now
desperately sick, and that this misfortune of his (without some beams of your
favor) will (as he fears (hasten death unto him that gave him life, and as
certainly disinherit him of his land, as it has already done of his affection:
You would be pleased to give him liberty to go into the Country to see his
Father before he die upon the security of the E. of Bedford and an other
honorable E. whose compassionatenes to your Petitioners calamity, joined with
their knowledge (as he believes of his former readiness and confidence of his
future) to serve his Country, makes them to tender their bail for him; And
your Petitioner as in duty bound, shall ever pray for the prosperity and good
success of the high and honorable Court of Parliament.

The Parliaments profession to receive His Majesty with honor, and give him
true obedience.
THe honorable Court of Parliament for the avoiding of blood, directed the
Earl of Essex Lord General, by himself and others, in some safe and
honorable way to cause to be delivered an humble Petition, wherein they desire
nothing from His Majesty, but that he would return in peace to his Parliament,
and by their faithful counsel and advice compose the distempers and confusions
abounding in his Kingdom, as he is bound to do: They therein professing in
the sight of God, which is the strongest obligation and assurance that any
Christian, and the most solemn public faith, which any such state as a
Parliament can give, that they would receive him with all honor, yield him all
true obedience and subjection, and faithfully endeavor to defend his person
and estate from all danger, and to the uttermost of their power to establish to
him and to his people all the blessings of a glorious and happy reign.

For the delivery of which Petition his Excellence has twice sent to the King,
humbly desiring a safe conduct for those that should be employed therein; but
his Majesty refused to give any such safe conduct, or to receive this humble
and dutiful Petition, by any address from the E. of Essex, saying that if
Justice had been done, the Gentleman which brought the second Message could not
expect his liberty.

By all which, and many other evidences and inducements, they are fully
convinced in their judgments and belief, that the Kings counsels and
resolutions are so engaged to the Popish party, for the suppression and
extirpation of the true Religion, that all hopes of peace and protection are
excluded, and that it is fully intended to give satisfaction to the Papists by
alteration of Religion, and to the Cavaliers and other Soldiers, by exposing
the wealth of the good Subjects, especially of this City of London, to be
sacked, plundered, and spoiled by them.

And that for the better effecting hereof, great numbers of Papists have in
show conformed themselves to the Protestant Religion, by coming to Church,
receiving the Sacraments, and taking the oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,
which some of their own Priests have encouraged them to do, by maintaining that
they might do all those things, and yet continue good Catholics: Under which
color his Majesty did at first begin to strengthen himself, those of that
Religion being weak, and unable to endure the envy and discontent which the
arming of the Papists would Procure in the Kingdom, and therefore endeavored
to keep off all jealousies and suspicions by many fearful oaths and
imprecations, concerning his purpose of maintaining the Protestant Religion,
and the Laws of the Kingdom, causing some professed Papists to be discharged out
of his Army, and none to be received that would not endure the Test of coming
to Church, receiving the Sacrament, and taking the oaths of Allegiance.

That his Majesty being now grown stronger, and able (as he conceives) to make
good his own ends by Arms, his confidence in the Papists does more clearly
appear: persons imprisoned for Priests and Jesuits have been released out of
the Jail of Lancaster; professed Papists have been invited to rise and take up
Arms; Commissions under His Majesty's Authority have been granted to many of
them for places of command in this war, with power to raise me^, and great
numbers have been raised by them, and they daily increase. And diverse Eorces
are raised and paid by the Earl of Worcester and his son the Lord Herbert: And
the said Lord Herbert (a notorious Papist) is made General of all South Wales.
And those that raise Forces in Yorkshire for his Majesty, do arm and employ
Papists, and use their advice in their consultations. And the King has
received about him diverse Papists of Ireland, some of which are indicted of
treason for their Rebellion there, which have been notoriously known to have
been in actual Rebellion.

FINIS.

