The poor Prisoners Petition for Charity against Christmas.
ECCLESIASTES, Chap. XI. Verse. I. Cast thy bread upon the Waters, for thou
shall find it after many days.
To the right Honorable, the PARLIAMENT now sitting at WESTMINSTER. The humble
Petition of the miserable poor Prisoners in Woodstreet Compter, and in behalf
of the rest of the poor Prisoners in and about London, most humbly begging your
Charity and pity against this blessed time of Christmas.
Humbly shows:
THat whereas the preceding Parliaments were graciously pleased to take into
their charitable consideration, the miserable condition of poor Prisoners, and
thereupon granted the five pound Act wherein was expressed that all those
Prisoners who were not able to pay fees, and Chamber rents, their own security
was to be taken: and since that another gracious Act was granted, which tended
as much to the good of Creditors, and poor Prisoners as could be expected, and
yet for all this, the poor Prisoners must now be kept in Prison to the
endangering life there, for want of food; unless they can find money to
satisfy the unreasonable Jailer.

May it please this honorable Parliament to vouchsafe a charitable
consideration of your poor Petitioners, and to give their following humble
Remonstrance, but a favorable aspect, then with confidence we may expect that
charity, that pity from Salters Hall which we never yet found.

And we shall be always bound to Pray etc.

To the honorable the Judges sitting at Salters Hall. The humble Remonstrance
of very many poor Prisoners, that have been and now are sufferers in the
Compter in Woodstreet London, by the Tyrannical oppressions long since
continued and now practiced by the power of the Master of the said Prison and
his sherking Officers.
I THat all drink they use there in general, is strong Beer and Ale, which
must be bought by the Prisoners in the house, at the masters price which is as
dear as in any place of England, being two pence the flagon; besides nick and
froth, and generally very bad, and not any leave is there all^wed to the poor
Prisoner, to send out of doors for what he wants, although he may have it
better and cheaper for the same money abroad, and only lives upon ch^rity.

II. That all exactions are there used to Prisoners and friends, visitants that
possible may be in any place, for there they must pay for Tobacco, Pipes, and
Candle, and be cheated too in the reckoning ^f not careful.

III. That in there Chamber Rent there is as much oppression as may be in
general, for the Prisoner pays all alike when he has a bedfellow, and none,
and so likewise he that has a Chamber to himself, and he that has a mate.

IV. That all Garnishes are basely extorted, which is a thing altogether
unlawful, to the extreme abuse of many a Prisoner by the sharking Officers if
not paid.

V. That those that are not able to pay Chamberrent at the day, are most
barberously dealt withal, for without any resp^ct of person he must from the
bed to the bare plankes, let the weather be never so cold, and many times
endangers life there, yet when he or they are to go off, the Master calls for
his Chamber rent and makes them or their friends pay to a penny, ^s if they had
never laid in the hole upon Charity, or else keeps them Prisoners until
legacies come about, and then pays himself or else no liberty.

VI. That every single Chamber on the Master side, and the least of all though
but a Garret Room, without a Chimney in it, is five shillings the week to one
alone, and if he has a Mate he pays as much more, and they have their
Chambers from ten shillings the week, to twenty shillings the week besides.

VII. That all that lodge on the Masters side, though in a three bed Chamber,
must pay six pence a night at least, besides 12 pence for sheets, and some more
lying single or double.

All that is herin mentioned the poor Petitioners will maintain to be true.
The Petitioners further Humbly offer to your Honors these ensuing proposalls.
I. Whether is it not fitting that the Prisoners there should have as much
accommodation in a civil way as in any other Prison.

II. Whether it be not fitting that Prisoners there should have liberty to buy
at the best hand, what they daily want without control.

III. Whether is it not fitting that the Prisoner having paid for his sheets
should quietly enjoy his Bed, and not be subject to every sh^ke Officer, to be
turned out of his lodging for want of money to pay them their unlawful Garnish.

IV. Whether it be not fitting that every Prisoners own engagement should be
sufficient for his Chamber rent for a convenient time, and not be subject to be
turned to a worser or baser place then many a dogkennel is.

V. Whether is it not fitting that every Prisoner that has a bedfellow should
be eased the one half of his Chamber rent.

VI, Whether six pence a night be not sufficient for any one to pay that has
a Chamber to himself.

VII. Whether is it not fitting that the Prisoners there should find as much
honesty for their money as at the Upper Bench, or Fleet, where they have their
drink in general, at five farthings the quart, and there is little or no
difference in the measure as they usually fill.

VIII. Whether is not fitting that the poor Prisoners in the hole there should
have their drink as good cheap as the poor, in the Ward of the Upper Bench,
where they pay but one penny the quart for the best strong beer.

IX Whether is it fitting that the poor Prisoners there should be stopped for
Chamber rent, or fees when unable to pay.

X Whether is it not fitting that your Honors now appointed to relieve the
poor and oppressed Prisoners, should be fully satisfied, how all Legacies and
charitable moneys appointed for that place are disposed of and not abused (as
they say) by the Master there and his sherking Officers.

XI. Whether is it not fitting that there should not be one or more persons of
honesty and indifferency appointed for that Prison, that upon all just
occasions of complaint should see the Prisoners have present remedy,

And lastly your poor Petitioners most humbly beseech your Honors that you
will be pleased to regulate the excessive Fees and Chamber rent of the said
Prison, according to the late Act, impowring your honors thereunto, whereby all
oppression may be removed, and the poor and honest Prisoner may be relieved.

And your Petitioners as in all duty bound shall pray etc.

This humble Remonstrance was presented to the Honorable the Judges sitting at
Salters Hall, about the sixth of March last past, and they promised that the
Prisons should speedily be visited, and that the poor Prisoners should have
redress, but it seems multiplicity of business or some other reason
prevented their good intentions therein.
ANd upon the twenty eight of March address was made unto Deputy HOVIL being
then a constant sitting Judge at Salters Hall, in the behalf of the miserable
poor Prisoners; his Worship answered that he had seen the humble
Remonstrance before, for they had it at the Hall, and for Mr. HACKET the Master
of the Prison, they understood him to be a very honest civil man, but
pressing his Worship farther to be mindful of the misery of the Prisoners, his
Worship answered that he doubted they hardly should have leisure to do any
thing in that business, because they should be so extraordinary busy about
selling of Lands; but as it prooved he and they were very much disappointed.

God send us more honesty and less Honor.
25. of Mat. 35 and 36 Verses. For I was an hungered and ye gave me meat, I was
thirsty and ye gave me drink, I was a stranger and ye took me in, Naked
and ye clothed me, I was sick, and ye visited me, I was in Prison and
yeecame unto me.

