THE VANITY OF THE Lives and Passions OF MEN.

Written by D. Papillon, Gent.

Eccles. 1.2. Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, vanity of vanities, all
is vanity.

April. 9. 1651.

Imprimatur. John Downame.

London, Printed by Robert White, and are to be sold by George Calvert, at the
Sign of the Half Moon in Wattling-Street, near St. Austins Gate. 1651.

To my beloved Sister, Mrs. Chamberlan the Widow.
Dear Sister,
AS men usually Dedicate their works to their best beloved or most respected
friend; so I Dedicate this Treatise unto you, who after God have ever been the
object of my dearest love and best respects; Be pleased then to peruse the
same; for you will find comfort in it, if you oppose or apply as Antidotes to
the passions of Sorrow, Way-wardness and Fear incident to old age, the passions
of Love, Hope, and Vndauntedness; for the love of God will w^an your affections
from the vanities of this life, and give them wings to soar up to heaven to six
themselves upon that infinite object of all perfection God himself; Psal^ 6.11.
In whose presence is fullness of joy, and at his right hand pleasures for
evermore. Secondly, the Christian hope you have to be made by the merits of
Christ coheir with him of the Kingdom of Glory, will expel all the sorrows,
way wardness, and discontents, proceeding from the crosses and afflictions you
are subject unto in this life. Lastly, your Christian fortitude or
undauntedness will annihilate, as the beams of the Sun does the morning dew,
the fears which may perplex your mind by the apprehension of the dart of death,
and will make you say with confidence at your departure out of this vayl of
Tears, Cor. 15.55.
O death, where is thy sting? O grave where is thy Victory? The sting of death
is sin, and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks be to God, which gives
us the Victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. And so being confident you will
accept this small evidence of my love with the same affection it is presented
unto you, I commend you to the Lords protection, desiring to remain

Dear Sister, Your loving Brother, David Papillon.
From London, June 1. 1651.
To the Reader.
IF this saying, Know thy self, were written in men's hearts as it was engraven
over the door of the Temple of Apollo at Delphos, they would be more careful to
regulate their passions: for when men's passions are distempered, it is
impossible for them to know themselves. And that is the reason why so many
Learned men have lately written upon the use and moderation of men's passions:
And specially Senault a most Elegant and learned French Author: And although
his works have lately been translated into English by the Noble Earl of
Monmouth: yet because they are fitter for Scholars then for the illiterate, I
have thought it convenient to publish this Treatise for the benefit of meaner
capacities: In which I have joined the Scripture-evidences with the principles
of Morality. For a good education, with an habit in the precepts of Morality,
without the sanctifying graces of the blessed Spirit, are not sufficient to
regulate the intellectual distempers of men's passions; because moral precepts
and a good education penetrates no further then the bark, and moderates only
the distempers of (...) ^utward man; but a justifying Faith and the grace of
sanctification its inseparable companion, does moderate the distempers of the
intellectual faculties of the soul as well as those of the corporeal members. I
mean that by a good education and the principles of Morality, a man may attain
to a corporeal continency, but never to an Intellectual Chastity, without the
graces of the sanctifying Spirit. Therefore such as desire to obtain the
mastery over the intellectual and corporeal distempers of their passions, are
to endevor to attain by fervent prayers from God the graces of the sanctifying
Spirit, as well as an habit in the Principles of Morality: Otherwise they will
never obtain the mastery over their passions to make them subordinate to the
rules prescribed in the word of God. And whereas Senault maintains that men
have a Free will to do good or evil, and gives over much power to the
Principles of Morality: I say we have no Free Will to do good, except it be
given us by the Free grace of God, and that the Principles of true Christianity
have more power to make men obtain the mastery over their passions then the
Principles of Morality can have. Be pleased then to accept of these Essays of
mine with the same affection as I present them unto you: and to account me, as
really I am,

Your humble servant in Christ, D. Papillon.
From London, June 1. 1651.
Errata.
Page 22. l. 1. r. he outbraded him. p. 26. l. 15. r. Crown. p. 28. l. 1. r.
concussion. p. 43. l. 1. of Chap. 4. r. there are also. p. 132. l 16. r. He
that looks upon a woman. p. 135. l. 13. leave out the word all. p. 140. l.
12. r. Crassus. p. 182 l. 2. r. Charles the eighth. p. 193. l. 3. r.
July-flowers. p. 194. l. 1. r. these. p. ibid. l. 14. r. curb. p. 205. l. 23.
r. Marquis d'Ancre. p. 244. l. 15. r. as conceiving the same. p. 246. l. 16. r.
say they. p. 231. l. 3. r. precise. p. 236. l. 17. r. these are. p. 361. l. 25.
r. are rather worse. p. 379. l 9. r. induces men.

The Contents.
Chap. 1. The vanity of the lives of Men. Page 1. Chap. 2. The vanity of
worldly Honors. p. 19. Chap. 3. The vanity of worldly Riches. p. 43. Chap. 4.
The vanity of worldly Pleasures. p. 65. Chap. 5. The vanity of men's passions in
general. p. 81. Chap. 6. The vanity of the passion of Love. p. 97. Chap. 7. The
vanity of the passion of Hatred. p. 115. Chap. 8. The vanity of the passion of
Desire. p. 131. Chap. 9. The vanity of the passion of Flight. p. 147. Chap. 10.
The vanity of the passion of worldly Joy. p. 162. Chap. 11. The vanity of the
passion of worldly Sorrow. p. 179. Chap. 12. The vanity of the passion of
worldly Hope. p. 197. Chap. 13. The vanity of the passion of Despair. p. 219.
Chap. 14. The vanity of the passion of Vndauntedness. p. 241. Chap. 15. The
vanity of the passion of Fear. p. 261. Chap. 16. The vanity of the passion of
Wrath. p. 280. Chap. 17. The vanity of the passion of Volupty. p. 299. Chap.
18. The vanity of the passion of Avarice. p. 347. Chap. 19. The vanity of the
passion of Ambition. p. 372. Chap. 20. The vanity of the passion of Envy. p.
401.
CHAP. I.
Of the vanity of the lives of Men.

IF the end be the crown of the work, the creating of man was the crown of the
creation; for after God had made man after his own Genesis 1.27.
Image, and had infused into him a living soul, he rested Genesis 2.2.
on the seventh day from all his works; and this ungrateful man (who was the
Masterpiece of all Gods works, and to whom he had given an unlimited
prerogative over the beast of the field, the fowl of the air, and the fishes of
the sea,) did by his disobedience become inferior to the most despised
creatures under the Sun; and by his sin, all his posterity that lived under the
state of Nature, are more miserable and fuller of vanity then any of the
unreasonable creatures: for ever since they have been an object of Heraclitus.
sorrow to some, or a subject of Democritus.
derision to others: But because the vanity and misery of their lives will best
appear, first, by their Conception, secondly, by their Infancy, thirdly, by
their adolescency, fourthly, by their virility, fifthly, by their declination,
sixthly, by their decrepit age. I will will speak of them in order.

For the first, concerning their conception, Psalm. 51.5.
( Behold, says the Prophet David, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my
mother conceive me,) it proceeds from a carnal delight, which God has been
pleased (for the increase and the preservation of mankind) to give to the act
of generation; for if in lieu of delight this act had been accompanied with
dolor, the world had been before this time deprived of reasonable creatures,
because of the antipathy there is between Nature and Dolor, but between Nature
and Delight there is a loving simpathy which begets a desire in the Males
and Females of conjunction for to increase or preserve their kind. Now if this
conjunction be not according to the Commandment of God, by adhering every man
to his wife, and every wife to her husband; this Delight becoms a Lust, and by
consequence a sin, odious to God and men: But suppose it be by the undefiled
bed of Matrimony, yet their conception according to the Naturalists that have
dived into the secrets of Nature, is strange and homely, for six days after
the conjunction, say they, of the husband and the wife, the seed of them both,
is by the natural heat of the womb, turned into a kind of milk, which is
enclosed within a skin, much like to the skin of an Egg, and nine days after
it becomes blood, having within it three small bladders, the one containing the
substance of the heart; the second containing the substance of the brain, and
the third containing the substance of the liver, and then after twelve days it
becomes flesh, and then by the admirable work of God the members are formed,
and by degrees the veins, sinews and nerves are strengthened, and within
eighteen days more, it pleases God to infuse into it a living soul, and so the
child having life, draws his food by his Navel, and by it increases daily in
strength, and this food is no other dainties then the menstruall blood of his
mother, held to be the most polluted excrement of Nature. now after it has
been imprisoned nine months in this obscure prison, and fed seven months and
an half, with this loathsome food, nature growing strong, it breaks by
struggling the skin of the bladder, above spoken of, and feeling the air
endeavors to come forth; so by his pangs, groans, and struggling, and the
violent travel of his mother it is produced to the light, many miscarrying at
their birth by diverse accidents, and others in their mothers womb, some by the
fright of their mothers, others by some rub on her sides, or by the loathsome
sent of the snuff of a candle; besides their mother is subject to swoundings,
and longings during her childe-bearing, and their longings and fond desires are
most commonly for fruits, or for strange and unsavory meats, which being
debarred, causes oftentimes the mother and the child to miscarry together.
The consideration of these things should humble the proudest man upon earth,
and make him acknowledge ingenuously, that of all other creatures under the Sun,
his conception and birth, are the most miserable.

For the second, Concerning the Infancy of men, it begins at their birth, and
continues till they be fifteen years of age; the two first years of it is
nothing but impotencie, and weak imbecility to himself, and charge, trouble,
and vexation to his Parents: and whereas other creatures by the benefit of
Nature can stand upon their legs, and seek after their food, man the Lord
Paramont of them all is swadled in clouts, and not able to help himself: the
young Chickins as soon as they are hatched can run after their Dam, to seek for
food, and have that sagacity to hide themselves under her wings at the
fluttering of the Kite: the Lambs, Calves, and young Colts stand suddenly upon
their legs to seek their Dams teats, but man would perish if his mother by her
natural affection did not bring the nipple of her breast to his mouth, and
rock him upon her knees: and for the three or four years of this infancy he
must be carefully tended, for fear he should, like Josephus in his Antiquities.
Moses, put burning coals into his mouth in stead of food, or kill himself with
a knife, or some sharp edged tool: and in the fifth and sixth year of his age
care must be taken, that Horses, Carts, or Coaches, run not over him in the
streets: and at seven years of his age, he must be carefully brought up to
learning, according to his birth or degree, either at the Grammar School, or to
learn to Write, Cipher, or to keep Accounts, that he may be enabled at fifteen
years of age to be sent to the University, or placed with merchants or
Tradesmen, that by a lawful calling he may live like a man for the time to
come. Now for as much as it is the fittest time for the education of children,
from seven years of age to fifteen, Parents must be careful in that time, if
they intend to have any comfort of them, to bring them up in the true fear of
God, to break them of their Will, and make them attain to an habit of Piety,
and moral Virtue: for Education goes beyond Nature, and a young twig will bend
any way, but an old standard will rather break then bow: and therefore Solomon
says, Prove. 22.6.
Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not
depart from it; and in the 22. Verse. he says, Pro. 22.15.
Folly is naturally bound in the heart of a child, but the rod of correction
will drive it far from him, and correction to wilful children is as useful to
them as their meat and drink; Withhold not Pro. 23.13.
correction from the child, says Solomon, for if thou beatest him with the
rod, he shall not die, and thou shall deliver his soul from hell. By these
Precepts of the Prince of Wisdom, it is apparent that the only way to have
comfort of our children, is to correct them when they are young; and the only
reason why this age does abound more then the former in rebellious children, is
the indulgency of the Parents toward them; and this indulgency and fond love
of Parents, is the cause of two evils: first, that the children come to a
shameful end; secondly, that their Parents hoary heads go down with sorrow to
the grave; and Solomon confirms the same, The rod and Prove. 29.15.17.
reproof give wisdom, but a child left to himself brings his mother to
shame: and in the 17. verse. Correct thy son and he shall give thee rest, yea,
he shall give delight unto thy soul. This Infancy of man, is then but mere
vanity: for the first five years of it, is but imbecility; the second five but
puerility, and the last five nothing but malice, obstinacy and disobedience; so
that according to their good or bad education, they become a blessing, or a
curse to their Parents.

Thirdly, the adolescency or youth of man, begins at 15 years of age, and ends
at thirty, the greater part of it is spent under the restraint of their Tutors,
or Masters, and by consequence freed from cares, and curbed from vices, if
their Tutors or Masters discharge their duty; but if they do not, they commonly
become so vicious, that without the special grace of God they can never be
recalled, and continue profane and unthrifty all their days: And therefore
Tutors and Masters who neglect their duty, and are too indulgent toward their
Pupils or Servants, are the cause of their overthrow, and will be called to a
strict account for it before the Tribunal of God; The remisness or indulgency
of 1 Samuel 2.2.3. and 3.17.18.
Ely toward his two sons Hophny and Phineas drew a great judgment of God upon
him, and upon them both: and the Pupils and Servants that reject the sharp
reprehensions and corrections of their Tutors or Masters, aggravate their own
guilt, and acquit their Tutors and Masters, for they do not show themselves
only disobedient to them, but also to God, for St. Paul charge them; Ephe.
6.5.9.
Servants be obedient to them that are your Masters according to the flesh,
with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ, not with
eyeservice as men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ. And ye masters, do
the same things unto them, forbearing threatenings; knowing that your master
also is in Heaven, neither is there respect of persons with him. But when young
men are freed from the subjection of their Tutors and Masters, and have as it
were, the Bridle cast over their necks, they run as fiercely after the
pleasures, delights and vanities of the flesh, as untamed Colts run from their
riders, when they have cast them down; and without Gods special grace, miscarry
in their race, as it is confirmed by Solomon; who in derision of their folly,
says, Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the
days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine
eyes; but know thou, that for all these things, God will bring thee into
judgment Eccles. 11.9.
. The reason, why in this age men are more addicted to their pleasure, then in
any other, is, Because their Passions are more predominant in them, and
experience does show, That from twenty five years, to thirty five years of age,
men are by the strength of their bodies, the abundance and hear of their blood
(in which does reside the vital spirits,) fitter for great enterprises, where
they may show their courage and valor, then at any other season, and that the
Passions of Love, and Ambition, are more violent in them, then in any other
age: For the Adolescency of men, is compared to the Spring; their Maturity or
Virility, to the Summer; their Declination, to the Autumn or Harvest; and their
decrepit age to Winter, the most irksome time of the year. But as it is the
most pleasant, and precious age of men, so is it the most dangerous; for more
are carried away with death, in this age, then in any other, because of the
distemper, and excessive riots of young men; which beget burning Fevers,
Pleurisies, Sanguine Apoplexies, and diverse loathsome Diseases, that sends them
to their Grave before their time. And as their Passions are more turbulent in
that age, so are their Actions more irregular: Young men being most addicted,
to Vindication, Spleen, Indignation, Wrath, Rapines, and Oppressions, then
others; and as fickle, and inconstant as the wind; fit to undertake, and active
to execute; but rash and inconsiderate, for want of a rational solidity of
Judgment. In a word, As this age of man has many rare Prerogatives over the
others, so it is subject to great inconveniences, and fuller of vanity then
any.

Fourthly, The maturity of man's age begins at Thirty, and continues till Forty
five: In this age men's minds are commonly full of the cares of this world;
they have wives, children, and servants to care for; and as their families
increase, so does their toil, and their cares: The vices or sins of their
youth, are rather changed then forsaken; their delights and pleasures, are
changed to Envy or Avarice; their desires are now bent to attain to honor and
riches, and to outgo their neighbors in all things; but in Virtue, or a Godly
life their thoughts fly high, and are bent only upon Machavilian policies,
that they may by them overreach their Brethren, by false lights, by
falsifications of Wares, by distinctions and equivocations; and as for
Religion, they use it only as a bait to deceive men; and are more unsatiable
after gain and money, then the Horse-Leeches are after blood: They account this
saying of Solomon a Paradox. He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with
silver; nor he that loves abundance, with increase: He that trusts in his
riches shall fall, but the righteous shall flourish as a branch Eccles. 10.5,
6, 7, 8.
And so either by right or wrong, they will become rich, and honorable; at
least in show, according to the world, but not really according to God; for in
his sight they are the most vile, the poorest, and the most despised Creatures
under the Sun; for they never take into consideration this saying of our
blessed Savior. What avails, if a man gets all the world, and loose his
own soul? This virility of man; is then but vanity, and not inferior in Vices
to Adolescency; but they are not so visible to the eyes of men, but as odious
to the eyes of God.

Fifthly, The declination of men's lives begins at forty five years, and
continues till seventy. This age of man, is as much subject to Envy and
Avarice, as the former age is to Ambition, and carking cares; whereby it
appears, that men's Passions and Sins, do rather change, then forsake them; for
volupty, and carnal delights, to which young men are most addicted in their
Adolescency, does change in their declining age, to Envy and Avarice, and
sometimes their Avarice does change to Ambition, a Passion more incident to the
virility or mature age of men, then to old age; yet diverse instances may be
produced to prove, That Avarice does change into Ambition, in men's declining
age. Martius Crassus See Plutarch in his life.
had by a sordid kind of Avarice, attained to the greatest riches of any that
we read of; and yet out of Envy that he bore to the warlike achievements of
Pompeius and Caesar, such an insatiable Ambition, or desire of honor possessed
him in his declining age, That at threescore and three years of age, he gave
away half his estate to the common people of Rome, to obtain a general
Commission, to be Commander in chief of the Roman Legions that were appointed
to make war in the furthest parts of Armenia against the Parthians. Which
insatiable and unseasonable Ambition of his, was ingeniously reproved by an old
Armenian Knight (of whom, he did desire to be informed, of the condition, and
distance of the way, he was to undergo, and power he was to oppose in this
Parthian journey,) saying unto him, That it was too great for him to undertake
the same in his declining age, and that the morning Sun of his age, had been
fitter for such an enterprise, then the setting of it. And had Crassus been
ruled by this wholesome Counsel, he had not by his insatiable desire of honor,
fallen from the highest degree of worldly prosperity to the lowest degree of
humane disgrace and misery, as he did; for by this rash enterprise, he was the
cause of his own death, and of his eldest sons, and of the lives of a great
part of the bravest Nobility of Rome, and of the rout and utter overthrow of
his whole Army. This is to prove, That men in their declining age, are fitter
for Counsel, then for Action; and that is the reason, that the Roman Senate,
the Counsel of Areopage, and the Senate of Venice, have been, and are composed
of men, much advanced in their declining age; because their Passions are
commonly more moderate, their Experience greater, their Judgment more solid,
and their Counsels safer, then of those who are in the youth or virility of
their age; for as Job says, With the ancient should be wisdom; and in length
of years, understanding Job 12.12.
Contrarily, there have been others, in whom the desire of honor has reigned
in their youth and virility, as their Noble Martial achievements do witness,
who have changed this Ambitious Passion into the Sordid Passion of Avarice, in
their declining age. As may appear by the lives of Vespasiaanus See Dion, and
the English, and the French Histories.
of Henry the seventh King of England, and of Henry the fourth King of France.
Howsoever, the desire of Wine, of Money, and the malicious Passion of Envy is
more natural, and does commonly increase with age, as much as rash Temerity,
and carnal Delights do diminish by age; whereby I conclude, That the declining
age of men is not free from Vanity. For what greater Vanity can there be, then
to Envy at another man's prosperity? or to desire Wine, when our headpiece is
so weakened by age, that it cannot overcome the vapors of it? or to desire
Money, when we have less need of it, since we daily expect to be carried to our
Graves?

Sixthly and Lastly, The decrepit age of men begins at seventy, and ends when
Death strikes them with her Dart; which is according to the course of life,
between fourscore, or fourscore and ten: For none attains to the days of
Methuselah Genesis 6.26
, or of the Patriarks, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; for God has shortened the
days of men, because of their transgressions, as it appears, Genesis 7.3. My
Spirit, says the Lord, shall not always strive with man, for he also is
flesh, yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years: and the oldest man
that has been known in this age of the world, was a Shropshire Husbandman that
was brought up to London as a wonder, in the days of King James, who was said
to be one hundred and thirty three years of age; and this long life of his,
according to the opinion of the learned Physicians, did proceed from the
simplicity of his meat and drink, for as soon as he came to be fed with the
dainties of the Court, he came to be diseased, and suddenly departed this life.
Plinius, and other Naturalists, have much troubled themselves to find out the
natural reasons why men's lives are so short: the best reason they give for it,
is, their immoderate diet, and the variety of dainties, and change of
superfluous meats, cooked with art, enticing men to gluttony and drunkenness;
for daily experience does show, that those who live soberly, and live upon
simple food, avoiding slowth and idleness, do live commonly longer then such as
feed on dainties, and use a sedentary life; but the chief cause of it is, that
men do daily increase in sin, and it is just with God for the punishment of
their sins to shorten their lives, since as the Apostle Paul says, Romans 6.23.
That the wages of sin is death: howsoever the decrepit age of men, except it
be endowed with free grace, and sanctified by the blessed Spirit of God, it is
the vanity of vanities, and the misery of all miseries; for the numerous
infirmities incident to it, and especially if penury does accompany the same,
for old age with penury is the greatest affliction that can befall to generous
spirits, and the greatest tentation of Satan to entice men to despair; for if
rich men, who have all manner of comforts, cannot with patience support the
infirmities of a decrepit age, but murmr, as some have done in my hearing,
that they were weary of their lives; of what distemper must the poor aged
people be, who have no worldly comforts at all, but are ready to starve for
cold, and to famish for want of food! therefore tender and compassionated
Christians should exercise their charity upon these objects of unparalleld
misery, as the most acceptable sacrifice they can offer to God: and yet all the
hearts of most men are so hardened by a just Judgment of God upon this Nation
for its transgressions, that they can look upon these dying objects of
compassion, whoperish daily in the streets without pity or reluctation. Now for
a conclusion and confirmation of the vanity and misery incident to the life of
men: I will make a short relation of the Maladies incident to every one of the
ages of their lives: first, in their very conception they may be extinguished,
by ill sents and vapors, and by diverse accidents of bruises or falls:
secondly, in their infancy, by the squincy, convulsions, measles, or the small
pox: thirdly, in their adolescency, by the sword, the pleuresie, and burning
fevers: fourthly, in their virility by sanguin apoplexies, bloudy-flixes and
consumptions: fifthly, in their declining age, by the stone and the gout, by
dropsies, paralepsies, and flegmtick apoplexies: and in the decrepit age, by
gouts, aches, cough, the retentions of urine, the strangullion, poverty, cold,
and hunger, and diverse other casualities; so that I may boldly conclude with
Solomon, that the lives of natural and unregenerate men and women, are mere
vanity and vexation of spirit, etc.

CHAP. II.
Of the vanity of worldly honors.

AS the end of the Creation of man was the glory of his Creator; even so the
end of the lives of men should be the increase of the glory of their Maker: but
the lives of the greater part of them have no other end then the honors,
riches, and pleasures of this world; and therefore to show you more perfectly
the vanity of men's lives, of which I have made a short Narration in the former
Chapter: I conceive it needful to describe unto you in these three Chapters
following the vanity of their desires, before I come to speak of their
Passions, for the desires of honors, riches, and pleasures are the three
deities they adore, and to whom they sacrifice morning and evening their best
thoughts, and these for their unparalled vanity, may be called the vanity of
vanities. I will then begin with the desires of worldly honors, which are
either spiritual or temporal, the spiritual are free from vanity, because they
are supernatural, and full of true joy and comfort: but the temporal honors are
but a mere conceit and shadow, a vapor without substance and subsistence; and
yet the most powerful charm of Satan, whereby he lulls men asleep in the
Paradise of fools, to cast them when they are awake into the bottomless pit of
eternal woe; for had not Satan held them to be the strongest of his
temptations, he had not reserved them for his last battery against the
constancy of our blessed Savior, as it appears in the fourth of Matthew, verse.
8, 9. Mat. 4 8.9.
Again the devil takes him up into an exceeding high monntain, and shows him
all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, and said unto him, All
these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me: Yet
although this roaring Cannon of his could not prevail against this invincible
Rock, it does prevail with many thousands in these days, whom he deludes by
the glorious glistering of worldly honors, and does falsely suggest in their
minds that they are the supreme good, in which does consist their bliss and
felicity, and makes them venture their bodies and souls to enjoy and possess
them. But to inlighten the eyes of these Monopolists of honors: I will here set
out the vanities of worldly honors in their lively colors, that they may avoid
this dangerous snare of Satan, and be induced to endeavor to attain unto the
spiritual honors that will fill their souls with unspeakable joys and comforts.
And to this end I will show in the first place the vanity of the means whereby
men usually attain to worldly honors, which for brevity sake I will reduce to
these: first, by Descent; secondly, by Strength; thirdly, by Beauty; fourthly,
by Riches; fifthly, by Favors; sixthly, by Learning; seventhly, by Prudence;
eighthly, by Valor. Secondly, I will show to whom honor is truly due; and
Lastly, I will give a hint of the excellency, and of the joy and comfort that
men may enjoy from spiritual honors.

For the first, Such as are nobly descended, Descent of race is the first means
to attain to worldly honors.
are honorable by their birth, so they degenerate not from the virtues and
valor of their Ancestors, for if they do, they are baser then the Plebeians,
because they have a great advantage over them to attain to the true personal
honor; for See Charon in his Wisdom Cap. 59.
Nature does always endeavor to return to its first principle; and that is the
reason why the reply that Marius made to a vicious Patrician, who out-braved
him because of his Plebeian descent, is so much commended: My See Plutarch in
Marius life.
nobility, says he, begins with me, and thine ends with thee; and it is
certainly more honorable to be the spring of a noble race, then the end of it:
therefore personal nobility is reputed to be more noble then that of descent,
except the persons thus descended do equal or excel their Ancestors in virtue
and valor; and when it is so, they are to have the precedence before a new
started Moucheron, that is the first of his race, that has obtained by his
personal virtues and valor the honor to be a Gentleman. But what cause have
men to boast, or vant, or conceive themselves honorable because of their
descent, except they be virtuous and valourous themselves? for it is a
ridiculous vanity to vant of the gifts that were never our own, and did belong
to other men: and yet it is a common vanity, much in fashion in these days
among our Gentlemen, to vant of their Ancestors virtues and valor, when
themselves are effeminate and vicious in their manners, lives and conversations:
Besides, what have men worthy to vant and boast of? for they were formed out of
the dust of the Genesis 2 7.
ground, and to dust they shall return again; and if any has any singular
parts above another, they are the immediate gifts of God: It is therefore a mere
vanity for men to think they should be honored for their descent, since the
meanest Plebeian will be found to be the cosen german to the greatest Monarch
of the world, as the Emperor See the Antiquities of Germany.
Maximilians fool told him when he saw him over curious to seek out the
pedigree of the Nobility of the House of Austria, which for Antiquity is much
inferior to that of diverse other Princes of Christendom, Leave off my Liege,
says he, these vain curiosities, for if you seek any longer, you will find at
last that I am your cosen german.

For the second, Strength is the second means to attain to honor.
concerning strength of body, diverse have attained to honor by their strength,
especially if they have made use of it against the enemies of God, and of their
Native Country; for Sampson for his strength was chose Judge and Governor of
Israel: the first essay of his incredible strength was, when he rent a young
Judge. 14.6.
Lion as if he would have rent a Kid; the second, when he Judge. 15.15.
slew with a new jaw bone of an Ass a thousand men; the third, when he carried
away upon his shoulders the gates of Gaza to the top of a hill that is before
Hebron; and the last, when he to avenge himself upon the Philistines for the
Judge. 16.3.
loss of his eyes, took hold upon the two middle Pillars upon which the house
stood, and so pulled down the same upon their heads, and slew more of the
Philistims at his death then he had done in his life time. Judge. 16.19.20.
And diverse Worthies attained to great honor by their strength and valor, as
it may be seen in 23 Chap. of the 2. of Samuel, 2 Samuel 23.8. to 39.
from the 8 verse to the 39 verse. Many other testimonies might be produced out
of ancient Histories, to prove that diverse of the Heathen have attained to
honor by their strength, as three or four of the Hercules, Hector, Ajax, Milun
and diverse others: but in regard that the natural strength of men is little
accounted in these days, when a youth of fifteen years of age can with a musket
shot kill the strongest man upon earth, I will only say That strength is mere
vanity, and that honor obtained by it can not be grounded but upon a sandy
foundation, The third means to attain to honor is Beauty and Comeliness.
since strength is subject to many accidents and mutations.

For the third, which is an extraordinary stature, comeliness and Beauty: diverse
have attained to honor by these gifts of Nature: Sam. 10.23, 24.
Saul for his extraordinary stature and personal parts was chosen King of
Israel, as it appears in the tenth of the first of Samuel, 23, 24. verses, And
they ran and fetched him thence; and when he stood among the people, he was
higher then any of the people from the shoulders upwards; and Samuel said to
all the people, See ye him whom the Lord has chosen? that there is none like
him among the people, And all the people shouted, and said, God save the King:
but for as much as the personal representation of the body without the gifts of
the mind, is not sufficient for the discharge of the honorable function of a
King: it is said in the 9. verse, that God was pleased to adorn him, after he
was chosen, with the spirit of Government, viz. with Prudence and Wisdom, the
chiefest ornament of a Prince: And it was so that when Saul had 1 Samuel 10.9.
turned his back to go from Samuel, God gave him another heart. Contrarily it
might be proved by diverse instances, that the deformity of body, a small
stature, and the want of personal representation is a great impediment to
Princes, because the common people do always more regard the outward gifts,
then the intellectual, as it does appear in the lives of See Plutarch and
Quintius in their lives.
Agisclaus, of Leonidas, Philopoemen, all wise and valourous Princes and
Commanders that were despised of the vulgar sort, because they were of a short
stature, and of no representative Majesty: but the comeliness of Alexander,
Alcibiades, and of Pompeius the great, made them to be honored and respected
above others: 2 Samuel 14.25.
Absalom was also much beloved of his father, and honored of the people of
Israel for his comeliness and natural indowments, for from the soal of his feet
to the grown of his head, there was no blemish in him: And the comely feature
and excellent beauty of Esther 1.1. and 2.17.
Esther made her from a Captive attain to that superlative honor, to be the
Queen of the great King Ahasuerus, who reigned from India, even to Ethiopia,
over one hundred and twenty seven Provinces; and the King loved Esther above
all the women, and she obtained grace and favor in his sight more then all the
Virgins, so that he set the royal Crown upon her head, and made her Queen in
stead of Vesta. It is then apparent that personal representation, comeliness,
and beauty, are means whereby men and women, attain to worldly honors: but how
sandy the foundation of these honors is, I leave it to the consideration of the
Reader, for nothing is more casual and subject to mutation then comeliness and
beauty, and therefore these honors are mere vanity and vexation of spirit.

Fourthly, The fourth means to attain honors is by riches.
Riches are an ordinary means in this vicious age, whereby men attain to
worldly honors; for honors that are the only recompense of wisdom, prudence,
fidelity and valor, are now sold for ready money; and the honorable titles of
Earls, Barons, Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen are obtained for a lump of clay,
gold or silver, the base excrements of the earth: this is one of the secondary
causes of all our distractions and present miseries, and has ever been the
overthrow of Kingdoms, and Commonweales: as long as the Roman civil
Magistrates, Senators, and Commanders of Armies were chosen in to such places
of honor and trust for their noble See Livius Decades.
descent, their prudence and valor, their State did flourish, and did enlarge
its dominions more in one century of years, then it did in three after these
places of honor became to be venal, and purchased by concession, for then men
of no parts were for money promoted to highest dignities, whereupon civil
contentions were fomented, factions increased, and continual bloody See Appian
in the Roman civil wars.
intestine wars maintained, by which the ancient liberties of that State were
suppressed, and the last, government of it changed into an Imperial Monarchy.
As long as the chiefest Officers of the Crown of France, and the places of
Judicature of the Realm were given by Charles the fifth, surnamed the Wise, to
men of learning, of wisdom, and valor; in recompense of their loyalty, virtue,
and merits, that Kingdom did flourish with peace, honor, and prosperity, and
the Courts of See the History of France.
Parliaments of France had the honor for their Justice and Equity, to be the
Arbitrators and Umpires of all the differences that happened in those days
between the greatest Princes of Christendom: but when these places of honor and
trust were made venal, in the reigns of Francis the second, Charles the ninth,
and Henry the third, and sold for ready money to such as gave most for them;
then was Justice and Equity banished, and that flourishing Kingdom reduced to
the brim of ruin and desolation, by variety of factions, and a bloody civil
war: And the selling of places of honor, and Judicature of late years in this
Kingdom, has been the spring of all the discontents, divisions, and
distractions, which have somented this unnatural war, because of the injustice,
rapines, and oppressions that followed at the heels the sale of these places of
honor and trust, for such as bought them by the great, sold them to their
Clients by retail; whereby it appears, that honors bought for money are
destructive to the Sellers, to the State, and to the Buyers; and that such as
enjoy them, carry upon their foreheads rather ignomy then honor.

For the fifth, Concerning favors, many have been promoted to worldly honors,
The fifth means to attain to honors, is by the favor of Princes.
by favor of the Prince, or such as are in authority for their virtue and
merits; but of these commendable favors I intend not to speak of, as being out
of fashion in these days, but undeserving favors, proceeding from vicious
services: Esther 3.5.
Haman the son of Amedatha the Agagite was promoted by King Ahasuerus to the
greatest honors of his Court, for he advanced him, and set his seat above all
the Princes that were with him; but as these honors came not by virtue or
merit, so the end of them was but shame and confusion. The Emperor Nero
promoted Tygelenus by favor to the greatest dignities of the Roman Empire, but
it was because he had been the private agent to his base and lascivious
delights, for which he was justly deprived of his honors, and of his life by
the Emperor See Tacitus in Othos life.
Otho. And how many are promoted in these days to great honors for the like
services, or for being the projectors of new imposts and taxes, for fishing in
troubled waters, for betraying their trust, for selling the liberties of their
Native Country, for changing their Principles, as the Camelions do their
colors at every new object? These I say, are the noble services for which men
are in these days promoted to places of honor and profit; but alas! the honors
and riches purchased by such means, will be like the brand of Cain upon their
forehead, and like a Moth in a piece of cloth, and like the gnawing Worm of a
despairing Conscience that will for ever rack them, and force them to cry out,
Vanity of vanities, all is vanity and vexation of spirit.

For the sixth, Concerning Learning; this has been in all ages a laudable
means to promote men to worldly honors, yet Solomon says Eccl. 1.18.
He that increases knowledge increases sorrow; and certainly as Learning does
much good when it is sanctified, so it does much hurt when it is not,
especially if learned men be transported with Ambition, for such men have from
time to time been the fomenters of the divisions of the Church, and the actors
of Schisms, The sixth means to attain to honors is by Learning.
Errors and Heresies: but when learned men are sanctified they are the Columns
of the Church, and deserve to be reverenced and hononored, and their memory
remains famous from one generation to the other by the learned Writings they
leave behind them; and Princes and States are to cherish and honor them for
their noble achievements, that should be buried in the grave of oblivion
without them: the liberal Sciences had been lost, had not Socrates, See the
Greek and Roman Histories.
Plato, and Aristotle by their learned Works prevented it: and the martial
achievements of the Greeks and Romans had been smothered up in Oblivion had it
not been for Herodotus, Thucidides, Livius, Suetonius, Tacitus and others,: and
the Art of Eloquence lost, but for Demosthenes and Cicero: nay, the very means
to attain to salvation had been hidden from us, had not the learned Writings of
the Prophets, Evangelists and Apostles, been preserved by the admirable
providence of God from the barbarous hands of the Goths and Vandals; and yet
there is a brutish generation among us, that would, if they could, destroy all
learning, and learned men; although learned men are the very supporters See
Bodwin in his Commonwealth.
of a Commonwealth: by them young Princes are instructed in the fear of God,
and in natural and moral Philosophy, as Alexander was by Aristotle, Nero by
Seneca, the good Emperor Traian by Plutarch, and Theodosius by Ambrosius,
Charles the fifth by Adrianus: and by such laudable means learned men are
promoted to honors and dignities: yet as I have said before, Learning without
Sanctification, is but me or vanity and vexation of spirit.

For the seventh, See Machiavel Prince, and his Commentary upon Livius.
which is Prudence, It has ever been a commendable means to attain to worldly
honors. Prudence is the active part of Wisdom, called by some Policy, of which
there is two sorts, a Just, and a Machivilian or Devilish Policy: for the Devil
was Machiavels Tutor, for all his principles are to be abhorred and detested as
coming from an Atheist, that neither did fear God nor the Devil: and his
disciple Alexander Borgia, Duke de See his life in Gui^^h^ardine.
Valentinois was the most desperate reprobate that ever I have read of.
Prudence is necessary in the managing of affairs of State, and by consequence
prudent men do commonly attain to great honors, if they be just; otherwise
their honors are changed into ignominy: I will prove the point by instances,
and first for the Machavilian Prudence; Come on, says Exo. 1.10. and 22.
Pharaoh, let us deal wisely with them least they multiply, and so commanded
the Hebrew Midwives to smother the Male-children of the people of Israel at
their birth, and when this policy failed him, he gave commandment they should
be drowned in the River Nilus; but this policy turned to his ruin and
confusion, for he and his horsemen were drowned in the Red Sea: Ahitophel
another Machavilian councelled Absalom, 2 Samuel 16.21.
Go into thy Fathers Concubines which he has left to keep the house, and all
Israel shall hear that thou art abhorred of thy Father; then shall all the
hands of all that are with thee be strong: by this devilish policy, he intended
to make the Father and the son irreconcilable, that his infidelity and
rebellion might never be called to account; but God turned his wisdom,
according to the prayer of David, to 2 Samuel 23.23.
foolishness, and so he set his house in order and hanged himself. The wicked
counsel given by the Cardinal de Lorraigne, and the Duke of Guise his brother
to Charles the ninth King of France, See the Massacre of Paris in the Inventory
of France.
to allure all the Protestants to Paris, under color of the marriage of Henry
de Burbon, with Margaret de Valois the Kings sister, to have them all as in a
trap for to cut their throats in their beds, as they did for the greater part,
proved fatal to the King, to the Cardinal, and the Duke; for the King, by the
just judgment of God dyed shortly after by an issue of blood which came out of
his mouth, ears and nostrils, and could never be stopped; and the Cardinal and
the Duke were both slain by the commandment of Henry the third in the Castle of
Blois. The barbarous policy of Philip the second King of Spain, See the Spanish
History in Philip the second's life.
to banish two or three hundred thousand Moors, with their wives and children,
under color of Religion, on purpose to confiscate all their land, and to
appropriate the same to his demains, was fatal to him, and to all the Spanish
Nation; for by a just judgment of God he was eaten up with lice, and the
Spanish Nation never thrived since, many of their Subjects revolting daily
against them; whereby it appears that wicked Policies are ever destructive to
their Authors. It was a good Policy, and a wise Council that Jethro gave unto
Exodus 18.21.22.
Moses, to make choice out of the people, of grave and able men, such as feared
God, men of truth, hating covetousness, and to make them rulers over thousands,
and rulers over hundreds, over fifties, and over tens, to disburden himself of
the heavy burden he had taken upon him to Judge the people of Israel; for by
this council he eased Moses and the people, and made the Elders of Israel to be
sharers with him in the honor of the rule and government of the Commonweal,
whereby he was much beloved and honored of all the people. It was a wise
Policy, and and a wholesome counsel, that the wise 2 Samuel 20.16, 22.
woman of Abel gave to her Citizens, to cut off the head of Sheba the son of
Bichri, and to cast it over the wall to Joab; for by it she preserved the whole
City from sack and ruin, that might justly have been destroyed by Joab if they
had persisted to be the abbettors of the rebellion of Sheba, who received but a
just reward for his treachery and rebellion, for endeavoring to raise a new
War against his lawful Prince, the anointed of the Lord. And it was a Council
grounded upon true prudence and policy, which was given to See the French
History in the life of Charles the seventh.
Charles the seventh King of France, by his grave and faithful Counselors of
State, to conclude a peace with Philip Duke of Burgundy, although he should
yield into his hands his Favorites, who had by his assent murdered the Duke
John of Burgundy father to Philip as he was treating a reconciliation with the
said King about the murder the said John had committed upon the Duke of
Orleance the Kings Uncle; for by this counsel the Kingdom of France was
preserved from ruin, and restored again to its former flourishing condition,
and the murderers had but their due deserts, it being more just that half a
dozen of guilty persons should perish, then a whole Kingdom should be undone:
these Counselors justly maintaining, that these Favorites were not to commit
such an act, although they had a Warrant from the King: Subjects being not
bound to obey the commands of their Prince in things that be contrary, and
forbidden by the Law of God, as murder is; and so these Counselors were for
ever after much honored of the King and of the whole Kingdom for their wisdom
and fidelity. It was a wise Counsel grounded upon humanity and sound Policy,
that the Bishop of See the History of Spain in Charles the fifth's life.
Osma gave to the Emperor Charles the fifth, after Francis the first King of
France became his Prisoner at the battle of Pavia, that he should for his own
glory, and the future good of Spain, set the said King of France at free
liberty, without ransom or capitulations at all, and have him conducted with
an honorable Train to the Borders of his own Kingdom; but this good counsel
being traversed by the Machavilian policy of the Duke d'Alva, they made a prey
of the said King, which was the cause after the Kings release of a bloody war,
that was fatal to the Emperor and the Kingdom of Spain: whereby it appears,
that by Prudence and just Policy, men may attain to worldly honors, and that
Machavilian policy is ever destructive, and subject to shame and ignominy.

For the eighth and the last, which is Valor, it has ever been one of the
first steps to worldly honors, and is a commendable means, so men's valor be
exercised in the service of their Prince, and propagation of the true
Protestant Religion, and for the desence of the Liberties of their native
Country; for by their valor in such cases they attain to the personal
Nobility, which is, as I have said before, the spring of the Nobility of race
or descent; for the Nobility obtained by valor in any of these three cases, is
the most honorable Nobility of all: neither is it true valor to kill any one
in duel, but rather an effect of an inconsiderate wrath, and of a desperate
vindication, and a mere murder in the sight of God; for true valor appears
only in the Field against an open enemy, and not to kill our friends for a
word spoken unadvisedly or unawares; and it has been observed, that these
Roarers are (...) v^liant.
roaring Gallants that make a trade of killing of men for punctillios of honor
in duels, are commonly cowards, and are the first that trust to their spurs in
a pitched Field; by which it appears that their valor is rather a raging Passion
then a virtuous valor which is always guided by Reason and Judgment. Now by
these eighth means, by which minds most commonly attain to honor in the world,
the Reader may judge, whether there by any probability that worldly honors
should afford men any true content, since the means by which they are obtained,
are subject to so many accidents, and are so vain, and full of vanity and
vexation of spirit.

For the second branch of this Discourse, concerning the persons that deserve
to be honored, I will be very brief, because all rational men are acquainted
with this duty: first, in the first of S Peter, Chap. 2. ver. 17. there is a
general charge, Honor all men, love the brotherhood, fear God, and honor the
King: and Solomon in his Prove. 39.
Proverbs goes further; for we are not only to fear God, but we are also to
honor him; Honor the Lord, says he, with thy substance, and with the first
fruits of all thine increase; and next to God and the King, we are to honor our
Parents; Exodus 20 12.
Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long upon the land which
the Lord thy God gives thee: God to induce men to honor their Parents, makes
here a precious promise to obedient and respective children; the next to our
Parents we are to honor civil Magistrates, and the Messengers and Ministers of
God; and next to them the grave and ancient men; Levit. 19.32.
Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the ancient;
and yet who are more despised then old men in this corrupt Age? for young men
are now preferred to places of Dignity, Profit, and Trust, contrary to former
Ages; for Solomon by these words, As snow in Summer, and rain in Harvest, so is
honor not seemly for a fool; intimates, that young men are not to be honored
with places of Trust in Church or Commonweal, because they are for want of
experience no better then fools, and yet they account themselves generally out
of a vain presumption, wiser then old men, whom they call doting fools: for
want of the knowledge of this Proverb, Before Honor is Humility; for were they
truly wise, they would be humble, and not presumptuous; for presumption is the
companion of Folly; besides virtuous, learned, wise, prudent and valiant men
are to be honored. I distinguish Learning from Prudence and Wisdom, because
learned men are not always wise nor prudent, although Learning is a means to
attain to Wisdom; but Learning is the theorical part of Wisdom, and without a
long practical experience a Learned man cannot attain to Prudence or Wisdom. As
for rich men, which are above all others honored in these days, except they be
Magistrates, or public Officers, or have any of these qualities above spoken
of; I see no reason why they should be honored above the common civility for
their Riches; yet an ancient Greek Philosopher, being demanded which of the
two, the Rich or the Wise should be most honored, answered, The wise; yet,
says he, I see both the learned and the wise court and attend upon the rich:
but above all other the true sanctified children of God should be honored,
because they are the only Psalm. 16.3.
excellent upon earth.

For the last Branch of this Discourse, which is the joy and comfort that men
reap from spiritual honors: 1. They that will attain to spiritual honor, must
above all things honor God; for if they honor any above him, they shall be
lightly esteemed; this is confirmed in the first of Samuel, Chap. 2. verse. 30.
When the Lord by one of his Prophets reproved Eli for honoring of his sons
above him; I said indeed that thy house, and the house of thy 1 Samuel 2.29, 30.
father should walk before me for ever; but now the Lord says, Be it far from
me; for them that honor me I will honor; and they that despise me, shall be
lightly esteemed. 2. They Prove. 3.7.
are to fear the Lord, and to depart from evil. 3. They are to Exodus 20.6. Deuteronomy.
5.10.
trust in the Lord with all their heart, and lean not to their own
understanding. 4. They must Exodus 23.25.
love him, and keep his Commandments, that he may show them mercy unto thousand
generations; for Love and Obedience are inseparable companions, 5. They are to
serve the 2 Chronicles. 20.21.
Lord their God that he may bless them. 6. And lastly, They are to praise the
Lord, for his mercy endures for ever; and in so doing they shall be honored of
him, and be as his precious Jewels. Men in these days account it a great favor
to be honored of a King; but to be honored of God, who is the King of Kings, it
is a superlative favor and honor; Nay, to be so beloved of God, that has not
Romans 8.32.
spared his only Son, but has delivered him up to the death of the Cross, to
redeem them that truly love and honor him; this is an unparalleld love and
honor, or to make some out of his free grace 2 Timothy 2.20.
vessels of honor, when he might have made them vessels of dishonor, this is a
superlative love and honor. Now what greater joy or comfort can men attain
unto, then to be assured to be the adopted children of so loving and gracious a
God, and to be his precious Mal. 3 17.
Jewels, and reputed by him as the only Psalm. 16.3.
excellent upon earth, and in whom is all his delight? This is then the only
honor they should strive to attain to; for it is permanent and eternal; but
worldly honors vanish away like smoke, and are mere vanity and vexation of
Spirit.

CHAP. III.
Of the vanity of worldly riches.

THere are two sorts of riches; the one worldly, and the other spiritual; the
spiritual are the immediate gifts of God, and by consequence superexcellent:
but the worldly are mere vanity and vexation of spirit, subject to diverse
accidents and changes; Will thou, says Solomon, Prove. 23.5.
set thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches make themselves wings; they
fly away as an Eagle toward heaven; notwithstanding men make an Idol of
riches, and will venture their lives, and hazard their souls to obtain and enjoy
them. Now as comparing two objects together, it is easy to discern which is
the most excellent of the two: so by the comparing of the imperfections of the
worldly riches, against the perfections of the spiritual, the excellency of the
last will be more visible to the Reader. I will therefore begin with the
worldly; and for method sake observe these four Particulars: first, how they
are obtained: secondly, how they are perserved: thirdly, how they are lost:
fourthly, how they are to be dispensed.

For the first, Worldly riches are of an indifferent nature, and by
consequence, become good or evil by accident: I mean, that they are either a
blessing or a curse, by the evil or good acquisition and dispensation of them.
They are called the gifts of fortune, because they are more proper to the
undeserving then to the well-deserving men; for fortune being blind, does
commonly distribute her gifts more by chance, then by judgment. And daily
experience does show, that the wicked abound in worldly riches, and the
righteous are poor and needy. Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea,
are mighty in power? says Job. Their seed is established in their sight with
them, Job 21.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
and their off-pring before their eyes: Their houses are safe from fear,
neither is the rod of God upon them. Their bull gendreth and fails not, their
Cow calveth and casts not her Calf. They send forth their little ones like a
flock, and their children dance. They take the Timbrel and Harp, and rejoice at
the sound of the Organ: And spend their days in wealth. The reasons why
ungodly men do outstrip the godly in Riches, may be these: 1. Because they
have a larger conscience then the godly. 2. Because they account worldly Riches
as their supreme good. 3. Because they erroneously conceive that they were
created for no other end then for to enrich themselves, whereas the godly make
conscience of enriching themselves by any indirect means, hold the love and
favor of God their supreme good: and are confident that they were only created
to propagate the honor and glory of their Creator. The main end of the ungodly
being then to enrich themselves: it is no wonder if they outstrip the godly in
wordly riches, Psalm. 37.35:
and flourish in this life, like a green Bay Tree. But the end of the godly
being only the advancement of Gods glory, and to make their calling and
election sure, they value not these momentary riches, Math. 6.21.
knowing that wheresoever their Treasure is, there will their heart be also.
But to return to the point in hand, worldly riches are obtained 1. By the
immediate hand and blessing of God. 2. By hereditary succession. 3. By activity
and diligence in our calling. 4. By indirect and unlawful means. And of these I
will speak in order.



For the first, The riches of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Job, did immediately
proceed from the hand and blessing of God; for their innocent vocation did
depend only upon the blessing of God, Genesis 26.12.
and not upon the art and industry of man: Therefore God was pleased that the
earth should bring forth a hundred for one, Genesis 30.43.
and that their Cattle should multiply extraordinarily.

Secondly, Men become rich by hereditary succession, as Solomon by the
incredible Treasures that his Father King David heaped up together by the Wars
he had with diverse Nations, which according to Sir Walter Raughleys Opinion
cannot be paralleld in any History. See Sir Walter Raughley.


Thirdly, Men grow to be rich by being diligent and active in their lawful
calling; for as Solomon says, Prove. 10.4.5.
He becomes poor that deals with a slack hand, but the hand of the diligent
makes rich. And again, He that gathers in Summer is a son of wisdom, but he
that sleeps in harvest is a son of shame. Now these three ways of obtaining
worldly riches, are commendable, and approved of God, so the dispensation of
them be suitable to his word.

But the fourth, That is by indirect and unlawful means, it is odious to God,
and destructive to men; And yet it is the ordinary way whereby men do attain to
incredible riches: And specially by these four sorts of Professions. 1. By the
practice of Arms. 2. By the managing of Politic affairs. 3. By the practice at
law. 4. By the practice of Merchandise, which shall be proved by instances.
First, by the practice of Arms; Sylla and Lucullus became incredibly rich, See
Plutarch in their lives.
but it was by unjust rapines and Tyrannical couses. Secondly, Sejanus and
Titus Vinius, by the managing of Politic affairs became extraordinarily
wealthy, See Tacitus.
but it was by concussion and bribery. Thirdly, by the practice at Law, Sir
John Cook and Judge Richardson became wealthy and rich, but it was by
condemning the innocent, and acquitting the guilty. Fourthly, by the practice
of Merchandise, Peter de Medecis, and Sir John Spencer became extraordinary
rich, but it was by falsifying and Monopolizing of all manner of Commodities:
Whereupon I conclude with Solomon, That such as make haste to be rich, shall
not be innocent. Prove. 28.20.


For the second, first, the preservation of riches is as irksom to the mind as
their acquisition has been painful to the body; for when men have heaped up
much wealth, they are in continual fears to be deprived of them, and hold no
place secure for the keeping of their treasures. Secondly, Riches expose their
owners to eminent dangers to preserve them, for as the highest Cedars in a
tempest, are more shaken then the low shrubs, even so rich men in a Civil war
are the objects of the false accusations of all Promoting Knaves; as it appears
in You may find diverse instances to prove this point in Tacitus.
Tacitus; and in the life of Sylla there is a notable instance for it, for
although a Roman Senator, called Quintus Aurelius, (in the civil wars between
Marius and Sylla) had always kept himself neuter, and never sided in words and
actions, with either of these two parties, yet notwithstanding Sylla coming
victorious to Rome, his name was written in the prescriptions of such as had
been of the abbettors of the faction of See Plutarch in Syllas Life, fol, 180.
Marius, and for no other reason, but because he was very rich, and had a
stately Palace at Alba, and so lost his life because of his riches. But it were
in vain to prove this Point by many foreign instances, since in this unnatural
civil war of ours: many have been accounted Roundheads, and other Malignants,
that neither had sided with one or the other side, but merely because of their
riches. Thirdly, Rich men are commonly the prey of Thieves; for where store of
gold and silver is, these spirits never leave haunting, For wheresoever the
Matthew. 24.28.
carcass is, there will the Eagles be gathered together. In Queen Elizabeth's
days a Pirate of Dunkerk laid a plot with twelve of his mates to carry away Sir
John Spencer, which if he had done, fifty thousand pounds ransom had not
redeemed him: he came over the seas in a Shallop with twelve Musketeers, and in
the night came into Barking-Creek, and left the Shallop in the custody of six
of his men, and with the other six came as far as Islington, and there hid
themselves in ditches, near the path in which Sir John came always to his
house: I have this out of a private Record.
but by the providence of God, Sir John, upon some extraordinary occasion was
forced to stay in London that night, otherwise they had taken him away; and
they fearing they should be discovered; in the night time came to their
Shallop, and so came safe to Dunkerk again. This was a very desperate attempt;
but hear another of the like nature, only it was more bloody, and more
successful, for the villains that undertook the same, some two years past it
happened at Paris in France, that ten stout thieves had notice given them that
the Duke of Orleans had received six thousand pounds in gold, and had caused
them to be laid in a chamber, next to his own bedchamber in the Palace of This
happened in Paris, in the year 1647. at the beginning of the year.
Lugseinbourg his ordinary abode; hereupon they plotted to steal away this
gold, and so in the day time got into the great garden, and in the night broke
into the middle court, and with a ladder of cords got up to the Chamber window,
and so into the chamber, slew two Gentlemen that were asleep in their bed, and
carried away the gold, unheard, and undiscovered, although there was above one
hundred Officers and servants in the house, and that the Duke lay in the next
Chamber. Many other instances might be produced for the confirmation of this
Point, That riches do expose their owners to great dangers, but these shall
serve for brevity sake. Fourthly, the care of the preservation of riches
interrupts the rest and sleep of men, and hinders learned men from their
Studies, and others from their ordinary employments. It is recorded, that the
Tyrant Policrates, to show his liberality, gave at one time to the Philosopher
Anacreon three talents, that is above nine hundred pounds sterlin, but after he
had it some four or five days in his custody, the care he took to preserve the
same, did so trouble his mind, that he neither could take his rest in the
night, nor in the day tend his School as he did before, for the fear he had
that thieves should break into his Chamber in the night, and deprive him of his
gold, took away his sleep, and the carking cares he took in the day to dispose
of his money to increase the same, hindered him from his Studies; whereupon
being vexed in his mind, he carried the said money again to the Tyrant,
entreating him to keep it himself, for it had done him more hurt in that time,
then it could ever do him good if he kept the same. And Demetrius See Plutarch
in the tranquillity of the mind.
the Phalerian, who by trading in merchandise had attained to be very rich,
finding his mind daily more and more perplexed with the increase of his
wealth, went to hear the Philosopher Crates, who made public Lectures upon
the tranquillity of the mind, and having learned that riches were the greatest
disturbers of the same, gave away all his riches to his poor kinsmen, that he
might with moore freedom apply himself to the Studies of Philosophy: Even so,
if the rich men of these days would divide their riches into three parts, and
give the first part to the poor, and the second to their poor kinsmen, and keep
the third part for themselves, they would be more free to frequent the hearing
of the Word of God, and more careful to make their calling and election sure:
for the cares of their great riches do so disquiet their minds, that they have
no time to endeavor to become An Allusion upon the 17. ver. of the 3. Chap. of
the Revelation.
rich in God, and so in the midst of their riches remain wretched, miserable,
poor, blind, and naked in the sight of God.

For the third, Riches are lost diverse ways, for there is nothing more subject
to accidents then riches: some loose their riches by thieves, as it has been
showed, other loose them insensibly, others consume them by riots, gaming, and
whoring, others by prodigalities, others by gluttony and drunkenness, others by
building stately houses, others by casualties of fire, others by imbrasing more
then they can gripe, I mean by undertaking of things beyond their abilities,
others by their inconstancy, by changing their dwelling, and their profession,
for this Proverb is not more common then true, That a rolling stone never
gets Moss, others by sloth and idleness, For he becomes poor, says
Solomon, Pro. 10.43
that deals with a slack hand: But rich men do commonly lose their riches by
these four means: first, by ventring over their abilities at sea, by shipwreck,
and Pirates: secondly, by invasion of a foreign enemy: thirdly, by siding in a
civil war with an unfortunate party: fourthly, by tyranny and oppession; and
for confirmation of it I will give some instances. The Philosopher Zeno had
been in his former time a rich Merchant, but having lost his wealth by a
Shipwreck, gave himself to the Study of Philosophy: and I could here produce
the names of diverse English, French, and Italian Merchants that have lost all
their means by Pirates and shipwracks, if I did not regard their fame: secondly,
by foreign Invasions; Cresus lost his incredible treasures by the invasion of
Cyrus, and Darius the last King of Persia his unparalled riches by the
invasion of See Plutarch in his Life.
Alexander the great: thirdly, all those of Marius faction that bore arms
against Sylla, lost their means and estates: and between See the History of
Guicchardine.
the two factions of the Guelfs and Gibelins, the richest Families of Italy
lost their means, sometimes the Guelfs being plundered of all, and presently
after the Gibelins; and how many rich families have also been undone in this
Kingdom by this unnatural war of both parties? Fourthly, by tyranny and
oppression rich men commonly lose their riches, for Tyrants are always jealous
of rich men, because moneys are the sinews of war; so where Tyranny raigns the
rich men go to rack; Piso See Tacitus in their Lives.
under the Emperor Otho lost his life for his riches, and so did Seneca See the
Turkish History.
under the Emperor Nero, and the Vizier Nassuff under the Emperor Achmat; and
the Vizier Ibrahim under the Emperor Morat, and a hundred more which I omit for
brevity sake. In a word, it is dangerous to be rich, a moderate estate is
safer, and there is no confidence to be reposed in riches; for as Solomon
says, Pro. 11.28.
He that trusts in his riches shall fall, but the righteous shall flourish as
a branch; nor profit nothing at the hour of death, for as Solomon says, Pro.
11.4.
Riches profit not in the day of wrath, but righteousness delivers from
death: besides, men presume upon their riches, for as Solomon says in another
place, The rich man is wise in his own conceit; but the Pro. 28.11.
poor that has understanding searches him out: and at last, the Prophet David
says, Psalm. 49.10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
Like sheep they are laid in the grave, death shall feed on them, and the
upright shall have dominion over them in the morning, and their beauty shall
consume in the grave from their dwelling.

For the fourth, of the dispensation of riches; in this consists the bliss, or
woe of rich men; for it is certain that they are but the Stewards of their
riches, and that the Lord will call them to an account how they have dispensed
of them; for Stewards, says St. Paul 1 Cor. 4.2.
are to be faithful: now if the rich man spoken of in the Gospel, might call
his Steward to an account, and say thus unto him; Luke 16.2.
How is this that I hear this of you? give an account of your Stewardship: for
you may not be any longer steward, how much more may the Lord of Lords call
rich men to an account for the wealth that he has been pleased to entrust them
withal? for by him only they live and move, and all they have are the free
gifts of his liberality: And in the twefth Chapter of the same Gospel the
Character of a good and bad Steward is elegantly set forth, and the reward of
the good, and the punishment of the bad Steward is exactly set down in these
words, Luke 12.42, 43, 44, 45, 46, and 47.
And the Lord said, Who then is that faithful and wise steward, whom the Lord
shall make ruler over his household, to give their portion of meat in due
season? Blessed is that servant whom the Lord when he comes shall find so
doing: Of a truth I say unto you, that he will make him ruler over all that he
has. But if that servant say in his heart, my Lord delayeth his coming, and
shall begin to beat the menservants and maidens, and to eat and drink, and be
drunken; the Lord of that servant will come in a day when he looks not for
him, and at an hour when he is not aware, and will cut him in sunder, and will
appoint him his portion with the unbelievers: And that servant which knew his
Lords will, and prepares not himself, neither did according to his Will, shall
be beaten with many stripes. By this it appears that upon the good or evil
dispensation of riches, depends the bliss and woe of rich men; and yet there is
not one of a hundred that dispense of them as they should, or may truly be
called wise and faithful stewards, for the greater part consumes them in carnal
pleasures in chambering and wantonness, in braveries and prodigality, in
drunkenness and gluttony, in dicing and whoring, in hawking and hunting, and in
sensualities and vanities, and other like: miserable wretches continually heap
them up, and have not the grace to make use of them, but famish themselves in
the midst of their treasures, whereas they might above all other do good to
their native Country, relieve the poor, and abound in works of charity,
whereby it is commonly seen, that riches are as a stumbling block to the ways
of righteousness; and it is confirmed by these words of our Savior, Mat. 19.23.
A rich man shall hardly enter in the kingdom of heaven; for rich men are for
the greater part so besotted with their riches, that their gold and silver is
their Idol, to whom they sacrifice morning and evening, nay day and night, the
best of their cogitations and thoughts; and rather then they will part from
them, will hazard the salvation of their souls, as it may appear by the
carriage of the young man spoken of in the Gospel; for when our Savior said
unto him, Luke 18.22, 23.
Go and sell all that thou have, and distribute the same unto the poor, and
thou shall have a treasure in heaven, and come and follow me; he went away,
says the Text, very sorrowful, because he was very rich: for their hearts be
so glued to the things of this world, and their minds so taken up with carking
cares to increase or preserve their riches, that they have no time to attend
carefully upon the hearing of the Word of God; and suppose they frequent (as
other men) do the public exercises, yet their minds are so bent upon their
worldly affairs, that they are not attentive to the Word, and do not apply it
to themselves, and so neglect to make their calling and election sure: And for
Charity, daily experience does show, that the greater part of them are
inferior to others in that excellent grace, for they above all others are full
of malice, envy, and vindication, and will upon the least offense, or unadvised
word undo poor men by tedious suits at law to vindicate themselves, presumption
and pride being as a natural habit to rich men, and these are the greatest
Antagonists to charity: and for their charity toward the poor, they are also
generally more close-fisted then the middle sort of men, for charity is not to
be valued by the gift: a man that gives six pence a week to the poor, may be
more charitable then another that gives five shillings a week, because that
six pence may be more, according to the Arithmeticall proportion to his estate,
then five shillings is to the wealth of a rich man: and that was the reason
that the two mites that the poor Mark 12.42.
widow did cast into the Treasury, was more esteemed of our Savior, then the
great gifts that the rich Pharisees did cast in, because she gave even all she
had, and they gave but a small part of their abundance: and many of them are so
hard-hearted, and deprived of all pity, compassion, and mercy, that like the
rich Glutton, they will suffer the poor Lazarus to famish at their doors rather
then they will allow them the crumbs that fall Allusion upon Luke 16.21.25.
from their tables; but it will be said unto them one day, Sons remember that
in your life time you received your good things, and the poor Lazarus evil
things, but now they are comforted and you are tormented. It cannot be denied
but there are diverse monuments abroad of the Christian charity of many rich
Citizens of London; but to erect Almshouses, and Hospitals with ill-gotten
goods, tending more to Ostentation then to true Charity, is an abomination to
the Lord; and Selymus Emperor of the Turks, and one of the greatest tyrants
that ever was, made conscience of it, for See the Turkish History in Selymus
Life.
Pyrrhus his grand Vizier persuading him upon his bed of death, to erect a
stately Mosque of the moneys that should proceed from the Persian Merchants
goods that he had most unjustly confiscated, he answered, No, Pyrrhus, this
would be an abomination to God, and to our great Prophet Mahomet: to build a
Church and an Hospital, with the moneys proceeding from goods that are not
justly my own, but rather I charge thee, they be suddenly restored to their
right owners; and to rob Peter to give to Paul, as many do, is a mere impiety,
rather then charity: Can men be so grossly deluded by Satan, as to think that it
is a satisfactory restitution to erect a sorry Almshouse, or Hospital, or a
Free School for the relief of the poor, and for the education of poor Scholars,
after they have undone many by Usury, Rapines, and Oppressions? No, the
restitution to be acceptable to God, must be made to the very same parties they
have wronged and oppressed, or at least to their heirs; and like Zacheus say,
Luke 19.8.
Behold Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken any
thing from any man by false accusation, I restore him four fold. Mr. Sutton
after he had undone by Usury, and Forfeitures of Bonds, and Morgages many
Gentlemen, out of a remorse of conscience, erected Charter House Hospital for
relief of decayed Gentlemen; but it had been a better restitution if he had
distributed the moneys it cost among the children of those he had oppressed:
yet few there are in these days so conscientious as he, for they will make no
restitution at all, neither in their life time, nor after their death: True
Charity proceeds from a feeling compassion of our poor brethrens present
misery, and therefore men that are close-fisted to the poor in their life time,
and great benefactors at their death, cannot be accounted true charitable men,
for they part from their money when they can make no more use of it, and by
consequence, this charity savors more of Ostentation then of true Piety. The
Magnificence and Christian Charity of Sir Thomas Gressam is then to be
commended, for as another Pericles did adorn the City of Athens with stately
structures. See Plutarch and Thucidides.
Pericles, he did in his life time erect the Royal Exchange for the ornament
of the City of London, and Gressam College for the propagation of Learning, and
many Almes-Houses for the relief of the poor, and so showed himself a wise and
faithful Steward of those riches that the Lord was pleased to entrust him
withal: and certainly rich men that do not dispense of their riches after this
manner, specially if they have no children, as he had none, without the special
mercy of God, and an unfeigned and timely repentance, they will be cut asunder,
and have their portion with the unbelievers: for it is rather a curse then a
blessing to be rich, and have not the grace to make use of our riches, which is
confirmed by this saying of Solomon, Eccles. 6.12.
There is an evil, says he, which I have seen under the Sun, and it is common
among men; A man to whom God has given riches, wealth, and honors, so that he
wants nothing for his soul of all that he desires, yet God gives him not
power to eat thereof, but a stranger eats it: this is vanity, and it is an
evil disease. And in another place, Eccles. 2.24.
There is nothing better, says he, for a man then he should eat and drink, and
that he should make his soul enjoy good in his labor; This also I saw that it
was from the hand of God. By these things it appears, that worldly riches are
painful in their acquisition, full of cares in their preservation, and in their
losses grievous and full of sorrow, The third Chap. of the vanity of riches.
and that in their dispensation do consist the bliss, or the woe of the owners
of them.

As for the spiritual riches of a Christian, they are the immediate gifts of
the blessed Trinity; for his Election is the gift of God the Father, his
Justification is of God the Son, and his Sanctification the gift of God the
Holy Ghost; and the riches of his other graces proceed from the same Spring,
and therefore these riches are supernaturally excellent, and free from all
changes and mutations whatsoever. Neither can the Elements, or any creature in
heaven, or upon earth, nor the Prince of darkness, nor death deprive him of
these riches: for as St. Paul says, Romans 11.19.
The gifts and calling of God are without repentance: And every good gift, and
every perfect gift, says St. James, Jam. 1.17.
is from above, and comes down from the Father of lights, with whom there is
no variableness, neither shadow of turning. Spiritual riches are then that
treasure laid up in heaven, where neither moth, nor rust does corrupt, and
where thieves do not break through and steal; It is that treasure Matt. 6.21.
hid in the field, the which when a man has found, he hides, and for joy
thereof goes, and sells all he has, and buyeth that field. It is that
precious Pearl of great price, Matt. 13.44.
which when a man had found, he went and sold all he had and bought it. Mat.
13.46.
To conclude, the gifts and graces of God, of his Son, and of his blessed
Spirit, are the true riches that men should endeavor to attain, for they only
are able to rejoice his heart, and content his mind, and to comfort him at the
hour of death: This is the wisdom that Solomon says, Pro. 8.11.
is better then rubies, and all things that may be desired, are not to be
compared to it. It is in these mercies, and graces, in which the Prophet David
Psa. 1. and 119.77.
took all his delight, and meditated upon day and night, for they are more to
be desired then gold, yea then much Psalm. 19.10.
fine gold, and are sweeter then honey, and the honey comb: whereas riches are
but mere vanity and vexation of spirit.

CHAP. IV.
Of the vanity of worldly pleasures.

THere is also two sorts of pleasure: first, the Worldly: secondly, the
Spiritual; the last are rather spiritual ravishments then pleasures, for their
superlative excellency: but the worldly pleasures are like the morning dew,
that vanishes away at the rising of the Sun; even so worldly pleasures have no
substance, and in the continuance they become irksome; and yet is one of the
dieties of worldly men, in the enjoyment of which, they conceive does consist
their supreme good: Their original spring is the five senses: first, the Sight:
secondly, the Hearing: thirdly, the Taste: fourthly, the Smell: fifthly, the
Feeling: and every one of these have their peculiar delights: the Sight takes
pleasure in beautiful objects, the Hearing in Music, the Taste in delicious
Savors, the Smell in oderiferous Odours, and the hand in lascivious Feelings; so
that all the worldly pleasures that can be imagined proceed from one of these
senses: how can it then be possible, that rational men should be so mad as to
conceive their supreme good should consist in such momentary vanities! besides,
it is daily seen, that men's pleasures are rather guided by Fancy then by
Reason, and more by inclination, then judgment; for what is pleasant to one is
distastful to the other throughout the five senses: First, in the Objects, some
love a flaxen hair'd, others a black hair'd woman: some love to hear a doleful
melody, others a joyful: some love to eat one thing, and some another; nay,
their very taste will vary, although they eat of one and the same meat: some
love a sweet, mild odor, others a strong perfume; and for their Feeling, they
are as various; and in the Election of their calling they differ as much, some
love a Soldiers life, others love Learning, others to be Merchants, other
Shopkeepers; others will be Artificers, others will be Seafaring men, others
will feed cattle, and others will till the ground: Likewise in their
Recreations, some love Hawking, others Hunting, others Shooting, others
Bowling, others Gaming, and so in all things their pleasures differ and vary.
If it be then granted, that their supreme Good does consist in the enjoyment of
their pleasures, then there must of necessity be as many different supreme
Goods, as there is variety of pleasures; but as I have said before, all these
pleasures or inclinations, are but mere phansies, vanities, and vexations of
Spirit; as it shall be proved by these ensuing Discourses: Observe then for
method sake, that worldly pleasures may be distinguished thus, 1. By necessary
and natural. 2. By violent and superfluous. 3. By moderate and lawful. 4. By
vicious and unlawful.


And for conclusion, I will give a hint of the spiritual Pleasures that are
superexcellent, and free from vanity.

First, under the necessary pleasures are comprised eating, drinking, walking,
resting and sleeping, with the actions and employments about our just and
lawful Callings, for in all these things there is a natural delight, for he
that eats when he is ahungry, and drinieth when he is athirst, and rests
when he is weary, or sleeps after a long watching, finds a delight in all
these necessary things, without which men cannot subsist, but in all these men
are to be moderate, otherwise they become vicious, but they must be laborious
in their caling; therefore as Solomon says, Prove. 5.12.
Sleep to a laboring man is sweet; as Soldiers in their Military exercises,
Students in their Studies, The necessary and natural pleasures.
Merchants in their Negotiations, Shopkeepers in their Shops, and Artificers
in their Work, otherwise their professions will seem tedious and irksome unto
them; and as a rolling stone never gets Moss, so fickle and inconstant men
in their calling never attain to honor nor riches, for it is diligence,
activity, and a constant assiduity in in any profession that make men thrive in
the world; He becomes poor, says Solomon, Pro. 10.4, 5.
that deals with a slack hand, but the hand of the diligent makes rich; he
that gathers in Summer is a wise son, but he that sleeps in Harvest is a
son of shame: and many men in these days come to penury by often changing of
Calling, or by undertaking such Callings as they never were bred to, or by
exercising four or five Callings at one and the same time, which is a great
vanity, for that is the cause that Artificers never attain to the perfection of
their Art, or handy-craft, but remain ignorant hudlers in them all: It is
therefore convenient that men should be constant to one Calling, and to take
delight in it, For godliness with content, says St. Paul, 1 Timothy 6.6.
is great gain, and without men take delight in their profession, they will
always be changing till they bring themselves to extreme misery.

Secondly, violent and superfluous Pleasures are desructive two ways, the first
impair men's health, and shorten their days, and the other does waste and
consume their estates: how many have lost their lives by the excessive
pleasures of Venery in the very act, and many more by excessive riots of
drunkenness and gluttony, and others by the violent exercises of Tennis,
Football play, Leaping, Vaulting, and running of races: some others by
swiming, The violent and superfluous pleasures.
and others by drinking in Summer wines cooled in snow; and of late years how
many have shortened their lives by the excessive use of Tobacco, a bewitching
herb, in the taking of which the poorer sort consume the small means they have,
and the richer impair their health, and fill their brains as full of foot, as
is the funnel of a chimney, by which they deprive themselves of sleep, consume
their radical humor, engender Palsies, and apoplexies, and go down to the grave
before their time, whereas if it be used moderately, it purges the Phlegm,
prevents the Dropsy, and refreshes the spirits. It is then apparent, that as
these violent pleasures impair the body, so they wast men's estates, for
rioting, gluttony and drunkenness, Tennis, and Foot-ballplay, running of races,
and drinking of wine cooled in snow are consumers of the means and estates of
men.

Thirdly, the moderate and lawful pleasures, are not prohibited in the word of
God, so they be used with moderation; for Christians may boldly take pleasure
in a moderate way of all the creatures under the Sun, so it be with
thanksgiving, and after a sanctified manner in all sobriety and temperance. 1.
They may take delight in the admirable works of God, Psalm. 136.8.
in the contemplation of the light of the Sun, in the constant course it
observes in the regulating of the seasons of the year, and in the increase and
declination of its height, whereby the days are lengthened or shortened; In the
various mutations of the Moon, by whose influence the Tides increase or fall.
2. They may delight to see the aspect of the Spring Psalm. 8.3.
when after a cold Winter the vegetative creatures begin to sprout, and when
Flora does revest her self in her glorious apparel clothing the earth with
variety of odiferous flowers inameled of diverse colors, which excel in beauty,
in the esteem of our blessed Savior, Math. 6.28.
the very glory of King Solomon; and in Summer they may delight in the blessing
of God, upon the labor of the Husbandman; and in Harvest upon the incredible
increase of the seed, and in Winter Psalm. 72.^6.
in the consideration of the propriety that God has given to the vegetative
creatures, to draw their sap, which is their life, into their root, that it may
be kept in the bowels of the earth, from the danger of the frost and snow; and
how by his admirable providence, he does feed the beasts of the field, and the
fowls of the air in that barren season, The moderate and lawful pleasures.
as well as in havest. 3. They may delight in the glorious objects of the green
and beautiful medows, and in the sweet rivers running along their banks; in the
numerous herds of cattle feeding in the Valleys and Mountains. 4. They may
rejoice in the commerce and trade of rich merchandise that are brought from
foreign parts, whereby the commonwealth does flourish, and the poor are set at
work; and all in general provided of all necessary things for this life. 5.
They may take delight to see the Artificers, Shopkeepers, and all others of
the poorer sort to prosper, and to have vent and utterance for their wares,
whereby they are enabled to maintain themselves, wives, children and servants,
in a decent condition, and free from want or penury. 6. They may delight and
bless the Lord, for their health, peace, and prosperous estate, and that they
live, and move, and have a being, with all necessary things for this life, as
meat, drink and raiment; but above all they may laud and praise the Lord for
his mercy, and the free liberty they have to hear his Word and Gospel preached
with zeal and sincerity. 7. They may solace themselves in honest recreations,
as in walking abroad to take the air, in the company of their friends; their
discourses being Col. 4 6.
seasoned with salt, and rather tending to edification then depravation. 8.
They may sometimes go a hunting, hawking, fishing, shooting, bowling, but these
recreations are to be short, and only for to refresh their spirits, after
tedious studies, and weekly employments, and to strengthen their bodies by
these laudable exercises, and not to make them, as some do, their daily work,
for otherwise these honest and laudable recreations would become vicious, and
destructive to body and soul, for nothing ought to be more precious to
Christians then Time.

Fourthly, Vicious and unlawful pleasures are the snares of Satan, and the
harbengers of death, and yet they are most in fashion in these days, See
Plutarch and the English and French History.
and few or none that are addicted to them, will give them any bound or limits:
It is recorded that Caesar, Edward the fourth King of England, and Henry the
fourth King of France, were overmuch addicted to Venery, and yet those that
have written their Lives, give them this commendation, that they bounded this
Passion within certain limits; for their Venerian delights did never, say they,
make them neglect any affairs of State, or actions of war, because, says a
modern Author of Caesar, Senault in the use of Passions.
that the Passion of Ambition was more predominate in him then the Passion of
Love, although the Passion of Love, in the opinion of Aristotle, and of Senault
himself, is held to be the most violent Passion of all the other Passions: but
if men are to be moderated, as I have said before, in the natural and necessary
pleasures, there is great reason they should be more temperate in their vicious
pleasures, since they are sinful, and odious to God, and to all virtuous and
temperate men: and St. Paul 1 These. 4.3.
would have men to be moderate in their cating and drinking for their healths
sake, and for conscience sake, for the abuse of the creature is prohibited by
the Lord: Nay, they are to be temperate in their walkings, resting, sleeping,
and in the very delight of the Nuptial bed, and that is the reason that St.
Paul gives them this charge, Phil. 4.5.
Let your moderation be known unto all men: the Lord is at hand; and
notwithstanding young and old run after vicious and unlawful pleasures, as the
Grayhound runs after the Hare, and yet they besot men, and deprive men of their
reason and judgment, and such as by custom have gotten an habit in carnal
pleasures, are seldom weaned from them, without a special measure of divine
grace, for they are more enticing, and have stronger charms to allure men (then
the Harlot spoken of in the 7. of Proverbs, Pro. 7. ver. 19, 20, 21, 22.
Come let us take our fill of love until the morning, let us solace our selves
with loves, for the good man is not at home, he is gone a long journey, he has
taken a bag of money with him, and will come home at the day appointed; with
much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the flattering of her lips she
forced him: he goes after her straightway, as an ox goes to the slaughter,
and as a fool to the correction of the stocks, till a dart strike through his
liver, as a bird hastes to the snare, and knows it not that it is for his
life) to entice men to lust, and all impiety, for under vicious pleasures are
comprised Lechery, Drunkenness, and Gluttony, Pride, Pomp, lascivious Apparel
and Prodigality: all vicious recreations, as Enterludes, Comedies, and
Tragedies, Tabling, Carding, Dicing, Dancing, Leaping, and Vaulting, Masks, and
Mummeries, and all such Court-vanities; and these are the deities of worldly
men, and paradise of the wise men, or rather of the fools in these days. But
before I proceed, give me leave to examine what bliss or felicity does consist
in the enjoyment of these vanities. First, Venery, is a sensual delight, of no
continuance, which enerveth, says Du Bartus in his second week.
du Bartus, all the faculties of body and soul, and casts men's reason in a
quick sand of lust: besides, it draws with cartrobes the judgments of God upon
men and women, and fills their bodies of loathsome and incredible diseases.
Secondly, for Gluttony and Drunkenness, they are absolutely brutish, and of all
the bruits and sensitive creatures, there is none that is addicted to these
vicees but the Fox and the Swine, for the Swine will sometimes burst by
drinking of Buttermilk, and the Fox by drinking of young Lambs blood, and
therefore no Nation has a better Etymology for a drunkard then the English;
for when men are drunk, they say, They are Fox'd; and what is more destructive
to the health of men's bodies then drunkenness and gluttony? Awake, ye
drunkards, says the Prophet Joel, Joel 1.5.
and weep, and howl all ye drinkers of wine, because of the new wine, for it
is cut off from your mouth. Thirdly, For pride, pomp, lascivious apparel, and
prodigality; to be proud of that which is not our own, is a mere folly, and
lascivious apparel is but as the tinder to inflame the fire of lust; and for
pomp, and prodigality, the one is the way to penury, and the other may be
compared to the Peacock, The effects of vicious and unlawful pleasures.
that has nothing in him that is good or worthy of praise but his gay
feathers: besides, men are but Stewards, or Feofees in trust of the means they
have, and they will undoubtedly be called to an account, if they lavish the
means they are entrusted withal in such vanities. Fourthly, Enterludes,
Comedies, and Tragedies, are but the Seminaries of lust, and Playhouses the
Schools of the depravation and corruption of youth. Fifthly, Tabling, Dicing,
and Carding, are the Circes or rocks where men make shipwreck of their means
and estates, and by which swearing, cursing, and banning is promoted and kept
in being. Sixthly, Dancing, Masking, and Mummeries, they are but the mere
Panders and Bawds of the Court, the very consumers of Princes treasures, and
the Nurses of all vices, that make young gallants sell their land to wear gay
clothes, and to glister in a Hall with their silver and gold lace; and when
they have lavished their estates, and impaired the health of their bodies,
multiplied and aggravated their sins, they have nothing left them but grief and
sorrow of heart, and a gnawing worm in their consciences that never dies;
except the Lord in his mercy touch their hearts, and make them cry out like the
Prodigal Son, Matthew. 15.20, 21, 22.
I have sinned against heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be
called thy Son; or prick their hearts as those that crucified our blessed
Savior, who said unto St. Peter, and his fellows Apostles, Men and brethren
what shall we do? Then Peter said unto them, Repent: even so if these
Monopolists of worldly pleasures do not repent unfainedly, they will incur Gods
just indignation at the last day.

Lastly, The Spiritual Pleasures are free from vanity, and ravish men's souls
into the third heaven, and by the eyes of faith see the presence of God,
Angels, and Saints. Thou have ravished my heart, says Christ unto his Church:
Cant. 4.9.
Even so the children of God, that take pleasure to meditate in the Law of God,
are ravished in spirit, as St. Paul says of himself, 2 Cor. 12.2, 3, 4.
I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, whether in the body I cannot
tell, God knows, such a one caught up into the third heaven: and I knew such
a man (whether in body, or out of the body, I cannot tell, God knows) how he
was caught up into Paradise, and heard unspeakable words, unutterable, which is
not lawful for a man to utter. And undoubtedly, in zealous prayers, and holy
meditations, does consist the spiritual Pleasures of a Christian; and it is
said in Genesis, Genesis 24.63.
that Isaac went every evening in the field to meditate; so that it is
apparent, that the servants of God have an intimate familiarity with him, which
does fill their hearts with unspeakable pleasures, for the Prophet David says,
Psalm. 1.2.
The godly men's delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he
meditate day and night: And the constant and fervent prayers of Cornelius Act.
10.2.
the Centurion obtained this favor of the Lord, that Saint Peter was sent for,
for the conversion of himself, and of his family; and St. Peter by his prayers
was cast into a trance, and saw Act. 10.11, 12.
a vision, whereby he was confirmed that God is no accepter of persons, and
whether they be Jews or Gentiles, if they love and fear him, they are received
into grace by the merits of Christ his beloved Son. How men may attain to enjoy
spiritual pleasure.
They that will then enjoy the spiritual pleasures, must pray continually, and
meditate day and night upon the mystery of their salvation, to get an assurance
their calling and ^ Pet. 1.10.
election is sure, and they are justified by the blood of Christ, shall be
saved from Rom 5.9.
wrath through him, and are Romans 15.16.
sanctified by the holy Ghost, and of the number, who by the preaching of the
Gospel, have had their eyes opened, to turn them from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive Acts 26.18.
forgiveness of sins and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith
in Christ, and that they have received a white stone, and in the stone Revel. 2.
a new name which no Man knows, saving he that receives it. This assurance,
I say, is able to fill a Christians heart with unspeakable pleasures, and to
ravish his soul into the third heavens, where he shall enjoy the presence of
God, in whom is the fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.11.
and in his right hand are pleasures for evermore. But worldly pleasures vanish
away like smoke, and are mere vanity and vexation of spirit.

CHAP. V.
Of the vanity of men's passions in general.

THe next aggravation of the vanity of the lives of men, after the former
description of the vanity of their desires, is the vanity of their passions,
with the exorbitant care they take for the cure of their bodily diseases, and
their unparalled carelessness of the cure of the maladies of their souls; for
what greater vanity can there be, then to prefer the health of their body that
is momentary and nothing but dust, to the preservation of the welfare and
tranquillity of their immortal souls, who are in the esteem of our blessed
Savior, Mar. 8.37
such a precious Jewel that there is nothing under the Sun, that for value may
be given in exchange for it: and yet it is daily seen, that if their finger
does but ache, or if they have but a quotidian ague, (that is a wholesome medicine
in the Spring) they will presently take their bed, and send for the best
Physicians, and will ingenuously declare unto them the symptoms of their
disease, that they may the better prescribe fit remedies for the cure of it:
but if their souls be sick, by the rageful distempers of their passions, which
breed storms of preturbations in their souls, as the impetuous winds do
tempests at sea, they make nothing of it, neither will they send for a
spiritual Physician, that can pour in their festered wounds the Balm of Jer.
8.22.
Gilead, and assuage by their grave Counsels the fury of their passions, but
will rather, if any come to visit them, unsent for, disguise their vicious
passions, by the names of virtues, for they commonly call Ambition a desire of
Glory, and Avarice a prudent forecast; and the furious passion of wrath a
generosity of courage, and so of all the rest: and by this concealing and
disguishing of their spiritual maladies, make them by custom utterly
incurable. This common vanity of men has induced diverse learned Authors, to
prescribe in their Writings, diverse excellent remedies to cure these concealed
maladies of the soul: but before I speak of the remedies, it is fit the Reader
should be informed of the essential cause of these distempers, for as it is
impossible for a Physician to cure the bodily infirmities of his patient before
he be acquainted with the nature of them; even so it is far more impossible for
the Reader to pacify the fury of his passions, before he be informed by these
ensuing particulars of the cause and nature of them. I will therefore speak in
order of these things.

1. Of the two distinct powers of the soul. 2. Of the Concupiscible and
Irascible appetite. 3. Of the definition of men's passions. 4. Of their seat,
and number. 5. Of their original spring. 6. Of their evil and good essects.
First, There are two distinct powers in the soul.
the soul is distinguished into two distinct powers, the one is called
Rational, the other Sensitive: the Rational is only peculiar to men, but the
Sensitive is common to men and beast. See Aristotle in his Phys. lib. 16, 17.
The Rational is a spark of the divine essence, and therefore immaterial, and
immortal, but the Sensitive is material and earthly, and therefore mortal and
corruptible, and from hence the Christian Philosophy, And Senault upon the use
of passions.
does infer the resurrection of the body, because it has such an affinity with
one of the powers of the soul; besides, the Rational power does its operations
without the aid of the corporal organs, but the Sensitive cannot execute its
functions without the assistance of the organs of the body, and that is the
reason, why the operations of it are more carnal, and those of the Rational
more divine and celestial; and this made St. Paul Romans 7.23, 24, 25.
cry out, But I see another law in my members warring against the law of my
mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my members.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death! I
thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord: so then, with the mind I my self
serve the Law of God, but with the flesh the law of sin: Moreover, the Rational
power of the soul is the spring of all the intellectual faculties of the mind,
but the Sensitive power is the spring of the senses, and of all the affections
and passions of men.

Secondly, Because this Sensitive power is distinguished into two distinct
appetites, viz. the Concupiscible, and the Irascible, which are properly the
faculties that the French call Appetitives, which intimates in the English
tongue an aptness, See Beau-lieu in his Body of Philosophy, pa. 721.
an instinct, or natural inclination, enticing men and beast to pursue such
objects as seem Good, or to fly from such objects that seem to be Evil; and the
truth is, The proprieties of the Concupiscible and Irascible appetites.
that the propriety of the Concupiscible appetite is to induce men to prosecute
the objects that seem simply to be Good, or to draw them back from such that
seem simply to be Evil, who have no appearance in them to be difficult to be
obtained, or to be avoided: and the propriety of the Irascible appetite is to
entice men to meet the objects presented by the senses unto them after a short
result of the imagination that be not only simply good or evil, but full of
difficulties to obtain or to eschew; for the seeming good simply, See Aristotle
in his Physio. lib. 16. cap. 3.
is the proper object of the Concupiscible appetite, because it is pleasant and
useful to men or beast, and may be obtained without difficulty; but the seeming
good that is apparently difficult to obtain, and the evil that is hard to
avoid, is the proper object of the Irascible appetite: But you are in this
place to take notice once for all, That the objects that the senses represent
to men's phansies, or imaginations are not always really good, nor really evil,
because the judgments of men are oftentimes deluded by the senses, who varnish
over the good with evil, and the evil with good; and that is the reason why
this phrase of seeming good, or seeming evil, is used so often in these
Discourses.

Thirdly, The definition of passion, according to Aristotle and the Bishop of
Ma^seilles.
Passions argues imperfection in the subject, and a distemper in the sensitive
power of the soul: and here is the definition of the general words of Passions:
Passion is nothing but a motion of the sensitive appetite proceeding from the
apprehension of a real or seeming good or evil, which begets an alteration in
the body against the law of Nature: Men's passions are born with them, and
therefore cannot be utterly extinguished, neither by an habit of moral Virtue,
nor by Grace; but their sury may be allaid, and their distemper regulated; they
never arise but there is an apparent alteration of the body, as it is noted in
the desinition above related, and this alteration proceeds after this manner,
the objects having been represented to the imagination by the senses; if it
conceives them to be good; the concupiscible appetite does entice men to
prosecute these objects, and having obtained their desire, there proceeds from
the enjoyment of it, a passion of joy and delight, which dilates the blood,
with the vital spirits that reside in it to the extremest part of the body;
and the heart being deprived of some of his natural heat, makes an alteration
in the body, that is apparently seen in the face, which has by it a more
pleasant aspect, and a more ruddy complexion then ordinary; but if this delight
or joy be violent and come unexpectedly, it makes a contrary alteration in the
face, for then it becomes pale, and the body falls into a swound, That men's
passions cause varieties of changes and alterations in the body.
and sometimes deprives the party of life, because the sudden violence of the
passion, has driven all the blood and vital spirits from the heart, and so for
want of heat the life is extinguished. Contrarily, if the objects procure a
passion of fear, then the blood and the vital spirits resident in it, withdraw
from the extreme parts of the body, and ascend up to the heart to comsort the
same, and stir up the passion of undantedness to oppose this fear, but in the
mean time, this irregular motion of the heart, and the running of the blood
causes an apparent alteration in the body, for the face and all the members of
the body lose their natural complexion and become pale, the knees, feet, and
hands trembling, as if the party had the dead-palsey. Nay, if this passion be
violent, and happen unexpectedly, it will deprive the party of life, for it
will bring up such a superfluous current of blood and vital spirits about the
heart, that it will be smothered by it, as it shall be proved by diverse
instances in convenient time and place. But some will object, How can the
powers of the soul sympathize thus with the accidents that happen to the body?
I answer, that it is by the communication that is between the Sensitive power
of the soul, and the organs of the body, as it appears in the passions of
Delight and Dolor; for if a man enjoy any pleasure, the sensitive power of the
soul has her part of this delight; likewise if his body be racked, the
sensitive power of his soul suffers her part of the torments, for the body and
the soul is but one individual, the body without a soul being but a lump of
clay, the one being the matter, and the other the form; or the the body is the
Bulk of the ship, and the soul the Helm that guides the same.

Fourthly, That the heart is the seat of men's passions, according to Aristotle
in his Physiogn. lib. 16.
the passions of men are seated in the heart, because it is the seat of the
Sensitive power from which they are derived: and this is the opinion of
Aristotle, and other ancient and modern Authors: yet diverse are of another
judgment, some would have the seat of them to be in the liver, others in the
gall, others in the spleen: but, because the reasons and arguments they use to
prove their opinion, have been confuted for erroneous, I will not trouble you
with them, specially since our blessed Savior does confirm by these words,
Matthew. 7.21.
that they are seated in the heart, For from within, out of the heart proceeds
evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders, etc. And these are the
effects of men's passions, nay, And of Beau-Lieu. in his Body of Philosophy, pa.
722, 723.
daily experience confirms the point; by the carriage of young children who are
addicted to envy, vindication, wrath, and diverse other passions, before they be
able by their rational power to distinguish the good from the evil, because the
rational power that is seated in the Understanding does increase by age: but
the Sensitive power is bred with us; and therefore the heart is the true seat
of the passions, affections, and inclinations of men.

As for the number of the passions of men, it is uncertain, for they may be
multiplied by the limitation of their objects, as the winds have been of late:
for at the first they were but four, the East, North, West, and South, and then
they were multiplied to eight, and afterward to sixteen, and then to two and
thirty, and of late they have been multiplied to threescore and four: as for
the passions, Aristotle was of opinion that there was but one general passion,
and that was Love: Others said there were but two, and they were Delight, and
Dolor; others said there were but four, and they were Joy, Sorrow, Hope and
Fear; and this opinion was grounded upon reason, for whatsoever men act or
undertake, they delight, grieve, fear or hope. That there is eleven general
passions.
But Beau-lieu, and the Bishop of Marseilles maintain there are eleven general
passions, but Senault a modern Author has made them up twelve, to make the
passions of the Irascible appetite equal with those of the Concupiscible
appetite, and so has brought in remisness; which in the two former Authors
opinions, nor in mine, can be no general passion, because it is mixed or
composed of Love and Compassion: and these are the eleven general passions, and
the six of the Concupiscible appetite shall have the precedence. First, Love.
Secondly Hatred Thirdly, Desire. Fourthly, Flight or Eschewing Fifthly, Joy.
Sixthly, Dolor, or Sorrow: and these are the five of the Irascible appetite:
First, Fear. Secondly, Vndauntedness or Boldness. Thirdly, Hope. Fourthly,
Despair. Fifthly, Wrath, or Choler. And here follows their definition
according to Beau-Lieu, The definition of these eleven passions according to
Beau-Lieu, page 723.
which I conceive to be the best. First, Love, is a motion, an appetite, an
affection, or passion toward a thing which is lovely, and pleasant unto us,
whether it be present or absent. Secondly, Hatred is a passion against some
thing that is adverse, or seems evil unto us, whether it be present or
absent. Thirdly, Desire, called by some Concupiscence, is an affection to
possess, and enjoy a thing that is absent, which is pleasant unto us. Fourthly,
Flight is a Passion enticing us to eschew, or fly from a thing that seems
evil, or is adverse unto us. Fifthly, Joy, Delight, or Volupty is the
possession, or enjoyment of the thing desired, which seemed good and pleasant
unto us. Sixthly, Dolor or Sorrow is a passion, proceeding from the anguish of
the body, or from some evil accident happened unto us: These six passions are
incident to the Concupiscible appetite; and these five following to the
Irascible appetite. First, Fear is an apprehension of an evil that is near, and
hard to be avoided. Secondly, Vndantedness, is an assurance or confidence that
we can avoid, or overcome an evil, though it be never so difficult. Thirdly,
Hope is an expectation of a good that we desire and long for; in the obtaining
of which we see some probability, although it be environed or compassed about
with great difficulties. Fourthly, Despair is a passion that inticeth us to fly
back, or retreat from the pursuit of a Good much desired, because we conceive
an impossibility to obtain the same. Fifthly, Wrath is a fiery passion,
enticing us to vindicate our selves for some injury received, or to chastise
such as do evil, or hinder others to do good.

These eleven general passions, and all others that derive from them, may be
reduced to six heads; three incident to the Concupiscible appetite, and three
to the Irascible; the three of the Concupiscible have every one of them their
Opposites. First, Love has for his opposite Hatred. Secondly, the Desire has
for his opposite the Flight. Thirdly, See Beau-Lieu, p. 724.
Joy has for its opposite Dolor: but the passions of the Irascible have but
two opposites, viz. First, Hope has for his opposite Despair. Secondly,
Vndantedness has for his opposite Fear,: but Wrath has no opposite; If you
will know the reasons, read Beau-Lieu, in his Body of Philosophy, for I cut
them off for brevity sake. These eleven general passions may be multiplied by
the limitation of their objects to be as numerous as a swarm of Bees.

Fifthly, The original spring of the passions of men, is the senses, which are:
first, the Sight: secondly, the Odor: thirdly, the Hearing: fourthly, the
Taste: fifthly, the Feeling; and they arise and spring up after this manner: The
Senses having represented the Objects to the Fancies, or imaginations of men,
The original spring of the passions of men is the Senses.
after a short result of the rational part: the Concupiscible appetite does
entice men to prosecute the real or seeming Good; and the Irascible appetite
does induce them to prosecute the Good, compassed with difficulties, or to fly
from the apparent or seeming Evil. Now by this pursuit of the Concupiscible
appetite, or by the flight of the Irascible appetite; the heart which is the
spring of all the motions of the body, must of necessity be distempered; and
from this distemper proceeds the alterations of the body that I have spoken of
before, which have been noted to be contrary to the Laws of Nature: for the
natural temper of the heart, of such as are in perfect health, and that are
free from the motions that arise from their passions, is more equal (as it may
appear by the beating of the Pulse, which is the surest evidence men have, of
the temper or distemper of the heart) then the balance of the most excellent
Watch upon earth: and the heart being once brought out of his natural temper,
the foresaid alterations are greater or less, according to the degree of the
distemper of the heart; which are so violent in some passions, that they are
visibly seen in the strange postures of the body; the high color of the face,
the inflammation of the eyes, or by the shrilness, and fierceness of the voice.
Besides, these alterations proceeding from the passions, there is a continual
contention between the forementioned Concupiscible and Irascible appetites in
the will of men, which is the cause of the anxiety and preturbation of the
mind, which shall be described in the next Discourse.

Sixthly, the evil effects of the passions of men arise from their contentions
one with another, and their good effects arise from the assistance they give
one to another to fly from evil, for to cleave to the good; The Desire, that is
a passion incident to the Concupiscible appetite is a great inticer to sin, and
therefore it is called by St. John, Ioh. 2.16.
The lust of the eye, and by St. Paul 1 These. 4.5.
The lust of concupiscence; and by this passion of the lust of the eyes was
David enticed to commit the heinous sin of adultery with 2 Samuel 11.2, 3, 4.
Bathsheba, the wife to Vriah the Hittite; Now had Flight come to his aid as it
did to Joseph, when his lewd Mistress did tempt him to lust, it had been an
excellent effect of that passion. It is likely that there was then a great
contention between the Concupiscible and the Irascible appetite, the first
enticing King David to sin by the representation of so beautiful an object, and
of the enjoyment of such a seeming good; and the second by persuading him to
eschew and fly from this apparent evil varnished over with a seeming good; but
what became of their great contention, but a great perturbation in the mind of
David for a time? yet had the Concupiscible appetite the mastery, for David did
enjoy his desire, and remained impenitent a whole year: 2 Samuel 12.13.
but when he was awaked from this spiritual lethargy by the Prophet Nathan, he
cried, out of a penitent heart, I have sinned against the Lord: this was then
an evil effect of this passion of Desire. The passion of fear that did possess
Saint Peter when our blessed Savior was brought into the Hall of the High
Priest, caused another evil effect, for it did entice St. Peter Matthew. 26.70,
71, 72, 75.
to deny his Lord and Master three times before the Cock crew; but it was a
good effect of the passion of Joseph, above cited, for it made him fly from sin
to preserve his continency; and it was a noble effect of the passion of
Undantedness that did possess the hearts of Shedrach, Meshach, and Abednego,
Dan. 13.19.
and of the Prophet Daniel, Dan. 6.16.
to induce the three first to endure the torments of the fire of a burning
furnace, heated seven times more then it was ordinarily: and the second, to
despise the rage of the Lions, rather then disobey the Commandment of the Lord.
But these are but moral allegories, for it is not in the power of the
Concupiscible appetite to make the children of God commit such sins as the
Prophet David, and St. Peter did, but it was because God was pleased to give
them over to themselves, to make them know that the perseverance in grace is a
free gift of his; neither is it in the power of the Irascible appetite to
infuse such a continency as was found in Joseph, nor such an unparalled
undantedness as was in Shadrach, Meshach, Abednigo, and in Daniel; but it was
the blessed Spirit of God that did infuse in their hearts that admirable
fortitude, etc.

CHAP. VI.
Of the vanity of the passion of love.

AS after a hard winter, the Sun is not only seen to give a new life to all
the Vegetative, Sensitive, and rational Creatures upon earth; but also by the
heat of his beams to penetrate the very bowels of the earth, for to purify the
insensible creatures from their dross, as the silver, gold, and precious
stones; even so after men's passions have by their natural commotions, clouded
their minds with a Winter of anxiety and sorrow: supernatural Love, does not
only revive their Spirits, but does also purify them from the dross that
these perturbations had left behind them in their souls. Love being then the
most noble passion of men, it is fit it should have the precedence in these
Discourses, since without love all humane society should be extinguished, and by
it men deprived of all content and comfort in this life; for the greatest
comfort that men can attain to in this vale of Tears, is to have a constant
friend, or a faithful consort, in whose breast they may confide their greatest
secrets, and be partaker with them of their prosperity, honor, and glory, or
sympathize with them in their afflictions and miseries. It is recorded that
Fpamonides, the Commander in Chief of the Thebanes, a man as free from
vainglory as any one we read of, did not glory in any thing but in this, See
Plutarch in his Mo^is.
that his father was living, when he won three famous battles against the
Lacedaemonians, that were then held for their valor to be invincible, regarding
more the content and honor that his father (whom he loved entirely) should
receive of it, then his own; and certainly the greatest fruit that men can
receive of their prosperity, is, when their friends rejoice and partake of it,
and the greatest comfort they can have in their afflictions, is when they are
assured to have friends that sympathize with their miseries. Now the passion of
Love being of such concernment, I will for the better description of it speak
in order of these particulars: first, of the definition of Love: secondly, of
the essential cause of Love: thirdly, of the variety or kinds of Love:
fourthly, of the end or interest of men's Love: fifthly, of the qualities
required in men for to obtain Love: sixthly, of the good, and bad effects of
Love: seventhly, of the Love of God toward men: eighthly, of the Love of men
to God.

First, Love is nothing else but to wish good to another, not for men's own
interest, Definition of love according to Aristotle, and Senault.
but for the good and merit of the party beloved, to whom men are to procure
all the good and content that shall be in their power. Upon which definition
observe these four Particulars: first, that Love does ever unite the Heart and
Will of men to the party beloved; And therefore the ancients said commonly that
Alexander and Ephestion had but one soul in two distinct bodies, because their
joy and glory, sorrow or disgrace was mutual to them both: secondly, Men's love
is not to be grounded upon the pleasure or profit they may receive by them they
seem to love; for it can be no love, except their love be grounded upon the
virtues and merits of the party beloved: thirdly, Lovers are to wish and
procure the good and honor of their beloved, and to require nothing of them but
what they may do with honor and equity: fourthly, The goods and lives of men
are to be at the disposing of the party beloved, Honor, Religion, and Loyalty
only excepted, for true friendship does not oblige men to blemish their honor,
rack their conscience, nor to betray their Prince at the request of their
beloved, because these requests are beyond the bounds of love, which is only to
be confined within the limits of Virtue; See Plutarch in his Moralls.
and therefore the ancient Moralist highly commends this saying of a Heathen,
who said to his friend, who did require him to perjure himself, I am, says he,
thy friend until the Altar: and the like answer was given to Charles Duke of
Burbon, See Du Belay Commentaries,
when he did entreat his noble friends, to side with him against his and their
natural Prince, Francis the first, King of France.

Secondly, The cause of Love is conceived by some to be a sympathy, or natural
inclination that inticeth men to love one man before another, for it is often
seen, that when a man comes in the company of other men he never had seen
before, he will affect one of that company more then any of the rest, which
proceeds, say they, from a sympathy of affections that is between these two
men. Others conceive that the cause of Love does consist in the influence of
the Planets, and for proof of their Opinions say, that the love of Achilles to
Patroclus, See Homer. See Quintius Curtius.
and of Alexander to the Amazon Queen, was because they were born under one and
the same Planet. Others conceive the cause of Love to be the intimate
conversation and familiarity of the parties, which by an habit and custom
begets love between them. Others conceive that the goodness and beauty of the
object is the cause of love; and with these I concur in Opinion, for God who is
the Beauty and Goodness it self, is certainly the essential cause of true love.

Thirdly, All sorts of love may be comprised under natural and supernatural,
the natural has diverse branches, that may all be reduced under the love of
Interest, and the love of Friendship, of which I shall speak hereafter, when I
have set forth the Opinion of those, who maintain there is five several sorts
of Love: first, the love of the innanimate creatures: secondly, the love of the
sensitive creatures: thirdly, the love of the rational creatures: fourthly, the
love of Angels: fifthly, the love of God: first, The love of the innanimate
creatures, is apparent in the prosecution of the perfection of their being,
the light ones ascending upwards, and the heavy ones descending downwards, as
to their center: secondly, The love of the sensitive creatures, is an
impression wrought by the senses in their imagination, by the objects it
conceives to beuseful unto them, which begets a desire to enjoy them; and
this passion is not only incident to the bruit creatures, but also to the
rational, who are overcome by the sensitive appetite: thirdly, The love of the
reasonable creatures should be guided by Reason, because it is enlightened by
the Understanding, the seat of the rational power of the soul: but because the
Sensitive power does oftentimes get the mastery, it straies from its right end,
that is properly to endeavor to attain to the supreme good, the very end why
men were created; but since Adams fall men are carried away by the violence of
their passions to greater inconveniences and dangers then they which ride upon
untamed Colts, their love being no more a temperate motion of their Will, but
an effect of their passions: fourthly, The love of Angels does far excel the
love of men, because they are the blessed Spirits, attending day and night
before the Throne of God, to execute his Will and Pleausure, and specially to
protect his Elect; now as the only object of their love is God, who is the
perfection of Beauty and Goodness, their love must of necessity be more
excellent then the love of the reasonable creatures: fifthly, The love of God
toward mankind, for excellency is so superlative over the love of men and
Angels, that it will admit of no comparison, his being infinite and theirs
finite, and therefore I will desist to speak of it at this present: for the
Love I am to speak of, is the love of Interest, and the love of Friendship.

Fourthly, The end and Interest of men's Love is of a large extent: for many do
seem to love such that can prefer them, to the enjoyment of honors, riches, and
pleasures: but the Love grounded upon these sandy foundations, is but a fained
and mercenary love: Sejanus the Favorite of the Emperor, See Tacitus,
Suetonius, and Dion.
Tiberius was adored as the morning Sun is by the Indians, by the greatest
Senators and men of war of the Empire, as long as he was in favor and could
prefer his Clients to places of honor or gain, but as soon as he fell in
disgrace, they became his greatest persecutors. Haman the Favorite of King
Ahasuerus was worshipped by the Officers that sat at the Kings gate, Mordecai
only excepted, but when he fell into disgrace, these very Officers informed
the King that he had erected a gibbit of fifty cubits to hang up Esther 3.2.
and 7.9.
Mordecai; upon which information the King commanded, they should instantly
hang Haman upon the same gibbit, and having readily performed this command, the
said men pillaged his house and rich movables. If Love be grounded upon
Beauty, it cannot be of any continuance; what is more subject to accidents then
Beauty? the Measles, the small Pox, or old Age, will disfigure the greatest
Beauty. But the love of true friendship, having no other object then the virtue
and merit of the beloved party remains permenant, and rather increases then
diminishes by age. But some will object, Many in these days that profess to be
our greatest friends, are our greatest enemies, how shall we then be able to
distinguish these counterfeit friends from the real: They may be discerned by
these evidences: first, if they rejoice when thou rejoycest, and mourn when
thou mournest, not in show but in heart: secondly, If they are as serviceable
in thy adversity as in thy prosperity, for if they respect thee in prosperity,
and reject thee in thy poverty, they are but fained friends: thirdly, If they
are as easily invited to a simple Meal, as to a great Banquet, for there are
too many Table-friends in these days: if they love those thou love, and hate
those thou hate, for otherwise their affections do not sympathize with thine,
and there can be no true love where an antipathy of affections raigns: fifthly,
If the defamation of thy honor, or good name be as tender unto them as it is to
thee; and whether they will be as apt to vindicate the same when opportunity
serve as thou will, for otherwise thou can not be dear unto them, who make no
account of thy infamy: sixthly, If they take in good part thy reproofs, and
acknowledge them to proceed from thy love to them, rather then from a censorious
austerity: many other Evidences might be given, but these shall serve for
brevity sake.

Fifthly, the qualities required in men to obtain Love are numerous; for
Aristotle in his Phys. makes mention of fifteen, and yet there be many more,
but Piety, Virtue, Goodness and Beauty are four of the principal: first, Piety
draws the love of God as the Adamant stone draws the Needle; and such as are
honored with the love of God are blessed, and need not fear the hatred of men,
For if God be with us, who shall be against us? secondly, Virtue is such a
Jewel, that all men and women that are endowed with Virtue are never without
lovers, nay, their very enemies love them: Tilligny for his rare Virtues was
rescued from death by his greatest enemies at the massacre of Paris: thirdly,
See the French History in the life of Charis the ninth.
Goodness is a dependency of Piety and Virtue; for goodness is to them as the
shadow is to the body, and therefore it is never without lovers: fourthly,
Beauty, although it be but a fading gift of Nature, has notwithstanding more
lovers then any of the former, for men are bewitched by the rays of Beauty;
the comeliness and beauty of Absalom ensnared the love of David unto him, and
although he had neither Piety, nor Virtue, it made him cry out Sam. 18.33.
O Absalom, Absalom, Absalom my son, would to God I had died for thee: fifthly,
such as execute unpartial Justice are beloved of all men, as Aristides and
Fabritius: sixthly, Valor makes men to be beloved, if they employ the same for
to free their Native Country from oppression, as Jepthy and Gedion: seventhly,
Liberal men are beloved, as Mecaenas was of all the learned men of his time:
eighthly, Grateful men are beloved, for ingratitude is abhorred of God and men,
for the very bruit beasts are grateful to their benefactors, witness the
gratitude of the Lion toward the Roman Slave, who saved his life for curing of
his paw: See Livius in his 1. Decade.
ninthly, Peacemakers are beloved, as Mamercus was for reconciling the People
with the Patricians: tenthly, Godly and Religious men that constantly stand to
their Principles, are beloved, as Athanasius, for although he was exiled diverse
times, yet was he ever protected, and found friends wheresoever he came:
eleventhly, Merciful men are beloved, See the History of France.
as Caesar was for his clemency: twelfthly, The cherishers of Learning are
beloved, as was Francis the first, King of France: thirteenthly, Men of a
sweet, pleasant, and complying conversation are beloved, as Ephestion was of
Alexander: fourteenthly, Men free from dissimulation, who speak what they think
to be good for their native Country are beloved, See Tacitus.
as Tracia was in Vespasians days: fifteenthly, Men love courteous and
serviceable men that are ready to befriend them upon all occasions, and by this
Absalom 2 Samuel 15.6.
stole the hearts of the people of Israel from his father. Diverse other
qualities might be produced which abstract Love from others, but these shall
serve for this time.

Sixthly, The effects of Love are either Good or Bad, according to the end of
it, for if the end of men's Love be Good, the effects of it are always
comfortable; but if the end of their Love is to satisfy their lust, it is
always destructive and fatal; and so proved the love of Genesis 34.2.
Sechem to Dinah, and the love 2 Samuel 13.14, 28. Homers Illiades. Livius Decade
1. lib. 2.
of Amnon to his sister Tamar, and the rape of Helen by Paris was the cause of
the ruin of Troy: the Rape of Lucretia by Tarquinus, was the cause that Rome
from a Monarchy fell into a Democracy: the violence committed by the Judge.
19.25.
Gibeathites to the Levit's Concubine, was the cause of the death of forty
thousand Israelites, and almost of the utter ruin of the whole Tribe of
Benjamin; and the love of Antonius to Cleopatra was the cause of their
lamentable end; but since a volume would not contain all the examples that might
be produced of the evil effects of lust, varnished over with the name of Love:
I will now speak of the effects of true Love: first, See Plutarch in the two
young Graccus lives.
The love of Tiberius Graccus toward his virtuous wife Cornelia was such, as
he slew the male Serpeut, and spared the femall, on purpose that he might save
her life by the loss of his own: secondly, The love of Antonio Perez's wife to
him was such, as she ventured her own life to save his: See the Spainsh History
in the reign of Philip the second.
thirdly, The love of Portia, daughter to famous Cato, and wife to Martius
Brutus, was so vehement and passionate, that being informed of his death at the
battle of Philippi, See B^utus life in Appian.
she smothered her self by casting a handful of burning coals into her mouth:
fourthly, The love of Artemisa Queen of Caria toward her beloved husband
Mausolus, was so violent, that being dead, See Plutarchs Morals.
it could not suffer his body to have any other grave then her own bowels, for
she caused the same to be burned, and drank a portion of his ashes at every
meal in commemoration of their constant love: See the Italian History.
fifthly, The love of an Italian Gentleman to his betrothed Mistress is to be
commended, for hearing she had been taken at sea by some Pirates of Tunis, and
sold for a Slave, he went over into Africa, and redeemed her with an incredible
sum of money: sixthly, The incredible love and fidelity of Damon and Pythias,
two Sicilian Noble men is to be admired; for Dionysius the Elder, King, or
Tyrant of Syracuse, having upon some jealousy of state, caused Damon to be
cast into prison, and to be condemned to death, Damon presented a petition unto
him, desiring to have leave for eight days to go into the Country to set his
household in order, See old Dionisius life.
promising to return; Dionysius granted the same, upon this condition, that
some other Noble man of his means and degree, should bail him body for body,
and life for life, and should remain in durance until the day appointed for
his return: Pythias his intimate friend bailed him of his free accord, and
yields himself prisoner in Damons stead; but the day being come, and almost the
hour appointed at hand, and Damon not appearing; Dionysius began to deride
Pythias for his credulity of the constancy of his friend, yet before the hour
went out, Damon came in and presented himself to the King, desiring his friend
might be discharged; at whose love, fidelity and constancy; Dionysius was so
astonished, that he set them both at liberty, and required to be accepted for
the third of their society; yet all these admirable effects of Love are as much
inferior to the Love of God toward man, as the finite is inferior to the
infinite, as it will appear by the ensuing Discourse.

Seventhly, The Love of God toward men is altogether incomprehensible, as it
will appear by these expressions of the blessed Spirit, For God, says St. John
Ioh. 3.6.
so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish but have eternal life: and Christ says
himself, Ioh. 10.10.
That he is the good Shepherd, who has given his life for his sheep: And St.
John says, 1 Ioh 4 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14
Beloved, let us love one another, for love comes of God, and every man that
loves is born of God: he that loves not knows not God, for God is Love. In
this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only
begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love,
not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the
propitiation for our sins: Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love
one another: no man has seen God at any time; if we love one another God
dwells in us, and his love is perfected in us: hereby know we that we dwell
in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his spirit. And we have seen,
and do testify, that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the world.
These words of St. John, and diverse others to the later end of this Chapter do
confirm the Point, that Gods Love is the Adamant stone that draws our love to
him, and that we cannot of our selves love him before he be pleased to love us.

Eighthly, As for the love of man toward God, it comes infinitely short of
Gods love toward them; for if any love God, it is a gift of his free grace,
and God has loved his elect before the creation of the world; and St. Paul,
Romans 9.13
does give us a clear instance for it, Romans 9.13. For God, says he, loved
Jacob, and hated Esau from their mothers womb: and the heart of 1 Samuel 13.14.
David was framed after Gods own heart, and that is the reason why this holy
man has such rare expressions in his Psalms of his unfeigned love toward God.
And to confirm the choice and election of Gods faithful ones, we have diverse
instances of it in his Word: for Moses Numb. 16.5.
was a chosen servant of the Lord, as it appears by these words; Even him whom
he has chosen will he cause to come near unto him. And Aaron Deuteronomy. 18.5.
was a chosen servant of the Lord, as appears, Deuteronomy. 18.5. And Cyrus King of
Persia, Isai. 44.28.
was a chosen servant of the Lord, to execute his will, as it appears Isai.
44.28. And St. Paul Act. 9.15.
was a chosen vessel of the Lord, as it appears, Act 9.15. But the Lord said
unto him, Go thy way, for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name fore
the Gentiles and Kings, and the children of Israel: Now this incomparable love
of God toward St. Paul in converting of him, to become from a persecutor, one
of the greatest instruments of Gods glory that ever was, did kindle in his
breast such a flame of fervent love toward God, Phil. 1.23.
that he often desired to be dissolved and to be with Christ, and wished Romans 9
3.
himself accursed from Christ for the increase of Gods glory, confirming our
blessed Saviors saying, Luke 7.47.
For he loves much to whom much is forgiven, as appeared by Mary Magdalen: And
the Prophet David, 2 Samuel 12.13.
who after the pardon of his two abhorred sins of Adultery and Murder, did so
fervently love God, that all his delight was to meditate Psalm. 1.1, 2.
day and night in his Law, and to magnify his love toward him, Psalm. 18.1.
Psalm. 116.12.
as it appears in the 18. Psaim, ver. 1. I will love thee, O Lord my strength:
and in Psalm. 116. ver. 1. I love the Lord because he has heard my voice and my
supplications; because he has inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call
upon him as long as I live. To conclude, Carnal love is but vanity and vexation
of spirit, but the love of God toward man, and the love of man toward God,
does fill their hearts with joy and comfort fort in this life, and will crown
their soul with eternal glory in the life to come.

CHAP. VII.
Of the vanity of the passion of Hatred.

THis Passion is the opposite of Love, and yet without Love and it nature could
not be perfect, nor the world subsist; for if the divine Providence were not
pleased to make use of the Natural aversion that is between the Elements, this
universal Fabric of the World would soon return to its first Chaos: And
without this passion of Hatred men might justly complain of Nature, to have
only given them an inclination to pursue the good, and not an aversion to
eschew the evil. Diverse men conceive this passion to be the greatest Antagonist
of mankind, and repute it as a Monster in Nature, but it is out of ignorance,
and for want of divine knowledge, for all the handy works of God were created
perfectly good, as the blessed Spirit does confirm it by these words: And God
saw every thing that he had made, Genesis 1.31.
and behold it was very good; but since the fall and disobedience of Adam, men
have abused the good that was in the creatures, and by a pernicious
transmutation have made those which were created for their good, to be the
Agents of their corrupt inclinations. And would they make use of Hatred for the
end it was created, they would find it a most useful passion for the
propagation of a godly life, as it will appear at the end of this Chapter: but
for the better description of this passion, I entreat the Reader to observe
these ensuing particulars as they are set in order.

1. The definition of Hatred. 2. How many sorts there are. 3. The Causes of it
4. Who are most addicted to it. 5. The nature and bad effects of it. 6. The use
that may be made of it.
First for the better description of the nature of this passion, I will set
down diverse definitions of it, according to the different opinions of the best
Authors. Hatred is an aversion and a detestation or horror, that men have
against all such things as they conceive in their imagination to be contrary to
their good, and opposite to their content. The Bishop of Marseilles, page 175.
Or Hatred is a detestation or horror of the sensitive appetite against such
things as it conceives to be hurtful and distastful to the Senses, and to its
content, or destructive to its Being; even as the Hatred or antipathy there is
naturally between the Sheep and the Woolf. As Love, says another, is a certain
sympathy of the Sensitive appetite with such things as are suitable and
convenient to Nature; even so Hatred is an antipathy of the Sensitive appetite
against such things as are distastful to the Senses, or contrary to men's good,
or destructive to their Being. And as Love is of two sorts, viz. The first,
True Love and Amity, Theophrast. Boju. in his Commentaries upon Aristotle's Phys.
called the love of Friendship: Secondly, Vicious Love, called Lust: so there
is two sorts of Hatred. viz. The hatred of Detestation or Horror: secondly, the
hatred of Enmity; the last being far inferior to the former; for to detest and
abhor, is the highest degree of Hatred. Senault says, That Hatred is nothing
else but a mere aversion in us, from whatsoever is contrary unto us; or an
antipathy of our appetite to a subject which displeases it: Senault, page 244.
all which definitions come near unto one and the same sense.

Secondly, The Moralists are of opinion, there is four sorts of Hatred: first,
The Vegetative: secondly, The Brute: thirdly, The Melancholic: fourthly, the
Humane: but the Divines add to these four the Spiritual Hatred, of which I
shall speak toward the later end of this Chapter: first, The Vegetative is
apparent in the Plants, as between the Cabbage and the Vine, and between the
Oak and the Ivy: secondly, The Brute, is to be seen between the Sheep and the
Woolf, between the Cock and the Lion, and between the Basilisk, the Panther,
and Mankind; See Plinius in his Natural History.
for the Naturalists say, That if a man see a Basilisk, that the Basilisk dies
by the glance of his eyes, but if the Basilisk see the man first, he falls down
dead: And it is Recorded, that the Panther does so detest and abhor man, out of
a natural hatred, that the Hunters that seek after him do commonly set the
Picture of a man against an Oak, and behind it their snares to catch him, for
he has no sooner discovered this Picture, but with a fierce violence he runs
toward it, and so is ensnared and taken: thirdly, The Melancholic Hatred is
not natural but accidental, for it does proceed from an Adust, or burned
Choler residing in the blood, but specially in the Mesentery veins, who cast
ill and virulent vapors up to the brain that begets Chimaeraes, and strange
phansies, that makes men sometimes abhor their Parents, nay, their Wives and
children: and this Melancholy begets such a hatred in Timon the Athenian
against mankind, See Plutarch in his Morals.
that he caused Gibbets to be erected and set up in his Garden, and proclaimed
through the streets of the City, That whosoever would come and hang themselves,
they might: fourthly, The Humane and Natural Hatred proceeds from an antipathy
of Affections that is between some men; and between men and women, as the
extraordinary antipathy which was between the affections of Mark Antonius, See
Plutarch in Marcus Antonius Life.
and Augustus Caesar; for which Antonius was advised by an Astrologian, that the
good Angel of Augustus would at last prevail over his; and the great antipathy
there was between Socrates and his wife, who had lived one with another live
Cats and Dogs, if the unparalled temperance of Socrates had not mitigated
their debates. And it is seen daily, that men hate the company of some other
men that never did them wrong, nor give them occasion of offense: and I have
known my self a man and a woman of good means, that had such an natural
aversion one against the other, that they were enforced to live asunder, and
yet neither of them could show a just cause; from whence this antipathy of
affections did proceed. There is another sort of Humane Hatred that is
accidental, but the description of it will be more proper in the next Discourse.

Thirdly, some of the accidental causes of the Hatred of men are these, for
they are so numerous that I cannot speak of them all: first, An inveterate
wrath, is oftentimes the cause of an everlasting Hatred, for when Wrath cannot
vindicate it self at the present, it becomes an incurable Hatred, because Wrath
is a sudden and fiery distemper of the Heart, which is but like a lightning if
it may freely vent it self; but if it be restrained in the breast, it becomes an
irreconcilable Hatred: It is a common saying, That Choleric men never sleep
upon their anger, and that it is but a flash that passes away; but if this
Choler has not some vent, it is changed into such a hatred, that all the
precepts of Philosophy can hardly extinguish the fire of it: secondly, One of
the greatest causes of Hatred is the denial of Love, or more properly of Lust;
the denial that Joseph gave to his Mistress, Genesis 39.17.20.
changed her love to a cruel hatred, for she caused him to be cast into a
dungeon, and in stead of imbracements, to be fettered with irons: thirdly,
Self-Love is an ordinary cause of Hatred; for such as are possessed with this
vanity, think themselves never sufficiently respected nor honored; and nothing
does sooner engender Hatred in men then misprision: fourthly, Calumnies and
false Reports that blemish a man's Fame and Reputation are cause of an
inveterate Hatred, for Honor is dearer to some men then their own lives, and
many have constantly endured all other injuries, that have been cast into great
distempers by Calumnies, which have also bred such a hatred in their hearts,
that they have shunned all familiarity with men, See Plutarch in his Life.
as it may appear in Tymolions Life: fifthly, The infidelity of men is often
the cause of men's hatred; for Confidence and Trust abused, is a great motive to
Hatred: and the reason why Hatred is so predominant in these days, is, that men
are so much addicted to betray the Trust that others have confidently deposed
in their hands, for like Weather-Cocks they change their friendship upon the
lest occasion of their friends disgrace, nay Religion it self, that should be
the greatest link, and the strongest bond to knit the fidelity of men together,
is as subject to mutation and change as the Winds, for look as the current of
the Times goes, these Camelions Religion is according to that which is most in
fashion: sixthly, Jealousies of Hate, and jealousies of Love are great
provokers to Hatred: The jealousies that the Turkish Janisaries did conceive,
See the Turkish History in his Life.
that their Emperor Osman would change his Militia, and remove the Seat of his
Empire from Constantinople to Damasco, begot such an implacable hatred in their
hearts, that they caused him to be strangled in the black Tower of
Constantinople: The jealousy that Mecaenas had conceived of the inconstancy of
his wife, did not only deprive him of sleep for three years together, but did
also engender such a hatred in his heart against women, that he ever after
abhorred the sight of them: And that is the reason why the hatred proceeding
from the jealousy of Love is held to be the most implacable.

Fourthly, Princes Favorites are addicted to Hatred, as it may appear by the
carriage of Haman the Agagite, toward Mordecai, Esther 3.2, 3.
because he did not worship him as the other Officers that sat at the King
Ahasuerus gate, and his hatred was so cruel, that conceiving Mordecai to be too
base an object for his hatred; he made suit to the King that all the Jews
living in his Dominions might be destroyed in one day: secondly, Envious men
are always addicted to Hatred, and upon the most unjust, and ridiculous
occasion that can be imagined, viz. for the prosperity of their intimate
friends, or next neighbors, whose good and welfare they are obliged by the
Commandments of God to prosecute with all their might; and yet the malice and
corruption of men's hearts is so vile, and so base, as to hate those who never
injured them, for no other reason but because God is pleased to bless them more
then they; exceeding in malice those murmuring laborers who envied at the
goodness and liberality of the Father of the Household that sent them into his
Vineyard: yet they had some color for their discontent, because they had born
the burden and heat of the day; but these have none at all, and therefore their
censure will undoubtedly be greater at the last day, then that which was given
to these Laborers, viz. Matthew 20.11, 12, 13, 14.15.
Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? Is thine eye evil
because I am good? thirdly, Effeminate and vicious Princes are addicted to
Hatred: It is recorded by Dion, that as the Emperor Commodus was riding over
the stone bridge that crosses the River of Tiber at Rome, he saw six noble
Gentlemen, who were discoursing together upon the bridge, and having sent for
them, he inquired of what they discoursed, they answered, they were talking of
the noble Acts, and virtuous Parts of his father Mark Aurelius, See Dion in his
Life.
whereupon he commanded that they should instantly be cast into the River,
saying, They could not speak well of his father but they thought ill of him:
Such a hatred did this effeminate and cruel Emperor bear to the Virtue of his
deceased father; and it is daily seen in this age, that the base and profane
People does hate extremely virtuous and religious men: fourthly, Ambitious and
high Aspiring men are much addicted to Hatred, for they hate mortally their
competitors, and all their abettors, witness the irreconcilable hatred that was
between Marius and Sylla, See Plutarch in their Lives.
and their adherents; and the horrid hatred that was between Antonius
Caracalla, and his brother Geta, See Herodion in their lives.
that did at last transport Antonius with such rage, that he slew his brother
in his mothers arms: fifthly, The common people are addicted to hate the
Favorites of Princes, because they conceive them to be the cause of all the
burden that are laid upon their backs, I mean Lones, Subsidies, Taxes, and
Monopolies: fifthly, The wicked are addicted to Hatred, 1 Cor. 4.13.
for they hate implacably the Just and the Righteous, and hold them as the
offscouring of all things.

Fifthly, the nature and effects of Hatred in the unregenerate are nothing else
but murders, ruin, and desolation: first, Hatred provoked Genesis 4.8.
Cain to kill his brother Abel, and this hatred did proceed from Envy, because
his sacrifice was rejected of the Lord, and the sacrifice of his brother was
accepted: secondly, Hatred provoked Simeon and Levy Genesis 34.25, 26.
to murder (under the vail of Religion) all the Shechemites, and to plunder
their City: thirdly, Hatred and the desire of Vengeance provoked 2. Sam. 13.29.
Absalom to murder (under color of friendship and hospitality) his brother
Amnon at a banquet as he set at table: fourthly, It was Hatred that provoked
men to invent all manner of Weapons to destroy themselves; and the devilish Art
of making Canons, Gunpowder, Muskets, Calivers, Carabines, and Pistols; whereby
the most valiant are as soon slain as the greatest cowards: fifthly, It was
Hatred that provoked men to dive into the bowels of the earth to find out
Mines of Silver and Gold, whereby they might execute their hatred, spleen and
malice, and set all the world together by the ears: sixthly, Hatred has given
men an habit in all manner of impiety, who have left by it their natural
humanity, and are become devouring Lions and Tigers; Nay, when open violence
cannot serve to execute their hatred, they have an art to poison men in their
meat and drink, by the smelling of a pair of gloves, The Queen of Navarr was
poisoned by the smell of a pair of Gloves.
by the putting on of a shirt, or by the drawing off a pair of Boots; nay, by
the very taking of a man by the hand under color of courtesy, as the Genovais
Admiral did to the Venetians Admiral, after he had been overcome by him at sea.
In a word, Hatred has been the projector of all the horrid actions of men; for
it is a passion that deprives men of all Reason and Judgment, and has bin the
cause of all the woes of men; for by the hatred of Satan, was our first mother
Eve Genesis 3.6.
deluded, and by her charms she deluded Adam her husband, and so by their
transgression sin is come into the world; and sin, like a contagious disease
has infected the whole race of mankind. Moreover, Hatred is of a permanent
nature, for it is not like Envy or Wrath, for Envy declines according as the
prosperity of its object does diminish, and Wrath vanishes into smoke, if its
fury may have some vent, or it may be mitigated, For a soft answer turns away
wrath, says Solomon Pro. 15.1.
; but Hatred continues from generation to generation, and death it self cannot
extinguish Hatred. Amilcar, father to Hanibal, out of an inveterate hatred he
bore to the Roman Commonwealth, See Livius and Plutarch.
made Hanibal to take an Oath a little before his death, that he should be to
the end of his life a mortal enemy to the Romans; and the hatred that Henry the
seventh, King of England, bore to the House of York, induced him to make his
son Henry the eight, to swear, as he was upon his bed of death, that after his
decease, that he would cause the Duke of Suffolks head to be cut off, that was
then his prisoner in the Tower of London as being the last apparent hair of the
House of York; an Unchristian part, says Montagnes, See Montagnes Essais.
for a Prince to have his heart filled with hatred at his departure out of this
world: Nay, the unparalled hatred that was between the two brethren Eteocles
and Polinices, could not be extinguished after their death, for after they had
slain one another in a Duel, See Garnier in the Tragedy of Antigone.
or single Combat, their bodies being brought together to be burned, the fire,
by an admirable antipathy did cleave of it self into two parts, and so divided
their bodies that their ashes might not be mixed together: and the inveterate
hatred that was between the Guelfs and Gibbelins, See Guiechardine in the wars
of Italy. Paulus Jovius in his Tragical Relations.
did continue from one generation to another. But Paulus Jovius relates the
most unheard of cruelty proceeding from an inveterated hatred that ever was
read of: Two Italians having had some bickerings together, such a hatred was
bred in their hearts, that one of them having got his enemy at an advantage,
made him by threats deny his Savior, promising to save his life if he did it,
but he had no sooner by imprecations impiously denied him, but the other
stabbed him through the heart with his Poniard, saying, The death of thy body
had not been an object worthy of my hatred and vindication, except I had also
procured the eternal death of thy soul: An horrid and unparrallel'd cruelty,
and a matchless effect of hatred!

Sixthly, Having thus described the evil nature and effects of Hatred; I will
now come to the use that Christians should make of it. I remember to have said
in the beginning of this Chapter; that this passion of Hatred had not been
given to men to abuse it as they do, but rather to eschew sin, the greatest
evil upon earth, and that being used as an aversion to fly from sin, it would
serve for a strong motive to the propagations of a godly life; for sin should
be the only object of men's hatred, as the efficient cause of all their
miseries; and why our blessed Savior out of his tender compassions toward his
Elect, was willing to suffer the ignominous death of the Cross, Matthew. 27.35.
to redeem them from the guilt and punishment of sin which was eternal death;
And men cannot by any other means show themselves grateful, and to be sensible
of this incompre hensible love of Christ, then by having an inveterate hatred
against sin, and to detest and abhor with all their hearts all sinful courses,
since sin is the only separation wall that bars them from having an intimate
and loving familiarity with God: for the hatred of sin, is the first step to
attain to the love of God, and without the love of God, a true faith in Christ,
and unfeigned hatred of sin, there is no possibility of salvation; hatred
against sin being the chiefest ingredient required in a true Repentance: and
how can men love God that hate their brethren? and therefore the blessed Spirit
in holy Writ, does so often exhort men to avoid all hatred, except it be
against sin; He that Ioh 3 14. 1 Ioh. 3.15.
loves not his brother, says St. John, abides in death; and whosoever hates
his brother is a murderer; and ye know no murderer has eternal life. Men must
then love God and their brethren, and hate sin; I hate every false way: Psalm.
119.104.
I hate vain thoughts, but I love thy Law says the Prophet David: And again, I
hate and abhor Psalm 119.163
lying, but thy Law do I love: Do I not hate them, O Lord, Psalm. 139.21, 22.
that hate thee? and am not I grieved with those that rise against thee? I hate
them with a perfect hatred, I account them my enemies. The fear of the Lord,
Pro. 8.13.
says Solomon, is to hate evil. Pride and arrogance, and the freward mouth do
I hate: Hate the evil and love the good, Amos 5.15
says the Prophet Amos. To conclude with the Apostle St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2.
Let us lay aside all malice, hatred, env e, and hypopocrisies, and all evil
speaking: as new born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may
grow thereby, etc.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the vanity of the passion of desire.

AS the billows of the Sea roll one after another till they break themselves
into foam against the clifts or rocks of the adjacent shores; even so the
desires of men drive away one another till they vanish away into the smok,
because the objects of their desires are for the greater part but vanity; for
not one man of a thousand does fix his desires upon the right object, that can
satisfy his desires, and fill his heart with joy and content; and although
men's desires be as free as their thoughts; for the greatest Tyrants have no
power over them, yet there is an Eagle eye above, who searches the reins, that
knows their desires as well as their thoughts. Men should therefore be very
cautious in their desires, since they proceed from the concupiscible appetite,
and are properly called Cupidity, and in plain English Coveteousness; and how
dangerous it is to desire or covet any thing prohibited in the Law of God, I
leave it to the judgment of the Reader; since in the Interpretation of our
blessed Savior, who was the best Interpretor of the Law that ever was upon
earth, He that coveteth a woman to lust after her, has already committed
adultery with her. If evil desires then be so criminal, men should be very wary
how they fix their desires, for they have a hand in all their passions, Senault
in his use of passions, page 273.
either to furnish them with weapons, or with strength to afflict them. And
among all the rest of the passions, there is not any which has more branches,
proceeding from one and the same root then this passion of Desire; for if all
the desires of men were limited by their objects, the number of passions
proceeding from the general passion of Desire would be as numerous as a Swarm
of Bees. I have already spoken of three of its branches, viz. first, Of the
desire of worldly honors: secondly, of the desire of worldly riches: thirdly,
Of the desire of worldly pleasures: the first being the passion of Ambition;
the second, the passion of Av^rice; the third the passion of Volupty: And now I
shall speak of the fourth branch, called Cupidity, which is of greater
concernment then any; and therefore give me leave, for the better description
of it, to speak of these particulars in order.

1. Of the definition of men's desires. 2. Of the two essential causes of them.
3. Of their effects and proprieties. 4. Of the comfort that proceeds from the
spiritual desires.
First, All the desires of men may be reduced to these two heads or comprised
under Necessary, and Superfluous: The Necessary are limited, but the
Superfluous have no bounds, because they cannot be numbered: And this is the
most approved definition of men's desires: Desire is nothing else but a passion
that men have to attain to some good which they possess not, which they
conceive to be convenient for them; The Bishop of Marsulles page 206.
And not withstanding men's desires are commonly fixed upon objects that seem
good, but are really evil, because the Senses delude their Imagination, and
oftentimes their Reasion and Judgment: Now the passion of Desire differs not
only from the passion of Love, but also from the passion of Delight, because
Love is the first motion or passion that entice (...) to prosecute the good,
The definition f^nens desires.
whether it be present or absent; but the desire is a passion that enduceth men
to prosecute the good that is absent; and the passion of Delight is only a
sweet content of the possession of the good, See Senault, page 27.
after men have obtained the same. Senault says. That the passion of Desire is
nothing else but the motion of the soul toward a good which she already
loves, but does not as yet possess; whereby it appears, that men's desires are
ordinarily fixed upon uncertainties, and that is the reason why I said
formerly, they often vanish into smoke.

Secondly, The two most essential causes of men's Desires, The impotency of men,
is a cause of their desires.
is their Impotency, and Discontentedness: for God who is Omnipotent has no
Desires, and in the fruition of his blessed and glorious presence is the end of
men's desires: And suppose he had desires, yet the end of them would be his own
incomprehensible Beauty and Goodness: If God does but Will, he has the
enjoyment of his Desire, as it is apparent in Genesis 1.3.
Genesis, And God said, or God willed, Let there be light, and there was light.
But it is not so with the greatest Monarchs in the world, for through their
impotency, they are enforced to desire, and their wishes and desires all are
oftentimes rejected by him who is alsufficient to grant them the enjoyment of
their desires: See Plutarch in A^^randers lite.
Alexander the Great was the greatest Monarch upon earth, and yet his wishes
and desires, nay the prayers he made to his Idols, or imaginary gods, for the
recovery of his dear and beloved Ephestion were rejected, and these desires did
manifest his impotency. See Suetonius in Augustus life.
Augustus Caesar was the greatest Monarch in the world, he wished and desired,
that the overthrow given to his Legions in Germany might be vindicated, and out
of impatiency of the performance of his desire, he often like a mad man stamped
with his feet upon the ground, Crying out, Varro, Varro, give me my Legions
again; and yet in his life time he did never obtain his desire: It appears then
that the impotency of men in the most eminent, is a cause of their desires: The
discontentedness of men is a cause of their desires.
secondly, the discontentedness of men in their Station and Calling, is the
cause of many fond desires, for there is not one of a hundred that is contented
with his condition, because there are but few Diogenes in these days that are
contented with a Tub to keep them free from the injuries of the air, See
Plutarch in his Morals.
or with a wooden-bowl to take their meat and drink, or refuse as he did the
great offers of such a Prince as Alexander was; for being demanded by Alexander
as he sat in the Sun, what he did desire he should do for him, Nothing, said
he, but that you should go out of my Sun, because he shaded him from the Sun in
a cold day. But their discontentedness breeds in them swarms of desires, and
makes them build Castles in the air; and yet is daily seen that our own wishes
and desires, and the wishes and desires of our intimate friends do most
commonly prove fatal unto us.

Thirdly, The proprieties and effects of men's desires change according to the
good and evil nature of their objects, and of their moderation, or distemper;
for the necessary desires of men, who are for the greater part harmless and
innocent, become vicious if they be violent and irregular, which makes men's
condition to be worse then that of the unreasonable creatures, for they have
also natural and necessary desires, or rather natural inclinations as well as
men, but they are moderate in the greatest part; for the Oxen, The propriety of
natural desires.
Horses, and Sheep have a natural and necessary desire to their food; but when
they have grased sufficiently to satisfy their hunger, they lie down and rest
themselves, bounding their desires with that measure and quantity of food as
does satisfy Nature: but men whom God has endued with Reason, whereby they
might better then they, moderate their desires, give them neither bounds nor
limits, many of them eating and drinking more then will suffice Nature, and by
their exorbitant distemper, are oftentimes enforced (to ease Nature) to vomit
up what they have eaten and drunk: Likewise the brute creatures are satisfied
with the clothing that Nature has bestowed on them; the beast of the field
with their Wool or Hair, and the fowls of the air with their Feathers, but men
are not contented with their natural skins, nor with woollen Cloth to keep them
from cold, and from the injuries of the Meteors of the air, but their desires
long after vain and superfluous garments of silk, and cloth of Silver and Gold,
although the Indians are as healthful that go naked, as they who go gorgeously
apparalled: and Montagnes records, See Montagnes Essais.
That a French Beggar, went for many years together stark naked through the
streets of Paris, having only a linen cloth before his privy members, How
men's desires are multiplied.
and when out of pity men gave him their old apparel, he sold them away, and
said that Custom made him prefer the clothing that Nature had given him to all
other. Moreover, the Foxes and Conies are contented with their holes, the
Tvgers and Lions with their dens, and the Sheep, Horses, and horned Beasts with
the shelter of Bushes and Hedges; but men are not contented now adays with
Cabins made of Boughs, of Reeds, or Flags, as many of the Indians are, or with
thatched Houses as their forefathers were, but they must have Palaces, and
stately Houses of a most exquisite and excellent Structure: And these and many
other like things do multiply their desires, and do vex and disquiet their
minds in these very things which should be free from vanity: but one of the
c^^efest proprieties of the superfluous desires, is, Pro. 3.16.
That they are insatiable, and harder to be satisfied, says Solomon, then the
Horsleech, the Grave, the Barren Womb, the Earth that is not filled with water,
and the fire that says not, it is enough: and daily experience does show, that
if one desire be obtained, that seven will succeed in his place, and that they
are properly the Hydras heads, who the Poets feign, that when one was cut off
seven came in its stead; even so, the greater success men have in their
desires, the more they multiply them; for the quintessence of all the most
excellent creatures under the Sun cannot satisfy the desires and cupidity of
men. The properties of the superfluous desires of men.
Alexander the Great having conquered the greater part of the world, did
inquire if there were any more worlds then one, his ambitious Cupidity being
not satisfied with the conquest of this world, but aspired to the conquest of
another. And Caesar having conquered the lower Asia, Africa, and Europe in three
years, his desire was not satisfied, but aspired to conquer also the Hyrcanians
and Parthians inhabiting in the furthest parts of the upper Asia: 1. Of their
Insatiableness.
So insatiable are the desires of glory. Likewise Cresus the King of Lydia had
heaped up unparalled treasures, yet could not they satisfy the Cupidity of
his desires to increase his riches, but he undertook a war against Cyrus to
augment them by the conquest of Jonia, the richest Province that was then in
Asia: but this desire proved fatal unto him, 2. That honor, riches, nor
pleasures can satisfy men's desires.
for he lost his own Kingdom, and all his treasures, and had lost his life,
without the mercy and clemency of Cyrus. Cresus also was the richest man that
ever was at Rome, and yet his wealth could not satisfy his Cupidity, but
longing still after more, he lost his life in the prosecution of the increase
of them: neither can carnal pleasures satisfy the lascivious desires of men,
as it does appear in the effeminate lives of Sardanapalus, Tilegnius, Nero, and
Heliogabalus, but rather cast them into the abhorred delights against Nature,
and from rational men, makes them become more brutish then beasts. 3. Of the
swiftness and inconstancy of men's desires.
Another propriety of men's superfluous desires, is, that they are swifter, and
more inconstant then the winds, for they have the same agility as the
thoughts, who are here and there at an instant by the working of the
imagination, and more fickle in the prosecution of their objects then the
winds, for one object be it never so beautiful or pleasant, cannot detain them
long, but it becomes distastful and odious unto them, and by this they are
enticed to seek after another, which they suppose to be more excellent then the
former, when it is oftentimes more deformed, and of less worth, because men's
desires delight most in Novelties, 4. The extravagancy of men's desires.
and variety of changes. The next propriety of men's desires is their
Extravagancy, being rather guided by Fancy, then by Reason, for they desire
commonly such things as are most opposite, and contrary to their own good, and
the welfare of their souls and bodies; for in their diet they love and desire
to eat of such things as are most contrary to the preservation of their health;
and in their actions they desire, and take more delight in those which are more
opposite to the salvation of their souls, their desires being more violent
after the pleasures of the flesh, then zealous or fervent after the ways of a
godly life; so that men's desires and inclinations are ever more addicted, and
fixed upon the evil then upon the good, except the nature and propriety of
them be changed by divine Grace. The effects of men's desires.
As for the effects of men's desires, they are, as I have said before, Good of
Evil, according to their objects; but since it has been proved that they are
commonly fixed upon evil objects, their effects must of necessity be rather
evil then good: If the honors of this world be their object, the fruits and
effects of Adhbition is the desolation of Kingdoms, the shedding of innocent
blood, and the miseries that follow civil and intestine wars: If their object
be the riches of this world, their effects are carking cares, moiling and
toyling, and vexation of mind in their acquisition, and fears and
apprehensions in their keeping, and grief and sorrow in the losing of them. If
the pleasures of this world be their object, the effects will be the wasting of
their means, the impairing of their health, and the indangering of their souls.
But if the object of their desires be the glory of God, then their effects will
be comfort in this life, and eternal bliss in the life to come; The fruition of
Gods presence, is the only object that can satisfy the desires of men.
So that upon the good or bad election of the objects of men's desires, depends
their happiness or woe in this life, and their torment or glory in the life to
come: It behooves men therefore to be wary upon what objects they fix their
desires, since there is not any thing under the Sun that can satisfy them; for
if all the excellency of the creatures were abstracted into one, yet it could
not satisfy the desires of men, sich their soul is a spark of the divine
essence that can never be free of the anxiety and perturbations of mind, that
proceed from the inconstancy, and restlesness of men's desires, till by grace it
does enjoy the sight of the glorious presence of God, the original Spring of
it, who is the fullness and perfection of all bliss, for that object only can
satisfy the wishes and desires of their souls.

Fourthly, The comforts that Christians may receive in this life of their godly
desires are many, as it shall appear when I have persuaded them to endeavor to
banish from their mind the swarms of vain desires, that disquiet the
tranquillity of their souls, which may be done by these means: first, To hate
and abhor all carnal desires, for as long as they have a predominancy in their
souls, it is impossible for them to have a feeling of the comforts proceeding
from the spiritual desires: for the flesh having the mastery over the spirit,
it keeps these effects under hatches. Allusion upon the 19. Psalm. ver. 9, 10.
But if men desire the sear of God, and prefer his Statutes and Judgments
before the refined gold, and hold them sweeter then honey, or the honey comb,
they will by degrees obtain the dominion over their carnal desires: The second
means is to endeavor to obtain a contented mind, for discontentedness is the
cause of the extravagancy of men's desires, But godliness 1 Timothy 6.6.
with contentment, says St. Paul, is great gain; for the daily discontent of
men makes them desire they know not what; but when they are contented with
their estate and condition in this life, Four means to contain men's desires
within their limits.
their desires aspire higher, and endeavor to attain to the supreme good, as
the only object of men's desires. The third means is to purify their hearts;
for as clean and pure streams cannot proceed from a foul and muddy Spring, even
so it is impossible that godly desires should spring from the hearts of men
except they be purified and sanctified by the Spirit of God; for as our blessed
Savior says, Matthew 15.19.
Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications,
etc. and these are the effects of men's desires, whose hearts are not purified
by grace, because the Concupiscible appetite resides in the heart; and this
appetite is the spring or root of all the desires of men. The fourth means is
for men to set a watchful Centry over their eyes; for by the eye men perceive
the objects, and the objects are the moving cause of men's desires and
Cupidities: by the eye King David saw the beauty of 2 Samuel 11. ver. 2.
Bathshebah, by which he was tempted to lust. Therefore men must make a
covenant with their eyes as Job did, Job 31.1.
for they are the windows whereby men's lascivious desires are conveied into
their hearts, and by these means, and the free grace of God, men will be able
to keep their desires within the limits prescribed in his Word, from which will
proceed; first, Six comforts proceeding from the spiritual desires of men.
A true and real contentment of mind, which cannot be obtained as long as
their vain desires do interrupt the peace of their souls; for being freed of
their extravagant desires of Cupidity, They may, as St. Paul says, be
contented with that they have, since Heb. 13.5.
God has promised that he will never leave nor forsake them: secondly, An
unspeakable inward joy: for being free from the continual vexation proceeding
from the irregularity of their desires, whereby they have more liberty to beat
the ways of righteousness, and make their 2 Pet. 1.10.
calling and election sure, from which they were distracted by their worldly
desires: thirdly, A far greater consolation, by the familiar communion they
will have with their gracious God, then they had before, At whose right hand,
says the Prophet David, Psalm. 16.11.
there are pleasures for evermore: fourthly, A fervent desire to walk in the
ways of righteousness, and to seek the Lord in the night, and in the morning, as
the Prophet Isaiah says, Isa. 26.9.
With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea, with my spirit within me
will I seek thee early: fifthly, A certain assurance that their desires shall
be granted, since they have banished their former vain, and extravagant desires,
as Solomon says, Pro. 10.24.
The fear of the wicked shall come upon him, but the desire of the righteous
shall be granted: sixthly; A hunger and thirst after righteousness, whereby
they shall be in love with all righteous duties, and be induced to Psalm. 1.2.
meditate day and night in the Law of God; and by their constant habit in the
ways of true piety, they shall be made partakers of this blessing of our
blessed, Savior Matthew. 5 6.
Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they
shall be filled, viz. with incredible joy, and unspeakable comfort. It is then
apparent that worldly desires are but mere vanity and vexation of spirit, and
that there is no true comfort but in the Spiritual, etc.

CHAP. IX.
Of the vanity of the passion of Flight, or Eschewing.

GOd out of his infinite love to men, has been pleased to furnish them with
arms to oppose their greatest enemies, of which the passion of Cupidity is one
of the most implacable; for of all the passions it is the harder to be subdued,
because it is the most successful snare of Satan for the increase of his
kingdom of darkness; by it sin came first into the world, and has infected
like a contagious disease all the race of mankind; For by the eye, which is
the spring of men's desires, Eve seeing the fruit of the Tree of the Knowledge of
good and evil to be beautiful, she coveteth the same, as it appears by these
words; Genesis 3.6.
And when the woman saw that the tree was good, and that it was pleasant to the
eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof
and did eat, and gave of it also to her husband with her, and he did eat; and
so by her Cupidity, and Adams Credulity, men have been brought under the
bondage of sin. Now against this great enemy of mankind, God has been pleased
to arm them with this passion of Flight, the great Antagonist of all covetous
desires; that as he had given men an inclination to desire such things as
seemed good to their eyes and phansies, they might also have an aversion to fly
from such things as seemed to traverse their good and being, otherwise they
might have seen their enemies coming upon them, when they had no arms to defend
themselves, nor power to eschew or fly from their apparent danger, and had been
enforced to cherish vices, and sinful courses, because they could not eschew,
or fly from them, and to harbor a Guest whom they abhorred and detested. This
passion being then so useful to men, and specially for the propagation of a
godly life; give me leave for the better description of it, to speak in order
of these particulars.

1. Of the definition of Flight. 2. Of the objects of it. 3. Of the causes of
it. 4. Of its proprieties. 5. Of its effects. 6. Of the uses of it.
First, Flight or Eschewing is a passion, The definition of Flight.
or aversion, that induces men to avoid or fly from all things that seem to be
evil, or inconvenient to them, or that may traverse their good, and annihilate
their being. Flight is the cosen German of Hatred, for they have many
qualities alike, and is incident to the Concupiscible appetite, and the violent
enemy and great opposite to the passion of Cupidity, the spring of all covetous
desires: But men are to be cautious how they make use of this passion, or
aversion, for otherwise they may flee from such things as are good, instead to
eschew those things that are evil: for such is the depravation of this age;
that Virtues are called Vices, and Vices are varnished over with the names of
Virtues, and true and sincere Piety is called Hypocrisy, and real Hypocrisy
is termed godliness and Sanctity; They must then be as harmless as Doves, Matt.
10.16.
and as wise as Serpents to make use of this passion aright, and then they will
avoid and detest sin as the greatest of all evils, and love God, the perfection
of all good and happiness.

Secondly, The objects of Flight.
The chiefest objects of this passion, are the guilt and punishment, which are
often taken one for the other; some men taking the guilt for the punishment,
and the punishment for the guilt; but guilt is the greater of the two, because
the punishment is but an effect of the guilt, and without guilt there would be
no punishment; and yet because death is commonly comprised under the punishment
(for as St. Paul says, Rom 6.23.
The wages of sin is death) men most commonly strive to avoid and flee from the
punishment, and with great eagerness pursue the guilt: I mean, they run
cheerfully after sin, and fly with fear from the punishment, and so pervert the
use of this passion that was given unto them by their Maker, on purpose to flee
from sin, that draws with Cart-ropes the wrath and judgments of God upon all
Nations, and particuliar men that impenitently go on in their sins. Men
commonly fly from Serpents, Dragons, Lions and Tigers, and from the contagious
disease of the Plague, but they seldom flee from sin, although it be more
dangerous and destructive to their souls, then any of these things above
related can be to their bodies, for they can but deprive them of this temporal
life, but sin, without the special grace of God, will cast them body and soul
into the everlasting flames: and therefore let men fly from sin if they intend
to make a perfect use of this passion, and let them not (as our blessed Savior
says of Fear) Flee from them that can kill the body, Matt. 10.28.
but are not able to kill the soul.

Thirdly, The causes of Flight are so numerous, The causes of Flight.
that they would be over-tedious to relate, I will therefore speak but of some
of them: first, Men if they could, would fly from death, because death is a
most horrid thing, specially to the Reprobate; and Nature does hate and eschew
all things that may annihilate its being: secondly, Fear is an ordinary cause
of Flight, for many great Armies have fled upon a panick fear, as Titus Livius
Records in his Decades: but there be Instances for it in the holy Scriptures,
as it appears, 2 Kings, Chap. 7. Verse. 6. When the Lord made the host of the
Assyrians to hear a noise of chariots, 2 Kings 7.6.
and a noise of horses, even the noise of a great host, and so raised their
siege from Samaria, and fled away, leaving their tents full of riches, and all
manner of provisions: thirdly, The Prophet Jonah fled from the presence of the
Lord, Jonah 1.3. and Cha. 4.3.
not to avoid evil, but to commit evil, in disobeying the Commandment of the
Lord, because he knew that God was a gracious and merciful God, slow to anger,
and of great kindness. A great weakness in a Prophet to be passionate and
angry, because God was pleased to be merciful to the Ninevites, and a greater
infirmity to flee to Tarshish from the Lord, because he was assured that God
would repent of the evil intended against them upon the sight of their
repentance: fourthly, Absalom fled from the presence of his father King David,
2 Samuel 13.28.
after he had slain his brother Amnon at a Banquet under color of love and
hospitality, and went to Geshur, and was there three years till his fathers
wrath was appeased: fifthly, Jeroboam the son of Nebat, 1 King 11.40.
fled from the presence of Solomon, went into Egypt, and staid there with
Shishak King of Egypt till after Salomons death; for Solomon sought to kill
Jeroboam, because he had been informed that the Prophet Ahijah had anointed him
King over Israel: sixthly, Joseph the supposed father of our blessed Savior,
and the Virgin Mary, Matthew. 2.12.
with the Child Christ Jesus were commanded by an Angel of God to flee into
Egypt, for fear that Herod would seek after the young child to destroy him,
whereby it appears, that the cause of men's flight does commonly proceed from
the fear of death, and not to avoid sin: But if men to avoid lust would flee
from their beloved object, Genesis 39.12.
as Joseph did fly from his lewd Mistress, out of fear to offend the Lord, it
were the only way to quench their lascivious desires; for in the passion of
true love, between parties of unequal degree, there is not any better remedy to
assuage and extinguish the flames of love, then to make the Lovers to absent
themselves one from another at a far distance, and for some continuance of
time, for since the dropping of a gutter does in continuance of time, blot out
any characters graven upon a Marble stone; there is more probability that the
impression of that object of beauty has made in the imaginaon of men or women,
will sooner be worn out, with a long absence, and it is daily seen, that the
last object of a beauty drives out of men's minds the former impressions of
another beauty: and daily experience does show, that to appease wrath, the
only remedy is to flee from, or to eschew the presence of him that is
transported with that passion, for the cause being taken away the effects
cease; so the object being removed, which did cause the distemper in the soul,
the passion by degrees does vanish away.

Fourthly, The proprieties of Flight are as numerous as the causes of it, and
there is as great a similitude between Hatred and Flight, The proprieties of
Flight.
as there is between Love and Desire: first, it seems to fly from evil, and
does aim at the good: secondly, Flight in outward appearance seems to be a
coward, and yet it is as generous as the Desire; for to fly from sin is a
greater valor then to fight in the field with a valiant enemy: Since it cannot
be denied, that he that has the mastery over his own passions, and can
mortify the cupidities of his desires, is a greater conqueror then Caesar:
thirdly, As the Desire calls Hope to its aid when it cannot obtain that which
is difficult, so Flight calls to its aid Fear and Hatred, that it may with
swifter wings fly from the evil that is overpowerful: fourthly, As the desire
is a sign of indigence, poverty and want, so Flight is an evidence of
Impatiency and Imbecility; and as men obtain by the prosecution of their
desires, such things as they want, so men by flight free themselves of those
things they most abhor and detest: fifthly, The propriety of Desire is to open
and dilate the heart, to make the same more eager after the prosecution of the
good it aims at; so Flight shrinks up the heart, and debars sin from coming in
to it: sixthly, As men by the means of the Desire enjoy and possess the good,
even so men by the help of Flight preserve themselves from evil. In a word,
Desire and Flight are the two Champions of Love and Hatred.
Desire and Flight are the two faithful Champions of Love and Hatred; for as
Love cannot execute any generous achievement without the aid of the Desire, so
Hatred cannot perform any noble exploit, without the help of Flight.

Fifthly, the effects of Flight, The effects of Flight.
tend either to the preservation of the body, or of the soul; I will then first
speak of that of the body, and acquaint you, that all horrid and terrible
things that may procure the annihilation of men's being, or deprive them from
the good they aim at, inticeth this passion, either to eschew or fly from them.
1 Samuel 18.11. and 19.10.
It moved David to avoid the Javelin that Saul threw at him, with an intent to
smite him even to the wall, but David fled and escaped: again, when he was
informed by Jonathan, that Saul his father did seek after his life, then he
fled again to Nob, to Ahimelech the Priest; and diverse other times when he was
in danger, he fled from the presence of Saul and all to preserve his life. And
St. Paul being at Damascus, and hearing that the Jews had set wait for his
life, and. watched the gates day and night to kill him, Act. 9.23, 24
the disciples took him by night and let him down by the wall in a basket,
preserving his life by his flight. It appears then by these two Instances, that
the effects of Flight tend specially to the preservation of men's being; and
when they fly from sin, to the prevention of the danger of their souls: for
they have no better remedy, as it has been said already, to free themselves
from lust, and from all lascivious desires, then to flee from the objects that
engender the same. But why they fly sooner from the punishment of evil, then
from the guilt of sin, I will hear enlarge my self, and entreat the Reader to
take notice, that it is only the natural men, that do so much abhor the
punishment, Why men fly from the punishment, rather then from the guilt of sin.
and are so eager to preserve the guilt, for the true children of God do more
detest the guilt then the punishment, for they know the punishment of sin is as
inseparable from the guilt, as the shadow is from the body, and they fear more
to offend their gracious God, then the punishment of sin: but the wicked who
have their portion in this life are afraid of the punishment more then of the
guilt, because their supreme good is in this life, which punishment seems to
interrupt; but the children of God carry their Cross, and have nothing but
disgraces, trouble, and vexations in this life, and expect their supreme bliss
and happiness will be in the world to come, and are confident and assured, that
the corrections and punishments, that God inflicts upon them because of their
sins, are but so many evidences that their heavenly Father does love, and has
a care of them, and so do adore the arm, and kiss the hand of God that is
pleased to chastise them, For whom the Lord loves, says St. Paul, Heb. 12.6.
he chasteneth and scourges every son whom he receives; but the wicked murmur
at the least corrections they receive from the hand of God, and say with the
two men that were possessed with evil spirits, Matthew. 8.29.
What have we to do with thee? art thou come to torment us before the time? for
so they enjoy the pleasures of this life, they care not what will become of
them in the world to come, being of this mind, That one bird in the hand is
better then two in the bush. But to return from whence this digression brought
me: one of the chiefest effects of Flight, is, that it is the protector of
Women's and Virgins Chastity, and makes young men free themselves from vicious
and debausht company, which they are to flee from, as from a contagious Air, or
from the sight of a Serpent, for ill company are Satan's Panders, and the
corrupters of youth, and as men cannot handle Pitch without soiling their
hands, so young folk cannot haunt ill company without they blemish their
reputation, and defile their manners, nor remain in their innocence, for they
are the Schools of Sin, and sin draws the wrath of God upon men, from whose
wrath it is impossible to flee, as the Prophet David says, Whether shall I go
from thy Spirit? Psalm. 139.7, 8, 9, 10.
or whether shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into heaven, thou
art there: If I make my bed in bell, behold thou (...) there; If I take the
wings of the morning and dwell in the utmost parts of the sea, even there shall
thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me. Now since it is so, that sin
draws upon men the wrath of God, that cannot be eschewed nor avoided, because
it is a consuming fire; For a fire, says Moses, is kindled in his anger, Deuteronomy.
32.22.
and shall burn unto the lowest hell, and shall consume the earth and set on
fire the foundations of the mountains; how careful should they then be to
eschew, and fly from sin?

Sixthly, The use that men should make of this passion of Flight, should be to
flee from all appearance of evil, as well as from sin, and not transfer their
own sins upon others as Adam did upon Eve, The woman, says he to the Lord,
Genesis 3.12.
whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the Tree, and I did eat. Much
less to charge and accuse men of sins, of which they are most guilty
themselves, for this kind of sin is altogether in fashion in these days;
neither must men make conscience of one sin, and make none of another; some
will make scruple to swear, but they will make no account to lie a hundred
times in a day, so they may with these lies delude their brethren, and attain
to their own ends. Others will forbear to eat Fish upon a Friday, but will make
no account of drabbing and whoring; others will flee from one sin, and will run
eagerly after another. In a word, there never was an age more addicted to
painting then this, for the most notorious sins are so varnished and painted
over, that men take Vices for Virtues: And that is the reason why I said in the
beginning of this Chapter, that men should be cautious how they make use of
this passion, for fear they flee from the good in lieu to eschew the evil, or
get an habit of aversion against the good, in stead to have it against the
evil: but if this passion of Flight be applied against its right object, it
will prove to be of great efficacy to the propagation of a godly life, for it
is impossible to love and affect the good unfainedly, before men have obtained
a strong aversion against the evil; and therefore to attain to that blessed
condition that the Prophet David speaks of in the first Psalm, they must flee
from all manner of conversation with the wicked, Blessed is the man that walks
not in the counsel of the ungodly, Psalm. 1.1, 2.
nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful,
but his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he meditate day
and night. Pro. 4.18.
And Solomon secondeth him thus; Enter not in the path of the wicked, and go
not in the way of evil men, avoid it, and pass not by it, turn from it and pass
away; This triple gradation of Solomon shows with a great Emphasie, how
necessary it is for men to flee from the conversation of wicked men, and from
all appearance of sin; and yet there are too many that add sin to sin, and so
fall under this censure of the Prophet Isaiah, Isai. 31.3.
Woe to the rebellious children, says the Lord, that take counsel, but not of
me, and that cover with a covering, but not of my Spirit, that they may add sin
to sin. To conclude, It is apparent that the passion of Flight, except it be to
flee from sin, is but vanity, for Gods wrath can over-take and find out (as it
has been showed) impenitent sinners wheresoever they flee.

CHAP. X.
Of the vanity of the passion of worldly joy.

AS Laughter is an expression of Joy, so Weeping is an evidence of Sorrow; but
these two proprieties, are only peculiar to mankind: because the Ape that
seems to laugh, does but grin; and the Crocodile that seems to weep, does
but moan: for Joy and Sorrow are affections of the mind, and therefore the
unreasonable creatures are incapable of them: Notwithstanding, some Moralists
conceive, that the passion of Joy, and the passion of Delight, which the French
call Delectation, is but one and the same passion, which cannot certainly be:
because Delight is common to men and beast, so is not Joy, for Delight proceeds
from the pleasures of the Senses, and Joy from the contentedness of the mind;
and our blessed Savior while he was upon earth, showed that these affections
did reside in him, as it may appear by these words, Joh. 15.11.
These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and that
your joy might be full: this confirms his affection of Joy, and these will
verify his affection of Sorrow; Ioh. 11.33, 34.
When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping which came
with her, he groaned in the Spirit, and was troubled, and said, Where have ye
laid him? They say unto him, Lord, come and see. Jesus wept. Now Christ being
the purity it self, it is impossible he should have had any affections
proceeding from the Senses: And therefore it is certain that Joy and Delight
are two distinct passions. This sweet and comfortable passion of Joy was given
to the reasonable creatures by their gracious and merciful Creator, for to
sweeten and temper the bitterness of their Sorrows, that come upon them as
thick as a storm of Hail, under the burden of which, they would undoubtedly
have fainted, if God had not been pleased to afford them this cordial of Joy:
for although Joy be pleasant to Nature, yet it is a mere stranger to it; but
Sorrow which she abhors, is her constant guest, and for one dram of joy that
men have in their life time, they have a pound of Sorrow, yet because Joy is
the comforter of men's lives (for without it they could not subsist) observe for
your better information of the qualities of it, these particulars.

1. The definition of Joy. 2. The causes of it. 3. The proprieties of it. 4.
Its effects. 5. The bad and good use of it. 6. The excellency of spiritual Joy.
First, There are two different sorts of Joy, the one is Worldly, and the other
Spiritual; the last is a rapture or ravishment of the Soul, by an intimate
familiarity that true Christians have with their gracious God, by
contemplation, meditation, or fervent prayers: The first is a sudden and
violent motion of the heart, that causes a great alteration in the body, The
definition of Joy. See Theuphrast. Boju. in his Commentaties upon Aristotle
Phys. fol. 727.
proceeding in the opinion of the Moralists from the possession or fight of
some object much desired; which is really good, or reputed to be so by the
imagination of men; yet it will appear by the proprieties and effects of it,
that it does not always come from the possession or enjoyment of a beloved
object, or from an imaginary good, but sometimes from relations, scurrilous
speeches, ridiculous postures, and deformedobjects: for Joy is, as I have said
before, an affection of the mind, and is rather infused in the Heart, by the
Eye, and by the Ear, then by any of the other three Senses; for those are more
proper to the passion of Volupty, of which Delight or Delectation is a branch;
however it is the fifth passion incident to the Concupiscible appetite, and
proceeds from diverse causes, as it will appear in the next Discourse.

Secondly, The causes of worldly joy, are either Public or Private: the
Public proceed commonly from the immediate hand of God, or from his favor, or
by his permission, and of these I shall speak in the first place: first, It was
a great cause of public joy, proceeding from the immediate hand of God to the
people of Israel presently after their coming out of Egypt, to see the sea go
back, Exodus 14.21. to 31.
and make a free passage for their host, to pass through the midst of it, and
when they were all safe come to dry land, to see the rolling waves of the sea
to turn back and overwhelm Pharaoh and all his Army: secondly, It was a cause
of public Joy, when it pleased the Lord to deliver the people of the Jews,
from that bloody decree obtained by Haman from the great King Ahasuerus against
the whole Nation of the Jews, Esther 3.4.
The causes of public joy.
that were scattered through the one hundred and seven and twenty Provinces of
the said Kings Dominions; for which admirable deliverance the people of Israel
made the 15th. and 16th. day of the month Adar, days of Thanksgiving, and of
Feasting and Rejoicing, from one generation to the other, which were called the
days of Purim: See the Spanish and Turkish History.
thirdly, It was the cause of public joy to the Venetians, and to all
Christendom, when God was pleased to give unto the Christian Fleet such a
memorable victory over the Turkish Navy at the Battle of Lepantho, for which
after thanks given to God, many days of Feasting and Rejoicing were kept at
Venice, and other parts of Christendom: fourthly, See Speed in the life of King
James.
It was an incredible cause of public joy for England, when the Lord was
pleased to deliver this Nation from the devilish plot of the Gunpouder
Treason, for which miraculous deliverance, after hearty thanks given to God,
great Feasting, Bond-fires, and other expressions of joy were made in London,
and through the whole Land.

1. It was a cause of private joy to the old Patriarch Jacob, to hear by the
report of his sons, that his beloved son Joseph, Genesis 45.26.
who he thought had been devoured by wild beasts, was chief Governor of Egypt,
and the next man in honor to the King. 2. It was a cause of private joy for old
Iesse, The causes of private joy. 1 Samuel 16.12.
to see his youngest son David from a Shepherd, to be promoted to be King of
all Israel, and specially to be reputed by God himself, to be a man after his
own heart. 3. It was a cause of private joy for old Mordecay, to see his Niece
Esther, Esther 2.16.
from a Captive to be exalted to be the wife of the great King Ahasuerus, and
the greatest Queen in the world. 4. It was a cause of incomprehensible joy to
the Virgin Mary, and to all mankind to hear the blessed and glad tidings that
the Angel Gabriel brought her from the Lord, saying, Behold, Luke 1.26.46.
thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shall call his
name Jesus: He shall be great, and shall be called the son of the Highest, and
the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David: whereupon the
Virgin Mary transported with joy, and ravished in spirit, sung some days after
this excellent Song, My soul does magnify the Lord, beginning at the forty
sixth Verse of the first Chap. of St. Luke. Here was a true and real Cause of
Spiritual Joy, not only for the Virgin Mary, but also for all the Elected of
God, who by free grace have part in the merits of Christ; By these Instances it
appears, that these causes of joy did proceed from the seeing and hearing,
which are the two Senses most proper to the passion of Joy. There are diverse
other Causes of worldly joy, which are not so well grounded as these, but are
most vain and ridiculous, and they are these following.

The joy of private and worldly men suits with their inclinations: first, The
Ambitious will rejoice in the increase of their honors: secondly, The Covetous
men in the abundance of their riches: thirdly, The causes of private men's joy.
The Voluptuous men will rejoice in the enjoyment of their pleasures: fourthly,
The Merchants and Tradesmen in the increase of their Trade: fifthly, The
Lawyers in the multiplicity of their Clients, and in the discord of their
neighbors: sixthly, The profane and Libertine in all manner of ridiculous
Sports, scurrilous Songs, lewd Music; Dancing, Valting, and in lascivious
Pictures, and Postures, and in Chambering, Gluttony and Drunkenness; and these
are the common and ordinary causes of the joy of worldly men, Let the Reader
judge then, whether carnal joy be not mere vanity, and vexation of Spirit: for
the great vanity of it moved Solomon to say, I said of laughter, Eccles. 2.2.
it is mad, and of mirth, what does it? and the very truth is, that men
transported with immoderate joy, are like fools and mad men.

Thirdly, The proprieties of worldly joy are these: first, Worldly joy is of
hot temper: secondly, It is of a dilative or spreading quality; and these two
proprieties are the cause that sudden joy does bereave men of life; for when
some beloved object, or glad tidings are unexpectedly represented to the eyes,
or ears of men, this causes a violent alteration in all the parts of the body,
but specially in the heart, by means of the hot, and dilative quality of this
passion of Joy, because the blood and the vital spirits that reside in it, are
with great violence driven from the inward parts to the extremity of the
members of the body, The proprieties of worldly joy.
whereby men's hearts are deprived of their natural heat, and of their vital
spirits, and so fall into a swoon; or if this motion be over-fierce and
violent, it does extinguish their life, as the snuff of a Candle goes out when
it has no more tallow to sustain its light: Now the heart who is the efficient
cause of life, being thus deprived of heat, loses its motion, upon which
depends the life of men; for the beating of the heart gives life and motion to
all the members of the body, and is congealed and frozen to death by this
sudden motion and privation, as water is congealed into Ice by a great frost:
and this may be confirmed by another violent action of men, of which many are
yet living that were eyewitnesses to it; Two English Footmen running a race
for a great wager from London to Kingston, did by their swift and violent
running, so drive their blood and vital spirits from the heart to the
extremest parts of their bodies, that their faces looked as black as their
hats; one of them obtained the victory, and out-ran the other about twenty
yards, and being joyful of his gain and honor presumed overmuch of his
strength, and did not use the means to preserve himself (as the other did, who
was much more distempered then he) whereby his blood and vital spirits, in
stead of returning to the heart, were congealed in the extreme parts of his
body by taking cold: which did deprive him of life within few hours after: but
the other putting on his apparel, and covering himself with a warm cloak,
prayed two of his fellows to walk him up and down till his blood and vital
spirits were settled again about his heart, A remarkable Relation.
and by this means he was as well the next morning as ever he was before; now
the motion of the blood being more violent by the inward distemper of the fiery
passion of Joy, then it can be by the motion of a long-continued race, it must
by consequence be more dangerous and mortal then the other: thirdly, As the
immoderate Joy has dangerous proprieties, the moderate joy has many good, for
moderate joy preserves and increases the health of the body: fourthly, It
gives a seemly and loving aspect, and a fresh color to the face: fifthly, It
makes men's company and conversation more pleasant and acceptable to all other
men: sixthly, It makes men more cheerful in their particular and general
calling, and pass their days through this vale of Tears with more alacrity and
content.

Fourthly, The effects of immoderate Joy would be incredible, The effects of
immoderate joy. See Livius in his third Decade, li. 3.
if they had not been recorded by approved and faithful Authors: first, A Roman
Lady, says Livius, died with joy at the sight of her son, whom she conceived
to have been slain at the battle of Cannae: secondly, The Author of the
Turkish History Records, See the Turkish History in the life of Achmath.
that Sinna Basha had but one son of great valor, who was taken prisoner in a
sea fight by a Venetian Galley, whereupon tidings were brought to Sinna his
father that he had been slain in that fight, because he had been wounded, but
by the care of the Captain of the Galley (who hoped to receive a great ransom
for him) he did recover, and his wounds were cured; and it happened some days
after, before the Venetian Galley could carry him to shore, that it was taken
at sea by Cicala Basha, a great friend of the abovesaid Sinnae, who finding
this prisoner of note in the Venetian Galley, was exceedingly joyful, as
knowing how grateful a present it would be to his friend; and therefore after
he had apparelled him with rich vestures, he sent him in a well-appointed
Galley, and with an honorable train to his father Sinna, that had lately been
made grand Vizier by Achmath, Emperor of the Turks, who was then at Caffa upon
the black sea; but this young man was no sooner come into his sight, but Sinna
transported with joy fell dead at his sons feet; whereby it appears that he who
had the power to bear with admirable constancy, the tidings of the death of his
only son, had not the power to moderate the joy that he did receive by his
unexpected return: thirdly, Theophrastus Boujou, records the names, and means
of a dozen more at least, who have died suddenly by the violent distemper of
immoderate joy, some by honors received, others for seeing their mortal enemy
ly wallowing in his own blood, See Boujou in his Commentary upon Aristotle,
lib. 19. ca. 39. fol. 835.
ready to give up the Ghost; and others by looking upon Pictures, which by
their ugly features enforced them to such an immoderate laughter as it did
deprive them of life; others for being victorious in the Olympian Sports; and
others in the field, as it is recorded of Epamonides, and of the Duke of Roan,
who died rather for joy of two great victories obtained against their enemies
in two pitched battles, then by their wounds.

Fifthly, The bad and good use of this passion of Joy, does only consist in
the not regulating, or in the regulating of it; for if Joy be let in to the
soul by degrees, the sting and venom of it is changed into an Antidote, and
does rather comfort Nature then destroy it; for as it is dangerous to open the
Floud-gates of a river suddenly, The bad and good use of worldly joy.
and all at once, for fear the violence of the water break down the banks, and
pull up the foundation of the sluice, even so it is dangerous to let in, into
the soul all at once, the swift current of good or evil tidings; therefore if
Cicala Basha had only at the first sent word to the Vizier Sinna, that he had
happily rescued his son, and that as soon as his wounds should be cured, he
would send him back unto him in an honorable condition, this had undoubtedly
prevented the death of this old man; but the sudden and unexpected sight of his
son, whom he thought to have been dead, caused so violent a perturbation in his
mind, and so great an alteration in the vital faculties of his body, that his
natural strength, being then in his declining age, was overcome with it, and
his life utterly extinguished, as the light of a candle is by a violent blast
of wind: But the Duke of Medina Coeli, who was General for Philip the second,
King of Spain, See the Spanish History in Philip the seconds life.
of the invincible Armado (as they termed it) that came against England, in the
Year 1588. did deal more prudently with his Prince, for his ship being the
first that arrived into Spain, after the utter rout of this great Navy, he sent
a discreet Messenger unto him, to inform him that some part of his Navy had
miscarried by foul weather, and that himself had been driven back by a storm;
and eight days after he sent another messenger to the King, informing him of
the particulars, and some days after came in person to give him an account of
his Journey, whereby he did prevent the evil effects, that such a loss might
have caused by a sudden impression in his Princes heart: therefore the
mitigation of the violence of the passions of Joy and Sorrow is of great use,
whereas if they be not moderated, they are dangerous and destructive: It may
then be collected by these discourses, that worldly joy is but mere vanity and
vexation of spirit, for as Job says, The triumphing of the wicked is short,
Job 20.5.
and the joy of the hypocrite is but for a moment.

The Spiritual Joy does as much excel the worldly Joy, as the Light does
Darkness, it ravisheth the soul, and fills it with unspeakable pleasures; the
nature of it is incomprehensible; neither can the superlative excellency of it
be expressed nor described by the Tongue nor Pen of men, for our blessed
Savior himself, says St. Paul, Heb. 12 2.
For the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the Shame,
and is set down at the right hand of God: and for, and by that joy, all the
Martyrs have despised the burning flames; nay, some have kissed the stakes
where they were to be burned, and their greatest torments seemed unto them when
they were upon the torturing racks, as if they had been upon a bed of roses.
The excellent effects of spiritual joy.
This joy is the true Or-potabily, which can, as Physicians feign, cure all
diseases for if a Christian has but a grain of this joy, the greatest
torments, and the greatest persecutions that ever were invented, and exercised
by the cruel and blood-thirsty Tyrants will not dant them, but they will bear
them with an incredible fortitude of spirit. And St. Paul to manifest the
excellency of spiritual joy, says in the fourteenth Chapter and the
seventeenth Verse of his Epistle to the Romans, That in Romans 14.17.
righteousness, peace and joy in the holy Ghost does consist the Kingdom of
God; And in all his Salutations and Wishes to the Churches and Saints, he
conjoyns Joy with Peace, Romans 15.13.
Now the God of Hope fill you with all joy and Peace in believing: And St. John
in his first Epistle, Chap. 1. and verse 4. making a relation of the excellent
Mysteries of eternal life manifested by the coming and incarnation of Christ,
concludes with these words, And these things write we unto you that 1 John 1.4.
your Joy may be full, intimating that men's joy cannot be full nor perfect but
in the meditation of the Mysteries of their salvation: And St. Peter in his
first Epistle, Chap. 1. verse. 8. speaking of the trial of the faith of the
true children of God, says; Whom having not seen, ye love, in whom though now
you see him not, 1 Pet. 1.8.
yet believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory: Sufficient
proofs that men's chiefest joy does consist in a true faith in Christ, and in
the delight they take in the reading and meditating on the Law of God: And that
is the reason that the Prophet David breaks out in this expression, Be glad in
the Lord, Psalm. 32.11.
and rejoice ye righteous, and shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart:
for this spiritual joy is only peculiar to the true children of God,
impenitent sinners being incapable of it: and therefore the Prophet David,
after his grievous sins of Adultery and Murder, feeling that this excellent joy
was departed from him, does earnestly entreat the Lord in the 51. Psalm, to
make him hear joy and Psalm. 51.8.
gladness, that the bones which thou have broken, says he, may rejoice: And
after a heavy burden of sorrow that he had carried in a penitent way, for these
abovesaid transgressions, which had in a manner broken his bones, and dried up
the marrow that was in them, he breaks out again with this expression, Restore
Psa 51.12.
unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit. To
conclude, Blessed are those who prefer the good and welfare of Psalm. 137.6.
Jerusalem above their chiefest joy: and unhappy are they that make worldly
joy, (that is nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit) their supreme good,
etc.

CHAP. XI.
Of the vanity of the passion of Dolor, or Sorrow.

SOme Moralists are of opinion, that Adam in the state of Innocence was free
from this passion of Dolor, and that it was after his Fall inflicted upon him
as a punishment for his disobedience against his Maker; because this passion is
so common to men, that it follows them at the heels, as the Spaniel does his
Master, their lives being but a continual succession of anguish, grief, and
sorrow, from their very Cradle to their Grave: Which unparalled misery could
not consist, say they, with that blessed condition in which man was created at
the first: yet I rather conceive, that all the passions that are at this
present incident to men, were in our first father in the time of his innocence;
and that God was pleased then to give him the power and ability to keep them
obedient and subordinate to his Will and Reason, which power was taken away
from him for his apostasy and presumptuous rebellion against the special charge
and Genesis 3.6, 7.
command given unto him by his Creator; and was not only deprived of this
power, but also of that royal Prerogative that God had given him over the
beasts of the Field, the fowls of the Air, and the fishes of the Sea; so that
ever since his Fall, his seed has had enemies within, and without, to punish
and correct them, for the transgression of their first Parents, and their own
actual sins, against their gracious God, who had created all things perfectly
Genesis 1.25.
good, and submitted the most fierce and cruel beasts of the Field, the
devouring fowls of the Air, and the monsters of the Sea to be subject and
subordinate to the will of man: But he having first of all rebelled against his
Maker, his own passions, and the bruit creatures by the just judgment of God
have also Genesis 3.18.
shaken off the obedience and respect they did ow unto him: yet the
unreasonable creatures are his meanest enemies, for by that small spark of
knowledge and divine Power and Majesty that is left in him, he does daily find
out means to curb their fury and rage, but wants power and ability to regulate
the exorbitant distemper of his own passions, of all which Dolor is one of the
most irksome. Now for the better description of it, I will speak of these
particulars in order.

1. Of the definition of Dolor. 2. Of the different sorts of it. 3. Of the
causes of it. 4. Of its nature and effects. 5. Of the remedies of it. 6. Of the
use of spiritual sorrow.
First, The Moralists are of different opinions, concerning the definition of
this passion of Dolor, under which is comprised, Anguish, Grief, and Sorrow,
some say it is a passion of the soul, proceeding from some sensible loss or
displeasure received; others say, it is a perturbation of the mind, and an
anguish of the body; others, that it is a passion afflicting the soul, by the
apprehension of present and future evils: but this last opinion seems to be
the best. The definition of Dolor according to the Bishop of Marseillis, page
302.
Dolor is a passion of the soul, proceeding from the dislike that men receive
from the objects represented to their imagination by their Senses, which are
averse, to their inclinations, and irksome to their bodies. Moreover, It is the
last passion incident to the Concupiscible appetite, and the root of diverse
other passions, and the great Antagonist of worldly Joy, because all carnal Joy
does end in Sorrow; there being none so pure, but it leaves in the soul a sting
of remorse and repentance: but Spiritual Sorrow is one of the greatest motives
that men have to induce them to beat with fervency the ways of righteousness,
For godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.10.
says St. Paul, works Repentance to salvation not to be repented of, but the
sorrow of the world works death.

Secondly, There are diverse sorts and degrees of Dolor, for the very word of
Dolor does signify Anguish, Grief, and Sorrow, and every one of these have
their degrees: Anguish does properly signify the Dolours, Pains, and Torments
of the Body, whether they be natural or accidental: and Grief does signify the
Dolor of the Mind; and Sorrow is an invetered grief of the Mind, which is by
long continuance turned into an habit of Sorrow: The first of these which is
Anguish, has a secret reflection to the Sensitive appetite of the soul, by
means of the communion there is between it and the senses; yet the seat of
Anguish is in the body: or in some of the members of it; but the seat of Grief
and Sorrow is in the Mind, The three different sorts of Dolor.
and this kind of Dolor is invisible to the eyes of men, because it is
intellectual, and has but little reflection to the body, except it become
excessive in degree: but when the grief of the mind is by long continuance
turned into an habit of Sorrow, then it has a great influence upon the body,
for by flow paces and degrees it consumes the body, the radical humor, and the
very marrow in the bones, and therefore the inveterate Sorrow is accounted the
worst Dolor of the three, because it is in a manner incurable, for it does
ordinarily reject all remedies that might ease and cure the same: as for
Anguish and Grief they are easily cured by removing of the cause of them; the
symtomes of the first being always visible and apparent by the paleness, or the
high color of the face, by the inflammation of the parts, by the distemper of
the pulse, or by the pains that are felt in any of the members of the body, to
which remedies may be applied by learned Physicians; and as for the grief of
the mind, which is recent and not yet inveterate, the cause being known by
such as frequent, or are familiar with the grieved and afflicted party; such
arguments and seasonable consolations may be used that they may stifle this
Cockatrice in the shell.

Thirdly, The causes of these three different sorts of Dolor may be reduced to
these Heads: first, To Public: secondly, To Private: thirdly, To Natural:
fourthly, To Accidental.

1. The Public causes of Sorrow should be more sensible to men then any other:
yet in these days they are not regarded, although there never was greater
cause: first, It was a cause of public sorrow to the People of Israel, when
they were informed of the cruel and bloody decree that Pharaoh King of Egypt
had made to cast all their male children into the River, Fxodws 1.22.
that the Hebrew Nation might by degrees be utterly destroyed: secondly, It was
a great cause of public sorrow, of weeping and lamentation for the whole
Nation of the Jews, Public causes of of sorrow.
when they were advertised that their good and religious King Josiah had been
mortally wounded in the battles fought in the Valley of Megiddo against Necho
King of Egypt, 2 Chronicles. 35.23.
and all their Army routed and defeated: thirdly, It was a great cause of
public lamentation and sorrow for the people of Israel, when they saw before
their eyes the Temple of the Lord to be burned, the City of Jerusalem to be
sacked, 2 Chronicles 36.19, 20.
and the rest of the people to be carried captives into Babylon, by the King
Nebuchadnezzar, for which great desolation the Prophet Jeremiah did wish that
his head were waters, Jer. 9.1.
and his eyes a fountain of tears that he might weep day and night for the
slain of the daughters of his people: fourthly, It was a great cause of public
sorrow for the people of the Jews that were scattered through the hundred and
twenty seven Provinces of the great King Ahasuerus dominions, Esther 3.12, 13,
14, 15.
when they were informed of the cruel decree that Haman their mortal enemy had
obtained to put them their wives and children to the sword, for which there was
great mourning, and lamentations in the said Provinces, but specially in the
City of Shushan.

2. It was a private cause of sorrow to the old Patriarch Jacob when he was
informed that his dear and beloved son Joseph had been slain and devoured by
wild beasts, Genesis 37.33.
although he was living, but had been sold by his brethren out of envy as a
slave to the Ishmaelites Merchants that were traveling down into Egypt:
secondly, Private causes of Sorraw.
It was a cause of private sorrow for King David to hear of the Rape of his
daughter Tamar, who was ravished by his own son Amnon: and again, of the murder
of the said Amnon committed by his darling son Absolon, 2 Samuel 13, 14, and 29.
in vindication of the Rape of his sister Tamar: thirdly, It was a cause of
private sorrow for King Jeroboam and his Queen to see the best of all their
children, Abijah, their elder son to be taken away by death in the flower of
his age, and the more, because it was by a judgment of God, 1 King. 14.12.
for the Idolatry of Jeroboam: fourthly, It was a cause of private sorrow for
the great Emperor Augustus Caesar, that his daughter Iulia by her impudicity was
banished, and that none of his grand children were thought worthy to succeed
him in the Empire, because of their vicious miscarriages, but was enforced to
adopt, See Tacitus and Suetonius in his life.
or elect Tiberius Nero his wives son, the worst of men, for his Successor in
the Empire.

3. The causes of dolor of the Mind.
The causes of Dolor or Sorrow of the Mind may be these: first, The privation
of the enjoyment of men's desires may be the cause of their sorrow, for Lovers,
Ambitious, and Covetous men are cast into strange fits of Melancholy and sorrow
if they be deprived of their Love, or of the honors and riches they aim at:
secondly, The carking cares that men usually take to increase their means, or
to preserve their lives and estates, is a cause of their sorrow: thirdly, The
fear that many men have to fall into penury is a common cause of their sorrow:
fourthly, The losses of men's goods, fame, or reputation, is a cause of their
sorrow, because they want the grace of patience, and cannot say with Job, Job
1.21.
The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord;
nor with the Prophet David, I will wash my hands in innocence: Psalm. 26.6.
fifthly, The loss of Parents, Wife, Children, or intimate Friends, is often
times the cause of men's sorrow; for want of the rememoration of this saying of
Solomon, Eccles. 3.20.
All are of the dust, and all shall return to dust again: sixthly, the vain
apprehensions that man have of the evil to come, is the cause of their sorrow,
because they rely not upon this gracious promise, All things work together for
good to them that love God: seventhly, Rom 8.28.
The want of courage in men is the cause of their sorrow, because like faint
hearted Pilots, they give over the Helm of the Ship in a storm; I mean, the
Helm of their Reason, whereby they might regulate the distempers of this
passion of Sorrow: eighthly, The fears that possess men for the punishment of
their sins, is a cause of their sorrow; whereas they should fear and grieve for
the guilt of sin, to attain to that spiritual Sorrow, which works repentance
to salvation.

The Natural causes of the Dolor and Anguish of the body may be these: first,
Long and tedious diseases, The natural causes of the Dolor and Anguish of the
body.
as the Stone in the Kidneys or Bladder, the Gravel, the Strangullion, the
Gout, the Cough, and consumption of the Lungs, or the Hectic Fever; for all
these in continuance of time by the secret communion that the senses have with
the sensitive power of the soul, do beget in the mind grief and sorrow;
besides the Dolor and Anguish of the body: secondly, The Adust or burnt Choler
or Bilis gathered in the Mesentery veins, which sends virulent vapors up
into the brain, is a natural cause of much sorrow.

4. The accidental causes of sorrow.
The accidental causes may be these: first when men themselves, or their
Parents, Children, or intimate Friends do accidentally come to their end, by
sea or by land, as to be murdered upon a Rode, or cast away at sea, or taken
captive by Pirates, or slain by a fall from a horse, or lamed by some other
accident; all these things are causes of sorrow and grief: yet none of these
natural, or accidental causes are or should be sufficient to breed sorrow to
men's mind, since nothing happens casually or accidentally, but is guided by the
hand of the divine Providence, to whose blessed will men are obliged to submit
themselves; and our blessed Savior does assure us, that the meanest Sparrow,
or an hair of our head, does not fall to the ground without the permission of
our heavenly Father.

Fourthly, The nature and effects of Sorrow, are directly contrary to the
nature and to the effects of Joy: first, The nature of Joy, is to dilate and
spread the blood, and the vital spirits that reside in it into the utmost parts
of the members of the body; but Sorrow being of a cold and dry nature, draws
the blood and vital spirits from the utmost parts of the body toward the heart
to comfort the same: secondly, Joy is hot and active, and by its sudden motion
indangers the life of men; The nature and the effects of Anguish, Grief, and
Sorrow.
but Sorrow is cold and slow, and comes upon men with leaden feet; and never
causes death, but by long continuance, and lingering diseases, except it cast
men into despair, as it does oftentimes, as it will be shown in the effects of
it: thirdly, Joy is proper and pleasant to Nature, and rejoices the heart, and
makes men cheerful in their Calling, both private and general, but Sorrow is
adverse and distasteful to Nature, and makes men slow and stupid in their
particular and general calling: fourthly, Joy preserves and increases health,
and lengtheneth men's days, and makes them pass their lives with mirth and
content; but Sorrow impairs men's health, and shortens their days, and makes
their lives to be tedious and irksome: In a word, moderate Joy is comfort to
man, and excessive Sorrow is the bane of man. And the effects of worldly Sorrow
are as bad or rather worse: first, Sorrow makes men flee the society of men,
nay the very light of the Sun, and all things that may rejoice and comfort
Nature, the sight of their dearest friends, nay, of their wife and children is
irksome to men that are possessed with excessive sorrow: secondly, See the Acts
and Monuments, or Book of Martyrs.
If men's Sorrow proceeds from men's Apostasy in Religion, it does commonly cast
them into despair, and inflicts upon them in this life the very pains of
hell, as it does appear in the life of Francisco Spira: thirdly, Sorrow tempts
carnal men to be rid of it, to desperate resolutions, as to bereave themselves
of life, by hanging, stabbing, and drowning of themselves, as it has lately
been seen in this City of London: fourthly, Sorrow makes men careless to make
their calling and election sure, and to neglect the means appointed by God for
their salvation, I mean, the hearing of the Word, with that attention as they
should; for their thoughts and cogitations are so fixed, upon the object of
their sorrow, that they mind nothing else; for this pernicious passion does
stupifie the most noble faculty of the soul, as the Memory, the Imagination,
and the Understanding. Diverse other effects might be produced, but these will
suffice to induce men to endeavor to eschew, or regulate this dangerous and
destructive passion.

Fifthly, The Remedies against the venom of this passion are, first, Natural;
secondly, Moral; thirdly, Spiritual. The Natural are, first, to flee as far as
men can from the object of their sorrow: secondly, If men's sorrow proceeds from
Natural infirmities; they are in the first place to call upon God; and then use
the Counsel of Physicians, for they must not do as Ahaziah King of Israel did,
2 Kings 1.2.
who being fallen from an upper Chamber through a Lattess, sent to the God of
Ekron, to know whether he should recover of his disease (as too many do in
these days, who send to Astronomers to know the events of things) not to the
Physician, 2 Chronicles. 16.12.
as Asa King of Judah did, who being diseased in his feet, sent to the
Physician, before he had called upon the Lord by prayer, for God is the
Paramount Physician, and the God of Nature and neither the Art of men, nor the
hidden Virtues of drugs and Simples, are of any effect without his blessing:
thirdly, the change of Air from bad to good, and the pleasent prospects of
green Medows, corn Fields, beautiful Gardens, The natural remedies against
Sorrow.
and odiferuos Flowers, rejoicing the Senses are remedies against Sorrow:
fourthly, Honest and godly Company, and moderate Exercises, as Walking,
Shooting and Bowling, divert and drive away Sorrow: fifthly, wholesome Diet, and
broth with Chickens and Mutton, Borage, Buglos, Marigolds and yellow Flowers,
with a cup or two of Claret Wine with Sugar, are excellent remedies against
Grief and Sorrow. The Moral remedies are Fortitude, Temperance, Constancy, and
Patience; for the use and practice of these Virtues are special antidotes
against the venom of Sorrow: I do not allow of the Stoics Constancy, The moral
remedies against Sorrow.
who would have their wise men to be insensible of anguish in the midst of the
greatest torments, nor to be sad for the loss of Parents, Wife, Children, or
intimate Friends, for this is rather a brutish stupidity then a true constancy;
Neither do I approve of an extreme dejectedness, or excessive sorrow for the
loss or deprivation of any thing that is dear unto men, but of a moderate
demonstration of the sinsibility required by Humanity and Christianity of such
a loss; for such as are truly wise are never transported with excessive Joy,
nor with extreme Sorrow for any thing which befalls them in prosperity or in
adversity, the medium temper being to be preferred before any extreme; as for
Fortitude, Temperance, and Constancy; I must acknowledge the Heathen have
out-gone in their Virtues the Christians in these days, The Pagans have outgone
the Christians in Moral Virtues.
as it may appear by the lives and actions of diverse of them, as of Aristides,
Phocion, Epamonides, Scevola, Regulus, Fabricius and Cato; but for true
Patience Christians have out-gone them, as it may appear in the Book of
Martyrs. Now because Patience is not only a moral Virtue, but also a divine
Grace; I will speak of it in the next Discourse, because

Sixthly, The Remedies I am to speak of have a coherence with the use of
Spiritual Sorrow; and the chiefest are these: first, Humility: secondly,
Fortitude: thirdly, Patience, for the pride of men's hearts is the essential
cause of all their sorrows; the other causes being but branches of it, The
spiritual remedies against Sorrow.
as the of loss Parents, Wife, Children, intimate Friends, Goods, Riches,
Honor, Reputation, and the Anguish and Pains of their natural infirmities. Now
if men endevor to obtain from God by fervent prayer these three graces, they
will be able to regulate their greatest sorrows: first, If they acknowledge with
all humility, that all things they have are the immediate gift of God, they
will have no occasion to be grieved, or to be sorrowful when God, who was, and
is the giver of them all, is pleased to take them away: And for instance, let
the Humility, Fortitude, and Patience of Job be their Pattern and President: Job
1.
he lost his dear children, all his goods and riches by four casual accidents;
(as men call them) and besides, Job 2.
the immediate hand of God was upon him to try and prove his patience; for
besides the sore Boiles that were upon his body, his wife, and intimate friends
that should have comforted him, did aggravate his grief; nay, as he says
himself, Job 6.4.
The Arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinks up my
spirit; the terrors of God do set themselves in array against me: and yet Satan
with all his temptations, nor by these losses, and bodily anguishes, could
never induce him to murmur against the Lord, nor cast him in a pit of excessive
Sorrow, being always supported by the confidence he had in the mercies of God,
and in the assurance that his Redeemer lives, Job 29.25.
and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth; besides, Humility
makes men to be contented in any condition, but Pride makes men fret and grieve
for the want of superfluous things: secondly, Fortitude makes men cast away all
timorous fears that beget sorrow, for men are apt to grieve and sorrow for
imaginary evils that they apprehend will come upon them (although there is no
probability they should befall them) as much as for those which they suffer: The
spiritual use of Sorrow.
Moreover, in Dolor and Anguish of the body; Fortitude gives men courage, and
makes them to regard them no more then a Flea-bite: Lastly, Patience mixed with
Hope, suffers all Griefs, Anguishes, sorrows, afflictions, tribulations, and
persecutions, as things that be of no continuance, for it teaches men to know,
That weeping Psalm. 30.5.
may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning; and that the sufferings
of this present time Romans 8.18.
are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us. The
first Use is, that men should not grieve, nor be sorrowful for any thing but
for sin, for sin indangereth the soul, which is more worth then all that a man
has; nay, men must not only be sorrowful for sin, but they must Zach. 12.10.
mourn for sin, as one mourns for his only son; Nay, men must not only
mourn for their sins, but their sins Psalm. 51.3.
must ever be before them, that they may say with the Prophet David, Hide thy
Psalm. 51.9.
face from my sins, and blot out mine iniquities; and they must continually
pray, Wash me Psalm. 51.2.
thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin: then shall all
worldly sorrow be bah shed away, and their mourning shall be turned into joy,
and they be made partakers of this blessing promised by our blessed Savior,
Blessed are they that Matt. 5.4.
mourn, for they shall be comforted. It appears then by these Discourses, that
worldly Sorrow is mere vanity and vexation of Spirit; and that godly Sorrow is
an introduction to a godly life, and by consequence, to Salvation, etc.

CHAP. XII.
Of the vanity of the passion of worldly Hope.

IF the greatest evil is nothing else but the privation of the greatest good,
how miserable should the lives of men be in their tedious Pilgrimage through
this vale of Tears, if they were deprived of Spiritual Hope? since it is their
greatest Comforter, and their chiefest Cordial against the anxieties of their
mind, and the anguish of their bodies, under the burden of which their hearts
would faint, if they were not supported and comforted by this Hope. And in this
as much as in any thing, is the incomprehensible wisdom of God visibly seen,
that he has been pleased to store men with Antidotes against all kind of
venoms and evils that might be destructive to them, and to their being; for
were it not for this passion of Hope, men upon the lest disgraces, afflictions,
tribulations, and persecutions of this world, would embrace all manner of
desperate resolutions, and make themselves away, to be rid of the continual
anguish, grief, and sorrow they are subject unto in this life. And I am
persuaded that the want that the Heathen had of this spiritual hope of the
eternal joy to come, was the cause that so many of them laid violent hands upon
themselves: for some to be free from the imperious insultations of their mortal
enemies, or disdaining out of a manly courage to be obliged for their lives to
their clemency, have ripped up their own bowels with their swords, See Plutarch
in Caesar and Catoes lives.
as Cato did, rather then he would fall alive into the hands of Caesar; and
others to be rid of the excessive grief and sorrow which did rack and torture
their souls for the loss of their beloved husbands, or intimate friends, have
drunk Poison, or stifled themselves with burning coals, as did Portia for her
dear husbands death, Martius Brutus. See Plutarch in Marcus Brutus life.
But Christians being supported by this spiritual Hope, and with an assurance
that all worldly disgraces and afflictions are not for continuance, but like
unto a vapor arising from the earth, which is suddenly annihilated by the beams
of the Sun, accounts these things unworthy to be regarded, in comparison of the
eternal joy and glory that is reserved in the highest heavens for such as
suffer with patience the crosses, and tribulations of this life for
righteousness sake. This passion being then of great use for all true
Christians, I will for the better descriptition of it, extend my Discourses on
these particulars.

1. On the Definition of worldly Hope. 2. On the Causes of it. 3. On the
Objects of it. 4. On its Proprieties. 5. On its Effects. 6. On the Excellency
of spiritual Hope.
First, There are diverse Definitions of Hope; some say it is but an
expectation of the good: The definition of worldly Hope.
others say, It is nothing but a confidence that men have that such things will
happen to them, which they have conceived in their imagination: The Bishop of
Marseillis page 500. Theophrastus, Bojou, page 723.
Others say, It is a passion of the soul, whereby upon the impression that men
have of some future good which is represented to their imagination by the
senses, as difficult to obtain; whereupon they addict themselves to an eager
prosecution of it, conceiving to be able of themselves to obtain the enjoyment
of the same. Hope, says another, is a motion of the soul, that inticeth men to
expect and seek after a good that is absent, in which they see some probability
to be obtained; and Senault agreeing with these two last Opinions, adds, that
there can be no real hope, except there be an apparent possibility it may be
obtained. Hope is then the first passion incident to the Irascible appetite, of
great use to men, if they fix their hope upon virtuous, or religious objects

Secondly, The causes that beget worldly Hope in the heart of carnal men; are
these: first, a continual prosperity in their understandings does puff up
their hearts with vain and deluding hopes that the same prosperity will still
continue, and accompany their designs to the end. See Plutarch in Pompejus life.
Pompejus the great was deluded by this hope, for relying overmuch in the
prosperous events he had formerly had in war (having never been foiled by any
of his enemies) he neglected to raise a sufficient Army to hinder Cesars coming
into Italy, as he was counseled to do by his intimate friends, but hoping on
his former prosperous success, he said unto them, If I do but stamp with my
feet upon the ground, soldiers will issue out of it in all parts of Italy to
side with me against Caesar; but this vain hope was the cause of his utter
overthrow, for he was enforced to forsake Italy to the mercy of Caesar, and to
fly beyond the seas, where his Army was defeated, and himself constrained to
save his life by shipping into Egypt, where he was basely murdered: secondly,
Might and Power does fill the hearts of carnal men with vain hopes; Xerxes King
of Persia relying upon his numerous Army of a million of men, hoped to overrun
Greece, See Plutarch in the life of Themistocles.
and to dry up the very rivers with the incredible number of his foot and
horse, but he was deluded in his hope, and in the straits of Thermopilae, his
whole Host was stopped and foiled by Leonidas King of Sparta, who had but three
hundred valiant Lacedaemonians with him, and presently after his invincible Navy
was utterly routed by Themistocles by the Island of Salamine, and he himself
enforced out of fear to fly into Asia with a great part of his Army: thirdly,
Youth, Strength, and a sanguin Complexion fills the hearts of young Gallants
with vain hopes, and makes them undertake things that seem impossible, See
Quintius Curtius in his Alexanders life.
as Alexander the Great did the Conquest of the greatest part of the world with
an inconsiderable Army of fouty thousand foot, and twenty thousand horses, in
comparison of five or six hundred thousand that Darius brought into the field;
and this passion of Hope was so predominant in him. that before he departed out
of Greece, he gave away to others his Patrimony estate, and reserved nothing
for himself, but the uncertain hope of the conquest of Asia. The natural
reasons why young, strong, and sanguin Complexions are more addicted to this
passion of Hope then others, are: Six causes of the worldly Hopes of men.
first, that they abound in spirits, for the Sanguin have more blood and
spirits then the Choleric, Phlegmatic, or Melancholic men: secondly, they
have time by their young age to prosecute the enjoyment of their hopes;
thirdly, they have strength and activity to overcome all difficulties that seem
to bar them from the enjoyment of their hopes, whereas ancient men are more
addicted to the passion of Fear then to Hope; Three reasons why young men are
more addicted to Hopes then ancient men.
first, Because their natural strength, and vital spirits are wasted with age;
secondly, because their long experience has made them more considerate then
young men; thirdly, because they have one foot in the grave, and have not time
to prosecute the enjoyment of their hopes, and are better acquainted with the
incertitude of the undertakings of men: fourthly, Men that are versed in the
affairs of the world, have their hearts filled with vain hopes, because they
think nothing impossible unto them, by reason that their long experience in the
affairs of this world has drawn them out of the snares of many perplexities:
fifthly, Men that have been diverse times in great dangers by Sea and by Land,
have their hearts filled with Hope when they fall into danger, hoping then to
avoid the same, as they have done formerly: sixthly, Men of undanted spirits,
have their hearts filled with vain hopes, because the passion of Undantedness
drives away all fears from their minds, yet these come oftentimes short of
their hopes; See the French Mercury.
for Baligny one of the most undanted spirits of the French Nation, who had
slain in Duel, or in single Combat seventeen valiant Gentlemen as any were in
France, was slain himself in the streets of Paris manfully by another
Gentleman, who was reputed but a Novice in the feats of Arms. Therefore men's
hopes are for the greater part of a deluding Nature, if they be not grounded
upon Reason and good Probabilities.

Thirdly, The Objects of the Hope of worldly men are these: first, Honors:
secondly, Riches: thirdly, Pleasures: fourthly, Self Ends, and Vainglory; for
all the hopes of carnal men are fixed upon one of these Objects, The vanity and
incenstancy of worldly honor.
and by consequence their hopes must be mere vanity and vexation of spirit:
first, Men that make Honors the Objects of their Hopes, will find them to be
grounded upon quicksand, for what is more subject to mutation and change then
worldly Honors? The Favorites of Princes are compared to Moucherons that grow
up in one night, Jonah 4.6, 7.
or to Jonahs Gourd that sprouted and grew to its perfection in one day, and by
a Worm was withered the next day, even so the honors of Favorites are taken
away in a moment; Esther 4, 2. and 7.10.
Hamon the Agagite was promoted on a sudden above all the Princes that were
with the great King Ahasuerus, but he lost in a moment his life and his Honors,
and suffered an ignominious death, for he was hanged on a Gibbet of fifty
cubits high. Sejanus likewise the Great Favorite of the Emperor Tiberius Nero,
See Tacitus in Tiberius life.
was raised to the greatest honors of the Roman Empire, but in a moment he was
degraded of all his Honors, and dragged like a dog through the streets of the
City of Rome; See the French History.
and of late years the Marquess d'Auere of a Groom was promoted to the greatest
Honors of the Crown of France, but in an instant he was pistoled by the command
of the King, Lewis the thirteenth, and having been buried in a Church near to
the Kings Palace, his body was taken out of the grave by the common people the
next day, The vanity and mutability of worldly Riches.
and dragged up and down the streets of the City of Paris, and afterward
hacked in pieces, burned, and his ashes cast into Seine. Therefore men's hopes
that are fixed upon worldly Honors have a very sandy foundation: secondly, If
men's Hopes be fixed upon Riches, they are as ill grounded, for what is more
fickle then Riches, that make themselves wings and flee away? Prove 23.5. See
Herodotus in the life of Cyrus.
Cressus King of Lydia, lost all his incredible Treasures and his Kingdoms in a
day; and Crassus the richest Roman that ever was, See Plutarch in Crassus life.
lost his life and his unparalled riches by endeavoring to increase them:
Riches are then a tottering foundation for men's hopes: thirdly, if men's Hopes
be fixed upon worldly pleasures, they are of less continuance then the fire of
thorns under a Pot, for carnal pleasures seem tedious in the continuance, The
vanity of worldly Pleasures.
and men's estates will be sooner wasted, and their bodies consumed by loathsome
diseases, then they will besatisfied with carnal pleasures: fourthly, Although
Self Ends, and Vainglory are the ordinary objects of the Hopes of the most
generous spirits, yet Vainglory is but a mere shadow; and for Self Ends it is
contemptible and base; for moral Hope which inticeth men to generous actions,
cannot be pure if it be not free from Self Ends, and vain ostentation; The
vanity of Self Ends, and vainglory.
and notwithstanding, if the most heroical actions of the ancient and modern
Worthies, both in Arms, and in learning, were well examined, few will be found,
that were acted merely for the love of Virtue, or the public good, but were
mixed with Self Ends, and Vainglory: for the Conquests of Alexander and of
Caesar, and of a hundred more, were to increase their fame and Dominions. And
the learned Works of Aristotle, of Plate, of Demosthenes, of Cicero, of Seneca,
of Salust, and of many more, were written as much to perpetuate their memory,
as for the love of Virtue, or of the Public good. Men's Hopes must then have a
more excellent object, and a more solid foundation then these before related,
or they will prove to be but mere vanity and vexation of spirit.

Fourthly, The nature and proprieties of this passion of worldly Hope are
these: first, Although all worldly Hope is of an earthly nature, because of its
corruptible and transitory objects, yet it has a propriety of agility, for it
is as swift as the thoughts and desire of men, for in an instant of time men's
Hope may be here, in France, in Spain, in Turkey, or any where, where men have
commerce or trading, The nature and probabilities of worldly Hopes.
acquaintance, or intimate friends: secondly, The worldy Hope of men is as
inconstant as the Winds, for sometimes it is fixed upon Honors, other times
upon Riches, and again upon Pleasures, or upon this undertaking, or this other
design, and alters according to men's fancies and imaginations: thirdly, the
worldly Hope of men is ordinarily void of Prudence, for it is extravagant, and
oftentimes ridiculous, because it does not take his measures and distances
aright, I mean, in fixing their Hopes upon impossibilities, which is the reason
that so many are deluded in their Hopes; diverse unreasonable creatures having
by a natural sagacity a better aim then they: for the Lions, the Tigers, the
Bares, and all other devouring beasts will not set upon any other beast except
they see some probability they may master them, for if they be too swift, or
too strong, they forbear to set upon them: nor the Kite will not offer to
ravish the young Chickens, if its sees the Hen near at hand to defend them, The
wild beasts, by a natural sagacity undertake nothing without probability they
may attain.
nor the Hawk will not fly after the Partridge except it sees that she is
within her reach; but worldly men, for the greater part, fix their hopes upon
objects, wherein there is no probability at all they should attain to the
enjoyment of them, which is against the natural propriety of this passion of
Hope; for true Hope eschews all impossibilities: fourthly, The worldly Hopes of
men are insatiable, as well as their Desires, for when they have attained the
fruition of one of their Hopes, they instantly fix their Hopes upon another
object, so that the thirst of an Hydropick will be sooner quenched, then the
worldly hope of men will be satisfied. Pyrrhus King of Albania had conceived a
vain Hope of the conquest of Italy: but his wise, and prudent Counselor
Cynias, perceiving no probability in this hope of his, because the Roman
Commonwealth was then powerful, argued with his Prince after this manner;
Suppose, says he, my Liege, that Fortune be so favorable to you, as to grant
you the fruition of your hopes, See Plutarch in Pyrrhus life.
in which I see small probability, because the Roman State is potent, and
abounds in valiant and warlike men, and experienced Commanders; where will you
then fix your hopes? Pyrrhus answered, when I shall have the possession of
Italy; I will cross over into Sicilia and subdue that, and then, replied
Cynias, where will you bend your Hopes? to conquer Carthage, said Pyrrhus, and
all the coasts of Africa; and whether then says Cynias? we will then, says
Pyrrhus, return into Albania, and joy in our Conquest, and make good cheer, and
be merry: and who hinders you, says Cynias, to be joyful, and make good cheer,
and be merry, since you have a rich Kingdom of your own, and abound in
Treasures, and in all things that your heart can desire? my counsel is then,
that you should give bounds to your hopes, and prefer the certain to the
uncertain events of Fortune. By this Instance only, these things will be
confirmed: first, That the hopes of men are insatiable: secondly, That young
and sanguin men are most addicted to hopes, and to undertake hard and difficult
enterprises: thirdly, That rash, and inconsiderate hopes, void of probabilities
are always deceitful, and vanish into smoke; for this young and valiant Prince
was deluded by his hopes, and was foiled in Italy by the Romans, and in lieu of
the conquest of Italy, of Sicilia, Carthage, and the coast of Africa, after the
shedding of his subjects blood, the exhausting of his Treasures, and the many
hazards he was in to lose his life, he was enforced to return into Albania, and
was slain in the City of Argos by a woman, that did cast a Tyle upon his head.

Fifthly, The effects of worldly hope may be these: first, it is Hope that
incourageth generous spirits to undertake all hard and difficult enterprises:
It was Hope that moved Alexander to forsake his Kingdom of Macedonia, to
undertake the conquest of Asia, and that made him leave a certain good for an
imaginary hope of conquest, which had a prosperous success against all human
probabilities by the secret decree of God, The effects of worldly Hopes.
that the Persian Monarchy should be transferred to the Greeks, as it was
foretold by the Prophet Daniel. It was Hope that moved Ferdinand, and
Isabella, King and Queen of Spain to undertake the conquest of the West Indies:
and by Hope the Ottoman Family has been enticed to undertake the conquest of
the third part of the Kingdoms of the earth; See the Spanish History.
but all their hopes had no other object then self ends, and vainglory:
secondly, It is Hope that induces Politicians, See the Turkish History.
and Statesmen, to impair their health, and tire their spirits, to dive into
the mysteries of the Maxims, and Reasons of State, to propagate the increase,
honor, and glory of their native Country, as Cardidinal Ximenez did for Spain;
and the Cardinal de Riche-lieu for France, See the French History.
yet their Hopes were mixed with self ends, and vainglory: It is Hope that
moves Commanders and Soldiers to venture their lives in the dangerous
achievements of war, under color to fight for the Liberties and increase of
the peace and extent of the demains of their native Country, yet Marius Sylla,
and Caesar had a self-end in all their Military exploits, tending more to the
utter subversion of the Liberties, and desolation of their native Country,
then to the increase of the good or glory of it: fourthly, It is Hope that
inticeth Merchants to venture their means and lives at Sea; and Tradsmen, and
Artificers to moyl and toil; and the Husbandman to to endure the heat in
Summer, and the cold blast of the Northerly winds in Winter; Hope incourageth
men in their calling.
nay, all the injuries of the Meteors of the Air; but all their Hopes have no
other object then their private gain, and to keep themselves and their Families
in a decent condition, and free from penury. This hope is necessary, and
therefore more commendable then any of the former (so it be kept within the
bounds of moderation) because it is profitable to the Commonwealth, without
which it could not subsist; but the other are destructive to mankind, for they
are cause of much shedding of blood, and of the desolation of Kingdoms:
fifthly, Moral Hope excels worldly Hope.
Moral Hope is better then wordly Hope, for it is a preserver of Life, and the
Moderator of Grief and Sorrow, and a Cordial against all Anguishes and
Infirmities of the body, it supports men in their greatest miseries, and is the
opposite of the passion of despair, for it moved a Rhodian who had been cast
into a dungeon full of Adders and Snakes (for some horrid crimes by him
committed) to use daily antidotes for his preservation, and to answer to some
that persuaded him to rid himself by a violent way out of that misery where he
lay; no, says he, as long as I have breath in my nostrils, I will ever hope
for my deliverance; and it is daily seen, Hope forsakes not men till death.
that the Gally-slaves, and those that are condemned to die, do ever hope to be
redeemed or reprived; and the sickest, or the oldest man has hope to recover,
or to live one year longer: Nature having, as it seems, endowed men with this
passion of Hope for the preservation of their being, for as soon as Hope
forsakes men they go the way of all flesh, or fall into despair: sixthly, If
Moral Hope be thus qualified, it will be of excellent use: first, Its objects
must be a real good: secondly, This good must be absent or to come: thirdly, It
must be difficult to obtain: fourthly, It must have some probability that it
may be obtained, for impossibilities destroy the nature and the proprieties of
Hope. Virtue is then the true object of moral Hope, but it must be without
mixture of self ends and Vainglory. But

Sixthly, The Spiritual Hope is free from both, for it is a supernatual gift of
God: The Apostle St. Paul in the eighth of the Romans makes a clear definition
of it; Hope that is seen is not Hope, Romans 8.24.25.
for what a man sees, why does he yet hope for? but if we hope for that we see
not, then do we with patience wait for it. Now the object of this hope is the
Rock of Eternity, Christ Jesus our Lord, and the Joy and Glory to come, for as
the Apostle says in the same Chapter, We are saved by hope. The cause of this
hope is the immediate grace of God, for so excellent a Flower does not grow in
the Garden of our corrupt Nature; The effects it prroduceth in all true
Christians proceed from the Promises of God, and the recompense of reward, as
the Apostle St. Paul says of Moses. Heb. 11.24, 26.
By faith when Moses was come to years refused to be called the son of Pharoahs
daughter, choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, esteeming the reproach of Christ
greater riches then the treasures of Egypt, for he had respect to the
recompense of reward. And were it not for this Spiritual Hope, the true
Christians should be more miserable then the profane; nay, more then the bruit
beast: for the portion of the children of God in this life is most commonly,
nothing but affliction, grief, and sorrow, tribulations, persecutions,
reproaches, and ignominy: whereas the wicked flourish in this world like green
Bay trees, Psalm. 37.39.
and enjoy all the delights and pleasures of this life, because they make no
conscience to sin; but the true children of God hate and abhor sin, and are
conscious to commit the least sins; therefore without this hope, which does
uphold and comfort them, their race through this vale of tears would be tedious
and irksome unto them: for as Solomon says, Hope deferred makes the heart
sick, Prove. 13.12.
but when the desire comes it is the tree of life. The first effect of
spiritual Hope is, that it breeds in the hearts of men such a fortitude and
confidence, that it expels all fears from their souls, and makes them say
with the Prophet David, Psalm. 16.8.
I have set the Lord always before me, because he is at my right hand I shall
not be moved: secondly, Hope engenders joy in the hearts of the Elect, and
this joy is so constant and permanent that it never forsakes them in their
greatest perplexities, nay, at the very hour of death, when all worldly
comforts forsake them, this joy chears up their hearts, and makes them say with
the Prophet David, Psalm. 16.9, 10.
My heart is glad, and my glory rejoices, my flesh also shall rest in hope,
for thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thy holy one
to see corruption: thirdly, Hope breeds patience, and makes Christians suffer
patiently, the greatest torments that the cruellest tyrants can inflict upon
them, Romans 5.3, 4, 5.
For we glory, says S. Paul, in tribulation, knowing that tribulation works
patience, and patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not
ashamed, because the love of God is shed in our hearts by the holy Ghost that
is given us: fourthly, Hope gives life to all our Christian and religious
Duties, as St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 9.10.
He that ploweth should plow in Hope, and he that thresheth in hope shall be
partaker of his hope: Hope is one of the best defensive Arms of a Christian to
oppose the fiery darts, and the temptations of Satan, as the Apostle St. Paul
says, Putting on the breast plate of faith, and love, 1 These 5.8.
and for an helmet the hope of salvation: sixthly, Hope is like a sure Anchor to
all afflicted Christians in the midst of the impetuous storms of persecution,
as the Apostle St. Paul says, Heb. 6.18.19.
That by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we
might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the
hope that is set before us; which hope we have as an Anchor both sure and
steadfast: seventhly, Hope does mitigate and sweetens all kind of afflictions
that befall to the children of God in this life, Colos. 1.5.
whether they be perplexities of the mind or anguishes of the body: eighthly,
All such as confide and hope in Christ shall never be ashamed nor confounded,
etc.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the vanity of the passion of Despair.

NOthing can be more hateful and odious unto God, who has been pleased to
create men after his own Image, then when they distrust of his mercies and fall
into despair, for in the second of the first Table of his Commandments, he does
exalt himself, his Mercies above his Justice, Deuteronomy. 5.9.10.
in these words, For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the
iniquity of the father unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate
me, and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my
Commandments: Yet the Stoics, the most presumptuous Sect of all the ancient
Philosophers, honor the passion of despair above all other passions, for Seneca
one of the greatest Champions of it, does exalt the criminal and abhorred act
of Cato of Vtica (who ripped up his own bowels with his own hands, See Plutarch
in the life of Cato.
because he would not be obliged to the clemency of Caesar for his life) as the
most heroical action that ever was acted. See Tacitus in the life of Nero.
And notwithstanding Seneca himself was stricken with a certain fear and
horror, when the messenger that was sent unto him from Nero, told him, that it
was the Emperors pleasure, that he should make choice of what manner of death
he would, for die he must; whereupon, seeing there was no other remedy, he
made, as they say, of necessity Virtue, and commanded his servant to heat a
Stove, and caused his veins to be opened as he was in the Stews, that he might
depart this life with the lest torment and anguish that might be, out of fear
that his Stoic constancy should have failed him at his need. That the
Academick Sect was the best of all the Heathen Philosophers.
But the Academicks, another Sect of the Heathen Philosophers, maintain that it
is rather a Pusillanimity then a true fortitude of courage for men to lay
violent hands upon themselves, to be free of the greatest evil that can befall
them in this life, and this opinion does best agree with the principles of the
Protestant Religion, for he that does with constancy and patience endure the
greatest evils, torments, and anguishes of the body, that can be inflicted upon
him by the cruellest Tyrants; That true constancy and fortitude, is more
visibly seen in the bearing of evils with patience then by laying violent hands
upon our selves.
and the grief and sorrow of mind, which may proceed from the shame,
reproaches, and ignominy that is done by them to his person in the public view
of the world, has a far higher degree of fortitude and manly courrge, then
they who to prevent the foresaid evils, torments and anguishes, or shame and
ignominy, lay violent hands upon themselves, because the longer the Dolor
continues, the greater is the constancy and fortitude of men that endure the
same; and it is daily seen, that the pains of violent deaths, are of no
continuance: And this was the reason why the Emperor Tiberius Nero, See Tacitus
in Tiberius life.
one of the most cruel Tyrants that ever lived upon earth, did prolong the
lives of those he most hated, by keeping of them in dungeons with bread and
water for many years together, saying to his friends that desired to know the
reason of it, because they shall (said he) feel daily the fears and
apprehensions of death, which is worse then death it self, and die for one
death a thousand deaths. Yet if men will dive into the nature and effects of
this passion of Despair without partiality, they will find that good use may
be made of it, so it does not attain to that exorbitant and horrid degree of
Self-murdering. Give me leave therefore to extend my Discourse upon these
particulars.

1. On the definition of this passion of Despair. 2. On the diversity of the
Causes of it. 3. On the bad and good Effects of it. 4. On the Remedies to allay
the fury of it.
There are diverse sorts of Despair, which may be reduced to these three: first,
Worldly: secondly, Moral: thirdly, Spiritual. The worldly Despair is nothing
else but a conceit of an impossibility in the acquisition of the vain hopes of
men, as it will appear in the Causes and Effects of that kind of Despair. The
definition of the Moral Despair, is according to the opinion of the best
Moralists as follows. Despair, says Boujou, Theophrast Boujou Lord of
Beaulieu fol. 723.
is a passion of the Soul, withdrawing men from some good much desired, because
it is represented by the Senses to their imagination, as impossible to be
obtained. Senault in his use upon the passions, page 344.
Despair, says Senault, is a violent motion of the soul, that keeps men aloof
from the prosecution of some good, in which they see no probability it can be
obtained. Now this good is not always a real good, for the Senses do oftentimes
delude the Reason and Judgment of men; but suppose it be a real good, then it
is Virtue it self, or some virtuous Object, Action, or Design which they conceive
impossible to be obtained or performed, for Moral Hope has no other object
then Virtue, or virtuous and generous actions, and by consequence Moral Despair
must have the same objects, The definition of worldly, moral, and spiritual
despair.
for diverse of the ancient Moralists held Self-murdering no Despair, (as I have
given a hint of it in the last Discourse) but an action of fortitude, and of
magnanimity of courage. And this Moral Despair is the opposite, and great
Antagonist of Moral Hope, and the second passion incident to the Irascible
appetite, which does mitigate the extravagancy of men's Hopes, as it will appear
in the ensuing Discourses; yet men often times despair of things, in which they
imagine impossibilities, when there is none, as it will appear by these two
Instances, About sixscore years past, it was a thing thought impossible to sail
with a ship round about the circuit of the earth, and yet Magalen a Portugais,
See the Spanish and English History.
and Sir Francis Drake an English man have shown by experience that it was
possible to be done: secondly, In the days of Charles the ninth, Henry the
third, and Henry the fourth, Kings of France; It was a thing thought impossible
to take the City of Rochel by force or by famine, and yet the Cardinal de
Riche-lieu by the Art of a French Enginere, See the French History.
has shown by experience it was possible to be done, for by a floating bridge
that he made over an Arm of the Sea, upon which he planted Ordinances, and
erected two Towers, and with a land Army, Lewis the thirteenth King of France,
took that City by famine in less then a year; whereupon I conclude, that men
Despair of things by imagining impossibilities where there is none, and this
proceeds from want of judgment, power, or experience, for it is daily seen,
that which seems to be impossible to one man, is easy and facile to another.
Spiritual Despair is nothing else but a distrust of Gods mercy, which by the
temptation of Satan, do entice men to be the murderers of themselves, which is
the next sin to the sin of the Holy Ghost.

Secondly, The causes of worldly Despair may be these: first, The death of a
beloved party; See Bandel in his Tragical Histories.
Romelio supposing his beloved Mistress Iuliete to be dead, when she was but in
a swound, slew himself upon her body, and when she came to her self again, she
seeing her Sweetheart had killed himself for her sake, she stabbed her self
with his Poynard: secondly, The infidelity in love is a cause of Despair; See
Virgils Aeneads.
Dido Queen of Carthage slew her self, because Aeneas a Trojan Prince forsook
her and sailed into Italy: but if this be a Poetical Fable, hear a true
Relation. A proper young maiden being secretly betrothed to a young man living
here in London, who broke his faith, and married another; whereupon the maiden
being transported with Despair poisoned her self, and died the next day, this
happened within this twelve month. I could relate a hundred such instances, to
prove that of all the passions, Love being abused, or extinguished by death,
does sooner then any other thing beget Despair, but I pass them over for
brevity sake: thirdly, Avarice is the cause of Despair; A Merchant in London of
good means, having had some losses at sea, and having received the tidings of
it on the Saturday; he being transported with Despair, hung himself on the
Sunday morning when his servants were at Church; and it is a common thing among
the Cormorant Farmers, when they have Monopolized all the corn of a County into
their hands, to hang or drown themselves, if the next year prove to be a
fruitful year: fourthly, Famine is a cause of Despair, 2 Kings 6.29.
for in Jehorams days, such a famine was in Samaria, that two women boiled a
child, and did eat the same, the mother of the child out of Despair
consenting to it; and whosoever will be pleased to read Josephus will see the
horrid actions of some of the Jews committed out of Despair, because of the
great famine that was at Jerusalem, when it was besieged by the Romans:
fifthly, The fear to fall into the hands of a cruel enemy causes Despair, some
of the richest of the Saguntines, rather then they would fall into the hands of
Hanibal, and his cruel Carthaginian and Numidian soldiers, See Titus Livius in
his third Decade. lib. 1. page 34.
did carry all their wealth, with their wives and children into their Market
place, and having made a great heap of their rich movables they set the fire
in it, and slew their wives and children, and having cast them into the fire
they slew themselves afterward: sixthly, Shame is a cause of Despair; Cleopatra
Queen of Egypt being informed that it had been resolved in the Counsel of
Augustus Caesar, that she should be led as a captive after the triumphant
Chariot of the said Emperor, when he should make his entry into Rome; out of
Despair to avoid that shame, See Plutarch in Marcus Antonius life.
she applied two Vipers to her two breasts, and so died. There are diverse other
causes of worldly Despair, but they are of another nature, for they attain not
to that exorbitant degree of Self-murdering, but draw men off from their vain
hopes, and rash enterprises; of which I shall have occasion to speak in the
Effects of this passion of Despair.

The Causes of Moral Despair proceed from the fatal events from generous and
Martial achievements, or from the managing of affairs of State: first, after
the Battle of Cannae, that Hanibal won upon the Romans, the young Nobility that
fled and saved themselves from the rout of it, were so transported with
Despair, that they resolved to fly out of Italy, and had done so, but for
Publius Scipio, who hearing of their resolution, See Titus Livius in his third
Decade, lib. 3.
came amongst them, and after a sharp censure for their pusillanimity made them
swear never to forsake him till he had been avenged upon Hanibal for the shame
the Romans had received at Cannae: And by their means was he elected by the
voice of the People to go as General into Africa, to enforce Hanibal by a
diversion of war, to withdraw his forces out of Italy: secondly, The
Carthaginians were so transported with Fear and Despair after the last
overthrow that Scipio gave them not far from Carthage, where he routed Hanibal
and Iuba King of the Numidians, that they lost all hope and courage, and made a
most shameful peace with the Romans, for they did deliver up unto them all
their shipping: But contrarily after the loss of three famous battles that
Hanibal won upon the Romans; Hope inflamed their courage, and by it, from a
conquered People, they became Conquerors; A good caveat for Princes or States,
to dissuade them from Despairing, in the dismal events of war, but to foment
hope in their breast in their greatest disgraces; for if Despair creap in men's
hearts that hold the Helm of the ship of the Commonwealth, See Titus Iavius in
his third Decade, lib. 3.
all goes to wrack: thirdly, Charles the seventh, King of France, was for
sometime so possessed with Despair by the evil events that his men of war had
daily with the English Armies that were under the Command of the Duke of
Bedford, that he suffered his own, and public affairs to go to ruin, till his
Concubine La bella Agnes, by the persuasion of the French Peers, See du Halian
in his French History.
and some of his chiefest, and most faithful Commanders of war infused Hope
into his heart, by saying unto him, that she was minded to leave him, for she
had been told, that she should be the Mistress of the most valourous Prince in
Christendom, and she saw nothing but pusillanimity in him, for he did suffer
the English to rent his Kingdom in piecemeals: This coming from a woman, filled
the King with indignation, and with the hopes that the Pucelle of Orleans, as
they called her, gave him to raise the siege of Orleans, that was then besieged
by the English, he took from that time forward his, and the public affairs to
heart, and became a valorous Prince: fourthly, In the beginning of the reign of
Henry the fourth King of France, the true French Nation was brought into such a
plunge of Despair by the conspiracy of the Chatholick league, and the
association it had with Spain, with the general revolt of the greatest Cities
in France against their lawful King, that had not God filled the heart of Henry
the fourth with Hope, and undanted valor, that Kingdom had been rent and torn
in pieces by foreign Princes: fifthly, Ahitophel fell into such a deep Despair,
2 Samuel 27.23.
because his Council was rejected, and Hushaies Council was accepted, that he
went and put his house in order, and then hanged himself: sixthly, The Cardinal
Ximines, See the Spanish History in the beginning of the reign of Charles the
fifth.
who was Viceroy in Spain, during the minority of the Emperor, Charles the
fifth, died with Sorrow and Despair, because his faithful services to the Crown
of Spain were rewarded with an ungrateful dismission from the Court, and all
public afairs.

First, Apostasy is the cause of spirtual Despair, for Saul, King of Israel,
fell into Despair for disobeying the Commandment of the Lord, Four causes of
spiritual Despair.
in not cutting off all the Amalekites, and for repairing to the Witch of
Endor, in stead to ask counsel of God; and being wounded by the Philistines, and
his Army routed upon Mount Gilboa, 1 Samuel 31.40.
he fell upon his sword and killed himself: secondly, Judas Iscariot, that
betrayed our blessed Savior, fell into Despair for his Apostasy and
disloyalty, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief Priest
and Elders, and said, I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent blood,
Mat. 27.3, 4.
and so went out and hanged himself: thirdly, Francisco Spira fell into Despair
for his Apostasy, for having embraced the Protestant Religion, he was by large
promises of great preferments seduced to return to Popery, but the worm of
Conscience did so rack him, See the book of Martyrs.
that he often cried out he was in in hell, because the torments of hell, as he
said, could not be greater then those that he did suffer: fourthly, The
persecuting of Gods children is a cause to beget a spiritual Despair in men, as
you may see at large in a Treatise, called, The Judgments of God upon
Persecutors.

Thirdly, The worst effect of Self-murdering Despair is, that it deprives men
of Repentance, and by consequence of salvation, for Repentance is a gift of the
free grace of God, neither can men repent when they will, Six pernitius effect
of De-Despair.
since it is not their own gift but Gods, and how can they repent when their
Understanding, and their Will which are the noblest faculties of their soul are
perverted, and so distempered with this furious passion of Despair, that they
are rather like mad then rational men, and worse then the bruit creatures, for
none of them will destroy their own kind, much less themselves; Repentance is
a gift of God, and is not at men's disposing, and must be attained by prayers,
and not to be deferred to the hour of death.
for Self-murdering is an action contrary to the Law of Nature, for Nature
strives in all its Effects to preserve its own being: besides, it is expressly
prohibited by the Law of God: that one man should murder another: but suppose
he do, yet if he murder the body of a man, he cannot murder his soul; but he
that murdereth himself, does murder his own body, and his own soul, and
therefore deserves a far greater punishment then a common murderer: secondly,
This kind of Despair proceeds from a distrust of Gods mercy, and what greater
injury can be done to God by man then to distrust of his infinite mercy, and to
be a wilful rebel to his blessed Commandments? thirdly, It deprives men of all
Reason, Judgment, Compassion, and Humanity, for they are more cruel to
themselves then their greatest enemies can be to them, as it will appear by
these three ensuing effects of Despair: fourthly, In the time of the civil
wars, See Plutarch in Syllaes life.
between Sylla and Marius: Sylla besieged Preneste, a small, but a very strong
City of Italy, because it had sided with Marius; and after a long siege he took
the same, and commanded that all the Inhabitants should be put to the Sword,
and the City set on fire, only he charged that his Host and his Family should
be preserved, because in former time he had showed him much love, and good
hospitality; so at the first entrance of the Town, an Officer with a band of
soldiers were sent to this Hosts house to preserve it from plunder: but he
hearing of Syllaes cruel decree against the City, was so transported with
Despair, that he slew himself, saying, He would not be obliged for his life to
the destroyer of his native Country: See Plutarch in Cesars life.
fifthly, in the civil war between the Cesarean and the Pompeian faction, a
Centurion, or Captain of Caesar, and some thirty common soldiers were taken in
a fight, and brought before Cornelius Scipio, that was then Governor of Africa
for the Pompeian party, who condemned them all to death, the Centurion
excepted, who seeing the cruelty of Scipio, drew out his sword, and slew
himself in his presence, saying, He would not be obliged for his life to so
cruel an enemy of Caesar: sixthly, In the war that fell out between the Romans
and the Jews, in the days of the Emperor Vespasianus: See Josephus in the war
of the Jews.
Titus his son laid siege, and encompassed Iopata, a strong City of the Jews,
with trenches, and a powerful Army; and after a long siege, and great
resistance, thirty of the chiefest Magistrates of Iopata seeing no probability
that the City could hold out any longer, hid themselves in a private Vault,
into which they conveied victuals for three days, before which time the City
was taken by a Storm, and the greatest part of the people put to the sword, and
such strickt watch set to the gates that none could escape, so that these
thirty in the Vault must either yield themselves to the Romans or famish;
whereupon transported with Despair, they resolved rather to kill themselves,
then to die a lingering death, or to yield themselves to the mercy of the
Romans: a desperate, mad, and barbarous resolution! for the fury of the
soldiers being over, they had undoubtedly obtained mercy: and so they cast
lots who should be killed first, till there were but two left alive, and that
was Josephus and another, who abhorring this Selfmurdering, persuaded his
fellow to yield themselves to the Romans, to which he consented, and having
discovered themselves they were brought before Titus, who having heard of the
merit of Josephus, showed him mercy, and at his entreaty saved the life of his
fellow.

Fourthly, The good effects of the passion of Despair may be these: first, It
annihilates and turns to smoke, all the vain and extravagant hopes of men
that are fixed upon impossibilities: Four good effects of Despair.
secondly, It does quench the burning flames of love, and clips the wings of
presumptuous Lovers, who fly too high with their desires, that would otherwise
rack and torment their minds, and make them daily sigh and groan, because they
could not obtain the enjoyment of that object, that is too rare and excellent
for their degree; but Despair coming on, makes them desist from the prosecution
of things in which there is no probability they can be obtained: thirdly, it
mitigates the ambitious hopes of Princes, who would conceive nothing impossible
to them because of their might and power, if this faithful counselor of
Despair did not respresent unto them the difficulties there may be to attain to
the fruition of their Hope. The Emperor, Charles the fifth, See du Bailys
Commentaries in the life of Francis the first King of France.
being ready to pass out of Italy into France with a very potent Army, led by
approved Commanders, and composed of old and experienced soldiers, caused this
Army to be ranged in Battle array, and when it was Marshalized in the best
order it could be, according to the Art, and Rules of War, he sent for a French
Noble man, that was his Prisoner, to ride along with him to view this Army; and
after they had ridden through the same, and viewed all the Squadrons of it; The
Emperor did ask the Noble man, what he conceived of this Army? He answered,
that it was a gallant one, and well disciplined; I hope, said the Emperor, to
ride with this Army through the heart of France, without impediment of any
moment, and come to the very walls of Paris safe; Sir, said the French Noble
man, mitigate your Hopes with Despair, for I can assure you, if you had three
such Armies, you will not come to Paris before you are well beaten; and so it
fell out, for he went no furthen then Marsellies, and there lost thirty
thousand of his men, and was enforced to raise his siege, and to return with
shame and dishonor into Italy: fourthly, As Despair makes men fly, and takes
away their courage; so, when it isextream, and that there is no hope left for
the preservation of their lives, it inflames their courage, See the English
History, and du Halian in his French History.
and makes them fight like Lions. The Black Prince having entered France with an
Army of some ten thousand men, and taken diverse strong holds in Poytou; John
then King of France, came against him with an Army of thirty thousand men; the
Prince seeing himself over-matched, by the means of the Popes Nuncio desired to
come to a Treaty, and offered to the French King to restore unto him all the
strong holds he had taken, and to make good the damages he had received, so he
might peaceably retreat with his Army into Aquitain, that did then belong to
the Kingdom of England; but King John, a rash and inconsiderate Prince,
required greater things, which stood not with the Princes honor to grant, and
so was enforced out of Despair to fight whether he would or no; and being an
excellent soldier, seated his Camp in a high ground full of thorns and bushes,
which he lined with his Archers, and caused in the night time a deep ditch to
be cast up about his Camp, to break the fury of the French horse; the French in
the morning, in stead to send their foot to make a passage through this ditch,
sent their horse, who falling atop of one another in the ditch were slain by
the Archers, and the battle of the French disordered; whereupon the Prince came
upon them with his whole Army, and obtained a famous victory, and took King
John and his youngest son Philip le Hardy, that was afterward Duke of Burgundy
prisoners, and a great number of the French Nobility; which confirms that
extreme Despair makes men fight like Lions, and that wise Princes are rather to
make golden bridges for their enemies to retreat, then by despair to enforce
them to fight. To conclude, Despair is a dangerous passion, and Self-murdering
Despair is to be abhorred of Christians, for it does not only destroy the
body, but it does also cast men's souls into the pit of eternal woe. There is
also another sort of Despair, which I have not as yet spoken of, which proceeds
from natural infirmities, as from burning Fevers, Frenzies, and Madness; but
the evil effects which proceed from these, are rather to be imputed to keepers
of the Patients, then to themselves, or to the fury of the disease, and
therefore cannot come within the compass of Self murder. The Remedies against
which horrid sin are contained in the ensuing Discourse.

Fifthly, Six remedies against Despair.
The Remedies to prevent the evil and most pernicious effects of this dangerous
passion of Despair, which is one of the strongest temptations of Satan, may be
these and such other passages of Scripture Psalm. 5.2.
Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my King and my God, for unto thee will I
pray; for constant and fervent prayers are able to cast back this temptation
like filth in Satan's face, and to obtain of the Lord these supernatural graces,
whereby Christians will be enabled to defy and overcome Despair: first, Faith,
as a shield wherewith men shall be able, says St. Paul, to quench all the
fiery Ephesians. 6.16.
darts of the wicked. And to say with Job in the greatest tribulations that can
befall them in this life, Though he slay me, yet will I Job 13.15.
trust in him: secondly, Repentance, for it is a precious Antitode against the
venom of Despair; What had become of St. Peter for denying his Lord and Master
three times before the Cock Matthew. 26.75.
crowed once, if by the bitter tears of Repentance he had not obtained mercy?
Nay, the very temporal and fained Repentance of Ahab King of Israel moved God
to transfer, or remove the execution of his wrath 1 Kings 21.27, 28, 29.
from him to his children: And it is conceived by the best Divines, that if
Judas, who betrayed our blessed Savior had repented of his horrid sin, he had
not fallen into Matt. 27.5.
despair, for the compassions of the Lord are incomprehensible, and his mercies
are infinite, as it appears by his toward Manasseh 2 Chronicles. 33.12, 13.
King of Judah, who had committed all the wickedness that could be imagined by
the hearts of men, for he caused the Prophet Isaiah to suffer a most cruel
death, by sawing his body in the midst with a Saw, and he turned aside from the
Lord to commit Idolatry, and caused his son to pass through the fire, and dealt
with Familiar Spirits, and made the streets of Jerusalem to overflow with the
innocent blood he caused to be spilt; and yet when he humbled himself by an
unfeigned Repentance before the Lord; God was so gracious as to show him mercy,
and from a miserable Captive he restored him to his royal dignity: thirdly,
Patience is a special remedy against Despair, for it preserved Job in the midst
of his greatest temptation, nay, when his wife, that should have been his
greatest comforter, said unto him, Do thou still retain thy integrity? Curse
Job 2.9, 10.
God and die; He answered with an admirable meekness of Spirit, Thou speak
as one of the foolish women speaks, What? Shall we receive good at the hand of
God, and shall we not receive evil? And this only consideration, That all
things work for good to them that Romans 8.28.
love God, should keep men from Despair, when they are in a manner overwhelmed
with the greatest afflictions that can befall them in this life: fourthly,
Confidence in God, is an excellent remedy against Despair; for such as trust in
the Lord, may say with the Prophet David, I will not Tsal. 3.6.
be afraid of ten thousands of people that have set themselves against me:
fifthly, Hope is a powerful remedy against Despair; for if men say with the
Prophet David, The Lord is my Rock Psalm. 18.2.
and my Fortress, and my Deliverer, for my Psalm 39.7.
hope is in thee: sixthly, Fortitude is an excellent remedy against Despair,
for it is able to dash and overcome all the evil apprehensions that beget
Despair, and check men's pusillanimity with these words of the Prophet David,
Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou Psalm. 42.11
disquieted within me? hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the
health of my countenance, and my God. By these and the like passages of
Scripture men may prevent the dangerous effect of Despair: Nay, draw
unspeakable comforts out of the very Causes that beget Despair, which passion
is full of vanity and vexation of spirit, etc.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the vanity of the passion of Vndantedness.

IF Diamonds were as common as Pipples, and Virtues as natural to men as Vices,
they would not be so precious, nor valued at so high a rate as they are in
these days, for it is the rarity of things more then their goodness that makes
them to be esteemed among men: for Instance, Bread is the only staff of man's
life, and the best food that Nature has appointed for his subsistence, and yet
because it is common, it is little regarded, for Beggars will hardly give men
thanks if they give them nothing but dry bread. But this passion I am to speak
of, is not only rare, (since one man among one hundred is not endowed with it)
but also good and excellent, and therefore the more to be esteemed and valued
of men, as a rare and precious Jewel: By it men's hopes are attained, all fears
expelled, and despair suppressed, and were it not a Passion, I should call it a
Virtue, because of the resemblance it has with Fortitude: For Undantedness is
the Spring of all true Valor and manly courage, and by it all the generous
actions that have been acted since the Creation till this day, have had their
being and successful end: And therefore most judiciously, and properly placed
by the Moralists after Despair, and before Fear, to mitigate by the excellent
proprieties of it, the evil qualities of the two others; for were it not for
this passion, men would be diverted from undertaking any noble design by Fear
and Despair, who have a natural propriety to withdraw the vital spirits into
the Center of the body, which hinders the natural faculties to do and execute
their functions, and makes men timorous and remiss to undertake any noble
action: but Undantedness causes the blood, and the vital spirits that reside
in it to dilate themselves to the utmost parts of the members of the Body, and
so gives them life and vigor, and makes men apt and fit to undertake and
execute all noble enterprises. Now for the better description of this noble
Passion, I will enlarge my self upon these particulars.

1. On the Definition of this Passion. 2. On the Causes of it. 3. On the Nature
and Proprieties of it. 4. On the evil and good Effects of it. 5. On the
Spiritual Use of it.
First, This Passion has several names, some call it Confidence, and have good
reason for it, because it is its unseperable companion: others call it
Audacity, but this term does blemish the true Nature of it, The definition of
the passion of Undantedness.
for audacious and presumptuous men, are held to be under one and the same
predicament: other call it boldness, but this word is often taken for
Impudency, but the French call it Hardiesse, which does express most properly
the nature of it, which is Undantedness in the English Tongue; And here is the
definition of it, according to the judgment of the best Moralists: Boujou. fol.
7 23.
Vndantedness, says one, is an affection and assurance to eschew an evil, and
to overcome all the difficulties of it: Vndantedness, The Bishop of Marseilles
in page 401.
says another, is a Passion of the soul which strengthens the same, and
makes it confident, it can overcome the most difficult evils that can befall it
in this life, and does also encourage it, to prosecute the good that is most
difficult to obtain. And to this last definition I assent; as concerning the
same the best of the two, for it does truly express the nature of this
passion, which is the third passion incident to the Irascible Appetite.

2. The Causes of it are many, but they may be reduced to these six; the two
first are Natural, the two middlemost accidental, and the two last
supernatural: The first natural cause of undantedness, is a hot and moist
temper of the body.
The first Natural cause may be a moist and hot temper of the body; for the
Naturalists have observed, that all such as are of that constitution of body
have ordinarily an undanted spirit: The Natural reason of it is, that this hot
and moist temper does suppress the Melancholic humor, and its evil proprieties
and effects, whereby the blood that is hot and airy, an full ofvital spirits,
and the bilia that is dry and fiery, and the phlegm that is cold and moist,
being thus mixed become of a dilative nature, and by the motion of the heart,
spread themselves into all the utmost parts of the body, and inableth the mind
to undertake, and the body to execute all manner of generous designs, be they
never so difflcult or perilous. The second natural cause of Undantedness may
be the largeness of the heart of men, for it has been observed by the
Physicians, when they have opened the bodies of valiant and undanted spirits,
that their hearts were larger then the hearts of ordinary men; See Plutarch in
the life of Themistocles.
and King Xerxes King of Persia having caused the body of Leonidas King of
Sparta to be opened (partly out of admiration of his valor, and in part out of
curiosity, The second natural cause of undantedness is the largeness of the
hearts of men.
to see whether the heart of such an undanted spirit was larger then the hearts
of common men) he found the same to be as big again, and hairy all over; a
natural propriety incident to such as are of a hot and moist constitution of
body, to abound in hair. The Natural reason why men with larger hearts then
others should be addicted to Valor and Undantedness, is this, that the larger
the heart is, the morevital spirits it can contain, which are the essential
causes of Valor and Undantedness; and therefore it may very well be that the
largeness of the heart is a natural cause of Undantedness: That tall and burly
men are commonly less valorous then short and middle stastured men.
Diverse men are of opinion, that tall and burly bodied men are more addicted to
Valor and Undantedness then short and middlestatur'd men, but they are
mistaken, for tall men have smaller hearts then others, and are also commonly
more fainthearted then other men; and the Naturalists give this reason for it;
If their hearts, say say, were proportionable to their body, they might have
reason to be of that opinion, but it is commonly smaller, because Nature
extended its virtue to the utmost parts, deprives the inward parts of it:
Besides, all the vital spirits reside in the blood, and in the heart, and by
its motion they are dispersed through all the parts of the body: Now the
farther distant these parts are from the heart, the longer time are the vital
spirits a going to quicken and vivifie them; and by consequence tall and
burlybodied men are fuller of Flesh then of Spirits, and less courageous then
others. It is true, that they have a presuming undantedness, because of their
strength, but what is done by strength proceeds from Strength and not from
Valor, which does reside in the heart, and in the mind, and not in the arms,
and in the sinews. And the most valorous and undanted spirits of this Age, and
of other Ages, were for the most part short, or at the most of a middle
stature; Leonidas, See Plutarch in Peleopidas life.
and Peleopidas were but short men; and Sir Francis Veere, and Sir Francis
Drake, and the Marshal de Biron, and the Marshal Gastion were all short men: I
conclude then, that Valor and undantedness does reside in the heart and mind,
and not in the strength of the body, and that some of all statures may be
valiant and undanted. The first accidental cause may be the innocence of men,
and the justice of their Cause, for as Solomon says, Prove. 28.1.
The wicked flee when no man pursues, but the righteous are bold as a a Lion;
and it is daily seen, that three true men will overcome half a dozen of
thieves; And when men fight for the preservation of the Liberties of their
native Country, and the lives of their wives and children, and all the means
they have, they fight commonly like Lions. The second accidental cause of
Undantedness may be, The relations, support, or alliances that men have with
potent and powerful Princes or States, for the confidence they have to be backed
and supported by them, does make them undertake with undanted courage difficult
and perilous enterprises; The two accinentall causes of the undantedness of
men.
for Instance, The Hollanders, a small Commonwealth, being at the first
supported by Elizabeth Queen of England, and afterward by Henry the fourth
King of France, have for many years together undantedly waged war with the
great King of Spain; and likewise the Kingdom of Sweden, a petty Kingdom, in
comparison of the Empire of Germany, being supported by Lewis the 13th King of
France, has with an undanted courage waged war many years with the House of
Austria. See the Histories of Germany, England, and France.
Thirdly, The first supernatural cause of the undantedness of men, may be their
zeal to Religion, for men do commonly fight like Lions for the preservation of
the true Religion, as the Protestants have done in Germany, and in France, who
were but a handful in comparison of the Roman Catholics, and yet they have
obtained diverse famous victories over them. And notwithstanding Machiavel out
of an Atheistical mpudency, does maintain that the Protestant Religion does
extinguish all true Valor and Undantedness in the heart of men, yet diverse
instances migh t be produced to prove that none are so courageous and undanted
as those that are truly religious; The two supernatural causes of undantedness.
for the wicked and profane do fight but out of despair; but true Christians
fight out of assurance that they shall prevail, because God takes their part.
The second supernatural cause of undantedness may be the true eonfidence that
men have in the Omnipotency of God, who is able by small means, nay, without
means if it pleases him, to make them obtain unexpected Victories, and come
off with honor and reputation, from the most perilous enterprises they
undertake, as it shall be proved by instances, when I shall speak of the
Effects of Undantedness.

Thirdly, The Nature and Proprieties of this Passion of Undantedness will best
appear in a comparative way: by showing the differences there are between it
and Temerity: first, undantedness is ever accompanied with Prudence and
Justice, The nature and proprieties of undantedness described in a comparative
way with those of Temerity.
but Temerity tramples them both under its feet: secondly, Men of undanted
courage never employ their valor but upon some noble occasion, as the defense
of their native Country, or for the increase or glory of it; but men
transported with Temerity run headlong upon all occasions, and will rather show
their valor to murder their dearest friends in a Duel upon some trivial word
spoken unadvisedly, then to meet the enemy of their Country in the Field:
thirdly, Men of undanted courage are cautious in all their undertakings, and
will not attempt things, except they fee some probability they may come off
with honor and reputation, unless it be in desperate cases, that threaten the
ruin of their Prince, or of their native Country, for in such cases they will
willingly sacrifice their lives, as Leonidas did at the straites of
Thermopilae: But men transported with temerity, will hazard their lives for
things of no moment, that con^ her do them nor their Country good: fourthly,
Men truly valorous (...) with patience and great magnanimity (...) and offenses
that are (...) their own persons, and (...) of such offenses and injuries which
blemish the honor of their Prince or Country, but such as are possessed with
temerity, vindicate with severity the offenses done to themselves, and connive
at those that are done to their Prince, or native Country. It has been a
subject of much debate among the Moralists, which of these two famous
Conquerors, viz. Alexander or Caesar, See Quintius Curtius in Alexanders life.
did excel one another in Undantedness of courage; the greater part hold that
Alexander in his actions had shown to have more temerity then prudence and true
undanted valor, and that Caesar in his actions had been more unjust, but less
temerary, and had far excelled Alexander in Valor and Courage: first, The
undertaking of the conquest of Asia by Alexander, was more just then Cesars;
for he undertook to suppress the Persian Monarchy, that had ever been a mortal
enemy to the Greeks; but Caesar undertook to suppress the liberties of his
native Country that had raised him to his honors and dignities, and had
entrusted him with their Armies for their defense, and not for their overthrow:
secondly, All the Actions of Caesar but one, (that was when he commanded the
Master of a Ship to cross the sea in a most impetuous storm, See Plutarch in
Cesars life.
saying, Fear not, for thou carriest in thy Ship Caesar and his Fortune; which
savored overmuch of Temerity) were guided with much Wisdom and Prudence; but
all the Actions of Alexander were guided by vain hopes, and his undertakings
were rash and temerary, for there was no humane probability that an Army of
forty thousand foot, and ten thousand horse should be able to encounter and
foil, two or three millions of men, but they were raw, and unexperienced
soldiers, whereas Caesar had to oppose the most expert Commanders and well
trained soldiers that were in the world, his only excepted, and therefore his
undanted courage was far the greater in overcoming of them. But some will
object, How came it then to pass that their actions were so successful and
fortunate, since the first were accompanied with Temerity, and the second with
Injustice? It may be answered, God in his infinite Wisdom had long before
decreed that Alexander should give the last period to the Persian Monarchy,
Dan. 7.6.7.
and be the first Erector of the Grecian Monarchy, and Caesar the first Founder
of the Roman Monarchy, which was to excel in Strength and Power all the former
Monarchies; and it was Gods Will and Decree that gave their Temerary, and unjust
designs such success, and not their prudence, nor undantedness. The evil
effects of undantedness when it is abused.


Fourthly, The Effects of Undantedness are of two sorts, Evil and Good, the
evil proceed from the abuse that men make of so noble a Passion, but the good
are essential and natural to it: first, As there is nothing so good, but may be
abused by the corrupt and depraved inclination of men; even so this noble
Passion whose natural object is Virtue, Prudence, and Justice, is
extraordinarily abused by the evil intentions of men, who make it the Emissary
of their wrath and revenge. Genesis 34.26.
The undanted courage of Simeon and Levi was by them made the agent and
instrument of their cruel revenge upon all the Inhabitants of Shechem, and upon
Hamar and Shechem, the Father and the Son; and had not God out of his mercy
toward the old Patriarch Jacob, been pleased to send a panick fear upon the
Cities that were round about them, Genesis 35.5.
their rash temerity had been the cause of their utter ruin: secondly, The
undanted courage of Joab, who was a man of valor from his youth, was made by
his immoderate ambition the instrument of the two base and horrid murders of
Abner, 2 Samuel 3.27. 2 Samuel 20.9.
and of Amasa, two more righteous men then he: thirdly, The undanted courage of
Alexander, of Marius, of Sylla, of Cataline, and of Caesar, was by their
ambition made the instrument of the shedding of an ocean of humane blood: See
the History hf France.
fourthly, The undanted courage of the Duke of Guise, and of the Marshal de
Biron, was made by their excessive ambition the instrument of the desolations
that happened in the civil war of France, and of the troubles that happened in
Henry the fourths days, and of their own destruction, and fatal end: whereby
it appears, that if Valor and Undantedness of Courage be abused, and are not
accompanied with Prudence and Justice, that it is a destructive passion to
mankind, and to the owners themselves.

But the good Effects of Valor and Undantedness that is guided by Prudence,
The good effects of undantedness that is guided by Prudence and Justice.
and grounded upon Justice, are always honorable to their owners, and
profitable to the public, as it shall be proved by Instances: first, The
undanted courage of David that was then but a young stripling in opposing the
rage of the great Champion of the Philistines, Goliath, who was so presumptuous
as to defy the Army of Israel, and by consequence God himself, 1 Samuel 17.10.
was honorable to him, and a cause of joy and comfort to all Israel: secondly,
1 Samuel 14.14, 15, 16.
The undanted courage of Jonathan and of his Armor-Bearer, who assailed a whole
Garrison of the Philistines, and put them to rout, was honorable to him, and was
the cause of a great deliverance to all the people of Israel: thirdly, The
undanted courage of Scevola, See Livius in the first Decade, leb. 2.
who having attempted to kill the King Porsena, killed his Secretary by
mistake; and having been taken and brought before the King, burned his own
hands in the flame of a torch with an admirable constancy, to insinuate in the
said Kings mind, that there was three hundred young men more in his Camp that
had vowed to kill him, as he had essaied to do; by which unparalled
undantedness, the King concluded a Peace with the Romans, whereby Mutius
Scevola obtained great honor, and the Roman Commonwealth a great deliverance:
fourthly, See Livius in the first Decade, lib. 2.
The undanted courage of Horatius Cocles another Roman Citizen, who was so
valorous, as to oppose himself to the whole Army of the said King Porsena, See
Livius in the first Decade, lib. 2.
to hinder it from passing over a wooden bridge erected upon the river of Tiber
which led into the City of Rome, and made the same good till the bridge was
broken down behind him, and then threw himself into the river and saved
himself by swimming over; by which noble action he obtained great honor, See
Plutarch in Themistocles life.
and preserved the City of Rome from ruin: fifthly, the undanted courage of a
Greek soldier in the seafight that was fought between the Greeks and the
Persians near to the Island of Salamina, is worthy of eternal fame; for the
Galley which he was in, having boorded and grappled a Persian Galley, the
enemies having cut off the iron hooks, he set his right hand to hold it, and
that being cut off, he set his left hand, and that being also cut off, he held
the Galley fast with his teeth, till his head was cut off from his body:
sixthly, The like undanted courage was seen in a Christian soldier when the
City of Vienna was besieged by Soliman the Great, Emperor of the Turks, for in
a great storm that the Turks gave to win a great Bastion, or stone Bulwork,
which lies next to the Gate that leads to Bressbourgh in Hungaria; a Turkish
Janisary having climbed the said Bulwork, with a Turkish Flag in one of his
hands, to plant the same at the point of the Bulwork, a Christian Soldier
grappled with him, and flung him and himself, from the top of the Bulwork, to
the bottom of the Ditch, and so were both slain; choosing rather to sacrifice
his life for the preservation of the City, then to preserve the same, by
betraying the trust that was reposed on him. See the Turkish History, in
Solimans life.
These are the laudable effects of true Valor, and of an Undanted courage.

Fifthly, Ephesians. 6.16.
It may serve as a shield, to cast back the fiery darts of the temptations of
Satan. Secondly, It may serve as a precious antidote, to expel the venom of
all manner of Afflictions, Tribulations, and Persecutions, that can befall a
Christian in this life, specially if it be grounded upon a true confidence in
Christ; for as the Prophet David says, Psalm. 56.4.
In God I have put my trust, I will not fear what flesh can do unto me. And
certainly, if the Undanted courage of men proceed from a true confidence in
God, they shall never be moved, but shall be like the middle region of the Air,
which is in a perpetual tranquillity, when the undermost is disturbed by
impetuous Storms and Tempest, Romans 8.31.
for as Saint Paul says, If God be for us, who can be against us? Thirdly,
This Undanted confidence in the mercies of God, will comfort a Christian at the
hour of death, when all other worldly comforts do forsake him; for that is the
only perilous time, in which men have most need of this Grace of Spiritual
Confidence, and Undantedness; because, if Satan, that roaring Lion, does then
miss of his prey, men are for ever freed of his paws; and therefore he does
then most bestir himself, and uses the uttermost of his wiles, to entrap the
weak and sickly souls, into his snares. Fourthly, This undanted Confidence made
Shadrach, Dan. 3.19.
Meshach, and Abednego, to despise the burning flames of a Furnace, seven times
more fierce then it was ordinarily heated; and made the Prophet Daniel to
contemn the rage of the hunger-bitten Lions, and 7.22.
when he was cast into their Den, by the malicious envy of the Princes,
Presidents, and Governors of Persia. Fifthly, By Faith, and this undanted
Confidence, all the ancient Heroes of the old Testament, named in the eleventh
Chapter of Saint Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 11.26.
did suffer with admirable patience those Anguishes of Body, and perplexities
of the Mind there specified, because they had respect unto the recompense of
the reward. Sixthly, This undanted Confidence, caused the Apostle Peter, and
others, to despise the threatenings and beating of the High Priest; and to
rejoice, Acts 5.41.
because they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name. And also, it
made all the Martyrs that suffered in Queen Mary's days, to bear with admirable
patience, the greatest torments that could be inflicted upon them.

It does then appear by these discourses, that an undanted Confidence in God,
serves as a shield in time of persecution to Gods children; and that Valor, and
an undanted Courage, guided by Prudence, and grounded upon Justice, is always
honorable to the owners, and profitable to the public; and that rash
Undantedness, is nothing but mere vanity, temerity, and vexation of Spirit, etc.

CHAP. XV.
Of the vanity of the passion of Fear.

AS nothing can be so good, but it may be abused, so nothing can be so evil,
but good use may be made of it. Wine is excellent and good, for it has a
natural propriety to rejoice the heart; Psalm. 104.15.
and yet diverse men abuse Wine, and by the immoderate drinking of it, become
worse then bruit Beasts, because they deprive themselves of Judgment and
Reason. The Viper is naturally rank poison, and yet the Mithridate, and other
Antidotes against venoms, are composed of it; even so this passion of Fear is
much abused, and made worse then it is, although it proceed from an evil
spring, I mean, the weakness and infirmity of men; yet God is pleased to make
good use of it to convert sinners, and to make them prosecute with greater
fervency, then they would otherwise do, the ways of Righteousness. Diverse
conceive Fear to be a Feminine passion, and unworthy to be harbored in a
Masculine Breast; yet it makes the proudest of men to be cautious, and
circumspect in their undertakings, and clips the wings of their vain hopes, and
ambitious designs. Tacitus says, See Tasitus in the life of Nero.
That it serves as a curb to the licentious will of Princes, and of all others
that are in power and authority; and for instance says, That as long as
Agrippina, the mother of the Emperor Nero lived, of whom he stood in fear, his
actions were not so exorbitantly wicked, as after her death; but he having like
a graceless son, deprived her of life, took free liberty to commit the greatest
impieties that his heart could imagine. And Joash King of Juda did the like;
for as long as Jehojada, the high Priest lived, whom he feared, he seemed to
love the Lord; but soon after his death, he gave himself over to Idolatry and
cruelty; for like an ungrateful wretch, he caused Zechariah, 2 Chro. 24.17, 22.
the son of Jehojada to be slain, because he only delivered unto him, the
message he had received from the Lord. Diverse prefer Love, before Fear; but
there cannot be any true Love without Fear. Others say, it is better to be
feared, then beloved, but it is better to be equally loved and feared; for men
without Love, endevor to be rid of the object of their Fears: But if men be
beloved and feared; this composure keeps off all danger, and begets security
and obedience: Neither can there be any filial obedience without Love; for the
obedience that proceeds from Fear, is not free, Prove. 1.7. and 20.2.
but forced. The fear of the Lord, is the beginning of knowledge. And the fear
of a King is as the roaring of a Lion; who so provokes him to anger, sins
against his own soul. How much more should men be afraid to provoke Gods wrath
by their sins? and yet that is one of their least fears; for they fear those
things which they should not fear, and fear not to sin, which they should most
fear. But since the fear of the Lord, is the beginning of wisdom, and of all
saving knowledge; which knowledge does teach men to be afraid of sin, which is
the greatest evil: Give me leave to enlarge my discourse upon these ensuing
particulars, that you may know to fear nothing but sin.

1. On the definition of Fear. 2. On the Nature of it. 3. On the causes and
remedies of men's fears. 4. On the evil and good Effects of Fear. 5. On the
Spirtiual use of Fear.
The Moralists do vary in opinion, Boujou in his Commentaries upon Aristotle's
Ph^s. lib. 16. cap. 6.
concerning the definition of this Passion of Fear. Fear, says one, is a
passion, and apprehension of an evil that is to come; but near at hand, and
looked for, and unlikely to be avoided. Fear, says another, The Bishop of
Marseille, p. 408.
is nothing else, but a Grief and Dolor of the soul, apprehending an evil at
hand; in which men see little probability it can be eschewed, although it aims
at the annihilation of their Being, or to some dismal disgrace, that threatens
their life or estate. Yet it will appear by the nature, the proprieties and
effects of Fear; that men are rather transported with Fears of imaginary Evils,
then of real; and that men's fears do but rarely proceed from the annihilation
of their Being: However, it is the fourth passion, incident to the irrascible
Appetite, and the opposite and great Antagonist to the noble passion of
Undantedness.

Secondly, parts of the body; contrarily Fear withdraws the blood from the
extremes of the body to the heart, because Fear is a cold passion; and the
heart finding this cold to oppress it, withdraws, and calls as it were, the
blood and vital spirits from the further parts of the body to his aid, that by
their natural heat, he may be revived and cherished. And that is the reason,
why diverse men and women have been deprived of life, by a sudden fear or
fright, because this cold passion congealeth the blood about the heart, as a
great frost congealeth water into Ice; but if the Fear be not so violent, yet
it produces a great alteration in the body; for men's and women's faces will
become as white as a cloth, and sometimes all their members will tremble as a
leaf; and the motion proceeding from this alteration, is so swift, and
forcible, that women great with-childe, miscarry by it; nay, it does oftentimes
turn the child in their womb, which depriveth the mother, and the child of
life. But Fear and Dolor have a great resemblance one with the other; for they
have both this withdrawing quality, and are both of an extreme cold and dry
nature; and therefore Fear and Sorrow are compared to the Winter Season, and
Joy and Delectation to the Spring and Summer, in which the vegetative Creatures
sprought and spring out their branches, leaves, flowers, and fruits; but in
Winter time, they withdraw their sap, which is their life, into their Roots, as
Fear and Sorrow does draw the blood and vital spirits about the heart; that is
the essential cause and motion of men's lives: Having both one and the same end,
the vegetatives to preserve themselves from the Frost and Snow, and the heart
to warm and cherish it self, against these cold and frosty passions of Fear and
Sorrow.

Thirdly, nor their childrens children; which kind of Fear proceeds from a
distrust of Gods providence, and therefore as odious to God as any other kind
of Fear, as it shall be proved, when I come to speak of the effects of this
passion. First, Worldly men Fear to loose their honors and dignities. Secondly,
Their treasures and riches. Thirdly, The enjoyment of their delights and
pleasures. These three fading, and vanishing things, are the most common causes
of men's fears: The remedies against these, are, First, to consider, that there
are not many noble called; 1 Cor. 1.26.28.
and that the things which are most despised, God has chosen. Prove. 23.5.
Secondly, That riches certainly make themselves wings, they fly away as an
Eagle toward heaven. Thirdly, That pleasures are of no continuance, and leave
a sting in the conscience at their departure, Eccles. 2.11.
and are but mere vanity and vexation of Spirit. Fourthly, Men fear Poverty,
and to prevent the same, addict themselves for the greater part to unlawful
courses of gain, remembering not this wise saying of Solomon. Prove. 28.2^.
He that makes haste to be rich, shall not be innocent. Poverty is no Vice,
and yet men abhor Poverty more then any Vice, nay, more then Sin, the worst of
evils. The remedy against Poverty, is Contentedness; for many believe they are
poor, when they are rich; and many think themselves rich, when they are poor.
As Christ said to the Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans, Because thou
say, I am rich, Revel. 3.14.
and increased with goods, and have need of nothing, and know not that thou
art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Contentedness is
a gift, and grace of God; for if men be never so rich, and want that grace,
they are but poor and miserable, and like Cormorants that can never be
satisfied. This Fear also proceeds from Distrust, and the remedy of it, is to
rely upon Gods providence, and on this precept, and promise of our blessed
Savior. Which of you, by taking thought, Matthew. 6.27, 28, 29, 31, 33.
can add one cubit unto his stature? and why take ye thought for raiment?
Consider the Lillies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do
they spin. And yet I say unto you, That Solomon in all his glory, was not
arrayed like one of these. And in the 31, 33. Verses. Therefore take no
thought, saying, What shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or wherewith shall
we be clothed? But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness; and
all these things shall be added unto you. Fifthly, Men fear to lose their
wives, women their husbands, Parents their children, and children their
Parents, and one friend another: But this Fear proceeds from the want, they
conceive, they will have of their help, and assistance. The remedy to this
Fear, is this consideration, That all men are mortal, and that all are of the
dust, Eccles. 3.20.
and all turn to dust again. And let not Christians have less constancy then a
Heathen; to whom tidings being brought, Plutarch in his Morals.
that his only son was dead, he answered, I knew he was not begotten to be
immortal; and to utterly root out this Fear, which proceeds from the distrust
of the want of their aid or assistance, let men have always in their mind,
Romans 8.28.
this saying of Saint Paul, All things work together for good to them that love
God. Sixthly, Men fear persecutions, tribulations, and afflictions: This Fear
proceeds from the infirmity of the flesh, and from the pusillanimity of men's
minds, and from an antipathy of nature, who abhors Anguish and Dolor: The
remedy of this Fear, is Fortitude, and an undanted Courage; with this
assurance, That by tribulations and crosses, God is pleased oftentimes to call
his children to repentance, and make them more fervent and zealous in the ways
of Righteousness. As the Prophet David says, Psalm. 119.67.
Before I was afflicted, I went astray, but now I have kept thy word.
Seventhly, Men fear banishment and long imprisonments: This Fear also proceeds
from want of a Masculine courage; for a Heathen could say, when he was
banished, Plutarch in his Morals.
That the whole world was his Native Country. The only remedy against this
Fear, is Patience; and as the prison does retain men's bodies, so it may, if
they make good use of their banishment and imprisonment, refrain them from sin,
and increase their Moral virtues, and Spiritual Graces. Acts 16.25.
Paul and Silas prayed, and sung Psalms, and praised God in prison. And Sir
Walter Rawleigh, and La Nove, have made themselves famous by the learned Works
they have written in prison. See Plutarch in their lives.
And Solon and Cicero did improve their learning, and Moral virtues, in their
exile or banishment. Eighthly, Men fear lingering and tedious Diseases; as the
Consumption of the Lungs, the Hectic Fever, and the wasting of the Liver: But
this Fear proceeds from their natural infirmity, that is impatient of pain;
for lingering Diseases prepare men for repentance, whereas sudden diseases
deprive them oftentimes of that Grace. The remedy against this Fear, is to seek
to the Lord, before men seek after the Physicians; for the issues of life and
death, are in his hands. Ezekiah, 2 Kings 20.2, 6, 7.
King of Judah, was soon cured of his Mortal disease, because he called and
prayed unto the Lord, with an unfeigned sincerity of heart. Ninthly, Men fear
to fall into a decrepit age: A vain and ridiculous Fear, since the oldest man
alive does commonly hope, and desire to live a year longer. It is true, that if
decrepit age and poverty do meet, it may be called, The Misery of Miseries; for
besides the many infirmities that are incident to decrepit age, the waywardness
common to it, is the most insupportable, for it makes all things distastful
unto them; and being deprived by Poverty, of all worldly comforts, this
aggravates far more the misery of decrepit age. The remedy of it, is to attend
with patience, the time appointed by the Lord, of the separation of the body
and soul, and to say with old Simeon, Luke 2 29.
Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word; for
mine eyes have seen thy salvation. Tenthly and lastly, Men are afraid of death,
and especially the wicked, because it deprives them of their honors, riches,
and pleasures (the enjoyment of which, is their Paradise upon Earth) and
ferries them over to the eternal woes. But death is welcome to the children of
God; for they account death as their deliverer, who frees them from the
continual miseries, and afflictions of this world, who are commonly their
portion in this life; for they are assured, that the sting of death has been
taken away, and that the redemption of their sins has been purchased at a dear
rate, viz. By the sheding of the precious blood of the only Son of God, our
blessed Savior Jesus Christ. And therefore defy death, and say to her face, O
death, where is thy sting? 1 Cor. 15.55.
O grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin, and the strength of
sin is the the Law; but thanks be to God, which gives us victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, viz. Evil and Good: The first evil effect of it, is, The evil
effects of Fear.
That it dants the courage of men, and makes valiant Soldiers become cowards;
and this is called a Panick Fear: The Greek and Roman Histories are full of
instances to prove it, which I will pass over for brevity sake, and will only
relate this ensuing, See Philip de Commines in the War of the Public good; for
so it was called, or the battle de Monlebery.
recorded by Philip de Commines. In the beginning of the reign of Lewis the
eleventh, King of France, the Duke Charles of Burgundy, and the discontented
Officers of the Crown of France, joined with him, raised a great Army, and came
near to Paris, against the said King; who hearing of their approach, came
against them with another great Army, and having both pitched their Camp,
within a mile one of another, with a resalution to give battle; the next day it
fell out to be a misty morning, and certain Troops of Horse being on both sides
sent out, to discover the intentions of both Armies, they saw as they imagined,
a great range of Lanciers standing on a high ground, the Bourgonians conceiving
they came toward them; and the French imagining they came toward their Camp;
and so transported both with a Panick fear, they fled as hard as they could
drive toward their Camp, and raised a fearful alarm, saying, The enemies were
at hand; and so put both Armies into a strange confusion; but when the Sun had
dispersed the mist, it was apparently seen that these imaginary Lanciers were
but Tysels growing upon a long high bank. And the two Armies being mixed, the
French having the better, another Panick fear came amongst the French Horse,
Fear begets cruelty in effeminate Princes.
by a false rumor that the King was slain; that made them flee as if all had
been lost; and had not the King suddenly showed himself, the French Army had
utterly been routed. Secondly, Fear begets cruelty in the hearts of effeminate
Princes; for it has been observed that Pusillanimity is ever accompanied with
Fear: The effeminate Emperors of Rome have all been addicted to this passion of
Fear; See Tacitus, Dion, Herodian and Suetonius.
Caligula did usually hide himself under a bed out of fear, when it Thundered
and Lightened; and Nero, Domitianus, Commodus and Heliogabalus were afraid if
men did but whisper together: and they were all more cruel then Tigers or
Cannibals. Thirdly, Fear has no regard to consanguinity; Tiberius Nero out of
fear, destroyed by one means or other, all his nearest kinsmen, See Tacitus in
the Life of Nero.
and caused the valorous and noble Germanicus his Nephew to be poisoned by
Piso. And Lewis the Eleventh King of France, caused his own Brother Charles Duke
of Normandy to be poisoned out of Fear; See the History of France and of
England.
and so did Richard the Third, his two hopeful Nephews: And out of reason of
State, or more properly out of Fear, The elder sons of the Ottoman Family, have
for these many years caused their younger Brothers to be strangled. Fourthly,
Fear does in admirable Effects go beyond Nature; for a Secretary of the State
of Florence, being over night condemned to die, was so transported with the
Fear of death, that out of the violent apprehension of it, the hair of his head
and beard, See the Florentine History.
which was as black as a Crow, became before the morning as white as snow.
Lastly, Fear is the cosen german of despair; for it makes men to eschew the
shame of a public death, to lay violent hands on themselves; For Hannibal
rather then he would suffer to be made a public spectacle of shame to the
Romans, poisoned himself: And Cardinal Wolsey rather then he would lose his
head upon Tower Hill, did the like, and died in Leicester Abbey.

The good Effects of Fear may be these: First, Six good Effects of the Passion
of Fear.
If it were not for the Fear of the punishments appointed by the Laws of the
Land, to chastise the misdemeanors of men, the Rodes and Highways would be so
full of Thieves and Murderers, that honest men should not be able to go from
one Town to another. Secondly, If it were not for Fear, Laws and Magistrates
would be trampled under feet, and all manner of Obedience, Reverence, and
respect would be banished; Joane would be as good as my Lady, and Jack-Straw
would be as good as my Lord Mayor; the Footman as good as his Lord, and the
Servant as good as his Master; but Fear of correction makes every one to give
honor to whom honor is due, and to know his Rank and Degree. Thirdly, If it
were not for Fear, rash and timerary men would fix their hopes beyond the
Stars, and would think nothing impossible unto them; but fear clips their
wings, and makes them to be more considerate. Fourthly, Fear is the only
Antidote against the venom of presumption; and were it not for Fear, this
world could not subsist; for there never was an Age so full of Phaetons and
Icarus's as this, that would with their waxed wings flee to Heaven, or burn the
Earth by the guiding of Phoebus Chariot, if Fear did not restrain them.
Fifthly, Fear is the faithful Counselor of great Politicians and Statesmen,
who would otherwise vaunt themselves (as the great Mathematician Archimedes
did, to remove the World, or turn it up-side down, if he could find out a
solid Foundation to plant his Mathematical Instruments) to set all the World
together by the ears, to make their Prince the only Monarch of the Earth, by
the means of their deep Machiavilian Policies: but Fear whispers them in the
ear, that Policy has ever been and ever shall be subordinate to Destiny, and
that the secret Decrees of God shall come to pass in despite of them, and will
turn their Wisdom and Policy into foolishness. Sixthly, As fear of temporal
punishment is a Curb to restrain open and gross Sinners from criminal
offenses: so the Fear of eternal punishment is a strong motive to withdraw
civil men from their secret sins; for let civil men be as private in their sins
as they can, yet the All-seeing Eye of God and their own Conscience are
witnesses of their sin; so that their Conscience which is their Accuser, does
infuse into their mind this Fear of eternal punishment, whereby they are as
much restrained from their secret sins, as the gross Sinners are by the Fear of
temporal punishment. And as the hope of the recompense of reward does draw many
into the way of righteousness; so the Fear of eternal punishment does enforce
many to forsake sin, and to turn unfainedly unto God; for Sinners must be first
humbled and brought low by the terror of the Law, before they can unfainedly
embrace the gracious Promises of the Gospel: I do therefore conclude, that
spiritual Fear joined with spiritual hope, are effectual means to beget in
Christians a hunger and thirst to obtain by the merits of Christ eternal life.

Fifthly, The spiritual Uses of Fear may be these. 1. Men are not only to fear,
The spiritual uses of fear.
but also to love God; that their fear may not be a servile, but a filial fear;
for the Devil himself fears and trembles at the very name of God; yet does he
not love, but hate and detest him. 2. Men are not only to fear to disobey God,
but they are also to endevor to do his will, and to perform his commandments,
that they may neither commit sins of commission, nor sins of omission; for it
is not sufficient for them to eschew evil, but they must also endeavor to do
good. 3. Men are not only to fear and to love God, but they are also to love,
and to fear to offend their neighbors, that they may fulfill the second Table
as well as the first, and observe this precept of our blessed Savior: Math.
7.12.
Therefore all things whatsoever you would that men should do to you, do ye
even so to them: for this is the Law and the Prophets. 4. Men are not only to
love and fear God, but they are also to love, fear, honor and respect his
Substitutes or Deputies upon Earth; I mean the supreme and subordinate
Magistrates to whom he has given the sword of Justice in hand for to preserve
the Innocent, and to punish the wicked; Romans 13.1.
For there is no power but of God; the powers that be are ordained of God. 5.
Men cannot fear God, except they fear to commit sin, because there is nothing
more odious to God then sin; and such as fear God, do hate and abhor sin: for
the fear of the Lord does always precede the hatred of sin, as it appears by
this saying of Solomon, Prove 10 27.^
Fear the Lord, and depart from Evil: Intimating, that men cannot depart from
sin before they fear the Lord: And how pleasant and acceptable this fear is
unto God, it may be collected by these sayings of the Prophet David, Psalm. 61.5.
Thou have, says he, given me the heritage of those that fear thy name;
meaning, that such as fear the Lord, have a most excellent Heritage, as it is
by him confirmed by these words, Psalm. 16.6.
The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly
Heritage. And in another place he says, that God is the help and shield of
those who fear him. Again, Solomon says, Psalm. 115.11.
The fear of the Lord prolongeth days, Prove. 10.27.
but the days of the wicked shall be shortened: Whereby it appears that such as
fear the Lord, have most excellent prerogatives. 6. The fear of the Lord is the
rarest jewel under the Sun; for King Solomon after he had shown in his Book of
recantations, that all things under the cope of Heaven were but mere vanity and
vexation of spirit, he concludes, That to fear God, Eccl. 12.23.
and to keep his Commandments, is the whole duty of man. And I conclude with
him, that all fears whatsoever (except it be the fear of God, and the fear of
sin) are mere vanity and vexation of spirit.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the vanity of the passion of Wrath.

IN the former Ages of the World, They only were accounted generous, and of a
masculine courage, that could with patience endure all manner of injuries, and
suffer with meekness all kind of reproaches that were done or said unto them,
without being moved or distempered with this fiery passion of Wrath: as it may
appear by these ensuing Instances that have been recorded by the Ancient
Authors, in the praise and commendation of such Princes and private men, See
Plutarch in his Trearise against Wrath.
that have been endowed with this rare virtue of Fortitude. It is recorded that
Antigonus King of Macedonia walking one evening through his Camp, heard some of
his Soldiers to curse him bitterly; but he with an admirable patience, without
being moved or distempered, prayed them lovingly to go a little further, that
the King might not hear them. See Sueto mus in Augustus life.
And the Emperor Augustus Caesar, being earnestly entreated by his Son-in-law
Tiberius Nero, to punish severely the Author of diverse scandalous Libels that
had been dispersed through the Streets of Rome against him: Answered, without
being moved with anger, That the greatest correction he could inflict upon him,
was to disdain to take notice of his calumnies. And King Philip, Father to
Alexander the Great, See Plutarch in Alexander, and in Demosthenes lives.
being entreated by one of his Courtiers to punish severely an Athenian Orator
that made him odious to the Greeks, by venting in his public Declamations,
bitter invectives against him: answered, without being distempered with wrath,
It may be, said he, I have not as yet done him any good, as I have done to many
others that deserved not so well as he; whereupon he sent him a present of two
Talents in Gold, that made this Nightingal to change his tune, and to exalt the
Liberality and Heroical Virtues of the King as high as the Sky: And Philip
being informed of it, told his Courtier, that he was a better Physician then
he, to cure the malignancy of evil-tongued men. See the French History.
And Lewis the Twelfth King of France, being persuaded by some of his Peers to
avenge himself of some affronts and injuries done unto him, by some great
Officers of the Crown in the days of Charles the Tenth, his Predecessor, when
he was only Duke of Orleans: answered with an admirable magnanimity of
courage, That it was unseemly for a King of France to revenge himself of the
injuries done formerly to the Duke of Orleans. But in this decrepit Age of the
World wherein we live, They only are reputed generous, and of a manly courage
that are addicted to wrath, and apt to vindicate themselves for the least
offense and injury which are done unto them, although it be done unwillingly.
And this is one of the causes of all the Divisions that reign in this
Commonwealth. Give me leave therefore to enlarge my discourse upon these
particulars, to show you the evil Nature, Proprieties, and Effects of this
furious passion of Wrath.

1. Upon the definition of Wrath. 2. Upon the causes that move Wrath. 3. Upon
the Nature and Proprieties of it. 4. Upon the evil and good Effects of the
same. 5. Upon the Remedies of it.
The Moralists do vary in their Opinions, concerning the definition of this
Passion; Senalt and others maintain it has an opposite; but the Bishop of
Marseilles, and Theophraste Boujou Lord of Beaulien, in his Commentaries upon
Aristoles Physics maintains the contrary, to whose Works I refer the Reader
for brevity sake. To come to the definition it self, Wrath, says Boujou,
Boujou, fol. 723.
is a Passion intising men to vindicate themselves for some injury received, or
for having been hindered to attain to some good by them prosecuted and desired.
Wrath, says Senault, Senault, page 405.
is nothing else but a violent motion of the sensitive appetite, provoking men
to seek revenge for some offense received. However it is the last passion
incident to the irascible appetite; for I am of the Opinion of those that
maintain it has no opposite; and is distingushed by these three names, Anger,
Choler, and Wrath. Anger is as it were the infancy of it, Choler its
adolescencie, and Wrath its virility or maturity, and the highest and
superlative degree of the distemper of this fiery and destructive passion of
Wrath.

Secondly, The causes of Wrath are numerous; but I will reduce them to these
four Heads.

1. To the Pride. 2. To the Impatiency. 3. To the indiscretion. 4. To the
over-credulity of men.
For the first; It was Pride that moved Simeon and Levi, to slay in their wrath
under color of Piety and Religion, Hamor and Shechem, and all the innocent
Males of their City, because of the dishonor they conceived to have received by
the rape of their sister Dinah: but the reward of their wrath was this heavy
curse of their Father Jacob; Cursed be their anger, Genesis 34. v 25.497.
for it was fierce: and their wrath, for it was cruel; I will divide them in
Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. And it was Pride that moved Nebuchadnezzar
King of Babylon, to command in his fierce wrath that Shadrach, Meshach and
Abednego should be cast into a burning Furnace heated seven times more then it
was wont to be, because they had refused to obey his imperious command: viz. to
worship the golden Image he had caused to be set up. But the reward of his
unparalleld pride and wrath was this, that he was deposed of his Empire, driven
away from the company of men, and enforced to live amongst the beasts of the
field, till he was humbled, Dan. 3.20. and 4.32.
and did acknowledge that God was the King of Kings.

For the Second; The ambitious Impatiency of Joab moved him in his wrath to
slay perfidiously Abner and Amasa, that he might still continue chief General
of the Armies of the People of Israel: But the reward of his wrath and ambition
was this, that king David at his dying hour charged Solomon his son that he
should not suffer Joabs hoary head to go down to the grave in peace. 2 Samuel 27.
and 20.10.
And the natural impatiency of Charles Duke of Burgundy was by Custom changed
into such an habit of wrath, that upon the smallest misdemeanor of any of his
servants, there was but a word and a blow: But the reward of his inconsiderate
wrath was the cause he was betrayed and slain at the rout of the Battle of
Nancy by a Neapolitan Commander, See Philip de Commines in his life.
to whom he had given a box on the ear.

For the Third; The indiscretion of Clitus, and of Callisthenes, two intimate
friends of Alexander, in their out-braiding speeches, See Plutarch in
Alexanders life.
moved this Prince to such a wrath that he slew them with his own hands. And
the indiscreet and unadvised answer that Zeno gave to Dionysius the Tyrant of
Syracuse, when he lovingly required he should give unto him his two Daughters
in marriage, viz. that he would rather see them carried to their graves, then
they should be married to such a Tyrant; See Plutarch in his Morals.
did kindle such a wrath in the heart of Dionysius, that he caused those two
innocent Ladies to be slain, and then invited their Father to their Funerals.

For the Fourth; The over-credulity of King Ahasuerus in believing the false
reports that Haman his Favorite made unto him against the Jews, kindled such a
wrath in his breast, Esth. 3.8.
that he caused presently a Decree to be passed for the utter destruction of
all the Jews that were scattered throughout the hundred and seven and twenty
Provinces of his Dominions. And the over-credulity of the good Emperor
Theodosius in believing the false reports of some of his Courtiers concerning
an uprore and mutiny that had happened in the City of Thessalonica, See the
Ecclesiastical Histories.
did beget such a wrath in this good Princes heart, that he instantly passed a
Decree that all the Inhabitants of that City, both men, women and children
should be put to the sword: But after this Decree had been put in execution, he
was truly informed that very few had a hand in this mutiny: for which
inconsiderate wrath of his he was much afflicted and penitent all the days of
his life.

Thirdly, The Proprieties of Wrath are these: 1. It is of an ayrie and fiery
quality, The Proprieties of Wrath.
It is also of an ayrie quality, because the mixture of the blood, which is
compared to the Element of the Air, makes the same as light and swift as the
Air. 2. Wrath is of a spreading and dilative quality, for as a small piece of
Leven does dilate it self in a short time through a great lump of dow, and make
the same rise and swell; so this choleric humor mixed with the blood, dilates
it self through all the parts of the body, and inflames them all with Anger and
Wrath. 3. Wrath has a changing or altering quality; for it changes the coulor
of the Face, sets the eyes on fire, and makes the members of some men's bodies
to tremble like a leaf. Again, in some other men, it will make their Face as
white as a Clout, their Tongues to stammer, and their Eyes to roll in their
Heads; all which symptoms and qualities do confirm the violent fury of this
passion. And that is the reason why it is compared to the flashof Gunpowder,
or to the overboyling of a Pot. 4. Wrath opposed and hindered to vent it self,
does in time turn into an inveterate hatred, or at the best into a deep and
incurable sorrow; and sometimes it induces men to despair and to lay violent
hands upon themselves when they cannot be revenged to their minds upon their
enemies.

Fourthly, The pernicious effects of Wrath.
1. The virulency of this passion is so pernicious that it blemisheth the
graces of Gods dearest Children, and extinguisheth all moral virtues in civil
and moral men: Nay, it deprives them of reason and judgment, and makes them go
astray from Justice and equity. King David was a man after Gods own heart; yet
by the means of this passion he committed a great injustice, in suffering the
false Accusator Ziba to have half the land of the Innocent Mephibosheth, as it
appears by this unjust sentence; 2 Samuel 19. verse. 27, 29.
And the king said unto him, why speak thou any more of this matter? I have
said, Thou and Ziba divide the Land. 2. Wrath begets contention and strife
betwixt the chiefest vessels of grace; for it wrought such a contention between
S. Paul and Barnabas, that it made Paul to associate himself with Silas; and
Barnabas with Mark; and so divided one from the other these two famous
Instruments of the propagation of the glory of God. 3. Wrath enticeth men to
cruelty, and is often the cause of the ruin and desolation of great and
Populous Cities. The Emperor Frederick was so transported with wrath by an
Affront done by the People of Milan to the Empress his wife, that he caused
his Army to sack the City of Milan, and to put all the Inhabitants of it to the
Sword, See the Fcclesiastical history.
and afterward to burn the same to the ground. And the Duke Charles of Burgundy
moved to wrath by an injury done to himself by the Citizens of Dinan, See
Philip de Commines.
caused all the Inhabitants to be slain by the Sword, and the City to be burned
to ashes, and salt to be sown in the fields of it, to make them for ever
barren. 4. When men are transported with Wrath, they have no regard to Father,
Mother nor Brethren. Genesis 4.8.
Cain slew his Brother Abel; Nero his Mother; and Selymus poisoned his Father,
out of wrath proceeding from ambition: So that Wrath is the cause of much
Blooshed, and unparalleld Evils, Miseries and Desolations.

The good effects of Wrath are these.

1. It makes Cowards to become valiant; The good Effects of Wrath.
for the greatest Coward in the World being transported with Wrath, becomes as
bold as a Lion.

2. Wrath inciteth Christians to a Godly Indignation, when they see the Worship
and Glory of God abused; and this is the only commendable effect of Wrath: for
the which, Phineas the Son of Eleazar, the Son of Aaron the high Priest,
obtained this following Blessing of the Lord for having slain Zimri and Cozbi
in his wrath, proceeding from a fervent Zeal to Gods glory; Wherefore the Lord
said, Behold I give unto him my Covenant of Peace; And he shall have it, Numb.
25.12, 13.
and his Seed after him; even the Covenant of an everlasting Preisthood:
because he was zealous for his God, and made an atonement for the children of
Israel.

3. The moderate Anger and Wrath of Parents toward their Children; and of
Masters toward their Servants, is oftentimes of great use to keep them in due
obedience, and to make them more diligent in the performance of their duty.

4. The Wrath of God is of great use to bring Impenitent Sinners to repentance.
For when they hear that his Wrath burns like fire, Psalm. 89.46.
and that it is like a whirlwind which turns upside down the highest
mountains, it makes them put their hands upon their breasts, and acknowledge
with the penitent Publican, Luke 18.10.
that they are not worthy to look up to heaven. And I am persuaded, considering
the perverse inclinations of men, that more are converted by the apprehension
of his Wrath, then by the gracious invitations of his Love are Promises; yet
happy and blessed are they who are drawn near him by his incomprehensible Love
in Christ Jesus toward them: and that fear more to displease him out of a
sincere and filial Love unto him, then out of a servile apprehension of his
Wrath.

To conclude, it appears by the Nature, Proprieties, and Effects of Wrath, that
it is a passion above all others that men should most endevor to subdue and
keep subordinate to Reason. And to that end observe these ensuing Remedies that
are to be used to hinder this stubborn Passion to obtain the Mastery over Men.

Fifthly, The Remedies to curb and keep under subjection this ragefull and
furious Passion of Wrath, may be reduced to these Four heads: 1. Four Remedies
against the venom of Wrath.
Humility. 2. Patience. 3. Prudence. 4. Charity.


For the First; Humility is an excellent Remedy to assuage the fiery rage of
Wrath; Prove. 15.1.
For as Solomon says, A soft Answer turns away Wrath; but grievous words
stir up Anger: And as fire goes out of it self if it be not nourished by some
Combustible matter: so Wrath will vanish into smoke, if it be not fomented and
increased by ill Language, or by insolent Postures and Misdemeanors. Abigail by
her humble gesture, and gentle speech, did suddenly pacify the fiery Wrath of
David that had been kindled by the churlishness of Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.22, 24.
and prevented the execution of the rash Decree that David had pronounced
against Nabal and all his Family. Nay, Humility is so powerful and acceptable
to God, that it is able to appease his Wrath, as it appears by Gods gracious
and merciful Carriage toward King David himself after the commission of the
two abhorred sins of Adultery and Murder: for he had no sooner acknowledged his
sin with an unfeigned Humility, 2. Sam. 12.13.
but God was pleased to pardon him the guilt, although he inflicted a heavy
Punishment upon his Family for it.

For the Second; Patience is an approved Remedy to appease the rage of Wrath:
as it appears by the Counsel that Athenodorus gave to his Pupil Augustus
Caesar, whom he knew naturally addicted to Wrath. At the first motion of this
Passion, said he to him, See Sueton. in August. life.
You must endevor to crush this Cockatrice in the shell: but if it cannot be,
break the fury of it by Patience: And before you decree any thing in your
Anger, count upon your fingers ends the four and twenty Letters of the Greek
Alphabet: For by this small intermission of time your Reason and Judgment will
come to it self again, that has been perverted by the fury of this Passion of
Wrath. It is Recorded that Plato upon the Relation of an unpleasant Message was
something moved with Wrath: whereupon he rose from his seat to fetch his staff:
But another Philosopher seeing it, said unto him, It is unseemly for you Plato
to be thus moved with Wrath as to fetch your staff to beat a Messenger; See
Plutarch. in his Mor.
You are deceived, said he: It was to burb and beat mine own Wrath that began
to be Master over my Reason.

Thirdly; Prudence is a sovereign Remedy against Wrath: For Solomon says, He
that is slow to Wrath, Prove. 14.28.
is of great understanding: but he that is hasty of spirit, exalts folly.
Whereby it appears, that such as are apt to be transported with immoderate
Wrath, are like fools or mad men: and that there is none truly wise but such as
can pacify their Wrath. And that was the reason why Socrates was judged by the
Oracle of Apollo to be the wisest man of all the Greeks, See Plutar in his Mor.
in his Treatise against Wrath.
because he could not be moved to Wrath: for had not he been patient and
prudent, he and his wife had lived like dogs and cats: but he with an admirable
patience did bear with her Infirmities and waywardness. It is Recorded that
Diogenes the Cynick being told that the Athenians jeered him for his rustical
and uncivil deportments: let them jeer says he, for they may do it long
enough before they can cast me into a Passion of Wrath.

Fourthly; Charity is a most excellent Remedy against Wrath: 1 Cor. 13.7.
for as S. Paul says, Charity bears all things, beleiveth all things, hops
all things, endures all things: so if men be endowed with this Superlative
Grace of Charity, they will not be moved nor transported with Wrath against
their Brethren: But the want of Charity one toward another is the Cause that
men are filled with Malice, Envy and Wrath. For Charity suffers long, and is
kind: Charity envyeth not, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6.
Charity vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, does not behave it self
unseemly, thinks no evil: Rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the
truth. These are the noble and gracious Effects of Charity; which S. Paul sets
out so fully and elegantly, to make men in love with Charity, as the chiefest
of all Spiritual Graces, as it appears in the last Verse of this Chapter, And
now abides Faith, 1 Cor. 13.13.
Hope, Charity, these Three, but the greatest of These is Charity. Men
therefore should earnestly endevor to obtain of God by fervent prayers this
excellent Grace of Charity; For without it all other Graces are without life,
and of no validity, as S. Paul does witness the same from the beginning of this
Chapter to the latter end. And I am verily persuaded that the want of Charity
is the cause of all the Divisions and Contentions that reign in this
Commonwealth, and why men are so apt to Vindication and Wrath; Which the
Heathen Philosophers did abhor and detest as the most ragefull and furious
Passion of all others, fitter for brute and cruel beasts, as Lions and Tigers,
then for Rational men, and specially for Christians, who have before their eyes
for a special President the admirable Patience and unparalleld Meekness of our
Blessed Savior, to make them hate and detest Anger, Choler and Wrath; for the
Lord (says the Prophet Isaiah) has laid on him the iniquities of us all;
Isal. 53.6, 7.
He was oppressed, and he was afflicted: yet he opened not his mouth. He is
brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a Sheep before her Shearer is dumb,
so he opened not his mouth. The Event, Issue and Accomplishment of this
Prophesy is clearly expressed in the 27. Chapter of S. Matthew, where you may
see how the Jews spit in his face, set a crown of thorns upon his head, put
upon him a scarlet robe, and gave him a reed in his right hand, and in derision
bowed the knee before him, and mocked him, saying, Mat. 27.28, 29, 30.
Hail king of the Jews. And yet for all these injuries, shameful reproaches,
and unparalleld ignominies, he never opened his mouth to give them a bad word:
far from being possessed with the least appearance or motion of Anger, Choler
and Wrath. This Example should induce Christians to abhor and eschew this vile
Passion of Wrath more then the Contagious disease of the Plague. It appears
then by this Discourse, that Wrath is not only vanity, but an extreme vexation
of spirit.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the vanity of the passion of Volupty.

HAving thus described the Nature, Proprieties, and Effects of the eleven
general Passions of men: I now come to speak of some of the mixed, or composed:
And will give the preheminency to Volupty, Avarice, and Ambition, as the most
predominant Passions of this Age: For although I have given a hint of them in
the second, third, and fourth Chapters of this Treatise, under the notion of
the pleasures, riches, and honors of this life; yet I conceive it convenient
to speak of them more fully in this place; for if men would but endeavor to
allay the fury of these three Passions; the boistrous storms of our Civil
Distractions would suddenly be changed into a calm of Peace; Since the distemper
of them has ever been from the beginning of the Creation to this day; the
chiefest Incendiary of all the Civil broils and mutations which have happened
in the World, as it will appear in the description of their pernicious Effects.

There are diverse sorts of Volupties; yet they may be reduced under these three
heads: 1. The Spiritual. 2. The Natural. 3. The Carnal.


The first is super-excellent, the second harmless, the third sinful.

The Spiritual proceeds from the delight the Saints take in the hearing of Gods
Word, and in the meditating in his Psalm. 1.2.
Law day and night: And in their prayers and other exercises of religious
duties, or in the contemplation of the admirable works of the Creation; and how
they have been preserved in their first being for so many years together, by
his Wisdom and Divine Providence: But specially in the consideration of the
incomprehensible love of God toward mankind, manifested by the sending of his
only beloved Son into the World to redeem his Elect from eternal death.

The Natural proceeds from a delight men take when they eat, being hungry, when
they drink, when they are athirst, sleep, when they have watched, and rest when
they are weary; and from diverse other such refreshments of Nature.

The Carnal proceeds from a tickling delight of the five senses; for every one
of them have their peculiar volupty, as it appears by the proprieties of their
organs: The Eyes take delight in beautiful objects, the Ears in melody, the
Nose in odoriferous odors, the Palate in delitious Wines, and the Members in
wanton feelings. Now when any of these delights of the senses becomes
disordinate, it is called a carnal volupty, whereby it is apparent that our
five senses are the original springs of all carnal volupties, which are
innumerable. But the volupty I intend to speak of, is a mixed delight, composed
of two of the most lascivious senses, viz. of the seeing and feeling, called
lust or lechery: And by consequence the most sinful of any, if it be refractory
to the Rules set down in the Word of God: This passion is more pleasant then
any other to our corrupt nature; for delight is the darling of nature, and
dolor her mortal enemies; and the more pleasing it is to the flesh, the harder
it is to overcome, For the flesh, says S. Paul, lusts against the Spirit,
and the Spirit against the flesh; and as these are contrary one to another, so
are their operations: For the fruits of the Spirit, are joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, holiness, etc. But the works of
the flesh, are adulteries, fornications, and uncleaness, etc. This Antipathy
should then move Christians to endeavor to overcome this passion as the
greatest Antagonist against the grace of sanctification; for if it gets the
mastery over their reason, it will deprive them of their love and filial fear,
and tempt them, 1 Cor. 6.15.
To make of the members of Christ, the members of a Harlot. It is also one of
the most prevailing snares of Satan, by which he draws more millions of souls
into the Pit of destruction then by any other sin whatsoever: And therefore
give me leave to enlarge my self upon these particulars: 1. Upon the definition
of this passion. 2. Upon the nature of it. 3. Upon the causes, why some are
more addicted to it then others. 4. Upon the evil proprieties of it. 5. Upon
the pernicious effects of the same. 6. Upon the judgments that God does
inflict upon voluptuous men. 7. Upon the means or remedies which are to be used
to avoid the venom of it. 8. And lastly, Upon the express prohibition of the
same by the Word of God.


First, Volupty is a composed passion of love and desire, The definition of
Volupty.
arising from a tickling delight of the senses when men enjoy really, or by
imagination, such objects as seem pleasant to their fancy. It is so general,
that all such as are under the state of Nature, are more or less addicted to
it: Nay, the regenerate are sometimes ensnared by it, by the temptations of
Satan and their original corruptions; the difference between them, is, that the
unregenerate by their impenitency die in their sins, and the regenerate by the
free grace of the sanctifying Spirit of God, are awaked out of this spiritual
lethargy, and by an unfeigned repentance are converted and reconciled to God.

Secondly, It is of a feminine nature; for all such as are overmuch addicted to
this passion, loose their masculine generosity, and become effeminate: Hercules
did cast off his Club and Lions skin, to vest himself and spin like a woman
before Omphale his Mistress. And it is daily seen that voluptuous men imitate
in their gestures, carriage and fashions, the Courtizans of these days; for
they powder their hair, wear black patches, and paint their Faces as they do.
It was not then without cause, that the ancient Poets did represent volupty
under the shape of the old Witch Circe; for as she transformed the Passengers
who sailed through the Straits of Sicilia into Swine if they listened to her
Charms: Even so Volupty does transform into brute beasts rational men, if they
converse long, and let themselves be ensnared by the alluring Charms of
Harlots; for as Zerubbalel proved it before King Darius, the Charms of a
beautiful woman are more powerful then strong Wine, Esdras 3. from the 14. ver.
to the 32.
or a mighty King.

Thirdly, The Causes why some men are more addicted to this passion then
others, may be natural, accidental, or artificial: such as are naturally more
addicted to it, are commonly of a hotter and moister constitution then others,
and these are of a sanguine complexion; for the Bilious are hot and dry, the
Phlegmatic moist and cold, and the Melancholic cold and dry, which are not so
apt to the Venereal delight as the Sanguine. The Accidental Causes are, The hot
Climate where men live: for Heat dilates the spirits outwardly, and Cold
restrains them inwardly. And Experience does show that the Africans, Spaniards,
and Italians, whose Climate is hotter then the Germans, Dutch and English, are
the most addicted to Venery. And yet they are not so apt to generation as the
last: because the desire of the reiteration of the Act does weaken their
bodies, and does waste their spirits. Idleness, Pride and Fullness of bread is
also an Accidental Cause why one Nation may be more addicted to Venery then
another. For this was the Cause why the Sodomites (as the Prophet Ezekiel
says) were so vicious, Ezekiel. 16.49.
and transported with Lust. The Artificial Causes are, Sophistical meats;
Delitious Wines, and enticing Simples, Drugs and Amber-gris overmuch used in
these days to provoke Men and Women to Lust. See Guicciardine in the Emperor
Charles the Fifth his Life.
Guicciardine records, that a King of Tunis, being at Naples, spent five
hundred Ducats in enticing Drugs and Amber-gris to dress a Peacock, to incite
himself and the company that supped with him that night to Lust. But these
Means are destructive to the Soul and Lives of Men. For Instance, the Queen of
Arragon gave Ferdinand her Husband an enticing Love-Drink to make him more apt
to the Venereal sport, See the History of Spain in Ferdinands Life.
but it cast him into an incurable Consumption, which brought him to his grave.
And Van-Dick an excellent Dutch Painter, lost lately his life by these enticing
Drugs provoking to Lechery. Alas; Men are too prone of themselves to sin
without Artificial Means to provoke them to it.

Fourthly;

First, It is insatiable; and may be compared to the horsleech, to the barren
womb, and to the Grave; for the Desires of Voluptuous men are never satisfied
with their carnal Delights, their bodies being sooner tired with the
reiteration of the Act, then their Lust can be exstinguished. For many have
been found dead in their Mistresses Arms, by endeavoring to satisfy their Lust
beyond their Natural Abilities. The Reason of it was, because overmuch
evacuation of the spirits exstinguisheth life.

Secondly, it is as inconstant as the wind; for they delight in nothing more
then in changes, because their judgment is so depraved by the Spirit of
uncleanness which besots them, that they cannot discern the beauty of one
Object from another, and do often forsake the most lovely, to dote upon the
most unworthy and deformed: conceiving erroneously, that stolen waters are the
sweetest.

Thirdly, It has a Destructive quality; for it provokes men to commit the
most abhorred sins that can be named. Genesis 12.15.
By it the Sodomites were enticed to commit with the very Angels the sin
against Nature. Genesis 19.5.
It moved Pharaoh and Abimelech to take away by violence Sarah, Abraham's wife;
Reuben to defile his Fathers bed; Genesis 35.22. Gen 34.2. Judge 19 25.
Sechem to deflour Dinah; The Gibeahnites to abuse brutishly the Levites
concubine; David to commit Adultery with Bathshebah, and to vail his sin to
murder Vriah her husband: Amnon to ravish his own sister Tamar: Sueton. in his
Life.
Augustus to take away by force Livia from her husband; Tacitus in his life.
Caligula to commit Incest with his two Sisters; Nero to defile himself with
his mother; French History.
Faragonde to murder King Clotair her Husband, that she might the more freely
enjoy her Paramour; English History.
King Edgar to murder his Favorite, to marry his Wife; And King Roderick to
ravish Duke Godfreys Daughter, Spanish History.
which was the cause of the Conquest of Spain by the Moors: And a thousand like
abhorred sins, which should move Christians to abhor and flee from this most
accursed and sinful passion as from a Serpent.

Fifthly, Sampson, a Nazarite from his Mothers womb, and a Judge and Deliverer
of Israel, was so besotted by the charms and lascivious allurements of Dalilah,
Judge. 13.6.
that he revealed a secret unto her, in the concealing of which did consist the
safety of his own life, and of his native Country. 2. Solomon the wisest
Prince that ever lived upon Earth, 1 King. 3.12.
was by the allurements of his Wives and Concubines turned away from the Lord,
and offered Sacrifices to their Idols. 3. Marcus Antonius, a valiant Commander
of the Romans, who never had been foiled in all his Martial Archivements before
he was infatuated by the alluring charms of Cleopatra; was so deprived of
understanding, that at the Battle of Antrium (when he had the better of the
day) he fled away, Plutarch in his life.
to follow her that carried his heart away, and by the fond love of a woman
lost his life and the Empire. Charles the Seventh King of France, was so
besotted by the lascivious embracements of La-belle Agnes his Concubine, The
French History.
that he neglected all the Civil and Military Affairs of his Kingdom, to Court
and dally the time away with her; and had lost utterly his Kingdom by this
passion of Volupty, if his Mistress that was of a generous spirit, had not
rouzed him out of his lascivious dumps, saying thus unto him, I was foretold in
my youth (says she) that I should be one day the love and Mistress of the
greatest and most valorous Prince in Christendom: But it appears by your
carriage that I am the love of the most effeminate Prince in Europe; for you
suffer the English Nation to rent your Kingdom into piece-meals; and in lieu to
be King of France, you are through your pusillanimity become the petty King of
Bourges; for shame rouse up your spirits, and let not a Foreign Nation deprive
you of Life and Crown. These taunting reproaches coming from a woman that was
dearer unto him then his own life, did so enlighten his understanding, and
inflame his courage, that he instantly undertook to relieve Orleance that was
then besieged by the English: And after he had enforced them to raise their
Siege, he drove them by degrees out of all they held in France ( Calice only
excepted.) 2. It deprives the dearest childern of God for some time of the love
and favor of their heavenly Father: As it does appear in the lives of King
David, and of Solomon his Son; 2 Samuel 11.2.3.
for David by the lascivious embracements of Bathsheba was cast into a
spiritual Lethargy for a whole year together, and deprived of the sweet
communion he had formerly with his gracious God; so that in lieu to be penitent
for his sin of Adultery, Verse. 13.
he committed one after another, two other abhorred sins; for to palliate the
first, he caused his Servants to allure Vriah to drunkenness, that his
understanding being depraved by the vapors of the Wine, he might return home
and lie with his Wife; but this wile failing, he caused him to be murdered by
the sword of the children of Ammon; yet was his understanding so stupefied by
this bewitching spirit of uncleanness, that he had dyed in his sins, if God out
of his infinite mercy had not sent the Prophet Nathan unto him, 2 Samuel 12.1.
to rouse him out of this mortal spiritual slumber. 1 King. 3.11, 12.
And King Solomon lay many years in such a deadly spiritual lethargy, that he
was utterly insensible of his gross Idolatries and abhorred Fornications: for
in number of Wives and Concubines he did excel all the Turkish Emperors: and
had perished in his sins if God out of his accustomed mercy toward his Elect,
had not out of Free Grace given him the gift of an unfeigned repentance, as it
appears by his Book of Ecclesiastes written after his conversion. 3. It
deprives men of all true content, and over-whelms them with grief and sorrows:
for in what condition soever voluptuous men find themselves, they neither take
pleasure nor content, except their mind be always bent upon the means that
can make them attain to the fruition of their carnal delights; for in them they
erroneously conceive does consist their supreme felicity: whereas the
termination of the pleasures of the flesh, is ever the beginning of misery and
woe: And therefore Aristotle to dissuade his Disciples from carnal volupties,
told them that they were like the Mer-maids, who are extraordinarily beautiful
above water, for their face is round and fair, their hair as yellow as gold,
their eyes of a loving dark gray, their mouth small, their lips as red as
Coral, their teeth as white as snow, their breast as round as an apple, and
their arms, hands, shoulders, back, flanks as white as Alabaster, but their
tail is like the tail of a great Serpent, frightful, full of teeth, and mortal
venom: Even so carnal volupties are delightful to men's corrupt nature, and seem
to be sweeter then honey and the honey comb at the first enjoyment of them; but
at their adieu, they are bitterer then gall, and more loathsome then the snuff
of a candle, and for one dram of carnal delight: they over-whelm their Clients
with anguish and sorrow, and make them shed rivers of penitent tears,
whenever God is pleased to give them the gift of an unfeigned repentance.
Besides, all true joy and content does consist in the favor and love of God,
and in the assurance he does infuse in the hearts of his Elect by his blessed
Spirit, that they are justified and reconciled unto him by the sufferings,
blood, and passion of Christ his only Son our most gracious Savior; and this
love, favor, and assurance is permanent and eternal; but the joy and content
proceeding from carnal volupties, are for continuance like a fire of Thorns
under a Pot, or like the morning dew which vanishes away at the rising of the
Sun; for the least blast of dolor and affliction does suddenly make the very
remembrance of carnal pleasures vanish away like smoke; moreover, the very
conceits, imaginations, and deportments of voluptuous men are mere vanity and
vexation of mind; for their paradise upon Earth is to be always musing upon
the beauty, comeliness and perfections of their Mistress: Nay, some are so
infatuated by the spirit of uncleanness which does possess them, that they do
Idolize their picture, kiss their dressings, and other things they wear, nay
the very ground they tread upon: And can there be any real content in these
absurd vanities, mad and foolish deportments? surely no: for these vain
phansies whereon they fix their minds, divert their thoughts from being
diligent Hearers of the Word of God, and careful observers of his Ordinances,
from which they might reap true content. 4. It deprives men of their means; for
Princes, Noblemen, Gentlemen, Merchants, and Artificers, who are given to
volupties, do commonly fall into penury; for as Solomon says, By the means of
a whorish woman, a man is brought to a piece of bread. I will prove the point
by Instances. 1. All the Treasures of Asia did not suffice to defray the
excessive volupties of Marcus Antonius and Cleopatra. 2. All the Revenews of
the Roman Empire did not serve to discharge the lascivious riots of the
Emperors, Caligula, Nero, Vitellius, Domitianus, and Heliogabalus. 3. All the
comings in of the Kingdom of France, did not suffice to defray the lascivious
volupties of Henry the third King of France; for he left the Crown indebted
fourscore millions of Crowns, although he raised the Subsidies and Imposts of
his Realm as much more as they were in his Fathers Reign; whereby it may be
collected, that voluptuous Princes are the greatest Oppressors of their
Subjects. 4. Daily experience does show that many Noblemen, Gentlemen, and
rich Merchants, spend and consume their Portion or Patrimony as the Prodigal
Son did with Harlots and riotous living. 5. Luke 15.13.
It shortneth men's days and makes their lives miserable; for none can deny but
continency, temperance, and sobriety does preserve men in health and does
prolong their lives. And without health the greatest Monarch upon the Earth can
neither have joy, nor content: And to that end God was pleased to add health
and length of days to those extraordinary gifts he gave unto King Solomon; 1
King. 3.14.
otherwise his Wisdom, incomparable Magnificence, and incredible riches had not
afforded him any true joy or content. Besides, carnal volupties do not only
consume men's Estates, and impair their health, but it makes also their life
miserable and loathsome to themselves; for what anguish, grief, and dolours,
perplexity and vexation of mind is it to a miserable Patient, that is sick of
the Venereal disease, to see his members rot away by piecemeals, and to smell
the stinking vapors that proceed from the inward corruption of his body. And
what vexation is it unto him to see Wife, nearest Parents, and intimate friends
to eschew the very sight of him, and forsake him in these anxieties? Oh what
inward torments does he feel by the gnawing worm of an awakned conscience which
does rack him day and night, by the horrid representations of his former
pollutions? Oh what unspeakable terror do possess him, when he sees and feels
the arrows of the Almighty, Job 6.4.
as Job says, to be in him, the venom whereof does drink up his spirits, and
the terrors of God fight against him for his former transgressions? Christians
should then endeavor to mortify this sinful passion, if it were but to
preserve their means, and lengthen their days. But 6. it endangers also their
souls, for if they continue in their impenitency till the end of their days,
they run a hazard, without the special mercy of God, to be deprived for ever of
his gracious presence; For S. Paul says in the affirmative sense, Heb. 13.4.
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge: And by the Levitical Law, Levit.
19.10.
The Adulterer and Adulteress were both to be put to death; yet Christ our
Savior goes further; for he says, Whosoever looks upon a woman to lust
after her, Matthew. 5.28.
has already committed Adultery with her in his heart. Now if the intellectual
adulteries and pollutions of the imagination deserve eternal damnation, the
actual fornications of voluptuous men, who take no other delight but in the
commission of such scandalous sins, must of necessity deserve a greater
punishment, if any did exceed the torments of Hell. The consideration then of
the evil nature, pernicious proprieties, and destructive Effects of this sinful
passion should induce Christians to endeavor by all means to crush this
Cockatrice in the shell before it gets the mastery over their reason:
Otherwise if this evil spirit of uncleanness does possess the noble faculties
of their souls, it will require an extraordinary measure of Grace to cast him
out, and will cost them many sighs, groans, and floods of penitent tears; for
this unclean spirit is of the same kind as our Savior speaks of, which cannot
be expelled but by fasting and prayer. Math. 17.21.
Now if they cannot be induced to this so necessary duty, by the reasons, moral
precepts, and strong Arguments before cited, let the ensuing judgments of God
inflicted upon voluptuous men awake and force them to it.

Sixthly, Genesis 19.5.24.
1. All the Inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed with Fire and
Brimstone (righteous Lot and his two Daughters only excepted) for their
abhorred Lust and sins against Nature. Number. 25.9.
2. Twenty four Thousand of the People of Israel were consumed by the Plague
for their fornications with the Moabitish women. 3. Judge. 20.47, 48.
All the Tribe of Benjamin (Six hundred only excepted) were destroyed by the
Sword for Patronizing the abhorred Lust of some of the Gibeahnites, committed
upon the Levites Concubine. See Herodotus. See the French. Hist.
4. All the Inhabitants of Ionia were destroyed by Cyrus for their lascivious
Volupties. 5. All the French that were in Sicilia were murdered in one night
by the Sicilians for their uncleanness and fornications committed with the
women of that Kingdom. See the Hist. of Naples.
6. A great Borough near unto Putzola in the Kingdom of Naples, was in one
night overwhelmed by a just judgment of God, with fire, brimstone and the
ashes of a hill near to it, for the abhorred Lusts against Nature of the
Inhabitants of the same. 7. Genesis 34.26.
Reuben was deprived of his Birthright, for defiling of his Fathers bed. 8.
Shechem lost his life for the rape of Dinah. 9. Numb. 25.8.
Zimri was run through the body with a Javelin by Phinehas for his impudent
Fornication with a Midianite Lady. 10. Eli the High Priest, 1 Samuel 4.17, 18.
and Hophni and Phinehas lost their lives; the two last for their pollutions
committed with the Israelitish women that came to Shiloh: and the first for not
reprehending his Sons so severely as he should have done for their lascivious
courses. 11. 2 Samuel 11.4.
King David was severely punished for the Adultery committed with Bathsheba.
12. Amnon his Son was killed by the servants of Absalom his Brother, for the
Rape of his sister Tamar; 2 Samuel 13.14.29.
And Absalom was slain by the commandment of Joab, for having defiled his
Fathers Concubines in the sight of the Sun, and of all Israel. See the
Ecclesiastical History. See the Millan and Florentine History.
Pope John the Twelfth was murdered in his bed, for his Adultery committed
with a Roman Lady. 14. One of the Sforza's, Duke of Millan was murdered in the
Church of S. Steven by a Gentleman for his Adultery committed with his Wife.
15. Alexander de Medecis Duke of Florence was slain in his bed, as he waited
for the coming of a Gentlewoman he had allured to his lust. 16. A Counselor of
the Court of Parliament of Paris, slew a Gentleman and his own Wife as they lay
abed together, for he struck them both through the body with a Stiletto as they
were upon the very act: And from thence went to the Court, and without
perturbation pleaded the Case under fained names, and obtained a definitive
sentence of absolution from the said court for the murder by him committed:
For as Solomon says, Prove. 6.34.
Jealousy is the rage of a man, therefore he will not spare him in the day of
vengeance. These instances and many others that might be produced of the
judgments of God inflicted upon whole Nations and particular men, for the
punishment of their lascivious volupties, should refrain them from this
destructive passion, and make them flee from it, as from a Serpent, and induce
them to leave no remedies unattempted to mortify the same. But before I come
to speak of the moral and spiritual remedies which are to be used to curb, or
to subdue this sinful passion; give me leave to answer an Objection which some
Moralists make to palliate the sin of it.

Voluptie (say they) is but a venial sin, Object.
and the most innocent Passion of all others; for it is the Darling of Nature,
and all men and women are naturally inclined to Delight; neither could they
subsist in the midst of so many woes and sorrows to which they are incident, if
it were not for these natural refreshments that you call Volupties. And since
the fire and heat of this passion is cooled or utterly extinguished by old age;
men need not be so copious in the description of the evil nature, proprieties
and effects of it: Nor so tedious in the manifestation of the remedies that may
mortify the same: For Volupty does not increase by Age, as Avarice and
drunkenness does.

I answer, Answ.
that in regard of the actual act of Volupty, old age may quench the flames of
it. But as for the intellectual desires, I say that old men who have from their
youth been addicted to this kind of Volupty, will long as much after that
delight, as the Avaricious men do after the increase of their Treasures, or the
Drunkards after the taste of delicious Wines, except they be sanctified both in
body and soul by the sanctifying Spirit of Gods Free Grace; for old age, nor
all the precepts of Morality cannot cast out of a man's heart this spirit of
uncleanness, if once he has taken possession of it, because it is of the same
kind Which goes not out (as our Savior says himself) but by prayer and
fasting; Math. 17.21.
that is to say, by the mere and immediate operation of the sanctifying Spirit
of Grace, as it shall be proved by Instances and diverse Passages of the Word of
God, when I shall speak of the spiritual remedies which are to be used to
mortify this passion: As for the moral remedies that I am now to speak of,
they are these; first men are to endeavor to attain to an habit in these four
Virtues or Graces: 1. Continency. 2. Temperance. 3. Fortitude. 4.
Sanctification.


Secondly, they are to eschew these four splitting rocks or great inticers to
all lascivious Volupties.

1. Idleness. 2. Alluring Objects. 3. Suspected places. 4. Evil company.
And in so doing they will undoubtedly by the help of the sanctifying Spirit
obtain the victory over this spirit of uncleanness, that is the greatest
Opposite to the grace of sanctification; for there is a greater antipathy
between holiness and pollution, then there is between fire and watter, the Lion
and the Cock, the Dog and Cat, or between Vice and Virtue. These things
considered, I will begin with those things which are to be eschewed; for it
were to small purpose to endevor to attain to an habit in these four Graces, If
men do not eschew the four things above spoken of, by which the use of these
Graces would be soon annihilated.

First, Idleness is to be eschewed, for if men's minds be not bent upon laudable
employments, they will busy themselves in unlawful things, because their
spirits are naturally active: And as standing waters become loathsome, even so
men who have no employment become vicious: And daily experience shows, that
such as are rich and have no calling, are more addicted to Volupties then the
meaner sort. The Lacedaemonians of all the other Greeks were the most active and
valorous; and the Athenians the most voluptuous; because the first were kept
under a strict Discipline, gold and silver being prohibited in their
Commonwealth, and all manner of volupties banished, and Military Achievements
cherished. But the second were rich, and by consequence Idle, and did nothing
(as the Apostle S. Paul says) but hear or tell news; Act. 17.21.
or did employ themselves in all kind of carnal Volupties. Therefore such as
will be continent, must addict themselves to some lawful calling, and are to be
diligent in the same: Prove. 10.4.
For a slothful hand, says Solomon, makes poor, but the hand of the diligent
makes rich: Fullness of bread and Idleness were the cause, says the Prophet
Ezechiel, of the abhorred lusts of the Sodomites: And for this cause the
Emperor Severus made a Decree, that all men whatsoever living in the City of
Rome, should employ themselves in some lawful calling, See Herodian in Severus
life.
and wear upon their Apparel the badges of their profession, that all idle
persons might be banished out of the Commonwealth, because Idleness is the
mother of all vices. The point might be proved by many instances, but two shall
serve for brevity sake.

1. As long as King David addicted himself to Martial Achievements, he never
was carried away by the temptations of Satan, to lust after other men's Wives:
but when he was Idle, and walking upon the Leads of his Palace, he was ensnared
into sin by the beauty of Bathsheba, the Wife of Vriah the Hittite. 2 Samuel 11.2.
2. As long as the Prodigal Son was employed about the mannaging of his Fathers
Household affairs, he carried himself like a dutiful Son, but as soon as he was
Idle, and had obtained his Portion, he wasted the same among Harlots, Luke
15.13.
and by riotous living; for Satan desires no better opportunity to tempt men
to sin, then when they are Idle.
Secondly, David after his fall prayed unto God he would be pleased to turn his
eyes from beholding vanity: Psalm. 101.3.
as conceiving the beauty of women to be the greatest vanity under the Sun; for
the glances of their eyes are as destructive to men's souls, as the glances of
the eyes of a Basilisk are to their bodies: Prove. 4.25.
And that is the cause why Solomon says, Let thine eyes look right before
thee, intimating, that to look aside upon a beautiful woman, is a sign of a
lascivious eye; but to look on her straight, is a token of an innocent eye: And
it is most certain, that of all the five senses, the Eye does more then any
other increase the Kingdom of darkness: because they are the windows whereby
all unclean thoughts enter into the soul, from which do proceed all the actual
and intellectual Fornications and Adulteries; and that is the reason why our
blessed Savior does charge us to pluck out our right eye if it does offend;
Math. 5 29.
meaning we should mortify the lust of our eye, rather then be cast into Hell;
for as S. John says, 1 John 2.16, 17, 18.
The lust of the eyes is not of the Father, but of the world, and the world
passes away, and the lust thereof; but he that does the will of God abides
for ever.

Thirdly,

1. The Schools of love, as the Italians call them. 2. Public meetings. 3.
Enterludes. 4. Court-Revels.
For in all these, men do find alluring Objects to commit sin; and when
opportunity, time, and place meet together, men or women must have a great
measure of Grace to refrain them from sin.

As for the 1. Solomon discribes elegantly in these words, the alluring charms
of the Mistresses of the Schools of love, Prove. 7.10, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
and 27.
Behold there met him a woman in the habit of a Harlot and subtle of heart; so
she caught him and kissed him, and with an impudent face said unto him, I have
peace offerings with me; this day have I paid my vows: Therefore came I forth
to meet thee, diligently to seek thy face, and I have found thee; I have decked
my bed with coverings of Tapestry, with carved work, with fine linen of Egypt,
I have perfumed my bed with Myrrh, Aloes and Cinnamon; Come let us take our
fill of love until the morning; let us solace our selves in loves, etc. But the
conclusion of it is, Her house is the way to Hell, going down to the chambers
of death.

For the 2. Dinah by rambling abroad to see the public Sports, was Ravished by
Shechem the Prince of the Land.

For the 3. Enterludes, Plays and Comoedies, are the very Seminaries of all
uncleanness; and the Aretin postures that are there seen, with the lascivious
Dances and Discourses, do inflame and entice men and women to Lust.

For the 4. Court-Revels and Masks have been the overthrow or loss of many
women's chastity: See the History of England and France.
Edward the Third, and Edward the Fourth, Kings of England, and Henry the
Third, and Henry the Fourth, Kings of France, were all of them allured to lust
by the beautiful Objects they saw in their Court-Masks.

Fourthly, patronize and maintain them: And become as vicious, profane, and
debaucht as the worst of them; and therefore as he that touches Pitch shall be
defiled with it: Eccles. 13.1.
even so such as haunt evil company, will at last be infected with their vices:
Besides, it is a dishonor to converse with evil company; for if men were as
righteous as Lot, Who was, says Peter, 1 Pet. 2.7, 8.
vexed from day to day with the unlawful and ahhorred sins of the Sodomites;
yet will he be reputed as vicious as they by this common Proverb, That birds of
a feather do ever flock together. Now I come to the four Virtues or Graces
which are to be obtained, to mortify and subdue this sinful passion of Volupty.

First, men are to endeavor by fervent prayers to obtain from God the Grace of
Continency, which is distinguished by corporeal and intellectual; the first is
common to natural men as well as to the children of God; but the second is
only peculiar to the true Elect, because it is an immediate gift of the
sanctifying Spirit of Grace, to such as are regenerated by a justifying Faith,
for by Faith men are justified, and afterward sanctified: for all things which
are done without Faith, cannot, Romans 14.23.
says S. Paul, be acceptable unto God; contrarily they are an abomination unto
him. The Heathens have excelled in the corporeal continency, most of the
Christians of these days, as it may appear by the carriage of Alexander the
Great toward the two Daughters of King Darius; See Plutarch and Livy in their
lives.
and of Publius Scipio toward a Spanish Lady that was his Captive; but none of
them could ever attain to the intellectual continency, because they were out of
the Covenant of Grace: and by consequence incapable of a justifying Faith: And
among those who were under the Convenant of Grace, the number was small that
were truly continent, or had the gift of the corporeal and intellectual
continency, except it were Isaac, Joseph, and S. Paul, for all the other
Patriarks were addicted to Polygamy. The corporeal continency may proceed from
natural causes, as from a defect of Nature, as the Eunuchs, or it may be
obtained by the precepts of Morality and a good education; But the intellectual
cannot be acquired, because it is a supernatural Grace of the sanctifying
Spirit, except it be by frequent and fervent prayers to God, who is the only
giver of it: And certainly by the want of this Grace of intellectual
continency, many of the most precious Christians of these days commit Adultery
in the cohabitation with their own Wives; of which they seldom repent. Which
does induce me to enlarge my self upon this point. Christ our blessed Savior,
who was the best Interpreter of the Law that ever was upon Earth, does tell us
plainly, Math. 5.18.
That whosoever looks upon a woman to lust after her, has committed Adultery
with her already in his heart. Now this lust proceeds from the eyes; 1 John
2.17.
and the lust of the eyes, says S. John, is not of the Father, but of the
world, and the eyes convey the same into the heart; and from the heart, says
our Savior, proceed evil thoughts, Math. 15.19.
murders, adulteries, fornications, etc. So many looking upon a woman with
lascivious eyes, make such an impression in their imagination of her beauty or
comeliness, which is suggested to their fancy by their senses and the
temptations of Satan, to excel the beauty or comeliness of their Wives, that in
the very cohabitation with them, their mind is wholly bent upon this foreign
object, and not upon the same they embrace; and this is a plain intellectual
Adultery of the heart, committed in the Matrimonial Bed, which is as odious to
God (although it be not censurable by men, because it is invisible) as the
actual Adultery with a strange woman. This should move all true Christians, who
through a filial fear are timorous to offend God, to be cautious of their ways,
that they be not ensnared by their deceitful hearts, and the temptations of
Satan in this kind of Adultery: or if they be, that they may unfainedly repent
of it before death part their soul from their body, otherwise without the
special mercies of God, their souls may run as much hazard by this sort of
Adultery, as by the actual.

Secondly, men are to endevor to attain to an habit in Temperance and Sobriety,
virtues or graces opposite to the vices of gluttony and drunkenness, two of the
greatest provokers to Lust. These are also distinguished by corporeal and
Intellectual.

The corporal Temperance may be acquired by Moral Precepts, but the
Intellectual is an immediate gift of the Sanctifying Spirit of grace, and
cannot be obtained but by Prayer; for God is the only giver of it: And it is
properly called Meekness of spirit, and the inseparable companion of the grace
of sanctification; The proprieties and effects of which are apparently seen in
the carriage and replies of Job, Moses, Ely, David, and Hezekiah. 1. When the
Messengers came suddenly after one another to acquaint Job of the loss of all
he had, and of the death of his Children: he replied with an admirable meekness
of spirit, Job. 1.21.
The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken: blessed be the name of the Lord.
2. Moses with the like meekness did patiently endure the false and offensive
reproaches of his own brother and sister, Numb. 12.3.
for the which he is called by the Holy Ghost the meekest man upon earth. 3.
Eli with the same meekness of spirit answered the Prophet Samuel, when hd had
acquainted him of the will of the Lord, 1 Samuel 3.18.
concerning the death of his two sons, and the casting off of his Posterity
from the Highpriests office; it is the Lord, let him do what seems good unto
him. 4. When King David heard the bitter Curses of Shimei, for the which
Abishai would have slain him, he answered with the like meckness of spirit, 2 Samuel 16.9, 10.
Let him curse, because the Lord has said unto him, curse David; who shall then
say, Wherefore have thou done so? 5. When the Prophet Isaiah was sent to King
Hezekiah to denounce the heavy judgment of God against Jerusalem and his
posterity, he answered with the like meekness of spirit, Isal 39.8.
The word of the Lord is good which thou have spoken. Whereby it appears that
the temperance of the mind is a great curb to bridle the violence of the
Passions of men: for the Answer that Joseph gave to his lewd Mistress when she
tempted him to lie with her, did proceed from the same root, and from the
filial fear he had of God: Genesis 39.8, 9.
Begold my Master knows not what he has in the house: but has committed all
he has into my hands: there is none greater in the house then I: neither has
he kept any thing from me but only thee, because thou art his wife: How then
can I do this great wickedness, and so sin against God? But such is the
depravation of this age, that I have heard some Voluptuous men call continent
Joseph a very Sot, for having rejected the lascivious Summons of his Mistress,
and neglected through a Puerile Fear, the Time, Place and Opportunity to enjoy
the pleasures of her embracements. As for the Corporeal Temperance and
Sobriety; the Heathens have also excelled most of the Christians of these days
in that noble virtue, as it shall appear by these Instances. 1. King Cyrus
being demanded by his Steward, Where and What he pleased to have for his
Supper, Answered, I will sup by the Riverside, and have only for my Diet Bread
and Salt: for Drink we shall have enough out of the River. 2. The Queen of
Caria having sent to Alexander the rarest Cooks that were in Asia, he sent them
back unto her, with this Message, that he had no need of Cooks as long as he
did observe the Precepts of his Tutor Leonides, who had charged him to exercise
his body in the Morning in running of Races on foot, or in the mannaging of his
War horse, to give him a stomach to his Dinner: and to walk two or three miles
in the Evening, to have an Appetite to his Supper. 3. Phocion, one of the
Governors of the Athenian Commonwealth, was found at Dinner (by the Ambassador
that Alexander sent to him with a Present of ten Talents) with one single dish
of meat; See Plutarch in his Life.
and having demanded of the Ambassador the reason why Alexander did send him
such a Present; he answered, Only for your integrity and virtue; Let him leave
me so, said Phocion, for this Gold will make me unjust and vicious, and so with
thanks sent the present back to Alexander. 4. Lucius Quintus Cincinnatus, See
Livy in his 1. Decade.
Dictator of the Roman Commonwealth, was found at Dinner with a small piece of
meat and a dish of Turnips, by the Ambassadors of the Samnites that were sent
unto him with a great sum of Gold, to induce him to show them favor in the
obtaining of a Peace which they required of the Roman Senate: Whereupon
Cincinnatus showing them the frugality of his Diet, said unto them, Tell the
Samnites, that he that can be contented with such Fare, needs no Gold; and
therefore carry it back; for if their request be just, they shall have my favor
without it. There are evidences of the Temperance of the ancient Persians,
Greeks, and Romans concerning the passions of Avarice and Volupty. But as soon
as the Persians by Cambises, and the Greeks by Alcibiades, and the Romans by
Lucullus were allured to desire riches and pleasures, See Herodotus in Cambises
Life.
they became the most covetous and voluptuous Nations of the World: and all
their former Virtues were turned into Vices: Therefore I conclude, that
Temperance and Sobriety are the inseparable companions of Continency and
sanctification: And that Riches, Gluttony and Drunkness are the greatest
Provokers to lust and carnal Volupties: And this Passage of S. Paul does
confirm the same, They that sleep, says he, 1 These. 5 7, 6.
sleep in the night: and they that are drunken are drunken in the night. But
let us which are of the day be sober. Therefore let us not sleep, but let us
watch and be sober. Intimating that none are more fit to attain to holiness
then those who are temperate and sober: And none more adverse then drunkards
and voluptuous men.

Thirdly, men are to endevor to attain to an habit in Fortitude, called by some
a virtue; but when it is accompanied with Faith, it is a grace of the
sanctifying Spirit. 1. By it Shadrach, Dan. 3.20
Meshach and Abednego did endure with admirable Constancy the burning flames of
the fiery furnace heated seven times hotter then it was wont to be, rather then
to worship the golden Image that Nebuchadnezzar had set up. 2. By the same
Fortitude Daniel did make choice to be cast alive into the Lions Den, Dan.
6.10, 16.
rather then to restrain himself from making his Addresses by fervent prayers
three times a day to God. 3. By it all those Worthies nominated in the eleventh
Chapter to the Hebrews did suffer with incredible Patience all the torments
there specified. Heb. 11.
4. See the book of Martyrs.
By the like Fortitude all the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days did suffer with a
sweet temper of spirit the fiery Trial that was inflicted upon them. And as it
is the propriety of the Christian Fortitude to endure without murmuring all the
torments that are inflicted upon them; so it is another of its proprieties to
endevor to subdue the lascivious Volupties of the flesh: believing that he who
can overcome his own Passions, is a greater Conqueror then Alexander. The
Heathen do much extol and boast of the fortitude of Cato, See Plutarch in his
Life.
who ripped up his bowels with his own hands rather then he would be beholding
to the clemency of Caesar. But these murdering resolutions are rather
evidences of Pusillanimity then of true Fortitude. For a sudden Death is a
lesser torment then to continue a long time in anguish and daily tortures.
Besides, the magnanimity of Decius Curious and others, did rather proceed from
vain glory then from any true fortitude: But the Christian fortitude has no
other end then the glory of God, and to overcome their sinful Passions.

Fourthly, men are to endevor to attain an habit in the grace of
Sanctification, as the Seal of their Justification and Regeneration and
Redemption; And the only way to obtain the same, is by frequent prayers and
daily exercises in Religious duties: having ever in their mind these Passages
of Scripture, Heb. 12.14.
For without holiness no man shall see the Lord. 2 These. 2.12
Because God from the beginning has chosen you to salvation by the
sanctification of the Spirit, 1 These 4.3, 4, 5, 6.
and the faith of truth. And that you should abstain from fornication: that
every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in holiness and honor;
and not in the lust of Concupiscence, even as the Gentiles which know not God.
For God has not called us to uncleanness, but unto holiness.

Now because Sanctification is the crown of all other Christian graces, I will
here set down the ordinary means whereby the Blessed Spirit does infuse the
same in the hearts of the Elect (for all natural men are incapable of it;)
which is commonly done by degrees, and not suddenly, as their Justification.
Yet in some it is more sudden, and in others more flow, according to the
activity or remisness of Christians in their exercises of Piety. The first
Means is, That the Blessed Spirit does move them to be diligent Hearers and
Readers of the Word of God; Romans 10.17.
For Faith (says S. Paul) comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God;
And none can be Sanctified without a Justifying Faith. 2. It endows them with
the spirit of Prayer, and with mortifying Graces, whereby they overcome their
Original and Actual corruptions. 3. It moves them to be cautious in all their
ways, and to be sensible of the smallest sins, and to flee from all appearance
or provocation to sin. 4. It infuseth in their hearts a strong Aversion to sin.
5. It engenders in them a reverent love, and a filial fear, which keeps them
from sin. 6. It does convince them of all their sins; and specially of their
bosom sin. 7. By this conviction it begets in them an implacable hatred
against their Darling sin. 8. By this hatred it does enlighten their Judgment,
and opens the eyes of the same, whereby the miserable condition they are in
by the enormity and multiplicity of their sins is made apparent unto them. 9.
By the consideration of this misery it induces them to seek earnestly the
means whereby they may be delivered out of it. 10. It infuseth in them a
constant resolution to return to their heavenly Father, and to humble
themselves in Sackcloth and Ashes before him. 11. It mollifies their hearts,
and makes them grieve, mourn, and lament for their sins; by which Spiritual
Sorrow, never to be repented of, it begets in them an unfeigned Repentance. 12.
And Lastly, being by this Cordial Repentance reconciled to God, by the merits
of the Passion of their Blessed Savior, it begets in them an extreme thirst
after the living waters of that Fountain which was opened to the house of
David, Zach. 13.1.
and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and uncleanness. And so by a
constant perseverance in the ways of Righteousness, they attain by degrees to
that measure of Sanctification as is required to see the Lord with Joy and
Consolation. For the most Sanctified man upon Earth cannot attain to a perfect
degree of Sanctification as long as he lives in these tabernacles of clay; the
perfection of this Grace being reserved for the glorified Saints in Heaven.

Eighthly, to Conclude, I admonish all those who earnestly desire to attain to
some degree of holiness, to suppress betimes the venom of this vicious Passion
of Volupty, before it turn into an Habit in them; For (as I have said in my
Answer to the Objection of some Moralists) the Volupty of the mind does as much
increase with Age, as do the vices of Avarice and Drunkenness, as it is
confirmed by this Saying of the wise Son of Sirach, All bread is sweet to a
Whoremonger; Eccl. 23.17.
he will not leave off till he dye.

Now to terrify and induce Voluptuous men to abhor this sin of Uncleanness, I
have collected these ensuing Passages out of Solomon's Proverbs, and out of
Ecclesiasticus, to show them how Destructive this sin is to their Means,
Bodies, and Souls.

The lips of a strange woman drop as an honey comb, and her mouth is smoother
then oil: but her end is as bitter as wormwood, and sharper then a two-edged
sword, her feet go down to death, her steps take hold of hell. Prove. 2.3, 4, 5.
Who so commits adultery with a woman, lacks understanding: he that does
it, destroys his own soul. Prove. 9.32. Stolen waters are sweet, and bread
eaten in secret is pleasant: but he knows not that the dead are there, and
that her guests are in the depth of hell. Prove. 9.17, 18. For a whore is a deep
ditch, and a strange woman a deep pit. Prove. 23.27. Give not thy soul to a
woman to set her foot upon thy substance. Eccles. 8.2. Meet not with a harlot,
lest thou fall into her snares. Eccles. 8.3. Gaze not on a maid, that thou fall
not by those things that are precious in her. Eccles. 8.5. Give not thy soul
unto harlots, that thou loose not thine Inheritance. Prove. 8.6. Look not round
about thee in the streets of the City, neither wander in the solitary places
thereof. Eccles. 8.7. Turn away thine eye from a beautiful woman, and look not
upon another beauty: for many have been deceived by the beauty of a woman: For
herewith Love is kindled as a fire. Sit not at all with another man's wife, nor
sit down with her in thy arms: and spend not thy money with her at the wine,
lest thine heart incline unto her, and so through thy desire thou fall into
destruction. Eccles. 8.10. A man that breaks wedlock, saying thus in his
heart, Who sees me? I am compassed about with darkness: the walls cover me,
and no body sees me: What need I to fear? The most High will not remember my
sins. Such a man only fears the eyes of men, and knows not that the eyes of
the Lord are ten thousand times brighter then the sun, beholding all the ways
of the sons of men. This man shall be punished in the streets of the City: and
where he suspecteth not, he shall be taken. Eccl. 23.18, 19, 21. By these and
many other places contained in the Word of God, it is apparent that the
lascivious Passion of Volupty is more destructive to men then any other Passion
whatsoever. Therefore it behooves all sorts of men, whether they be young or
old, to be cautious of their ways, that they may not by their own corruptions
(set on fire by the temptations of Satan) be ensnared in this horrid sin of
uncleanness: And specially that it turn not by a continued custom into an
habit. For if it does, it will cost them rivers of bitter tears before this
spirit can be expelled; Because the best Divines hold, that an old Voluptuous
sinner is harder to be converted then any; because the sin of Volupty is so
suitable with the natural inclinations of men. Yet if young men would always have
this Saying of Solomon in their mind, Eccle. 11.9.
Rejoice O Young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of
thy Youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes:
But know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee to judgment; And
Old Voluptuous men this Saying of the Prophet Isaiah, Isal. 55.6.7.
Seek ye the Lord while he may be found; call ye upon him while he is near. Let
the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his thoughts, and let him
return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him: and to our God, for he
will abundantly pardon. There is no doubt but God out of his infinite mercy
would have compassion of them, and hinder that Satan should not tempt so many
Voluptuous Old men to Despair as he does, by suggesting falsely that their sins
are unpardonable; And so inticeth them to put violent hands upon themselves,
which is to commit a sin that is Cousin-german to the sin against the
Holy Ghost. Therefore when Old men, who have from their Youth been addicted to
Actual Fornications and Adulteries, and by an habit in these sins do
impenitently continue in their decrepit Age, by the instigations of Satan, in
the intellectual Fornications and Adulteries of the heart; let them cast (I
say) these false Suggestions of Satan like dung into his face. For to despair
of the Mercy of God, is to yield him up their Spiritual weapons, and to commit
an unpardonable sin. For were their sins greater then the sins of Manasseh King
of Judah, and equal with that of Judas, who betrayed his Lord and Savior: yet
if they despair not of Gods Mercy, they will undoubtedly find Mercy: God being
pleased sometimes to magnify his unparalleld Mercy, by calling some impious
sinners into his Vineyard at the last hour of the day, and to give them out of
his free grace, the same wages as he had agreed to give to those who had born
the burden and heat of the day. Math. 20.12.


CHAP. XVIII.
Of the vanity of the passion of Avarice.

DIogenes the Cynick, being demanded why Gold was of so pale a yellow; Answered
ingenuously, that it was out of fear, because all men did run after it to make
it their captive, or rather their god; For it is daily seen that avaritious men
are the slaves of their riches, and that Gold is their only Deity. But the Poet
Simonides being moved by a friend of his to resolve him which of these two,
viz. of Wisdom or Gold, was to be most desired and pursued: Answered, Wisdom,
says he; for she is the Mistress, and Gold is her Hand-maide; Notwithstanding,
said he, I see daily the wisest men court, wait, and attend upon the
Gold-mongers and rich men of these days; so little is Virtue regarded, and Vice
so highly esteemed: Whereas in the judgment of King Solomon, riches are
nothing but vanity and vexation of Spirit. And to this purpose he gives this
caveat to avaritious men, Labor not to be rich; Prove. 23.4, 5.
will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches certainly make
themselves wings, they fly away as an Eagle toward heaven. Prove. 8.11.
But Wisdom, says he, is better then Rubies; and all things that may be
desired, are not to be compared to it: But these sayings of Solomon seem to be
paradoxes to avaritious men; for the glistering luster of their Gold has
dazzled the eyes of their judgment to conceive erroneously, that Gold is a
sovereign remedy for all diseases: For it can, say they, deliver them from all
danger, raise them to honors, and give them the fruition of all the delights
of this life, and so they become more eager after the purchase of these
momentary riches, then sincere and zealous Christians are fervent, active, and
diligent after the acquisition of the spiritual Treasures. Now because this
vicious passion of Avarice is extraordinarily predominant in this Age, and
enticeth many to undertake strange projects, and practice undirect means to
hoard up Gold and Silver, to the undoing of the Commonwealth, and the
destruction of their own souls. Give me leave to enlarge my self upon these
particulars, to show you the virulency of this sordid passion.

1. What is properly called Avarice. 2. How it is composed. 3. Of what nature
it is, being thus mixed. 4. What kind of men are most addicted to it. 5. The
causes moving men to affect the same. 6. The pernicious proprieties of it. 7.
The destructive effects of the same. 8. The considerations inducing men to
allay the fire of it.
First, What men properly call Avarice, The definition of Avarice.
is only an exorbitant and insatiable desire to hoard up Gold and Silver.

Secondly, This desire is never free from fear and self-love; so that Avarice
is a composed passion of fear, love, and desire.

Thirdly, Being thus mixed, Of what passions Avarice is composed.
it is of a violent nature by the means of love, that is extraordinarily
violent in all its operations: It is also of an insatiable and sordid nature,
by the means of the passion of desire, that has an insatiable propriety; and
is most base, because this desire has no other object then the excrements of
the Earth; Avarice is of a violent, insatiable and feminine nature.
for Gold is nothing but a yellow, and Silver nothing but a white clay,
calcinated and refined by the beams of the Sun by a long continuance of time:
It is likewise of a timorous quality, by the means of the passion of fear that
is of a feminine nature; so by the mixture of these ill-qualified ingredients,
Avarice is one of the most base passions incident to men.

Fourthly, These kind of men are most commonly addicted to it. 1. Low and base
minded men. 2. Old men are more addicted to it then the young. 3. Those who
have in their youth been riotous and prodigal, are much inclined to it when
they become ancient. 4. Such as have been in great want in their youth, become
avaritious, when they are old, out of fear to fall into the like straits. For
the first, all generous spirits disdain to be avaritious; for their thoughts
soar higher then the excrements of the Earth; whereas the low-minded are like
the Swine who never rise nor lift up their eyes to Heaven, but are still fixed
and routing with their snout in the muck-hils of the Earth. See Plutarch and
Dion in their Lives.
I mean by using all vile and base means to enrich themselves, as Crassus and
Vespasian did. Secondly, the ancient are more addicted to Avarice then young
men; and this proceeds of fear, and from the experience they have of the
mutability of all worldly things; besides, they consider their weakness and
disabilities of body to labor as they did in their youth, and therefore hoard
up what they can against the day of need, hope being then utterly extinguished
in their breast, by the cold blast of timorous fears which does possess
decrepit aged men: yet this consideration, that they have one of their feet
upon the brink of their Grave, should induce them to make use of the blessings
of God, since they have but short time to live, and less need of them then
younger men. Thirdly, such as have lavished their means by profuse
prodigalities, fall (when they are recalled from these courses) from one
extreme to another, and from great Prodigals become great Usurers and
avaritious Misers. Fourthly, Princes who in their youth, were of a generous
spirit, yet having been brought by mutation of state into great wants and
necessities, become when they are ancient, out of fear to fall again into the
same straits, extremely avaritious, and prone to hoard up Treasures, as it
appears by the Lives of Peter de Medecis Duke of Florence, See Guicciardine,
and the English and French Histories in their Lives.
and by Henry the Seventh King of England, and Henry the Fourth King of France.

Fifthly, The causes moving men to affect Avarice, may be these: 1. A base
distruct of the providence of God, suggested in their hearts by Satan through
want of Faith to believe these precepts of our blessed Savior, Math. 6 25, 26,
27, 28, 29, 30.
Take no thought for your life what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor
yet for your body what ye shall put on: Is not the life more then meat, and the
body more then raiment? Behold the fowls of the air; for they sow not, neither
do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are
ye not better then they? Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit to
his stature? And why take you thought for raiment? consider the Lilies of the
Field how they grow; they toil not, neither do they Spin. And yet I say unto
you, that even Solomon in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of these.
Wherefore if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to
morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of little
Faith? 2. This diffidence does beget in them a faint-hearted fear to fall into
poverty, if they scrape and heap not by hook and crook some heaps of Gold or
Silver; for although poverty of it self be innocent, yet in these depraved days
it is held criminal, and the greatest vice, and misery upon earth: Prove. 14.20.
For the poor, says Solomon, is hated even of his neighbor. Notwithstanding
says he in another place, Prove. 19 1.
Better is the poor that walks in his integrity, then the rich that is
perverse in his ways. 3. Because none are regarded in this age but the rich;
yet rich men without wisdom and piety, should be no more regarded then fools;
for as snow in Summer, Allusion upon Prove. 26.1.
and as rain in Harvest comes unseasonably, even so honor is as unseemly to
rich men that want understanding. It was an ingenuous comparison of a modern
Author, who said that a wise virtuous and religious poor man was like a good
horse with a leather Saddle on his back; and a vicious profane and foolish rich
man, like a Jade that had an embroydred Saddle on his back; Men respecting in
these days, more the rich and gay apparel of men then their worth and virtue.
4. Because they may enjoy by riches all carnal volupties, from which the poorer
sort are debarred by their poverty. 5. Because they erroneously conceive that
riches make them have many friends; but they are commonly Sycophants and
Table-friends; for all such whose friendship is grounded upon riches, and not
upon the virtue and merits of the party, are time-servers, and of a base and
mercenary spirit, and as fickle in their love and friendship as the wind, and
at the least blast of disgrace or adversity forsake them. These two instances
shall prove the point: Haman the great Favorite of King Ahashuerus, had many
friends who bowed their knees daily before him when he had the favor of the
King: but as soon as his wrath was kindled against him, they acquainted the
King he had erected a Gibet of fifty Cubits high to hang up Mordecai the
preserver of the Kings life; Esth. 7.9, 10.
and were the first upon the Kings command who cast a Cloak upon his face, and
offered to hang up Haman upon the same Gibet. See Sejanus Life.
2. Sejanus the beloved Favorite of the Emperor Tiberius, had many friends as
long as he was graced by the Emperor; for he was more courted by the Senators
and men of War then Tiberius himself: but they all forsook him when he fell
into disgrace, and were more eager and active then any, to draw his body
through the kennels of the Streets of Rome. Whereby it appears that the rich
men's friends are like a broken bow or a bruised reed. 6. Because they falsely
believe that riches will rescue them out of many dangers; but they are
deceived; for the smaller shrubs in a Forest are safer from being rooted up
with the boisterous winds, then the high Cedars in Libanon. And the Ancient and
Modern Histories do verify, that rich men under Tyrants are always the mark at
which promooting knaves and false informers do aim, See Tacitus in their lives.
as it is apparently seen in the lives of Caligula, Nero, Vitellius, Domitianus
and Commodus, and such other Monsters in nature. Likewise in all civil broils
and public commotions, the richer men go ever to the pot, as it is apparent in
Livies Decades, See Livie in his first Decade.
the Plebeian ever repining and envying the richest Patricians. So that riches
do rather expose men to dangers then rescue them.

Sixthly, The evil proprieties of this sordid passion are many, but I will
speak only of some of them. 1. It inticeth men to Idolatry; for Avaricious men
make their addresses morning and evening to their god Mammon, in lieu to make
their prayers to God. I mean in bending as soon as they rise, all their
thoughts and cogitations upon the means how they may increase their wealth:
whereby it appears that the love of money does extinguish in them the love of
God, and that it is almost as impossible for a rich avaritious man to obtain
the Kingdom of God, Allusion upon Math 19.24.
as it is for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle; and that is the reason
why few noble and rich are called; and why rich men are compared in the Gospel
of S. Luke to the thorny ground: 1 Cor. 1.26. Luke 8.14.
because the care they take to increase their riches, smothers in them the seed
of the Word, and hinders them to grow in spiritual graces: there being as great
an antipathy between the carking care of this life and godliness, as there is
between light and darkness; Math. 6.21.
for where men's treasure is, there is their heart. And that is the reason why
Saint James does pronounce this heavy sentence against the rich who are
possessed with Avarice, Jam 5.1, 2, 3, 4 5, 6.
Go to now ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon
you. Your riches are corrupt, and your garments are motheaten. Your gold and
silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and
shall eat your flesh as it were fire; ye heave heaped treasures together for
the last days. Behold the hire of the Laborers which have reaped down your
fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, cries; and the cries of them which
have reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath. Ye have lived in
pleasure on the earth and been wanton; ye have nourished your hearts as in a
day of slaughter. Ye have condemned and killed the just, and he has not
resisted you.

The second propriety of it, is, That it deprives those who are possessed with
it, of all true joy, because their joy and content does only consist in the
increase of their riches, which can afford no solid joy, the creatures having
nothing in them but emptiness: whereas the object of true joy is God himself,
that ever will be an infinite, unchangeable and eternal God. Besides, how can
avaritious men have any joy or content, that are hourly perplexed with fears of
being deprived of all they have, by a thousand accidents which riches are
subject unto? See Plutarch in his Morals.
And this moved Crates to cast all his wealth into the Sea, saying he would
rather drown his riches then they should drown the tranquillity of his mind in
fears and continual anxieties. He that loves silver (says Solomon) shall not
be satisfied with silver: Eccles. 5.10.
And except men's desires be satisfied, they can have no joy nor content.

The Third Propriety of it, is, That it deprives men of understanding. For
Avaritious men cannot make use of their Riches, but will pinch their bellyes,
go ragged, and deprive themselves from the comfort of all good things: Nay
their harmless Cattle shall feel the smart of their biting Avarice. An Italian
Bishop was so base, as he did steal in the night time the Provender that was
allowed to his Coach-horses: But his Coachman gave hiw a hundred bastinadoes
as a just reward for his Avarice. For seeing his horses daily decline and
become poor and faint, he watched all night and found his Master stealing of
their Provender out of their manger, and taking no notice who he was, did
swadle him soundly, verifying this Saying of Solomon, That he who loves
riches, shall be without the fruit thereof. And this he calls An evil
sickness, or sore disease. And in truth, it is a sign of Phrensy, or of a
Privation of understanding, when men make no use of the Blessings of God; And
may be compared to a dog that sits upon a truss of hay, that will not suffer it
to be taken away, although he cannot eat of it himself.

The Fourth Propriety of it, is, That it banisheth all Christian Charity out of
the hearts of men: For none are so closefisted toward the Poor as Rich
Avaritious men. And when with much importunity Collectors draw from them some
small Contribution toward their releif, they repine for it, and think they draw
like horsleeches their hearts blood. Nay, they will bury their Gold and Silver
in the ground, rather then they will lend their poor Neighbor some part of it
gratis. See Plutarch in his Morals.
And this moved Aesop to say to an Avaritious man, who lamented for the loss of
a Treasure he had hid in the ground, Lament and vex not thy self (said he) but
carry a stone of the like weight, and bury it in the same place where thy gold
was, and imagine it is the same Gold which was taken from thee: For this stone
will be as useful to thee as thy Gold was, since thou could not make a better
use of it. And certainly such Nabals as hoard up their Wealth, and deny to
relieve the distressed David's of these Times in their extreme need, may be
compared to that Sicilian Merchant, who being possessed with a strong Phrensy,
did believe that all the rich ships that came into the Haven of Syracuse, were
his own. Even so these miserable Cormorants, are not Really, but Imaginarily
rich, since God deprives them of the use of their Riches.

The Fifth Propriety of it, is, That it begets Pride, and makes men insolent,
disdainful and arrogant. For it is a Saying as True as Common, That Honors and
Riches corrupt good manners. And daily Experience does show, that such as
become rich suddenly, which were before of a mean and low degree, are prouder,
and more insolent in their carriage and comportments, then the greatest
Noblemen in the Land: And more disdainful toward their neighbors, then those
whose shoos they were formerly unworthy to untye. See Plutarch in his Life.
Crassus from a mean condition being by his Avarice and his vile and base
courses to get money, grown to be the richest Citizen of Rome, became so proud
and insolent, as to dispute and contest for the preheminency with Caesar.

The sixth propriety of it, is, That this sordid passion does increase by age,
and is most eager and insatiable when men have one of their feet upon the brim
of their grave, then when they are in their virility and the strength of their
youth: Whereas diverse other passions, as wrath, ambition, audacity, and
volupty, do diminish by age; which pernicious quality should move men to abhor
the same, since no passion is more opposite to the tranquillity of the mind
then it, because when ancient men should only have their mind fixed upon the
means appointed by God, to make their calling and election sure, and to attain
to that assurance of eternal bliss, without which they can have no true peace,
joy nor content, then is it most of all vexed and perplexed with the carking
cares to increase and preserve this Idol of theirs; I mean their gold and
silver.

Seventhly, The Effects of Avarice are rather more then the Proprieties of it.

First, They who are addicted to the same, are never loyal to their Prince nor
native Country. And this moved Philip King of Macedonia to say, that no
Garrison was impregnable, See Plutarch in Paulus Emylius Life.
if a Mule laden with gold could enter through the gate of it. And the Duke of
Memorancy high Constable of France, told his King, Francis the First, See the
History of France.
that the Governor of Metz was the Phoenix of that Age for loyalty, since he had
been tempted with a great sum of gold by Charles the Fifth Emperor of Germany,
to deliver that strong hold into his hands. But the Governor of Calice in
Henry the Fourths days was not so faithful; for being possessed with Avarice,
he yielded up that Garrison that is one of the Keys of France, into the
Archduke Alberts hands, for the sum of thirty thousand Crowns; for which
disloyalty, he and his posterity were degraded of their Nobility.

The second Effect of Avarice, is, That it perverteth Justice and Judgment;
Cambises King of Persia, caused one of his Judges to be flead alive, See
Herodotus in his Life.
and his skin to be nailed upon the Judgment Seat, because he had been seduced
by a Bribe to condemn the Innocent. And the annihilation of the power of the
Roman Decemviri, Livie in his 1. Decade.
happened because they took Bribes to pervert Justice. And the two Sons of
Samuel, Joel and Abiah who were Judges of Israel, 1 Samuel 8.2.3.
out of Avarice walked not in the ways of their Father, but turned aside after
luere, took bribes and perverted judgment. And this moved Jethro to give this
counsel to Moses his Son-in-law, to provide out of all the people able men,
Exodus 18.22.
fearing God and hating Avarice, to make them Judges over Israel; for
wheresoever Judges and Magistrates are possessed with Avarice, the Laws are
trampled under foot, and Justice is utterly perverted.

The third Effect of it, is, That Avarice does foment divisions and contentions
in all places wheresoever it reigns. 1. It was the Avarice of the Roman
Patricians, See Livie in his 1. Decade.
that was the only cause of all the divisions and commotions which happened and
continued for so many years together, between themselves and the Plebeians or
common people of Rome: for Avarice is the mother of Usury, Oppression, and
Extortion.

The fourth Effect of it, is, That it makes Princes and private men as cruel
as Lions and Tigers. 1. See the conquest of the West Indies.
The Avarice of Ferdinando King of Aragon moved him to undertake the discovery
of the West Indies, and with a barbarous cruelty, to cause two or three
millious of the poor Indians to be slain with the sword, and to be torn in
pieces with Mastiffs, that his Spanish Subjects might have a freer possession
of the gold and silver Mines that are there. 2. It moved Philip the second King
of Spain to exile out of his Dominions all the Christian Moors that were in
Spain; See the History of Spain in his Life.
the number of men, women, and children, who were thus cruelly banished,
amounting to above three hundred thousand, and all to add to his own demains
their Lands and Inheritances, under a false color of zeal to Religion. 3. It
moves Mariners and Merchants to venture their lives into the furthest and the
most cold and hotest Climates of the World to increase their Wealth, many of
them losing their lives in the prosecution of it. 4. It moves the most profane
and debaucht sort of men to become Rovers and Murderers upon the Roades and
Highwayes, to break open Houses, and to carry away men's goods by force and
violence.

The fifth Effect of it, is, That Avarice has ever been the Incendiary of
Civil Wars. 1. See Caesar's Commentaries and Plutarch in his Life.
The Avarice of the Plebeian Tribunes of the City of Rome in the days of
Caesar, was the cause of the Civil Wars which happened between himself and
Pompeys; for by the extraordinary bribes he gave to some of them, they bought
the voices of the Centuries of the people to make him continue in his Office of
Lieutenant General of the Roman Legions that were in France, longer then it was
appointed by the Law, by which means he attained to such power and reputation,
that with the same Army which had been given him by the Senate and People to
defend and enlarge the demains of the Roman Commonwealth, he changed the
Government of it, and overthrew their Liberties. 2. See Guicciardine in his
History.
The Avarice of the chiefest Magistrates and Officers of the Commonwealth of
Florence in the days of Peter de Medecis, was the cause of all the Civil
broyls which happened in that State. 3. The extreme Avarice, mixed with cruelty,
of the Duke D'Alva Deputy Governor for the King of Spain in the Low Countries,
was the cause of the death of many Nobles, and of the miserable end of thirty
thousand Protestants he caused to be drowned, hanged and slain, See the History
of the Low Countries.
to confiscate their goods; and of the rent of seven of those Provinces from
the obedience of the King of Spain. 4. The Avarice of the sixteen Zealots who
had the Government of the City of Paris in the time of the Catholic League as
they called it, was the cause of all the Civil Commotions, Murders, and
Rapines which were committed in Paris, See the History of France.
and in diverse other Parts of France.

The sixth Effect of Avarice, is, That it endangereth men souls; for men who
are possessed with this passion, care not what indirect courses they take to
enrich themselves; For he who makes haste to be rich, Prove. 28.20.
says Solomon, cannot be innocent; Intimating that his many sins and
transgressions make him run hazard to be cast into the Pit of eternal
destruction, which is confirmed by this saying of S. Paul, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10.
They that will be rich, fall into temptations and snares, and into many
foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction: For the
love of money is the root of all evil: which while some lusted after, they
erred from the Faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.

Eighthly, The considerations inducing men to allay the fire of this passion,
are these: 1. They are to consider that nature is contented with a little; for
some bread and water, some Rise, Reasons, Almonds, or Figgs, will satisfy the
same: So that all such as are not nice but sober in their diet, and temperate
in their drinking, will never be enforced to sell their Land to feed their
bodies; for it is the excess of the superfluous volupties used in these days
that brings men to penury. 2. They are to consider, That he who cannot be
contented with a little, will not be satisfied with all he could desire;
nothing under the Sun being able to satisfy the desires of men, but God only.
And that is the reason why S. Paul says, 1 Timothy 6.6.
That godliness with contentment is great gain; for none can be truly
contented, except he has the power of godliness in him, because the love of
God does suppress all other desires in men. It was therefore a wise saying of a
Heathen, That he who can give bounds to his desires, is a greater Conqueror and
a richer Monarch then Alexander was; See Quintus Curtius in his Life.
for having conquered one World, and having in his possession all the Treasures
of Asia which Darius had heaped together, yet were not his desires satisfied;
for he did enquite if there were any more Worlds to satisfy his Ambition and
Avarice. 3. They are to consider, that riches are accounted the gifts of
Fortune, which is held to be blind; therefore it is no wonder if she bestows
her gifts upon undeserving men, such as were Nabal, Sobna, and the rich
glutton. Besides virtuous and Religious men make conscience of their ways, and
will rather be poor then use indirect and unlawful means to enrich themselves;
but such as neither fear God nor man, stretch their consciences upon the
Tenters, and conceive no courses unlawful or sinful, so they enrich themselves
by them. 4. They are to consider, that Avarice is worse then Prodigality; for
the profuseness of Prodigal men is not destructive to any but to themselves;
but the courses used by Avaritious men to enrich themselves, are destructive to
the whole Commonwealth: for all Shopkeepers, and Artificers are the better by
Prodigals, but they are the worse by Avaritious men, and specially the poorer
sort; For they commonly engross or monopolize into their hands all manner of
Commodities, to sell them dear; and principally corn; and so like horsleeches,
suck the very blood of the Poor: which makes them to be hated of God and of
Men. The consideration of which, should move all conscientious men to abhor
Avarice, and to endevor by all means to subdue this sinful Passion. 5. They are
to consider, that if they had in their possession all the gold and silver Mines
of the West Indies, yet they would not add any thing to their present and
future Felicity, but rather traverse the first, and deprive them of the second.
Neither can they prolong their Lives an hour, nor free their bodies from any of
the numerous Infirmities they are naturally subject unto. It is then an
absolute Madness, for men to tire their bodies, and to waste their spirits, by
laboring and carking day and night, to accumulate some small heaps of white and
yellow Clay, that will be of no use unto them at the hour of death. Nay, they
run great hazard (without the mercy of God) to lose their own souls in, or by
the acquisition of them. Therefore they should have always this Saying of our
Blessed Savior in their mind, Mark. 8.36.
For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his
own soul? 6. They are to consider, that there is a greater difference between
the spiritual and temporal riches, then there is between Light and Darkness: in
regard of the superexcellency and duration of the first, and the baseness and
mutability of the second. For spiritual riches are free from all Accidents,
durable, and eternal; but the temporal riches are subject to changes and
mutations, and of no continuance, their abode being uncertain: men being rich
to day, and extreme poor to morrow, as it appears by the History of Job, and of
Croesus king of Lydia: the one being the richest man of the East; and the other
the richest Prince in Asia: And yet in the revolution of one day, Herodotus in
Croesus life.
the last was deprived of his incredible treasures and kingdom, and became also
the Captive of his mortal Enemy: And the first came to be an Object of Poverty
and Misery, See the Book of Job. Chapter 1.
and a Subject of Derision and false Imputations to his own wife and intimate
friends. It is Recorded, that at the sacking or destruction of the City of
Thebes by Alexander the Great, a Greek Philosopher for his rare parts was
permitted to go away with all he had, before the rest of the Inhabitants were
slain, and the city set on fire: And being asked as he came out, Why he carried
not away his Goods, Answered, In saving my person I preserve all that may truly
be called Riches or Goods; meaning his Learning and Virtue. Even so if
Christians would be as careful to hoard up spiritual riches, as they are to
heap up gold and silver, they should not need to fear the loss of them. For
Godliness and Holiness, that are the spiritual riches of a true Christian, are
free from all Accidents. And this is the reason why our Blessed Savior does
charge us all, To seek first the kingdom of God, Math 6.33.34.
and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto us: And, Let
us take no thought for to morrow: for the morrow shall take thought for the
things of it self: sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.


CHAP. XIX.
Of the vanity of the passion of Ambition.

AS it is not the quality, but the quantity of wine that is offensive to men:
So it is the excess and the irregularity of men's ambition that is destructive
to mankind; for as a little wine rejoices the heart, so a spark of ambition in
the heart of men bends their minds upon generous actions: And could they make
virtue and holiness the only objects of their Ambition, as they do the honor
and glory of this world, Ambition would prove to be the best and the most
commendable passion of men. See Plutarch in his Life.
Themistocles did use to say, That the great Trophies of Miltiades did hinder
him to take his rest; even so, if the Faith of Abraham, the righteousness of
Lot, the patience of Job, the continency of Joseph, the meekness of Moses, the
zeal of Phineas, the fervency of David, and the holiness of our blessed
Savior, were the objects of men's ambition, ambitious men would carry away the
garland, and be reputed as the only excellent upon earth. Psalm. 16.3.
But to be excessively ambitious after the fading and momentary riches,
honors, and glory of this world, or after the conquest of a Molehill, (for
the greatest Kingdom in Christendom in comparison of the whole Globe of the
World, will appear but like a Molehill,) it is a mere vanity, Eccles. 6.2.
and an evil disease. Socrates being informed that Alcibiades was proud and
ambitions, and boasted of the great demains he possessed in Attica a Province
of Greece, See Plutarch in his Morals.
of which Athens was the Metropolitan City, brought him into a place where
there was a Map of the whole Earth, and prayed him to show him where stood his
Possessions; Alcibiades after an exact view of the same, found out at last the
Province of Attica, which was no bigger then a great pins-head, but could not
see any sign of his demains, whereupon Socrates said unto him, Why are you then
so proud and ambitious for a thing of so little Continent, that it cannot be
seen in this Card. Even so Princes and Commonwealths, who out of ambition
contend for enlargement of their demains, will find at the end, when they have
shed their subjects blood, and exhausted their Treasures, that they have only
obtained with much ado, a small Molehill of ground: And will be enforced to
say, See the History of France.
as Charles the Fifth, and Philip the Second, Kings of Spain did (who through
their Ambition had been the cause of the death of a million of men, and of the
exhausting of all the Treasures that came out of the West- Indies, which did
amount in threescore years to above two hundred millions of Crowns, by the Wars
they made about the Conquest of France,) viz. That with all this blood and
incredible Treasures, they had not won a Foot of ground in France, and were
further from the Conquest of it, then they were the first day of their War. And
verily if the seventeen Provinces of the Low Countries were represented in a
Map, and compared to the whole Globe of the Firmament, of the Seas, and the
Earth, they would not seem to be so big as a Molehill: And yet they have this
threescore years and ten been the object of the Ambition of him that styles
himself the greatest King in Christendom. And notwithstanding his might and
power, See the History of the Netherlands.
and the innumerable lives of men that have been lost, and the incredible
Treasures that have been exhausted in the Conquest and preservation of them,
yet has he been enforced to acknowledge seven of these Provinces to be
free-States, and at this very hour courts them by his Ambassadors, to obtain an
offensive and defensive League with them: For although the Ambition of Princes
and Commonwealths have no bounds, yet are they bounded by the Lord of Hosts,
and shall extend no further then he has Decreed: The beginning, the increase,
the decay, and utter annihilation of Empires, Monarchies, and Commonwealths
being wholly at his disposing. Notwithstanding the desires of Ambitious men are
never satisfied, and are always projecting to enlarge their bounds, although
they are ignorant of Gods will and pleasure therein; these ambitious desires of
theirs, being oftentimes the forerunners of their ruin and annihilation. See
Herodotus in his Life.
Croesus King of Lydia desiring ambitiously to enlarge his dominions, made War
against Cyrus, who deprived him in one day of his Kingdom, and of his
incredible Treasures. And Antiochus the great, ambitiously desiring to enlage
his Kingdom, declared War against the Romans, who took from him Armenia, See
Plutarch in the Lives of Lucullus and Pompeius.
and confined him beyond the Mount Taurus. And because this fiery passion of
Ambition is as predominant in all parts of Christendom in these days, as it
has been in former Ages, give me leave to enlarge my self upon these
particulars: 1. On the definition of this passion. 2. On the composure of it.
3. On the nature of the same. 4. On those who are most addicted to it. 5. On
the Causes that move men to be Ambitious. 6. On the proprieties of the same. 7.
On the pernicious effects of it. 8. On the means to subdue the same.


First, The definition.
Ambition is nothing but an exorbitant and irregular desire of worldly honor
and glory.

Secondly, It is a mixed passion, composed of these, The composure.
viz. of Audacity, of Hope, and Desire. 1. Audacity expels the fears that might
dissuade Ambitious men from undertaking any perilous enterprises. 2. Hope
infuseth in them a confidence they shall attain to their ends. 3. Desire gives
them wings to prosecute with indefatigable labor, the fruition of that which
they aim at.

Thirdly, It is of a fiery, restless, and insatiable nature. 1. It is fiery,
because such as are more ambitious then others, are of a bilious, hot, and dry
constitution. 2. It is restless, because the bilious humor, which is the most
predominant in their bodies, does usually ascend up to their brains, which
makes them active in all their actions, and sudden in all their undertakings.
The nature of Ambition.
And of this natural constitution were Caesar, Henry the Fourth King of France,
and the last King of Sweden, who were all three extraordinarily ambitious. 3.
It is insatiable, because of the great predominancy the passion of desire has
over the other passions of which it is composed, nothing being more insatiable
then the desires of men.

Fourthly, Those who are most ambitious, are commonly of a haughty spirit,
envious and impatient when they see any other excel them in valor, honor and
glory. It was Ambition that moved Alexander to reject the fair offer that
Darius King of Persia made unto him of the half of his Kingdom, and of his
eldest Daughter to be his wife, (if that would have satisfied his ambition,) so
he might enjoy peaceably the other moity the rest of his days; See Quintus
Curtius in his Life.
but this answer of Alexander made unto Darius upon this offer did proceed from
a haughty and imperious spirit, viz. That as there was but one Sun in the
Firmament, so there could be but one Monarch upon Earth: See Plutarch in
Caesar's Life.
And this saying of Caesar did proceed from a haughty and ambitious heart, viz.
That he would rather be the chiefest Magistrate in a petty City of Italy, then
the second in the City of Rome. And this other that he spoke to the Master of a
ship in the midst of a storm; Fear not, says he, For thou do carry in thy
ship Caesar and his Fortune; as if the Wind and the Sea had been bound to obey
and comply with his ambitious designs: But his passion of Sorrow when he wept,
seeing the Figure of Alexander cut in Marble standing in the Market place of
the City of Cadice in Spain, does evidently manifest that he was of a haughty
and ambitious spirit. Out of these instances it may then be collected, that
Ambition is as common to haughty and proud spirits, as Avarice is proper and
peculiar to vile and base-minded-men.

Fifthly, The causes moving men to be ambitious, may be these: 1. Self-love. 2.
Pride. 3. Vainglory.


1. Self-love induces to prefer their own glory to any thing under the Sun.
And it is certain that all the heroical Actions of the ancient Heathens did
rather proceed from self-love, then from the love they did bear to Virtue, or
to their native Country. And in these days most of the commendable Actions of
Magistrates, Commanders, The causes moving men to be Ambitious.
and Learned men, have a greater reference to this self-love then the glory of
God and the Public good, except it be the actions of some special Saints, and
true children of God.

2. Pride raises their hearts above the Moon; for like proud and ambitious
Haman, they would have all men bow their knees before them, and will be
accounted as the Cedars of Libanon, and not as the brambles of the Forest. And
this Pride makes them aspire to the greatest Offices and Places of the
Commonwealth, being assured that by these Places and Dignities they will be
more honored then for their own worth. Never considering that the steepest
Mountains, the highest Clifts, Towers, and Steeples are more subject to be
beaten down by the boisterous winds and thunderclaps, then the low trees
growing in the Valleys. And that God does always exalt the humble, and speaks
thus to the proud, Though thou exalt thy self as the Eagle, Obad. 1.4.
and though thou set thy nest among the stars, thence will I bring thee down,
says the Lord.

3. Vainglory gives wings to the ambitious men, and makes them undertake the
most perilous enterprises, if they conceive they may obtain in this life the
praise and the applause of men, and make their memory famous in the Generations
to come. This moved the two Decii to throw themselves in the midst of the
Enemies Army, to save and to give the Victory to the Roman Legions: See Livie
in his first Decade.
It moved Martius Curtius to cast himself on Horseback, armed from head to
foot, into a bottomless Pit to free the City of Rome from the contagion of a
consuming Plague: It moved Scevola to burn his own hand before King Porsenna in
the flame of a lighted Torch, to obtain an advantageous Peace for his native
Country. And the ancient Romans knowing what power vainglory has over
ambitious men, did ordain to this purpose three kind of Triumphs, to incite
them by these vain shows and the applause and acclamations the common people
made at their entering, See Livie in his 1.2. and 3. Decade.
to hazard their lives in Martial Atchievments; the first of these Triumphs
excelling in honor the second, and the second the last; that their valor
might be honored according to the degrees, as it did really deserve: Whereby
it appears that vainglory has from the beginning to this day been the only aim
of proud and ambitious men.

Sixthly, The proprieties of ambition are numerous, but for brevity sake, I
shall only speak of three of them.

The first proprietiy of it, is, That it has neither limits nor bounds; and
this I will prove by three instances, that are known to such as are versed in
ancient and Modern Histories. 1. The Ambition of the Democratical Commonwealth
of Rome had no bounds, although the beginning of it was vile and small; it was
vile because the first erectors of it were for the greater part Outlaws,
Fugitives, and Vagabonds; and it was small because their number did not exceed
three thousand before the Sabines joined with them; the first object of their
Ambition was the City of Alba, See Livie in his 1. Decade. Lib. 1.
which was destroyed in one day; the second was Gabes; and the Citizens of them
both were joined with the Romans, which did much increase their number, and so
by degrees subdued all their neighboring Princes and Commonwealths; then
Sicilia was the object of their Ambition, then Carthage, Spain, France,
England, Greece, Macedonia, and Armenia: And when they had in their possession
the greatest part of Europe, See Caesar's Commentaries.
Asia, and Africa, then the ambition of Caesar swallowed up them: who from a
servant became their imperious Lord. Neither was the ambition of their Emperors
ever limited; for the greater part of them did endevor to enlarge their
Monarchy, till the days of the Emperor Trajan, See Dion and Apian.
at which time it had the largest extent that it ever had; for presently after,
it began to decay, and was annihilated by its own weight, as all great Politic
Bodies are commonly. 2. The Ottoman ambition was never limited to this day. At
the first, it was contained within the Circumference of a Country Village,
their number not above six hundred; then they extended the same in the Lesser
Asia, and then it came over Hellespontus into Greece, conquered Constantinople,
See the Turkish History.
suppressed the Greek Empire, subdued Servia, Dalmatia, and a great part of
Hungaria; then Egypt, Syria, and Armenia, with the Island of Cyprus, Rhodes, and
all the Islands of the Archipelago; then they extended the same into Persia,
but were enforced to give it over because of their Civil Divisions: The
Janisaries and the Spahis holding at this present the helm of the ship of that
great Monarchy; for they have of late years placed and displaced to, and from
the Throne, such as pleased and displeased them; yet is not their ambition
limited; for Candia is now the object of it. 3. The ambition of the House of
Austria was never yet limited: 1. In the days of Ferdinando and Isabella, they
conquered the Kingdom of Grenado, See the German and Spanish History.
and the West- Indies, and by a wile possessed themselves perfidiously of the
Kingdom of Navarr, and drove the French out of the Kingdom of Naples, and the
Duchy of Milan; and having by the Heir of the House of Burgundy obtained the
rule of the seventeen Provinces of the Netherlands, Charles the Fifth, the son
of that Heir was chosen Emperor of Germany when he was already King of Spain,
which Kingdom he left to Philip the Second, his son: and the Empire of Germany
to his brother Ferdinande, whom he caused to be chosen by his power in his life
time; and so ambitiously and cunningly made the Empire of Germany Hereditary to
that Family, that was formerly elective; his son Philip the Second of that
name, King of Spain, following his ambitious steps, by the invincible Navy he
sent to conquer England, See the French and English History.
and the Catholic League that were his Emissaries to betray into his hands
France their native Country, came very near to be the absolute Monarch of
Christendom: But God who derides at the ambition of Princes which do not tend
to the execution of his secret will, brought all his ambitious designs to
nothing; for his invincible Navy was beaten and scattered by the English
valor, and the greatest part of it swallowed up by the roaring Seas. And the
Catholic League in France, was utterly subdued by the activity, wisdom, and
valor of Henry the Fourth their lawful king. See the Netherland History.
Yet notwithstanding that the Hollanders have deprived him of seven of the
Netherland Provinces; and the Portuguies from his usurped kingdom of Portugal;
he hoped still ambitiously to make himself the absolute Monarch of Christendom,
by the divisions he has lately fomented in Holland, England, France, Scotland
and Ireland, by the means of the Machiavellian Principles spread abroad by the
Jesuitical Locusts, that he has scattered among these Nations like so many
swarms of Bees. But I hope, God will turn his Counsels into foolishness, 2 Samuel
17.14.
as he did that of Achitophel: and make his unlimited Ambition the cause of his
utter annihilation.

The Second Propriety of Ambition, is, That it hates Parity, and all
Competitors and Equals. Numerous Instances might be produced for proof of it:
but half a dozen shall serve: 1. Romulus and Remus, brethren, having been
chosen kings or Governors of the Fugitives that were the first Erectors of the
Roman Commonwealth, did not reign two years together, Livie in his first
Decade. Lib. 1.
but Romulus out of ambition to reign alone, slew his brother Remus under
color that he had in derision leaped over the mud walls of the City of Rome. 2.
Lucius Tarquinius impatient of the long life and reign of Servius Tullius his
Fatherin-Law, possessed with an ambitious desire to reign in his stead, by the
wicked instigations of his wife Tullia, Lib. 1. p. 76.
threw him down the Senate-Chamber stairs, and caused him to be murdered in
the streets of Rome; and this accursed and abhorred Tullia coming from the
Senate in a Chariot with four horses, where she had caused her Husband to be
proclaimed King, caused her Coachman to drive the Chariot over her Fathers
body, as he lay a dying and goared in his blood in the street: And no marvel it
was that she who to prosecute her ambitious design, had already caused her
Husband to murder her own sister and his own brother that was her first
Husband; would omit to act this unparalleld cruelty toward her Father-in-Law,
by whose untimely and violent death she came to have the fruition of her
accursed ambition. See Plutarch in their lives.
3. Crassus, Pompeius, and Caesar having divided the power of the Roman
Commonwealth between them, Crassus being gone with a great Army into Asia to
subdue the Parthians, and Caesar with another Army into France, and Pompeius
with another Army left at Rome to preserve Italy; all three of them being
excessively ambitious, and specially the two last, could not be contented with
their condition, but underhand aspired to be absolute Monarchs, which Caesar
after the death of Crassus easily obtained. 4. After the death of Caesar,
Lepidus, Marcus Antonius, and Augustus Caesar did divide the power of the Roman
Empire between them; but before seven years came about, Augustus Caesar the
most ambitious of them became the absolute Monarch of the World, by these
means; first Antonius and Augustus joined together to deprive Lepidus of his
part; then Antonius and Augustus came to a second division; but ambition being
more predominant in Augustus then in Antonius, who was addicted to volupty, he
soon deprived him of his part, and became the only Monarch upon earth. 5. See
Herodian in his Life.
The Emperor Severus at his death left his two sons, Bassianus and Geta, equal
Heirs of the Roman Empire; but Bassianus transported with an unnatural
ambition, slew his brother Geta before a year came about in his Mothers arms,
to reign alone. 6. Lewis the Twelfth, King of France, and Ferdinando King of
Arragon by a mutual consent did divide the Kingom of Naples between them: See
the French History in the Life of Lewis the Twelfth.
But the Spaniard being more ambitious then the French, under color of a Toll
paid for Cattle, which did really appertain to the French, but fained to be the
Spaniards; Ferdinando's pride and ambition disdaining to have a Competitor or
Equal in that Kingdom, deprived the French of all he held in the same.

The third Propriety of ambition, is, That it is never free from jealousy; I
mean that which is called the jealousy of State; And for proof of it, these
following instances shall suffice. 1. The Emperor Tiberius out of an
ill-grounded jealousy that Germanicus his own Nephew, who was extremely
beloved of the Senators, Soldiers, and common People for his virtue, valor,
and noble parts, should aspire to the Empire before his death; See Tacitus in
his Life.
caused Lucius Piso Governor of Syria to poison him at a Banquet, and then
forsook the said Piso, being accused and convinced of the Fact, and suffered
him to be sentenced and executed, although he had a warrant under his own hand,
commanding him to rid him out of the way; the which Warrant he durst not
produce out of fear the Tyrant would deprive his children of his incredible
Riches and yearly Revenews. 2. Nero out of the same ambitious jealousy, caused
young Germanicus the true Heir of the Empire to be poisoned as he sat at his
own Table. 3. Domitianus out of the like jealousy, See Tacitus and Dion in
these Empeiors lives.
caused diverse Roman Senators to be slain, and was resolved to do the like to
the Captain of his Guard, and to the best beloved of his Concubines, if they
had not prevented him by taking away his life to preserve their own. 4. Lewis
the Eleventh King of France, out of an ill-grounded, but violent ambitious
jealousy, that his Brother Charles Duke of Normandy did aspire to the Crown,
See the History of France and of England.
caused him to be poisoned secretly by one of his own servants. 5. Edward the
Fourth King of England, by the false impressions that his younger Brother
Richard Duke of York had maliciously infused in his heart of this ambitious
jealousy, caused the Duke of Clarence his brother to be arraigned and drowned
in a Butt of Malmsey. 6. Richard the Third, out of this State jealousy caused
the Duke of Buckingham to be beheaded, because he conceived him to be as
willing then to disthrone him, and to set his Crown upon the Earl of Richmonds
Head, as he had been ready in former times to make him that was an Usurper,
King of England. 7. This ambitious jealousy is so cruel, that it makes men
trangress the Law of Nature, and to put their own sons to death, as Herod did
Antipater his son; See Josephus.
whereupon Augustus Caesar said ingeniously, that it was better to be Herod's
Swine then his Son. See the Spanish History.
8. Philip the Second King of Spain, caused Prince Charles his eldest Son to be
put to death by the Inquisition of Spain, out of an ambitious jealousy that he
did aspire to bereave him of his Crown.

Seventhly, The Effects of Ambition are worse then the Proprieties of it; for
Paracidies, Murders, Rebellions, Mutations of States, Annihilations of Laws,
intestine and foreign Wars, with all the desolations and mischiefs that follow
them at the heels, are the fruits of men's ambition; and of these I will speak
in order, and by instances confirm the same.

For the first, Andronicus the younger, See the History of the Emperor of
Constantinople. See the Turkish History.
out of ambition to reign, did most cruelly put out the eyes of his
Grandfather, and famished him to death in Prison. 2. Sylimus out of ambition to
reign, did most unnaturally poison his Father Bajazeth, and flew all his
brethren. 3. 2 Chronicles. 2.10.
Athaliah out of Ambition to reign, slew and destroyed all the Seed-Royal of
the House of Judah. 4. Richard the Third King of England, out of Ambition to
reign, See the English History.
caused his two Nephews to be murdered in the Tower; and in hope to settle the
Crown upon himself and his Posterity, he put his Wife to death, to marry the
Lady Elizabeth his own Niece: Incests being accounted no sin by ambitious men:
So they may (as the House of Austria do daily) uphold and advance by it their
ambitious designs.

For the Second, 2 Samuel 3.27.
Joab out of ambition to remain still the Commander in Chief of the men of War,
murdered perfidiously under color of friendship, Abner and Amasa, by stabbing
of them under the fifth rib. 2. Baasha out of ambition to reign, murdered
Nadab his Lord and King. 1 King 15.27.
3. Zimri out of ambition to reign, murdered Ela his Lord, the Son of Baasha.
1 King 16.10. 1 King. 16.18.
4. Omri out of ambition to reign, rose up against Zimri and enforced him to
burn himself in the Kings Palace.

For the Third, Absalom out of Ambition to reign, rebelled against his Father
King David, 2 Samuel 26.21.
and did endeavor to deprive him of life from whom he had his being. 2.
Zedechiah out of ambition to reign as an absolute King, rebelled against his
benefactor King Nebuchadnezzar, 2 King. 24.20.
which was the cause of his miserable end. 3. Otho out of ambition to reign,
rebelled against Galba who had made him his second favorite. See Tacitus.
4. Pippin the short, out of ambition to reign, rebelled against his Lord King
Childerick, and by force and violence caused him to be shaven as a Monk, See
the French History.
and to be shut up into a Monastery.

For the Fourth, The ambition of Nebuchadnezzar was the secondary cause of the
destruction of the Assyrian Monarchy: And the ambition of Cyrus was the cause
of the overthrow of the Babylonian Monarchy: And the ambition of Alexander was
the cause of the annihilation of the Persian Monarchy: And the ambition of the
Roman Commanders was the cause of the utter subversion of the Greek Monarchy:
See Sir Walter Rawleighs History of the World.
And the ambition of Caesar was the cause of the mutation of the Democratical
Government of Rome into a Monarchical: And the ambition of the Rulers of the
Gauls, Goths, Visgots, Vandals, and Lombards, of the utter ruin of the Roman
Monarchy; for they rent the same in pieces as a Kite rends a young chiken. I
say, the secondary Cause, for the secret will and Decree of God is the first
and efficient cause of all the mutations of States or Monarchies: And that is
the reason why Saint Paul gives this charge, Romans 13 1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of
God; the powers that be, are ordained of God.

For the Fifth, From the mutations of one kind of Government to another
Government, See Plutarch in Caesar's Life, and Caesar in his Commentaries.
proceeds annihilation of the ancient Laws of either of them. It happened so at
Rome, upon the change that Caesar's ambition brought in that Commonwealth; for
the ancient Laws were annihilated, and new Laws were established; and likewise
after the coming of William the Conqueror into England, the ancient Britain
Laws were annulled, See Speed in his History of England.
and the Norman Laws confirmed: This proverb being not more common then true,
viz. From new Lords, new Laws; and this might be proved by diverse instances out
of the ancient and modern Histories; but these two alleged will serve for
brevity sake.

For the Sixth, Ambition breeds divisions, and divisions beget intestine and
foreign Wars, and from these Wars proceed the mutations of States and
Monarchies, and from these mutations the Annihilation of ancient Laws. Now the
inseparable companions of foreign and intestine Wars, are, Atheism, Schisms in
the Church, and a Laodicean luke-warmness in Religion, and great effusions of
blood, injustices, oppressions, and desolations; And all these mischiefs
proceed from the exorbitant and irregular ambition of men; and therefore I
conclude, that the passion of ambition is nothing but vanity and vexation of
spirit, and more destructive to mankind then any other passion.

But before I speak of the means which are to be used to restrain the fury of
this violent passion, give me leave to examine the justice, or injustice of the
Wars which have been merely undertaken out of an ambitious desire of vainglory.

It is certain, that if the actions of the most ambitious Princes and
Commonwealths that have from the creation to this day bin upon the Earth, were
examined without prejudice or partiality, that they would be found more
injurious then just: If men set aside the secret will and Decree of God, who
had ordained from the beginning that these four great Monarchies here spoken
of, should be so successful in their increase; they would wonder how injustice
and oppressions could have such prosperous events. I will only speak of the
Actions of the Romans and Greeks. 1. Because they have been more clearly
demonstrated to us by their Authors, then the actions of the other two. 2.
Because the Actions of the Assyrians and Babylonians were guided by a special
providence of God, for the punishment of the sins of his own People the Jews.
As for the Actions of the Romans, men may clearly see, that from their very
beginning until the days of Caesar, they have for the greater part been unjust,
oppressive and injurious, although they with much cunning and art did palliate
them under the cloak of Justice, and the right of the Laws of Nations. And as
for the Civil War undertaken by Caesar against his native Country, it was void
of all humanity and Justice; and Ambition only gave him the audacity to resolve
to enslave under his yoke those to whom he had been a servant for seven years
together; Nay, with that very Army that they had given him and entrusted into
his hands, and constantly paid wages to for the enlarging of their limits. And
as for the invasion of Asia by Alexander, It was in the Opinion of the best
Politicians, a rash and inconsiderate enterprise, proceeding rather from
Temerity, then from prudence or true valor to undertake such a Conquest with an
Army of forty thousand Foot and ten thousand Horse, when Darius had to oppose
him twenty times as many more; yet because it was decreed in the secret Council
of God, that he should be the Head of the third Mornarchy, the end of this rash
and unjust enterprise proved prosperous, and not for the justice of his cause;
for Darius had never attempted to invade any of his Dominions, or done him any
injury; all the pretext he had, was, that the former Persian Kings had invaded
Greece; and to prevent future invasions, it was a wise policy to assail and
give him work at home: A poor excuse or color of justice for him to deprive
Darius of his Life, Empire, and incredible Treasures; which did well deserve
this Answer that a Pyrate made unto him, See Plutarch in Alexanders Life.
when he was brought before him to be sentenced to death for his Pyracies at
Sea; For Alexander having asked him why he did use that base and unlawful trade
of Pyracy; Out of need (said the Pyrate;) for my Father left me nothing but
this small Brigantine to maintain my self, my wife and children; but thy Father
left thee a large Kingdom, and incredible Treasures, and yet thou usest this
trade by the great, by depriving Princes of their Kingdoms and Treasures,
whereas I use it only by retail, in taking some sorry Merchants goods; consider
then which of us two is the greatest Pyrate, and which of us deserves the
greatest punishment. Alexander was so astonished at this Answer, considering
that he said nothing but the very truth, that in lieu to sentence him to death,
he made him Captain of one of the best Ships he had in his Navy. Therefore
foreign and intestine Wars are not to be undertaken but upon just grounds;
otherwise the Authors of them will be answerable at the last day for the life
and blood of those who have been slain in them, and for appropriating to
themselves such Provinces or Kingdoms to which they have neither right, nor any
just tittle.

Eighthly, The means which are to be used to allay the fury of this passion,
and to subdue it utterly if it be possibe, are these: 1. Men are to endevor to
attain to a true habit in the grace and virtue of humility; for he who is truly
humble, can never be ambitious; because Pride and Ambition are inseparable
companions. 2. This grace of humility will beget in them a filial fear; for men
before they be humbled by the consideration of their unworthiness, can never
attain to this filial fear, the fear of God being the beginning of true wisdom;
And to fear God, and to keep his Commandments, Eccles. 12.13.
is, says Solomon, the whole duty of a man: And those whose are endowed with
this filial fear, can never be ambitious; because they know it to be offensive
to God and to men: as the criminal effects of this sinful passion here before
discribed do witness the same. 3. Men are to strive to attain to an habit of
true contentedness; for such as are contented, cannot be ambitious; because
from the discontentedness of the mind, proceed the ambitious desires of men.
Diogenes had more content with his Tub, to shelter him from the injuries of the
Meteors of the Air, and with his wooden dish to eat and drink therein, then
Alexander had with the Conquest of half the World, and the fruition of all the
Treasures, Pomps, and lascivious Volupties of Asia. 4. Men are to consider,
Job. 1.21.
That naked they came into the World, and naked they shall go out of it. And
that the reward of all their ambitious undertakings will be at the conclusion,
if they had conquered the whole World, but six foot of ground to bury them in.
5. Ambitious men are ever to have in their mind this saying of our blessed
Savior, For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose
his own soul? 6. If men will needs be ambitious, let them be ambitious to excel
all others in spiritual Graces, and to make their Calling and Election sure;
That they may at their departure out of this miserable life, be made by the
merits of Christ Coheirs with their blessed Savior of the Kingdom of Heaven,
and of eternal Glory.

CHAP. XX.
Of the vanity of the passion of Envy.

CImon the famous general of the Athenian Commonwealth, hearing a friend of his
highly commending his martial Atchievments, Answered, That he feared they were
not werthy commendation, because they were not envied. See Plutarch in Cimons
life.
Intimating that in those days, the noble and generous actions of the most
valorous and virtuous men were the only object of the Athenians Envy. But
Plutarch in his life gives sufficient reason why Cimons actions were not
envied by the Athenians, as the actions of Solon, Themistocles, Alcibiades, and
Aristides were in their time (for through envy of their virtue, they banished
them all for ten years,) viz. because of his extraordinary liberality showed to
the common people; for he having great and spacious Demains about the City of
Athens, relieved the poorer sort with corn when it was dear, and every year at
Lammas laid open the Gates of his Closing to relieve their Cattle: And this
liberality of his did quench the fire of Envy, stopped the mouths of envions
men, as conceiving his own prodigality would bring him lower, and make him
poorer then their own envy could wish or desire. Aristides was one of the most
just and upright Magistrates that ever was in Athens, and for his Justice,
Prudence, Temperance, and other rare Virtues was called Aristides the just, and
by consequence more envyed by the common people then any other. Therefore his
name being written in the List of such as the people did desire to banish that
year, the day appointed for the collecting of the peoples Votes being come, See
Plutarch in Aristides life.
a Country-fellow that could neither write nor read, came amongst the rest to
give his voice; and because the Athenians gave their Voices by Tickets, he
addressed himself to Aristides, desiring him to write Aristides name in that
Ticket, whereupon Aristides astonished, demanded of him, Whether he knew
Aristides, and what injury he had done unto him, that moved him to desire he
should be banished; I know him not, said the fellow, neither has he done me
any injury; but I cannot endure to hear him called Aristides the Just;
whereupon Aristides without disclosing of himself, The common object of Envy
is goodness and virtue.
write his name in the Ticket, and gave it to the Fellow: And was the same day
exiled by the major part of the voices of the people. By this it appears that
goodness and virtue is the common object of envy. Give me leave therefore to
enlarge my Discourse upon these particulars, to discover the venom of this
vicious passion.

1. On the definition of Envy. 2. On the nature, causes, and proprieties of
it. 3. On the evil Effects of Envy. 4. On the means or remedies for the
curbing of it.
First, Envy is a mixed Passion, composed of cupidity, wrath, and hatred;
cupidity makes it vile and base; wrath, fiery and furious; and hatred makes it
loathsome and odious. And by the mixture of these three pernicious ingredients,
it becomes one of the worst passions incident to men; for where it reigns, it
produces nothing but anguish, grief, and sorrow of heart, and no profit, joy,
or pleasure at all. Envy, says the Bishop of Marseilles, is a sordid passion,
See p. 369. of the Book upon this Passion.
begetting a repining grief and sorrow in the hearts of men who are possessed
with it.

2. The Nature, Causes and Proprieties of this passion of Envy may be these:
First, The nature of Envy.
Envy is by accident of a cold and dry nature, having a shrinking quality,
like unto that of Fear and Sorrow; for although Wrath, of which it is composed,
be hot and fiery, yet being turned into Hatred, it loses its natural heat,
becomes cold by accident, as the humor of the yellow Choler, which is hot,
being burned, changes its nature, and is turned into a cold melancholy humor.
Secondly, the causes of Envy are these: 1. Pride. 2. Self-love. 3. Malice.


First, Pride-begetteth Envy; for all such as are proud, repine and grieve to
see others to excel them in honors, The causes of Envy.
riches, pleasures, or in moral Virtues, and spiritual graces.

Secondly, Self-love is the cause of Envy; for such as are possessed with
self-love, cannot endure that others should be accounted more valiant, nor more
learned, virtuous, or righteous then they.

Thirdly, Malice breeds Envy; for malicious men cannot see without grief and
sorrow their Neighbors prosperity; and all these shall be proved by instances,
when I shall speak of the malicious effects of this passion of Envy.

The first propriety of Envy is, The evil Proprieties of Envy.
that such as are transported with it, never envy those who are of a lower
degree then themselves; for Envy does ever ascend and never descend, because
Envy is not like Hatred, which continues till death, and sometimes after
death, as it has been proved in the Chapter of Hatred: but it increases or
decreaseth according to the prosperity or adversity of those that are envied by
others; for if the party envied, become poor, or fall into misery, the envious
party will change oftentimes his envy into compassion and pity.

The second Propriety of Envy is, That men of different Callings seldom envy
one another: But Princes envy Princes, Commanders envy Commanders, Learned
men envy the Leaned, Merchants envy Merchants, and Artificers envy
Artificers of their own calling; for a Smith will not Envy a Carpenter, nor a
Carpenter a Smith. Marius did envy Sylla, Pompeius Caesar; Francis the First
King of France did envy the Emperor Charles the Fifth; See Plutarch in their
lives, and the French and Spanish Histories.
and all these were Competitors of honor and glory. And likewise learned men
never envy Generals of Armies, but they envy such as they fear will outgo
them in the Sciences they profess: Orators envy Orators, and Divines envy
Divines; for the objects of this malicious passion are those that excel others
in Valor, Prudence, Honors, Riches, Pleasures, Sciences, Arts and Piety.

The third Propriety of Envy, is, That it enticeth men to cruelty, for if
Might and Power happen to be in the hands of envious men, to satisfy their
envy, they will commit all manner of injustice and Tyrannical cruelty.

3. The effects of Envy have from the Creation to this day been destructive to
mankind. And the Painter that did first represent this Passion under the shape
of a woman having a wrinkled face, squint-eyes, a crown of Snakes on her head,
The evil effects of Envy.
and a Vultur gnawing her breast, was well acquainted with the evil nature and
pernicious effects of Envy. For the Feminine Sex first intimates the
pusillanimity of this Passion, Secondly, her wrinckled face represents the
grief and sorrow that is incident to such as are possessed with envy. Thridly,
her squint-eye demonstrates the indirect objects of this passion. Fourthly, the
crown of Snakes on her head, signifies the anxieties of their mind. Fifthly,
The Vultur gnawing her breast, is a lively emblem of the wracking tortures
wherewith Envy does continually afflict the hearts of envions men.

The first effect of Envy proceeding from Pride, was the cruel murder of Abel;
for the pride of Cains heart did beget in him this envy, because his Sacrifice
was rejected of the Lord, and Abels Sacrifice was accepted, as it appears by
these words, Genesis 4.5.
And the Lord had respect unto Abel, and to his Offering: But to Cain and to
his Offering he had no respect.

The second effect of Envy proceeding from Pride, was, when the hearts of the
Pharisees puffed up with pride, did out of a malicious envy slander our
blessed Savior, saying unto him, Joh. 7.46.
That he did cast out Devils by the power of Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils,
because they could not endure to hear their own Officers say, Never man spoke
like this man. The first effect of Envy proceeding from self-love was this;
Dionysius Tyrant of Syracuse caused the Poet Philoxenus to be sold for a slave,
See Plutarch in his Morals.
because he was generally reputed to be a better Poet then he. The second
effect proceeding from self-love was this, That the Emperor Adrianus caused
Favorinus and Melisius, See Spartianus in Adrianus Life.
two Learned men, to be banished, because they were generally reputed to be
more learned in the Liberal Sciences then he. The first effect of Envy
proceeding from Malice was this, that Joseph's brethren sold him to the
Midianite Merchants to be carried and sold as a Slave into Egypt; for being
transported with Envy and Malice, they said amongst themselves, Come now
therefore, Genesis 37.20.
and let us slay him, and cast him into some Pit, and we will say, some evil
beast has devoured him, and we shall see what will become of his dreams. But
God who had in his secret Decree otherwise disposed of him, caused Judah to
persuade them he should be sold, and not slain. The second effect of Envy
proceeding from Malice was the malicious Envy of Saul against David. And for
no other cause, but forasmuch as God was pleased to bless him in all his
designs and undertakings: And this Malice and Envy was so inveterate, 1 Samuel
29.
that when all his wiles miscarryed, he persuaded Michal his Daughter to betray
her own Husband; but she abhorring so base an act, out of love saved his life
by a wile.

Fourthly, Tyranny and Cruelty is an effect of Envy; for the Envy of Marius
against Sylla was the cause of a bloody Civil War: And the envy of Pompeius
against Caesar was the cause of a greater; and the Envy of Francis the First
against Charles the Fifth, was the cause of the death of a Million of men. The
fifth effect of Envy is, That it begets shame and ignominy, because envious
men cannot excuse nor palliate this Passion of Envy, as men can diverse other
passions. The ambitious man will excuse his ambition, and will say it is an
evidence of his generosity of spirit, to aspire to honors and places of
Authority; that there is none but base-minded men who do affect to live
obscurely. The covetous man will varnish over his avarice, and cloak the same
by this passage of S. Paul, 1 Timothy 5.8.
But if any provide not for his own Family, he has denied the Faith, and is
worse then an Infidel. The choleric man will disguise his wrath, and persuade
men it proceeds from a masculine courage, and that there is none but cowards
that will suffer injuries and affronts. The voluptuous man will disguise his
Vices, and say this, that joy, mirth and pleasure are natural to men, and will
pervert this passage of Solomon's, Eccles. 3.22.
I preceive there is nothing better that a man should rejoice in his own works.
The timorous man will excuse his pusillanimity, and say, that Fear is the
mother of security, and that there is more prudence to be fearful then
over-bold. The curious man will varnish over his nice curiosity, and say it is
comely and gentile to be apparrelled a la mode, and that none but Clowns will
go after the old fashion. In a word, men have excuses to turn all their vicious
passions into Virtues, Envy only excepted: for they disclaim it and will not
own it, because it is shameful and ignominious. The last evil effect of Envy
is, That it fills the minds and hearts of men with anguish, grief and sorrow;
for repining and discontent do follow envious men, as the Spaniel follows his
Master, and the shadow the body. See Plutarch in his Morals.
The Philosopher Anarcharis being demanded by a friend of his, why so many men
were discontented; because they conceive says he, that their Neighbors
condition is better then theirs; intimating that Envy is the greatest
disturber of peace and tranquillity of the mind, and that they that are
addicted to this vile and base passion, can never be merry nor joyful. And
Solomon the Prince of wisdom, that was better able then any to judge of the
evil nature and pernicious effects of men's passions, says, that Envy is worse
then Wrath, as it appears by these words, Wrath is cruel, and anger is
outrageous, Prove. 27.4.
but who is able to stand before Envy? To conclude, Envy is not only vanity,
but a great torment and vexation of Spirit.

4. The chief means or remedies against this passion of Envy, are, prayer, The
remedies against Envy.
contentedness, charity, and self-denial: First, fervent Prayer to God is a
special remedy against this passion; for Envy is one of the temptations of
Satan, which cannot be overcome without God be pleased to give men power to
cast them like dirt into his face by the shield of Faith; Ephesians. 6.16.
Whereby they may be able to quench all the fiery darts of the Wicked.
Secondly, contentedness is an approved remedy against Envy; for if men were
contented with the condition that God has been pleased to set them in, they
would never Envy the prosperity of their Neighbous; for this discontent that
is so familiar to men, proceeds from their cupidity or covetousness, which is
one of the ingredients of the composure of this passion of Envy, and this
cupidity is insatiable, except men can obtain from God by fervent prayers this
excellent grace of contentedness; for as S Paul says, Godliness with
contentment is great gain. 1 Timothy 6.6.
And were a man the absolute Monarch of the whole World, yet without this grace
of contentedness, his desires would never be satisfied, but would envy and
long for some other imaginary felicity or greater glory. And that is the reason
why S. Paul does exhort the Hebrews to be contented with such things as they
had, and that their conversation should be without covetousness; Let your
conversation, Heb. 13.50.
says he, be without covetousness, and be content with such things as ye have;
for he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. Thirdly, Charity is
a sovereign remedy against Envy; for if men were in charity with all men, they
would never envy at the prosperity of their Neighbors; and the only antidote
against Wrath, which is another of the ingredients of the composure of this
passion of Envy, is Charity; because men that be endowed with the Grace of
Charity, bear patiently all manner of injuries, For Charity, says S. Paul, 1
Cor. 13.4.
suffers long, and is kind. Fourthly, self-denial is an excellent remedy
against Envy; for men that deny themselves drive all manner of hatred and
Envy from their hearts. And hatred is the third ingredient of the composure of
this passion of Envy; and our blessed Savior does tell us, that if we will
imitate and come after him, Mark 8.34.
we must deny our selves and take up his cross and follow him. To conclude, If
men would be fervent in prayers to obtain these foresaid Graces, they would
abhor and detest Envy more then they do the Pestilence and the contagious
disease of the Plague; for a grain of Envy is able to stain and blemish all
the spiritual Graces of a Christian.

FINIS.

