A RELATION OF A DISPV^^ OF BAPTISM of INFANTS of CHRISTIANS.

At Holgate in the County of Salop, Maii. 30. 1650.

Betwixt P. PANTER, D. in Divinity, Rector of the Place, And Mr. BROWN,
Preacher to the Anabaptists in that Circuit.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Vere, dwelling at the upper end of the Old-Bayly.
1650.

A Relation of a Dispute of Baptism of Infants of Christians.
BEing come into the Hall of Holgate, and the Question put to Mr. Brown, of
the cause of his secession and separation from the Church of England, in which
he was brought up, and had for certain years been an instructor of others. He
answering with a distinction (as he termed it) of the name of the Church (from
the true Professors whereof he said, that he had not receded.) It was asked,
whether he did hold with the people of England, professing as they did,
according to the Articles of Doctrine and Faith authorized in the same;
whereabout, after some tergiversation, he called for the Book of Articles, and
after some turning over it, pitched upon the Baptism of Infants; which (and no
other at that time) he seemed to give, for the cause of his separation: he
spoke somewhat of original sin; but that Question being woven and wrapped in
the other, it was thought sufficient to speak of either for both: and indeed,
the Baptism of Infants was that which overnight he had desired to be handled,
and wherein he could not but come prepared with all the answers and shifts
which could be devised; especially he knowing what arguments the Doctor would
chiefly urge, by a disciple of his there present by him, who had been brought
to the Doctor not long before for satisfaction.

The Doctor albeit not liking of such Meetings, (knowing how often such
Conferences do end in Wrangling) yet that they should not have occasion to
brag of refusing the Challenge, did not decline the Dispute; and albeit the
other shunned to be the actor, and by arguments to prove his reason, or
disprove the baptism of Infants (still taking himself to the defenders part
by negatives, which are easier then proofs) albeit the Church of England was
in possession of that custom without prescription, and therefore should have
been ejected of her custom by reason and Divine Law, it not only being the
custom of the Church of England, but also of whole Christendom from all time
out of mind or record, the beginning of which custom the Separatist could not
show (for albeit once he said, that it begun 200. years after Christ's birth, in
the days of Innocentius Pope, yet being desired to show that by evidence, he
passed from it) which is the mark and rule proposed by the Ancients for knowing
Divine and Apostolic Ordinances and Customs, whatsoever has been universally
kept in the Church, the beginning of which cannot be found out, that is
presumed always to have proceeded either from our Savior, or his Apostles.

He standing at this, and holding close to the Negative, the Dr. asked him, what
proofs, and from whence should they be sought? He answering, out of
Scriptures, the Scriptures of truth, (as he often mentioned and seemed to brag
of them) it was replied, that the Question would be about the meaning of
Scripture: who therefore should be the interpreter and pointer out of the mind
of God in them? Should it not be the Universal Church of Christ, the pillar
and ground of 1 Timothy 3. 15.
Truth? by whose consent Heresies and Errors in all Ages had been judged, as
the style of the Canons and Conclusions of Councels do show, Ita credidit,
tenuit docuit semper Catholica Ecclesia, and would he not follow the wholesome
direction of Vincentius Lirinensis adversus haereses, taking the Scripture
always, Cum catholica interpretatione, which is not adding to the Scriptures,
but declaring the sense and meaning of them; which (as the Eunuch humbly
acknowledged to Philip, saying, How should he understand without a guide?) Acts
8. 31.
are not only in allegorical Prophecies, (as Mr. Brown pleaded) but also in
Commands and Ordinances about the Sacraments, not so obvious and open to every
one; wherein, if the express Letter be holden to (as he still craved and urged
for Infant Baptism) then what shall be said of the other Sacrament in the
words, Hoc est corpus meu^, hic est sanguis novi Testamenti? which words the
Anabaptists do leave out in their administration. And indeed, if this way be
followed (as some of his Disciples there present declared, except they saw and
read the name of Infants expressed in the Text, they would not receive it,
Thomas-like, as by some present was returned to them) not only Infant
baptism, but all the Articles of the Creed shall be called in question, as
appeared by Mr. Brownes Questions concerning Arrius, Macedonius and Pelagius
(when the Dr. named them as condemned by the Doctrine of the Church,) what they
did hold, and for what they were condemned? Which M. Brown said he knew not,
for their books were not extant, not only doubting of the justice of the
proceedings against them (as appears) and giving great suspicion of a
favorable construction of them, as with Pelagius they hold, and more.

Always he still provoking to the Scriptures, held up the same to the people
(although it was but a Translation of the Bible, and done by these men, and
that Church which they account Antichristian, and no Church, I mean by the
Church of England) the Doctor seeing his resolution, lest the meeting should
have been broken up without doing any thing, as was expected, resolved to take
the part of the Actor, and by their own weapons (as they boast) take them
which way they would, to deal with them.

First proof.
Matthew. 28. 19.
And first argued from the Ordinance of Baptism, which being universal, To
baptize all Nations without exception (expressed in the words as they required)
why should not Infants be understood to be included, And when one Nation was
entered in Covenant by Circumcision, Infants were circumcised; why not then,
when all Nations are to be entered in Covenant with God, Infants baptized?
they being a part of Nations, as Mr. Logane argued afterward from the etymon
of the word Nation, being from Nati, born, so that all that are born ought to
be included they being able to satisfy Christ's command of coming to him,
which by our Saviors own declaration and acceptance of those who were brought
to him (albeit (...), and Sucklings, not able to walk on their own feet) was
proved; Suffer (says he) little children to come to me, and forbid them not,
for of such belong the Kingdom of heaven.

But Mr. Brown answered to the Doctor, That it did not follow, that Infants
were included in the Command because they were not excluded, or excepted; for
then (says he) the baptism of Bells, and Horses, and of his Hat, were
included, because they are not mentioned to be excluded: And (as having a great
advantage) did call the people to hear the absurdity of the proof brought;
wherein as he was very impertinent and ridiculous, in bringing an instance
altogether, extra subjectum quaesiti, without the bounds of the Question, and
the subject thereof, which are all Nations, (neither Bells nor Horses being of
the Nations) so that there needed no exception of them, the very name of [
Nations] Here M. Brown did cavil at the word Sacrament, and Initiation,
because not Scripture words: as if expositions of Scripture should be always in
its own terms, which would make progressum in infinitum.
excluding them: but of Infants (if they had been intended to be excepted)
there was great need of expressing the same, they not only being a part of the
Nations, but also in use and custom from the days of Abraham, to be entered in
Covenant with God, by a Sacrament of initiation: Which use and custom, if our
Savior had intended to have broke off, or altered, he would (no doubt) have
done it by a dictum est antiquis etc. sed ego dico vobis, as he did in altering
the Law of Divorcement, and other Precepts, which past current among their
ancestors, Matthew. 5. 22, 27, 31, 33, and 34. so he would have said here, in the
appointing of the new Sacrament, Baptism, (termed the Circumcision of Christ,
Col. 2. 11.) It was commanded to the ancients, that they should circumcise
every male of eight days old; but I say to you, you shall not baptize, before
they can give a Confession of their Faith.

Here Mr. Brown (although by the Laws of Dispute bound to the active part,
and to be the prover of his exception of Infants, as being an Affirmative
avouched by him, for affirmanti incumbit probare) yet did nothing that way, but
sought to wrangle upon the words, and that by so dark Inferences, and
Consequences, as were no ways agreeable to what he required of us, as clear
and express proofs in particular of our Position.

First, he alleged, That they should be made Disciples The Adversaries
exceptions against the Proofs.
[in the word (...)] before they be baptized, because the Pronoune [(...) them]
in the Command [ Baptizing them] is of the Masculine Gender; which (said he)
cannot agree with [(...)] which is Neuter. But for answer: As the name (...) is
not in the Text, albeit the Verb (...) be; so the Pronoune (...) repeats not
the Verb (it is not the use of Grammar) but the Noune going before, which is
(...) albeit diversi generis, and that by the Figure Synthesis, which
respects more the thing then the name, as Grammarians know.

Next he objected, That the first Disciples were taught before baptized; which
albeit granted, yet does not follow that always it was to be so, and that
their Children might not be baptized after them, before they were taught: For
Christ's Commandment was not only for that time, but to dure for ever; and not
only to remain in constituenda Ecclesia (in the Church, when it was first a
gathering) but also in constituta, when it is gathered. Neither the order of
the Precept makes against this order of baptizing first, and then teaching;
seeing (as S. Matthew has the words) it is so, baptizing and teaching them;
albeit the English Translation Matthew. 28. 19.
(rendering the word (...), Teach) does express teaching first. But indeed, the
word signifies not only to teach, but in general to Disciple, or make
Disciples, that is, Christians, (for these two words were Acts 6. 1. Acts 9.
10, 36. Acts 11. 26.
in the beginning reciprocal) which not only by teaching, but also baptizing,
may be done: as not only our Saviors own words (expounding the Verb (...)
by two Participles, baptizing them, and teaching them) do declare; but also
the words of S. John the Evangelist: where crossing the rumor made to the Joh.
4. 1, 2.
Pharisees of our Savior, as making more Disciples then John, he subjoyneth,
albeit Jesus himself baptized not, but his Disciples, insinuating Baptism to
be a way of Discipling. And the common use of speech, is to call one a Disciple
as soon as he is put to School, and Earnest given, although for a long time
the Child learn little or none; and a Soldier when he takes Sacramentum,
though he yet cannot handle his Arms.

Neither the joining of the two parts of the Commandment together, Baptizing
and Teaching, proves the exercise there of jointly, more then our Saviors
Command, at the first sending out of his Disciples; Go preach the Kingdom of
Heaven, heal the Sick, Matthew. 10. 7, 8.
cleanse the Leaper, raise the Dead, cast out Devils did bind them to teach,
before they cured or raised from the dead.

Second proof
From Acts 2. 38, 39.
From answering the Adversaries Exceptions, and vindicating the Proof, the
Disputer did proceed to prove positively, that Children were included in the
Command of Baptism, as it is cleared by the words of Peter, in the first
descending of the Holy Ghost, who was to bring all our Saviors words into
their mind, and direct them in all truth. Repent ye therefore, and be baptized
every one of you in the Name of Jesus, and ye shall receive remission of sins
and the gift of the Holy Ghost; for the promise is made to you and to your
Children, and to those that are afar off, even as many as God shall call.
Where, in the reason or encouragement to take Baptism, the Children are
comprehended and invited, as appears; for wherefore should their right to the
Promise be mentioned. Mr. Brown answered first, that it was spoken to the
Jews (meaning, as I apprehend, that they had an hereditarie Covenant and
Sacrament;) but if it was so, then it would follow at least, that the Children
of the Jews were to be baptized. But the Dr. urged, That the Promise is said
to belong to them that were afar off, even as many as God should call; which
were not the Jews, as Mr. Brown assirmed: for see Verse. 5. 10,
they that were even farthest dispersed from Judaea, were present at the Feast,
and were astonished at the marvelous gift of the Holy Ghost, and heard Peter's
words, and therefore had part in the answer with the present, in the second
Person, (...), to you: but (...), all that are afar off, are the Gentiles, as
the phrase of speech is used, Ephesians. 2. 13. But you who were afar off, are made
nigh: before, they were aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers,
etc. So that not only the Jews and their Children, but also the Gentiles
(being once called) and their Children have Title unto the Promises, or the
Promises are made to them. Here he did cavil, that they behooved first to be
called, before they obtained the Promise; because it is said, even as many as
God shall call: but who doubts of that (said the Doctor?) Nevertheless it
will follow, that as to the Jews (albeit as yet the Parents were only called)
the Promises were made both to them and to their Children; so to the Gentiles
(of whom we are) albeit the Parents be first called, yet the Promise is made to
their Children also, if they be baptized; for only upon the receiving of
Baptism, the Promise was to be effectual.

Hence he fell a questioning, Whether Children were capable of remission of
sins, and of the gift of the Holy Ghost (who is called the Promise of the
Father, Acts 1. 4.) especially by Baptism? At which he and his company mocked,
saying Naamanlike, Can a little sprinkling of water do it? Albeit it be the
expression of the Holy Ghost himself by S. Paul, Tit. 3. 5. calling Baptism
the washing of new birth and renewing of the Holy Ghost. Which gave occasion to
the third proof following: to wit;

^^ird proof.
^^. 5. 26.
That Infants of believers (being a part of the Church, Christ's Spouse) are
sanctified by the washing of water, in the Word; the Argument was thus: The
Church is sanctified by the washing of water, in the Word; But Infants are a
part of the Church, Therefore must be sanctified by the washing of water, in
the Word. Mr. Brown answered first to the Conclusion, ^^ainst the ^^^ of Lo^^^.
denying their sanctifying to be by Baptism, but by the blood of Christ: To
which the Dr. replied, That prima causa non tollit secundam, nor the
principal, took away the effect of the instrument; Christ's death, though it
have virtue enough, yet it must be applied by some mean; and Baptism to be
one of these means, appears not only by this place, but also by Romans 6. 3,
4. Col. 3. 12. Whosoever are baptized unto Christ, are baptized into his death;
we are buried with him by Baptism into his death. After, he begun to cavil
about the Proposition called major, That the sanctifying of the Church here, is
expressed not only by Washing, but by the Word. To which the Argumentator did
grant, That to the Church in adultis, it was; but the Question was, of that
part of the Church which as yet were not capable of the Word: wherewith else
then with Baptism are they sanctisied? either so, or not at all (to speak in
the way of Gods ordinary dealing, not of his absolute power:) Beside that, the
Word there may be understood of the Sacramental Word, which coming to the
element of Water, makes it a Sacrament, and gives the virtue and blessing:
For unde est (says Austin) that aqua corpus tangens animam abluat? est a
verbo. Hence he fell to the denying of the minor, That Infants were not a part
of the Church, using the distinction of visible and invisible, that they were
not of the visible Church; which is as much, as not to be of the Church
Militant at all: for, beside that the Church and the Profession and Sacraments
thereof are visible, and so compared to a City on a Mountain; none are of the
invisible ^^tth. 5. 14.
Church but such as are of the visible, it being but a part of the whole,
qualified in certain respects; so as she is not discernable to man, but to God,
who alone knows the hearts of the children of men: neither can there be any
Church but that, which is called either by Word or Sacraments, as the word
(...), the Company of the Called, does prove: beside, the children of the
Israelites were of the visible Church.

Fourth pro^^^
1. Pet. 3. 21
Hence the Dr. argumented, from the similitude of Baptism and the Arc of
Noah, which for the exactness of it is called (...), (as Beza renders it)
correspondens exemplar; others, expressa forma, such as in Wax, or Coin:
whence he argued thus by a double Argument: first, The Arc of Noah is like
Baptism, and caetera; But without the Arc, by Gods appointment, none were
saved: Therefore, without Baptism none saved ordinarily, and so the Infants
salvation by you hazarded: secondly, Baptism saves as the Arc; But the Arc
saved Noah and his household, Heb. 11. 7. Therefore Baptism (by Genesis 7. 1.
the Law of example) saves us and our household. To the first he answered,
with an upbraiding of Popery; which the Argumenter said he had no reason to
challenge, who complied so much with them in other things: but the Question was
not, What the Papists, but what the Scriptures said, whom he made his Judge. To
the second he answered, That no young ones were in the household of Noah:
against which it was insisted by the Disputer, That if they had been, they had
not been excluded, the reason for their safety in the Arc being the same in
young ones and elder Children, because they did belong to Noah, who had found
favor with God. Neither was Genesis 6. 8.
it the personal Faith of Cham, that made him be received into the Arc: last
of all, he fell to cross the first words of S. Peter, by his following words;
[ Not the laying away of the filthenesse of the flesh, but the asking of a good
Conscience toward God, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ.] Whereupon
the Dr. began to clear these words; showing, that nothing was intended in them
derogatorie to Christian Baptism (for then he should give with the one hand,
and take from it with the other;) which if it were, why did he mention
Baptism, and not a good Conscience alone? But what he speaks against the
putting away of the filth of the body, is against their washings and
purification (for to the Jews dispersed he writes;) which also the Apostle to
the Hebrews, almost in the Heb. 9. 10, 13.
same expressions, does, calling them Ordinances, or justifications of the
flesh, and purifyings, as touching the cleanness of The words of S. Peter
contain non oppositionem to Baptism, but Appositionem
the flesh: like to which, Baptism does not save us, as not being a putting
off the silth of the flesh, but the asking of the Conscience; or, that which
makes the Conscience ask God, and cry, Abba Father: for it is a Metonymie,
effectus pro causa, its the asking of the Conscience toward God, that is the
mean or cause isntrumental of our approach to God; it being the Laver, or
washing of new birth, and so making us the Children of God.

Here the Answerer startled; What? (says he) Are we made Gods Children by
Baptism? Whereupon some present, not evil affected, would have mitigated or
denied the assertion: but the Arguer not moved, asked Mr. Brown, Whether that
were so strange an expression to him, who had so often uttered it both Child
and Minister? Had he forgotten the words of the English Catechism (Answer to
the very second Question?) To which he replied, That he had indeed sometime
taught so, but he was otherwise illightned now, so that he accounted it
Blasphemy. Then (said the Arguer) the Apostle blasphemeth, calling it the
washing of new birth, Tit. 3. 5. and our Savior himself saying, that a man is
borne again by the Water and Spirit. To these words of Scripture he replied
nothing, but talked still of regeneration, and making the sons of God by
Faith; which (indeed an effect rather of regeneration and holy Spirit then a
cause) he endeavored to confirm by these words, Gal. 3. 2. Received ye the
Spirit by the Law, or by the hearing of Faith; (and Ioh. 1. 12. where he
speaks of the first receivers of Christ being in the world, as appears
verse 10. and 11. before) where, as Gal. 3. 2. (...) the hearing of Faith is
the hearing of the Gospel, which is the Doctrine of Faith (for it is opposed
there to the Law of Moses;) so the Spirit there spoken of, is the extraordinary
gifts of the Spirit, to the doing of Miracles, as it is after, verse 5. not the
ordinary gift of sanctification, for then all the Churches of Galatia had been
inwardly sanctified: beside that, receiving of the Spirit by Faith, does not
exclude the Sacraments, every one working in their own way and order; for,
particulares affirmantes nec contradicunt, nec contrariae sunt.

^^fth proof, from exam^^es.
^cts 16. 14, 15.
Here the Answerer did call for an example of Infant Baptism in all Scripture,
and did read to all the Auditors an example of believers baptized. Wherefore
the Arguer brought first the example of Lydia's household baptized, where
mention is only of her hearing and believing: next, an insinuation of John's,
That little Children had their sins forgiven in his Joh. 2. 12.
Name; where there is an expression of the form of Baptism (at least a part of
it) as 1 Cor. 6. 11. But now ye are washed, sanctified and justified in the
Name of the Lord Jesus.

To the first he begun to cavil, that Lydia had not a Husband, which was more
then he could affirm; howsoever, she had a Family, said the Arguer. To the
second he said, first, that these Children were of ripe years, as having John's
Epistle directed to them; next, that In the Name of the Father, was in the
power of the Father, which he said it signified principally and properly
(apparently mistaking himself, for frequently saying properly and principally,
for he cannot be so ignorant to think either (...) and (...) to be Synonyma,
(...) significare magis robur quam nomen ex vi vocis, for that is proper;)
thirdly, that the words, 1 Cor. 6. 11. were said to them of years, who
sometime were thieves, etc. fourthly, that the distinction there was not of
age, but of gifts; and some were called Little Children, for their gifts of
mind accordingly.

Against which the Arguer did insist; and first, that it did not prove that
they were of ripe years, because S. John wrote to them; for Epistles may be
designed for them that are not yet able to read them: as whatsoever was
written before, in former ages, was written for our instruction, Romans 15. 4.
Next, suppose they had been able to read then when S. John wrote, yet he
puts them in mind of forgiveness of sins before obtained, (...) Attice
pro (...) which is praeteritum perfectum: but the name (...) v. 14. being a
Diminutive, with the opposition not only to Fathers, but also to young men,
(the like of which, is not when there is a Spiritual Childhood only
insinuated, for then the opposition is only to perfect men) do sufficiently
show their age. Neither is the Question, to whom the Apostle speaks in that
place to the Corinthians; but whether there, Baptism and the form of it be not
insinuated? So that [ In the Name of the Father, or Son,] as there in the 1 John 2. 12.
Name of the Lord Jesus, are parallel and like phrases: neither does the use of
the word [ Name of God] sometime transferred to signify his Power (whether in
Greek or Hebrew) make any thing against the form of Baptism insinuated in the
words of S. John; for when we are baptized, In the Name of the Father, and of
the Son and Holy Ghost, not only is it in Name and Authority from him, but
also in the Power of him, accompanying the calling of his Name upon us.

Neither if any should object, (which he did not remarke) ^ Joh. 2. 14.
That they are said to have known the Father, does that prove, that either
they had that knowledge before Baptism, (although when he wrote, it may be
they were beginning to know him) or that even then their knowledge was such as
the Anabaptist requires, for Children begin betimes to know their Parents,
(according to that of the Poet, Incipe parve puer risu cognoscere matrem) and
to this small measure of knowledge, accompanying Infancy it self, the Apostle
seems to allude, writing to these little ones, as he alludeth to that which
is incident to youth-head and old age, writing to the other 2 distinctions of
age, wisdom in old men, and strength in young men. Beside that, the receiving
of Baptism is a sort of acknowledgment of the Father, not mental but real;
whence Sacramentum fidei, and professionis Christianae dicitur, although after
following.

Sixth proof, From the types and figures of Baptism.
This proof the Adversary did shift, saying, That it was nothing to the
purpose what was among the Jews, and that they had no reference to our
Sacraments; That a type could not be a type of another type: where the Disputer
asked, If Baptism was to be called a type? the other answering, That it
represented Christ's death and burial. The Doctor insisted, That albeit in a
large extent of the word it might be called a type, yet not according to
Ecclesiastical use of the word, in which it is joined to figures and shadows,
which are abolished; for Baptism is not a shadow, but a putting off of the body
of sin, Heb. 10. 1.
Col. 2. 11, 12. yea, S. Peter says, the Ark was a type of baptism.

1. Old Circumcision, answering to the Circumcision of Christ, which is
Baptism, Col. 2. 11, 12.
Always, albeit he shifted them, here I set them down, and first
Gircumcision, to which not only succeeded, but answers our Baptism: Now it
was bestowed upon Children, as soon as possible for Nature to endure it; and
God had dealt more hardly with our Children then with the Jews, if he had not
provided for us a mean, and conveyance of Grace to us, as well as to them his
Covenant. Here they said, they recommended their Children by prayer to God; but
this answers not to a Sacrament, which the Jews had beside prayer.

2. Baptism in the Sea and Cloud, 1 Cor. 10.
The second prefiguration of Christian Baptism, was the baptism of the
Israelites unto Moses in the Cloud and Sea; wherein as the Children were as
well as their Parents, yea, pars magna (for the Fathers were but a many of
them, not all, nor most part) so in the baptism unto Christ should our Verse. 5.
Children be.

Seventh proof^ The Prophesies.
The Prophesies may be added here to Isaiah 49. 22. Behold, I lift up my hand
to the Gentiles, and my Ensign to the people, and they shall bring their
sons in their bosoms, and their daughters upon their shoulders.

Eighth proof, From the necessity thereof to all.
The last proof brought, was the words of our Savior; Ioh. 3. 5.
Except a man be borne again of Water and Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God: Unto which the Adversary made this poor answer, That it was
spoken of a Man, looking to the English Translation, not to the Greek. Where
the Disputer marvelling of his impudency, asked him what (...) signified, and
what (...) Whether, or not, the name which John has in the words of our
Savior, be not nomen speciei, a common name for all mankind, without
difference of sex, or age? which albeit he could not deny, yet he still said,
That in that place it signified a Man, and not a Child; which, as it was
Petitio principii, (...) the begging of the Question, (as the Logicians call
it) so it might be convinced out of the very next words of our Savior,
Whatsoever is borne of the flesh is Ioh. 3. 6.
flesh, and whatsoever is borne of the Spirit is Spirit. So that (...)
whatsoever begotten of man, is here declared to stand in need of new birth;
yea, the same name (...) rendered Man, is used by the Evangelist, speaking of
Circumcision, ( Accipit Ioh. 7. 23.
homo circumcisionem Sabbatho) which was meant of Infants.

The Doctor seeing no answering upon their part, but mere shifting, or
shameless denyals and oppositions of the Truth, rose, with this saying, That
what he had brought, was sufficient for modest spirits, and submissive to the
Truth; to obstinate people nothing was sufficient.

There were diverse passages betwixt the company and him; as that Infants were
blessed by Christ, by laying on of his hands, and prayer: to which the
Anabaptist answered, That they were not baptized; but no marvel of this, for
neither was baptism craved by the bringers of them, nor they that brought them
baptized before, for they were not Disciples, as appears by the Text, the
Disciples forbade them: moreover, the Faith of the bringers was not such, as to
obtain baptism, either to themselves or their Children: for it does not
appear, that they brought them to Christ out of any other opinion, then that
he was a Prophet, or holy man, whose prayers might be steadable to them.

Other either words or passages, as not being material, I pass; only I add
an Epigram of the Doctors, in commiseration of Infants defrauded of baptism.

VIderat innumeras Infantum flere catervas,
Seque open destitui, subsidiisque quaeri;
Ecquis (ait Christus) nostros audaculus amnes
Clausit? munifico me prohibet que frui?
Vellite, pastores, vallum convellite dextris,
Oppositosque obices, and reserate lacus.
At que salutari pueros respergite Lympha,
Et Patris, and nomen front ferunto meum;
Nos tutelares ipsa incunabula jactent,
Omnis and aufugiens vis inimica fremat.
The same in English.
GReat companies of Infants weeping,
And bemoaning much their woe,
That no man reached his hand helping,
The depth of evil to bring them fro;
Our Savior saw it, and in wrath
He said, Who was so bold to stop
The streams and fountains of our Grace,
That they on Infants should not drop?
Pull Shepherds, pull, the Dam's throw down,
The Sluses d'ope, and let them run;
With saving Water sprinkle there
The Children that are brought to me,
And let them on their foreheads bear
My Fathers Name, and mine; that We
To Infants in their Cradles may
Be Patrons, Tutelars, and God;
And that the Enemy flee away,
And by them make no more abode.
FINIS.

