Poor outcast Childrens Song and Cry 'Twixt Joy's and Sorrows ecstasy. Their
past and present state they view, Their old depraise, and praise their new.
These fathered fatherless, their Fathers bless, And beg their Blessings, and
this Works success.


SHall we sigh, sing, or do neither;
Mourn, or make melody, or whether,
for our late past, or present blessed estate?
Poor starvelings then, though strengthened now,
And Worms did seize us as their due,
when pining, puling under stalls we sat.
Friendless and harborless were we:
And yet what Friends, what Fathers be
so rich, so great, so good as ours indeed!
The mighty GOD, the PARLIAMENT,
Englands Chief CITY with consent,
to Father us have mutually agreed.
In filthy Rags we clothed were;
In good warm Raiments now appear
from Dunghils to The Wardrobe-house, and Heiden-house, formerly the Kings. A
Steward. A Schoolmaster. A Matron, Nurses. An Arts-master.
Kings Palaces transferred:
Where Education, wholesome Food,
Meat, Drink, and Lodging, and that is g^^d
for Soul and Body, are so well pre^^^.
Blessed be our God, our Parliament,
Our Corporation, President:
we bless your Blessings, and your Blessings crave;
That your adopted Children may,
By you made fit, another day
your Graces, Places, Worth and Wealth to have.
Your Children further you implore,
Oh do not this new Work give over,
and starve not that, which starvelings thus did cherish!
This will relieve you in that day,
When Health, Wealth, Strength and Life decay,
when Golden Chains, and Scarlet Robes shall perish.
Our ancient Grandsire Lazarus
Has Children poor and numerous,
who at rich Gluttons gates do fainting lie:
Remove this Scandal from our Land,
And raise them with thy mighty hand,
O Orphans God, regard their watery eye.
Grave Senators, that sit on high,
Let not poor English Children die,
and droop on Dunghils with lamenting notes:
An ACT for Poor's Relief, they say, Parliament.

Is coming forth; why's this delay?
O let not Dutch, Danes, Devils stop those VOTES!
Right Honorable Lord Mayor for time being.
President,
And faithful Sir his John Cutler Esquire Deputy-President.
second sent,
with Mr. Maurice Gething Treasurer.
Treasurer, and all our Corporation;
Your presence and assistance give
At Courts, Committees, and revive
your former thoughts to prosper this Foundation.
Though you no carnal motives have,
No Badge of Honor, no Green Staves,
no Golden Cords, such purposes to hold:
When dusty Tabernacles fail,
Such Works as these with God prevail
new to provide, and Bags that wax not old.
Common Counsel empowered by Act of Parliament.
Most worthy Represented City,
We bow to you, and beg for pity.
You friends of Orphans, Orphans now desire,
To make Assessments for carrying on of this Work.
That Power which God and Man did give
To you, poor Orphans to relieve
improve, and let not this new Work expire.
BEsides the relieving and educating of poor friendless harborless Children in
Learning and in Arts, many hundred of poor Families are employed and relieved
by the said Corporation in the Manufactury of Spinning and Weaving: And
whosoever does repair either to the Wardrobe near Black-friars, or to
Heiden-house in the Minories, may have Materials of Flax, Hemp or Towe to spin
at their own houses, if it be desired, leaving so much money as the said
Materials cost, until it be brought again in Yarn; at which time they shall
receive money for their work, and more Materials to employ them; so that a
stock of 12d. or 14d. will be a sufficient security for any that will be
employed; and every one is paid according to the fineness or coursness of the
Yarn they spin: there being a certain rule of Length and Tale to pay every one
by, so that none are necessitated to live idly, that are desirous or willing to
work. And it is to be wished and desired, That the Magistrates of this City
would assist this Corporation, by enjoining all Constables to discharge the
duty of their Offices According to Statute of 39 Eliz. 4. and 1 Jac. 7.
in suppressing of Vagrants and common Beggars (able to work, which come from
the out-parts of this City) that do so abound, to the great scandal and
dishonor of this City, and hindrance of the Charity of many pious people
toward this good Work.

Printed by James Flesher, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON. 1653.


