THE Pope in a Passion; OR, Bad News for England.
Which was sent in a Packet of Advice from Rome, by Cardinal Howard, to the
Popes Nuncio; but miscarrying, is now Published to prevent Danger.
To the Tune of, O brave Oliver, or O brave Popery, etc.
I.
THE Catholic Post, that came lately to Town,
Does tell that the Pope, with his high Triple Crown,
The totestant Churches will quickly pull down:
Sin hey brave Catholics, O rare Catholics, O
Fin^ Catholics, Excellent Catholics, O!
II.
The No^les of England must all in a row,
Buy Pardons, and stoop to his Holiness Toe;
Or by Bell, Book and Candle, to Pot they must go:
Sing hey brave, etc.
III.
The Catholic King, with our Neighbor of France,
Will rig an Armado with Musket and Lance;
But the orange will teach the proud Lilly to Dance:
Sing hey brave, etc.
IV.
The great Irish Cutthroat; Tyrconnel, that is worse,
That drinks Bonny-Clabbor, and Swears by the Cross,
Will Muster an Army of Bog-trotting Horse:
Sing hey brave, etc.
V.
Then Bryan and Patrick, with Morice and Teague,
Will batter down London, and level the Hague;
They Will strip you quite naked, and force you to beg;
Sing hey brave, etc.
VI.
The hopeful young Innocent Prince of the Scots,
Or Wales, (chose you either) by Jesuit Sots,
And old Father Peter's will Plague you with Plots:
Sing hey brave, etc.
VII.
His Holiness swears by his God in the Host,
(Before to his Kinsman three Kingdoms be lost)
He Will Conjure by Spells up Mazareen's Ghost:
Sing hey brave, etc.
VIII.
He wisely will vanquish you, tell you right down,
That the P. of W. right (though himself were a Clown)
Is as good as Lodvick's was to the French Crown:
Sing hey brave, etc.
IX.
Submit then in time to his Holiness Feet.
Both hug them, and kiss them, they are soft and they are sweet,
His Yoke is but easy, his Words are discreet:
Sing hey brave, etc.
X.
He Will fend yon a Preset.
A Bushel of Peter's Tet of Relics and Beads,
With papess Joan's Pleth, two of his Heads, ket, and Nuns that are Maids:
Sing hey brave, etc.
XI.
He Will sell you Indulgences,
He Will pardon your sins, whaave you at last,
He Will teach you the cafiest way to come, and wha'ts past, ^ow to fast:
sing hey brave, etc.
XII.
He Will send you St. Anthony's Fart in a bag,
With Milk in a Bottle, and Hair in a Rag,
Which have been long kept by the old Scarlet Hag:
Sing hey brave, etc.
XIII.
He Will liberty give you to Rogue and to Whore,
To Drink, and to Rant, to Swear and to Roar,
And the Devil is in you, if you desire more:
sing hey brave, etc.
XIV.
But if you will not do what the Pope does require,
He Will come with his Clergy in Scarlet attire,
And teach you good Breeding with Faggot and Fire:
sing hey, etc.
XV.
The Papists are Cruel, for they that eat Gods
Must needs have strong Stomachs, and likewise the odds,
They Will poison your Pulpits, and whip you with Rods:
sing hey brave Catholics, O rare Catholics, ho
Fine Carholicks, Excellent Catholics, O!
With Allowance.

London: Printed in the Year, 1689.


