astrological diagram The meaning and use hereof is declared next after the
epistle to the reader:

The names of the 12. signs which for want of room could not be written at
length in the out most, Circle above in their proper place.
Aries Taurus Gemini Cancer Leo Virgo Libra Scorpio Sagitarius Capricorn
Aquarius Pisces




map of the world A NEW AND ACCVRAT MAP OF THE WORLD
Dranne according to ye truest Descriptons latest Discoueries and best
Observations yt have been made by English or Strangers
Printed and are to be sold by Robert Walton at the Globe and Compass on the
North side of St. Paul's church



A COMPENDIOUS VIEW, OR Cosmographical, and Geographical Description of the
whole WORLD.

With more plain general Rules, touching the use of the Globe, then have been
yet published.

Wherein is showed the Situation of the several Countries, and Islands: their
particular Governments, Manners, Commodities, and Religions.

Also a Chronology of the most Eminent Persons, and things that have been since
the Creation, to this present: Wherein you have a brief of the Gospel, or a
plain, and easy Table, directing readily where to find the several things,
that were taught, spoke, done and suffered, by Jesus Christ, throughout the
said Gospel.

The which is not only pleasant, and delightful; but very useful, and
profitable; for all. But chiefly for those who want, either time, to read, or
money to buy, many Books.

By THO. PORTER.

Are to be sold by Robert Walton, at the Globe and Compass, in S. Paul's
Churchyard, on the North-side, 1659.

TO THE READER.
THe matter herein is very pleasant, and exceeding useful, for resolving many
questions, and doubts: both in reference to Persons, and things: great part
past long since, but being eminent, and of much note, Historians have thought
good to Chronicle them: and men of this present generation, being as ingenious
and for the greater part more inquiring, into things then formerly. I have
spent much time in gathering them together: But it may be some will say, that I
have already published a good part hereof in another manner: I answer it is
true, but I conceive of my self, and also hearing from others; that many would
have it in this manner, for as much as some would have it to be their Companion
in their pockets, others in their closets, as well as some for ornament, and
use of the house. And I had not then room for the Chronology, nor had I
finished it: neither did I then think of several things that are now added. And
whosoever will may have the four Maps of the four parts of the World, put into
this Book: and they are very useful, for that things may be more fully seen and
understood. And thus wishing you as much profit, and satisfaction, in reading,
as I had in Collecting, I bid you fare-wel, and remain

Yours THO. PORTER.

The Description and use of the FRONTISPICE.
THe Frontispice consists of certain Circles one within another, the
outermost whereof is divided in 12 equal parts, and each of those parts is
again d^vided into 30 smaller equal parts, the 12 larger parts represent the 12
Signs of the Zodiac, and the ^o smaller parts contein the degrees of each
Sign; in each 12th. part there is written the name of the Sign it
represents, and the degrees are numbered by 10, 20, 30.

Within this Circle, is another Circle, which is divided into 12 unequal parts,
representing the 12 months of the year, and those 12 parts are divided into
other smaller parts, namely, into so many as there are days contained in each
month, and those are numbered by 10, 20, etc. and the name of each month is
written in its proper place. Under the name of the month you have the names of
such Holy or Festival days as are fixed in that month, together with the day
of the month upon which they constantly fall, so under the month of July you
shall find James Apost. 25, which denotes unto you that the 25 day of July is
St. Jamses day, and so of all the rest.

Now the use of these Circles are chiefly two; which are these: 1 The day of
the month being given, to find in what Sign and degree of the Zodiac the Sun
is. 2 The degree in the Sun in the Zodiac being given, to find the day of the
month.


First, Let the day of the month be given, and let it be required to find the
place of the Sun in the Zodiac, to effect which, seek the day of the month in
the Circle of months, and right against it you shall find the sign and degree
in which the Sun is in the Zodiac. Example. Let the day of the month given be
the 25th. of July, seek the 25th. of July in the Circle of months, (which you
shall find to stand at the letter [a,] then right against it in the Circle of
the 12 signs you shall find about 12 degrees of Leo, and in that sign and
degree is the Sun upon the 25th. day of July, which 12 degree stands at the
letter [b].

Secondly, If the sign in which the Sun is had been given and it were required
to find the day of the month then look in the Circle of signs for the sign
and degree, and right against it you shall have the day of the month. Example.
Let the sign in which the Sun is, be 12 degrees of Leo, look in the Circle of
Signs for 12 degrees of Leo, which will be found at the letter [b] and right
against it you shall find 25th, day of July, which is the day of the month
required. The like is to be done for any Sign and degree in the Zodiac, and
also for any day of the month in the whole year, this is sufficient for
example sake.

Within these Circles in a little square you have a Table which tells you the
day of the month for ever, and may be called a perpetual Almanac, the use
whereof shall be declared, but before that can be well understood you must know
how.

To find the Sunday letter for ever.
THe Sunday Letter is always one of these seven, A, B, C, D, E, F, or G, now
to know which of the letters belongs to any year, this Table annexed shows
for ever.

The Table following begins at 1659, and ends at 1686. Now to know the Sunday
letter for any year look in the Table for the year of our Lord and right
against it you shall have the Sunday Letter.

Example. I would know the Sunday letter for the year 1661, look in the Table
for the year 1661, and right against it you shall find F, so is F Sunday letter
for all that year. In 1663 D will be the Sunday letter. In 1682 A will be
Sunday letter. In the year 1664 C and B will be Sunday letters, and because
there are two letters against that year (as there is every 4th. Years of our
Lord Sunday Letter. 1659 B 60 A G 1 F 2 E 3 D 4 C B 5 A 6 G 7 F 8 E D 9 C 70 B
1 A 2 G F 3 E 4 D 5 C 6 B A 7 G 8 F 9 E 80 D C 1 B 2 A 3 G 4 F E 5 D 1686 C
year) it declares that year to be Leap-year. Note, When you come to the year
1686, which is the last year in the Table, you must begin again, and must call
the year 1659. 1687. and so continue the Table for ever.

The use of the perpetual Almanac.
HAving by the former directions found the Sunday letter, look in the Almanac
what day of the week stands under that letter, for that is the day of the
week represents by the figures under every month. Example. 1659 the Sunday
letter is B under which is Friday, therefore the figures 18. 15. 22. 29. which
stand under April and July do represent the Fridayes of those months: so
likewise the figures 4. 11. 18. 25. which stand under March, November, and
February do represent the Fridays in those months, and so of the rest. And the
Fridayes in every month of the year being thus discovered, the other days are
easily known; for if the fourth of March or the first month be Friday, the
fifth must be Saturday, the 6th. Sunday, the 7th. Monday, the 8th. Tuesday, etc.

Only, Note, that if it be Leap-year there are two Sunday letters, each of
which will give you a several day, as in the year 1660 the Sunday letters are A
G, the letter gives me Saturday, which serves for January and February, and G
gives me Sunday, which serves for all the year after.

A Definition, Explanation, and Description of several Names, or Terms, of
Water and Land.
THe Terrestrial, or Eartly Globe, is defined to be a Spherical, or round Body,
proportionably composed of Earth and Water: A Figure of which you have
expressed at a corner of the Map. The Earth is first to be considered, and is
affirmed by the latest, best, and most ^^arned Writers, to be in compass 21600
English (...); and plainly appears thus: Every of the greater Circles, contein
360 degrees, every degree being accounted 60 English miles, let 360 be
multiplied by 60, and the sum or product, will be 21600 as was aforesaid. The
Earth is divided into real and imaginary parts: and these usually and commonly
into Continents and Islands.

A Continent is a great quantity of Land, not separated, or enterlaced by any
Sea from other parts of the World: in which are contained many Countries or
Kingdoms; as Europe, Asia, or as the Countries of France, Germany, Tartary, or
the like.

An Island is a part of Land, environed, or encompassed round about with Water;
as England and Scotland together; or, as Ireland alone. And these are
subdivided, or again divided into Peninsula's, Isthmus, and Promontories. A
Peninsula is almost an Island; that is to say a Tract, or part of Land, which
is but almost encompassed with Water, being joined to the firm Land by some
little part of Land, or Isthmus; as Morea in Greece, etc. An Isthmus is a
little narrow neck of Land, which joyneth any Peninsula to the Continent; as
the straights of Corinth in Greece, and Dariena in America. A Promontory is a
high Mountain, which shoots it self into the Sea: the utmost end of which is
called a Foreland, or Cape; as the Cape of Good-hope, Cape Verde in Africa, and
St. Michaels Mount in England. There are also other real parts of the Earth; as
Plains; Vallayes, Hills, Woods, and the like: but these are so well known by
every one, that they need no explanation. The second real part of the Globe is
Water: which is divided into Ocean, Sea, a Straight, a Creek, or Bay, and Lake.

1 The Ocean is a general collection of Water, which environeth or encompasseth
the Earth on every side.

2. The Sea is a part of the Ocean, to which we cannot come, but through some
straight, as the Mediterraneum sea, the Black-sea, the Red Sea, etc. Now it is
plain and certain, that diverse and sundry names have been given to the Sea, as
well as to the Earth, taken either from the Contries and places adjoining to,
or watered by it; as the Brittish-sea, the Spanish-sea, the Indian-sea, etc. or
from the diverse Climates, Situation, or parts of the World: from whence came
the North-sea, the East-sea, the West-sea, the South Sea, Mare del Nort, Mare
del Zur: The Sea which flows between Europe, Africa, and Asia, is called the
Mederiterraneum, or Mid-land Sea, because it lies as it were between the
aforesaid places. She has sometimes her name from the color, as the Red Sea,
(which also called Arabian Gulf) not that the Water is red, but the Red sand
which lies under it, make it to appear so. Moreover, it takes its name
oftentimes from the nature, effects, and events of things: as appears in that
which did be fall the Spaniard, in the Sea between Spain and the Canaries, or
fortunate Islands: for they carrying over a great company of Mares, to put in
the places they had taken, (which were destitnte of them) that they might there
increase and multiply, and because by tempest they were drowned in the Sea:
they called it the Gulf of Mares. About the North Pole, it is called the frozen
Sea, because it is there almost always frozen.

3. A Straight is a part of the Ocean, restrained within narrow bounds, and
opening a way to the sea, as the Straights of Gibralter, and the Straights of
Magellaniea.

4. A Creek or Bay, is a crooked shore, thrusting out as it were two arms, to
embrace the sea; as the Corinthian and Persian Creeks: also Button's and
Hudson's Bay.

5. A Lake is a great Collection, or gathering of Water, which has no visible
intercourse with the sea: as the Lake of Lough-Neauh in Ireland, the Dead-sea
in the Land of Canaan, and the Caspian-sea: though by reason of the bigness of
the two last, they are called seas. And hereunto belong Rivers, Brooks and the
like, which are so well known by every man, that we will pass them over without
more ado.

Of the flowing and ebbing of the Sea.
You must know that it is not always alike: for in diverse places it does
increase for the space of 6 whole hours, and decrease as many: but in the
Promontory of Erithrem, in Africa, commonly called Cabo Rosso, it increases 4
hours, and decreaseth 8. In diverse places it keeps always at one state,
without ebbing or flowing. And so at the Cape called Das Palmas, it runs still
toward the East, although by virtue of the first mobile, or chief moveable,
and of the Moon, the whole Sea seems to move toward the West: Notwithstanding,
when by interposition of the Earth, she is hindered from her natural course, it
comes to pass, that her course is variable, not only in the aforesaid places,
but also in many others. For the same cause it is, that about Florida the Sea
runs still toward the North without any return; and so the course has been
observed to be diverse, according to the diversity of places. It must also be
observed, that the Sea does move otherwise at the full Moon, then it does when
it is but half: for there is more strength in a full light, then in that which
is almost extinguished. There is also a certain place in Norway, called
Maelstroom, within which the Sea flowing is in such sort swallowed up by a
Gulf, that it is never seen afterward. The like is to be seen in the Boddick
Gulf.

Of the deepness of the Sea.
It must also be understood, that it is not every where equal, for it is less
in the Ocean then in the Mediterranean Sea. The Seas which the Spaniards call
Del Nort, and Del Zur, are in such sort covered with green Reeds, that the
ships seem rather to sail upon green Meadows, then upon the Waters.

Of the fruitfulness, and richness of the Sea.
And this is no less different, according to the diversity of places then of
the Earth; for they who have sailed through the Sea, which is between Spain and
America, say, that they have often made above 100 Leagues, without seeing one
fish: and contrariwise in there places, there are such abundance to be seen,
that it is wonderful: which has been well known by the those who have sailed
toward the North Coasts of America; and above all, toward Newfound Land,
which for the abundance of fish is called De Baccalos. Moreover, one would
think that Nature has taken delight, in counterfeiting in the Sea, many things
which are seen on the Earth. For as touching four-footed Beasts, you shall find
therein the Elephant, the Hog, the Schel-crab, the Dog, the Calls, the Horse,
the Cow, and many other the like things. And as for Feathered Fowels, there is
the Hawk, the Swallow, and others: yea, the very likeness and image of man. The
ancient Writers, as also the late, do likewise affirm, That there are Meirmaids
in the Sea, which have at sundry times showed themselves in diverse places, (as
Peter Launy affirms) by the testimony of many, (to whom I remit the doubtful
Reader.) And finally, the Sea brings forth also diverse Plants; as Coral,
Pearls, Amber, Sponge, and many other things, both delightful and necessary
for man's use.

Of the Circles in the Map, and their Use.
The imaginary parts of the Earth, are such, as though not in the Earth, yet
must be supposed to be so, for the understanding of this Science; and are
certain Circles going about the Earth answerable to them, which the Astronomers
attribnte to the Heavens: That bigger Line which crosses both Planispheres, in
the Map, straight along in the midst, dividing (as it were) the World into two
halves; that is to say, North and South, is called the Equinoctial, Equator, or
middle Line; because when the Sun is come thereto, which is on the 11th. of
March, and 12th. of September: the day and night is of equal length over all
the World, and this is the great, fixed, and immovable Circle, which goes
round about the Earthly Globe, from East to West, and passes through Bornea,
Upper-Ethiopia, and Guinea: as you may see in the Map. This Line is full of
black and white spots, or spaces (to the number of 360:) which are called
Degrees, and a degree consists of 60 minutes, and conteins 60 miles; for as
much as a minute is accounted a mile. -- The use hereof is to show the Latitude
of any Country, Place, or City, (that is) the distance of them toward the
North or South, from the Equator, which is reckoned on the Meridian, toward
either Pole. Those therefore have North latitude, that inhabit or dwell between
the middle Line, and the North Pole: and those South latitude, who dwell
between the Equinoctial, and South Pole.

The Meridian is a great Circle compassing round the Earth, from Pole to Pole,
and is that which you see in the Circumference of the two Planispheres of the
Map. But there are many Meridians, according to the diverse places in which a
Man lives: but the chief and fixed passes through St. Michaels, one of the
Azores Isles. The use of the Meridian is to show the Longitude of any Country,
Place, or City: Now the Longitude is the distance of it East or West, from the
great and fixed Meridian: and this distance, or longitude is measured and
numbered on the middle Line, or Equator, by 10, 20, etc. from the great and
fixed Meridian, to the numbers of 360, into which the whole Compass of the
Earth is divided, An Example shall be this: Look for England, and you will see
that it is a little East of the second Meridian: then follow that Line to the
Equator, and look there as much Eastward, as England is from the Meridian
above, and count or reckon the degrees thereon, from the great and fixed
Meridian, to that place, and you will see that it is about 22; and this is the
longitude of England: but then you must note, that we mean the middle thereof.
All the other small Lines that go through the Map, from North to South, are
also called Meridians. We will give you an Example, both of the longitude and
latitude together. Suppose, you would know in what degree of longitude and
latitude the middle of Ireland is; First, then look for Ireland, and you will
see it is North of the fifth parallel: then follow that Line to the Meridian,
and you will see that it is about 51: Then cast your eye to the middle of
Ireland, and you will see that it is about 52: Then look toward the West, and
you will perceive that it lies somewhat East of the first Meridian: Then follow
it down to the Equator, and so look as much East there as Ireland is above, and
you will see that the middle thereof is about 52, which is the longitude
thereof: so that the middle of Ireland is about the 52 degree of latitude, and
thus you may easily find any other place or City. And this may serve for a
Rule, to know the length and breadth of any Country; for as much as every
degree is reckoned for 60 miles, as was said before. Those small Lines
thwarting or crossing the Meridian, from East to West, are called parallels, or
equidistances, being distant one from another 10 degrees. toward each Pole, and
are for the easy and ready finding out of the latitude of any place from the
equator. As for example, look for England, and count the parallels or
equidistances, till you come to the parallel, which is nearest to it, and you
will find them to be 5: Then follow that line to the meridian, and you will see
the figure set thereat is 50: so that you will find the latitude, or distance,
(for they are both as one) of England, from the Equator, toward the
North Pole, to be 50 degr. and better: but then this (you must note) is the
South part of England, and so in the like manner may you find any other place.
But there is another sort of parallels, which are called Artificial Parallels,
for that they show the difference of Artificial Days: the use of which, is to
show the Climates.

Of Climates.
A Climate is a space of Earth, included within two of the Artificial, or
lesser parallels, and are declared and set forth in the Circumference of the
Eastern Planisphere of the Map. The use thereof is to show the length and
shortness of the Day, in all the several parts of the World. Now under the
Equinoctial line and 10 Degrees on North, and as many on the South Side
thereof, the days exceed not the length of 12 hours; but afterward they
increase the length of half an hour in every Clime, till they come to 24 hours
without night, (and are so marked, showed, or declared, as you may see in the
utmost Circumference of the Map) which length atteined, they increase no more
by hours, but by weeks and months, until they come to the length of half a
year: so as there are two sorts of Climates; that is to say, 24 North, and as
many South, from the Equator: (touching the names of which, we will refer you
to larger Volumes and discourses.) By which it appears, that they who dwell
under the same Latitude of the Poles, have the same length of day and night:
But to them on the South of the Equator, the day is shortest, then with us (on
the North) it is at the longest; and our Winter is their Summer, and so
contrariwise their Winter is our Summer, etc.

Of the Tropicks.
The Tropic of Cancer, or the Crab, is a Circle, (or rather (for distinction)
a double Circle, or Line) which is distant from the Equinoctial, or middle
Lines toward the North, about 23 degrees and a half: Now when the Sun is come
thither, which is on the 11th. of June then is the day longest with us, who
live on the North of the Equator, and shortest to them on the South thereof.
This Line passes through New Spain, Arabia, and India. The Tropic of
Capricorn is a like Circle to that of Cancer, and is distant from the Equator
23 degrees and a half toward the South, (being just as much as Cancer is
toward the North) when the Sun is gone down thither, which on the 12 or 13 of
December. then are the days shortest with us who dwell on the North, and longest
with them who dwell on the South thereof. This Line passes through Ethiopia
the Lower, and Peru. The Arctick or North-Polar Circle, is a like Line or
Circle, as the Tropic of Cancer; and it is distant from the North Pole 23
degrees and a half. It passes through Tartary, Norway, Greenland, and some
part of the unknown Land, as you may see in the Map. The Antarctick, or South
Polar Circle, is a like Line or Circle, to the North Polar Circle; and is
distant from the South Pole 23 degrees and about a half, (being just so much as
the North-polar Circle is distant from the North Pole) and passes through the
South unknown Land.

Of Zones.
Now the use of these four Circles, of Cancer, Capricorn, the Arctick and
Antarctick) are to show the five parts, called Zones: whereof there are two
temperate, the one North, the other South: two frozen or cold; one of them also
North, and the other South, and one hot, or scorched. The North temperate Zone,
is that part or space, contained between the Tropic of Cancer, and the
North-Polar Circle. The South temperate Zone, is that space contained between
the Tropic of Capricorn, and the South-polar Circle. They are called
temperate, because the Air thereof is more moderate, and of a better temper,
being neither so very hot, as the scorched Zone, nor so extreme cold as the
frozen Zones.

The torrid, burnt, or hot Zone is that space contained between the two
Tropicks of Cancer, and Capricorn, and is continually scorched with the Sun,
which does always pass over it, afflicting it with a mavelous heat and
downright Rays: the breadth hereof comprehends 47 degrees, or 2820 miles,
every degree being 60 miles, as has been said already. The North Frigid,
frozen, or cold Zone, is that space contained within the Arctick, or
North-Polar Circle: the breadth whereof from the very Pole it self, is 23
degrees and a half, which is 1410 miles. The South frigid, frozen, or cold
Zone, is that space or part between the Antarctick, or South Polar Circle, and
has the same breadth as the North Frozen Zone has from the North Pole: namely
23 degrees and a half, or 1410 miles.

The Division of the World.
The World is commonly divided into the known and unknown parts: the latter
whereof we will pass by* forasmuch as time and opportunity has not discovered
it, and only refer you to the Map, by which you may see that it lies toward
the Poles, but chiefly toward the South-pole.

The known World is divided into these four parts: EUROPE, ASIA, AFRICA,
AMERICA: and each of these contain several Countries and Islands.

EUROPE
Contains England, Ireland, Scotland, and their Isles: Spain, Portugal, France,
Italy, Germany, Holland, Denmark, and Norway, Swedland, Poland, Hungary,
Slavonia, Transylvania, Greece, Dacia, Russia, and their Isles.

ASIA
Contains Natolia, Syria, Palestine, Arabia, Caldea, Assyria, Mesopotamia,
Turcomania, Media, Persia, Tartary, Shiria, India, and many Islands.

AFRICA
Comprehends Egypt, Barbary, Numidia, Libia, the land of Negroes, upper, and
lower Ethiopia, with diverse Islands.

AMERICA
(Or the New World) not to speak of it, as some divide it, into North and
South: for by the Map you may see, how it lies: the several Countries
comprehended therein, are Estotiland, Terra Corterealis, Canada, New Scotland,
Norumbega, New England, New Netherland, Virginia, Florida, New Albion, New
Spain, Guatimalia, Golden Castile, Paria, Guiana, New Granada, Peru, Chile,
Paragnay, Brasile, and many Islands: as Hispaniola, Cuba, Jamaica, and diverse
others, as you will find in their proper place.

Of the Wind.
It is a hot and dry Exhalation drawn into the air by the power of the Sun: and
by reason of the weight thereof, (being driven down) is carried side-long about
the Earth: but this must be understood of general winds, which blow over all
the Earth, or at the least some great Countries. For there are a second sort of
winds, which are peculiar only to some Countries, and those not very large,
which are begot on this manner. It is confessed, that in the Globe of the Earth
there are wonderful holes, wherein when air abounds, (and cannot abide to be
shut up) finds some little hole, or as it were a mouth, to breathe, or break
out at: In (or about) those Countries blows vehemently; but that force
extends not far, for it is like wind that comes out of Bellows. This wind
therefore differs from the general winds, both in substance and quality: for
the matter of them is an exhalation, and the quality such as the nature of the
exhalation, very airy, but not indeed air. There is also a third sort of wind,
which is a gentle and cool moving of the air, coming from no certain place, yet
is felt in the shade under trees, but in the open Sun it is not perceived: it
comes whisking suddenly, (very pleasant in the heat of summer) and cease
presently again. This is no wind properly, but a moving of the air by some
occasion.

1. The North wind is cold and dry, but serene, clear, wholesome, and a
preserver of things from corruption: yet through the extremity of cold, it
oft-times proves hurtful to flowers, and new-budded fruits. 2. The South wind
is hot and moist, and by reason of its moisture, it is not only hurtful to
seeds and fruits, but to living creatures, and begets dark and cloudy air,
which is for the most part accompanied with rain, unless it keeps generally
blowing, and then it produces clearness, but a stifling heart, and stirs up
many diseases, as fevers, pestilence, and other contagious griefs. 3. The West
wind is moist, and temperately watery, and has many favorable and cherishing
blasts: yet stireth up both rain and thundrer. 4. The East wind is very hot,
and intemperately dry; yet very pleasant, pure, and wholesome: (but chiefly in
the morning) for it preserves the body sound, and in winter it produces frost.
These are the four chief, or principal. The secondary are,

1. The North-East wind is dry and cold, and partakes of the temper both of
North and East: it stirs up clouds, and sometimes produces snow. 2. The
North-West is cloudy, moist, and stormy, and usually makes an unquiet and
turbulent air. 3. The South-East is cloudy, dark, and somewhat moist, begetting
rain, but not so, common as the South. 4. The South-west is evil, moist
begetting clouds and showers, and turns fair weather into foul and tempestuous,
though not so much as the South. As for the rest, we will only name them; East
North-East, North North-East, North North-West, West South-West, South
South-west, South South-East, West No^th-west, East South-East, East and by
North North-East by East, North-East, North-East by North, North-west,
North-west by North, West by North, North-west by West, South-west by West,
West by South, South-west by South, South by West, South by East, South-East by
South, South-East by East, East by South. But in the plain and open South Sea,
between the two Tropicks, (by virtue of the first moveable) the wind does
continually blow from the East to the West: as also in the Ethiopick and
Indick, unless it be when it comes nearer the Land, where it oftentimes
changes: For the wind which takes his beginning from the vapors which are
lifted on high (either by the inequality which is between the mountains and the
valleys, by the lakes and rivers, or by something else unknown to men)
stretches in some sort his strength from the earth, and also in the two
Tropicks. And for this cause in the East-sea (where there are many
Promontories, and diverse Islands) the wind in certain months of the year,
blows still from the East; and the other months, continually from the North.

Of the Sea-Compasse.
It will not be amiss to add here some things of the deviation, or going out
of the way of the Sea-Compasse, for the help and aid of the Mariners. For these
observations are not forged lies, or untruths of the Mariners, to cover their
error: (as Peter de Medina would make us believe.) Neither does it come to
pass, by the default of the Aiman stone, too long using it; (as Peter Novin is
persuaded) or because it was not well set at the first, (as others would have
it) it is so carried naturally. There are none that hitherto have atteined to
the knowledge of the true cause of it; for it has been found to be, even as
many other the like secret and miraculous works of Nature; namely, that men are
blind in the knowledge of them, and their shallow understanding cannot
comprehend them. True it is, that some have labored to give certain Canons and
Laws of this deflexion, as if it were regular, or ordinary, but all in vain;
for Experience has taught us, that it is irregular, and without order: and not
only that Experience which is made by the Mariners, (by some gross and
unlearned conjecture, which oftentimes is far from truth) but also by the most
careful and diligent observations that have been thereof. And if from those
Islan^s which they call Azores, the Compass goes not from the Meridian:
namely, between Fayal, and Flores; as appears by the observations that have
been made thereof. And if from those Islands you sail toward the East, the
point which looks on the North does turn it self a little toward the East.
To London, in England, it goes from the true Meridian 11 degrees; to Antwerp
in Brabant, 9 degrees. If from the same Islands you take your course toward
the West, the same point shall turn on the West. In the seashore of America,
about the latitude of 36 degrees, it is gone from the true Meridian more than
11 degrees. Beyond the Equator, it falls altogether otherwise. About the last
Promontory of Brasil, toward the East, (commonly called Cabo Frio) it turns
from the Meridian 12 degrees, if not more. And in the East parts of the
Straights of Magellan, 5 or 6 degrees. And if from the said Promontory of
Brasil, you sail toward the North into Africa, this deflexion shall increase
to the 17th and 18th degree, which hapeneth to that Meridian, which is a little
distance of the same that passes beyond the Azores: from thence the deflexion
does increase to 9 or 10 degrees. By the Island of S. Hellen somewhat to the
West, from thence it decreaseth unto the River de las Agulias, all which
deflexion is to the East. These things are well known to us, and have been
tried by careful observations, (in as much as the perfection required to the
Sea-Compass does permit) and calculated by the doctrine of Spherical Triangles,
by the most Learned Mathematician Robert Hues: By all does appear, that the
Reports which are made of this deflexion, are partly false, and partly
suspected.

Of the four Seasons, or Quarters of the Year.
1 The SPRING begins the 11th. of March, and continues till the Sun does come
to Cancer, which is the 11th. of June; This quarter is generally both hot and
moist, but constant to neither, being sometimes hot, sometimes cold, and other
whiles moist: but heat now has some sway, by reason of the Suns elevation, and
daily ascension toward us. This quarter at the beginning, (whilst the Sun
passes through the sign Aries) is more moist then hot; In the middle, of a
good even temper, both for heat and moisture; but in the end more hot then
moist; at which time, we have frequent winds, by reason of the temper of the
Air.

Conjectures on the Spring.
If the Spring be over-moist, it prenotes or signifies fewness of Fruit, and
much putrefaction in what there is. If it be too hot, the Trees shoot out
leaves, and Flowers come to a sudden ripeness, sooner then ordinary, though it
may be a pleasant season, yet will not Fruit retein their quality and taste. A
cold and dry Spring much hurts the Fruit, and make it lateward.

2 The SUMMER begins the 11th. of June, and continues till the 12 of September.
It is hot and dry, and now we are not troubled with many Winds, especially in
the midst hereof.

Conjectures on Summer.
A wet and hot Summer begets many diseases, scarcity of Corn, and putrefies
Fruit: If it be to dry, a Dearth oftentimes follows, but plenty of Summer
Fruit, which being too eagerly eaten, often engender, or beget many hurtful
Diseases: And a cold Summer makes Fruit lateward; but proves a fruitful season.

3 AUTUMN begins the 12 of September, and ends the 12 of December: it is cold
and dry, and has many Winds, At the beginning, dryness is most predominant: in
the midst, much like: but at the latter end, more cold then dry.

Conjectures on Autumn.
If it be moister then usually, it is wont to corrupt the Grapes: If wet fall
at the latter end hereof, beware of scarcity the year following: if it be hot,
unhealthful, and if too cold, a hazard to Fruits.

4 WINTER begins the 12 of December, and continues till the 11 of March. It is
cold and moist.

Conjectures on Winter.
A cold and dry Winter is wholesome; for it purifies and cleanses the Air: but
if it prove hot and moist, it is both unwholesome, and hurtful to the Corn;
frequency of Wind is hurtful to all manner of Fruits; a want thereof brings as
much damage to all kinds of Grain: but if the whole year be calm and very
quiet, you may suspect that a Pestilence will range up and down, Although these
four Seasons, Quarters, differ something every year; yet while the Earth
remains, seed-time and Harvest; Cold and Heat, Summer and Winter, and Day and
Night shall not cease, Gen 8. 22.

Of the Heavens and Elements, according to Ptolomies Figure thereof.
The whole World is divided into 2 parts, that is to say, Elemental, and
Celestial: The Elemental part is divided into 4 parts, namely, Earth, Water,
Fire, and Air; as you may see in the round figure of the Heavens, and and
Elements: the inmost or middle most containing Water, and Earth, intermingled
together: next the Air, and next to it the Element of Fire, as you may there
see, each having its name set in the proper place, to which I will refer you:
and here chiefly describe them.

1 The EARTH is dry and cold; an Element differing from Air, agreeable with
Fire, in dryness: with Water, in coldness; and it is more of a dry quality, and
less of a cold. The Circuit of the Earth is 21600 miles; but the Diameter is
6872: so that 3436 will reach the middle. In the middle thereof is eternal Fire
and Hell, which is the bottomless Pit of the damned. 2 The WATER is cold and
moist, an Element differing from the Fire, agreeable with earth in coldness;
with Air moisture; and is more cold, and less moist. 3 FIRE it hot and dry, an
element differing from Water, and agreeable with the Air in heart, and with
earth in dryness; and it participates more of heat and less of dryness. The AIR
is hot and moist, and element differing or disagreeable from the earth, and
agreeable with Water, in moistness; and with Fire, in heat, and has more of
moisture, and less of heat.

1 The MOON, the lesser light, like no mean Princess, ordained or placed
between the Sun and the other Planets, does govern the earthly Region,
disposing and ordering days by a manifest change and alteration; She is less
then the earth 39 times, and compasses 12 degrees with the beams: she goes
about the Zodiac in the space of a month, is a friend to Jupiter Venus, and
Saturn: and enemy to Mercury, and Mars: She is Female, Night-shining, cold and
moist, having somewhat variable qualities in her quarters: as the sun by
quarters does change the times of the year: she is a conveigher of all the
virtues or forces, and impressions of other Planets. Of Colors, she has
yellow; in man, she has the Brain; in woman, the womb: in both, the stomach,
belly, and the tuition of the left part

2 MERCURY is 19 times lesser then the Earth, he casts his Rays 7 degrees,
and makes his course nearly with the Sun and Venus: he is a Friend to Jupiter,
Venus, and Saturn, and enemy to the Sun, Moon, and Mars: He is a mixed Planet,
male with male, and female with females: Hot with hot, and moist with moister
Planets. According to some, he rules the Thighs, Navel, Privity, Legs, Sinews,
and Veins. According to others, (and more rightly) he possesses the Mouth,
Tongue, Cogitation, and Memory: also the Hands and Legs: and Colors, all mixed
and various.

3 VENUS, is 6 times less then the earth, she equals her course with the Sun,
and is friend to all Planets, except Saturn: she is female, night-shining, cold
and moist, temperately phlegmatic, and rules or keeps the Loins, Reins,
Haunches, Privities, and matrix: of Colors, she holds white, declining unto
green.

4 The SUN, the greater Light, is Lord of perfection, and King of Nature, the
Author of Times, Generation, and Life; the greatest of all the Planets,
exceeding the earth 30 times, or more: with his Orb and Beams, he possesses
15 degrees, going about the earth in 365 days, and almost 6 hours, which is
the compass of a year. He is a friend to Jupiter and Venus, an enemy to Mars
and Mercury, and is a Masculine day-shining Planet, moderately hot and dry. He
keeps the Brain, Marrow, Sinews, the right eye of a man, and the left of a
woman, and holds the yellow color mixed with red.

5 MARS is the Lord of War; he equals the earth once with an half, and an 8
part. With his beams he compasses 8 degrees and is 13 times less then the
earth: he compasses the Zodiac in almost 2 years. He is only a friend to
Venus, all the rest are his enemies, but especially Jupiter, and Sol. He is a
Male Planet, night-shining, immoderately hot and dry; predominant over the left
Ear, the Veins, the Gall, and the Stones: Of Humors, he has Choler; and of
Colors, red.

6 JUPITER is 14 times greater then the earth: In the bigness of his Orb, he
is 9 degrees, and goes about the Zodiac in 12 years. He is a friend to all
Planets, except Mars, and is a masculine Planet, shining by night, hot, moist,
sanguine complexioned; he rules the Liver, the Lungs, the Ribs, the Gristles,
the Blood, and the Seed: He has Citron, or Orange color, or gray and green.

7 SATURN is a male Planet, and the highest of all: In bigness 22 times greater
then the earth: the Circuit of his Orb is 9 degrees; he compasses the Zodiac
in 30 years, and is a friend to Jupiter, the Sun, and Moon; an enemy to Venus
and Mars; an adversary to Humany Learning, destroying life; he is malevolent,
cold, and dry: Of all the members of man, he has the right Ear, the Spleen,
and the Bladder: of Humors, he has Melancholy, with commixture of Phlegm: and
of colors, he has black.

8 Is the Sphere of the fixed Stars, commonly called The Starry Firmament: and
performs his motion in 7000 years.

9 Is called, The Christalline Heaven* or 2 moveable, his motion is almost
immensible, and is called, The trembling Motion: and is said to be performed,
(by later Astronomers) in 49000 years.

10 Is called, The first moveable Heaven, containing the rest within it: and
removing from the East to the West, carries about with it inviolably, all the
other Spheres: whose motion is contrary from the West, to the East: and do
differ much in their motion, as you may see by what has been said.

The 11. is called, The Imperial or highest Heaven, where God, and his Angels
are said to dwell.

Of the Eclipse.
The word Eclipse, is as much as to say, want of light, as when a thing is
darkened, or hid from our sight.

Of the Eclipse of the SUN.
The SUN is said to be eclipsed, when the Moon comes directly between the Sun
and the Earth, or our sight: And the reason why we have not an Eclipse of the
Sun, every new Moon, is because the Moons latitude carries her beyond the
Bounds, in which an Eclipse happens (that is when she is somewhat far distant
from the Head and Tail of the Dragon.

Of the MOON's Eclipse.
The MOON is said to be eclipsed when the dark Body of the Earth comes directly
between the Sun and Moon, and so hinders the Beams of the Sun from the Moon:
and thus the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon are caused, as by the Figures
thereof, at the lower end of this Map does appear.

Of the effects of the Eclipses.
When there happens an Eclipse of the Sun or Moon if Mars shall be Ruler
thereof, he signifies houseburnings and quarrels, etc. If Saturn be Ruler
thereof, he signifies overflowing of Water, Earthquakes, Famine, and dangerous
diseases. If Venus or Jupiter are Rulers, they signify plenty of all things.
Hermes says, If there happen two Eclipses in one month, they signify many
troubles and controversies. But we must not be overcurious in the search, (nor
too confident in the event) of things. For that secret things belong unto the
Lord, and revealed unto us, Deuteronomy. 29. 29.

Of the Blasing Stars or Comets.
They are flames drawn into the higher parts of the Air: which come by
dryness, and long quietness in the Air: and signify corruption in the Air to
follow, and are either signs of Earthquakes, and dearth of Corn, or Wars, and
dearth. There happened one in the year 1618 from the 18 of November, to the 16 of
December following, it was seen all over Europe.

Of the Firmaments, and Constellations.
The two Hemispheres in the middle of the Map, one above, and another below,
filled with shapes or pictures, of men, beasts, birds, fish, and the like,
embost with Stars, to show the names of the several Stars, and other things, to
large for present discourse, and hard to be understood by ordinary capacities.

A View of EUROPE, (or, as we may call it, The Christian World; because all the
Kings and Rulers thereof, do not only allow, but profess the same.)
EUROPE (bounded, as in the Map is showed and expressed) though it be the
least, (being but 2800 miles in length, and in breadth 1200) yet does it carry
the name of the most happy part of all the World, for Her plenty of Grain,
Cattle, Fruits, Rivers, and Fountains of most excellent virtue; being also
richly furnished with beautiful Cities, Castles, Houses, and men very expert in
Arts and Sciences: She wants nothing but what she may well spare; as precious
Jewels, which have brought in vain, and useless Pride; and Wild-Beasts, which
cause Deserts in the place where they breed: Yet of Silver, Gold, and other
Metals, she has her share. It was first inhabited by the Sons of Japheth, (as
is granted by the best Historians.) But we shall more fully describe it in Her
several Countries,

ENGLAND, (not to spend time to show how it has had its alterations, and
changes of Government) (as well as others) is bounded on the East with the
German Ocean; on the West, with the Irish Sea; on the South, with the British
Sea; and on the North, with the Rivers of Tweed and Solway: It is situated in a
sweet, temperate, and wholesome Air, and is exceeding fruitful in Wheat and other
Grain; and has not only many pleasant Valleys, furnished with goodly Rivers,
plentifully stored with Fish; but diverse Hills, on which are fed innumerable
Flocks of Sheep, bearing fine Wool, of which is made Cloth, which serves not
only themselves, but is also transported into other Parts. The Men are brave
Warriors, both by Sea and Land; as (the Scots, Irish and French formerly, and)
the Dutch of late have felt. Neither have the Spaniards fared much better then
the rest; for they sent John of Gaunt home with 8 Wagons laden with Gold, and
he was to have an Yearly Pension of 10000 Marks. The Women are not inferior
to, if not before, any other Parts, and they have been of high esteem amongst
Foreign Nations for their modesty, though of late much addicted to the light
garb of the French: and as they are the handsomest, so are their privileges
the greatest of any; for it is a byword with the Italians, That if there were
a Bridge made over the narrow Seas, all the Women of Europe would run into
England; for here they have the upper-end at the Table; the upper-hand in the
streets; the thirds of their Husbands Estates; and in a word, it is a Paradise
for Women. And although their Nobles are many, yet their Powers are limited.
The whole Land is divided into 40 Shires, and those have 6 Judges for the
ending of Controversies: two whereof, are to administer Justice in the chief
Town of every Shire twice a year. And although it had but two Universities, yet
they exceed ten of most other Countries. The Revenues hereof in Henry the 7.
time, were said to be 40000 Crowns yearly, and improved by Henry the 8th, to a
Million more. The Gospel was first preached here by Joseph of Arimathea, which
they do still profess, and in a good degree keep to, though there be many who
differ in Opinion. Their Religion, at the present, is called Independency,
because they give liberty of Conscience: but the Government Presbyterial. From
hence is not only sent Woollen-Cloth, as was said before, but Stuffs, Saffron,
Licorish, Tin, Lead, Wheat, Barley, and good Beer, (as the Dutchmen know full
well.) Herein are also many Rivers, sweet Springs, excellent Fountains,
healthful Baths, populous Cities, commodious Havens: and, in a word, there is
hardly any Country in the Universe, (all things considered) on which God has
bestowed larger bounties.

IRELAND is on all sides environed with the Sea, and is a most fruitful and
pleasant Country; the Air temperate, being warmer in Winter, and cooler in
Summer, then in England: The Soil is fitter for Pasture, then Tillage. Herein
are many Rivers and Lakes, which are abundantly stored with Fish: as also Fowl
in good plenty, and great store of Cattle; but the breed is less then in
England, except Grayhounds. The People, (I mean the Irish) are strong, nimble,
haughty, greedy of glory, patient in Cold and Hunger, careless of their lives,
and leight of belief, much addicted to Customs; one whereof is, That they kneel
down to the Moon, desiring her to leave them, in as good health as she found
them. One of the many Rarities I will recite, is, 3 Lakes in the Country of
Mead, not far a sunder, and have an intercourse of Waters, but of so different
natures, that the Fish which are proper to the one, will not live in the other.
Their Government is by one supreme Magistrate, called the Lord Deputy; the
profit of the Custom is said to amount to 30000 li. yearly. From hence are sent
Rugs, Mantles, Honey, Herrings, etc. And in brief, Nature has enriched it
beyond most others.

SCOTLAND is surrounded with the Sea on all sides, except on the South, where
it is separated from England, by the Rivers of Solway and Tweed: It is divided
into the High-lands and Low-lands, Northern and Southern: for the most part,
especially the North, it is so barren, that it is hardly able to afford
sustenance for the people, were they not patient in hunger and want: Nor has
it much Fruit, nor many Trees: the people for the most part holding the Land at
the Will of their Landlord, and so not encouraged to plant: Their chief
Commodities are coorse Cloth, Hides, Malt, Fish, and Sea-Coal.

WALES is encompassed with the Sea, except toward England; from which it was
anciently divided by the River Wy, and a Line drawn to the River Dee: The whole
Country is mountainous and barren, scarce able to maintain the people, but
that its defect is helped by some Silver Mines, which were of late found out:
It has many Rivers, which afford good store of Fish. Their Commodities are
Frizes and Cottons; the People much given to passion, but soon appeased.

The Isles belonging to Great Britain, are, the Sorlings, Garnsey, Jersey,
Wight, Orcades, Hebrides, Man, Anglesey, and many others; as you may see in
that new Map of England, Scotland and Ireland, called, The Plain Man's Map; to
which we will refer you.

SPAIN is bounded on the East with the Mediterranean Sea, on the West with
Portugal, and the Atlantic Ocean; on the South, with the Straights of
Gibralter; and on the North with the Cantabrian Sea, and some part of France:
The Air is very clear and calm: The People are said to descend from Goths,
Moors and Jews: They are proud, melancholy, superstitious, conceited of
themselves, great braggers, very much given to Women, and are exceeding jealous
of their Wives. The Women are sober, and loving both to their Husbands and
Friends. The Soil for the most part, is overgrown with Woods, and is very
mountainous, or of so hot a nature, and sandy, as not fit for Tillage; and by
reason of the scarcity of Water, it is unfit for Pasture: Yet in some places,
it is as fruitful as any part of Europe. Their Religion for a long time, has
been that of Rome; for such is the cruelty of their persecuting Inquisition,
that some that are Papists, withstand it to the death. They are, by some,
reckoned for good Soldiers, not for their valor, but because they are able to
endure hardship. Their Commodities are Orenges, Lemmons, Marble, Honey, and
some Mines of Gold and Silver.

PORTUGAL is bounded on the West and South, with the Atlantic Sea: on the East
and North with Spain. The Soil is hilly, and bare of Corn; the Air healthy, the
People more simple, and plain of beheaviour, than the Spaniard: for Religion,
they are Papists, good Seafaring-men, and happy in discovering of Foreign
Countries. Herein are diverse Rivers, of which Nitinius is none of the least;
for it is said to be Navigable with small Vessels near 100 miles, and is full
of Red-Lead. Their chief Commodities are Oil, Wine, Allom, Honey, Salt-Fish,
Silk, Marble, Fruit, and some Mines of Silver. This as well as the
Low-Counrries, did once belong to the King of Spain.

FRANCE is bounded on the East with some part of the Low Countries, Germany and
Italy: On the West, with the cantabrian Sea, and some part of Spain; On the
South with the Mediterranean Sea; and on the North, with the British Sea. It
is very fruitful in Wine, Salt, Beeves, Corn, Prunes, Woods, Nuts, Coral,
Skins, Canvas, Sisers, Cards, and most kind of Mercery Ware: Having many
illustrious Cities, exceedingly well peopled; as Paris, Roan and others.
Neither can it be wanting in Fish: for, besides the Seas here, are many Rivers,
Ponds and Lakes. The People are said to be hot of nature, leight of carriage,
curious of Palate, and therefore not able to endure hardship; and so, by
consequence, not good Soldiers, but for a spir^ only. The Women, generally,
are straight of body, and personable, but somewhat enclining to swarfiness. The
condition of the common people is miserable, for that they have great and
uncertain Rests set by the Landlords (for the Husbandman is Tenant at their
Will:) and because they have great Taxes laid upon them.

The Christian Religion is said to be first planted here by some of St. Peter's
Disciples; but at this time, they are accounted Papists, yet are they divided;
for in the year 1560. there were said to be 1250 Protestant Churches, and it is
conceived, that they are much increased, notwithstanding the Massacres they
have suffered.

ITALY is bounded on all sides with the Sea, except some part where it
bordereth on France; and on the North, where it is separated by the Mountains,
called the Alps, from Germany. It is as pleasant and fruitful a Country, as
any in Europe, and yields not only Wine and Corn, but Silks, Sattens, Velvets,
Grograins, Rash, Bombasus, Taffeties, Wire of gold and silver, Alum, Galls,
Drinking and Looking-Glasses of Venice. The people are witty, but deceitful,
malicious, hot, and lascivious; in their Houses sumptuous, at Table neat, in
expenses thrifty, and civil of carriage, unless to their Wives, of whom they
are extreme jealous, (and happily not without cause) and will permit them liberty
of Discourse with few or none, though they are said to be outwardly modest: but
the Proverb is, That they are Magpies at the Door, Saints in the Church, Angels
in the Streets, Goats in the Garden, Sirens in the Windows, and Devils in the
House: Most of them use painting, most wickedly saying, That if God make them
tall and plump, they will make themselves fair. The Language of both Sex is
very courtly and fluent. They have twice given Laws to the powerful part of the
then known World; once by their Valor, and once by their Wit: By which last,
they have subjected great part of Christendom to the Pope. And as their
Language is much changed, so is their Religion; for (as some say) the Gospel
was first preached here by St. Peter; and as others say, by St. Paul: but one
quaering the truth hereof, thus says;

That Simon Peter was at Rome, who knows?
That Simon Magus was at Rome, Truth shows.
But now they are Papists, and straightly kept thereto by the cruel bloody
Inquisition: so as they dare not hearken to any other, though never so good
reason be given for it.

Of the Isles belonging to Italy.
CORSICA, which is hard to be come at, being enclosed on all sides with cliffs;
and within for the most part mountainous, and therefore yields not much grain:
only in some parts where the Country opens it self, and is watered with
Rivers, and makes it fruitful: It has good Wines, great store of Honey, Figs,
Oil, Rozin.

SARDINIA, the Air hereof is rough, and unwholsom; but neither Serpent nor
Wolf, nor any other venomous or hurtful Beast, but the Fox only, and a little
Creature like a Spider, which will by no means endure the Sun, except held by
violence: it abounds in Fruit, Wine, Wheat, and some Mines: and affords great
store of hunting, because it has good plenty of Bores and Deer.

SICILIA has a good Air, and fruitful Soil, and the Corn yields abundance of
Increase: It has plenty of Fruits, great store of Honey, Sugar, Oil, Wines,
Saffron, Salt, Alum: It produces precious stones, as the Emraud, Jasper, and
Marble-stones; and as well stored with Metals; for it has Gold, Silver, and
Iron: as also great Herds of Oxen, and other Cattle. And herein is the Mount
Aetna, which some have taken to be Hell, and ignorant Papists Purgatory,
because it sends forth continually streams of fire, which the brimstone there
causes: as is affirmed by good Authors. There be some other Isles of small
note, which we will pass by.

GERMANY is bounded on the East with Poland and Hungary, on the West with
France and the Low Countries; on the South with Itaely, and on the North with
part of Denmark, and the Baltic or Swedish Sea: In the midst hereof, lies
Bohemia, in which stands Prague, where the Emperor commonly keeps his Court:
it has many stately Towns well fortified, and furnished with so many Castles
and Villages, such abundance of people, and such politic Government, that she
may compare with any. The Soil is fruitful in Corn and Wine: it has many
Navigable Rivers, stored with plenty of Fish, most excellent Fountains, and hot
Baths, Mines of Copper, Lead, Tin, Iron, and some of Silver and Gold. It has
many learned men, very skilful in all Sciences, and mechanical Arts. They were
the Inventers of Gunpowder, and of the Noble Art of Printing. Their Women are
of a good Complexion, but much given to eating and drinking, and so apt to
fatness. The Title of the Father descends to all the Children: so that the
Son of a Lord, is a Lord, which verifies the Italian Proverb, That the Dukes
and Lords of Germany, the Dons of Spain, the Nobility of Hungary, the Monsieurs
of France, the Knights of Naples, the Lairds of Scotland, the Bishops of Italy,
and the younger Brethren of England, make a poor Company. In Religion they are
reckoned for Protestants.

HOLLAND (or the 17 Provinces of the Low Countries) is counted a part of
Germany: the Air is now more wholesome then formerly: for through the industry of
the people, it is much drained: And in it are many Rivers, (as the Rhine*
Mosella, Mosa and the Escant) plentifully stored with Fish. Here is also plenty
of Corn and Cattle, many great Towns rich and well peopled. The Inhabitants are
witty; for to them we are indebted for the making of Cloth, Clocks, Chariots,
Pictures in Glass, Watches, and laying of Colors in Oil. They perfected the
Mariners Compass, and have many Pilots well practiced in the Art of
Navigation. They are industrious in all Sciences, and Mechanical Arts, and have
had a name for the Art Military. They are said to be mindless of good turns,
and injuries done unto them. The first too true, the latter I fear not true
enough.

Their Women are of a good Complexion, and well proportioned, (though their
Habit do not set them out so well as the French) familiar and active: for unto
their good Hou^wifery are we beholden, for the making of Tapestries, Woosted
and Says.

From hence are sent all sorts of Commodities; as Fl^x, Linen Cloth, all kind
of twisted Thread, Cables, Ropes, and other Ammunition belonging to Ships;
Butter, Cheese, Fish, Tapes, and much Drapery Ware; Scarlet, Taffeties, Silks,
Velvets, and diverse others, though not many of their own growth; but most of
the Stuffs fetched from other parts, and by them made up, and so carried into
other Countries.

Their Religion in the general, is the reformd, though they suffer all: and in
Flanders and Artois, they are Papists.

DENMARK and NORWAY we reckon both together, for that they belong to the King
of Denmark: Toward the East they border upon Sweden, on the South upon
Germany, and on the West and North with the Sea: That part called Norway,
affords but little Corn, and the North thereof none at all: so that the poorer
sort are sain to use Stock Fish dried, instead of Bread, (as they do in
Ice-land) and have no night for almost three months together. The people
generally are of good stature and complexion, healthful and long lived: for
though they eat and drink much, yet have they good digestions. In managing
their Affairs, they are subtle, strict in executing Justice, peremptory in
maintaining their Opinions, good observers of their Words and Contracts,
reasonable good Soldiers, but given to vaunting.

Their Women are very fruitful in bearing Children, but not delivered without
great pain. Of Complexion, they are fair, and are discreet in managing their
Household Affairs.

In Religion, they are Lutherans or Protestants, and their Church Government is
by Archbishops and Bishops. Their Commodities are Oxen, Barley, Malt,
Stock Fish, Tallow, Nuts, Tackling for Ships, as Masts and Cables; Train-Oyl,
rich Furs, Deal-Boards, Pitch, Tar, and such like.

Of the Islands in the North-Sea, belonging to the King of D^nmark.
ICE-LAND is situated, for the greater part, under the Arctick Circle, as you
may see in the Map so called, for the abundance of Ice unto which it is
subject, being constantly frozen for about 8 months, and is so vehemently cold
with the North wind, that it affords neither Corn nor Trees, except Juniper:
yet there is grass in good plenty, as also Horses, Oxen, and Kine without
horns, sheep, white Ravens, white Faulcons, white Bears, and white Hares; but
the people are said to live on that which Nature gives them, without help of
Art, more then the making of Butter and Cheese. They use neither Physician nor
Physic; and yet it is reported, that many of them live to 150 years of age:
few of them but have some familiar spirit. They have Necessaries brought to
them by the Merchant, who has given him in return thereof, sometimes Beeves
and Muttons; but more ordinarily Brimston, Skins, Horses, Butter, and Fish
chiefly. And notwithstanding the cold condition of this Country, it is full of
heats and fires under the ground, occasioned (as is most probable) by those
veins of Brimston on which the Hills stand. There is no difference between the
Habits of the Men and Women.

FRISLAND (so called from the continual Frosts, to which it is subject) is
situated farther from the Arctick, then Ice-land; the Soil so cold and barren,
that it bears neither Corn nor Fruit: The Inhabitants live most on Fish,
which is the chief commodity to invite the Merchant.

GROENLAND, the greater part, is situated within the Arctick, and is
continually covered with Snow, (except June, July, and August) so that the
people are clad in Skins and Furs, and dwell much in Caves, and are given to
Necromancy. The chief place of note is St. Thomas his Monastery, which (as
Mercator relates) is not far from a burning Mountain, standing upon hot
scalding Springs, conveyed by Pipes of Stone into the Monastery, serving both
for a Stove to warm them, and fire to heat their Victuals: The Walls of the
Monastery are built of Pumice-stones, cast out of that Mountain: Which being
tempered with the water of those Springs, does make a glutinous substance,
instead of Lime, and as durable: And the Garden, in regard of this heat, is
stored with Herbs, and sweet Flowers all the year and the adjoining Sea, for
the same reason, is never frozen, but affords both Fish and Fowl.

SWEDELAND is bounded on the East with Russia, on the West with Denmark and
Norway, on the South with the Baltic Sea; and on the North, with the North or
Petzork Sea. The Air is pure, and not so extreme sharp as in Norway: though in
some parts for want of care in opening and cleansing the Watercourse, there
are great Mists and Fogs which do corrupt it.

The people are naturally strong, active, (and so industrious and provident,
that they have no beggars) Hospitable to strangers; and so healthful, that they
live commonly to above 100 years of age.

The Commodities (that the Country affords) are Barley, Malt, Steel, Lead,
Brass, Iron, Tallow, Nuts, Honey, costly Furs, Hides of Goats, Bucks, Elks,
Oxen: as also plenty of Pine-Trees, Firs and Oaks: Neither do their Lakes and
Rivers want Fish. In Religion, they are Lutheran Protestants, and are governed
by Archbishops, and Bishops.

Of the Isles belonging to Sweden.
1. The first is Oeland, of no great note, but that it is strongly garrisoned,
and well fortified. 2. The second Gothland; the Soil is very good, but not so
much for Tillage, as Pasture, affording great store of Fish, plenty of Pitch,
and very good Marble.
POLAND is bounded on the East with Russia, on the West with Germany, on the
South with Hungary, and on the North with the Baltic Sea, which divides it
from Sweden. It is plain, but full of Woods, which are a good means to
rectify the coldness of the Air. They have Barley, and Pulse in abundance:
also Wheat and Rye in good plenty, and such store of Cattle, that it alone is
able to supply the greatest part of Europe. The people are industrious and
studious of Languages, especially the Latin; proud in their Garb, costly in
Apparel, impatient in their Humors, and delicate in their Diet; the last,
common to the Women, who are more witty then well spoken: But then you must
understand, that it is spoken chiefly of them on the South part. Their Religion
is of all sorts, Lutherans, Calvinists, and Arrians, and what not: but the most
part are of the Church of Rome, and the Greek Church: The first of which has
three Archbishops, and 19 Bishops: The latter, two Archbishops, and six
Bishops. But amongst all of them, there is this conformity, That whenever the
Gospel is read in the Congregation, the Nobility and Gentry use to draw their
Swords, showing their readiness to defend the same, against all opposers. The
Commodities, wherein it abounds, are Wheat, Rye, Honey, Wax, Pitch, Tar,
Hemp, Flax, Amber, Spruce or Dantz Beer: It has also some Mines of Copper and
Iron.

HUNGARY is bounded on the East with Moldavia, on the West with Germany, on the
South with Sclavonia, and on the North with Poland: The Soil is very fruitful
in Corn, and has such plenty of Cattle, as it alone is thought to be able to
supply all Europe therewith, and yet (some say) they send Eighty Thousand Oxen
into Germany, and Sclavonia yearly; and Partridges, Pheasants and Dear, are
there in such abundance, that any one may kill them. Here are many Rivers
plentifully stored with Fish. The other Commodities are Tin, Iron, Copper,
Lead, Salt, Wine, diverse sorts of Colors, and some Veins of gold and silver.

The people are strong of body, rude of beheaviour, and show their descent to
be of the Scythians, by their neglect of Learning, both in the Liberal Arts,
and Mechanical Trades.

Their Sons equally inherit, without privilege of Birthright. The greatest
aspersion with them, is, the name of a Coward, which cannot be wiped away,
without killing a Turk, after which they have the privilege to wear a Feather:
the number that they wear, signifying the number of Turks killed in Battle.
They delight in War, as their only Trade, being slothful (like the Irish) that
so they may live on other men's labors. Their Daughters portion is only a new
Attire. As for Religion, they are reckoned Christians; a free Exercise whereof,
was first granted by Maximilian: The German Emperor, and the Turks, share the
Country betwixt them.

SCLAVONIA is bounded on the East with Dacia, on the West with part of Italy,
on the South with the Adriatic Sea, or Gulf of Venice, and on the North with
Hungary; part of it belongs to the Venetian States, pa^ to the Hungarians, and
some to the Turks.

The people are proud and stubborn, strong of body, and thereby enabled for
works of drudgery: of which they have had their share.

The Country is fruitful in those things that are found in Italy, and not much
inferior thereto; for it has not only Wine-Oyl, good store of Cattle, wild
and tame; but some Veins of silver and gold. The Northern parts are
mountainous, but afford breed of sheep, which bring forth young twice a year:
and are shorn four times a year, (as says my Author.) Nor is the Seacoast
unprofitable to them; for besides the plenty of Fish, it affords many
convenient Havens. The greatest part profess the Christian Religion, and allow
both that of the Greek Church, and that of Rome also: yet they are permitted to
celebrate Divine Offices in their Natural Language: but they are not all
Christians, the Turks and Mahometans prevailing in these parts. There are some
small Isles (under their obedience) that belong thereto, as Pogo, Pharus; but
we must pass them by.

GREECE is bounded on all sides with the Sea, except on the North, where it
bordereth on Dacia (as you may see in the Map:) It was once the Mother of all
Learning and Arts, but now a Den of the Turkish Emperors, whose Palace is at
Constantinople. The people are not only destitute of Learning and means to
obtain it, but riotous, unconstant, uncivil, and so lazy, that (for the most
part) they endeavor their profit no further, then their belly compels them.
The Women are of a brown complexion, and use painting, to keep themselves in
favor with their Husbands: for if once they grow wrinckled, they are put to
all the drudgery of the House. Both Sexes, for the most part, apply themselves
in their habits, to the State under which they live: Such as live under the
Venetians, to theirs: and those under the Turks to theirs. The Christian
Religion (doubtless) was once planted here by St. Paul, as appears, Act. 16.
12. but now they are much swarved from it; many of them being trained up (from
their Infancy) in the Mohammedan Rites, (or rather Fopperies.) The Soil is very
fruitful, and yields good profit to the Husbandmen, if they would take pains to
till it: but they knowing nothing certainly to be their own, (being all at the
mercy of the Grand Signeur, and his Soldiers) neglect the manuring thereof.
Their Commodities are Turkish Grograins, Damask, Velvets, Wine, Oil, Vitriol,
diverse Colors, Copper, some Gold and Silver.

Of the Isles in the Mediterranean Sea, near (and sometimes belonging) to
Greece.
1. Candia is mountainous, yet yields good store of corn and grass, and diverse
Fruits; as Olives, Orenges, Lemmons, Figs, Citrons, Wax, Honey, Saffron, Gum,
Vines, and Malmsey, is said to be made only here. And (as Pliny relates)
whatsoever grows here, is better then any of the same kind that grows
elsewhere. It is also reported, that here are neither Serpents, Foxes, Woolfs,
nor any harmful Creature, except Spiders.

2. Corfu, the Air is temperate and gentle; so that there are whole VVoods of
Citron-Trees, Orenges, Apples, Olives, Grapes, and all kind of Fruit, but no
good Corn, by reason of the Southern wind, which dries it before it be ripe.

3. Zant has a wholesome Air, and fruitful soil, and yields good store of Oil,
Raisins, Wine, and Corn. There are diverse other small Isles, which we must
pass by.

DACIA is bounded on the East with the Euxine, or Black-sea, on the West with
Hungary and Sclavonia, on the South with Greece, and on the North with Poland:
It is very fruitful in Grass, Wood, Wine and Corn; but not so good for Tillage
as Pasture: It also affords great plenty of Beeves and Muttons, with which they
supply not only the great City of Constantinople. but part of Poland also. In
matters of Religion, they allow the Dictates of the Greek Church, and obey the
Patriarch of Constantinople. They are a rough-lived people, hard to be
civilized, not fully weaned from the superstitions of the Gentiles, swearing by
Jupiter and the like. They marry and unmarry, at their pleasures; are much
given to Magical Charms, and bury with their dead both Clothes and Victuals,
for their relief in that long Journey to the other World.

RUSSIA, or MOSCOVIA, is a good part in Asia, and is bounded on the East with
Tartaria, on the West with Sweden, on the South with the Euxine or Black-sea,
and on the North with the Petzork, North, or Frozen Sea; a vast Country, and
as wild a Government. The people are reported to be crafty, perfidious, and
deceitful in their bargains; making no reckoning of their Promises, studying
ways to evade their Agreements; and both Parents and Children unnatural,
endeavoring to domineer over one another; giving much to drinking, strong of
body, thick and short, broad-bearded, gray-eyed, and very swift in running. The
common people live in great subjection to the Nobles, and they are in as much
slavery to the Duke, or Emperor. And it is the fashion of their Women, to love
those Husbands best, who beat them most; and think themselves not loved, or
regarded, unless they be soundly swadled.

The Country is not so populous, as spacious; but is very much filled with
Woods: amongst which are the greatest and tallest Trees in the World (some
whereof are reported beyond belief) which is a good help against the coldness
of the Air, that the greatest part of the Country is subject unto: Nature also
has stored them with rich Furs, Sables, White Fox, Martines, Honey, Wax,
Pitch, Tar, Rozen, Whales, Grease, Hides of Oxen, and Elks, Hemp and Flax: as
also Cattle, Corn and Fruit. In Profession, they are Christians, and follow the
Greek Church, having a Patriarch, two Metropolitans, and 18 Bishops: and though
they use Mass, yet do they much differ from the Romish and Reformed Churches;
for they deny Purgatory, and the proceeding of the Holy Ghost: They also
dissolve Marriage upon slight occasions, and diverse other things. The whole
Region is subject to the Emperor of Russia.

Of the Islands belonging to Russia.
1. Sir Hugh Willoughby's Land, because he first found it out in the year 1553.
and was thereabout found frozen to death the year following.

2. New Zemia, which is but little discovered, and is said to have neither
green boughs nor grass: yet to harbor many Bears, and the men hereof are very
little.

As for knowledge of the most famous Cities and Rivers, that are in this part,
I will refer you to the Map of Europe, by which you will find their situations
also.

A View of ASIA (or as we may call it the old World; for that it was first
inhabited, as is by all allowed).
ASIA is separated from Europe, by the Rivers Tanais and Duina; and from
Africa, by that small and narrow part of Egypt, which lies between the
Mediterranean, and Red seas, and is much bigger then Europe or Africa: and
excels them in Riches; as Pearls of great price, precious Stones, and hot
Spices, which by Experience are found to be both good and wholesome. This part
has been renowned by the first and second Monarchs of the World. The length
hereof is about 5200 miles, and the breadth 4550. Herein man was not only
created, placed in Paradise, or the Garden of Eden, and seduced by Satan: but
also here was wrought the great work of man's Salvation by our Savior Jesus
Christ; and here were done most of the Acts and Histories mentioned in the Old
Testament, and great part of those in the New. The condition of those who
profess the Christian Religion, is sad and deplorable; for it is both
discountenanced and oppressed, but not extinguished, though all the chief
Rulers be either Pagans or Mahometans; for it is at present governed by these
six great Monarchs.

1. The great Cham of Tartary. 2. The King of China. 3. The King of Barma, who
governs most part of India beyond the River Ganges. 4. The great Mogol, whose
Empire extends over all India, on this side the River Ganges. 5. The King of
Persia. And 6. The Turk.
But for the better understanding of the Babylonian, Assyrian, and Persian
Monarchs: (which are often mentioned in Scripture) we shall consider it, as it
is divided into its Regions.

1. Natolia, or Asia the less, is bounded on the East with the River
Euphrates, by which it is almost parted from the Greater Asia, but all the rest
is encompassed with the Sea. The Air is good, and the soil is said to be
furnished with very good Pasture, which afford a special Race of Horses: And as
it has formerly, so it would still afford plenty of Fruit, were not the people
idle and given to pleasure. The greatest part profess the Christian Religion,
but are much over-powred by Mahometism, which is prevalent here. They are
followers of the Greek Church, and are all subject to the Patriarch of
Constantinople, (except those of Isauria and Cicilia). It has been heretofore
populous, and replenished with goodly Cities, but now many of them laid waste
by Wars and Earthquakes. The chief commodities hereof are Wine and Oil.

2. Syria is bounded on the East with the River Euphrates, on the west with
the Mediterranean Sea, on the South with Canaan, and on the North with Cicilia,
and Armenia the lesser. The Christian Religion was first preached here by some
of the dispersed Brethren, as you may read Act. 11. and here the Disciples were
first called Christians, ver. 26. But now here are Christians, Pagans,
Mahometans, and a Sect compounded of all, called Drusians; but the generality
(and all in Office) embrace Mahometisme; though the rest are tolerated, yet
they are subject to a Patriarch.

3. Cyprus is situated in the Mediterranean Sea, and abounds in Corn, Oil,
wine, Honey, Turpentine, Cotton, Wool, Grograins, Alum, Salt, Verdigreece,
and all kind of Metals: The people are strong, nimble, and of good civility,
Hospitable to their Neighbors, and loving to all strangers (Jews only
excepted.) The Christian Religion was first preached here by St. Paul and
Barnabas, as appears Act. 13. 4. but now they agree much with the Eastern
Churches of the Greek Communion.

4. Palestine, (the Holy Land, Canaan, or the Land of Promise; for by all these
Names it is sometimes called) is bounded on the East with Mount Taurus, on the
west with the Mediterranean Sea, on the South with part of Arabia, and on the
North with Syria: The people, in their best times, stiff necked, murmuring, and
much given to Idolatry, before their coming out of Babylon. And in point of
Religion, they were privileged above all others, had they made good use of it:
for here the Law was given by God, the Gospel preached by Jesus Christ, and
confirmed by the miraculous operation of the Holy Ghost. And if you would have
a Description hereof, see Deuteronomy. 8. where Moses has done it to our hands, but
now through the negligence of the Inhabitants, it comes short of that ancient
fruitfulness: yet the Air is neither extreme cold, nor scorching hot: And it
affords Olives, Pomgranates, Honey, Figs, Sugarcanes, Palm Trees: also Quails,
Partridges, Geese swine, and Hares; but so troubled in many places with Mice
and Rats, that were it not for certain Birds which feed upon them, (as says my
Author) it were impossible for them to have any Harvest.

5. Arabia is bounded on the East with the Gulf of Persia, on the west with
the Red Sea, on the South with the main Ocean; and on the North with Syria, and
the River Euphrates. The people are small of stature, swarfie of complexion,
swift of gate, given to spoil, robbery, and have hardly any dwelling place, but
in Arabia the Happy. St. Paul first planted the Christian faith here, as you
may see Gal. 1. 17. But shortly after it was endeavored to be supplanted by
Mahomet, who had his first Rise here; which has so overspread, that there are
now hardly any Christians left, except in Happy Arabia. The Isles belonging to
Arabia are, first, those in the Red sea, which are about 12. And 2. those in
the Persian Gulf, and in the main Ocean; but all small, and not of account, and
therefore we will pass them by.

6. Caldea is bounded on the East with some part of Persia, on the west with
Arabia Desert, on the South with Assiria, and on the North with Mesopotamia. It
is said to be so fruitful in some places, that it would yield one hundred fold
increase, and the worst 50, were it as carefully ordered as formerly. But this
is agreed on by those of the best Judgment, both Divines and Geographers, that
herein is the Garden of Eden, or that Paradise, wherein man was placed by God.
And although the Country in general is exceeding fruitful, yet in some places
it is covered with a slimy matter, with the overslowing of the water, and
nature of the soil together, used by them in building, instead of Mortar, as
being more durable, and was chosen for the Cement of the Tower of Babel, Genesis
11. 3. The Faith (I need not say the Christian, because all other is rather
fiction or fancy, then true Faith) was first preached here by St. Peter, as
himself hinteth, 1 Pet. 5. 13. But at present, there are only some remainers,
and those much corrupted, being Jacobites, but most Mahometans: their chief
City is Babylon, which is said to be built by Nimrod; the compass of the Walls
are 46 miles, in height 50 Cubits, and of such breadth, that Carts and
Carriages might meet on the top of them; but the repute hereof is now much lost.

7. Assyria is bounded on the East with Media, on the West with Mesopotamia, on
the South with Susiana, and on the North with Caldea, and Turcomania: It is a
plain and fruitful Country. They have a Custom to expose their fairest
Daughters to sale in the open Market, and with that money, put off those that
were deformed. St. Jude is said to preach the Gospel here first, and it was so
well rooted, that it could not be plucked up, though cruelly persecuted by the
King of Persia, and therefore he endeavored to corrupt it: By which means, the
Nestorians very much increase: They differ much from other Christians. In
contracting Marriages, they never see their Sweet-hearts; but, hearing a good
report of her, deal with her Parents for her; and having agreed, they meet in
the Chancel of the Church, wherein there is a partition with a hole in it: The
Bridegroom and his Friends stand on the one side; and the Bride and hers on the
other. Then the Churchman bids the Bridegroom put his hand through the hole in
the partition, and take his Bride by the hand; which being done, the Mother of
the Bride, with a sharp-pointed Instrument, pricketh the Bridegrooms hand with
great eagerness: If, when he feels the smart, he let her hand go, they rake it
for a sign that he will not love her; but if he wring her till she cry, they
are glad that they have so well bestowed her.

8. Mesopotamia is bounded on the East with the River Tigris, on the west with
Euphrates, on the South with Arabia and Caldea, and on the North it is
separated from Armenia the bigger, by the Mount of Taurus.

This is that Country (as Historians conceive) which in Scripture is called
Paedan-Aram; but this name is more peculiar to the North part, because
inhabited by the Aramites. It is well stored with Corn, Wine, and other
Necessaries for the Life of Man; but the Southern part is barren, and full of
Deserts.

The Gospel was first preached here by Thadd eus, one of the 70 Disciples; but
about the year 530, one Jacobus rose up, (who denied the Unity of Nature in
Christ) and many of his Followers are now here, and differ from other
Christians, affirming the Angels to consist of two substances, Light and Fire.
They retain circumcision, and use it on both Sexes, and are of Opinion, That
the souls of the dead, remain some where in the Earth, expecting Christ's
coming: with other gross errors, which here I shall forbear to name.

9. Turcomania is bounded on the East with the Caspian Sea, on the West with
the Euxine sea and Cappadocia; on the South with Assyria and Mesopotamia, and
on the North with Tartaria. It is so called from the Turks, who from hence made
their first Expedition for the Conquest of Persia, and spread themselves into a
great part of Africa, and some of Europe. The whole Country in general, is
said to be of a fruitful soil, affording all necessaries for the use of man.
Their Religion is mixed, some Papists, some Jacobites, but most Mahometans.

10. Media is bounded on the East, with some part of Persia, on the West with
Armenia the greater, and some part of Assyria, on the south with Persia also,
and on the North with the Caspian Sea. The south part is excellent, rich, and
fruitful in Corn, Wine, and all things necessary; but the North both cold and
barren: so that for the most part, they make their Bread of dried Almonds, and
their drink of the Juice of Herbs: they have few tame Cattle, so that their
Food is chiefly on Venison, or other wild Beasts. The Gospel is said to be
first preached here by St. Thomas, though always opposed. At the first by
Pagans, since by Mahometans, and after by Saracens: yet there are some
Christians amongst them, both Nestorians and Armenians: (as in most other parts
of the Persian Empire) here are also many Jews, who have free liberty of their
Religion. But the Religion (if I may so call it) commonly received and
countenanced, is that of Mahomet.

11. Persia is bounded on the East with India, on the West with Media, on the
South with the Main Ocean, and on the North with Tartaria. It is of great
extent, being situated under the 3d, 4th, 5th, and 6th Climate, and therefore
not alike fruitful in all places, being destitute of water, having but few
Rivers, and not many Lakes, and therefore not well inhabited, and yet is said
to be furnished with all necessaries, both for life and pleasure. The people
were anciently given to Wars, but most to Bows, Darts, and slinging. And they
(as well as most others) were at first Pagans, being chiefly directed therein
by their Magi, or Priests, men of severe lives, forbidding outward Ornaments,
making Herbs their food, and the ground their bed, and spending their whole
time in pretended Devotion, or else in Divination, foretelling things to come:
from whence the Name of Magicians are derived to us.

The Gospel is said to be first preached here by St. Thomas; but there are now
many Nestorians, and Armenians. And the Jews, who are dispersed up and down,
have Synagogues allowed them. But the Religion authorized, is that of Mahomet:
From hence are brought the Bezar, and other precious Stones, Oriental Pearls,
much silk-work, and some goodly Horses.

12. Tartaria, is bounded on the East with the Straights of Anian, the East
Ocean, and some part of China; on the West with Russia, and some part of
Poland; on the South, with Persia and India; and on the North, with the Frozen
Ocean. It is a very vast Country, containing (as some say) 5400 miles from
East to West, and 3600 from North to South, and must needs differ much in the
soil, though all of it barren enough: In the most Northern part, they have day
for six months together, and night for six more.

The people generally are of a square stature, broad and gross faces,
hollow-eyed, thin beards, thick lips, flat noses, and swarfie of complexion;
occasioned not by the heat of the Sun, but by their own nastiness. They are
barbarous in all parts, but especially in those called Asiatica, and Antiqua,
patient in all extremities, both of cold and hunger, and eat Horses, and all
other Beasts, (except Hogs, howsoever they be slain, as says my Author) yea,
they eat their enemies, when they take them, first letting out their blood,
which they use as Wine in their Feasts, and think their Cham the only
considerable Prince, by whose mame they swear, as by their gods. These Chams,
for the most part, are very severe, punishing almost every small Fact with
sudden death, but Theft especially. Insomuch, that a man in Cambalu, taking a
pail of milk from a woman's head, and beginning to drink thereof, was (by her
Outcry) apprehended, and cut asunder with a sword: so that the milk and blood
came out together (as my Author relates): Adultery also, and Lying, are
punished with death.

The women are suitable to the men, scorning or wanting Ornaments, to set them
out; or when they do, they seldom have better then Feathers, Copper, or such
like Trifles. For matter of Religion, it is hard to say, whether there be most
Pagans, or Mahometans: some parts being wholly of the one, some wholly of the
other, and some mixed of both: yet have not these so greatly prevailed, but that
there be some who go under the name of Christians, though much differing from
the Doctrine, which (some say) was first preached here by St. Andrew, and St.
Philip.

The Inhabitants also in some parts, are great Enchanters: and so abominable
sottish in others, that though they send for the Physician in time of sickness,
yet do they suffer the next Enchanter to apply some thing to help them, in
another part.

They had a Custom to present their Wives and Sisters, to the pleasures of such
as they entertained: from which, when they were restrained by Mongo Cham, they
petitioned for a restoration thereof, protesting that they could never thrive,
since that Custom was left off: which desire was at last granted, and is still
in use; and therefore we will leave them to be no better then Beasts.

13. China is bounded on the East, with the East Ocean, or Chinean Sea; on the
West and North with Tartaria, and on the South with India. It is a very rich
and fruitful Country, having in some places two, and in some three Harvests in
a year, of all manner of Grain: being also stored with the best kind of Fruits,
which come to a more speedy maturity, then any of these Eastern parts. And
their Pearls are fairer, and of greater virtue, then those of America. The
people are of a swarfie Complexion; but more or less, according to their
nearness to the Sun. They love their bellies, eating three times a day, but not
immoderately. They drink the^ drink hot, and eat their meat with two small
sti^ks o^ Ivory, Ebony, or the like. Their Marriages they most commonly
celebrate at the New Mood, and many times put them off till March, when the
year begins with them, as it does with us. The Son is bound to follow his
Fathers Trade, which causes them to be excellent Artificers, and preventeth
the roving of idle people. In giving Alms, they are liberal to the lame and
maimed; but neglect the blind, as being able to get a livelihood.

The Art of Printing is more ancient with them, then in Europe; but they do not
print from the Left Hand to the Right (as we do) nor from the Right to the
Left, (as the Jews do) but from the top of the Leaf downwards.

The making of Guns also, is of more antiquity with them, then with us, and
they make Wagons that sail over the Land, as Ships over the Sea. They are wise
and politic, but extreme jealous of their Wives, not permitting them to go
abroad, nor sit at the Table, if any strangers be there, although the poor
Women be civil, and fearful of giving offense; and do paint more to keep
themselves in their Husbands affections, then out of wantonness: most of them
have very little feet; and to effect this, they bind them up hard from their
Infancy: in their Dress they are neat, and in Apparel costly.

In Religion, (if it deserve the name thereof) Gentiles; and they say there was
one Taine, who created Panzon, and Panzona, whose Posterity remained Ninety
Thousand years: but then for their wickedness being destroyed, Taine created
Lutizam, who had two Horns; from the Right, came Man; and from the Left, Woman:
and such notorious Idolaters are they, that they do not only worship the Sun,
Moon, and other Idols, but the very Devil, because he should do them no hurt:
yet do conceive, that the Soul dies not with the Body, but is capable of
punishment or reward, according to their works done in this life.

The whole Country is said to be divided into 15 Kingdoms, or Provinces; each
having a peculiar Prince, but all subject to their great King, who is able to
bring into the Field 300000 Foot, and 200000 Horse: it has many Cities well
peopled; but of the greatne's and goodness of the City Paquin (where the King
is resident) things are written almost incredible. Their chief Commodities are
Mines of Gold, Copper, Iron, Steel, precious Stones and Pearls. It is plentiful
in Wheat, Barley, Rice, Wool, Flax, Vines, Olives, Cotton, Sugar, Camphire,
Musk, Honey, Salt, Rhubard, Cattle, Fruit, and all kind of Spices.

14. India is bounded on the East, with the East Ocean, on the West with
Persia, on the South with the Indian Ocean, and on the North with Taertaria. It
has a fruitful soil, affording two Harvests in a year, and is abundantly
stored with Camels, Lions, Elephants, Oxen, Apes, Camelions, Gold, Silver, Silk
precious Jewels, and Pearls of great price, Medicinal Drugs and Perfumes, Hens,
Pheasants, and Partridges; nor is it wanting of Fish: so that we may call it a
Paradise. The People are of a swarfie Complexion, but strong, tall, ingenuous,
free from fraud, and punctual of their word: (and indeed they had need; for
they lend without Witness, or sealing of Bonds.) Their Women are not much
fairer then the men, and wear their hair long and loose, but covered with a
thin Vail: their Ears and Noses they hang with Rings and Jewels, according to
their Estates. Their men are allowed many Wives, which they buy of their
Parents for a yoke of Oxen. He that deprives another of any member, is not only
to be punished in the same, but his Hand is to be cut off. But if an Artificer,
or Tradesman be deprived of an Eye, or Hand; he that caused it is to die for
it. And of such esteem are the Tradesmen, that they are free from Tribute, and
have Corn allowed them by the King (which is no small encouragement to them.)
Their Food is Rice, Barley, Honey, Milk, and things without life: And though
there be many people who inhabit here, besides the Indians, (as Jews, Moors,
Portugese, and Tartarians) yet here (as in all other places) when we say the
people, we mean the Indians, because the other are described in their proper
places. St. Thomas is said to have preached the Gospel first here: but now
those who profess the same, are but few, if compared with the number of those
who retain the Customs of the Jews and Mahometans.

Of the Isles in the Indian Sea.
1. Japan, The Air is healthful, but the Soil mountainous and barren: The Rice
which is their principal food, they gather not till September, but their Wheat
is ripe in June. It wants neither Woods, nor Forests, wherein are the largest
Cedars that I read of, whose Bowels are said to be stored with diverse Metals,
and amongst the rest Gold, which is here in such plenty, that the Palace of
their King was covered therewith, in the time of Paulus Venetus. Their Fields
are stored with Cattle, and they have plenty of Turtles, Quails, Pigeons,
Wild-Ducks, and other Fowl.

The people are apt to learn, having good memories, are strong and vigrous of
body, and ambitious of glory. Their Complexion inclining to an Olive color.
They shave the one half of their Heads, and their Beards are thin. In
salutation, they put off their shoes, and at their Feasts wear black, but
their mourning is commonly white: so that we may say of them, as the Poet did
in another case.

The Motions of the World to day,
Are turned the quite contrary way.
In matters of Religion they are Gentiles, adoring formerly the Sun, Moon, etc.
But of late the Jesuits Christianity has got some footing.

2 The Islands of Philippi are not far from Japan; the Air of them all is
indifferent temperate in the Inland, but on the Seacoasts somewhat hot. Diverse
of them belong to the Spaniard, and are stored with Rice, Wax, Honey,
Cotton-wooll, Sugarcanes, Figs, Beasts, and Birds, both tame and wild, some
Mines of Gold, and other Metals, and many sorts of Fruits.

3 Not far from these (more South, for that way we steer our course) are
another parcel furnished with choice Fruits, and some of them rich in Gold, and
other conveniences.

4 Banda, though but small, is very famous: for only there, and in other small
Isles thereabout, grow all the Mace and Nutmegs, which are in good plenty, sent
over all the World. The Trees on which they grow, naturally yield them three
times a year Fruit, viz. in August, December, but the best and most in April.

5 The Moluccaes are known throughout the whole Universe, by reason of the
plenty of Cloves which grow no where else: They are six in number, and are
scant of Victuals; for there grows no Rice nor Grain: neither has it any
Flesh, but a few Goats and Hens; and therefore make their Bread of Trees and
Roots: and herein only are found the Birds of Paradise, which for strangeness
and fairness of Feathers, excel all the Birds in the World.

6 Caelibes, (which gives name to some other Islands) is large and rich, the
soil fertile, and the people tall and comely.

7 Gilolo is well stored with Hens, and has plenty of Rice. In it is a Tree
called by them Sagu; with the Pith whereof they make their Bread; and with the
sap, a Drink, which they use as Wine.

8 Amboyna produces great plenty of Rice, Citrons, Orenges, Lemmons,
Sugarcanes, and Cloves: It was first taken by the Portugals; but in the year
1605. re-taken by ^he Dutch, who did most wickedly torture and mur^er some of
our English in 1618. for this only reason, because they were loved of the
Inhabitants, and began to gain their Trade.

9 Massar, is well stored with Flesh, Salt, Fish, Rice, Cotton-Wooll, Sander, a
Medicinal Wood, and some Pearls.

10 Borneo is rich in Agarick (which is of good account in Physic) Camphire,
and some Mines of Adamants.

11 Java-Major, or, The Greater, yields good plenty of Rice, Corn, Fruit, Flesh
abundance of Silk, the best Brass, a great quantity of Cinnamon, Cinger, Pepper,
and other Spices; store of Fowl, both Tame and Wild: as also Gold, and some
precious Stones; but the Country is much exposed to florm and tempest. The
people are proud, treacherous, lying, and careless of their words, cruel and
hard to be pacified, if they be offended, being of a middle stature, broad
faces, and full bodied.

12 Java the Lesser, I have little certainty of it, and therefore shall pass
it by.

13 Sumatra, the Air is very hot and unwholsom, because of the gross Vapors
that arise from the Fens. Their only Grain is Rice, but it affords plenty of
Pepper, Camphire, Ginger, Agarick, Cassi^, Silks, Cottons, Honey, Wax, Mines of
Iron, Tin, Sulphur, Brimstone, and Go^d in such plenty, that some conceive this
Island to be Solomon's Ophir: The people are cunning Merchants, and good
Artificers.

14 Zeiland, or Ceylon, as it has many Hills and Valleys, watered with several
Rivers, so has it whole Woods of Cinnamon; besides, Lemmons, Orenges, Mettalls,
and Jewels: Also, Tame and Wild Beasts, and Fowl in great plenty. The people
are straight, and tall of body, naked from the middle upwards, good Artificers,
but are given to pleasure and bravery; and such is the weight of their Jewels,
that the holes in their Ears, are stretched near their shoulders. There are
diverse others which are small, and not much of account, that we must omit.

And as for knowledge of the principal Cities, and Rivers, which are herein, we
will send you to the Map of Africa.

A View of AFRICA (or, as we may call it, the hot World; for that the
Aequinoctiall Line, passes through it, well near in the midst).
AFRICA, is bounded on all sides with the Sea, except toward Asia, where it
bordereth on Arabia: (as appears in the Map): it is situated for the most part
between the two Tropicks of Cancer and Capricorn, in the Torrid or scorched
Zone: The Equator, or Aequinoctial, passing almost through the middle of it:
yet they were much mistaken, who thought it was not inhabited (because so
extreme hot); for it could not be long (after the Earth began to be
replenished) but some came into this part: And some are of opinion, that the
Sons of Cham possessed the Northern part presently after the confusion of
Babel. Neither could it hardly be otherwise, considering how nigh it is unto
that part, in which Adam was first placed, and to those so much mentioned in
Scripture. And in the time of Jacob, there was such store of provision, that it
supplied the wants of the Canaanites: as you may see Genesis 42. Yet we yield,
that in some places it is full of sandy Deserts; as you will better perceive in
the Description of the several Countries. The state of the Christian Religion
(in this part) is very weak, insomuch, that not only the North part of Africa,
near the Mediterranean, (even from Spain to Egypt) where once the Gospel so
exceedingly flourished, that 300 Bishops were at one time banished from thenc^,
by Guencericus, (King of the Vandals); is at present void of Christians,
(except some Towns belonging to the King of Spain) but even in this Country,
(near thrice as big as Europe) there is not one Region entirely Christians, but
the Kingdom of Abassia only: Nor one, where the Christians are mingled with
Mahometans, but only Egypt: neither any, where they are mingled with Idolaters,
but in Congo and Angola; and some few Towns on those Coasts, in the hands of
the Portugals. The people possessing (and dispersed in) this part, we may
reduce, 1. To Africans, properly so called. 2. Abissines. 3. Egyptians. 4.
Jews. 5. Arabians; and some European Christians, in Forts and Garrisons. From
hence are brought Dates, Balm, Ginger, Sugar, Myrrh, Aloes, Aneel, Ivory,
Ebony; also Madera, and Canary Wines.

Egypt is bounded on the East with Arabia, and some part of the Red Sea; on the
West, with Barbary; on the South, with Aeth^opia Superior: on the North, with
the Mediterranean Sea. Here is seldom Rain; which defect is supplied by the
overflowing of the River Nilus: so that (notwithstanding the Heat) it is very
fruitful in Wheat, Barley, Oats and Pulse. It abounds also in rich Pasture,
wherein are good store of sheep, Oxen, Horses, Camels, Goats and Mules, of a
bigger growth then ordinary. It produces good Wines, and choice Fruits, as
Pomgranates, Citrons, and diverse others, with some precious Stones. The chief
places of note are, Alexandria and Caire: the last was heretofore Memphis; some
say Babylon; whither the Virgin Mary fled, to escape Herod's cruelty intended
against Christ. The things that are strange and rare, which we shall speak of
here are only these: The Crocodile, a Creature of a strange nature, hatched of
an Egg about as big as a Turkies, but increases to the length of near 30
foot, his Tail as long as all his Body, with which he does enchant his prey,
and draw it into the water, used equally to both Elements, but can see best in
the water. The shape or picture whereof, you have over the Ti^le in the Map.
Another is the Isle and Tower of Pharos, situated opposite to Alexandria, and
about a mile distant from the Land, but joined to the Continent by Cleopatra:
for the Rhodians being then Lords of the Seas, used to exact some Tribute out
of every Island within the Seas, belonging to Egypt; and therefore sent to
Cleopatra, to demand the same: But she detained the Messengers 7 or 8 days,
(under pretense of making a Solemn Festival) and in the mean time, by making
huge Dams and Banks in the Sea, with incredible charge and speed, united the
Island to the shore, and sent the Rhodians away with this answer, That they
were to take toll of the Islands and not of the Continent; a work of great
rarity and bigness, taking up seven furlongs of ground. There is also a
Watchtower, called by the name of the Island, wonderful high, ascending by
degrees, having many Lanthorns on the top, wherein Lights burned nightly, as a
direction for Sailors, (the Seas upon those coasts being very unsafe) to guide
them over the Bar of Alexandria. About 5 miles distant from the City of
Caire, there is a certain place, in which on every Good Friday, yearly, appear
the Heads, Arms, and Legs of men rising out of the ground; which, if touched,
will shrink again into the Earth. This is affirmed by some, who (say they) have
been Eyewitnesses, and have touched some of the Rising-Members: which, if
true, is a Lecture of the certain Resurrection of the whole body, that once a
year is preached to these people. The Inhabitants are of a tawny complexion,
and wit^y; for to them we are indebted for the Invention of w^i^ing on Paper,
Physic, Arithmetic, Astronomy, and Astrology. But now they are greedy of
Profit, luxurious, crafty, cowardly, and were the first who were given to
Sorcery. Their Women are exceeding fruitful, some of them having 3 or 4
Children at a Birth. The Gospel was first preached here by S. Mark, (as is
granted by the best Historians) but by the coming in of the Saracens, (and
chiefly since the Turks Conquest) the Christians have much decayed; and those
that remain, are Jacobites: of whom you have something in our Description of
Asia.

Barbary is bounded on the East with Egypt, on the West with the Atlantic
Ocean; on the South with Mount Atlas, and on the North with the Mediterranean
Sea. It has many Hills well stored with Woods, an^ therefore here is no want
of Wild-Beasts; but they have scarce any Wheat, so that the people live on
Barley-bread: yet that part near Mount* Atlas, has many Rivers, (which arise
from the aforesaid Mountain) that do water it. And it is stored with Sugar,
Oil, Honey, some Mines of the best Gold, all sorts of Apples, Peaches,
Apricocks, Figs, Cherries, and Pears. And besides their beautiful Horses and
other Cattle, here are Leopards, Lions, Dragons, and Apes, in great plenty. The
people are inclining to blackness, covetous of honor, crafty, unfaithful, not
willing to take pains, studious in matters of their Law, and some of the
Liberal Sciences, exceeding jealous of their Wives, who have good features, and
comely bodies, which they apparel most bravely, thereby to make themselves more
lovely in their Husbands eyes. The Gospel was first preached here by Eutychus,
one of the 70 Disciples in Africa propria, and in other parts by others. But
now Mahometism is wholly embraced, so that there are no Christians, except in
some few Towns possessed by the Spaniards and Portugals. This Country contains
these 4 Kingdoms, 1. Morocco. 2. Fez. 3. Tremesin, or Algiers. And 4. Tunis.
The first of which has a Church in the chief Town thereof, a mile and half in
compa^s, and a Tower so high, that (as some affirm) you may discern from the
top of it, the Hills of Azasi. And here is also a Castle of great Fame, for the
Globes of pure Gold that stand on the top of it, which are reported to weigh
130000 Barbary Ducats, if my Author be not mistaken.

The Istes of Barbary in the Mediterranean Sea.
1. Zerby is something Hilly in the middle, but indifferent fruitful, affording
Dates, Olives, and the like.

2. Chercheny, formerly so fruitful, that it was able to supply the wants of
Caesar and his Army, when he was wearied in Africa.

3. Pantalaria, whose Soil is not fit for Corn, because both mountainous and
stony; yet well stored with Cotton, Figs, and Oxen without Horns.

4. Malta, anciently Melita, as appears Act. 28. 1. (for it was the place where
St. Paul, and those that were with him in the shipwreck, got to Land:) It
affords good store of Cotton, Citrons, Melons, Pomgranates, and such kind of
Fruits. Their Religion is that of the Church of Rome.

Numidia is bounded on the East with Egypt, on the West with the Atlantic
Ocean, on the South with Lybia, and on the North with Mount Atlas, which parts
it from Barbary. It contains these 10 Provinces; namely, 1. Fessen. 2.
Tebelbeti. 3. Zeb. 4. Segelmesse. 5. Talset. 6. Bileduldgerid. 7. Tegoida. 8.
Pes^ara. 9. Fighid. 10. Dara.

The people are Thieves and Murderers, except the Arabians, who are in most
parts mingled amongst them; those character you have in Asia, it being their
proper place: and therefore we speak here only of the Natural Numidians, whose
food commonly is Dates, Barley, and (^ome say) Carrion. Their Garments are very
short, and the richer sort are distinguished with a blew Jacket of Cotton. They
ride on Camels, without Saddles or stirrups, a Leather being only put through a
hole, that is made in the Nose of the Beast. The Air is said to be so sound,
that it cures the French Pox ^peedily, without the help of Physic. In matters
of Religion, they are Mahometans.

Lybia Desert, is bounded on the East with the River Nilus, on the West with
the Atlantic, on the South with the Land of Negroes; and on the North with
Numidia. It is divided into five Provinces, or great Deserts: (to which the
rest of less nore are to be referred) namely, 1 Bordea, 2 Lembta, 3 Zuenzigae,
4 Targa. And 5 Zanhaga. This Country is by some counted a part of Numidiae,
and indeed, the people are as bad, or rather worse then they. It is a dry and
sandy Country; for in some parts, it affords not water to a Traveller in seven
days journey; and therefore the Merchants are fain to carry water with them on
Camels backs; and if that fail, they kill the Beasts, and squeese water out of
their guts. The water which the Country affords, is drawn out of Pits, (and is
exceeding brackish) and those Pits are sometimes so covered with Sand, that men
die with thirst. And therefore the Land is not much inhabited, so that it is
fitly called Desert.

Terra Nigritarum, or the Land of Negroes, is bounded on the East with Nilus,
which divides it from Ethiopia Superior, on the West with the Atlantic Ocean,
on the South with the Ethiopick Ocean, and some part of Ethiopia Inferior; and
on the North with Lybia.

It contains 25 several Kingdoms; namely, 1 Guinea, 2 Benin, 3 Guangara, 4 Ora
Enterosa, 5 Gualata, 6 Gialosofi, 7 Gubar, 8 Ghenehoa, 9 Melli, 10 Sanaga, 11
Casena, 12 Cano, 13 Agadez, 14 Gambra, 15 Tombu^um, 16 Bornum, 17 Gaoga, 18
Nubia. (The rest of less note, besides those in Guinea* are) 19 Temiano, 20
Zegzeg, 21 Bico, 22 Zanfara, 23 Medra, 24 Gothan, And 25 Daum.

The whole Country is very hot, because situated in the hot of scorched Zone,
but is indifferently well inhabited, and very fruitful, especially where the
River Niger overflowes, enriched with Mines of Gold and Silver; and on the
further side of the River Senega, well stored with Corn, Cattle, and Woods,
wherein are Lions* Elephants, and other Wild-Beasts.

The people are Cele-black, except those in the South part, and use to paint
the Devil white, thereby declaring their love to their own Complexion. They are
destitute of Arts and Sciences, and most abominably prone to luxury. The
greater part are Idolaters, mixed with some Mahometans: (which I cannot say are
much better) only there are a few Christians in those Garrisons, that belong to
the Portugals: And as the people differ in Religion, (if I may so call it) so
do they in their Language, as well they may in so great a compass of ground,
wherein are so many Kingdoms and Provinces. The River of Niger spoken of
before, is found to have its Rise from a great Lake, some two degrees from the
Equinoctial, or Line of the Sun: whence running forward, for a good space, he
hides himself under ground for about 60 miles together: then rising up again,
makes a Lake called Borneo (as you may see in the Map) and then bends his
course directly toward the West, taking in many lesser Channels, or Rivers;
and at last falls into the Sea. Of a much like length, and of the same
wonderful nature, as the River Nilus: for from the 15 of June, it over-flowes
all the adjoining fields, for the space of 40 days; and in so many more
recollecteth his Waters into their proper Channels. The whole Country is
indebted to these inundations for its fruitfulness, which otherwise would be
but little: for the dryness of the Soil can afford no Exhalations, whereby
Clouds may be generated, and the Earth refreshed with moistures, or enlivened
and revived with Dews. The chief Commodities are Sanders, Civet, Ivory, Sugar,
Mines of Gold, and other Metals.

Aethiopia-Superior, or The Higher, otherwise called Abissines, is bounded on
the East with the Red Sea, and the Sea called Barbar^^^; on the West with the
River Nilus, which parts it from the Land of Negroes; on the South with the
Mountains of the Moon; and on the North with some part of Egypt. It is situated
on both sides the Equator, and is governed by one of the greatest Emperors in
the World, who is (by us) called Prester John. His Court remains not long in
one place; for (some say) it consists of 6000 Tents only, which encompass 12 or
13 miles. He is said, by some, to have 70 Kings under him, who have their
several Laws, and Customs. But Historians do much differ herein, so as I am not
satisfied. The chief Kingdoms are, 1 Dangali, 2 Dobas, 3 Adel, 4 Tigremnon, 5
Barnagasso, 6 Guagere, 7 Bagamedrum, 8 Damut, 9 Amara, 10 Angote, 11 Goiamy, 12
Adea, 13 Fatigar. 14 Xoa. And 15 Barus. There are many others in the Imperial
style, but of little note, and therefore we shall forbear to name them.

The Title which the chief Ruler, or Emperor claims, and takes to himself,
(because both strange and arrogant) I will here set down.

N. N. Supreme of his Kingdoms, and the Beloved of God, the Pillar of Faith,
sprung from the Stock of Judah, the son of David, the son of Solomon, the son
of the Column of Sion, the son of the Seed of Jacob, the son of the Hand of
Mary; the son of Nahu after the Flesh, the son of St. Peter, and St. Paul,
after the Spirit; Emperor of the Higher and Lower Ethiopia; of the most mighty
Kingdoms, Dominions, and Countries of Xoa, Goa, Caffares, Adea, Vangne,
Balignazo, etc. and Lord of all the Regions, to the Confines of Egypt.

The Air of this Country is very hot, and the ground so parcht, that the
people are said to roast their meat in the Sun: And therefore (...) populous,
except in the Northern part, and Seacoasts: they have not much Wheat, but
plenty of Rice, Barley, Pease, Sugar, Orenges, Lemmons, Citrons, Honey,
Minerals of all sorts, and many Herds of Cattle; as Oxen, Sheep, and Goats. It
is a good Country for increase, were not the Inhabitants idle, for they have
plenty of Vines, but make little Wine, Flax, but make no Cloth; and Woods full
of Venison, which they trouble not themselves to catch; being destitute of
Learning, and very base in Religion: for though there be some Christians, which
are said to be first planted by St. Philip, (who baptized the Eunuch of Queen
Candace) yet now they much differ from their ancient purity. They circumcise
both Sexes, and after baptize them, and keep the Saturday for Jewish Sabbath,
equal with the Lords Day. They baptize themselves every Epiphany Day, in Lakes
and Ponds, because they say, that Christ was that day baptized of John in
Jordan.

Aethiopia Inferior, or Lower, is on all sides begirt on the Sea, except
toward the North, and there it is separated from the Abissines, or Aethiopia
Superior, by the Mountains of the Moon. It is so called, because o^ its lower
situation; and is governed by five chief Rulers, or Kings, each having a
several Province belonging to him.

As first, Monomotapa, whose Air is temperate, and Soil good; and though it be
full of Forests, yet are they well watered with Rivers, that carry Gold in
their Sands. It has also good store of Corn, and Pasture, wherein are many
Herds of very large Cattle, and such plenty of Elephants, that they are said
to kill 5000 yearly, for their Teeth: and herein are (reported to be) 3000
Mines of Gold. The people are black of Complexion, courageous; strong, active,
and so extreme swift of foot, that (some say) they will outrun Horses. They
may have as many Wives as they please; but the first is chief, and her Children
only are Heirs. In punishing offenders, they use no Prisons, but execute them
as soon as apprehended: and they use most severity to Witchcraft, Theft, and
Adutery.

2 Manicongo, the Air is so temperate in Winter, that they neither change their
Garments, nor make more fire than at other times. The Day and Night, for the
greatest part of the year, little differ. The Soil is very fruitful, and does
not only produce Fruits, Plants, and Herbs; but has good Pasture also, in
which are bred many Herds of Cattle, large Flocks of Sheep, Stags, Goats,
Conies, Hares, and Elephants so large, that their Teeth weigh 200 pounds; and
Serpents of that bigness, that they eat a whole Deer at once. Here are Fowl
also in great plenty, both Tame and Wild. The people are said to have Shambles
of man's flesh, as we have for meat; and they kill their Children in the birth,
to avoid the trouble of breeding them; preserving their Nation with stolen
brats from the adjacent Countries.

4 Zanguebar is low and Fenny, and much overflown with unruly Rivers, and so
full of Forests and Woods, that for want of Air it is very pestilent. The
people are black of Complexion and very much given to South-saying; indeed
Witchcraft.

4 Cafraia (so much of it as is discovered) is said to be plentifully stored
with Herds of Cattle, Flocks of Sheep great store of Foxes, Deers, Pheasants,
Partridges, Geese, Ducks, and other Beasts and Fowl: Also the Hills are as it
were mingled with grassie Valleys, stored with Forests and Woods: and, in
brief, all things necessary for the use of man, were it better stored with
Corn. And pity it is, that the people of so good a Country, should be so base
and brutish, that men can hardly say, whether the people generally may be
thought to be men in the Skins of Beasts, or Beasts in the shapeand likeness of
men.

In this Country stands the Cape of Good-Hope, about which the Sea is always
dangerous: it has been so, especially to the Spaniard, in omuch that one was
angry with God, that he suffered the English Heretics (as he called them) to
pass it so easily, and not to give them the like speed.

5 Ainan, which affords plenty of Honey, Wax, Fish, Ivory, Gold, Iron, and very
large Sheep.

In Religion, they are Heathens in all the aforesaid Kingdoms; only some
Mahometans on the Seacoasts.

Of the Islands belonging to Africa.
1 Zocotora (at the mouth of the Red Sea, lies open to the sharp Winds, and is
therefore extreme dry and barren; yet affords some good Pasture for the breed
of Cattle; as also Dates, and some kind of Fruits, liberally furnished with
Medicinal Drugs, and the best Aloes, etc.

The people are rude and barbarous; and though their Hair be long, yet their
Clothing is hardly enough to cover their nakedness. The Women govern all the
Affairs within and without: their Bread for the most part is made of Dates, the
rest of their Food is milk and butter. The people are accounted Christians, and
Jacobites in Sect, adoring the Cross most superstitiously, and give themselves
much to Enchantments.

2 Madagascar, or St. Laurence, is rich, and plentifully stored with almost all
Commodities that man can use; as Rice, Sugar, Honey, Goats, Deer, Elephants,
and other Creatures, both Tame and Wild, in great plenty: Also, Beeves and
Muttons, both large and good are here in such abundance, that they sell them
for very trifles. Here is also Wax, Cotton. Ginger, Saffron, Cloves, Amber,
some Mines of Gold, Silver Copper, and Iron. And here grows ^ Tree, which
bears that Fruit called Caeos, a kind of Date, as big as a Cabbage; wherein is
a pint of Liquor, which tastes like Wine and Sugar, and the Kernel is sufficient
to satisfy two men. It affords not only meat, but clothing, furniture for
their Houses, Tackling for Ships, Timber for Building, and Fuel for the Fire.
The people (for the most part) are black, ignorant, and treacherous; Idolaters
in the midland parts, and Mahometans upon the Seacoasts.

3 Mohelia, the people are black, large, strong and courageous: they pink their
Arms and Faces in several shapes, and use no other Apparel, but their Natural
Garments, except some Plantain Leaves to hide their shame. They are Mahometans.

4 Mauritius, or De Cirne, is well stored with Beeves, Goats, Hogs, most sorts
of Fish* dainty Fruits, and plenty of Ebony, of all colors; yet not inhabited.

5 St. Hellen is very high and hilly, stored with Hogs, Goats, Hens, Orenges,
Lemmons, Figs, and the like.

6 St. Thomas is situated directly under the Equator, inhabited by the Negroes,
and Portugals. The Air agrees so well with the former, that they generally live
to 100 years of Age, but few of the Portugals to 50. It is destitute of Wheat,
but abounds with Sugar: In the midst hereof stands a Woody Mountain,
over-shadowed continually with Clouds, which moysten the Trees that grow here
in good plenty; from whence falls a great quantity of water, which does refresh
their Fields and Sugarcanes, notwithstanding the extreme heat of the Air.
Their Religion is the Christian.

7 Princes Island, so called, because the Revenues thereof belonged to the
Prince of Portugal.

8 The Isles of Gorgades, or Cape Verde; the chief now inhabited, are

1 St. Jago, though it be mountainous and rocky, yet is full of pleasant
Valleys, and well inhabited. 2 Demay has a Lake, whose Water is medicinable. 3
Del Fuego, so called from the Flakes of Fire, which it usually sends forth. The
rest we forbear to name.
9 The Hesperides, which are often mentioned by the ancient Poets, in the Fable
of Atlas his Daughters. It was supposed to be the Seat of their blessed, which
they called the Elisian Fields: and indeed it is a happy Soil, the Weather
always fair, the Season also temperate, and the Air never extreme.

10 The Canaries and they are 7.

1. Canary is plentiful in Barley, Sugarcanes, Honey, Wax, Kine, Camels,
Goats, Woad for Dyers, and Canary Wine, which at first was accounted good for
cold stomachs, but is now brought in such abundance (to supply Luxury) that (as
it is reported) there are 3000 Tuns vended yearly into England and Holland.

2 Teneriffa has a Mountain in it, which (as some affirm) may be seen 80
Leagues, or more, at Sea, in a clear day. This Island is as fruitful as Canary;
but has no Water but from a Cloud, which at Noon dissolves, and is conveyed
into several parts.

3 Gomera, though formerly most barbarous, yet is now as well manured as the
rest.

4 Ferra, has no fresh water, but what they preserve in showers, both for
themselves and Beasts; but a happiness it is, if they have them often.

5 Palma is well stored with Cattle, Cheese, Sugar, and Wine; and is the place
where our Ships touch to refresh themselves, in their Voyage toward America.

6 Forte Ventura, which is of the same nature with the rest.

7 Lancerote, whose Inhabitants were the first that were made subject to the
Spaniards, and were then so rude and ignorant, that they did account it the
greatest work that could be put upon them, to kill a Beast; and did therefore
impose it on condemned persons and prisoners. But now they are most Christians
of the Church of Rome, and their Seat of Justice, is in that Isle called
Canary. There are some others, but of little account, and therefore I omit them.

And as for the knowledge of the Cities of most note, that are within this
part, we shall refer you to the Map of Africa.

A View of AMERICA, (or, as we may call it, The New World; for that it was last
discovered.)
AMERICA, or, The New World (so called, because it was last discovered, and
from its bigness) Christopher Columbus was the first that opened a gap into it.
Next to him, Americus Vesputius, who gave it that name. Ferdinando Magellanicus
first attempted, and found out the compass of the South Sea Limits which
bears his Name. Our own Heroicks, Sir Francis Drake, and Noble Candish
followed, and added to what was done by them: Davis and Forbisher, two
Englishmen, went fair for a Passage round, and have left their Names behind
them, in the North part thereof, as is expressed in the Map. This New World, or
America, has many Mines, in some whereof (as it is reported) they hardly find
so much Earth, as Gold, which they exchange for Axes, Hammers, Knives, and such
like Tools: for want of which, they (formerly) made their Boats, or Canoes,
with the force of fire. There are such multitudes of Bulls and Kine, that the
Spaniards kill thousands yearly, only for their Tallow and Hides: It is also
very plentiful in Spices and Fruits, and diverse strange Beasts and Birds, which
other parts are ignorant of: as Deer without Horns; a kind of Hare resembling a
Cat in its Tail, a Wont in its feet, and under his Chin is a little bag, which
Nature has taught him to make a Storehouse: for having filled his belly, he
reserveth the rest therein: And here is a Bird so big, that it will seize on a
Calf, or Sheep, and devour it. Here is another also as little, called Tomineo,
of all colors, yet hardly bigger then a Butter-fly, and is as sweet as the
Nightingale in note.

The People are indifferent fair, (though a good part of it lies in the same
Parallel, as the Land of Negroes: so that it appears, that the heat of the Sun
is not the sole and only cause of blackness) and it is most probable, that
these people came first out of Tartary, (not only by reason of their rude and
barbarous manners, but also) because America is parted from thence by a very
small straight; as appears in the Map, to which I refer you. But from
whomsoever these People descended, they have surely been here many Ages, which
clearly appears, because no part was found without Inhabitants, by any of the
first Discoverers; though now much diminished by the cruelty of the Spaniards,
who killed them like Beasts, not suffering them to enjoy their Natural
Birthright, though there was Land and Riches enough, both for the one and the
other.

But in our Description of this Western Hemisphere, we shall speak to it, as it
is now known and discovered in the several Countries, and then of Its Islands.
And this we would have you note, that when we say the People, you are to
understand the old and Natural Inhabitants, except we express the contrary. We
will begin in the North part, because that is the upper part of our Map, and
the Cardinal, or chief Point, of the Wind or Compass.

As for the furthest North of all, we can say little, only that some small
Discoveries have been made by our English to several parts: as appears by the
several Names given thereto; as New-North Wales, New-South-Wales, New-Brittain,
Buttons-Bay, Hudsons Straights, and the like, which you may see in the Map.

Estotiland is but little known; and therefore this is all that we can say of
it, That it is very cold, yet is said to have diverse Metals and Fruits,
necessary for the life of the People, whose Clothing is the Skins of Beasts,
and Sea-Calves; Laborers Land is like to it, and they are accounted both as
one.

Terra-corterealis was first discovered by Sebastian Cabot, Anno 1499. (at the
charge of Hen. 7th) who found good store of great Stags, White Bears, and
abundance of Cod-fish: but returning home, (there being preparation for a War
with Scotland,) nothing was done in further Discovery.

Canada, on the North of New-France, all we can say of it, is, that the French
have taken some possession hereof, and that it affords good store of
Wild-Beasts and Fish.

New-France has plenty of Stags; Hares, Conies, Bears, Foxes, and Fish. The
people are rude, Idolaters, and are allowed two or three Wives apiece. The
Women labor more then the men, both in digging the ground, and in Fishing; and
are so constant, that they will not marry after the death of their Husbands.

New Scotland, containing that part to New-France, which was by King James
called Cady, in his Grant to Sir William Alexander, 1621. But he, for want of
means, sold it to the French.

Norumbega, the soil is fruitful, and the Air of an indifferent temper: the men
are given much to Hunting, and the women love their Husbands well: for until
the death of their Husbands be revenged, (if at any time they be killed) they
will neither eat flesh, nor marry.

New England, (now come we to have the Countries better distinguished, that
they may be discerned in the Map, for thereunto we refer you) has on the
South-West New-Netherland, on the North-East Norumbega: The rest, either
borders on the Sea, or is not well discovered. The Air is much like to that of
England, and the soil fruitful, in the Natural Commodities; as also in those
that were carried from England. It affords great store of Wood, Deer, Fruit,
Swans, Ducks, Geese, Partridge, Pigeons, and the like. But the chief
Commodities are Amber, rich Furs, Iron, Pitch, etc.

New-Netherland has on the South-West Virginia, and on the North-East
New England. The Air is good, and the soil fruitful, abounding with Nuts and
Wild-Grapes, and is within the Hollanders jurisdiction. Their Woods are stored
with Deer, their Plains with Fowl, and their Rivers with Fish. They have also
Grain, Hemp, and Flax, in good plenty. The people are fickle, yet true to them
that trust them; and did use Bows and Arrows, until the Dutch furnished them
with Arms, and showed them how to use them; but they were the first that felt
the smart. Their Religion is gross Idolatry, for they worship the Devil, by the
name of Meneto.

Virginia is bounded on the South-West with Florida, on the North-East with
New-Netherland: The Country is mixed with Hills and Valleys, affording not
only Woods, Fruits and Corn; but plenty of Cattle, Fowl, Fish, Turpentine,
Pitch, Gums, Alum, and some Mines of Copper and Iron.

The People are crafty and inconstant, for the most part full limbed and tall,
wearing an Apron, and a loose Garment, and paint their bodies with horrid
shapes of Serpents, and other Creatures. They worship whatsoever is like to
hurt them; as Water, Thunder, Fire, and the like.

Florida is bounded on the East with the Sea, called Mare Del Nort; on the West
with some part of New-Spain, and some Countries not yet well known: On the
South, the Gulf of Mexico; and on the North, East-Virginia: It was first
discovered by Cabot, an Englishman, in the year 1497. though better searched
into, by John de Ponce, a Spaniard Anno 1527.

The People are of a big stature, and go naked, except their secret parts,
which they cover with some skins. They have many Hermaphrodites, which they put
to all kind of drudgery. And herein are diverse sorts of Woods; as Bay-Trees,
Cypress, Cedars, Oaks, and the like. Also wild and tame Beasts; with several
sorts of Fruits, and some Mines of Gold and Silver.

New-Albion lies on the West of California, and was first discovered by Sir
Francis Drake, who gave it that name in honor of England, which was once
called Albion: But because it lies at such a distance from thence, (that
little or no benefit could be returned), it has been neglected. Beyond it,
lies the Kingdom of Quivira, and Anian: The last so called from the straights
of Anian, which parts America from Asia.

New-Spain is bounded on the East with the Gulf of Mexico, on the West with the
Gulf of California, and part of Mare Del Zur; on the South with Mary Del Zur,
on the South-East with Guatimalia, and the North not yet discovered. The Air is
very hot, but much qua^ified by the cooling-Winds which come from the Sea,
almost on three sides. The people are more ingenuous, then the rest of the
savadges, curious in painting upon Cotton what is presented to their Eyes:
Neither are any more expert in refining Metals, or making of their
Feather-Pictures, at which they will sit a whole day touching and trying, how
they may best fit each Feather to the place assigned. The Country affords
plenty of Citrons, Pomgranates, Cherries, and other European Fruits; many
Silver and Brass Mines, but few of Gold or Iron, all of them mixed with Lead;
good plenty of Beasts and Birds, both tame and wild: also Fish, and Bees
without flings, breed here in abundance. But there is a kind of Fly, or Gnat,
which does offend the Inhabitants. Herein also is a Tree which is planted, and
dressed as a Vine, which is reported to have 40 several sorts or kinds of Leaves,
fit for diverse uses: for they make of them Mantles, Shoes, Paper, and many
other things. From the top comes a juice like Sirrup; which if purified,
becomes Sugar; if boiled, Honey. And there is a Mountain called Propocampeth,
in the Province of Mexico, which sends out streams of fire like Mount Aetna in
Sicilia, and another in the Province of Guatimalia, which casts forth two
streams of fire: the one of black Pitch, and the other of red.

Guatimalia is bounded on the South with Castella del Oro, or Golden Castle; on
the North-West with New-Spain; and the rest with the Sea, as appears in the
Map. It is divided into these six Provinces.

1. Guatimalia, specially so called, is mountainous, but wants not Rivers; by
reason whereof, it has not only good plenty of Fish, but much good Pasture,
well stored with Cattle; nor is it barren in Maize, Wheat, and other Provision;
plenty of Cotton-Wooll, many Apothecaries Drugs, some Balsoms, and good
Sulphur.

2. Hundura is full of Hills and Valleys, fruitful in Maize and Wheat; but not
much Campaign: very rich in Pastures, by reason of the overflowing of their
Rivers. The people are so idle, that they had rather feed on Roots, then labor
to till the ground.

3 Chiapa is not very fit for most kind of Fruits, nor Corn; the Trees are
bigger then in other places, as Cypress, Cedars, Pines, and Oaks, and whole
Woods of Walnuts; but they not so big as in Europe. The Country is full of
venomous Creatures; of which the Snakes are none of the least for offense nor
greatness, some of them being reported to be twenty foot in length. Many of
their Trees do not only afford Rozen, and some precious Gums; but also some,
whose leaves being dried to a Powder, make a good Plaster for exulcerating
Sores. There is likewise a Spring in the Cantred of Tafixa, which in Winter is
dry, and in Summer full of water.

4. Verapaz is full of Hills and Valleys, most overgrown with thick and large
Woods, which so hinder the Wind, that they have Rain for near nine months in
the year: by reason whereof, their Fruits are much annoyed with a kind of
Gnats; but they have good store of Fish, and some of the Trees drop Amber:
some, Mastick: and others, Gums. They have also many Medicinal Woods.

5 Veragua is neither fit for Pasture, nor Tillage, because both barren and
mountainous, yet yields Maize and Herbs; but the want of other necessaries
is supplied with Aurum Potabile, Silver, and such never fading Mines of Gold,
that the Spaniards think themselves able to cure all Diseases, and supply all
wants.

6 Incargua is well stored with Cattle and Trees, though little Corn, and but
few Rivers: the want whereof is supplied by a great Lake, called Nicaragua,
(which ebbs and flows as the Sea) wherein are good store of Fish, and many
Crocodiles: it is said to have as many Parrots, as England has Crows: also
plenty of Sugarcanes, and Cotton-Wooll.

Castella del oro, or Golden Castle, is bounded on the East with the Gulf of
Venezala, and some part of Paria; on the West, with some part of Guatimalia,
and Mare Del Zur: on the South with New-Granada: and on the North with Mare.
Del Nort: It is divided into these five parts.

1 New-Andalusia is mountainous, and full of Woods; wherein are good store of
Gums, Rozen, and some kind of Balsoms: The soil is very moist, through the
abundance of Rain which falls thereon, so as few of our European Fruits come to
good.

2 Martha is so mountainous and barren, that it is not fit for Pasture or
Tillage; yet does it produce Pomgranates, Lemmons, and other Fruits, that are
brought out of Spain. The Air on the Seacoast is sealding hot, but in the
midland parts cold, because some Mountains are always covered with Snow: some
of which the Mariners discern 30 Leagues at Sea: and by reason of these Hills,
the Inhabitants do pretty well preserve their liberty, in despite of the
Spaniards.

3 Panama lies in the narrowest part of the Isthmus, or Straights, which join
both the Peninsulaes together. The Air hereof is very hot and foggy; but
especially from May to November: (and therefore not healthful.) The soil is
either mountainous and barren, or low and miry, unfit for grain, so as it
yields nothing but Maize, (and but little of that); but it is better for
Pasture.

4 Darien, the Air is good, and the soil so fruitful, in the increase of
Melons, and other Fruits, that they are ripe within 20 days after they are
sown; and here are Fowl and Beasts in great plenty: the like not heard of in
other parts.

5 De la Hatha has very good Salt, diverse Mines of Gold, some gems of much
value: And the Soil is fruitful in such Plants as are brought from Spain.

Paria is bounded on the East with Guiana, on the West with the Gulf of
Venezala: on the South it is not discovered, and on the North it has Mare Del
Nort: It is divided into these two parts.

1. Cumana (so far as it is discovered) is neither pleasant nor rich, covered
with Bushes and Briers, but is in esteem for an excellent Salt that is found
near the Bay of Carico, in great abundance. The people are treacherous,
high-minded, and revengeful, accustomed to use poisoned Arrows, which they
venom with Snakes blood, and other mixtures. They have many Wives, which they
prostitute to the Piacos, or Priest, for the first nights lodging. They also
put strange colors on their bodies instead of garments; and like black Teeth
so well, that they take great pains to make them so. And are singular from
others, not only in fencing their Ground or Orchard with a Cotton-thread as
high as the middle, with an Opinion, that whosoever goes under, over, or breaks
it, shall die immediately; but also in feeding on Spiders, Horse-Leeches,
Worms, Grasshoppers, and the like.

2. Venezala, is so plentiful of Grain, Cattle, and Fruits, that it does not
only supply themselves, but spares the Neighboring Nations, such store of
wheat, Meal, Swines flesh, Fish, Oxen, Hides, and Cotton-Cloth, that it is
called a Granary.

The Women are trained up to leap, ride, run, and swim, as we^l as the men; and
do not only look to the hou^e, but till the Land, whilst the men fish and
hunt.

Guiana is bounded on the East with some part of the Atlantic Ocean, and
Brasile; on the West with part of Par^a, and some undiscovered Countries, which
lie b^tween it and ^eru; on the South with a good part of the River Amazons,
and on the North with some part of the River Oronoque, and Mare Del Nort, or
the Atlantic Ocean.

The People are without any settled Government, though they acknowledge some
Superiority in the chief parts. The Richest, who have two or three Wives a
piece; and the poorer, who have but one, are alike jealous, and if they take
them in Adultery, they beat out their brains without more ado. Their Wives (but
especially the eldest) they use as servants: and solemnize their Funerals with
a strange Feast; for the men drink and sing, and the Women houl. Their Accounts
and Reckonings they keep by a bundle of sticks, which they either increase or
diminish, as they have occasion. The Country is divided into these three parts:

1. Guiana (specially so called) is so fruitful, that on the shrubs grow plenty
of Cotton, Sugarcanes, without planting, and Tobacco to nine handfuls long.
Their Fields are well stored with Beasts, which they call Moyres, (in use and
shape resembling Kine, but without horns) their Woods with Venison, and their
Rivers with Fish. They make their Bread and Drink of a Plant called Cassavi;
and a great part of their Food is Fish, which they intoxicate with a
strong-scented Wood, and so take them up, while they are floating on the top of
the Water.

2. Oronoque is very rich and pleasant, consisting of large Plains, adorned
with unknown Plants and Flowers, and sometimes Hills intermingled, which are
(reported to be) furnished with Mines of Silver and Gold, the Forests with
Beasts and Fowl, and the Rivers with Fish: so that no Country in all America,
can compare with this for abundance of Riches.

3. Rio de las Amazones, or the River of Amazons, though in some places it be
dry, and barren; yet in others, very fruitful, and full of large Woods: wherein
are most sorts of Trees, which are found in America: Amongst the rest, here is
one peculiar to this place, which they call Too-ock, of a very large Bulk, and
the Fruit as big as a man's head; so that when it is ripe, the people dare not
go into the Woods without some strong shelter, for fear it should beat out
their brains.

New-Granada is bounded on the East with Guiana, on the West with Mare Del Zur;
on the South the Countries not yet discovered, and on the North with Castella
Del Oro. It is generally full of Woods, and has good Pasture in some parts;
wherein are many Cattle, some Corn, Mines of Gold, and other Metals, but not
so good. And here grows the Wood Guatican, good for the French Pox.

The Air hereof is much alike, both in Winter and Summer, the People tall and
strong of body, and given much to dancing and singing.

Peru is bounded on the East, with a great ridge of Mountains called Andes, on
the West with Mare Del Zur, on the South with Chile, and on the North with some
part of New-Granada. It affords very little Maize or Wheat, so that the
Inhabitants live most on Roots, yet they have store of a kind of sheep, (which
they call Pacos) as big as a small breed of Horses, but in taste as pleasant as
our English Mutton, and not inferior for nourishment; nor are they only of
good use for their fleece and flesh, but also to carry burdens; and so well
they know their own strength, that if they are overladen, no blows will make
them go, till their burden be lightened. Herein are also a multitude of Beasls,
like wild Goats. And though the great Riches of this Country be in the
never-fading Mines of Gold and Silver, yet Tobacco is no small profit to the
Spaniard. The people are ignorant of Letters, but well skild in such Weapons as
they had been used to. Of good courage in War, and fearless of death, prompt
thereto by an old conceit, that in the other World they shall eat, drink, and
love Women: And therefore diverse times at the Burials of great persons (who
were attended on in this life) they use to kill and bury one or more of his
servants with him, to wait upon him in the other World. This Country is of a
vast length, but the breadth not answerable.

Chile is bounded on the East with some unknown Countries; on the West with the
Pacifick Sea, or Mare del Zur; on the South with the Straights of Magellanica;
and on the North with that part of Peru, called the Desert of Alacama.

It lies almost wholly between the Straights of Magellanica, and the Tropic
of Capricorn, and therefore in the South temperate-Zone: and yet (as some say)
extreme cold, insomuch that some are frozen to death, and hardened like Marble.
And though the Midland be mountainous and barren: yet toward the Sea it is
very fruitful in Maize and Wheat, and has very good Pasture, stored with
Cattle, plenty of Gold, Silver, and Honey. The people are of a large stature,
and white complexion.

The Straights of Magellan were so called from Magellanus, who first discovered
them: Their breadth is very unequal; for in some places, it is 5 or 10 miles
broad; in some 2 or 3, and in the narrowest but one. There are in all 3 several
Straights, which heretofore they were clear of. The first of which is most
dangerous, because it ebbeth and flows with violent swiftness. The second is
bad enough, though least dangerous. The third is said to be of that nature,
that let a man steer his course which way he will, the Wind will be still
against him. And therefore it is no marvel, that Magellanus, when he had past
them, and got into the main Ocean, called it the Pacifick, or Peaceable Sea.

Paraguay is bounded on the East with some part of the main Atlantic, on the
West with some unknown Countries, between it and Chile; on the South with part
of Chile, and the main Atlantic Ocean, and on the North with some part of
Brasile. So far as it is discovered, it is said to be very fruitful in Wheat,
and European Fruits: and the Cattle which are brought from Spain, increase much
there. It has some veins of Gold and Silver, Mines of Brass and Iron, Monkies
and Stags in abundance. I need not say that here are good store of Tigers,
Lions, and such like Creatures; a few of them being too many.

Brasile is bounded on the East with the Main Atlantic, on the West with some
unknown Countries, on the South with Paraguay, and on the North with some part
of Guiana, and the Atlantic Ocean. It is very fruitful in most places, were it
not for the abundance of rain which does often fall: yet Sugarcanes grow here
in great plenty, and a kind of Wheat which is always growing, and continually
ripe; for when some is ripe, others blossom. And here is a certain Plant called
Copiba, the virtue of which is known to the very Beasts: for if they are bit by
any venomous Creature, they resort to it for cure.

The people are the Monsters of Nature, being malicious and barbarous: for when
they get the body of a fat man, they (gather a company together, and) roast him,
making a jovial Banquet therewith. They are said to worship no God at all, but
adore the Rising-Sun, and believe the immortality of the Soul.

This Country is not divided into Provinces or Nations, as other places, but
into praefectures or Captainships (as the Portugals call them) of which there
are 13. But we may not speak particularly to them.

The Islands of America, in the Atlantic Ocean.
Newfound-land was discovered by John Cabot, 1497. who was employed by Hen.
7th. It is said to be indifferent well-peopled, and accordingly furnished with
other Necessaries, but Fish in abundance, of several sorts, and many safe and
commodious Havens.

Further toward the East by the Azores, or Acores, which are in number 9. Of
which that called Fayall, is of most note with us, for our Noble Sir Walter
Rauleights Victory over the Spaniard. And now come we back again toward
New-France, and there is Sablon, then St. Anna, and more toward Virginia, are
Bermudas, or the Summer-Islands: (so called from Sir George Summers, who first
discovered them:) which are very small, except that from which the rest take
their name. The Air is hot, but healthy: (as the English find who now possess
them.) And now we will go toward the Bay of Mexico, and take a view of some
few of those many, if not numberless, multitudes. And so come down by the
Antillas, or Camercane, commonly called the Caribian Islands.

1 Lucaia, 2 Bahama, 3 Abacoa, 4 Tiguasea, 5 Guateo, 6 Cuba; the biggest of all
the rest, abounding in Sugar, Ginger, Cinnamon, Cassia, Aloes, Mastick, Cattle,
Fowl, and fish; excellent brass and gold, though somewhat drossie.

7 Jamaica is plentifully stored with diverse kinds of Fruits, Cattle, Cotton,
and most necessary things, and was once very populous, though now the Spaniards
cruelty has made it destitute of the Natural Inhabitants; for so horridly did
they use them, that they chose rather to kill their Children in the birth, then
to leave them to the Spaniards mercy, (or rather slavery.)

8 Hispaniola, the soil is so fruitful, that in 20 days, Fruits will be ripe,
and the Meadows and Trees are always green. It affords Sugar, Ginger, Mines of
Gold, Iron, and Brass, and Cattle in such plenty, that they grow wild for want
of Owners.

9 Margarita has plenty of Maize and Fruits, but extreme defective in Water:
It was discovered by Columbus, 1498.

10 Cubagna is said to be destitute of Grass and Water, and therefore of
Cattle, except some few Conies; but on the Shores are found plenty of Pearls.

11 Torgula affords such store of Salt, that 3 or 4 Ships are yearly loaded
therewith; and although it be much beset with Rocks, yet it affords good
Harbor for shipping.

12 Catelina, or Providence, was granted to several Noblemen and their
Successors, about 1620.

13 Bonaire is naturally fruitful in little else but Trees, which are there in
abundance, but now it has Goats, Sheep, and other Cattle, which the Spaniards
brought over with them.

14 Trinidado, the Air is hot, cloudy, and unhealthy; but it is well stored
with Maize, Sugarcan^s, Tobacco, Cotton-Wooll, and Pitch in great abundance:
also some Veins of Gold, and other Metals.

15 Tobago is well stored with Wood, some whereof is not to be had in other
places; it has also Fish and Fowl in good plenty.

16 Portrico, 17 Anguilla, 18 St. Martin, 19 Barbada, 20 Antigoa, 21 St.
Christofal, 22 Mortinino; 23 Barbudos, And 24 St. Vincent; many of which are
well known for several Commodities that I cannot stay to name; as Sugarcanes,
Cotton-Wooll, Tobacco, and the like.

The Islands of American in Mare Del Zur, or the Pacifick Sea.
1 California is situated over against Florida, and the Gulf of Mexico; the
greatest part of it is above the Tropic of Cancer, and is reported to have
plenty of Fish, Fowl, and wild Beasts.

2 Ladrones, or, The Island of Thieves, so called from the Natives theft, who
stole Magellanus's Cock-boat, when he first entered in. There are several
others, which I will not trouble my self to name, but refer you to view them in
their proper places in the Map; because they lie at too great a distance to be
well known, and are not rich enough to invite the Merchant.

And for the knowledge of the Cities, of most note herein, we shall do as we
did in the other parts; namely, refer you to the Map of America, or to large
Maps of the World and the parts also. With the which you may be fitted at the
same place, where this Book is said to be sold, who does print and color them
also.

THE CHRONOLOGY.
Years of the World. Tears before Christ. 1 Adam created 3970 130 Seth born
3840 235 Enos born 3735 325 Kenan born 3645 395 Mahaleel born 3575 460 Jared
born 3510 622 Henoch born 3348 687 Methuselah born 3283 874 Lamech born 3096
930 Adam died 3040 987 Henoch taken away 2983 1042 Seth died 2928 1056 Noah
born 2914 1140 Enos died 2830 1235 Kenan died 2738 1290 Methalaleel died 2380
1422 Jared died 2548 1536 120 years began 2434 1556 Japheth born 2414 2558 Sem
born 2412 1651 Lamech died 2319 1656 Methuselah died, and the flood destroyed
all mankind, but Noah and his family 2314 1657 Man's age was shortened half in
half 2313 1658 Arphaxad 2312 1693 Selah born 2277 1723 Eber born 2247 1757
Peleg born, and Babel builded 2213 1787 The 70 Families distinguished into 70
languages, and man's age half shortened 2183 1787 Regu born 2183 1849 Nahor born
2121 1878 Terah born 2092 1996 Peleg died 1974 1997 Nahor died 1973 2006 Noah
died 1964 2008 Abraham born 1962 2018 Sarai born 1952 2026 Regu died 1944 2049
Serug died 1921 2083 Terah died, and the promise was made unto Abraham that
Christ should be of his race, 430 years before the Law, and he went into Canaan
1887 2093 Hagar the Bondwoman, an Egyptian was given to Abraham 1877 2094
Ishmael born 1876 2096 Arphaxad died, being 438 years old 1874 2097 Abraham had
two Sons, one by Hagar, and one by Sarai 1873 2099 Just Lot vexed at the
un-godly 1871 2107 Sodom and Gomorra destroyed 1863 2109 Isaac born, Abraham
and Ishmael were circumcised 1861 2111 Moab and Ammon born 1859 2114 Ishmael
and Hagar were cast out, where began the first manifest afflictions of Abraham
1856 2126 Selah died, being 433 years old 1844 2128 Ishmael had 12 Dukedomes in
the land of Cush 1842 2141 Abraham offered Isaac 1829 2145 Sarah died, being
127 years old 1825 2147 Abraham married Keturah 1823 2148 Isaac married
Rebecca 1822 2158 Sem died, being 600 years old, whom some think was
Melchifedeck 1812 2169 Jacob and Esau born 1801 2183 Abraham died, being 175
years old 1787 2187 Heber died, being 464 years old; he was the longest liver
after the flood, and none after Babels building exceeded much above half his
years, for Peleg who lived longest had but 239 years 1783 2208 Esau took a wife
of Canaan which was a grief to Rebecca, and displeased Isaac, therefore Esau
went to Ishmael and took his daughter Maalath to wife 1762 2215 Esau sold his
birthright for a mess of red pottage, therefore was his name called Edom 1755
2227 God gave unto him the land of Seir, of whom came many Dukes, Genesis 36. 1743
2231 Ishmael died, being 137 years old: the only wicked whose whole age is
recorded in the law 1739 2235 Jacob stole the blessing from Esau 1735 2245
Jacob went to Laban, he saw a ladder reach up into heaven, and the Angels of
God ascending and descending by it 1725 2250 Jacob fled into Aram, and Israel
served for a wife 1720 2252 Leah was given to Jacob instead of Rachel 1718 2255
Judah was born 1715 2259 Joseph was born 1711 2264 Rebecca died 1706 2265 Jacob
went from Laban, he wrestled with the Angel and was called Israel. Benjamin was
born. Rachel died at Bethlem 1705 2275 Joseph was sold for a slave. Judah
committed incest. Phares was born of Thamar his daughter in law 1695 2288
Isaac died, being 180 years old, he lived longest of any from Terah 1682 2289
Joseph expounded Pharoahs dream 1681 2297 Hezron was born 1673 2298 Jacob went
into Egypt with 70 souls 1672 2315 Jacob died in Egypt, being 147 years old
1655 2369 Joseph died in Egypt, being 110 years old 1601 2406 Nasson born 1564
2434 Moses born 1536 2441 Moses first received, and wrote Divinity with
prophetical authority 1529 2460 Hosea was born 1510 2475 Moses visited his
brethren, and about this time slew the Egyptian 1495 2476 Caleb born 1494 2512
Jannes and Jambres caused 10 plagues 1458 2515 Moses brought Israel out of
Egypt 1455 2520 Moses received the Law 1450 2533 The Israelites were fed with
Manna from Heaven 1437 2540 Rachab was born 1430 2541 Moses lift up the Serpent
in the wilderness 1429 2545 Nasson died 1425 2553 Moses died being 120 years
old 1417 2554 Hosea, Joshua or Jesus of Ephraim ruled 1416 2561 Years of
Jubilee began 1409 2570 Joshua having ruled 17 years died 1400 2570 Othoniel
began his reign 14^0 2603 Chusan of Aram began to reign over Eber 1367 2608
Salmon begat Booz of Rachab 1362 2610 Othoniel died 1360 2673 Eglon King of
Moab, with Ammon, and Amaleck oppressed Israel 1297 2687 Samgar killed 600
Philistines with a Goad 1283 2691 A great famine in Israel 1279 2696 The people
chose strange gods; for which the Lord sold them into the hand of Jabin King of
Canaan 1274 2711 Sisera chief Captain to Jabin oppressed Israel twenty years
1259 2731 Magiddons field was fought by Barak wherein Sisera was overcome 1239
2732 Media oppressed Israel, and Gideon ended his government 1238 2771
Abimelech began to reign, and though he was bad he defended Israel after he
had reigned 3 years, his brain-pan was broke by a woman in Tebez, and he
commanded his page to kill him outright 1199 2791 Israel again worshipped the
gods of Aram, the Moabites oppressed them 18 years 1179 2794 Thola (after he
had defended Israel 23 years) ended 1176 2808 Samson was born 1162 2814 Jeptha
(having ruled 6 years) ended 1156 2817 The war of Thebes 1153 2831 Ibsan of
Judah and Bethlem ruled 7 years, he had 30 sons and 30 daughters all married
1139 2832 Philistines oppressed Israel 40 years 1138 2833 Ibsan ended 1139 2834
Jesse born and Elon of Zebulon reigned 10 years 1136 2842 Abdon of Ephraim
reigned 8 years 1128 2850 Sampson of Dan judged his people 20 years 1120 2852
The destruction of Troy 1118 2855 Laviniam built 1115 2859 Aeneas reigned in
Italy 1111 2870 Eli of Levi of Itama ruled 40 years 1100 2872 Brute entered this
Island, and soon after built London 1098 2881 Samuel, a new Moses, was born
1089 2883 Alba longa was built 1087 2909 Eli his transmigration 1061 2910
Samuel and Saul reigned 40 years 1060 2912 The Ark was taken, and Hophni and
Phineas were killed 1058 2919 David the seventh son of Jesse, and fourteenth
from Abraham, was born in Bethlem 1051 2934 Samuel waxing old, his sons Joel
and Abiah ruled but corruptly, therefore Israel desired a King not as Moses and
the Judges were, but as the Heathen had 1036 2941 David killed Goliath, and was
anointed in Bethlem 1029 2950 David was anointed King of Hebron at 30 years, as
Christ was at his Baptism 1020 2957 He was anointed King of Jerusalem 1013
2972 Solomon was born 998 2977 Absoloms rebellion 993 2989 David died being 70
years old, and Solomon sat upon his Throne. 981 2990 Roboam born 980 2993 The
foundation of the Temple was laid on mount Sion 977 3000 The Temple finished
970 3030 Solomon (having reigned 40 years) ended 940 3031 Roboam reigned over
the two Tribes 939 3033 Judah and Israel were divided for Solomon's idolatry and
Roboams tyranny, and Jeroboam confirmed King 937 3047 Abiam reigned 3 years he
slew 500000 of Israel 923 3049 Asa reigned in Judah and cleansed his Kingdom
from idolatry 921 3050 Nadab began to reign over Israel 920 3052 Baassa killed
Nadab (when he had reigned two years) he performed Athaliahs words upon
Jeroboams house, Jehu told him of the like for himself, he reigned 24 years
over Israel 918 3056 Jehosaphat born 914 3057 Asa made made a law that every
one that sought not Jehovah should die under him, Judah had peace 10 years, he
had 50000 warriers, and discomfited Zerah with 100000 of Cush and Lubin 913
3063 Elias born 907 3073 Homer flourished 897 3075 Elah of Baassa reigned two
years 895 3076 Omri began to reign in the 31 years of Asa 894 3079 Joram born,
Asa died, and Elias prophesied 891 3089 Jehosaphat reigned 25 years 881 3100
Bladud began to rule in this Island, and built Bathe 870 3106 Joram son of
Achab reigned 12 years 864 3109 A great famine in Samaria, which continued 7
years 861 3111 Edom rebelled 859 3113 Jehosaphat ended 857 3118 Athalia the
daughter of Achab, and Grandmother to Joas, killed the Kings seed, and reigned
6 years, she had Sons by another which she tendered, and she was slain by the
commandment of Jehoida. 862 3119 Jehu was anointed King, and reigned 28 years,
he slew Jezabel, Joram, 70 sons of Achab, and 42 of Achaziahs brethren his
Uncles sons 851 3124 Joas the natural son of Achaziah, being hid in the Temple
6 years by his fathers sister, was in the 7th. year anointed King, and reigned
40 years, he repaired the Temple, but fell to idolatry and unthankfulness after
the death of Jehoida, and was slain by his servants 846 3136 Dico builded
Carthage 834 3156 Zachariah the Son of Jehoida was stoned to death between the
Temple and the Altar 814 3160 Hazael King of Syria spoiled Jerusalem 810 3163
Joachaz reigned 17 years, in which time the Lord delivered him into the hands
of Hazael King of Syria, but he prayed to the Lord, and he delivered him, and
yet he did not depart from the sins of Jeroboam 807 3164 Joas ove^come Benhadad
the son of Hazael three times, he took Amaziah King of Judah, he brake down the
walls of Jerusalem and spoiled the Temple, he died after he had reigned 16 years
806 3166 Amaziah began to reign, and at first did that which was right, but
after fell to idolatry, and was slain by his servants, having reigned 29 years.
In his days Azariah was high Priest 804 3168 Jehoram began, he did evil in the
sight of the Lord, and having reigned 41 years died. In his days Hosea, Amos
and Jonah were Prophets, 802 3187 The Olympiades began, being Games of running
riding, wrestling, and other feats of activity 783 3198 The building of Rome.
Jonas sent to convert Ninive, fled to Joppa, being hopeless to convert the City
till he had been 3 days and 3 nights in the Whales belly 772 3200 The Kingdom
of Judah was ruled by States 770 3201 Ozias began to reign over Judah, his
first great works are said to be after his fathers death, to warn us that he
ruled not with his father. Isai. Joel and Hosea were prophets in his time 769
3212 Zachariah began to reign oyer Israel, but he did evil in the sight of the
Lord, and Shallum slew him, after he had reigned 6 months, and reigned in his
stead 758 3232 Jotham born 738 3240 Menahem began to reign over Israel, he gave
Pull the King of Assyria 1000 talents of silver, that his hand might be with
him, to confirm the Kingdom in his hands, and he exacted money of all the
mighty men of Israel 730 3250 Manahem ended, and Pekahiah began to reign over
Israel, but Pekah one of his Captains slew him (in the second year of his
reign) and reigned in his stead 720 3252 Jotham began to reign in Judah, he
built the the gate of the Temple called Beautiful, and overcame the Ammonites.
Isaiah, Nahum, and Micah were Prophets in his days 718 3268 Jotham ended
having reigned 16 years, and Achab reigned in his stead, he drew his sons
through the fire, and burnt incense in the high places, and took the gold and
silver that was found in the house of the Lord and in the treasure of the Kings
house, and sent it for a present to the King of Assyria 702 3279 Osee made a
conspiracy against Perah, and slew him, and reigned in his stead, he sent Oil
for a present to the King of Egypt to win his favor. Obadiah, Amos, Jonas and
Joel were Prophets in his days 691 3282 Hezekiah began to reign over Judah,
and did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, he removed the high
places, cut down the groves, brake in pieces the brazen serpent which Moses had
set up 688 3295 Senacherib came against Jerusalem, were 185000 his soldiers
were slain by an Angel 675 3299 Upon Hezekiahs sickness the Sun went back 10
hours 671 3310 Manasses began to reign, and under him Esaias was sawed to death
600 3365 Manasses having reigned 55 years ended, and Ammon began to reign over
Judah, he served the idols which his father served, and was slain of his
servants when he had reigned 2 years 601 3368 Josias succeeded Ammon, he walked
in all the ways of David his father, and renewed the covenant with God.
Jeremiah and Zephaniah were prophets in his time 602 3370 Eliakim, or Jehoiakim
born 600 3375 Joachaz John, or Shallum born 595 3380 Jeremiah prophesied, he
labored to keep Judah from being carried to Babel, 40 years before the third
captivity 590 3385 Moses original that was hid in the Temple, being about this
time found, was caused to be read in the hearing of the people, by King Josias
585 3389 Mathanias or Thedek born 581 3390 Thale born 580 3393 Solon born 577
3398 Periander reigned at Corinth 572 3399 Josiah was slain with an arrow at
Megiddon, having reigned 31 years 571 3399 Joachaz began to reign over Judah,
he did evil in the sight of the Lord, and Pharaoh Necho put him in bonds at
Riblath in the land of Hamath, and carried him into Egypt, and made Eliakim or
Jehoiakim his brother King over Judah and Jerusalem, he was 25 years old when
he began to reign, and he reigned 11 years 571 3406 The desolation of Jerusalem
the first captivity and rest for the land 70 years 564 3407 Draco set forth his
bloody Laws 563 3411 Arrion the Musition flourished 559 3413 Jehoiakim buried
like an ass 557 3414 Zedekiah began to reign over Judah, he did evil in the
sight of the Lord, and had h^s eyes put out by Nebuchadnezar in the 11th. year
of his reign. Baruch, Ezekiel and Jeremiah were prophets, and Seraiah a high
Priest in his time 556 3422 Jerusalem was taken, and the Temple burnt, wherein
began the third captivity which was to last seventy years 548 3423 Ezra born
before Seraiah died 547 3425 Egypt contended with Babylon, against whom Ezekiel
prophesied 545 3428 Pittacus flourished 542 3429 Chilo flourished 541 3431
Solon abolished the laws of Draco 539 3434 Nebuchadnezar conquered Egypt 536
3438 Pythagoras was famous in Italy 532 3445 Nebuchadnezar dreamed of a great
tree cropped, bearing the heart of a Beast, Daniel expounded it of him 525 3454
Tarquin banished from Rome for the ravishment of Lucretia 516 3456 Cyrus first
began to reign 514 3457 Phalaris the Sicilian tyrant flourished 513 3461
Pisistratus the tyrant of Athens began 509 3465 Esop was famous in these times
505 3468 Astyagus was subdued by Cyrus 502 3470 Babels fall. Daniel was made
high 500 3471 The word was named Messiah by an angel 499 3480 Croesus
vanquished by Cyrus 490 3490 Balthazar was slain and Babylon taken 480 3491 The
Jews returned out of captivity 479 3498 Ahasuerus the 3 King made a decree that
all the Jews in his 127 Countries should die in one day, because their laws
differed from the Heathen: But Mordecai and Adossa turned it on Hamon the
Amalekite, 472 3499 Darius Artaxerxes was elected King of Persia, of Assure and
of Babylon. He knew that Gods wrath was upon his predecessors for hindering the
Temple, and therefore he began it in the second, and finished it in the sixth
year o^ his reign. In h^^ seventh year Ezra returned with authority to
imprison, amerce, banish, and kill the disobedient Law 471 3500 Esther was
married to Ahasuerus 470 3503 The fight at Marathon 467 3517 The expedition of
Xerxes into Greece 453 3518 Zachary told of Babel to be as a pit without water
452 3519 Jerusalem was built by the seven, sevens and the Cloisters about the
Temple, wherefore the Temple is said to be 49 years in building 451 3526 Ezra
came to Jerusalem 444 3531 Darius Persa the last King named in Scripture
Nehemiah 12. 22. 439 3554 The Peloponensian war began 416 3581 The 30 Tyrants
ruled at Athens, who slew more Citizens in 8 months then the war had consumed
in 10 years 389 3586 Plato borne in Athens 384 3587 Conon overthrew the
Lacedemonian fleet 383 3589 The peace of Antalcidas obtained 381 3590 The
Lacedaemonians brake that peace, and were vanquished by Epaminondas 380 3595
Epaminondas slain at Mantinea. 377 Darius the Persian gave reward for the
invention of new pleasures, and thereby was not aware how he had sold his
Kingdom till another was proclaimed to bear his scepter: He carried with him
in the Camp 350 Concubines 377 3608 Alexander caused Judah to date from his
reign, and that each sacrificers child born that year, should be named
Alexander 362 3614 He licensed Sanballat to built a Temple for the Samaritans
and false Jews. 356 3618 Darius vanquished by Alexander, and Persian Monarchy
ended 352 3644 The Sadducees rose first about this time, who said there is no
resurrection nor angel nor spirit, but this Sect fearing to be stoned by the
people, pretended to lean on Moses, but not admitting any exposition 326 3658
Antiochus Soter King married his fathers wife, which thing was infamous among
the heathen. 312 3660 The 70 Interpreters translated the Old Testament into
Greek 310 3700 Ptolomy Philip set forth a huge Army against Antiochus Megas
3714 Seleucus Callinicus was overcome by Ptolomy Evergetes, who spoiled the
Country and carried his Nobles to Egypt, as the angel had foretold. 256 3727
The Pharisees opposed themselves against the Sadduces, and unskilfully they
said, that Moses received another law besides the written, given by tradition
243 3748 Epimanes King of Egypt abrogated Moses laws, and confirmed heathenisme
in Judah 222 3793 Alexander Demetrius Nicators brother, killed Triplo, and
himself was killed in wars against Parthia 177 3796 Philomether was killed in
wars against his son in law 167 3796 John Simeons son became a Sadducee, and
made inquisition for all Pharisees and put them to death 174 3800 Physcon who
had been King of Cizen married Cleopatra his natural sister, wife once to their
brother, on the marriage killed her son by Philometer, in time he loathed her,
and married her daughter Cleopatra, extreme cruelty he showed to his people
that made him King and filled all with blood and banishment: after banishing
others he fled with the Queen his wife, and sent for his eldest son from Ciren,
and least Alexandria should make him King, he killed him 170 3803 Aristobolus
wore a Crown first of any Levite, he killed his brother Antigonus, and soon
after died with torment of conscience, and vomiting blood 167 1812 His brother
Alexander reigned after him, and killed 50000 Pharisees, he being a Sadducee
and rejected by them 158 3817 Alexandria his wise succeeded him, and bare him
two sons both strove for the Kingdom, and drew sundry nations to their
factions 109 3839 Alexander who killed his mother, was made King, and banished
131 3849 The city of Jerusalem was surprised by Pompey on the Sabath day, and
he placed Hircanus in the regiment, and carried Aristobolus with his two sons
Antigonus and Alexander captive to Rome 121 3851 Alexander moved covetous
Crassus to surprise Jerusalem, who spoiled the Temple of 60 tuns of gold,
Crassus and his Camp were wholly overthrown at Charran by the Parthians 119 3860
Alexander was killed by Scipio 110 3863 Aristobulus the father, favored by
Julius Caesar; was poisoned by Pompeys side, Antigonus requested of Julius
Caesar the kingdom of Judah, in which Pompey settled Hircanus: But he bestowed
it upon Antipater, once Hircanus servant 107 3875 Antipater was poisoned by
Malchus 95 3877 Malchus was slain by Caessius 93 3878 Antigonus (helped by
Pachor king of Parthia) reigned in Jerusalem 90 3881 Hircanus intifed to go to
Pachor was of him kept prisoner 89 3883 Antonius and Cleopatra fought against
Italy, and were overcome 87 3885 Herod escaped to Rome, and was there
proclaimed king of Judah, and brought into the Capitol between Antonius and
Octavius 85 3889 Tigranes was chosen king of Syria 81 3896 Seleucus house
perished, and an Earthquake destroyed 170000 men and many cities 74 3899 Herod
(with the help of Sosius) took Jerusalem 71 Antigonus was brought to Antonius,
and of him beheaded, as an enemy to the people of Rome, 3912 Herod was
afterward confirmed by Antonius and Cleopatra Rulers of Egypt 58 3970 Jesus
Christ was conceived in Nazareth, and born in Bethlem in Judah, Mat. 1. 3970
years from the creation, and in the 42 year of Augustus Caesar 000

After 12 years of age, he went up to Jerusalem with his parents, and sat in
the Temple in the midst of the Doctors, hearing and asking them questions, Luke
2. 41.

After he was baptized he preached, and did many miracles, the knowledge of
which one would think should convince the m^st obstinate, if they would but
seriously consider those things recorded by the Evangelists. The which for your
eas^e and ready finding, I have collected into this method and may call it, A
brief of the Gospel, or a plain Table readily directing where to find the
several things, taught, done, and suffered by Jesus Christ, through the Book of
Matthew beginning at the first Chapter, which things are confirmed by the three
other Evangelists and by the Apostles

Mat. 2. Christ was circumcised the 8th. day, Joseph and Mary fled with him
into Egypt, and so maliciously was He^od against him, that he sent forth and
slew all the male children that were in Bethlem and all the coast thereof from
two years old, and under. He dwelt in the city of Nazareth.

Mat. 3. He was baptized of John in Jordan, and the heavens were opened, and he
saw the spirit of God descending like a Dove and lightning upon him, and lo, a
voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.

Mat. 4. Christ appeared to his Disciples, and sent them to teach, and baptize
all nations.

Mat. 5. He began his sermon in the mount, declared who are blessed, who are
the salt of the earth, the light of the world, the city on a hill, that he came
to fulfill the law, what it is to kill, to commit adultery, to swear, exhort, to
suffer wrong, to love our enemies, to labor for perfectness.

Mat. 6. He speaks of alms, prayer, forgiving our brethren, fasting, where our
treasure is to be laid up, of serving God and Mammon, exhorts not to be careful
for wordly things, but to seek Gods kingdom

Mat. 7. He ended his sermon in the mount, reproved rash judgment, forbids to
cast holy things to dogs, exhorts to prayers, to enter in at the straight gate,
to beware of false prophets, not to be hearers but doers of the word, likewise
men who build on the rock and not on the sand.

Mat. 8. He cleanses the leper, heals the palsy, the fever, and cast out
devils, of many that were possessed, healed all that were sick, rebuked the
winds and the Sea, and they were calm, he casts out the devils out of the two
possessed, and suffers them to go into the Swine.

Mat. 9. He called Matthew, eats with Publicans and sinners, cures the bloody
issue, raised from death Jayrus daughter, gave sight to two blind men, healed a
dumb man possessed with a devil, and had compassion on the multitude.

Mat. 10. He sent out his 12 Apostles, enabling them with power to do miracles.

Mat. 11. John sent his Disciples to Christ, Christ gave testimony concerning
John, the opinion of the people both concerning John and Christ, Christ
upbraids the unthankfulness and unrepentance of Chorazin, Bethesday, and
Capernaum, and praises his fathers wisdom in revealing the Gospel to the
simple, he calls those who have many and great sins to come to him

Mat. 12 He reproves the blindness of the Pharisees concerning the breach of
the Sabbath, by Scripture, reason, and by a miracle heals the man poss^ssed
that was blind and dumb, declares that blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall
not be forgiven, that account shall be made of idle words, rebukes the
unthankful who seek after a sign, and shows who is his brother, and sister,
and mother

Mat. 13. He puts forth a parable of the seed, and expounds it, the parable of
the tares, of the mustard seed, of the leaven, of the hid treasures, of the
pearl, of the drawn net cast into the sea, and how he is contemned of his own
Countrymen.

Mat. 14. Herod's opinion of Christ, wherefore John was beheaded, Jesus departed
into a desert place, where he feeds 5000 men with five loaves and two fishes,
he walks on the sea to his Disciples, landeth at Genazareth, and heals the
sick by the touch of the hem of his garment.

Mat 15. Christ reproves the Scribes and Pharisees, for transgressing Gods
commandments through their own tradition, and taught how that which goes into
the mouth does not defile the man; he healed the daughter of the Woman of
Canaan, he went up into a mountain, and great multitudes came unto him bringing
with them those that were dumb, maimed, and many others, and cast them down at
Jesus feet, and he healed them, ins^much that the multitude wondered when they
saw the dumb to speak, the maimed to be whole, the lame to walk, and the
blind to see, and they glorified the God of Israel. He had compassion on the
multitude, because they had not eaten in th^ee days, and with 7 loaves and a
few little fishes fed 4000 men, besides women and children, and yet there
remained of broken meat seven Baskets full.

Mat. 16. The Pharisees require a sign, he warns his Disciples of the leaven
of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees, fore-sheweth his death, reproves Peter
for diswading him from it, and admonishes those that will follow him to bear
the Cross.

Mat. 17. He is transfigured, heals the lunatic, foretells his own
passion, and pays tribute.

Mat. 18. He warns his Disciples to be humble, and ha^mless^ to avoid
offenses, and not to desp^se the little ones, teaches how we are to deal with
our brethren when they offend us, and how often to forgive them.

Mat. 19. He heals the sick, answers the Pharisees concerning divorcement,
shows when marriage is necessary, receives little children, ^nstructeth the
young man how to atto^ne eternal life, and how to be perfect, tells his
Disciples, how hard it is for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God, and
promises reward to those that forsake any thing to follow him.

Mat. 20. By the similitude of the laborers in the vineyard, he shows that
God is debtor to no man, foretells his passion by answering the mother of
Zebedees children, teaches his Desciples to be lowly, and gives sight to two
blind men.

Mat. 21. He rides into Jerusalem upon an Ass, drives the buyers and sellers
out of the Temple, curses the Fig Tree puts to silence the Priests and
Elders, and and rebuked them by similitude of the two sons and the husbandman
who slew such as were sent unto them*

Mat. 22. He puts forth a parable, of the marriage, of the kings son,
shows who should come thereto, punishment of him that wanted the wedding
garment. He shows that tribute ought to be paid to Caesar, confutes the
Sadducees who denied the Resurrection, tells the Lawyers which is the first and
great Commandment, and poseth the Pharisees about the Messiah.

Mat. ^^. He admonished the people to follow the good Doctrines, not the evil
examples of the Scribes and Pharisees, and of ambition, he denounces 8 Woes
against their hyprocrisies and blindness, and prophesies of the destruction
of Jerusalem.

Mat. 24. He fore-telleth the destruction of the Temple, what, and how great
calamities shall be before it, the signs of his coming to judgment, and
because that day and hour is unknown, we ought to watch like good servants,
exspecting every moment our masters coming.

Mat. 25. He propounded the parable of the 10 Virgins, and the Talent, and also
gives a description of the last judgment.

Mat. 26. The Rulers conspireth against Christ, the woman anointed his feet,
Judas ^elleth him, eats the Passover, instituted his supper, prays in the
Garden and being betrayed with a kiss, is carried to Caiphas, and is denied of
Peter.

Mat. 27. He is delivered bound to Pilate, Judas hangs himself, Pilate being
admonished of his wife, washes his hands, and loses Barrabas. Christ is
crowned with thorns, crucified, reviled, dies, and is buried, his sepulcher is
sealed, and watched.

Mat. 28. Christ's resurrection is declared by an Angel to the women, he
himself appears unto them the high Priests give the soldiers money to say that
he was stolen out of his sepulcher, he appears to his Desciples and sends them
to teach and baptize all Nations.

I will refer you to two other scriptures, where Christ wrought two great
miracles, the one is the curing of him that was diseased 38 years, John 5. The
other is his raising of Lazarus after he had been dead 4 days. John 9.

He ascended into Heaven, Mark 16. 19. Acts 1. 9. and sent the Holy Ghost on
his Apostles and they spoke with other tongues, Act. 2. 4. and is at the right
hand of God making intercession for us, Romans 8. 34. for as in Adam all died or
were put into a state of condemnation, so in Christ all are made alive or put
into a state or condition, in which they may have salvation if they neglect it
not, 1 Cor. 15. 22. Romans 5. 18, 19.

Pilate who gave sentence against Christ, slew himself in the time of Cajus 30
St. Stephen was stoned, and St. Paul converted to the Christian faith 43 St.
James beheaded, and Agrippa eaten of the worms 44 Simon Magus the forcerer,
perceiving his withcraft did not prevail and himself slighted, told the people
of Rome that he would leave them, and flee into Heaven from whence he came. A
certain day being appointed, he climbed up into the high Capitol whence he took
his flight by means of his witchcraft, and the spirits which bare him up in the
air, the people thereat being amazed, Peter fell down and prayed to God that
his witchcraft might be revealed to the World, he had no sooner prayed, but
down came Simon Magus, and bruised himself in pieces, so that he died miserable
47 Seneca flourished 50 Rome by the commandment of Nero was set on fire 61
Joseph of Arimathea came into England, and the first persecution began in the
10th. year of Nero 63 St. Peter and St. Paul were put to death 66 Jerusalem was
destroyed by Titus 70 The Temple of Peace at Rome finished 71 The second
persecution began under Domitian 89 St. John banished into the Island of
Pathmos 90 He wrote his Revelations 95 The third persecution under Trajan 100
Ignat us Bishop of Antioch suffered Martyrdom 111 The J^ws rebelling against
the Romans were slain in Egypt and Cyprus 114 The fourth persecution under
Adrian 126 A new town built, where the old Jerusalem was, and called Elia 135
The fifth persecution under Amelius 167 Pol^ca^pus Bishop of Sm^rna burnt 169
Lucius began his reign, and in his time England received the Christian faith
177 The Christian faith received in Scotland 201 The sixth persecution under
Severus 202 Tertullian a priest of Carthage in Africa flourished 210 Leonides
(the father of Origin) was beheaded 215 Origin flourished in Alexandria 216
Potamiena a Virgin, together with her mother burned, 220 The seventh
persecution under Maximinus 236 Cyprian Bishop of Carthage died 249 The eighth
persecution under Decius 251 A whole Synod held at Carthage, in the time of
Cyprian did err Eusebius. book 7 254 The ninth persecution under Valerianus 257
Galienus his son reigned, and restored peace unto the Christians 262 Diocletian
began the tenth persecution 302 He deposed himself voluntarily, and lived a
private life 307 Maximinianus (who reigned with him) hangs himself 310 Peter
Bishop of Alexandria was beheaded 311 Manes the Heretic called himself Christ
and the comforter, and chose unto himself 12 Apostles, he taught that there
were many Gods, and that the Sun was to be worshipped, he took the king of
Persia his son to cure him, and killed him, whereupon the king imprisoned him:
but he brake prison and fled into Mesopotamia, and was there taken, and flaid
alive, his skin filled with chafe and hanged at the gate of the City 320
Constantine procured a peace for the Christians, he was the first Christian
Emperor 324 The first general Council, 325 Christian Churches built by
Constantine, for in the tenth persecution they were greatly demolished 332
Frumentius made Bishop by Athanasius, and sent to convert the Indians 333
Athanasius died 334 Cyrillus an Arrian was chosen Bishop of Jerusalem 344
Julian succeeded Constantius in the Empire, he became an Apostate, banished the
Christians out of his court, and entertained Philosophers and Conjurers in
their stead 365 Macelonius and Tatianus were boiled to death 366 Artemius a
noble man was beheaded for the faith 367 Julian was slain with an arrow in a
battle against the Persians and Jovianus was Emperor in his stead 369
Valentinianus, one whom Julian banished his court succeeded Jovianus in the
Empire, and joined with him his brother Valens 368 80 Priests were put in a
ship and burned by the Commandment of Valens the Arrian Emperor 381 Jerome the
learned writer, whose works are famous throughout the World, flourished about
this time 383 Augustine Bishop of Hippo, wrote sundry excellent Books 386
Theodosius the Emperor died 396 Nectarius a man of profound learning was chosen
B. of Constantinople by 150 Bishops 397 He banished Confession, and the
shriving Priests out of the Church, because a Deacon abused a grave Matron
under color of confession 399 John Chrysostom was B. of Constantinople after
Nectarius 401 He was deposed by the procurement of the Empress, and died in
banishment 412 Orostus a learned Historiographer flourished about this time 413
Cynesius B. of Cyrene an eloquent man and a profound Philosopher flourished 430
A council called at Ephesus of 200 Bishops where Nestorius the Heretic was
condemned 434 Polichronus B. of Jerusalem, was deposed for simony and extortion
435 Socrates Scholasticus who wrote seven books of Ecclesiastical history, was
of great fame throughout all Greece 438 Theodoretus B. of Cyrus wrote the
Ecclesiastical history comprizing 105 years Sozomenus wrote the Ecclesiastical
history from Constantine the Great, to the reign of Theodosius the younger 443
A Provincial Council held at Constantinople, were Eutiches the heretic was
condemned 446 An heretical Council held at Ephesus, where by means of Dioscurus
B. of Alexandria Eutiches was restored 446 A Council of 630 Bishops held at
Chalcedon where Dioscurus was deposed and Nestorius, Eutiches, and Macedonius
condemned 450 Theodosius (was by the Monks) made B. of Jerusalem in the absence
of Juvenalis, but he was deposed by Martianus the Emperor, and the other
restored 451 John Damascenus a learned writer, wrote against the Arrians 453
Timotheus Aelurus a Monk, was by the seditious persons made Bishop of
Alexandria, but was immediately deposed by Leo 454 Paulinus Bishop of Nola in
Italy, was of great fame about this time, he gave all his substance to redeem
captives and poor prisoners 458 Basilius Bishop of Antioch 459 Timotheus
Aelurus was called from exile (where he had been 18 years) by Basiliscus the
Tyrant, and restored to the Sea of Alexandria 463 Letus a learned man was
burned by Honorius the Arrian 475 Fulgentius flourished about this time 484 All
the Bishops of Africa came together, by the command of Honorius the Arrian,
where his heresy was confirmed, and 444 Bishops exiled 485 A Synod called of
70 B. was called at Rome by Gelasius where the Canonical Sciptures were severed
from the Apocrypha 492 Flavianus B. of Antioch was deposed for sedition, by
Anastasius the Emperor 493 Boethius a Christian Philosopher endured great
persecution under Theodoricus the Arrian 494 Olympius an Arrian B. as he was
blaspheming the Trinity, was suddenly smitten from heaven with three fiery
darts, and burned quick 510 Theodosius B. of Alexandria was deposed by
Justinianus, for mainteining the heresy of Eutiches 524 Priscianus the great
Grammarian flourished 528 Muccarius Bishop of Jerusalem was deposed for heresy
532 Clocks and Dials set up in Churches 606 The Persians took Jerusalem from
the Romans 615 England was divided into Parishes 630 Cambridge was made an
Unive^sity 635 The Saracens took Jerusalem from the Persians 637 Painting,
Glazing, and building with stone brought into England by one Benet a Monk 655
Organs first used in Churches 661 Egbridius first made England a Monarchy 762
The Turks took Jerusalem from the Saracens 1010 England conquered by Duke
William 1066 St. Paul's Church burnt 1068 Westminster Hall built 1102 London
bridge new built with timber 1162 The first Major of London 1190 The Bible
divided into chapters 1195 London bridge with 33 years labor finished with
stone 1209 London bridge burnt 1212 Tyling first used in London 1247 The order
of the Garter 1344 A frost from the midst of September until April 1364 The
invention of Guns 1380 Printing first used in England 1440 St. Paul's again
fiered 1443 First yeomen of the guard 1485 Norwich defaced by fire 1508 Evil
May day. Egypt was added to the Turkish Empire 1517 Luther wrote against the
Popes Indulgences 1517 Duke of Buckingham beheaded 1521 Tindals Testament first
printed 1530 Queen Elizabeth born. Popes authority abrogated in English 1534 L.
Thomas Cromwell made Lord keeper 1536 The Bible appointed to be read, and
Register books to be kept in every Parish 1538 Queen Katherine beheaded 1541
King Henry the 8 conquered Bulloigne 1544 Great Hailstones shaped like men's
heads. Earl of Hertford made Protector 1546 Kets rebellion at Norwich 1549 The
sweating sickness 1551 Coaches first used in England 1555 The Book of the
Common Prayers established in English 1558 The last firing of St. Paul's steeple
1561 The plague at Newhaven 1563 The great frost 1564 The Royal Exchange built
1565 L. Darnley married the Queen of Scots 1565 K. James crowned king of
Scotland 1567 The Earls rebellion in the North 1569 The battle at Lepanto 1570
Duke of Northfolk beheaded. The massacre of the Protestants at Paris in France
1572 E. of Essex sent into Ireland, and made Captain General 1573 The heavens
seemed to burn 1574 The black Assize at Oxford 1577 Forbishers third voyage
1578 An earthquake in England. Sir Francis Drakes voyage about the world 1580
Jesuits hanged 1582 Tobacco first used in England 1583 Antwerp besieged by the
Spaniards 1584 14 Traitors executed 1586 Qu. of Scots beheaded 1587 Tilbury
camp on St. James day 1588 Portugal voyage 1589 Hacket hanged for blasphemy
1590 A Parliament began 1592 Dr. Lopez executed 1594 Dearth of corn by reason
of former transportations 1595 The voyage to Cadiz 1596 K. Charles born 1600
Earl of Essex beheaded 1600 Monopolies restrained by the Queen 1601 Qu.
Elizabeth died, and James the 6th. K. of Scotland proclaimed king of England
1602 A great plague in London whereof died in one year 30578 1603 Sir Walter
Rawleigh condemned, Watson, Clark and Brook executed 1603 A treaty of peace
with Spain. K. James the first instiled King of great Britain 1604 The powder
treason discovered. The oath of allegiance devised and administered 1605
Christianus K. of Denmark first arrived in England 1606 A great inundation in
Somersetshire, and insurrection in Northamptonshire, King James made free of
the Clothworkers, and Prince Henry of the Marchanttailors 1607 The new Exchange
built. St. Edmondsbury burnt 1608 The new Exchange first finished with wares;
fishing on the English coast forbidden to strangers, the high Commission Court
complained of the Parliament and king James moved three things concerning the
Common Law. 1 That it may be in English, 2 That it might have a settled text in
all Cases. And 3 that all various Reports might be reconciled. The making of
Alom brought to perfection in England, and Silkworms brought into England 1609
The K. of France murdered, Prince Henry made Prince of Wales 1610 Gold
enhaunsed. Legate the Arrian burnt 1611 Pr. Henry died. Plantation in Ireland
by the Companies of London. Lady Elizabeth married to the Palsgrave at
White-hal 1612 They departed England, Dorchester and the Globe-playhouse burnt.
The Artillery Compa. revived 1613 Stratford upon Avon burnt. The new River
brought to London by Sr. Hugh Middleton-Morefields fashioned into Walks 1614 A
great snow. The Lady A^bella died. Sir Th. Overbury poisoned, for which the
Earl of Somerset, and his Lady were condemned. Smithfield paved 1615 Pr.
Charles made prince of Wales. K. James went into Scotland. The Bishop of
Spalato came into England 1616 The king returned from Scotland. Sir George
Villers made Duke of Buckingham. And Sir Walter Rawleigh undertook the
West India voyage 1617 A declaration to lerating dancing about May-poles, and
other sports on Sundays. Sir Walter Rawleigh returned and was beheaded in the
Palace yard at Westminster. Diverse Ministers sent from England to the Synod of
Dort. A blasing Star appeared 1618 Queen Anne died. Alteration of Gold coyns.
Sir Rich. Weston Ambassador to Bruxels 1619 ^ernard Calvert performed his
Journey from Southwark to Callis, and back again in one day. A proclamation
against talking of States affairs. 1620 Bishop of Spalato retracted what he
had formerly wrote in defense of the Protestants, and was therefore commanded
to depart the Kingdom 1621 The English treated with the Spaniard, touching the
restitution of the ^alatinate 1622 A massacre of the English by the Dutch in
Amboyna 1622 Prince Charles returned from Spain. Blackfriars fall 1623 The
marriage with France accorded, the Duke of Lenox died 1624 K. James died, and
Prince Charles proclaimed king 1625 A great plague in London. A Parl. called at
Oxford Two subsidies granted, and the Parl. dissolved which produced the loss
of Rochel, the diversion of a hopefal war from the West Indies to a succesless
attempt on Callis, and the Isle of Rhee. The marriage with France celebrated in
Paris, Parliament began at Westminster. Queen mary arrived at Dover. Michaelmas term
kept at Reading. A league with Denmark, Sweden, and the States against Spain. A
second Parl. called, and a grant of five subsidies dissolved, many imprisoned
for refusing to pay, and great sums of money extorted by privy Seals and
excises. English ships arrested in France. Traffic with Spain prohibited.
1627 The voyage to the Isle of Rhee, Sir William Heyden slain there. Parliament
began at Westminster. Petition of right granted by the kings Commissions for loan and
excise cancelled 1627 Doctor Lamb murdered. London fined for his death. Duke of
Buckingham slain by John Felton, for which he was executed at Tiburn. Parl.
dissolved, and 10 of the members committed 1628 Peace with France concluded. An
uprore in Fleetstreet, werein diverse were slain, and for which Capt. Ashenhurst
and Capt. Stamford were executed 1629 Earl of Pembrook died, Pr. Charles borne.
Peace with Spain proclaimed. The plague began at Cambridge 1630 Earl of
Castlehaven beheaded on Tower hill. Broadway and Fitz Patrick executed. Lady
Mary born 1631 St. Paul's began to be repaired. Buildings in Covent Garden begun
by the E. of Bedford. Frankendal surrendered to the English. Pr. Elector died. A
great fiere at London Bridge 1632 The King began his progress into Scotland,
he was crowned at Edinburg. Duke of York born. A masque presented at Whitehal,
by the Gentlemen of the four Inns of the Court. K. and Qu. feasted by the City
1633 Attorney General Noy projected the design of Ship Money. A Parl. called
in Ireland, and a Synod assembled there 1634 Robert Parre (aged 152 years)
brought out of Shropshire to London, where he shortly after died. Commotions
about Ceremonies 1635 Ship Money debated. The King required the Judges opinion
touching the Legality of ship money, 12 gave their opinions for it 1636 Prynne
and Bastwick censured. Bishop Williams sentenced. Book of Liturgy sent into
Scotland, and first read at Edinburgh. Scots petition against it. They entered
into a Covenant. A great plague in London 1637 A Parl. called many imprisoned,
and the Parl. dissolved. Great sums of money got by Knighthood, book of rates,
ship money, Monopolies of soap, salt, leather, Seacoale. The first Major of
Da^by. Marquess Hambleton ^^t Commissioners into Scotland. He consulted with
the Covenanters, and they demanded a general assembly and a Parl. The King
granted the Scots their desires and sent Proposals to them. The Covenanter
disliked the Proposals. A Declaration from the King nulling the service Book,
high Commission, Canons, etc. Qu. Mother of France arrived in England. General
assembly at Glascow, Bishops protested against it, and it was dissolved. The
Covenanters began to arm and solicited France for aid. Scots papers dispersed
in English (to vindicate their actions and intentions, were suppressed by the
King 1638 King marched against the Scots, and declared against their actions.
Parliament began in Scotland, dissolved by the king. The Covenanters desired a
treaty. Pacification granted, and the armies disbanded. The king returned to
London, and Scots papers burnt. Parl began in Scotland. 2 fight in the Downs
between the Spanjard and the Dutch: Scots Parl. prorogued till June 1, 4 Scots
Commissioners sent to the king, A Parl. summoned in Ireland by the Earl of
Strafford to levy money to raise an army against the Scots, but they refusing
to comply, were dissolved: Earl of Strafford returned into England, and the
Scots Commissioners secured 1639 A Parl. began in England. The Scots letter to
the French king produced in Parliament, and Earl of Lowden imprisoned for
subscribing it. The Parl. dissolved, and some members imprisoned. Synod imposed
a new oath: the Bishops house beset with Prentices, some taken and imprisoned,
and one of their ringleaders executed. Synod ended. Parl. at Edinburgh sat
again. Henry Duke of Gloucester born, Newborn fight, Newcastle deserted, and
possessed by the Scots, king set up his standard at York: He determined to call
a Parl. to begin November 3. Commissioners treated with the Scots at Rippon,
and a cessation from hostility agreed on. Nov. 3. the long Parl. began. 300000
l. given to the Scots toward their losses

1641 Convocation house fined, Earl of Strafford beheaded. Voted that the Scots
should receive 10000 l. in part of the 300000 l. given them. Two bills for
putting down the high Commission Court, and Star Chamber. Owen Chonelly
discovered the design of the Irish rebellion, Mat. Mahon and Lord Macquire
taken and secured. The first rebellion began, whereby above 100000 Protestants
were murdered. 200000 l. voted to be raised, for suppressing the Irish
rebellion: 12 Bishops accused of high treason, for protesting against the
Parliament. The Irish proclaimed Rebels. The King demanded five members.

1642 Sir John Hotham denied the Kings entrance into Hull: The Parl. made three
Votes, First, that the King did intend to make war against his Parl. Secondly,
that when he did make war, upon them it was a breach of the trust reposed in
him, contrary to his oath, and tending to the destruction of his government,
and thirdly, that whosoever should assist him were traitors. The great Seal
carried to the King. The Earl of Essex marched out of London. Edghill battle, a
weekly tax of 33580 l. imposed by the Parl.

1643 Cheape-side Cross demolished: Newberie first battle, the Covenant taken
by the house of Commons. The Scots army entered England. A Parl. began at
Oxford.

1644 The Synod began at Westminster. The great battle on Marston-moor, New
castle taken with storm. The kings army beaten the second time near Newbery.
The Book of Common Prayer voted down. Sir Thomas Fairfax voted General, Capt.
Hotham, Sir John Hotham and the Bishop of Canterbury beheaded. The treaty began
at Uxbridge.

1645 Oxford blocked up. The Kings party routed at that memorable Battle of
Naseby, Taunton the second time relieved. The Club-men in Somersetshire
suppressed, Mountross defeated in Scotland. Basing house taken by storm.
Hereford, Emblodon, and Shipton Castles taken. Sir Jacob Ashley totally routed.

1646 The King went out of Oxford disguised. He went to the Scots army at
Southwel The Parliament voted, that the king should be disposed of by the
Parliament of England, but the Scots excused themselves: Oxford, Sir Robert
Pyes house, and Farington surrendered. The Duke of Yorks servants discharged.
John Lilburn Committed to the Tower. The great Seal broken. Earl of Essex
died. General Fairfax came to London. The Scots received 200000 l, and went out
of England. Excise house burnt. King brought to Holmby.

1647 The King was taken from Holmby, and carried with the Army to New Market.
An empeachment against 11 members. The king brought to Windsor. The Armay
marched through London, General Fairfax made Constable of the Tower* The Forts
and Works about the City slighted. The case of the army stated, and presented
to the General by the Agitators of the army. The agreement of the people
presented to the house of Commons by the Agitators of the army. The king fled
into the Isle of Wight. Four bills presented to the king: Upon the kings
refusal to sign the four propositions both houses passed these four votes:
First, that they would make no more addresses to the King, Secondly, that none
be made unto him, without leave of both houses, Thirdly, that he, or they, who
should break this Order, should encurre the penalty of High treason: Fourthly,
that they would receive no more any message from him, and they enjoined that no
person whatsoever should. The Parl. made a Declaration about the cause of the
votes.

1648 The trained bands by a tumult had their colors taken away in
Moor-fields, but part of the army quelled them the next day. The Earl of
Warwick sent to take command of the Navy. Duke Hamilton with a numerous army
invaded England. Hamiltons army routed 300 slain, he and about 12000 taken. The
Parliament nulled their former votes. The empeached members sat again. The
treaty in the I Will of Wight. The General and Council of Officers presented a
Remonstrance to the Parliament. The treaty ended. The king carried to
Hurst-castle, from thence to Windsor. The supreme authority voted in Commons.
An ordinance for the trial of the late king. The high Court of Justice
proclaimed. Voted that writs should no longer run in the kings name. The Scots
Commissioners delivered in papers, and a declaration from the Parliament of
Scotland against the proceedings of the English Parl. and army, for trial of
the king. The king brought three times before the high Court of Justice,
sentenced to death, and beheaded at White Hall. The house of Lords voted
useless and kingly office un-necessary. The great Seal broken and another
brought in and approved. The oath of Allegiance and Supremacy nulled. A new
stamp ordered for coining money. The crown Jewels, hangings, and the rest of
the kings goods ordered to be sold. Lord Cromwell voted Commander in chief of
the forces sent against Ireland, and Sir Thomas Fairfax of England and Ireland

1649 An act for assessing 90000 l. a month. The Earl of Pembrook admitted a
Commoner. The monthly fast nulled: General Fairfax marched out against the
Levellers. England voted a free state. The Act for abolishing kingly government
proclaimed. Ordered that no ceremonies should be used to the kings children. An
Act for sale of the Kings and Queens goods. 1000 l. per annum bestowed on Col.
Jones, and 6 of the Kings Horses. An Act for settling 2000 l. per annum on
President Bradshaw. An act settling 1000 l. per annum on Colonel Henry Mart,
and an Act for 2000 l. gratuity to Major General Skippon. Mr. Lilburn quitted
by his Jury at Guildhal. The fire by powder in Tower street.

1650 Lord General Cromwell returned from Ireland, King of Scots set forrth of
Holland, and landed at the Spey, in the North of Scotland. General Fairfax
voted to march with his army against the Scots, he laid down his Commission.
Lord Cromwell made General of England, Scotland, and Ireland. He entered
Scotland. A great fire at Holborne Conduit. Traffic with Scotland prohibited.
The head of the kings picture (in the the old Exchange) broken off, an this
inscription set over the body thereof, Ex^t Tyrannus Regum ultimus anno
libertatis Angliae restitutae prim^ Jan. 10, 1648. His statute on the West end
of St. Paul's thrown down also, and after the remainder of his picture in the
old Exchange broken down. The great victory at Dunbar, Leith, and Edinburg
taken. The Scots king crowned in Scotland. Diverse Scots who mu^dered some of
Lord Cromwels men had their houses pulled down and a Gallows erected there and
the murderers hanged thereon.

1651 Some of the chief in the plot for the Scots king, in England taken.
Scilly Isles surrend^ed. Castle-haven and his army threw down their arms, and
fl^d, and diverse taken in pursuit. The Scots king entered England. 40 men kept
Worcester against the Scots army, whilst the magazine was removed to
Gloucester. Mr. Love and Gibbons beheaded. Dundee taken, the great victory and
total rout of Worcester. 500 l. profferd to any that should discover the Scots
king.

1652 Sr. George Askew took, sunk, and dispersed 36 Dutch ships. The French
fleet beaten by the English The Dutch beaten near the Downs, and about 8 ships
sunk and taken. Another terrible sea fight between the English and the Dutch
near the Isle of Wight, and about 40 Dutch ships taken, most of them being
Merchants.

1653 The long Parliament which began 3 Nov. 1640 dissolved. The Dutch beaten,
seven ships sunk, two Hoyes, eleven ships, a fly Boat, and 1350 prisoners
taken. Mr. Lilburn returned to England, and was committed to Newgate. The short
Parliament began, General assembly of the Scots kirk dispersed. Another bloody
fight between the English and the Dutch wherein their Admiral Van Trump was
slain, 30 or more ships taken, sunk and fired, and 1000 prisoners taken. The
Dutch beaten again near the Coast of Holland and about 40 ships sunk and taken.
The Chancery voted down. An act for Marriage, births and burials. Mr. Lilborne
after diverse days trial at the sessions house cleared by a Jury. The short
Pa^liament dissolved, the Lord General Cromwell made Lord Protector of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging. And magnificently
feasted at Grocers hall.

1654 Peace proclaimed with Holland. A third Parliament began at Westminster.
Major General Overton was committed to the Tower. The Parliament dissolved.
Major General Harrison was carried to Portland. A lamentable fire in
Threed-needle-street

1655 A Cruel Massacre acted on the Protestants in Piemont by the Duke of
Savoys forces. Lord Lambeit chosen Lord Warden of the Cinque ports, and
Colonel Nathaniel Fines made Lord privy Seal. A day of Humiliation was
observed in England in the behalf of the Savoy Protestants, and a great
collection was made in the City and suburbs for them. Diverse of the late kings
party secured in the several Counties of England. General Blake lay before
Cadiz in Spain with 30 sail of ships. The Lord Christian Bond Ambassador from
the king of Sweden arrived in London. Mr. Rolt one of his Highness Gentleman
set forth his journey, with a ratification of the alliance between England and
Sweden. Articles of agreement were drawn between the Duke of Savoy and the
Protestants there. General Penn and Venables committed to the Tower. His
Highness appointed several Major Generals for all the Counties in England. The
Ambassador of France brought the ratification of the treaty of peace, which was
signed by his Highness, and the king of France, and sealed with the seals of
both Nations.

1656 Richard Hannum the great Robber executed in Smithfield. A very great
sto^m of hail, thunder, and lightning in the City of Norwich. A great victory
obtained by some of our Frigots against 7 Spanish ships richly laden, coming
from the West Indies. The River of Thames ebbed and flowed twicein three hours.
A day of thanksgiving was observed in England, for the success of the English
against the king of Spains West India fleet. James Naylor, John Stranger and
his Wife, Martha Simons, and Dorcas Erbury brought from Bristol to London. An
act for taking away the Court of Wards and Liveries. Peace with Portugal
proclaimed in London and Westminster.

1657 Major General Harrison was committed to the custody of the Sergeant at
arms, also Capt. Lauson, Colonel Rich, and Major Danvers were taken into
custody. Sir John Reynolds received his commission to be Commander in chief of
those forces which were embarked for Flanders. A great defeat given to the
Spanish Navy near Santa Cruz, by General Blake as they returned from the
Indies. Mardike taken, and put in the possession of Major General Morgan, for
the use of his Highness. 8 or 9 Popish Priests were apprehended in Covent
Garden, and were sent prisoners to St. James.

1658 A great victory obtained by the English in Jamaica against the king of
Spains forc^s Dr. John Huet, Mr. John Russel, and Sir William Compton committed
to the Tower. The Earl of Warwick died. May the 15, the Guards at White-hal
were doubled, and at other places about London, and all the horse and foot were
commanded to be in arms, and about 40 of the Cavalliers party were apprehended
and carried to White Hall. Sir Henry Slingsby, and Doctor Huet were condemned
to be hanged, drawn, and quarterd at Tibou^n. A Whale was taken in the Thames
near Greenwich about 60 foot long, and of a very great thickness Victory
obtained by the French and English forc^s at the leagure before Dunkirk wherein
1^0^ were killed and 2000 prisoners taken. Sir Henry Slingsby and Dr. Huet were
beheaded on Tower Hill. Dunkirk surrendered to the English and French forces,
and the king of France put it into the hand of the Lord Lockart for the use of
his Highness. Graveling surrendered to the English and French forces.

1659 September 3. Oliver Lord Protector died. The The Lord Richard Cromwell
(his son) was proclaimed L. Protector

January 27. The Parl. began

April 22 The Parl. was dissolved.

May 6. There was published a Declaration of the Officers of the army inviting
the Members of the long Parl. (who continued sitting till the 20 of April 1653)
to return to the exercise and discharge of their trust. The 7 day the members
met in the painted Chamber, from whence after some consultation amongst
themselves with Mr. Speaker, they went in a body to their house (the Speaker
having the Mice born before him,) where they passed a Declaration (which since
was printed) wherein they do declare that they are resolved (through the
gracious assistance of Almighty God) to apply themselves to the faithful
discharge of the trust reposed to them, and to endeavor the setlement of this
Commonwealth upon such a foundation as may assert, establish, and secure the
property and liberty of the people: in reference unto all, both as Men and as
Christians, and that without a single Person, Kingship, or house of Peers. A
petition of diverse Citizens of London was presented to the Parl. to have the
Militia of the said City settled, in such persons as are of known integrity. The
house ordered certain members (or any five of them) to be a Committee, to
consider of the imprisonment, of such persons who being committed to continue
for conscience sake, and how, and what manner they are and stand committed,
together with the whole cause, and how they may be discharged. The style and
title in all Legal proceedings and process were declared to be, The Keepers of
the liberty of England, by authority of Parliament, and no other. A petition of
many persons in, and about the City of London, was presented to the Parliament
of the Commonwealth of England desiring: 1 That the Militia of the several
Cities and Countries may be settled in such hands as have approved themselves
faithful thereto. 2 That such persons as have been ejected out of place of
trust may be restored. 3 That care may be taken that persons entrusted with the
Legislative power, may not be perpetuated. 4 That all persons may be tendered,
so that neither their persons may not be imp^isoed, nor their goods touched,
without the breach of some known law and due prosecution accordingly. 5 That
all moneys that are or shall be levied upon the people for the service of the
Commonwealth, may not be diverted to any other purpose, and that the great sums
of money, proportions of land, and places of advantage conferred on any since
the 20 of April 1653, may be taken into consideration, and that the chargable
Offices and Officers of the Exchequer may be regulated. 6 That provision may be
made, that such as may live peaceably in godliness and honesty (though of
different persuasions in matters of faith and worship) may be equally protected
and encouraged. 7 That a Committee may be appointed to receive propositions
from any person or persons as may conduce unto the frame or constitution of a
good and equal Commonwealth or free state. 8 That all such sums of money that
since the 20 of April 1653 have been received or borrowed out of the Exchequer
by privy Counselors or others, be repaid into the treasure of this
Commonwealth. 12 day the petition and address of the Officers of the Army (with
several proposals) was presented to the Parliament: The Parliament made an Act
wherein they declare what the great Seal shall be. The Parl. resolved that
White-hal and Somerset House with all and every the a purtenances be forthwith
exposed to sale, and emproved to the best advantage of the Commonwealth, for
and toward the satisfaction of the great arrears and pay due unto the Army. A
petition of the Bailiffs and Commonalty in the Maritime Town, and Corporation
of South-wold, otherwise, of Soulbay, in the County of Suffolk, and a
certification from the Justices, certifying that on the 25 of April 1659, 228
dwelling houses were wasted and consumed to the damage of 40000 l. and upward,
and letters patents ordered to pass under the great Seal, for a charitable
contribution throughout England and Wales for 12 months. A petition from
diverse in the town of Warmister in the County of Wilts. The house did take the
petition and address of the Army, into consideration and made these resolves.
First, that the liberties of the estates of all the free people of these
Nations shall be maintained, preserved and kept inviolable, according to Law,
under the government of a free State or Commonwealth without a single person,
kingship, or house of Peers. 2 That there shall be such a just and due
regulation of the Law, and Courts of Justice, and equity as that they shall be
a protection, and not vexatious or oppressive to the people of this Nation. 3
That all persons who profess faith in God the Father, and in Jesus Ghrist his
only Son the true God, and in the Holy Spirit, God coequal with the Father and
the Son, one God, blessed for ever, and do aknowledge the Holy Scripture of
the Old and New Testaments, to be the revealed or written word or will of God,
shall not be restrained from their profession, but have due encouragement, and
equal protection in the profession of their faith and exercise of their
religion, whilst they abuse not this liberty to the civil injury of others or
disturbance of others in their way of worship; so as this liberty be not
extended to Popery or Prelacy, nor to such as shall practice or hold forth
licentiousness under the profession of Religion, and that all Laws, Statutes,
Ordinances, Clauses in any Laws, Statutes, or Ordinances, to the contrary may
be declared null and void.

Richard Cromwell, eldest Son of the late L. Genesis did signify, that though he
could not be active, in making a change in the government, of these Nations:
yet he does freely acquiesce in it, being made: and that he does hold himself
obliged, as (with other men) he expects protection, from the present
government, so as to demean himself, with all peaceableness under it; and to
procure to the utmost of his power, that all in whom he has any interest do
the same. Several other petitions were presented to the Parliament to the like
purpose, of the former, which we cannot stay to mention.

27 day was a day of humiliation, and seeking the Lord, by the Members of the
house in the house.

An old Parson of a Parish called Lesbury, in Northumberland (whose eyes,
teeth, and hair, (as is affirmed) renewed after he was 112 years old) died (at
the latter end of the Month of May) being 114 years old.

A Catalogue, of some pleasant and useful Maps and Pictures that are cut in
Copper, being very neat ornaments for houses, Gentlemen's studies and Closets,
and useful for diverse callings, as Painters, Embroyderers. etc. which are
printed, colored, and to be sold by Robert Walton, at the Globe and Compass,
in St. Paul's Churchyard, between the 2 North doors.
Maps of the World with or without descriptions. The 4 parts of the World with
or without description. A map of England, and Ireland in a royal sheet. The
P^a^mans map of England, Ireland and Scotland, with a description, and
chronology, of all the memorable, and considerable passages and actions, that
have been therein ever since William the Conqueror, or without descriptions. A
map of London and Westminster with a large description of the places and things
of note: As also a brief, but particular description, of the several
Companies, and Corporations, that are therein, or without de^cription. The
arms, crests* and supporters, of all the Cities in England, and all the several
Companies of the famous City of London. The Philosophers head, or an excellent
compendious abridgement, comprehending the chief grounds and principles of
Philosophy, and the very marrow of humane learning. A Laurel of Metaphysick. An
Artificial description of Logic. The tree of man's life, or an Emblem declaring
the like, and unlike, or various condition of all men in their state of
creation, birth, life, death, burial, resurrection, and last judgment, etc. An
Almanac (in a large sheet) for 50 years. The manner of the Savoy's Massacre
are presented in several pictures. A new Book of Maps, being a ready guide to
any who is to Travel in any part of England, Scotland, and Ireland. A view of
the creation, being a Book of birds, beasts, flowers, fruits, flies, worms, and
fish; containing 28 leaves. Another called Orpheus, containing 9 leaves.

A Book of the pictures, of all the Kings and Queens of England, ever since
William the Conqueror. The 5 Senses, and 7 liberal Sciences of Mr. Cleins
doing, and also his rare book of Foldigde. A Copy Book, called an ease for the
writing Schoolmaster, and the yougmans tutor, and all other Copy Books that are
commonly used in England.

And he has many other, both sheets and half sheets, (and is doing more) and
had not the Graver been backwards more had been made known to the World before
this time.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 4 lin. 11 for 18, 15, read 1, 8, 15. page 4 last line but 2 for the
letter gives, read the letter A gives. page 34 l. 12 for leight read light. p.
34 l. 18 for rests read rents. P. 76 last line but one, for the cities of, read
the cities and rivers of. p. 94 l. 8 for Arphaxad read Arphadax born. p. 106 l.
10 for disabedient Law, read disobedient to the Law. pa. 108 l. 13 for Cizen
read Ciren. pa. 108 l. 15 for marriage killed, read marriage day he killed. And
if there be any small faults the Reader is desired to correct them.


