THE UNVEILING OF Antichrist.

OR, ANTICHRIST stripped naked out of all his SCRIPTURE-ATTYRE, by which he has
deceived the Christian World; So that we may the more clearly see the very
bottome-root, from whence he sprang, and the very Basis and Foundation upon
which he has erected, and set up his Kingdom.

By JAMES POPE.

GAL. 3. 1 O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you should not
obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth,
crucified among you? GAL. 3* 3. Are ye so foolish? Having begun in the spirit,
are you now made perfect in the flesh? GAL. 4. 31. So then, Brethren, we are
not children of the Bondwoman, but o of the free. LONDON, Printed by Jane Coe,
for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his Shop in Pope's Head Alley. 1646.

To the READER.
COURTEOUS READER;
SEeing it is so generally thought by the People of God, that the total
rooting out of Antichrist draws near; and that the discovery of Antichrist, is
the way to root out Antichrist: I thought it my duty to impart to others, what
my self did conceive touching the same; That which I have endeavored to do in
this ensuing Discourse is, by the Scriptures to strip Antichrist out of his
Scripture Covering, that so we might see the very Root from whence he springs:
I confess many have writ worthily in our age concerning Antichrist, in some
particulars; and although I come short of them in those particulars whereof
they have written, yet this may be as useful, if not more useful; First,
because this touches not only some few, but almost (if not) all particulars,
whereby Antichrist has deceived the Christian World, as it is called. Again,
other Treatises have been very useful to the more able and judicious, but for
the most part the less able have had but little profit, there being in most
Books so much School-Language, that many do not know the phrase, nor sense;
but I have endeavored to be plain and familiar to every ordinary capacity,
and it can be no wrong to the godly, wise, that are more taken with the
excellency of the matter, than of the style. Reader, I intre it thy help
against Antichrist, who is an Enemy to us both* yea and to the Lord also* Oh
therefore, wherein I have been deficient do thou supply and let us all join our
forces against this great Enemy* Read diligently* peruse carefully weigh the
S^riptures coated and I hope thou will be more abuntantly enabled then m^ self
to enlarge in thy meditations, what I have but briefly hinted at; that it may
be so is the earnest desire of him that daily prays for the ruin of
Antichrist.

JAMES POPE.

Faults escaped in some Copies.
Page 6. l. 8. r. receive. p. 8. l. 22. r. Rule. ibid. 35. dele away, p. 10. l.
17. r. Ephesians. 2. 5. 8. p. 12. l. 13. r. Stews. ibid l. 19. r. Stews, p. 15. in
the Margin r. Heb. 9. 24* p. 16. l. 16. r. Heb. 10. p. 18. l. 15. for chap. 8.
r. chap. 2.

THE UNVEILJNG OF ANTICHRIST.
NOtwithstanding Antichrist has been in the world this Sixteen Hundred years,
and notwithstanding all his great works, and the much talk that has been of
Antichrist; yet very few till of late have learned to know what is Antichrist,
much less have they made any discovery of him to their fellows, which may
cause us the more to admire* at the working of God in this present Age, that
now it begins to be familiar among the people of God, what Antichrist is, which
gives us good hope that the final consumption thereof is at hand; and indeed,
God has stirred up many of late to do worthily against Antichrist: our
Parliament have struck hard against him in some of his Branches, which is well;
for all cannot be done at once, seeing the rooting up of Antichrist is not the
work of one day. Now Antichrist is that Spirit of Error, whereby men are
deceived, and so deny Christ to be come in the flesh 1 John 4. 3. Now to deny
Christ to be come in the flesh in words, I conceive none do, except it be the
Jews, no not the Pope himself; therefore it must needs be to maintain
something to be still on foot that was before Christ, and pointed to Christ to
come, who being come, has ended all those things, Gal. 3. 24* 25. So that my
work now is to examine what it is, which to hold forth now, does deny Christ to
be come in the flesh, and to this end I shall declare by the Scriptures, that
God made two Covenants with his people; Rom* 9. 4. Gal* 4* 24* Ephesians. 2, 12*
with the end of them; and the Differences between them,

Heb* 8. 8, 9. does fully prove that God made two Covenants.

The end of these Covenants was to take people near unto God* to walk before
him as his own people, Exodus 19. 5, 6. Heb. 8. 0 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10.

The Differences between them are many; First, in regard First Difference in
regard of the time of making of them.
of the time of the making of them, the first being made with the people of
Israel, when God took them by the hand to lead them out of the Land of Egypt,
Heb. 8. 9. Jerem. 21. 4. and 31, 32.

Objection. But some may object, that in regard this is a Covenant of works, it
must needs be the same that God made with Adam.

Answer. I answer, that Adams state was different from ours, and there is no
mention of this Covenant to him, but he was near unto God by Creation, and this
Covenant was to take some of the lost Seed of Adam near to himself, and the
rest were strangers to the Covenants of Promise, Ephesians. 2. 12.

Objection. But it may be some will object, and say, was it not made with
Abraham in the 17* of Genesis

Answer. I answer, that Abraham had the promises of both Covenants, Gal. 4.
and had also the types of both; to wit, Agar and Sarah, and so vertually he
had both; but always the types go before the thing typified, and the promises
before the things promised; and God says expressly he made the first Covenant
with that people, when he took them by the hand, to lead them out of the Land
of Egypt: The second, or New Covenant was actually made out at the death of the
Testator, Heb. 9. 16, 17.

Objection. If any ask what benefit then was to those that were before the
death of the Testator?

Answer. I answer, they had the efficacy of his death, by Faith beholding him
in the Promises, and in the Types; for vertually he was A Lamb slain from the
foundation of the world, Revel. 13. 8. Second difference is in regard of the
people with whom these Covenants are made*


The second Difference is in regard of the people to whom, or with whom these
Covenants are made; the first was made with Israel after the flesh; the second
with Israel as they are considered in spiritual relation to Christ, Gal. 3. 29.

The third Difference, is in regard of the Conditions of the Covenants; the
Condition of the first, Do this and live; and upon that Condition only God did
promise to be their God, Jer. 11. 4. 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. and all the Promises were
upon Third difference is in regard of the Conditions of the Covenants.
condition of doing* Jerem. 11. 3, 4. Deuteronomy. 28. throughout the Chapter. But the
New Covenant requires nothing by way of a condition on the Creatures part,
without which it is not made good, and without which the Promises are not made
good, as appears by Heb. 8. 9. where he says, Not like the Covenant which he
made with their Fathers* which Covenant they broke, and he regarded them not.
So that his not regarding them, proceeded from their not keeping the conditions
of his Covenant*: but it is not such a Covenant; for (says he, verse. 10. 11.)
This is the Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel after those
days, says the Lord: I will put my Laws into their mind, and in their hearts
will I write them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my People. And
they shall not teach every man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother;
saying, know the Lord: for all shall know me from the least to the greatest;
for I Will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and I will remember their
sins and iniquities no more: Se also the Prophecy of this Covenant, Jerem.
31. 31, 32, 33, 34. In all which, we find nothing as a condition put upon the
Creature, but God has engaged himself to do the whole work for them.

The fourth Difference is in regard of the Promises of these Fourth difference
is in regard of the Promises of these Covenants.
Covenants; the Promises of the first Covenant being only Temporal Promises,
of Temporal things: as Deuteronomy. 28. verse. 1. to the 15. Jerem. 11. 5. But the
Promises of the New Covenant are all Spiritual Promises of Spiritual things;
as by those forementioned places, Heb. 8 9, 10, 11. Jerem. 31. 32, 33, 24. As
in one, there is no mention of a Spiritual Promise; so in the other there is
no mention of a Temporal Promise.

The fifth Difference is between the Mediators of these Covenants; Fifth
Difference is between the Mediators of these Covenants.
the first being (as I conceive) Moses, and therefore he is said to be
faithful in all his house, Heb. 3. 2. 5. Gal 3. 19. and we see Moses
performing the office of a mediator, as need did require, as Exo. 32. 11. Let
me alone says God that I may destroy them; but Moses would not give over God
till he was appeased; as verse 14. and Psalm. 106. 23. But the Mediator of the
new Covenant is Jesus Christ, Heb. 8. 6. and 9. Sixth Difference is in the
Blood of the two Covenants.
15. It is Christ alone that is the Mediator between God and man with referance
to the new Covenant.

The sixth difference is in the Bloods of the two Covenants, one was the blood
of Calves and goats (to wit, of the first covenant) as Heb. 9 19 20. Where it
is called the blood of the Covenant; so also, Exodus 24. 8. But the blood of the
New Seventh difference is in writing of the Law of the Covenants.
Covenant is the blood of Christ, Who through the Eternal Spirit has offered
up himself without spot to God; so also, cor. 11. 25

The seventh Difference is in the writing of the Law of the covenants; the
first was written in Tables of Stone, Exodus 32. 15, 16. But the Law of the New
Covenant was written in the heart, as Heb. 8. 10. 1 cor. 11. 25.

The Eighth difference, is in regard of the obscurity of the 8 Difference is in
regard of the obscurity of the one, and plainness of the other.
one, and plainness of the other, as in the 2 Cor. 3. 13, 14, 15. there was
blackness and darkness at the delivery of it, Heb. 12. 18. but the New
Covenant is plain and clear, 2 Cor. 3. 18. and it must needs be so, seeing the
law of it is written in the heart of the people; The people of the first, could
not look to the end of that which is abolished, and this obscurity was shadowed
out by the veil upon Moses face, 2 Cor. 3. 13. therefore this vail is said to
remain upon their face until this day in the reading of the Old Testament,
verse. 14. but we with open face behold as in a glass the glory of the Lord,
and are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory; as by the Spirit of
the Lord, verse. 18.

The Ninth difference, is in regard of the worship that did 9 Difference is in
regard of the worship appertaining to these Covenants.
appertain to these Covenants; for that which did belong to the first Covenant,
did consist of tipes and shadows of good things to come, Heb. 10. 1.

But the worship under this Covenant, is such a worship as declares that those
good things are already come, and is a spiritual worship, John 4. 23. and
Phil. 3. 3.

The last difference that I shall name, is, that The first Covenant Last
difference is, the 1 Covenant is done away that the second might be established.
is done away, that the second might be established, 2 Cor. 3. 11. Heb. 8. 13.
and 10. 9.

Thus have I briefly showed the differences between the two Covenants: But it
may be some will object and say, what is this to the laying open the main root
of Antichrist?

I answer, that in regard the first Covenant did run in the flesh, and did hold
out Christ to come in the flesh; Now to hold out that Covenant when Christ is
come in the Flesh is the main Root of Antichrist, and denies Christ to become
in the flesh: As will more evidently appear by the going over these particulars
again, and making such use thereof, as the Scripture will direct us to do.

The use of the first Difference.
If the first Covenant was made when God took the people of Israel by the hand
to lead them out of the Land of Egypt; then it takes off that which some
suppose, that all actual sins are sins against the first Covenant, and are
done away by Christ, and that unbeleife is only the sin against the New
Covenant; to this end they bring that place, Heb. 9. 15. where it is said, for
this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of death, for
the Redemption of the Transgressions that were under the first Testament, they
which are called, might retain the promise of eternal Inheritance: Now to my
understanding, the whole scope of that place is to show, that notwithstanding
there were sacrifices offered for sin according to the Law, yet it was not
sufficient to do away sin; for there was an insufficiency in them, as appears
Heb. 10. 3, 4, 11. and chap. 9. 9. see also the following verses to the 15.
verse; also chap. 10. 1. All which shows, that that Covenant, and those
sacrifices could not make perfect, nor do away sin, as touching the
Conscience, but that the blood of Christ must do it, and that they must look
beyond all those things to Christ, Heb. 10. 9, 10, 12. chap. 9. 14, 26, 28.

Again, this Covenant being made at that time, declares, that other people were
not privileged with that Covenant, as Psalm. 147. 19, 20. It is most evident
that God took no people into Covenant before he took the people of Israel, for
there was no people in a Religious communion, until God gave Abraham the
Promises, and the tipes of the Covenants, as may be found by the Scriptures:
Therefore to hold that all actual sin, that has been, or shall be committed
by men of all Nations, are sins against the first Covenant, and done away by
Christ, makes the first Covenant to be made to all Nations, which is contrary
to Psalm. 147. 19, 20. Again, it makes the Covenant to be before it was: Again,
it holds it out to be still in being to the end of the world, whereas the
Scripture declares it to be done away: as before showed.

The use of the second Difference.
If the first Covenant was made with Israel after the flesh, and the second
with Israel after the Spirit; Then to affirm that Infants are foederally holy
by virtue of their being borne of Believing Parents, holds forth still a
Covenant in the Flesh, which to do, does (to my understanding) deny Christ to
be come in the flesh; for if the Testator of the New Testament be dead, and the
New Testament be in force only to the Spiritual Seed, then to bring in the
Natural Seed again, is to look for Christ to come again, for he was to come
of the Natural Seed, and when he is come, all the privileges that came by
descent, are void; as appears by the Apostle Paul, Phil. 3. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
where the Apostle renounces all fleshly privileges, and those he strives for,
are such as flow from Christ's sufferings, death, and resurrection; as also 2
Cor. 5. 16. After the Apostle had spoken of the death of Christ, in the 15.
verse; he infers (verse. 16.) that henceforth we know no man after the flesh,
though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth know we him so no
more.

If any ask what holiness that is in, 1 Cor. 7. 14.

I answer, that we are to mind the scope of the place; the Apostle is there
answering a doubt, which was, whether the believing husband, or wife, might
continue to dwell with their husband or wife being an unbeleiver? He answers,
they might, or else their children would be unclean, as they were under the Law
or first Covenant; but that was a thing out of question; it seems they did not
question but they might keep their children. But it appears by the Apostle they
might, as well question the one, as the other; but neither was to be questioned.

But it may be some may object and say, that the people that came of Jacob were
not the Seed of the Flesh, but Ishmael was the Seed of the Flesh, as Gal. 4. 29.

For answer hereunto, the Seed of the Flesh is to be considered in a Twofold
respect: First, Ishmael was the Seed of the Flesh, for he was by a Bond woman,
and was begotten in the strength of Nature; and so Isaac was not the Seed of
the flesh, for he was of the Freewoman, and born by promise, Gal. 4. 23.
Again, Ishmael was the Seed of the fleshy, Genesis 18. 11, 12. as he did ^ipe out
the Seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as they were considered the Seed of the
first Covenant, and therefore he was before Isaac; for the Bondwoman did type
out the first Covenant, and her Seed did type out the Seed of the first
Covenant, Gal. 4. 23, 24 But Isaac as a type, did hold forth the Seed of the
New Covenant as Sarah did (as a type) hold forth the New Covenant, Gal. 4. 26,
27, 28. and therefore the mighty Power of God was seen, to make good his
promise above and beyond the power and strength of Nature, to cause Sarah to
conceive, and bring forth Isaac; even as it is the mighty power of God above
the strength of nature, that causes the children of the new Covenant to be
brought forth, John 2. 5. Ephesians. 2. 5, 6. Colos. 1. 12, 13 14. 1 Pet. 1. 3. 23.
1 Cor. 1. 23, 24. Therefore let us learn to put a difference, where the
Scripture puts a difference, least we deny Christ to become in the Flesh, and
so be antichristian.

If any object and say, May not Infants be the children of the New Covenants?

I answer, Not by virtue of being descended of Believing Parents, as is pleaded
from 1 Cor. 7. 14. and Acts 2. 39.

Again, let this teach all Believers, to love as Brethren; Be not like those
Israelites, Exe. 2. 13. What though there be difference in judgment, it is for
want of Light that there is any falling short, or going beyond a Rub; for all
the people of Christ are a willing people in the day of his power, Psalm. 110.
3. and that every one that knows God, to be his God, according to the Grace
and Power of the New Covenant, is willing to be, and do what ever God would
have them. Oh therefore, let there be no strangeness amongst us; God our
Father loves us, and bears with us; let us learn to do the like one toward
another: It is not the taking, or not taking up of an Ordinance that makes us
the children of God, but our being in covenant with God, and there may be as
much tenderness of the Glory of God showed, in the forbearing to practice that
which we are not satisfied in, as in practicing that which we are satisfied in.
Let us not therefore judge one another any more, Romans ^. 13. But judge this
rather, That no man put away a stumbling block, or an occasion of offense in
his Brothers way (verse. 13.) And let us therefore follow after the things which
make for peace, and things wherewith one may edify another, (verse. 19.) And
judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to
light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the Counsels of
the hearts: and then shall every man have praise of God, 1 Corinthians. 4. 5. Love
is a great duty, that the people of the New Covenant owe one to another, Heb.
10. 24. and that which Christ requires of them, John 13. 34. and it is a Note
to know Christ's Disciples, from the World, verse. 35. I his makes us like God, 1
John 4: 7, 8, 11, 12. I might write a whole Book of this particular; But I hope
those to whom this is directed, will be active in the discharge of this duty;
and truly I observe, that of late the people of God are more for love, and the
silencing of differences, then ever I knew them; which I doubt not, but it is a
presage of much good: but I say no more of this, lest it should seem to be a
degression.

Again, by this it appears, that to hold a Nation (as England, Scotland,
Germany, etc.) to be the Church of God in Covenant, denies Christ to become in
the flesh, and so is Antichristian; For if a Nation be in Covenant, it must
needs be in the first Covenant, for the New Covenant takes a choice people out
of the Nations in whose hearts God writes his Law, Heb. 8. 10. 2 Cor. 3. 3. and
they shall all know him from the least to the greatest, (verse. 11.) But so it
cannot be said of any Nation; and he will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and their sin, and their iniquities he will remember no more.
But to what Nation can this be applied? Surely to none, but to a select people;
and therefore the Churches of Christ under this Covenant, are said to be in
Christ, Gal. 1. 22. 1 These. 2. 14. In which places take notice, that even in
Judea where was only one Church; which was the collective body of the Nation,
none excepted under the first Covenant; now under the New Covenant, there is
several Churches which are in Christ.

The use of the third Difference.
If the Conditions of the first Covenant were, Do this and live; then it
shows us the reason why God did deal so sharply with them in outward things
when they sinned against him; because it was according to the conditions of his
Covenant with them.

Again, it shows the privilege of the people of the New Covenant, they live to
do, but not do to live; they do not act to God, to be kept in the favor of
God; but they are kept in the favor of God, that so they may acknowledge God,
and be to the praise of his Grace, for all is of grace to them: First, their
Election is of grace, Romans 11, 5, 6. Secondly, that Christ dyed for them is
grace, Heb. 2. 9. Again, they are freely justified by his grace, Tit. 3. 7.
Again, that they are called, it is of grace, Gal 1. 6. 15. Again, that they
believe, it is of grace, Act. 18. 27. Again, that they have Hope, it is through
grace, 2 These. 2. 16. Again, that they are saved, it is by grace, Ephesians. 2. 9,
8. and all is, that they should be to the praise of the glory of his Grace,
Ephesians. 1. 6. you see here is nothing but Grace: Now if there were a Condition
of Works, then Grace were no more Grace, Romans 11. 6.

If any object and say, then we need not work.

I answer, We are the more engaged to work.

If any ask to what end?

It is answered already, viz. to glorify God, who has called us to partake of
such Grace; so that to hold forth Works as the Condition of the Covenant, does
(as I conceive) deny Christ to become in the flesh; for the first Covenant,
with the Condition thereof, was ended in Christ, when he came in the flesh.

The use of the fourth Difference.
If the promises of the New Covenant, are only Spiritual; then it may serve
to silence them, that speak against those that walk not with them in the
public way; Because (say they) they are poor men most of them, and God does
blast them in their Estates: For my part, I conceive that such speeches as
these flow from a Spirit of Envy, or a Spirit of Antichrist, or both: If they
speak that which they do not think, it is like, it is from Envy; But if they
think indeed, that because God did promise in the first Covenant to make his
people prosper in outward things, and they see not this made good to them now,
and therefore they conclude them to be in a way of Error; this is from the
Spirit of Antichrist; for this was the privilege of the first Covenant, and
God did make good his promise to them; he gave them indeed a Land flowing with
milk and honey, and made them a rich People, and a terror to their Enemies, so
long as they keep close to him. But the things promised in the New Covenant, is
only of Spiritual privileges, as is before showed, from Ierem. 31. 32, 33,
34. Heb. 8. 9, 10, 11. which God has ever made good to them; only for the
measure he does proportion them accordingly to his Fatherly dispensations; and
for outward things, it is enough for them, that he that takes care for Lillies
and Sparrowes, is their Father; but for abundance, they are not to look for it
by virtue of a promise, but rather the contrary, and that by the current of
Scripture; see first Christ's own words, Matthew. 5. 10, 11. Blessed are they
which are persecuted for Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven: Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and say
all manner of evil against you for my sake, falsely: And truly friends, if ever
men were set on work to say all manner of evil against the servants of Christ
falsely, then surely now; I admire that men dare to write, and See Dr. Featlies
Dipper dipped. Mr. Pryns fresh discovery of prodigious Blasing Stars, their
Epist. to the Parl.
preach as they do: for first they brand them with the reproachful names of
Sectaries, and then lay to their charge such things as is most false, and then
run to the Magistrates in their Dedicatory Epistles, to have them put to death
for denying the Authority of the Civil Magistrate, and for striking at the
very Roots of it, the most unjust thing in the world; but they bring large
stories of the Anabaptist in Germany, and thence conclude, that those they call
so here are such. Whether ever there were any such in Germany, or no, I know
not; But it is evident those in England that are so called, are as faithful to
the Magistrate as any in the Kingdom; for though they do not fight for their
Religion, yet are there Thousands of those Sectaries, and Anabaptists, (as they
call them) in the Field, with their lives in their hands, to maintain a lawful
Magistracy against Tyranny.

Add to this, the Confession of Faith published in the name of seven Churches
in London.

Sometimes they say they are an unclean people, and then to See the Dipper
dipped, page 1^^.
prove it, they bring a great many stories of Outlandish men, and of a great
many of their beastly Predecessors; the Popes who tolerated Jews, and
instance in but one man in all in England, one Farnham, that pretended he was
one of the Prophets in Revel. 11. this Farnham, if he be a man of any Religion,
it is that of the Church of England, for since he was in prison he was very hot
for Common Prayer; therefore Dr. Featly should have framed his argument thus;
if the Popes tolerate shows, or if any old stories can be related of some
beyond Sea that have been called Anabaptists, that have had many wives, or any
one giddy-brain'd fellow in England, although of no Religion, then are the
Anabaptists an impure Sect; but the former is true, therefore the latter.
Another slander as bad as this is cast upon the Anabaptists; which is, that
they are a bioudy Sect, and to make this good, Dr. Featly tells us; First, that
some under Dipper dipped, page 174, 175, 176.
color of Religion, sacrificed their Parents, some their Children, in the
Valley of Hinnon, the Indians their Kings and Priests, to which they were
stirred up by the Devil, and sometimes to wars, then tells us of persecution
against the Church; but because this reaches not the Anabaptist, he tells us
what the Anabaptist did in Suevia and Franconia, of Thomas Muncer, John
Mathias, and John of Leyden; and because this is little to the Anabaptist in
England, he says, it is not good to suffer the Eggs of the Cockatrice to
remain among us; for when they be hatched, there will break out of them most
venemons Serpents: Now good Reader, judge impartially who are the bloody sect,
whether the Anabaptist, or Dr* Featly and those of his Sect? as Mr. Paget who
applies himself to the Lord Mayor to take a course with the Anabaptists, and
Mr. Pryn who applies himself to the Parliament, to cut off the Sectaries, or
Dr. Featly himself, who would have them dealt with as one would do with a
Cockatrice Egg, and if the Dr. and his Sect be the bloody Sect, then whereas
he says the Anabaptist are a lying Sect, page 168. this will fall upon him
also, and his fellows whose Books are almost as full of untruths, as an Egg
is full of meat: Though for my part I am no Anabaptist, so called, but seeing
that they, as well as other honest men, are accused to Magistracy falsely, this
made me give the Reader this brief hint thereof*
But pardon this digression, it is only to show how that Scripture is
fulfilled, Matthew. 5. 11.

I will now proceed to show that the people of the New Covenant are not to look
to be the more prosperous in the things of this life, because they walk close
with God, as it was with the people of the first Covenant, Matthew. 10. 16, 17,
18. Christ tells those, he sends out what hard things they must suffer for his
Name sake; He does not tell them, that their Enemies that come out against them
one way, shall fly before them seven ways; but they must go forth as Sheep
among Wolves, and be brought before Councels, and before Kings, and
Magistrates, for his Names sake^* so also, verse. 21, 12, 36, 37, 38. And
therefore he gives them many encouragements against their troubles, as verse.
19, 20, 24, 25, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 39. And what Christ foretold his servants
in these and many more Scriptures, they found to be fulfilled; see an abstract
of their sufferings, 2 Cor. 1. 8, 9, 10. and Chap. 11. 23, to the 28. and chap.
4. 8, 9, 10, 11. see how it befell the Churches, 1 These: 2. 14 Act. 8. 1. Heb.
10. 32, 33, 34. Revel. 29, 10. chap. 11. 2. chap, 12. 4, 6, 13, 14, 16, 17.
Thus you see how it went with them, in regard of persecution: I will give you
some Scriptures, that speak of their poverty; the Churches of Macedonia had
great trial of affliction, and were in deep poverty, 2 Cor. 8. 2. So the
Church of Smyrna, Rev. 29. Christ told those that would be his Disciples, that
they must deny themselves* and take up their cross daily and follow him,
Matthew. 16. 24. Mark. 8. 34. Christ himself had not whereon to lay his head,
Matthew. 8. 20. and the Disciple is not above his Lord, Matthew. 10. the Prophets
prophecy in sackcloath, Rev. 11. God has chosen the poor in this world, rich
in Faith, Jam. 2. 5. 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27, 28. Thus you see by the current Luke 4,
18 ^. 22.
of Scripture, what is the condition of the Churches, and people of the New
Covenant: Now if God had promised them the same privileges in outward things,
as he did the people of the first Covenant, he would have made good his
promises: But he Heb. 8, 6. 10, 11, 12.
has promised better things in this Covenant, to the people that belong to it;
and has also made it good to them, as he did make good the promises of the
first Covenant, to the people of it: This may cause us to suspect that Church,
in which we see worldly glory, to be none of Christ's; especially, seeing the
Scripture has set out the Whorish, Antichristian Church in her bravery, Rev.
17. 4. having the Kings of the Earth to be her companions, in her fornication,
or Whorish Worships; as also the Multitudes of the Nations, verse. 2. 15. chap.
18. 3. 9. See her costlinesse farther, verse. 7. 12. to the 19. But by what
means are people deceived, to think this glorious Whore to be the Church of
Christ? Only by this, that God did put a great deal of outward Glory upon the
Church of the first Covenant, and it had in it the Kings of Is^ael to Rule in
matters of God; and from this they ground, that the Churches of the Nations,
are the Churches of Christ; and from hence it is, that their Ministers must be
Gentlemen, and have the Tithe of all men's charge, and labor, which they bestow
on their Land, as well as the increase: and from hence it is, that there must
be dedicate places for Worship, built large, and high with great stones, like
the Temple: But we have seen the contrary in the Church of Christ under the New
Testament all along; therefore this worldly glory did only belong to the first
Covenant, which now to hold forth, denies Christ to be come in the flesh and is
Antichristian.

In the next place, it may be of singular comfort to the people of this
Covenant, that the promises thereof are better promises, then the promises of
the first Covenant; for they are Spiritual, and perpetual good things that
are promised: It may be a strong ground against falling away. If God have writ
his Law in our hearts, who shall raze it out? If God has pardoned our sins,
who shall lay them to our charge? If God will Rom: 8. 3^
not remember them, who shall call them to mind?

The use of the fifth Difference.
If the Covenant into which we are taken, be that better Covenant, and Christ
(not Moses) is the Mediator of it; then to have any Mediators besides Christ,
denies Christ to be come in the flesh, and is Antichristian.

Again, it shows us the happy estate of the Saints, that they have such a
Mediator; It is their duty not to sin, but when Ioh. 2. 1, 2
they do sin, there is a Mediator between God and Man, who continually makes
up the breach: I confess if it were not so, they might fall out of the favor
of God; but seeing he is gone into Heaven it self, now to appear in the
presence of God for us* Heb. 4, 29*
I believe so long as he appears a Risen Christ for us, and continues his
Mediatorship, those that are in covenant with God, shall so continue;
otherwise, we shall make the Mediatorship of Christ, less successful then
that of Moses, who did prevail with God to pass by the peoples sin, Exodus
32. 11. Psalm. 106. 23. Oh let us take heed that we do not so dishonor Christ
in his Mediatorship; for to prefer Moses before Christ, is Antichristian.

The use of the sixth Difference.
If the blood of Christ (and not the blood of Beasts) is the blood of the New
Testament, then here is the great privilege of Saints, the blood of the first
Testament, did only purify the flesh, Heb. 9. 13. But the blood of Christ is
shed for us, being the blood of the New Testament, Matthew. 26. 28. And this
blood purges the conscience from dead works, to serve the living God, Heb. 9.
14. by this blood we have Remission of sins, and a way made into the holiest,
through the veil, which is his flesh; and that with boldness, by that new and
living way, and have a high Priest over the house of God, Heb. 10. 18, 19, 20,
21. Nay, it is not only our privilege that we may enter boldly, but it is our
duty, we ought to draw near in full assurance of Faith, verse. 22. So that which
is our privilege, is our duty; and our duty is our privilege: In this, we may
take notice of the unspeakable freeness of the Grace of God, and magnify it;
as also, the wonderful happiness of the Saints, that are made to partake of
such Grace; When the blood of the first Covenant was to be offered, none could
go into the holiest, but the High Priest; but now the veil that did keep the
people from the holiest is done away, or rather the substance of that shadow is
consecrated to be our new and living way of entrance, by the blood of Jesus,
into the holiest; and this blessed way unto the Father is open to all the
people of the Covenant, that they go as freely before the Mercy Seat, as the
high Priest who is already entered, Hab. 9. 24. But the way was not made
manifest while the first Tabernacle was standing, Heb. 9. 8. This shows us,
that for men to teach, that the people of God ought to mourn for sin, not
declaring in what sense, is Antichristian; because there is no need to offer
this blood, year by year, nor a remembrance of sin every year, as under the
Old Covenant, Heb. 10. 1. 3. but by this one offering Christ for ever has
perfected them that are sanctified, Heb, 10. 12, 14. So that now for the people
of God to mourn for sin, as under sinnee, is sinful; for it undervalues the
blood of the Covenant, as if it needed to be offered yearly, as the blood of
the first Covenant was. Again, it is sinful, because it opposes duty; for it
is the duty of Saints to draw near in full assurance of Faith; but to apprehend
our selves to lie under guilt of sin, keeps us off of this duty; so that
those that are truly humbled for sin, (I mean those that are in the Covenant)
are not humbled from the sense of guilt, and fear of wrath; but because they by
sin do dishonor God, who is their loving Father, who also has pardoned
their sin.

The use of the seventh Difference.
If the Law of the first Covenant was written in Tables of Stone, and the Law
of the New Govenant in Fleshly Tables of the heart; then it informs us, that
we are not to reckon a Nation to be in covenant with God, and so to be the
Church of God; for that sets up the first Covenant again, and so is
Antichristian, denying Christ to be come in the flesh; for God did take a
Nation in to covenant by the first covenant; but by the second he takes only
those neet to himself by covenant, in whose hearts he writes his Law; and
therefore there were Churches in Judea, where was but one National Church,
under the first Covenant, (as I have formedy showed) and those Churches were in
Christ. 1 These. ^. 14. Gal. 1. 22. The Church of Corinth were Saints by
calling, 1 Cor. 1. 2. The Church to whom Peter writ, were lively stones. 1 Pet.
2. 5. Such as did believe, Verse. 7. A holy Nation, a peculiar people, such as
were called out of darkness, into his marvelous light, Verse. 9. Such holy
Nations, and none else, the new Covenant does allow of, to be the Churches of
Christ; all other Nations, viz. all collective bodies of the Nations, assuming
to themselves the title, and practice of Churches, having no rule but from the
first Covenant, are Antichristian.

Object. It may be some will object and say, that in the invisible Church,
there is none but such as have Gods Law written in their hearts; but in the
visible Churches under the new Covenant, there have been as bad as was among
the Jews under the first covenant.

Answ. I answer, that into the visible Churches of Saints, some may creep in
unawares; as Jude speaks, Jud. 4. But if they once be discovered to be wicked,
the Church will be leavened with them, if they do not cast them out, 1 Cor. 5.
1. 6, 7. 11. Revel. 2. 20. And so my ground holds good for Saints in the
Nations to be the people of Gods covenant, and for the Nations that call
themselves Gods Churches, they are (as I conceive) The waters that carry the
Whore, Rev. 17. 15. For the Whore being a spiritual thing, must necessarily
sit upon people that are accounted religious, and not the Nations of Turks and
Pagans, as some think.

The use of the Eighth Difference.
If the New Covenant be so plain, and full of Light; then let the people of it
labor to walk as children of the light, and of the day; putting on the
Breast Plate of faith, and love, and for an Helmet the hope of salvation, 1
These. 5. 8. Oh let us endeavor so to walk, as those that watch for our
halting, may have nothing against us, unless it be in the matter of our God:
Let us labor to show forth the praises of him, that has called us out of
darkness into his mavelous light. 1 Pet. 2. 9. And the note that the
Scripture gives us to know if we are in the light, is, If we love the Brethren,
1 John 1. 7. chapt. 8, 9, 10, 11. So that (I conceive) to desire to have any of
them hanged, imprisoned, or banished, is from the dark spirit of Antichrist,
and not from the spirit of Love, and Light, which is from Jesus Christ: For
when the Disciples would call for fire from Heaven, as Elias did, Christ tells
them, they did not know what spirit they were of. Luke 9. 55. It is like, they
thought it had been the spirit of God that moved them to be so zealous for
their Master, when it seems it was nothing so; For the spirit of the Lord does
produce other fruits, Gal. 5. 22 23. as Love, joy, Peace, Long-suffering, etc.
So by this (I suppose) we may judge what spirit men are guided by, if we see
them exercising Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Goodness, Gentleness, etc.
then we may conclude, they are led on by the spirit of Christ.

But if we hear them cry out thus; Let us fill all Presses, See Mr. Edward's
Gangraena, page 164.
and make all Pulpits ring, and so possess Parliament, City, and whole
Kingdom against Sects, etc. And when such counsel as this, is so generally
practiced by the Ministers of the Presbyterian way, crying continually to God,
and the Magistrate, for fire from heaven, or that which is equivalent to it, to
devour them, We may also conclude as safely, that this is from the dark spirit
of Antichrist, the veil being still upon their hearts, when they look to the
Old Testament for a Rule in this; that because God appointed under that
Testament, that men should be cut off by death for diverse sins; as breach of
the Sabbath; Numb. 15. 36. and for many other offenses; as Lev. 20. 2. 27.
Chapt. 24. 14. 23. Deuteronomy. 13. 10. and 17. 5. and 21. 21. and 22. 21, 22. 24. Now
Christ has appointed in the New Testament, that they be cut off by
Excommunication, for that which was death under the Old Testament, Deuteronomy. 22.
22. compared with 1 Cor. 5, etc. But they would not have them cut off for the
same things, as they were under the first Testament, but for Heresy; and that
not proved by two or three witnesses, without which none could be put to death
under the first Testament.

Objection. But it will be objected, that it is proved to be Heresy, for which
the Presbyterians would have the Sectaries cut off, by more then two or three
witnesses; for the whole Synod (some few excepted) prove it.

Answer. For answer hereunto they say so; but unless they be infallible in
their sayings, they cannot prove it.

Objection. But it will be objected, that it is like that so many learned men,
after long debating, know more then some few, and those for the most part
unlearned.

Answer. I answer, there were the more ground to think so, if their own
interest did not so much blind their eyes; but seeing that lies at stake (as
they conceive) and they having the whole business in their own hands, they
being parties, and witnesses, and judges, it is not likely they should
acknowledge that to be truth, which their supposed adversaries the Sectaries
(as they call them) hold; but condemn it for heresy, though it be the very
truth of Christ: If it were not so, why did they formerly seek to the
Magistrates for liberty See Smectymnuus.
themselves, when the same would make out their own interest, and now are so
earnest against it, Crying daily to the the Magistrate to restrain it in
others, who do as well deserve it as themselves: But they be in honor, and
live like Princes, yet this avails them nothing, so long as they see any
honest Mordecay's (that are faithful to make discoveries of whatsoever is
against the welfare of the state* whom they have reproached with the name of
Sectaries) to sit in the Kings Gate, under the Parliaments protection; But
should they prevail to have them cut off, I am sure these adversaries could not
repair the States loss; for I am persuaded that this design to cut off the
Sectaries, is of as dangerous consequence, as any one thing that has been
plotted by the Kings party: But blessed be God that the faithfulness, and
valiant achievements of these Mordecayes, are daily read in the ears of the
Parliament, so that I doubt not but they will keep them still under their
protection, although their adversaries have set up Gallows in their own
thoughts, and purposes to hang them all upon, as appears by their daily
preaching and printing, following the Parliament with their Dedicatorie
Epistles, Sermons, and Petitions for power to suppress them; and because they
have it not to their minds, they charge the Parliament with Covenant Breaking,
etc. But I wonder what these men think of the 25. of Matthew. Do they think that
Jesus Christ was in earnest, when he said; that those which did not visit his
brethren in their affliction, must be sent away with Go ye cursed: Oh then,
what will be the condition of those that labor by all possible means to have
them imprisoned, banished, etc.

The use of the Ninth Difference.
If the worship of the first Covenant did hold out Christ to come, and the
worship of the New Covenant declares Christ to be already come; Then it teaches
us, that to hold out any part of that worship now, is to deny Christ to be
come, and so is Antichristian.

Now the worships of the two Covenants, did differ in many regards; As first,
the worship of the first Covenant was tied to one Nation, Psalm. 147. 19. 20.
Also, it was tied to one place, Deuteronomy. 25. 5, 6, 7 14. 26, 27. But the worship
of the New Covenant is to be performed in any Nation, and in any place of that
Nation, Acts 10. 34, 3. Ephess. the 2. to the end of the Chapter, Joh. 4. 21,
22, 23. Answerable to this was the Saints practice, Acts 2. 46* 1 Cor. 14. 23.
When the whole Church is come together into some place (says the Apostle)
making no difference of places. The worship of the first Covenant was carnal,
and performed in a worldly sanctuary, Col. 2. 10. 20. Heb. 9. 1. But the
worship of the New Covenant is Spiritual, and performed in a Spiritual
Sanctuary, Phil. 3. 3. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Ephesians. 2. 20. 21. 22.

These things premised, it will easily appear what is the reason that many of
the people of God, do question many things in point of worship: As first of
all, that all the People in a Nation should be compelled to worship; for though
God did require under the first covenant that the whole Nation of Israel should
worship him, it was because they were his people in covenant; but he has not
taken any other Nation into covenant; therefore to force any Nation to worship,
must have a ground from the first covenant; But in the New Covenant God only
requires such to worship him, as can worship him in spirit and truth, Joh. 4.
23. This makes many think, that if it would please the Magistrates to set men
free in point of worship, there would be more sincerity, and less hypocrisy
in the worship of God; As to instance in the public Fasts, the whole Nation is
forced to worship, as the Nation of Israel was; But now under the New Covenant
God requiring only Spiritual worship, it is conceived, that if all those who
have no heart, nor no spiritual ability to perform worship, were left to
follow their business in the world, which they can do, and the work were
commended only to those that would freely offer themselves, it would be more
pleasing to God, being more suitable to the New Covenant, and less suitable to
the Old; for it is not the number, but the sincerity in answering a Rule of
the New Covenant that is well pleasing to God: Three horses that can, and will
draw, will do more when the Cart stands, then they can with twenty more added
to them that draw backward: The like may be said of other National worship.

Again, inasmuch as God did bind all the people of the first covenant to come
to one place to worship, and to bring thither their gift, which place he made
holy by dedication, and consecration; and now a ground being taken from thence
to set apart special places of worship, consecrated, and dedicated, and all
men bound unto it under penalties, as in the first covenant; that therefore it
is, that many of the people of the New Covenant are afraid to come to worship
there, ^ Ioh. 10.
lest they should approve (at least) of that which (as they do conceive) does
deny Christ to be come in the flesh; and upon this ground it is (and no other,
as I verily believe) that many people of God do think, that the power of Christ
alone is to be administered among the Churches, in things appertaining to God;
and that in matters of Civil Government, the Magistrate is to rule all men
alike, both Churches, and others; for the Scepter was not to depart from Judah;
nor a Lawgiver from between his feet till Shil^ come, Genesis 49. 10.

Objection. But if you say, sometime they had none to rule by that Scepter? As
appears, Judge. 17. 16. and 18. 1. and 21. 25.

Answer. I answer, though they had none to rule, yet there did remain the
Scepter, and the right of ruling; and that in matters of worship, God informing
them by his Prophets what to do, they being to rule for him, in that Nation
which he had chosen, which was Church and State individual; and this to
continue till Shilo came; therefore when this people would have a King like
other Nations (God having differenced them from all other Nations) God tells the
Prophet, they had not cast off him, but God: 1 Samuel 8. 7. And though God did
grant them a King, yet would he not make them altogether like other Nations;
for he would choose their King for them, 1 Samuel 10. 24. And he appointed the
manner of their Kingdom, verse. 25. Thus did God rule over the people of His
Covenant, in a more especial way then over other Nations; therefore it is
conceived, that he does so now over the people of the New Covenant; But now
Shilo is come, he is Ioh 1. 49 Rev. 1. 5. and 15. 3. Mat. 2. 2 and 21. 5.
conceived to have the Scepter, and to be the Lawgiver to the people of the
New Covenant, in all those things that appertain to his own Kingdom; and for
those things that appertain to this life, he has set the Ordinance of
Magistracy to be obeyed, by all his own people, as well as others, and he that
resists, Romans 13. 1 2, 5.
resists the Ordinance of God, and therefore they must obey, or submit to
every humane ordinance, or ordinance of man for 1 Pet. 2. 13 14
the Lords sake, and for conscience sake.

Objection. If any object, that if this be so, then every one will do that
which is right in his own eyes?

Answer. I answer, seeing God by his own Ordinance has appointed Magistrates
to order the affairs of the Nations, and Jesus Christ to order the affairs of
his Kingdom, this objection is fully resolved: Neither need any fear that any
of those that have learned to give the Lord his due, will deny Caesar his,
seeing the Lord has made both a duty; and both former, and latter, experience
does confirm it; and if any men in the Kingdom be disloyal to the
Magistrates, it is those that would so fain have those that are faithful and
true hearted to the State cut off, imprisoned, or banished, in a time when
there is so great need of them: But the Lord forgive them.

The use of the Last Difference.
If the Lord have taken away the first, that he might establish the second,
Heb. 10. 9. Then it should teach all people to take heed that they do not go
about to establish again that which God has taken away, nor take away that
which God has established* as all do which endeavor to bring into the worship
of God the rites of the first Covenant; and it is indeed to give the spirit of
God the lie, for it is in effect to say the first Covenant is best, when the
spirit of God says the second is the best, being established upon better
promises.

I am persuaded, that each godly heart does long for the utter ruin of
Antichrist, which will be completed so soon as this is generally seen, that the
upholding the first Covenant, is the upholding of Antichrist; what was that
with which the Churches were deceived* and bewitched presently upon their first
planting? Was it not the bringing in some thing of the first Covenant? As
appears, Gal. 3. 1, 2, 3. and almost the whole Epistle declares it. O foolish
Galatians (says the Apostle) who has bewitched you, that you should not obey
the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth,
crucified among you? The Apostle seems to admire that inasmuch as a crucified
Christ had been so clearly held forth among them, which did put an end to the
Rites of the first Covenant, that they should be so bewitched as to bring them
in again.

Are you so foolish (says he) having begun in the spirit, are you now made
perfect by the flesh? Verse. 3. By flesh he means the rites and privileges of
the first Covenant, and by spirit the privileges of the second, as appears by
what follows all along, to the 12. verse of the fifth Chapter; compared with
Phil. 3. 3, 4. If the Galatians were bewitched, and if it were foolishness in
them to return to the first Covenant; is it not so now in those that do the
same thing, as they did? Would it make the Apostle a transgressour to build
again the things which he had destroyed? Gal. 2. 18. And must not they needs be
transgressors, which build again the things which God himself has made void,
Heb. 10. 9. We see there was no small deceit in this, that the Apostle is fain
to use so many Arguments to prevent it; He tells them it was to Gal. 4. 9*
be in bondage to weak and beggarly elements; as if he should say, What folly
is it for those that are set in a glorious liberty* to desire to be in bondage
to things that are beggarly? Therefore he warns them to stand fast in this
liberty, against that bondage, Gal. 5. 1. You see he holds out the distance and
difference between the Liberty of the New Covenant, and the bondage of the Old,
in the two Mothers, and their two Seeds; as before is showed. Gal. 4. 22. 24
25. 26. Again, he tells them, If they were circumcised Christ should profit them
nothing, Gal. 5. 2. That Christ was become of none effect to them, that they
were debtors to keep the whole Law; that they were fallen from grace, Gal. 5. 3,
4.

It seems that Circumcision was that particular of the first Covenant, whereby
they were most easily deceived at that time, being so lately in use: But now
this will not take with people, the spirit of Antichrist has put men upon the
observing of other particulars of the first Covenant, which are as dangerous
(as I conceive) as that of Circumcision: Oh therefore let us take heed how we
act in any of the parts of the first Covenant, in the worship of God; for the
persuasion so to act is not of him that calls us, Gal. 5. 8. Religion is not
a thing to be jested with; If we would therefore honor God, and be honored of
God in the enjoyment of Gospel freedom, and pursue Antichrist to his utter
ruin; Let us cleave close to the rules which Christ, and his Apostles have
left us to walk by, which when all religious people* are brought unto,
Antichrist is down.

FINIS.

