AYTHENTS OR A TREATISE OF SELF-DENIAL WHEREIN The Necessity and Excellency of
it is Demonstrated; WITH Several Directions for the practice of it.

By THEOPHILUS POLWHEILE, M. A. Sometimes of Emmanuel College in Cambridge,
now Teacher of the Church at Teverton in Devon.

Luctare contra teipsum maximum hostem.

Luther ad Melanct. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Johnson, and are to be sold by
Richard Scott Bookseller in Carlisle. 1658.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL The Major, Recorder, Aldermen, Common Council, and the
rest of the Citizens of the Ancient City of CARLISLE, THEOPHILUS POLWHEILE
Presents this his Treatise of SELF-DENIAL, PARTLY As an expression of his
real and unfeigned Thankfulness for the many favors which he received (both
while he was a STUDENT in the University, and afterward a PREACHER in their
CITY) from diverse of them:

BUT CHIEFLY As a Testimony of his exceeding great and earnest desire of the
Spiritual and Eternal good of THEM all.

To the Readers, Those especially of my present Congregation in Teverton.
WHether this Treatise, Readers, may come to the hands of any that are
professedly Infidels I know not; possibly it may, for I have heard that there
are such, not only abroad, in India and Turkey, but at home, even here in
England; however that it will come to the hands of many that are really
Infidels, I do somewhat more than believe. We have multitudes that cry out,
and that justly, against those that deny the Authority of the Scriptures, but
do not consider, that the crime whereof they accuse others may as justly be
laid to their own charge; for whereas in words they do acknowledge it, in
works they do deny it, being abominable and disobedient, and to every good
work reprobate, Tit. 1.16. There is a palpable contradiction to the Principles
of Christianity, in the Some think Orthodex and right opinions to be a plea for
a loose life, whereas there is no ill course of life, but springs from some
false opinion. Sibbs Souls Conflict, c. 13.207.
principles and practices of many, not to say the most of those that profess
themselves Christians, (a) witness the unrighteousness, fornication,
wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, fullness of envy, murder, debate,
deceit, malignity, whispering, backbiting, hating of God, despitefulness,
pride, beasting, inventing of evil things, disobedience to Parents,
Covenant Breaking, want of natural affection, implacableness, unmercifulness,
Romans 1.29, 30, 31. theft, sacrilege. cha. 2.21, 22. recompencing evil for
evil, cha. 12.17. ryoting, drunkenness, chambering, wantonness, cha. 13.13.
Idolatry, adultery, effeminateness, sodomy, reviling, extortion, 1 Cor. 6.9.
Witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies,
revellings, Gal. 5.21. filthiness, foolish talking, jeasting, Ephesians. 5.4.
blasphemy, filthy communication, Col. 3.8. idleness, wandering about from house
to house, tatling, 1 Timothy 4.13. doting about questions and strifes of words,
perverse disputings, cha. 6.4, 5. love of money, verse. 10. self-love,
unthankfulness, unholiness, truce-breaking, false accusing, incontinency,
fierceness, despising of those that are good, treachery, headiness,
high-mindedness, loving of pleasures more than God, 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4.
unruliness, vain talking, deceiving, Tit. 1.10. purloyning, cha. 2.10.
partiality, despising of the poor, Jam. 2.4, 6. cursing, cha. 3.9, 10.
swearing, cha. 5.12. scoffing, 2 Pet. 3.3. loving to have the pre-eminence,
Joh. Epist. 3. v. 9. despising of Dominion, speaking evil of Dignities, Jude,
ver. 8. feeding at Feasts without fear, ver. 12. murmuring, complaining,
speaking great swelling words, having men's persons in admiration because of
advantage, ver. 16. and such like, the reigning sins of some of all sorts, even
of some that have as complete a form of godliness as the best, 2 Timothy 3.5. so
that there is no other difference betwixt the grossest Anti-Scripturists, as
Familists, Ranters, etc. and many of those that seem to be their greatest
adversaries and opposers but in words only; in words indeed they contradict
each other, but what the one says, the other thinks; though I will not affirm
it of all these, yet of many of them I dare be bold to say it, that
notwithstanding they can talk gloriously, and earnestly contend for the true
Religion whereof they profess themselves to be, yet they do not believe the
truth of their religion. If it should be here, as it is frequently elsewhere
demanded, how can this be, seeing they profess as they do; they say they
believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and if any should say otherwise,
they would be ready to offer him the Combat, or call aloud to the Magistrate
for the severest punishment to be inflicted upon him; they have been Baptized,
and at their Baptism engaged by a solemn promise and vow in their names, to
forsake the Devil and all his works, the pomps and vanities of this wicked
world, to believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith, to keep Gods holy
Will and Commandments, and to walk in the same all the days of their life,
which since they have been at age they have professedly owned; the answer is
ready, Quid verba audiam, facta cum videam? The most solemn protestation is
nothing, when by a continued contrary practice and course of life, it is
manifestly contradicted. And yet this bath no such wonderful thing in it, but
that Tradition, Custom, and the Laws of the Land where one lives are alone
sufficient to produce it. Did these men seriously consider with themselves upon
what grounds they embrace the Christian Religion rather than Mahumetanisme, the
Protestant Religion rather than Popery, I verily think their hearts would
dictate no other answer, but that they were borne and bred in this Religion,
which being established and countenanced by the Laws of their Country, they
embrace, as their forefathers have done in times past; so that the same
grounds upon which they profess Christ here, were they in another Land would
move them to deny him. They condemn the Jews as the vilest People that ever
lived upon the face of the earth, because they rejected and crucified Christ,
but had they lived amongst those Jews, and seen a poor mean man, one in the
form of a Servant come amongst them, endeavoring to alter their former
Religion, and to abolish those Rites and Customs which their Nation had for so
many generations before used, would not the same spirit of enmity and
opposition have acted in them, as did in those Jews against that man? Would
they not have rejected him as a mere Impostor and Deceiver, and have continued
their former profession still? Would they presently have hearkened to him, and
become his Disciples? If we may judge by what we frequently find in the like
case, without doubt they would not.

In the Primitive times, when the Gospel-day began to dawn upon the Pagan
world, the Apostles had much to do to make way for their Doctrine, many
Curtains were drawn to keep out the light which went with them, and the World
contended to live in their Egyptian darkness still; but afterward the light
breaking in upon those clouds of darkness which muffled them up, and opening
their eyes to see the danger of their present condition, they resolved to
cherish the light, and to do the business of the day; but when once Religion
was more generally professed, in most places it begat a form, and the Daughter
devoured the Mother, a bare form and outward correspondence was cried up, but
the power of godliness was denied. And as it was then, so it has been ever
since, and is so at this day. There are very few Christians amongst Christians,
few, yea a very inconsiderable number amongst Professors, who do in deed and
in truth submit to the Lord Jesus, and take his yoke upon them. It is the great
and maine business that the Ministers of the Gospel have to do, to convert
men to the life and practice of Christianity, the name and shadow whereof they
do only retain; this is their work as much almost here, as it would be were
they amongst Turks and Indians. It is somewhat easy to bring men to an outward
order and conformity with the rest in attending public Ordinances; generally
they rush in upon them, and take it as a great affront to be kept back from
any, but to prevail with them, out of an equal respect to all the precepts of
the Gospel, one as well as another without partiality, to endeavor an
universal Gospel-obedience throughout the whole course of their lives, in all
manner of conversation both toward God and man, is only net impossible. And no
wonder, seeing they think it is of no concernment, either to the attaining of
that good which they chiefly desire, or the escaping. of that evil which they
mainly fear. It is sufficient for the carrying on of their worldly design,
which is all they aim at, living amongst a people professing themselves
Christians, to whom the name of Heathen is abominable, to take upon them the
like form of Religion that others do, but as for any thing more, seeing it is
of no such advantage in this World, and they neither hope nor fear for any
thing in the World to come, they do not regard it. This is one reason why,
when we have done all that we can, we cannot get them beyond a form, and that
not the strictest neither. Men will never be under the power of that, the truth
whereof they do not believe; but this is not the only reason, for some of them
do believe, I mean with an Historical faith, the truth of what is told them
in the Gospel, and yet for all that live as wretched wicked lives as if they
believed it not; the cause of it is their presumption and carnal security, into
which they argue themselves by a false reasoning; That there is a Heaven they
believe, but they think they shall not be shut out of it; and that there is a
Hell, but they hope they shall never come there; though they walk on after the
imagination of their own heart, in the allowed omission of some one or more
known duties enjoined in the Scripture, and commission of some one or more
known sins therein forbidden, yet they promise themselves peace, as they, Deuteronomy.
29.19. they hope they shall do as well as others when they come to dye,
whatever they read or hear of in the Scripture to the contrary
notwithstanding. There are multitudes of these presumptuous ones amongst us,
and they are either openly profane, such as have not escaped the pollutions of
the world, but tumble and wallow like Swine in the common puddle, that run to
all excess of riot, and declare their sin as Sodom, and hide it not, that let
loose the reins to their lusts, and run a career after the Prince of this world
in the common road way that the Scripture tells them leads to Hell, as open
notorious drunkards, swearers, blasphemers, raylers, filthy talkers, scoffers,
prophaners of the Lords day, etc. or secretly profane, such as under a garb of
civility, or more than ordinary profession hide the foulest wickedness, such
as sin in the secret Chamber, as those that are given to self-pollutions, that
defile themselves by themselves; close Adulterers, and Adulteresses, that have
Husbands and Wives to hide their uncleanness; close tiplers and drunkards, who
will now and then shoot into an Alehouse, but be ordinarily drunk in their
own houses; secret Dice-players, and Gamesters, that squander away their time,
and money, when they are out of the Magistrates reach; such as have not
renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, but will secretly cosen and cheat,
defraud, and go beyond their brethren; one would wonder that any of these
should entertain one thought of entering into Heaven, and that they do not
rather fear every moment least God should strike them with a Thunderbolt into
Hell; but usually it is so, that even such as these have as confident an
expectation of happiness in the world to come as the best; ask them, and they
will tell you, they hope to be saved as well as the proudest Precisian of you
all, they have it almost at the end of every sentence, As I hope to be saved;
what it is that imboldens them in this manner, and makes them thus foole-hardy,
may be easily imagined.

1 Some confused thoughts of Gods mercy; they think he that made them will not
damn them, they cannot imagine when it comes to be their own case, that he can
be so cruel to his Creatures, as to torment them eternally in Hell. To show the
particular workings of their thoughts here:

1 They think only on his Mercy, and not at all on his Justice, they think he
is all mercy, and love, and goodness, and the thoughts that they have of this,
quite swallow up all thoughts of his justice.

2 They cull out many of those Scriptures that speak of the love and goodness
of God, as that he is love, and dwells in love; that he is slow to anger, and
plenteous in mercy, and does not willingly grieve the children of men, etc.

3 They argue from Gods goodness in this world, that he will not be otherwise,
to them at least, in the world to come; he is good unto all, and his tender
mercies are over all his works; he causes his Sun to shine upon the just, and
unjust also, they see that he does not punish when provoked, but is
long-suffering, and full of forbearance. Hence,

4 They think that when Ministers preach Damnation, they do but pry into Gods
secrets, and vent their own passions; and know not of what spirit they be of.
Thus they labor to secure their hearts, but if this will not do, then

2 They fly to some of the Promises, never minding the conditions that are
annexed to them; though they be Dogs, yet they will be snatching at the
Childrens bread. And now they think they are well provided for, they now think
that they believe, for faith is grounded upon the Promises, and the Scripture
says, he that believes shall be saved. Now come to these men after this, and
tell them of the threatenings, why

1 They think the threanings will not be executed, they think there is some use
of them in terrorem, to overawe men a little that they might not be wicked
over much, but that God never threatened with intent to execute; or if they must
be executed, then

2 It is but upon those that despise the Promises, but for their parts they
rely on them.

3 However it be, they think they must not despair, but be of a good courage,
and hope to the last breath, and therefore notwithstanding all the threatenings,
they have these and these promises, and here they will hold fast. If this do
not fully comfort them, then

3 They look into themselves, and conclude that though they be guilty of a
great many sins, yet they are but infirmities and failings, for they often hear
that to fall into such and such sinful Acts, may consist with grace, and for
their parts they cannot help it; they swear indeed, but it is but now and then
when they are provoked; they are sometimes drunk, but it is but now and then
when they are drawn in by good company, and they do forget themselves are they
be aware, and it is not so much many times, only they have weaker brains than
others, and men think they be drunk when they are not.

4 They consider the examples of godly men in Scripture, who have been guilty
of the same sins, as Noah, Lot, David, Peter, etc. and hence they argue, that
every man has his failings, and the best must have their grains of allowance.
And the Apostle says, that in many things we offend all; and, If any man says
he has no sin, he is a liar; and now they can hold no longer, but presently
fly out upon other Professors, as mere pretenders to perfection and Saintship,
which they hold to be a thing impossible on this side Heaven, and so fall to
scoffing, and jeering, and railing upon those that live more conformably to the
rules of their Religion than themselves. Hence,

5 They think that all those, many of them at least, that do condemn them,
live in the same sins secretly, or in as bad of another kind; though they will
not swear, say they, they will lie; and though they will not be drunk, they
will play the Gluttons, and that they cannot endure good fellowship with the
rest of their Neighbors, it is only from pride, and Self-conceitednesse; Stand
off, touch me not, I am holier than thou. Hence again they conclude, as for
perfection, no mortal man is capable of it, it is but in vain to endeavor
after it, or pretend unto it. If this does not quiet their guilty consciences,
then

6 They hope they shall repent, and then they are sure all will be well, then
there will be no fear, for, At what time soever a sinner repents, etc. As for
example, the Thief upon the Cross, therefore if they can but cry God mercy
before the last gasp, they doubt not but they shall make a good end. But,

7 At the worst, come the worst that can come, they shall do as well as
others, and they think that others have souls to save as well as they, and why
should they fear more than other men? They consider, that not only the
generality of the common people, but many of the wise and learned, especially
of the great and mighty, do commonly practice the same things, or as bad, or
worse, and they think if there were any danger they would be ware of it;
howsoever to make all sure, beside their constant attending of the public
Ordinances,

8 They will pray in their Closets, and in their Families, and repeat to their
people the Sermons they have written, and sing Psalms; and besides, sometimes
they will put themselves to a voluntary penance, as to fast such a day yearly,
it may be weekly, or to part with some gaineful employment, or to give away a
great sum of money to good uses, as serves best for the quieting of their
consciences, fearfully vexed with the guilt, it may be, of some particular sin
above all others, that they live in.

Now, Readers, if you be any of you of this number, as I suppose some of you
be, give me leave in a few words a little to expostulate, and reason with you;
Yet believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and in them ye think ye have
eternal life; search them therefore and peruse them diligently, view every line
from the beginning to the end, ponder every word, and see if upon the most
exact and curious observation, you can find the least syllable of any comfort,
or encouragement for any one that allows himself in any one known sin. They
speak much indeed of Gods mercy to sinners, but to what Sinners? are they not
believing and repenting sinners only? and who are they, but such as in their
purposes and endeavors turn from every known sin? Do they say, he will be
merciful to any presumptuous sinners? to any such as hold fast deceit, and
refuse to return? Hear what they say, Whosoever confesses his sins and forsakes
them, shall have mercy, but he that covers them shall not prosper, Prove.
28.13. For the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness:
mark it, all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men, namely of such men, who
hold the truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. You think God is merciful, true,
but is he not also just? is he not also wrathful and revengeful? See how the
Prophet describes him, God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth, the Lord
revengeth and is furious, the Lord will take vengeance on his adversaries, and
he reserveth wrath for his enemies, Nah. 1.2. It follows indeed in the next
verse, The Lord is slow to anger, but mark what comes after, and will not at
all acquit the wicked; where the Lord proclaims his Name in this manner unto
Moses, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long suffering, and
abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, transgression and sin, Exodus 34.6. even there he also adds, and that
will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon
the Children, and upon the childrens children, to the third, and to the fourth
generation, verse. 7. God bears with you now, and is good unto you, you think
he will deal thus with you in the world to come, and therefore you sin with
the more boldness; but hear what he says, These things have thou done, and I
kept silence, thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self, but
I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes. Now consider this
ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces and there be none to deliver,
Psalm. 50.21, 22. Patientia laesa transit in furorem. The long suffering and
goodness of God being abused, will at length grow into fury, and then woe be
unto all such as shall be found in their sins; the more of the goodness of God
has been spent upon them here, the more of his wrath shall be poured out upon
them hereafter. What if God, willing to show his wrath, and to make his power
known, endured with much long suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to
destruction, Romans 9.22. Therefore think thou, O man, that thou shall escape
the Judgment of God? Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and
forbearance, and long suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads
thee to repentance? but after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up
wrath against the day of Wrath, and revelation of the righteous Judgment of
God, who will render to every man according to his deeds; to them who by
patient continuance in well-doing seek for glory, honor, and immortality,
eternal life; but to them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but
obey unrighteousness, indignation, and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon
every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile,
Romans 2.3-9.

You think that he that made you will not damn you; But what says Isaiah? It
is a people of no understanding, therefore he that made them will not have
mercy on them; and he that formed them will show them no favor, Isa. 27.11.
You think God cannot be so cruel, but if ye walk according to the course of
this World in the lusts of your flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and
of the mind, and dye so, I tell you, he will not only damn you, but damn you
with delight. Ah, says he, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me
of mine enemies, Isa. 1.24. Because I have called and ye refused, I have
stretched forth mine hand and no man regarded, but ye have set at naught all
my counsel, and would none of my reproof; I also will laugh at your calamity, I
will mock when your fear comes, when your fear comes as a desolation, and
your destruction comes as a Whirlewind, when distress and anguish comes upon
you, Prove. 1.24-27. Your flying unto the Promises while in this condition will
do you no good, for there is no promise in all the Book of God belongs unto
any upon any other terms but the renouncing and abandoning of every known
sin. Why do you look to the Promises, and do not mind the conditions of them?
If God promise to be merciful to such as believe and repent, what is that to
you, so long as you do neither? If God promise absolutely to work the
condition in some, what is that to you, so long as there is no evidence that
he has wrought it in you?

God has no where promised to save men in their sins, he has appointed
holiness as a necessary antecedent to eternal happiness; for without holiness
no man shall see God, Hebrews 12.14. If the Promises be yours, whose then are
the Threatenings? who are they against whom the Wrath of God is revealed from
Heaven in the threatenings of his Word, but such as you who hold the truth in
unrighteousness? For the Law is not made for a righteous man, but for the
lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for unholy and
profane, for murderers of Fathers, and murderers of Mothers, for Man slayers,
for Whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind, for
men-stealers, for liars, for perjured persons, and if there be any other thing
that is contrary to sound Doctrine, according to the glorious Gospel of the
blessed God, 1 Timothy 1.9, 10, 11. When the threatenings speak so plain, naming
the very sins whereof you know your selves guilty, as allowing your selves in
them, why do you not make application, and say, we are the men? Oh! what shall
we do to escape the Judgments threatened?

Do you not think that God is as true in his threatenings as in his promises?
Remember how he dealt with the old World, how with the Israelites in the
Wilderness; For if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every
transgression received a just recompense of reward, how shall we escape, says
the Apostle, if we neglect so great salvation? Heb. 2.2. Let us therefore fear
least a Promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem
to come short of it, for unto us was the Gospel preached as well as unto them,
but the Word preached did not profit them, being not mixed with faith in them
that heard it, Heb. 4.1, 2. Some do not so much as believe the Promises to be
true, it may be you do, and yet this is not enough to prove you to be as you
think you be, believers; this is not the believing to which Salvation is
promised, for the Devils believe both Promises and Threatenings to be true, and
do somewhat more, it may be, than you do, they believe and tremble, James
2.19. and yet shall never be saved: God having reserved them in everlasting
Chains under darkness, unto the Judgment of the great day, Jude, verse. 6.

You believe the promises of the Gospel to be true, but you do not so believe
as to obey the Gospel; you do not so believe as to close with the Lord Jesus,
as he is therein tendered to you, to be your Prophet to teach and instruct you,
and your King to rule and govern you, as well as your Priest to make
satisfaction for you.

You walk on still after the imaginations of your own hearts, and do your
own wills, and therefore do not believe, therefore you have no ground to hope
that you shall be saved, for you are yet in your sins, which,
notwithstanding you account them but infirmities, are reigning sins, for as
much as you yield your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin,
but do not yield your selves unto God, Romans 6.13. Know you not that to whom
you yield your selves servants to obey, his servants you are to whom you obey;
whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto life, verse. 16. and do you
not obey sin when you willingly and readily fulfill its commands? When you go
at its bidding, and come at its beckning? Will you call this an infirmity? Will
you call this a failing? It is but an infirmity, and yet you sin willingly;
Willingly? nay you sin wilfully, like a company of madmen running on
headlong in the ways of sin, against all checks of Conscience, and
gainsaying of your understandings.

Your rebellion witnesses against you, your stubbornness testifies to your
face; you are as the swift Dromedaries traversing their ways; as the wild
Asses used to the Wilderness, that snuff up the Wind at their pleasure. You
have altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bonds. The Lord has stricken
you, but you have not grieved; he has consumed you, but you have refused to
receive correction; you have made your face harder than a rock, you have
refused to return. How then can you say, you cannot help it? Behold, you
speak and do evil as you can, you do evil with both hands earnestly, adding
sin unto sin, as if you could never sin enough, waxing worse and worse, and
still increasing unto more ungodliness. You do not so much as resolve against
every known sin, but your hearts are fully set in you to do wickedly; you do
not watch against it before it be committed, but run your selves upon
temptations, and after it is committed, are you ashamed? nay, you are not at
all ashamed, neither can you blush; none of you smites upon the thigh, saying,
What have I done? None of you repents him of his wickedness, as those holy
men did, from whose example of sinning, but not of turning from their sin,
you fetch so much comfort.

But you hope you shall repent too at last; at last? Why do you not endeavor
it at present? Do you think you can repent when you will? or have you any
engagement upon God, that whenever you please, he should work it in you? Qui
promisit poenitenti veniam, non promisit differenti poenitentiam. He that has
promised to grant a pardon to the penitent, has no where promised to grant
repentance to him that delays to repent. How can you expect it? you have
rather cause to fear, that he will give you over to a reprobate mind, Romans
1.28. and to your own hearts lusts, Psalm 81.12. that you may live all your
days in your sins, and at last dye in them, John 8.24. and afterward be
damned for them, 2 These. 2.12. Wherefore as the Holy Ghost says, To day if ye
will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, lest he swear in his wrath you
shall not enter into my rest, Heb. 3.7 - XI.

There is a time even in this life, after which God will show no mercy; it is
possible to sin away a day of Grace long before you dye, and then though you
call upon him, he will not answer; though you seek him early, you shall not
find him: for that you hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the
Lord; you would none of his counsel, you despised all his reproof, Therefore
you shall eat of the fruit of your own way, and be filled with your own
devices; for the turning away of the simple shall slay you, and the prosperity
of fools shall destroy you, Prove. 1.28 - 32. Beware therefore of going on any
longer against your light, presently abandon every known sin, practice every
known duty, necessity is laid upon you, and woe be to you if you do it not.

Though you should make never so glorious a profession, though you should
perform never so many duties, if you stick but at one, so that you will not
perform that too, it is impossible but you should be shut out of heaven; as
you may see in the Story of the Young man, Luke 18.22. And though you should
abandon never so many sins, if you stick but at one, so that you will not
abandon that too, it is impossible but you should be turned into Hell, out of
which there is no redemption, there you must lie, and lie to all eternity.

Think upon this, and then see, whether it be best to gratify the flesh,
either by the forbearance of any known duty, or practice of any known sin, as
you do. Let not the example of the generality of the World move you, better
go to Heaven with a few, than to Hell in the crowd.

Thus much Readers, I thought fit to preface, as a necessary preparative to the
profitable reading of this Treatise of SELF-DENIAL, The blessing of the Lord
go along with it. Not else, but that I am

Your Servant in the work of the Gospel, Theoph. Polwheile.

To not only the Christian Reader, but to any Reader that has a mind, or if
not, that he may have a mind to be a Christian, and that not only in show but
in truth, not only in word but in deed.
SElf-denial! bless us, what a strange hard word, what a prodigious and
monstrous thing is this? says poor selfish man; Self-denial forsooth, what! am
not I my self? Do not I my self live, and live for my self? How can I be a
man, and put off the man? How can I be my self, and deny my self? Is it not to
be beside my self (and that is to be mad) to be without my self? Thus (alas!)
does poor man play the fool in wit, he rages and is confident; as if there
were such good reason for, and such good sense in self-seeking, as that the
Doctrine of Self-denial were but a Paradox, yea an absurdity, a contradiction,
and very nonsense. He highly applaudes even to admiration, that (by him
mistaken and mis-interpreted) saying of Solomon, Prove. 9.12. if thou be wise
thou shall be wise for thy self; and for his part, he will praise none but them
that do well unto themselves, Psalm. 49.18. he will admit none to the name of
wise and worthy persons, but dismiss them for a company of un-intelligent,
in-significant and poor spirited Sneakes, yea for dull Sots, witless Dolts,
and God Almighties Fools, that prefer not themselves before every thing else.

Man indeed is so dear to himself, that Self-interest seems to be his all in
all; the first mover, the circumference and center of all he does; the
principle from, the rule by, the end for which he acts any good, or forbears to
act any evil, and this is natural to him; but though Nature be master of this
Art, and can teach man to seek his own good, yet Nature is not such a Doctor
in Divinity, nor has attained to such a degree of learning and wisdom, as to
teach man wherein his true good and interest lies; so that it is no wonder that
poor man is filled with indignation at such a word, much more at such a thing
as Self-denial is. Alas! in what a sad, uneasy, and restless condition must
poor man be that has a nature so freely inclined, and strongly addicted to his
own interest, and yet is not owner of a judgment and discretion able and
acute enough to tell him what it is, and how it may be attained; so that did
not God, who is a God of grace and mercy, take pity on poor man (for so I
must always call him) he would do nothing but undo himself, and that by
seeking himself.

But God (God blessed, and to be blessed for evermore) who is a Lover of
Souls, and the preserver of men, who would not that they should perish, but
that all men should come to the knowledge of the truth and be saved, God I
say, has shown (in and by his Word) what is man's good, and wherein his true
interest and happiness does consist, how he may love, seek, and save himself,
which is so dear unto him; beside ( ex abundanti, which is a wonder) God
invites, and (if I may so speak) courts man hereunto; not that he needs man,
for he is God happy for evermore, whether man be saved or damned, but by the
most obligeing, and most indearing way in the World, that man himself may be
the gainer, and enjoy himself in the enjoyment of a good infinitely better than
himself, even God himself. When God exhorts and persuades man to obedience, why
is it? but oh that he would hear and keep my Commandments always for his
good; when God dehorts and disswades from sin, why is it? but that man might
not wrong and injure himself; God has so twisted his own glory and our good
together, that he expects no service from us, which shall not be more a service
to our selves: God has so graciously ordered the matter, that the very means
of our happiness is a part of it, our duty a privilege, and our work wages; so
that we cannot do our selves a greater courtesy, than in doing God the best
service, our greatest interest lies in surrendering our selves wholly unto God,
to fear God, and keep his Commandments is the whole (as duty, so happiness)
of man, for all the rest (that is under the Sun) is but impertinent and
unprofitable, yea (to call it by its own name) very vanity, and vexation of
spirit.

We do but miscall and flatter the World, yea abuse our selves also, when we
attribute to it, and adorn it with the fine words, and specious titles of
Grandeure, and Gallantry, beauty and bravery, delight and delicacy, pleasure
and prettiness, honor and happiness; alas, these are but pompous shows,
glittering and gaudy nothings: the rosiness of the most glaring and charming
beauty, the whistling of the most silken bravery, the chinking of bewitching
white and yellow dust which we call gold and silver, the sparkling Crowns
which do tempt and captivate: the amorous, the genteel, otherwise proud, the
covetous, and the ambitious Sons of men, will one day appear to be but a cheat
of Fancy, and that such as have been enamoured of them have but deceived, and
jugled themselves out of true happiness for a false one, and espoused
themselves to a mere paultry vanity, which if it be any thing, is a something
worse than nothing.

Welcome my wealth, this loss has gained me more;
Riches adieu:
When I again grow greedy to be poor, Herb. Imit.

I Will wish for you.
Welcome my credit, this disgrace is glory;
Honors adieu:
When for renown and fame I shall be sorry,
I Will wish for you.
Welcome content, this sorrow is my joy,
Pleasures adieu:
When I desire such griefs as may annoy,
I Will wish for you.
And as for sin, it is so ugly a thing, so vile and abominable, that the worst
of words are not bad enough to call it by; its own name is the very worst,
sinful sin, Romans 7.13. yet as if that were not significant enough, the Apostle
could not but add an exceeding to it, to denote how hyperbolically vile a
thing it is; it is good for nothing but to be hated, and to have stones of
scorn, contempt, and indignation thrown at it: such a deformed Hagge is not
fit for the embraces of men, no nor of Devils; it is not only the cause, but
the hell of hell, and if there were no other hell, it were yet damnation enough
to be a sinner: for as such the poor wretch is in a state of separation from
God, whom to enjoy is eternal life and Heaven, and therefore it can be no less
than Death and Hell to be without him; and thus the Scripture concludes no less
peremptorily than truly and justly, that men in their sins are condemned
already, and must be so for ever without the interposition of repentance, and
faith before they dye.

Sin.
Oh that I could a sin once see! Herb.

We paint the Devil foul, yet he
Has some good in him, all agree.
Sin is flat opposite to the Almighty, seeing
It wants the good of virtue, and of being.
Sin.
Sin, Herb. Imit.
I would feign define thee, but thou art
An uncouth thing,
All that I bring
To show thee fully, shows thee but in part.
I say, thou art the sting of Death; it is true,
And yet I find
Death comes behind:
The work is done, before the pay be due.
I say, thou art the Devils work, yet he
Should much rather
Call thee father,
For he had been no Devil, but for thee.
What shall I call thee then? if Death and Devil,
Right understood,
Be names too good,
I Will say thou art the quintessence of evil.
By all this it most clearly appears that Grace is man's glory, that the service
of God is man's freedom, that Self-denial is man's advantage. Oh Divine thing,
Grace! how would the Sons of men make Court to thee, did they but see what a
beautifying, what an innobling, and to speak as truly as highly in Scripture
sense, what a deifying thing thou art.

Surely as Reason is man's advance above bruits, grace is man's advance above
men, other men and himself, for it makes a man more a man, and more than a man;
and though man was Created little lower than the Angels, yet as a new
Creature, he shall not only be like and equal to the Angels, but (it seems)
is already above them, they being his servitours, and spirits sent forth to
Minister to him, and for his good. Yea further, it makes man like God himself,
for what is godliness? but God-likeness; that, whereby we are as so many
living Images, and lively pictures of the Divine nature.

How highly concerning is it then to put off our self that we may be our own,
Not to be in our selves, that in God (as naturally, so spiritually) we may
live, move, and have our beings: for clearly, man is never truly his own nor
himself, but when he is Gods; Dead and lost is his Motto, all the while he is
a stranger to the life of God, Luke 15.32. Man is not himself when he goes
from God, that is, when he sins and seeks himself, and man then comes to
himself as it is said of the Prodigal, when he comes to God; so that if man will
but do himself the right to be wise for, and good to himself, it must be by
this Christian Art and knack of Self-Denial; not making his own understanding
his guide, Prove. 3.5, 6, 7. For he that will be wise must become a fool, not
making his own will his rule, nor flesh-pleasing, or which is all one
self-pleasing his end; but resigning himself to the conduct of God, considering
what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God, devoting himself to do
all he does to the glory of God, he may find himself in not seeking himself,
and live altogether to himself, in not living at all to himself.

But dear Reader, This Treatise, which I commend to thy perusal and practice,
will further, and more fully acquaint thee with this thing; the nature and
excellency of it, as to which, and the Author my friend, I think it improper,
because needless, to say any thing. I shall therefore add but a little more,
and commend this, the book, and thee to the blessing of God.

Go Self-Denial, go and prosper; I am sure, thou were once (and did then make
a glorious triumphant show) in the world, when Christ, our dear and blessed
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ was here; and though thou have been a stranger
for a long time, not only in this our Israel, but in most parts of the World,
yet me thinks thou should be welcome for his sake; it seems to me to be
highly and hugely obligeing, that if Christ denied himself (his glory) for us,
we should deny our selfs (our sins) for him, yea, I may say for our selves;
surely they will do but little for Christ, that will not for his sake be
content to be happy. Moreover, Oh thou most rare Self-Denial! this adds to
thy beauty and takingness, and should indear thee to all the professing world,
that thou come forth in season, for when should Self-Denial be Preached and
Pressed, but when men that say they are Christians, savor the things that are of
men, and not the things that are of God; then it was Matthew. 16. that Christ said
to his Disciples, if any will come after me, let him deny himself. Shall I
add, that some graces and duties are to be acted but now and then, but this
always, a Christian should be often in Self-Tryall, etc. but always in
Self-Denial; for when other duties are but as Letters, this must be as the
vowel to give it a sound, and make it a word, there cannot be a Monosyllable
spelt in Religion, without this vowel of Self-Denial.

In a word, to disabuse the mistaken World, which look upon this as a
pusillanimous and dispiriting Doctrine, a puleing quality fitted only to
little souls; If God and Reason may be heard to speak, there is nothing more
becoming brave Spirits than Self-Denial; it argues the greatness of their
courage, that they are Persons of high and noble Souls, who can give the
Denial to that which has been born and bred with them, and is therefore so
near and dear to them, rather than adventure to break the Command of their Lord
and Sovereign; It Is effeminate and worse, it has nothing of masculine and manly
in it, to indulge and gratify selfish inclinations, and fleshly appetites, has
not God said it? he that rules his spirit, that subdues and denies himself,
is better, a person of more honor, and of higher command, than he that takes
and rules a City; and he that dares not undertake such an Heroic Conquest, is
not worthy the name of a stout and gallant man. How many valiant Swordmen of
the World, have shown themselves mere cowards, who have come Conquerors out of
the field, and then lived, and (it may be) dyed base slaves to a lust at home;
As one said of a great Roman Captain (who as he rode in his triumphant
Chariot through Rome, had his eyes fixed on a Courtizan that walked the streets)
Behold, how this goodly Captain that has Conquered such Potent Armies, is
himself conquered by one silly woman; he might have better said, by his own
lust.

Well then, if thou will save thy self generously, away with thy self; for he
that will loose himself shall save himself, but he that will save himself
shall loose himself, and then, what will thou do? but pule and sneak, complain
and lament, with such a sad outcry as this, Ah! my too much of me, me much
annoyed
And my self-plenty, my poor self destroyed.


To conclude all, let me beseech thee for Christ's sake, and thine own souls
sake, to learn not only the name and notion, but the thing; and not to please
thy self with the word, without the spirit, power and practice of Self-Denial.
Now that the Author, thy and my self, and all the world may put Self-Denial in
practice, and so as to abound and persevere therein to the end, is the hearty
Prayer of the Authors, thine and every man's Friend and Servant in Christ Jesus,

RALPH VENNING.

A Table of the several Chapters and Sections in the following Treatise.
Chap. 1 The Text. Sect. 1THe Introduction to the Text. P. 1 Sect. 2The
Occasion of it. Page 4. Sect. 3The Division. Page 6 Sect. 4.The Explication.
Page 7
Chap. 2 The Doctrine. Page 18 Sect. 1Showing what is meant by self. Page 18
Sect. 2Showing what it is to deny self, more generally. Page 21 Sect. 3Showing
what it is to deny self more particularly. Page 42 Subsect. 1.Of denying self
in respect of inherent grace. Page 43 Subsect. 2.Of denying self in respect of
Common gifts. Page 75 Subsect. 3.Of denying self in good works. Page 129
Subsect. 4.Of denying self in respect of worldly enjoyments. Page 167 Subsect.
5Of denying self in respect of worldly sufferings. Page 191 Subsect. 6Of
denying self in respect of our Relations. Page 220

Chap. 3 The Demonstration. Page 231 Chap. 4 The Application. Page 242 Sect.
1Of Information. Page 242 Sect. 2Of Exhortation. Page 259 Subsect. 1Motives to
self-denial from the Excellency of it. Page 265 Subsect. 2Directions for the
practice of self-denial. Page 308


A TREATISE OF SELF-DENIAL.
CHAP I.
Matthew. 16.24. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his cross, and follow me.
SECT. I. The Introduction to the Text.
THat multitudes perish eternally, even of Mat. 7.21, 22, 23. etc. 21.21, 22,
23, 24. Lu. 13.24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal 5.19, 20, 21.
those that live under the Gospel, though but few do believe it, will be found
to be no mistake at the last day. Two things there be that ruin them, (...),
and (...), their Luke 9.26. c. 19.14. and 27. Ephesians. 5 6. Col. 3 6. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8,
9. c. 2.10, 11, 12.
disobedience in standing off, and their Jer. 3.20. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. 2 Timothy 3.2,
3 4, 5. and 13. Heb. 6.4, 5, 5. etc. 10 26, 27, 28, 29 and 38, 39. 2 Pet. 2.20,
21, 22.
treachery in falling off from Religion, notwithstanding all the preaching in
the world, there are but few that will be induced to 1 Timothy 6.12.
make a profession, but few that will be persuaded to Heb. 4.14. c. 10.23.
hold it fast. I speak not of that vulgat profession that denominates men
Christians, in contradistinction to Heathens, but of that which gives them the
signal name of Professors, in contradistinction to nominal Christians. As for
the former, there are none with us that deny it, and not many that do disclaim
it; Verily as for the latter, it is far otherwise. Some like the deaf Adder
Psalm. 58.4.
stop their ear, others will not suffer it to be Exodus 21.6. Deuteronomy. 15.17.
boared. Some will by no means put their hand to the plough, others afterward
will look back, but both are unfit for the Kingdom of God, Luke 9.62. That
which keeps off the One, that they do not enter into the ways of godliness, is
Joh. 7.13. etc. 11.48. and chapter 12.4. Act. 19.27.
fear of suffering, that which drives off the Other, that they do not persevere
in them, is Mat. 13.21.
impatiency under it. The cause of both these, if we trace them to their
springhead, will be found to be nothing else, but (...) amor sui nimius.
inordinate self-love (for this is the Affectionum choragus, It is the first
and fundamental Affection. Quoddam quasi pondus in objectum, Flav. Quaeren. Eo
feror quocunque feror, Aug.
leading affection, and exercises a Dictatori comparatur, quo creato,
cessantomnes Magistratus. Flav. Quaeren. Poiaghi Comes.
sovereignty over all the rest) by reason whereof, men naturally seek (...), to
please themselves, as the Apostles phrase is, Romans 15.1. which is by fulfilling
the desires (or the (...).
wills) of the flesh, and of the mind, Ephesians. 2.3. and therefore are exceeding
Res est soliciti plenatimoris Amor.
careful in any undertaking, if there be any appearance or likelihood of
danger, before hand to decline it; and if through inadvertency or mistake,
having engaged, they happen, by some unexpected evil or other to be surprised,
afterward to relinquish it. Now the Gospel requiring us to Tit. 2.12.
deny all ungodliness, and 1 John 2.15.
worldly lusts, a thing so exceeding painful in the practice of it, that no
unregenerate man in the world is able to endure it, the cutting off the right
hand, and the plucking out the right eye, and the suffering the most cruel
tortures of the rack, being not half so terrible, and yet even these also, and
worse than these, if worse there be, being sometimes for the sake of the Gospel
to be endured: Some considering of it before hand, are struck with such a
panick fear, that they will by no means have any thing to do with Religion, but
contenting themselves with the bare name of Christians, continue to live the
lives of Pagans: Others having rashly, and inconsiderately adventured upon a
profession, not Luke 14.28.
casting up before hand what it will cost them, and finding the strictness and
preciseness of Gospel principles, and practices, quite contrary to their
expectations, so every way inconsistent with their carnal interess, that they
cannot make that Romans 13.13, 14.
provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, as formerly they were
wont, and still resolve to do, are by and by Mat. 13.21. Magnus dolor iratus
Amor est. Seneca.
so offended, that either they presently abandon their profession, and become 2
Pet. 2.18, 19 ad finem.
openly profane, or if they continue under some outward form of godliness,
which they may do and yet be the veriest wretches in the world, they hold the
truth in unrighteousness, 2 Timothy 3.5.
and deny the power thereof. That then which is required in order to
Gospel-obedience, our entrance upon it, and perseverance in it, is If a man
come to me, and hate not his father, and mother and wife, and children, etc.
yea and his own ^^fe also, cannot be my disciple, Luke 14.26. Things in their
absolute being good, may have in them a relative or comparative evil, and in
that sense be by consequence hated. Reynold. Treat. of Pass. See also Ezekiel.
20.43. and ch 36.31.
Self-hatred. This would work two things in us, Courage and Resolution in
denying our selves, Patience and Long-suffering in bearing the anguish of it,
without which two it is impossible for any one to come after Christ, as he
tells his Disciples in the words of the Text, If any man will come after me,
let him, etc. which is indeed the marrow of all Gospel-divinity concerning life
and practice, the very quintessence and spirit of it, in a word, the very Self
of Divine-learning.

SECT. II. The Occasion of it.
THe particle [Then] in the beginning of the verse, shows the occasion, the
Lord Jesus preaching the Doctrine of the Cross, foretelling his own sufferings
to be shortly at Jerusalem, verse. 21. Peter it seems being strongly possessed
with a conceit of Christ's earthly Kingdom, conceiving of it according to the
common apprehensions and expectations of men, and not according to the counsel
and will of God; herein, like a carnal Politician turning himself to carnal
counsel, Magno igitur zelo Christum praecuntem vest intergo appresum vult
tenere ne pergat, etc. Pareus in loc.
he draws his Master aside, and wishes him to look better to himself, and to
act the part of a wise man, and prevent those troubles, verse. 22. Our Savior
discerning whereto his counsel tended, even to dissuade him from that work,
which was his meat and drink to accomplish, for which he came into the world,
and upon which the salvation of all the Elect depended;

1 Sharply reproves him, as acting the part of Satan verse. 23.

2 Compassionately instructs him, and with him all the Saints of God that shall
be brought to embrace the Gospel to the end of the world, that none of them all
ought to stumble at the Cross, but if they would be his Disciples indeed, they
must 1 Thoroughly deny themselves. 2 Willingly take up the cross. 3 Obediently
follow him, his commands, his example, verse. 24. If any man will come after me,
let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.


SECT. III. The Division.
THese words are a Connex Axiom, wherein are these two parts.

1 The Antecedent, If any man will come after me. 2 The Consequent, Let him
deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
In the Antecedent there is See the Explication Sect. 4.
both a Duty, and a Privilege.

In the Consequent a threefold Duty.

1 Self-denial. 2 Taking up the Cross. 3 Following Christ.
Wherein observe further, 1 The terminus a quo recedendum, the term from which
we must go, Self. 2 The terminus ad quem accedendum, the term unto which we
must come, Me. 3 The onus portandum inter procedendum, the burden that must
be born in our going from Self to Christ, and that is the Cross.


The truth of this Axiom does not lie either in the Antecedent or in the
Consequent, but in the connection of both together; for though it be not true,
that any man will come after Christ, or that any man will deny himself, yet
this is undeniably true, That if any man will come after Christ, he must deny
himself. Upon this supposition of coming after Christ, Self-denial must be of
necessity.

SECT. IV. The Explication.
FOr the opening of the words, before I come unto the Doctrine, briefly thus,
If any man will come after me. Any man] i. e. Every man. It Is an indefinite, and
this indefinite is universal, q. d. not this or that particular man only, not
only you my Disciples, who hear me this day, but everyone that will be my
Disciple, Whosoever he be that will come after me, he must deny himself.
There Is no dispensation in this duty of Self-denial, none for the great man
more than for the mean, none for the Learned more than the Idiot, none for the
Statesman more than for the Peasant, none for the Minister more than for the
People. Self is alike odious to Christ in every man. Will come] The Patrons of
Free Will, amongst other Scriptures which they would make to suffrage for their
errors, bring in this for one. But Gods invitations and commands in Scripture,
are not the measure of our power, but of our duty, they show not what we can
do, but what we are bound to do.

That which may be concluded hence, take in these four following Propositions:
1 Any man that will, may come; many refuse to come that be called, but Christ
refuses none Joh. 6.37. Rev. 22.17.
that come upon his call.

2 Christ expects that if any come, he should will to come. Christ requires
and looks for willing Disciples, that they should be Voluntaries, not
Prest-men, that they should come after him upon choice, and not upon constraint.

3 Not any one comes, but he that is willing to come. Christ offers violence
to no man's will, flectit, non cogit, he puts forth his Psalm. 110.3.
power, and makes them willing, he does not compel them against their will.
Grace so prevails upon the will, that it still preserves its liberty.

4 Many list themselves under Christ very rashly and inconsiderately: Therefore
our Savior in saying thus, puts in a caution, by acquainting them before hand
with the hot service they must be put upon; Dulce bellum inexpertis. Ignorance
is the mother of presumption, and Thrasonical boldness as well as of despair,
and cowardly Apostasy. Herein our Savior then acts the part of a discreet
General, who when Voluntaries offer themselves to the service, lets them know
beforehand, the difficulties they shall be put upon afterward, q d. Take heed
what you do; many come to me as Spies, viewing the Privileges, but go away
afterward, afraid of the Anakims, the news of the Crown, makes multitudes
flock after me, but the sight of the Cross, causes them to forsake me,
Christ speaks here as he did unto the Matthew. 20.22
sons of Zebedee, when they desired to sit with him in his Kingdom, Are ye
able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of? and to be baptized with the
baptism that I am baptized with? If you be not you desire a vain thing. So
here, Are ye able to deny your selves? are ye able to bear the Cross? If you
be not, your coming to me is to no purpose, for this you must do, thus you
must suffer; Come after me] i. e. as my Disciple, or Scholar, learn and
practice the duties of a Christian. An allusion to the custom of Scholars in
following their Masters, q. d. If ye will be my Disciple, ye must turn over
a new leaf, and take out a new lesson, I shall teach you that ye never heard of
in all your lives before; you have been a long while trained up in other
Schools, under other teachers, but never had the least inkling of this kind of
learning. But now if ye will be my Disciples, if you will take it upon you to
come after me, this ye must learn, this ye must do: Ye may follow others
long enough, and follow Self too, Self leads both the Master and the Scholars,
but if you will come after me, you must deny your selves. This is a strain of
spiritual learning, far surpassing any humane teaching in the World, for though
many of the Heathen Philosophers have spoken bravely, and gallantly of diverse
Morral and Metaphysical truths (as they are called) yet their whole frame of
Notions was built up with so much affectation, that they plainly showed they
never had acquaintance with this lesson, which would have been the Crown and
glory of all their other wisdom. The streams arise no higher than the Fountain
from whence they issue forth, whatsoever they invented, whatsoever they
practiced, had its spring and original from Self, and therefore they could not
ascend higher than Self in any thing they did; so that even Diogenes that
self-denying Cynick trampled upon Plato's pride with greater pride. This
Doctrine then of Self-denial which Christ here teaches, is not from man, it is
not a Doctrine which Humane wisdom teaches (Self, will not teach Self-denial)
but a Doctrine that comes down from above -- e coelo descendit, (...). Again,
Come after me] i. e. as my Champion or Soldier, fight the good fight of a
Christian under my Banner. An allusion to the manner of Soldiers following
their Commanders in the field. In Hebr. 2. verse. 10. the Lord Jesus is called,
the Captain of their Salvation, whom God has appointed to be brought to glory,
because he leads them through the midst of their enemies, from a state of sin
and misery here, to a state of holiness and happiness hereafter. He goes on
fighting before them, and they come on fighting after him, till all their
Spiritual enemies being quite vanquished and subdued, he bring them
triumphantly into heaven.

Two things then I conceive are here meant by coming after Christ. Our coming
after him in the Regeneration here, and in the Resurrection hereafter; the
former is our duty, the latter our privilege. Both these we have, Mat. 19.28,
29. verse. the former expressed, the latter employed. In the twenty seventh
verse, Peter said unto Christ, Behold, we have forsaken all and followed thee,
what shall we have therefore? And he answered, Verily I say unto you, that ye
which have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit in
the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the
twelve Tribes of Israel. And to show that this is not the Privilege of the
Apostles only, but of every one that so comes after him, he adds in the next
verse, Every one that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or
fathers, or mothers, or wife, or children, or lands for my name sake, shall
inherit everlasting life. Which place is a full Comment upon this expression
of our Saviors in the text, Let him deny himself] This is not merely
Evangelical counsel to some perfect men, but a precept obligatory to all
Christians, otherwise that weight could not be laid on, which is, Whosoever
does not this, cannot be my Disciple. And indeed, though he begin here with
the Apostles, as if he had spoken to them alone, yet elsewhere we read that
he spoke it to the people also, those great multitudes that followed him, Mark
8.34. Luke 9.23. Deny himself] Qu'il renonce soy mesme. Fren. Die versake
bemselven. Dutch. Christ does De doc^bit nos istos mores: qui Christum discit,
peccatum dediscit.
dedocere before he does docere, unteach before he teaches; and we must
dediscere before we can discere, unlearn before we can learn; we must first
deny our selves, before we can take up our Cross and follow Christ. Here note
the wisdom of this great Prophet in teaching Self-denial, before following him
under the Cross; men must have the old bias cut away, before they can run after
Christ. Aristotle in the beginning of his Ethics, denies young men to be
idoneous auditors of Morral Lectures, because says he, (...), they being
transported by youthful lusts, and passions, have little regard to civility,
and Necesse est honestum sit in eo vile cui corpus charum. Seneca.
honesty in the things of this life; and the same may be said of those who
have not the command over their own spirits, (whether young or old) but are
carried headlong by the violence of their unbrideled lusts, they are no fit
hearers of Gospel Sermons, for Seeing Christian faith is a firm assent unto
Divine revelations, especially Gods mercies in Christ, as much better than life
it self, or all the contentments that attend it, impossible it is such says
should ever be rightly planted, until the strength of those intoxicating
desires, which make Mole-hils seem like Mountains, be either broken, or they
extirpated, or to use our Saviors words, till we learn to deny our selves. Dr.
Jackson of Just. Faith. c. 22. Sect. 3.
while such, they will never observe them. And take up his Cross] (...) as a
man takes up an heavy burden We must not go out of our way, neither to meet
the Cross, nor to avoid it.
that lies in his way before him, End neme siin ctuyceop, and lays it upon his
shoulders, Et charge fur soy sa croix. Fren. In Matthew. 10.38. it is, (...), he
that receives, or accepts not his Cross -- i. e. when Christ will lay it on,
to show that it must be born with patience; as we must not withdraw our neck
from the yoke, so neither our shoulder from the Cross. It was the custom for
the Malefactor that was condemned to suffer Death, to carry his Cross to the
place of Execution, (i.e) (...). Now because the Cross was so long, and withal
so heavy, that the Malefactor could only drag it along, trailing the nether
part upon the ground behind him (and most times I suppose not able to do that)
the custom was likewise to enjoin some other to bear up the hinder part after
him. For this cause it was that Simon the Cyrenian was compelled to bear our
Saviors Cross, that is, the hinder part after him, for we read that he bare
his own Cross himself, i. e. the handsome or foremost part of it, Joh. 19.17.
Now unto this custom our Savior here alludes in these words, q. d. Let him
take up his Cross and follow me, bearing part of it before him let him bear the
(...); unto this Paul likewise alludes, Col. 1.24. Who now rejoice in my
sufferings for you, and fill up (...), that which is behind of the sufferings
of Christ in my flesh. And there is another place that may have some reference
unto this likewise, Romans 8.26. The Spirit helps our infirmities, (...),
bears, or lifts together with us, and over against us, i. e. the Spirit at
the one end of the burden, and we at the other. And take up his Cross] By cross
is affliction either in common, or in special for righteousness sake; this he
must take up in his resolutions the very first day that he begins to be a
Christian, and actually afterward as often as it lies in his way, though it
be every day, Luke 9.23. besides this outward affliction, I conceive here is
further meant that inward affliction which happens by reason of the mortifying
of sin, which whosoever means to be a Christian indeed, must daily undergo,
though God should never call him to suffer persecution. And take up his Cross]
We teach Children their first elements, viz. their Letters, before they can
go on to any abstruser kind of learning; every man must begin at his Christ's
Cross, before he can be a good proficient in Christ's School. Vines on Numb.
14.24. Sermon. before the Parl.
As the Philosopher says of Privation, that it is one of the Principles of
natural Generation; so is Self-denial, and the sale of all for Christ, it is
the first Lesson, howsoever it be the last that is well learned, being the only
removens prohibens that which removes all impediments of our fulfilling after
Christ. It was the speech of holy Bradford the Martyr, He that has not learnt
the lesson of the Cross, has not learnt his A. B. C. in Christianity. Christ's
Scholars are trained up under the Banner from their very infancy, taught to
endure hardship from the very Womb. There is some kind of servitude in all
Religions, Satan is a cruel Task master among the silly Pagans, the Pope among
the superstitious Papists, the Mosaical frame of Ordinances of old, was a yoke
that the Israelites were not able to bear; Christ imposes a yoke and a burden
too, it is the burden of the Cross, and this discourageeth many from coming
after Christ, and following him fully; yet no such reason, blessed Christ, why
any should be afraid to follow thee, thy yoke is easy, thou imposest a
burden, but it is very light; who would refuse to bear this one burden, seeing
thou have taken off so many weights? Did thou bear the Cross to save us, and
shall not we bear it to serve thee? Did thou bear ours which we had made so
heavy, and shall not we bear thine which thou have made so light? Thou have
provided a Crown for our heads, shall we then withdraw our shoulders from the
Cross? And follow me] Let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow
me. The Precepts of the Gospel are Copulative, as well as the Precepts of the
Law; the Law in the sanction of it was dis-junctive, it was, Do this or dye;
but in the injunction it was copulative, not, do this or that, but this and
that; Tota lex est una copulativa. So in the Precepts of the Gospel, it is not,
believe or repent, or walk as becomes the Gospel, but, believe and repent, and
walk as becomes the Gospel too. So here, it is not deny himself, or take up his
Cross, or follow me, any one of these is enough, no, but he must do all
three. The poor Woman that was to bring either a pair of Turtles, or a young
Pigeon, Levit. 12.6. she did that which was required, if she did either, for
the Law was dis-junctive, either the one or the other; not so here, for Tit.
2.12. we are taught to deny not this or that, but all ungodliness. And follow
me] Via ad Doctrinam per exempla, brevissima, the most compendious way of
teaching is by example. Christ exhorting to obedience, Mat. 11.29. propounds
himself for an example, Learn of me; so Joh. 13.14. I have given you an
example, that ye should do as I have done unto you; and the Apostle tells us,
1 Pet. 2.21. that Christ has suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we
should follow his steps. The Lord Jesus not only spoke as never man spoke, but
acted as never man acted; he was not a Pencil in his tongue, and a Sponge in
his conversation, but a walking Commentary upon his own Doctrine, especially
this of Self-denial. It was the observation of a Buroughs Gosp. Conversation.
Reverend Divine, now with God, That by all the ways that God has revealed his
will, he never revealed his will in an example of Self-denial, so as he has
done in the Gospel. I shall have occasion to open this at large before I have
done with this Treatise, but take notice of this for the present. Christ does
not only command us Self-denial in his Doctrine, but commend it to us in his
practice, he propounds himself as a Pattern of it, follow me. Saints must not
only know Christ, but imitate Christ, not only have an ear to his Doctrine, but
an eye to his example; follow me. To follow Christ, what is it else but to come
after Christ? it is true indeed there seems to be but little difference betwixt
them, but this, this latter expression has more in it than the former. Many
come after Christ but follow Self; many come for the things of Christ but not
for Christ himself; for the Loaves, but not for the love of Christ; But if any
man will come after him, he must deny himself, and take up his Cross, and
follow him.

CHAP. II The Doctrine.
OUt of the words thus opened, the principal thing that I have to observe, and
intend to prosecute throughout the whole Treatise following, I shall here lay
down in this Conclusion,

Self-denial is a duty that must of necessity be thoroughly practiced by every
one that will come after the Lord Jesus, in the way of holiness, unto eternal
happiness.

Before I come unto the Demonstration of this grand Conclusion, two things
there are to be explained, 1 What is meant by Self? 2 What by denying of Self?


SECT. I. Showing what is meant by Self.
SElf here, is ones own person in contra-distinction to whatsoever belongs unto
the person, that which a man is, in opposition to that which he has. This must
be denied, yet not simply under any consideration, but (...) in some certain
respect only, namely, as it stands in opposition unto Christ, and refuses to
come after him. In all other respects, a man not only may, but ought to please
himself, save in this only, that he would be pleased contrary to the will of
God. So that if there were nothing of contrariety or enmity in him to the will
of God, but in all things he were subject thereunto, there would be no need
of Self-denial.

The soul therefore in the practice of this duty of Self-denial, must be
considered Moors Platon. Poems Interpretat. Genesis We must conceive in a godly
man, a double self, one which must be denied the other which must deny. Sibs
Souls Conflict. cap. 9.
as a thing complex or concrete, necessarily including the corruption of that
evil life, or spirit, which is the souls self for a time. This by the Apostle
is called (...) hic est subjectam pro adjuncto, pro (...), ^etus illa in homine
vivendi ^atio, quae and tatura dicitur. Grotius in loc.
(...), the old man, Romans 6.6. and the flesh, Gal. 5.17. in regard of the
remainders whereof in himself, he says he was carnal, Romans 7.14. This is true
of every one, but with this difference, some are altogether carnal, as those
that are not born again, Joh. 3.6. The Apostle speaking of these, expresses
them by this Periphrasis, (...), they that are after the flesh, Romans 8.5. and
afterward, (...), they that are in the flesh, v. 8. Others are but in part
carnal, as those that are born of the Spirit, who in that respect are said to
be Spirit, Joh. 3.6. and yet in regard of a remainder of corruption, are said
to be also carnal, 1 Cor. 3.4. Now as such, whether regenerate or unregenerate
a man is bound to deny himself, though it be the regenerate man only that will
do it.

Those that treat of this subject, do usually make mention of diverse other
Selfs, and accordingly make so many several sorts of Self-denial. Some
distinguish it into circumscribed Self, which is a man's person, Divided-self
which is his wife; Multiplied-self, which is his posterity; Civil-self in
respect of his Civil relations, and worldly enjoyments; Sinfulself in respect
of his corruptions, and Moral-self in respect of his good works.

Others make a tripartite division of it, into Natural, Sinful, and
Renewed-self. Natural-self they consider,

1 In regard of being and substance, importing our life, together with all the
powers, and faculties of nature, as understanding, will, and affections, the
senses and members of the body.

2 In regard of well-being, or the comforts of this life, which are either,

1 External relations;

Or 2 Special gifts, and endowments, as Learning, Wisdom, Power, and all other
abilities of mind and body.

3 Common ends, which all men labor for, as riches, honors, and pleasures.
Renewed-self they make to be a man's duties, holiness, and obedience, his
righteousness, and the graces of the Spirit: But thus one may make all the
things in the world ones self.

That which is to be denied in all these, is but one and the same thing, and
that is the Old man, which would have something to do in all of them, contrary
to the will of God, which must not be suffered. The Old man would have us save
our lives, when God would have us lose them; he would have us keep our
estates, when God would have us part with them; he would have us seek to be
justified by our good works, he would have us employ our understandings and
other abilities of mind and body for other ends, than God has appointed, and
when it is thus, he must be denied. Therefore its more proper to say, that
Self must be denied in, or about riches, and honors, and good duties; that
that riches, and honors, and good duties must be denied, as I shall show
afterward.

SECT. II. Showing what it is to deny Self more generally.
HAving shown what Self is, I come now to declare what Self-denial is; and
first I will speak of it more generally, afterward more particularly. For the
right understanding whereof, I shall premise this distinction concerning a
Denial in general. Denial is either in respect of something affirmed, something
requested, or something violently contended for.

1. In respect of something affirmed, as when one shall say of any thing, It is
so, a another says, It is not so.

2 In respect of something requested, as when a man shall beg an Alms, and he
of whom he begs will give him nothing.

3 In respect of something violently contended for, as when a Thief sets upon a
Travellor for his purse, and the Travellor withstands him, takes him prisoner,
or kills him. According to this distinction, there is a threefold Denial, that
I shall make use of in the explication of this duty of Self-dental.

1 Argumentativa negatio, an argumentative denial. As when the Respondent
denies the Assertion of his Opponent, and the arguments that he brings to prove
it. This is in Scholis.

2 Judicialis negatio, a Judicial denial, as when the Judge denies the
Malefactor his life, will not be entreated, but resolves to pass sentence of
death upon him. This is in Foro.

3 Hostilis negatio, a Warlike denial, as when one Enemy will by no means
suffer the other to be quiet, but endeavors continually by all means to
destroy him. This is in Castris.

These three as will appear in the application of them, do make up the whole of
this duty of Self-denial.

The first is the arraignment and conviction of Self.

The second, the sentencing and condemnation of Self.

The third, the actual execution of it.

In the first, (...) Romans 8.6. (...)
Self-wisdome is denied. In the second, (...) 1 Jo. 2.16. (...)
Self-lust. In the third, (...) Ephesians. 3. (...)
Self-will.
First, There is an Argumentative Denial of Self, a denial in a way of
argumentation and reasoning with Self. There is a twofold reasoning with self,
a reasoning of consultation, and a reasoning of contestation.

1 A reasoning of consultation. This is the most ordinary and usual kind of
reasoning, but most abominable, seeing Self-consultors take counsel, but not of
God, idolizing the wisdom of the flesh within themselves, which yet Romans 8.7.
is enmity against God, as the grand Oracle, to which they recourse continually
as able to give advice and direction upon all emergencies; wherefore they
retire themselves into themselves, summoning in all their thoughts to a privy
council, not at all attending to the counsel of the Word without them, nor to
the secret hints of the Spirit of God within them, both which they lay aside as
dissenting in their votes. Even as Ahab when he was to advise about his war
with the King of Syria, would not send for Michaiah, because said he, 1 King.
22.8
he does not prophecy good concerning me, -- (...), as he in Homer on the
like occasion. There are not two greater enemies in the world than Self, and
Christ, and their counsels are mutually destructive one of the other, therefore
Self will not advise with Christ in any thing. The natural man, i.e. the
Selfish man, is not, nor indeed Romans 8.7.
can be subject unto Christ; he is now a secret enemy, then an open and
professed rebel, always an actor in a way of opposition against him, striving
with him for his Crown, and scrambling with him for his Scepter. This design
of prevailing against Christ, Self carries on by advice, and counsel from
carnal reason, which still advises the breaking of his bonds, and the casting
away all those cords that are any way obligatory to his service. Counsel in a
selfish heart, is the first and great engine that moves all the lesser wheels
of opposition against Jesus Christ, the womb that conceives, and the breast
that suckles all those devilish plots and contrivances whereby it keeps up its
own kingdom, and labors to ruin Christ's; for frustra sunt arma foris, etc.

A notable instance we have of this in the second Psalm, The Kings of the
eearth set themselves, and the Rulers took counsel together against the Lord.
Now mark what was the result of this debate the issue of this consultation, Let
us break (say they) his bonds, and cast his cords from us. This is the counsel
that Self gives whenever it is consulted with.

1 If it be a bond of injunction, a cord of duty, Self presently gives counsel
for the breaking of it: A Selfish man is an Heifer unaccustomed to the yoke,
and therefore no wonder that he draws back, when Christ would draw him
forward. It is the nature of Self, to work for it self, and not for another.
Besides, the service of Christ is of a spiritual nature, and heavenly
employments suit not with one that is carnal.

And further, the duties of the Gospel are attended with the contradiction of
sinners, the shame and the cross accompany them, and therefore Self cannot
endure them. But conscience which in repect of its power and authority, is Gods
Vicegerent in the soul, will not suffer him to be quiet, but calls for duty,
lifting up its voice, and crying aloud, Duty, Duty, man, it is thy duty, and it
will have the full tale also. Therefore that he may quietly omit the duty,
conscience must be silenced. But how must this be? Why Self prescribes a way
presently.

1 Let conscience be blinded, that it may not see it to be a duty. If this
cannot be done, then,

2 Let conscience be bribed, that it may not say, It is a duty. If this will
not do, then,

3 Let conscience be broken, and this will be sure to do it. Thus do many men
when they have convictions upon their spirits, they labor either to extinguish
the light, or else to get it on the same side with their lusts; but if they can
do neither, as many times they cannot, especially if they live under a
convincing Ministry, then they resolve to sin against their light; as for such
and such duties they are not consistent with their carnal interess, therefore
come what will of it, they cannot, they will not submit unto them. Thus what
ever be in the premises, they are resolved this shall be the conclusion, We
will not have this man to reign over us, Luke 19.14.

2 If it be a bond of prohibition, a restraining bond, self administers
counsel for the breaking of this too. The commandment that comes to a selfish
man, forbidding him to proceed any further in the pursuit of his carnal
projects for the satisfaction of his lusts, now when the commandment comes,
Self comes too for the making void of this commandment. It Is Paul's expression,
Romans 7.9. When the Commandment came, sin revived. Then the Commandment comes,
when it is understood by conscience, and conscience dares not but speak unto the
soul what it understands, whether it be a duty or a sin. Now when the
Commandment comes in this manner unto Conscience, declaring the sin, and
threatening the vengeance that will follow it; Self is presently alarmed, and
in all haste calls a Counsel for the breaking of this bond. It cannot endure
that its licentiousness should be restrained, and therefore deals with
Conscience here as before, it endeavors to widen and wire-draw the Conscience,
to delude and cheat it, and if this cannot be affected, it resolves to do
violence to it. Balaam, when he was convinced what a dangerous sin it was to
curse the people of God, which notwithstanding, for the Gold and Silver, and
great promotion that was offered him, he had a great mind to do; presently
begins to consult, to see if there were any way in the World to make it lawful.
And thus do many, when the thoughts of sin do lie in the way to any thing
they have a mind to, they try if it may be otherwise, they will see if they
can bring down Gods mind to theirs, because they are loath to bring up their
minds to Gods, that so God may deny himself because they will not. The Apostle
Ephesians. 5.10
exhorts us, to prove what is the good and acceptable will of God, for this end
that we may obey it; but selfish men prove what is not the will of God, because
they have no mind to obey it, and therefore are glad if they can find it to
be no duty, because they list not to practice it; and no sin, because they are
loath to be restrained from it. Thus we see what course men take when they
reason with Self in a way of consultation, and therefore this is not that
reasoning whereby Self is denied, this is so far from Self-denial, that it is
the veriest self-pleasing, and self-seeking that is in the world. Self must not
be consulted withal when we are called to come after Christ. Abraham when he
was called to go out into a place which he should after receive for an
Inheritance, obeyed, and went out, not knowing whither he went, Heb. 11.8. When
once we are certain of the command, it is too late to ask counsel. In retam
sancta non est deliberandum. Let us then go on to the second particular.

2 A reasoning of contestation, this is the reasoning here meant; we must not
reason with Self in a way of consultation, but in a way of contestation. This
is a principal part of Self-denial, for the opening whereof consider these two
particulars.

1 Self will affirm that which is not to be affirmed, both of sins and duties,
persons and things; it will Esa. 5.20
call darkness light, and light darkness; it will call that which is evil,
good, and that which is good, evil; it will put bitter for sweet, and sweet for
bitter. First, it will call darkness light, it will say of the grossest error,
it is the most glorious truth; thus it calls Antinomianisme a Honey-combe,
Familism the rule of perfection, and Arminianisme Gods love to Mankind.
Secondly, it will call light darkness, it will say of the most glorious Truths,
they are but the dreams, and melancholy fancies of a company of ignorant and
silly people. Thus it decries the holy Scriptures as a dead Letter, a beggarly
Element, incky Divinity, and a Humane invention. Thirdly, it will call that
which is evil good, it will commend the foulest Vices, for the fairest virtues;
thus it calls Drunkenness good fellowship, Covetousness frugality, and Pride
magnanimity. Fourthly, it will call that which is good evil; thus it calls
Preciseness hipocrisic, and Zeal vain glory. Fifthly, it will put bitter for
sweet; thus it says of Religion, that it is but a melancholy dumpish thing,
void of all true pleasure and comfort. Lastly, sweet for bitter, and thus it
says, that the only way to peace and comfort is, to make conscience of nothing.
Thus Self speaks many times in bare affirmations only, without arguing of the
case, or urging what it says by the strength of seeming reason; And this is
from hence, that in Natural men, not only through ignorance, but also many
times through a wilful and inordinate love of that which is evil, and
inveterate hatred of that which is good; this unjust sentencing of truth and
falsehood, and good and evil, is not so much as called in question, so that it
being taken for granted what Self says, there needs no further urging of it.
But now, if that an Ipse dixit, a bare affirmation will not prevail, there
being some conviction or other in the Conscience that gain says it; then,

2 Self will endeavor to prove what it says by strength of argument; it will
not only say of evil that it is good, and of good that it is evil, but it will
allege such and such Reasons why it must needs be so, and these Reasons it
will urge with much vehemence and importunity, pressing them not only upon the
judgment for the gaining of the affections, but upon the affections also for
the winning of the judgment, and by this means it so far prevails with many,
that the most powerful and convincing preaching will not work upon them.

Our duty in this case is Twofold, 1. To distinguish. 2. To deny.

1 To distinguish seeming reason from that which is reason indeed. Self
produces its strong reasons, as they are called, Isa. 41.21. but their
chiefest strength is the color and vizard of true Reason wherewith they are
disguised, strip them of their clothing, and they dis-appear presently; they
seem to be reason, but indeed are not: Like as in a picture of fire, wipe off
the colors and nothing remains. In all the Arguments that Self brings, two
things are warily to be observed; First, what it lays down for a principle, or
rule; and, Secondly, how it does apply it. The fallacy lies in one of these
two, and where the fallacy is, we must be sure to deny.

1 Sometimes the fallacy or deceit lies in the principle; Self has many wicked
and cursed Principles, whereby it misleads the generality of the world. As, 1
Believe no more than you can see reason for. 2 Moderation in Religion is most
commendable, whatsoever is beyond it, is Hypocrisy. 3 Take up a form of
hodliness, but deny the power thereof. 4 Do many things, but keep thy Herodias
still. 5 Perform religious duties, but allow as little time for them as may be.
6 Engage no further in the cause of Religion, than there is a way open for a
retreat. 7 Every man for himself, and God for us all. 8 I may make the most of
my own. 9 Let the buyer look to himself. 10 Flesh and blood cannot endure it.
11 I scorn to be beholding. 12 Shall I want while I have, and when I have it
not too? 13 Qui nescit dissimulare nescit vivere: He that cannot dissemble
knows not how to live. All these are false Principles.


2 Sometimes the fallacy is in the application of the Principle, as for
instance; sometimes Self pleads for Prodigality, under the name of Liberality;
for Covetousness, under the name of Frugality; for foolish Pity, under the
name of Lenity and Mercy; for Superstition, under the name of Devotion; for
Censoriousness, under pretense of Zeal; and lastly, for Licentiousness, under
the name of Christian liberty. Here the principle is good, but the application
naught. As suppose when a man is profuse in his expenses, wasting his estate in
unnecessary entertainments, etc. if the question be put, whether he do
virtuously or not? Self will tell him he does virtuously; and to prove it,
frames this argument; He that spends liberally does virtuously; but thou
spendest liberally, Ergo. Here the Principle is good, for Liberality is a
virtue, and he that is liberal devises liberal things. But the testimony or
application is false, for in spending in that manner he is prodigal. Now when
we have found out wherein the fallacy lies, whether in the principle or
testimony, we must have a care,

2 To give a peremptory denial. And though we should not be able to unriddle
all the mysterious fallacies of Carnal reason, yet we must by no means yield
our assent to any thing that is brought against the Truth; though I cannot
dispute for the Truth, yet I can burn for the Truth, said that worthy Martyr in
Queen Mary's days. But we shall be the better enabled with more confidence and
resolution to give a denial to all those Objections that Self shall at any time
make against the Truth, the more careful we be in acquainting our selves with
the Principles of the Gospel, and the more serious we be in charging them home
upon our own Consciences. This indeed would be an effectual way of reasoning
down Self, when a man can set himself in the presence of God seriously, seeking
after his mind and will revealed in his Word, and then bring all these Carnal
principles of Self unto the Test, and upon the discovery of their disagreement
with the Principles of the Gospel, discard them, and charge it upon his
Conscience to believe the other, and walk by the other. It Is not the knowledge
of Gospel-Principles that is sufficient to beat down Self, but there must be a
charging them upon my Conscience, I must make them my principles; such and such
principles I walked by formerly, I but now I have found out better, and these
henceforth shall be my principles, I will walk by these. So that when self
urges Carnal Principles, and Carnal Rules upon me, I must answer Self, those
are not my principles, I have now another rule to walk by; those are
destructive principles, destructive to the purity and peace of my Conscience, I
will not walk by them. Thus of this first kind of Self-denial, by way of
argumentation and reasoning.

Secondly, there is another kind of Self-denial, and that is a judicial
denial, such a denial as that of a Judge upon the bench, when he refuses to
show mercy to the convicted malefactor. Self must not only be arraigned, and
convicted, but also sentenced, and condemned: Sentence of death must be
pronounced upon Self. Before Self was an Advocate, and pleaded its own cause,
now it becomes a Solicitour, and petitions for its life. And thus it will do
when it cannot prevail with all its subtilties, and carnal reasonings, but is
foiled at its own weapon, it will become an humble suitor, it will come with
tears in its eyes. Now it dares not enter the lists of disputation as before,
there is so much convincing light in the Conscience, but it goes another way to
work, it presents it self as an object of pity; it speaks the soul fair, and
flatters with it, lest it should be condemned. Self in this case will be
content to lose much, it will be content to lose the name of Reason, and
Wisdom, so that it may live. And here many carnal hearts are at a stand; they
have so much light as stops the mouth of Self, itdares not argue and reason the
case; they know it is guilty, but yet they will not pass the fatal sentence
upon it. They are afraid to condemn it, for if they should do that, it would
be very difficult to recall the sentence, and far more difficult to comply with
Self afterward; it would breed far more guilt and horror in the Conscience, it
being a great aggravation of sin to do that for which a man is already
self-condemned. But it is not enough to reason down Self; we must bring the
matter in debate to a Judgment, after we have debated thoroughly, and heard
what Self can say for it self: we must come to some resolution, what to do
with Self, we must debate it to destruction. In Acts 3.13, 14. it is said that
the Jews denied Christ; now turn to the 19th. of Joh. v. 15. and we shall see
how they did it, They cried out, away with him, away with him, crucify him.
Even so must we deny Self, when it begs for its life, saying, away with it,
away with it, crucify it. Many know that God has decreed the destruction of
Self, and yet are afraid lest the decree should bring forth too soon; yea, they
will pray for the killing of their lusts, even while they are loath that God
should hear their prayers. As Augustine confesses of himself, Confess. l. 8.
c. 7. Sect. 2.
etiam petieram a te castitatem, and dixeram: Da mihi castitatem, and
continentiam, sed noli modo. Timebam enim ne me cito exaudires, and cito
sanares a morbo concupiscentiae, quem malebam expleri quam extingui. I desired
(says he) in the beginning of my youth, that thou would give me chastity,
and I said, give me O Lord chastity, and continency, but not yet, for I was
afraid lest thou should have heard me too soon, and healed my disease too
soon, which I had rather have had satisfied, than extinguished. What do they
speak but that the work of conversion is yet very doubtful? to say no more.
There is an hostile Self-denial. This is the actual execution of Self. Self
must not only be convicted, and condemned, but actually crucified, and
thoroughly mortified. Self is not to live in the soul, it has lain under the
curse ever since its departure from God; and this curse will eat out its very
life in all that belong to God. This we must submit unto if ever we mean to
be Christians indeed, we must be content to let Christ do whatsoever he
pleases within us, he must have his will of us, he must be suffered to say
where, and what he will. If we will be Saints, we must have fellowship with
him in his death, as well as in his resurrection; we must be crucified, as
he was crucified, that the body of sin may be destroyed, and herein we are
not to be passive only, but active too, we must by the Spirit mortify the
deeds of the flesh, Romans 8.13. This implies a twofold act of Self-denial.

1. An act of retention, or withholding from Self those things that keep it
alive. Two things have I required of thee, says Agur, Prove. 30.7. deny me
them not, or withold them not from me before I dye. So 1 King. 20.27. He
sent unto me for my silver, and my gold, and I denied him not. Heb. I kept not
back from him. This then is to deny Self, to withold, and keep back from it
those things it would have. We must not fulfill the lusts of Self. So the
Apostle, Romans 13. ult. make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof. And truly we may very well be sparing unto Self, it has usurped
much, but nothing is its due. Self is an hellish vorage that still cries, give,
give, a bottomless gulf that sucks in all before it. Where it lives and
reigns, it makes every thing become tributary, it Lords it over time, and
strength, and parts; it exacts homage and devoir from every thing. Therefore
Self must be stinted, it must be cut short of its allowance. There is no need
of feeding Self, it will grow fast enough of its own accord. Nature affords it
livelihood enough wheresoever it is; so that adventitious helps are altogether
needless. As it is with the ground which is cursed for man's sake, it brings
forth naturally Briars, and Thorns, without manuring, without tilling, So it is
with man's heart, it is altogether disposed, and of it self apt, too too apt to
engender, and bring forth all manner of noisome lusts, which being fed,
multiply in more abundance. Notwithstanding it be thus, yet many there are,
yea, multitudes that pretend to come after Christ, who yet are too indulgent to
themselves, lavishing out upon themselves whatsoever their lusts call for.
These are persons of such facile and easy nature, that they can hardly deny
themselves any thing, they must have not only for necessity, but lust also.
Pride calls for this, and the other fashion, they must have it presently;
Covetousness for Naboths Vineyard, and they are sick if they have it not;
Ambition for Mordecaies Cap and Knee, and they cannot enjoy themselves if they
have it not. But my Brethren, do you think that ever this fire of Self-love
will be extinguished while ye daily administer fuel unto it? do you think
that ever this Prodigal will return to his Fathers house, while he has money
and maintenance at his will and pleasure? Self must be stinted, not fed and
pampered, that is the first.

2. Anact of substraction. This is another act of mortifying Self-denial. The
former is properly a negation, this latter a privation. Self catches at every
thing, it continually gathers in unto it self, but never lets any thing go,
unless upon double or treble interesse. It is a cruel extortioner, a griping
usurer. It never parts with any thing, but upon main force, and therefore
violence must be used in taking from it. Self acts many times violently, and
by force for the satisfaction of its lusts, and violence must be opposed to
this selfish violence. Self gains by force, and it must lose by force also.
Self does violence to principles of Reason, and Revelation, it withholds the
truth in unrighteousness, it breaks all bonds, that so it may act without
control, and this licentiousness gotten by force, it will keep by force,
unless a greater force prevail against it. This is that strong man, Mat.
12.29. that keeps the house until a stronger than he break in by violence
upon him, and cast him out. Those that will come after Christ must do as Christ
did, who Col. 2.15. Spoiled Principalities, and Powers. Christ spoiled
principalities, and powers, for us, and without us, but there are other
principalities and powers, which he spoileth within us, and by us, and these
are the principalities and powers of carnal Self, in the destroying of these
we must be copartners with Christ, when the Isr aelites were called out of
Egypt to come after Moses into the promised Land of Canaan (being therein a
type of the Saints going after Christ to Heaven) it is said, they Spoiled the
Egyptians, Exodus 12.36. under whom they had been so long held in bondage. The
grand Tyrant under which all natural men lie to this very day, is Self. Self is
he that refuses to let the people of God go at the call of the Gospel; but
friends, whenever ye will ser forward in obedience to the call of Christ, to
come after him; you must be sure to spoil these eruel principalities and
powers of Self within you, they have usurped a long time many precious Jewels,
of parts, and abilities, and affections, for their own service, but all these
must be taken from them by violence, they are fitter for the service of
Christ, than of Self; therefore not an hoof must be left behind, not so much
as a thought for the service of Self. Ah souls! think on it seriously, what a
loser God has been, and what losers you your selves have been, since Self has
had the upperhand within you! how little have you done for the blessed God of
heaven, and earth, since you have been in the world! how little you have done
for your precious souls! Self has as it were bought you out of the hands of
God, and you are become its bondslaves. We read of Ahab 1 King. 21.20.
that he sold himself to work evil. Thus have you done, who are for the
present under the power of Self, you are apprentices unto Self, work from Self,
and for Self, receive all your direction, all your encouragement from Self; if
Self bid you go, you go, if Self say come, you come, you go at its bidding, and
come at its beckning, the reason is, Self is your Lord and Master: Now before
you can come after Christ, you must be recovered out of the hands of Self; God
has lost, and you have lost, and therefore by violence you must snatch away
whatsoever Self has gotten, either from God, or from your own souls. Self has
had possession long enough, for shame let him not dwell quietly any longer.
Self has reigned a long time, and too long, it is time now that he be
dethroned, and that the Lord Jesus be exalted in his room. Stolen waters have
been sweet to Self, and bread eaten in secret, very pleasant; Oh! it is now
time to imbitter them. What one of the Fathers says of repentance, I may say
of Self-denial; it is sordium vomitus, Self-denial is a purging grace; a
cleansing grace, it forces up all its sweet morsels again. Thus we see what
must be done, if we mean that Self should be destroyed. We must not only
not give to Self, but we must also take away from Self, whatsoever has been
unjustly detained by it. Has Self any right to what it keeps back from Jesus
Christ? certainly not. Therefore I will say to all that read this book, as the
Prophet to the King of Israel, Ezekiel. 21.26. Remove the Diadem, take off the
Crown, exalt him that is low, lift up Christ upon the Throne, who is now
trampled under foot by Self, abase him that is high, bring down self into the
dust, if ye will not, then as in the 27th. verse. God will overturn, overturn,
overturn, and it shall be no more, until he come, whose right it is, and he
will give it him.

SECT. III. Showing what it is to deny Self more particularly.
I Have done with the more general description of this duty, and now come to
speak of it more particularly, and first,

SUBSECT. I. Of denying Self in respect of inherent Grace.
In this, as also in the rest of the particulars following, I shall consider
it, 1. Negatively, what it is not. 2. Affirmatively, what it is.


Negatively, To deny Self in respect of inherent Grace, is not

1. To deny the presence of it where it is. This were to bear false witness
against ones self, and consequently to break the ninth Commandment. Luther
judged it no small error in Melancthon, that to the intent that all might be
ascribed unto God; he imagined Christ to be further off from his heart, than
indeed he was. Solt Deo omnia deberi tam obstinate asserit, ut mihi plane
videatur saltem in hoc errare, quod Christum ipse fingat, longius abesse cordt
suo, quam sit revera; But says he, Certe nimis nullus in hoc est Philippus;
Certainly Philip is too-much-nothing in this kind of Self-denial. It is not
humility, but pride, and foul ingratitude, not to acknowledge what good soever
God has wrought in us; which is not so well taken notice of as it should by
some, otherwise very good men, and women, who now and then will needs thus
severely pass sentence upon themselves, as having not one jot of goodness in
them. It is commonly observed by such as have to do with men of troubled
consciences, that notwithstanding they will acknowledge such things to be in
themselves, as according to the judgment of the word, are the very fruits, and
real effects of Gods sanctifying Spirit, yet by no means will they yield, that
there is a work of grace in their hearts. They cannot deny but that there is a
change in some measure wrought from what they were before; the ways of God
which once they counted too strict and precise, and hated under that very
notion; they now love, and account them the happiest souls that walk in them;
and those sinful ways which they took pleasure in formerly, they now loath,
and detest, and are even ashamed of them; and as for the people of God whom in
times past they hated, and persecuted, they now love them dearly, and esteem
them the only excellent ones upon the earth. They cannot deny but they have an
hungring and thirsting after the Lord Jesus; not only to be made partakers of
his Righteousness, but his Holiness also, and that nothing without this, will
content, and satisfy them; and yet notwithstanding all this, they will most
unreasonably conclude against themselves that they have no grace; and for what
reason? why, because they have not such a measure of grace as they apprehend to
be in others; they have not such stirring and strong affections, such a
measure of grief for sin, such a measure of love to, and delight in the ways
of godliness, as others have, and hence they conclude they have nothing in
themselves more than what may be found in reprobates, and that all is but in
Hypocrisy. Now, could they but see it, there is much of Self in this, that
because they have not so much as they would, they will not take notice of so
much as they have. A little grace must be owned, though in the midst of many
corruptions. As with one eye we should look upon the evil that is in our selves
to be humbled, so with the other we should look upon the good that is in our
selves to be thankful. I am black, but comely, says the Spouse, Cant. 1.5.
And I sleep, but my heart waketh. chap. 5.2.

2. It is not to deny the power of it, when it should be exercised. Power is
most properly proper unto grace, (...), it is always necessarily in it, and it
can no more be conceived without it, than a body without quantity, or fire
without heat. To say therefore that grace is not a powerful inabling thing, is
a very contradiction, for it is all one as to say that grace is not grace; as
to say that fire is not hot, is all one as to say that fire is not fire.
Therefore it is but an idle plea for any one that is godly, to say, he can do
nothing, and that upon this account he must not attempt the performance of any
good duty, till the Spirit move him. Verily there is much of Self in this. Non
posse praetenditur, non velle in causa est. Want of power is pretended, but
want of will is the cause why those that are godly do no more than they do. I
doubt not to affirm that ordinarily it is so. Austin wondering at himself (as
he tells us, L. 8. Confess. c 9.) why the mind when it commands the body,
should presently be obeyed, but when it commands it self, should be refisted,
thus at length resolves the case. Non ex toto vult, non ergo ex to-to imperat,
it does not fully will, and therefore does not fully command. Nam in tantum
imperat in quantum vult, and in tantum non fit quod imperat, in quantum non
vult; for in so much it does command, in as much as it does will, and in so
much that is not done that it does command, in as much as it does not will.
Paul exhorts Timothy to stir up the gift of God which was in him, 2 Timothy 1.6.
and he gives this reason, verse. 7 for God has given us the Spirit of Power,
of Love, and of a sound mind. And the Prophet complains, Isa. 64.7. There is
no man that stirs up himself to take hold of God. Vulg. Nonest qui surgat,
there is none that rises up; and so Augustine in the forementioned place;
speaking of the mind as partly willing, and partly unwilling to that which is
good, Non totus assurgit, says he, it does not fully rise up. Therefore
though Natural men, who are dead in sin, be without strength, and so cannot
stir up themselves to a further doing, and receiving of that which is
spiritually good, yet spiritual men, who are quickened, have a power, and ought
to stir up that power, for the doing of that good which God requires, and for
the receiving of that good which he has promised.

3. It is not to deny the use of it, as an evidence for the clearing of the
goodness of our spiritual estate. We know says the Apostle that we have
passed from death to life, because we love the Brethren, 1 John 3.14. And by
this we know that we love the Children of God, when we love God, cap. 5.2.
Quicquid de aliquo universali dicitur universaliter, id etiam d^ omnibus
dicitur quesub isto uriversali continentur.
and by every other grace we may know it as well as by this. The least grace
if true and sincere, is sufficient to salvation, and therefore the sense of the
least grace is Culverwell's White Stone.
sufficient to assurance. Grace is the fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. and the
tree is known by its fruit, Mat. 12.33. Some cry up an immediate revelation of
the Spirit, as the only evidence, in opposition to the testimony of a good
conscience, arguing from inherent Grace; but such do not consider that the
testimony of Gods Spirit is always accompanied with the testimony of our own
spirit, as Romans 8.16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that
we are the sons of God, (...) Culverwel. Ibid.
which is properly of one that confirms what the other says. If our own
conscience condemn us, i. e. upon just and warrantable grounds, out of the
word, God will much more condemn us, for God is greater than our consciences,
and knows much more wickedness by us, than we do our selves, 1 John 3.20. It
is not our confidence and persuasion then, but the ground of it, that argues
our Estate to be good. Though our persuasions be never so strong, yet if our
grounds and reasons be none, or false, we are but in a tottering condition;
we do but build upon the sand, and therefore when the rain descends, and the
floods come, and the winds blow, our building will fall, and great will be the
fall thereof, Matthew. 7.27. Here I cannot but make mention of a dangerous
mistake of some, that first take it for granted, that they are in Gods favor,
and then, though they can see nothing in themselves (setting aside their form
of godliness, their holding of some popular opinions, and engaging in the
public service with the honest party) but the fruits of the flesh, as
Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Hatred, Variance,
Emulation, Strife, Sedition, He resies, Envyings, Drunkenness, Revellings, and
such like. Yet they go on securely, vainly trusting that none of these (some
whereof they rather judge to be fruits of the Spirit, than of the flesh, and
others of them (upon the forementioned supposition) rather infirmities, than
reigning sins) shall separate them from the love and favor of God, seeing,
whomsoever he loves, he loves unto the end. We have a remarkable place for
this, Isa. 48.2. They call themselves the holy City, and stay themselves upon
the God of Israel, and yet as the former verse shows, they were most abominable
Hypocrites, they made mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth, nor in
righteousness; and the fourth verse tells us, that they were very obstinate,
their neck was as an Iron sinew, and their brow brass. I am verily persuaded
this is a delusion that damns millions of souls under the Gospel. Dr. Jackson
in his Treatise of Justifying Faith, has so fully opened it, that I thought
good for the conviction of this sort of men, to transcribe this that follows.
The Hypocrite (says he) always perverting the practical, as the Heretic
does the theorical rules of Scripture, never sounds the main depth of
Christianity, but passes over it, as if it were some Philosophical shallow --
And after he has once lost the right way, and wandered a while in uncertain
blind persuasions of his private favor with God, takes a course quite
contrary to all godliness. For where our Savior lays it down as one of the
first and most necessary rudiments of Christianity, that we must forsake all,
and deny our selves, otherwise we cannot truly follow him, the Hypocrite
persuades himself he has forsaken Father, and Mother, Sister and Brother,
even all he has any saecular reference unto, because he so devoutly follows
Christ. As in what? in hearing Sermons, quoting places of Scripture upon every
occasion, in common talk, or in precise observance of some precepts, whose
practice is very compatible with his principal desires, apt to support his
reputation, otherwise defective and lame, or perhaps consort as well with his
sour afections, his niggardly, or scrapin disposition, zeal in reading, and
hearing Gods word; I ever admire, where it is accompanied with practice
conformable; but to be more precise in persuasions, than in actions, more
zealous in performance of duties toward God, no way chargeable, than lowly,
courteous, and really loving toward their neighbors, is a fearful sign that
worldly affection has got the start of Faith in the Spring, and will hardly
be overtopped in the growth; and that the mind thus affected, is sickly, and
faint, yet willing to stay the working of couscience with these repasts. And
were it not the nature of this disease, to put out the eye of reason, and rely
wholly upon forced persuasions; it were impossible such palpable contradictions
betwixt most men's ordinary resolutions, and fundamental principles of Faith (as
any Heathen that could but understand what the words of Scripture meant, would
upon the first view of both, clearly discry) should go so long, often times for
ought we can perceive, the whole course of their lives, without control, or
check, and without notice of their danger. He is in worse case questionless
than the mere natural, or reasonable man, even blinded by Gods just Judgment
for his hypocrisy, that can suffer himself to be persuaded he has truly
denied himself, taken up his cross, forsaken all, and made fit to follow
Christ; when as the world sees, and his practice proclaims he minds nothing,
either so intensively, or continually, as the increasing of his wealth, or
raising his own, or his Childrens fortunes, already greater than they are,
Christianly capable of. Thus far the Doctor; Therefore I do here in the name of
God warn all those, of what rank soever they be, that shall read this Book,
that as they love the salvation of their own souls, and would not suffer the
vengeance of eternal fire with unbeleevers and hypocrites, the Devil and his
Angels in Hell, they would beware how they entertain any such conceit of the
goodness of their spiritual condition, while in the mean time they neglect to
look after the evidence of the real presence of sin-subduing, sin-mortifying
grace in their own hearts. The five foolish Virgins never doubted of their
grace, till it was too late, and this was their folly; they were shut out of
the Bride-chamber for their neglect, Mat. 25.11, 12. Our Savior tells us, that
many at the last day will say unto him, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in
thy name? preached many powerful Sermons, even to the wonder and astonishment
of those that heard us? and in thy name cast out Devils, and in thy name done
many wonderful works? been instruments of a wonderful reformation in the places
where we dwelt, casting out Drunkards, Swearers. Prophaners of the Lords day,
etc. and that then he will proof sse unto them, that he nevr knew them, Mat.
7.22, 23. Let every one therefore examine himself whether he be in the Faith; 2
Cor. 13.5 and give all diligence to make his calling and election sure, i. e
his election by his calling, 2 Pet. 1.10.

4. It is not to deny the expression of it, when it should be seen. Though
grace be an invisible thing in it self, yet by an holy practice it may be
made visible. I willshew thee my Faith by my works, says the Apostle, Jam.
2.18. and this is according to the commandment of our Savior, Mat. 5.16. Let
your light so shine forth, that men may see your good works, and glorify your
Father which is in Heaven. Some are afraid to discover their graces, when they
doubt it will be to the prejudice of their worldly interesse; and therefore
lest they should offend some particular persons, not cordially affected to
religion, upon whom they depend for some place of honor, or profit, which
either they expect for time to come, or for the present do enjoy, they choose
rather in a way of base servile compliance, to discover their corruptions. But
this is a great dishonor to God, and that which provokes him exceedingly. It
was a great evil in David, that he would play the natural fool before Achish,
1 Samuel 21.13. but certainly it is a far greater evil for any one to play the
profane fool. Let such remember that terrible speech of our Savior, Mark 8.38.
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in this adulterous and
sinful generation, of him also shall the son of man be ashamed, when he
comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy Angels.

Thus I have shown what it is not, Negatively, now in the next place I shall
show what it is,

Affirmatively, To deny Self, in respect of inherent grace, is

1 Not to attribute it to our selves, either as the efficient or meritorious
cause thereof.

1 Not as the efficient cause. The work of grace is supernatural; such a work
as is tar above and beyond any finite power, whatsoever to effect: which being
so abundantly declared in the Scripture, sometimes calling it a Sire novatio
naturae nostrae cadem regeneratie, and creatio dicitur, oportet certe ejus
generis opus esse, quod cum creatione aliquam habeat cognationem: nullam autem
habebit -- si homini parts suae ita tribuautur, ut quippiam ferisse tatuatur,
quod agracia Deinon sit omuino profectum Camero. Collat. cum Tileno. p. 668.
New Creation, 2 Cor. 5.17. Ephesians. 4.24. and a regeneration, and new birth:
John 3.5. James 1.18. sometimes a vivification, or a quickening of those that
were dead, Ephesians. 2.5. and a resurrection from the dead, Col. 2.21. in all
which that there should be any cooperation of humane power is x utterly
impossible; one may justly wonder with what face any that do acknowledge it to
be the Word of God, can affirm the contrary. And yet the Arminians are not
ashamed to go up and down boasting and bragging of a power within themselves,
to do all this, and much more, without any dependence upon the special grace of
God, at their own will and pleasure, which is too too (evident, although Etsi
Gratiam Dei Verbis concedant, reipsa tamen tollunt, quia secundum eos,
efficacia Gratiae Dei non est absoluta, comparatione bonae electionis, sed
depeudenter se habet a consensu liberi arbitrii, unde apud cos vocatur
Efficacia Moralis. Rive^ in Psalm. 16.
in words they would sometimes dissemble the matter, in that they will
acknowledge no other efficacy of grace, but what consists in a moral suasion
only.

But some of them speak their minds plainly, Episcopius Disp. de pers. Script.
Posse quemlibet modo usu rationis polleat, sine ulla peculiari, immediata, vel
interna lucis collustratione, facillime intelligere ac percipere omnes
scripturae sensus qui ad salutem necessarii sunt scitu, creditu, speratu, vel
factu, etc. That any man, if he have but the use of reason, without any
peculiar, immediate, or internal illumination, can most easily understand, and
perceive all those meanings of the Scripture which are any way necessary to be
known, believed, hoped for, or put in practice: And that these meanings of the
Scripture being apprehended by the understanding, are most easily propounded to
the will, which has by nature a free and inseparable faculty of choosing any
kind of object whatsoever, that is presented by the understanding.

Again, Jo. Arnold advers. Bogerm.
Positis omnibus operationibus quibus ad conver sionem in nobis efficiendam
Deus utitur, manet tamen ipsa conversio, it a in nostra potestate libera ut
possimus non converti, i.e. nosmetipsos convertere, vel non convertere.
Notwithstanding all the operations that God makes use of for our conversion,
yet conversion it self so remains in our own free power, that we can be not
converted, that is (as they explain it) we can either convert or not convert
our selves. Owens Display of Arminianisme.
Where the Idolater plainly challenges the Lord to work his uttermost, and
tells him, that after he has so done, he will do what he please.

Most horrid blasphemy! Neither the word of God that tells us, The natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, because they are foolishness
unto him, and that he cannot know them because they are spiritually discerned,
1 Cor. 2.14. that he is Hi timli (si nihil aliud esser) satis arguunt quam sint
illa vana quae de liberi arbitrii viribus in causa salutis vulgo jactantur.
Erenim si servi sumus peceati, quo pacto cum servitute porerit una consistere
Libertis? Came. de Effic. gratiae These. 5.
the servant of sin. Rom 6.20. Enmity against God, and therefore neither is,
nor can be subject to him, Romans 8.7. That every imagination of the thoughts of
his heart is only evil continually, Genesis 6.5. That he can no more alter his
custom of sinning, than the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his
spots. Jer. 13.23. That he is without strength, Romans 5.6. Can do nothing, Joh.
15.5. Being altogether dead in trespasses and in sins, Ephesians. 2.1. Nor
Experience, whereby we see that till God do mightily overpower him by the
irresistible working of his Spirit within him, he goes on; adding sin to sin,
and iniquity to iniquity; the most convincing and persuasive Ministry of the
Gospel notwithstanding, is sufficient to convince these men.

Certainly, if any of them perish in this damnable error, their condemnation is
of all men's most just, they are (...), altogether inexcusable, and can have
nothing to plead for themselves; For whereas other men plead their Cannot
Fenners wilful Impenitency, Selfmurder.
, (though that be not the reason) these must needs confess that their Will-not
is the only cause of their destruction: For if they can convert themselves,
whence is it then that they are not converted? It is not (they say) because
they cannot, therefore it must needs be because they will not.

But to let this pass, What ever these men think or speak concerning the
ability and power of nature in the work of conversion, the Scripture (we see)
teaches us otherwise, That by nature we are spiritually dead; and if so,
reason will tell us, That we cannot make our selves spiritually alive; And
therefore let no man presume upon any strength of his own, as if he were able
as of himself, to answer the Call of the Gospel in turning himself from the
power of Sin and Satan, unto God; but rather pray as Ephraim, Jer. 31.18. Turn
thou me, and I shall be turned.

Indeed if God will undertake the work, it shall be effected, and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it; but if he let it alone, though there be
line upon line, precept upon precept, and persuasion upon persuasion, most
certain it is, it will never be.

If he leave men to themselves, if he say concerning any one, as he did
concerning Ephraim, Hos. 4.17. Let him alone, he will stand it out in a way of
rebellion to the last, be will hold fast deceit, and refuse to return till his
iniquity be full, and he become ripe for destruction.

Did men see this sinful disposition of theirs, not only as it is discovered
in the Scriptures, but as it discovers it self in their own hearts, with what
implacable antipathy, and irreconcilable enmity it is continually acting
against God, and the things of God, which by reason of Self-love that blinds
their eyes, they do not discern, there would be no great difficulty in
convincing them of the truth hereof; but this is part of the corruption of
sinful nature, that though it neither can, nor will be good, yet it would be
thought to be so by others, and inforceth a conceit upon it self that it is
good, at least not so bad as to be altogether unable to do any thing that is
good.

Hence many persons having their affections sometimes extraordinarily stirred
by some rowsing Sermon, upon this imaginary conceit of their own ability to be
good, presently begin to reform their former course of life, not only
abandoning those gross evils which heretofore they practiced, but taking up
the practice of those good duties, which then they neglected, hoping at length
to arrive at that perfection which the Law requires; but finding that after all
their tugging and striving in many things, they still come short of it, they
come to Christ desiring him to join his strength to theirs, and to perfect that
which they have so well begun themselves.

But O the woeful delusion these men are under! They change indeed their
outward actions, but they do not, they cannot change their inward dispositions;
they are the same men still as before, they have a form of godliness, but are
not under the power of it, they bring forth some fruit, but they have no root
in themselves, and therefore, Luke 8.13.
(...) in the hour or opportunity of temptation they will fall away.

And it cannot be otherwise, for while they imagine they have power sufficient
in themselves, it is certain they will not go out of themselves for it, and if
they go not out of themselves for it, it is certain they cannot have it, and if
they have it not, how is it possible they should do that which cannot be done
without it?

As for their coming unto Christ, for augmenting and consummating grace, upon
this supposition, that initiating grace is of themselves, it is a mere vanity;
Amesius Coron. ad Collat. Hagiens. Ar. 4.248
Quasi majore opus esset potentia ad incrementum and constantiam fidei quam
adejus primam in generationem, etc. As if more power were required for the
increase of faith than for the first beginning of it, and it had not its
beginning, as well as its increase, from one and the self-same cause.

This was the conceit of the Massilienses, against whom Austin writes in his
book, De Praedestin. Sanctorum, who said, that as touching the augmentation of
faith, Ex Deo fidei complementum, ex nobis est fidei caeptu^, sibimet
arrogantes primitias boni, Deo vix decimas relinquentes, Ames.
they granted it was the work of God; But as for the initiation, or first
beginning of it, they stiffly maintained, that it was the work of man. But the
Scripture tells us, That Christ is the Author, as well as the Finisher of our
faith, Heb. 12.2. and so of every other grace, as well as of faith. Therefore
if we look not to him as the Author of grace, we have no reason to look that
he should be the Finisher of it. Unto every one that has says he, shall be
given, Mat. 25.29. and he shall have great abundance, but from him that has
not, shall be taken away even that which he has. Where Christ has begun a
good work, we may be confident he will finish it, Philip. 1.6. But if we
begin in the flesh (as we do Quicquid est extra Christum caro est.
if we begin without Christ) we cannot expect we should end in the Spirit. To
expect that the Spirit should join his strength with ours, and cooperate with
us, has not more of ignorance than of arrogance in it; for what is it else
than for the second. cause to expect to take place of the first? to look that
God should come down from the Throne, and wait upon us at the Footstool?
Co-operatio est hominis, non Dei, insert enim co-operatio aliquam
imperfectionem, supponitque alium primum agentem, atque it a si Deus
cooperaretur homini per gratiam, homo praeiret, and Deus sequeretur. Rivet.
excreitat. in Genesis 52.
Cooperation supposes another to be the first Actor. and therefore if God
should cooperate with us by his grace, we should go before, and God follow
after; a thing very pleasing unto Self, and that which these men would have,
though all of them do not take notice of it. But enough of this.

By all that has been said, it is clearly manifest:

1 If we have no grace, from whom it must be expected; not from our selves,
but from him who is full of grace, Ioh. 1.14. in whom it has pleased the
Father that all fullness should dwell, Col. 1.19. for this end, that all that
come unto him might receive from his fullness grace for grace, Ioh. 1.16. and
therefore abandoning all conceits of our own sufficiency, and despairing of
grace by any strength of our own, we must come into him, Scripturae sibi
respondent de praecepto and gratia, ut Ezekiel. 18.31. and cap; 36.26. Item Jer.
6.16. and Ezekiel. 36.27. item Phil. 2.12. item Marth. 5.48. and 1 Cor. 1.10. quae
manifest evincunt he ipsum agratia Dei expectari and ficri quod a Deo
praecipitur, i. e. ipsam rei effectionem Rivet. in. Psa. 16.
earnestly praying, that he would make us such as he would have us to be.

2 If we have grace, to whom it must be ascribed, not to our selves, but to
him who is the God of all grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. who has wrought it in us, 2 Cor.
5.5. we must say, This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes,
Psalm. 118.23. It is he that has made us, and not we our selves, Psalm. 100.3.
and therefore not unto us, not unto us, but unto the Name of the Lord be all
the praise, Psalm. 115, 1. This is indeed to praise God aright (and it is a
principal part of Self-denial in the matter we now speak of) to acknowledge
God as the This is the difference betwixt thanksgiving and praise, the one
looks at the benefit, the other at the workmanship of God in it. Vines on Isa.
63.8. Sermon. before the Parl.
Workman. We are (...). Syrus (...), Ad priorem hominis creationem alludit,
utetiam David. Psa 51.12. Pro nomine (...), caeteri omnes prorsus excluduntur,
(...) vocat quod Hebr. (...). Beza in loc.
his workmanship says the Apostle, created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
Ephesians. 2.10. therefore if we attribute any thing to our selves Sibbs Souls
Conflict, cap. 28.
We commit either Sacrilege by robbing God of his due, (and so do not praise
him) or mockery, by praising him for that which we hold to be of our selves.

It is a most unreasonable thing to arrogate that to our selves as the
principal cause, in the effecting whereof we were not so much as the
instrumental; and yet it is that which even the best of men are naturally prone
to do. Spiritual pride, though it be one of their greatest infirmities, yet it
arises out of their chiefest excellencies, namely their graces; not that Grace
breeds it, but the flesh, though it cannot endure the grace that is in the same
heart with it self, yet it is apt to be proud of it; it loves not the grace,
but the praise and honor that comes by it, it loves right well, and under that
notion it will glory in it. If we observe the workings of our hearts,
especially at such times when we compare our present condition with our former
condition, what a change there is, and our selves in this condition with others
in our former concondition, what a difference there is; nay, when we compare
our selves with others in the same condition with our selves, how much we do
excel; we shall often take notice how ready Self is to catch all the praise,
so that if we be not exceeding watchful, it is presently gone with it, and
instead of admiring God, we do nothing but admire our selves, and go up and
down glorying in our own thoughts, as if we had made our selves to differ, and
had nothing that we received from another. Surely if what I have found by
experience of the wickedness of my own heart in this particular, be an argument
of the like wickedness in other men's hearts (as I think Prove. 27.19
it is) I must needs warn them to have a very watchful eye over themselves,
that while they take notice of the grace they have received, there be no secret
glorying in their thoughts, as if they received it not. We find the Apostle
more than ordinarily careful of this, both when he speaks of the life of Grace
in himself, and in others; in himself, 1 Cor. 15.10. By the grace of God, says
he, I am what I am; I labored more abundantly than they all, yet not I, but
the grace of God which was with me. And Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me; and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the
faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. In others,
Ephesians. 2.8. By grace ye are saved through faith, (...), and this not of your
selves, it is the gift of God. This is the first thing, not to attribute it to
our selves as the efficient cause, the next is,

2 Not as the meritorious cause; The work of Grace, as it cannot be effected by
any ability of our own, so it cannot be deserved by any worthiness of our own.
We are not worthy of the least of Gods mercies (as humble Jacob said of
himself, Genesis 32.10.) much less of this that is so great. There was no such
thing as deserving at Gods hands, in the state of innocence; Adam might
impetrare, but not mereri, obtain by working, but not deserve; for works were
never Suo jure in the first Covenant, they were not made the condition of
eternal life for any intrinsecal worth that was in them, there being no
proportion betwixt a finite obedience and an infinite reward; it was an Act of
Grace on Gods part to promise life eternal upon the performance of that, to
which man was obliged by his Creation, though there had been no such promise;
how then can there be any such thing in this state of degeneracy? Then there
was non-deserving, but now, not only nondeserving, but ill-deserving too. We
are so far from deserving any thing that is good, that we deserve the quite
contrary, even all manner of evil to be inflicted upon us. And therefore if God
should deal with us according to our deserts, he might justly punish us, not
only by denying us grace to do that which is good, but by Exodus 4.21 Romans 19.
hardening our hearts to do that which is evil, that so waxing worse and worse
2 Chronicles. 28.22. 2 Timothy 3.13
notwithstanding all that he should do to reclaim us, our Damnation might be
the greater. We have had our portion already, but we have played the Prodigals,
and have broken, and therefore cannot demand a second setting up. Therefore if
we will return to our Father, if we will have the best robe brought forth, and
put upon us at our return, we must come with the Language of the Prodigal in
our mouths, Luke 15.21. Father, we have sinned, (...), and we are no more
worthy to be called thy Sons; the Childrens bread belongs not to us, even the
crumbs that fall from thy Table are too good for us, and thou might justly
suffer us to pine away in our iniquities. This is the way to obtain grace if
we would have it; but Self hardly stoops to terms of so great Self-abascment.
Papists and Arminians know not how to speak in this humble Dialect. Merit of
congruity, and merit of condignity are continually in their mouths; merit of
congruity in respect of Vid. Henric a Die. Mellific. Catech. par. 3
Grace, merit of condignity in respect of Glory. The latter of these we shall
speak to See Subsect. 3. following.
afterward; to the first here. Their Opinion and Meritum de congruo hominis
nonrenati seu ante primam gratiam acceptam operibus tribuunt. Meritum de
congruo nominant, quod congruum sit, ut Deus homini seeundum virtutem suam
operanti plae mium (Wolleb) conversionem, (a Die) reddat.
Doctrine concerning it, is, That works going before conversion may of
congruity promerit grace; that is, if a man do but make a due improvement of
his reason, a good use of his natural endowments, if he do but as much as he
can (which many (they say) do) it is fit that God should give him grace. Where
not only the supposition, but the inference also is false, and contrary to the
Scriptures; for,

1 Here is supposed that which is not to be supposed, and that which will never
be proved, namely, that some men as yet not converted, who for the present are
in an unregenerate estate, do do as much as they can; certainly, every wicked
servant will be found to have been a slothful servant at the Day of Judgment,
Matthew. 25.26. But,

2 If this were true, that some such persons act adultimum virium, to the
uttermost of their power, yet it follows not, that therefore it is fit that God
should give them grace; nor does God give any one grace upon that account; for
when they have done all that they can in this unregenerate state, what is it
that they have done? why nothing well-pleasing and acceptable unto God, because
(as the Apostle says Romans 8.7, 8
The carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the Law of
God, neither indeed can be; whence he concludes, that they that are in the
flesh cannot please God. Now, is it fit that God should give them grace, for
doing that which does displease him?

Again, as faith without works is dead, so works without faith are dead also;
and if they be dead works, and not the service of the living God (as the
Apostle says they are, Heb. 9.14.) how can a man by such works deserve to have
grace? What a monstrous thing is it, that vice should merit virtue? that a man
by sinning against God should deserve to be partaker of his holiness! That
Natural men may do some things that are materially good, there is none will
deny, but that they can do any thing formally good, smells too much of the
Pelagian Forge, and is manifestly contradictory to the Word of God, which tells
us, that whatsoever such men do is sin, Prove. 21.4. Titus 1.15. And therefore
most certain it is, they can do nothing to prepare themselves for conversion,
nothing to move God either to vouchsafe them the means of grace, or to make
them effectual, as these men vainly teach. Dr. Twisse against Hoard. Lib. 2.
This is the peculiar glory of Gods grace, to make us perfect in every good
work, and to work in us that which is pleasing in his sight through Jesus
Christ, and this he does according to his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. and
Hebrews 13.21. for Grace is not conferred according to works; that was
condemned as a pestilent Doctrine long ago in the Synod of Palestine, and all
along in diverse Councels against the Pelagians. That the Gospel prevails upon
some, and not upon others to whom it is preached, whom it still leaves in the
gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity; our Savior ascribes it wholly
to the good pleasure of God, as the only reason of it. I thank thee Father,
Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them unto babes, even so Father, for so it seemed
good in thy sight, Matthew. 11.25, 26. And Judas (not Iscariot) hearing him say,
that If any man loved him, he would manifest himself unto him, replies with
wonder, Lord, how is it that thou will manifest thy self unto us, and not unto
the world! as if he had said, There was nothing in us more than in them that
could move thee to it, we were by nature the Children of wrath as well as
others. It is not only true of Election, but of Vocation also, It is not of him
that wills nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy. The grace
of God is preventing grace, it meets us in the way of sin, even while we are
running away from God; we do not seek it first, but it seeks us, and finds us
out in our lost condition, that we might seek it afterward, and having found
it may be careful to keep it; as Isa. 65.1. I am sought of them that asked not
for me Non ergo putandum est cum Pelagianis, gratiam dari ex merito, and iis
communicari qui eam antea quaesiverunt. Non enim quaeritur gratia, sine gratia,
quae prima homisem perditum in se quaerit and invenis, ut postea eam quaerat
and censervet inventam. R. vet in loc. Exercitor in Gen 52.
I am found of them that sought me not; I said, behold me, be hold me, unto a
Nation that was not called by my name. Therefore if we have any evidence of a
real work of grace in our hearts, in any measure, wrought by the Spirit of God,
let us cry Grace, Grace unto it; let us say unto the Lord as Mephibosheth unto
David, 2 Samuel 9.8. What are thy Servants, that thou should look upon such
dead Dogs as we are! And thus much for this first particular of Self-denial in
respect of inherent grace, the not ascribing it to our selves as the cause,
neither the efficient nor meritorious cause of it. In the next place, to deny
Self in respect of inherent grace, is,

2 Not to rest upon it, as the righteousness whereby we are justified in the
sight of God. It is not a righteousness inherent, but imputed, whereby we are
justified. Righteousness inherent is a necessary antocedent of glorification, 2
These. 2.13. (the subject of reconciliation is an enemy, Romans 5.10. of
Justification, a Sinner, Romans 4.5. but of Glorification, a Saint, Acts 26, 18,)
it is also a necessary concomitant of Justification, I Corinth. 1.30. and Romans
8.29, 30. (where God does alter and change the state, there he does mend the
condition by the operation of his holy Spirit) but it is not the formal cause
of it, as Bellarmine and other Papists teach. Justification is a gracious
sentence of God, whereby for Christ's sake apprehended by faith, he does absolve
the Believer from Sin and Death, and accounts him righteous unto life. Non est
Physica transmutatio qualitatum in haerentium, sed moralis vel relativa
transmutatia status qualis est mutatio hominis qui per condonationem
creditoris, ex debitore fit non debtor. Ames. Bellarmin. Enervar. Tom. 4.132.
It does not denote any Physical or real change of disposition, but a judicial
or relative change of state, such a change as consists in pronouncing of a
sentence, and in reputation; But to him that works not, but believes on him
that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness, Romans 4.5.
where this phrase [ Faith is counted for righteousness] is all one with that in
the sixth verse [ God imputes righteousness without works] What this
righteousness is, that is there said to be imputed, the Apostle afterward
tells us, Cap. 5.19. where he says, that as by one man's disobedience many were
made sinners, even so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous; by
which he shows, that the righteousness whereby we are justified, is the
obedience of Christ (his active and passive obedience) and therefore not a
righteousness inherent in our selves, but imputed to us; for 1. It is the
obedience of Christ; and, 2. The text says, that we are made righteous by that
obedience in the same manner, as we are made Sinners by the disobedience of
Adam, which is by Non potest intelligi quomode in obedientia Adami constitueret
posteros peccatores efficienter, nisi illa in obedientia prius imputetur ipsis;
peccatum enim qu^d neque nobis inhaeret, neque imputatur, non potest in nobis
quilquam efficere Ames. Bellar. enervat, Tom. 4.140.
imputation.

As for the righteousness of Sanctification inherent in our selves, it cannot
justify us, because it makes no satisfaction to the Justice of God; the
righteousness whereby we are justified, is such a righteousness as makes a full
and perfect satisfaction to the Justice of God, for all that it can justly
require, either by way of punishment for sin, or by way of obedience to the
Moral Law. The Covenant of Works being broken, man stands bound unto God in a
twofold Debt, a debt of suffering for his first Transgression, and of perfect
and perpetual conformity to the Law (both habitual and actual) for time to
come; God will have the Threatening fulfilled, as well as the Precept observed;
and the Precept observed, as well as the Threatening fulfilled. This the Justice
of God requires, and therefore, it is neither suffering according to the
Threatening alone, nor being conformable according to the Precept alone, but
both together, that satisfies Gods Justice; therefore inherent righteousness
alone cannot justify, because the Curse of the Law for sin, remains still to
be suffered. This God stands upon, to have sin punished to the full, according
as he has threatened, and therefore the punishment must be endured either by
the Sinner himself, or by another (for him, and in his stead) that is able to
bear it, that so God may be sufficiently revenged for all the wrong that sin
has done unto him; therefore they do miserably mistake that talk of
Justification, either by habitual or actual righteousness alone, for that is
not full satisfaction to the Justice of God, and that which is not full
satisfaction, in this case, is no satisfaction at all, and where there is no
satisfaction to the Justice of God, there can be no Justification.

Suppose a man should attain to that perfect and complete habitual conformity
to the Law which is required (for of that only we speak in this place) yet
this could not justify him, because it could not acquit him from his sin in
losing that which he had before; This After-conformity would not make amends
for the former that was lost: This Conformity recovered, is a debt as well as
the former which was lost, and the payment of one debt, will not satisfy for
the non payment of another. But that conformity to the Law, which is even in
the best of Saints, since the Fall, is not Lex non tantum actualem obedientiam
sed and omnimodam cum lege conformitatem requirit, secus enim lues originalis
peccatum non effet. VVolleb. l. 1.
that perfect and complete conformity which the Law requires; for we are
renewed but in part, there is a remainder of corruption still, A law in our
members warring against the law of our mind, Romans 7.23. Therefore if we were
to be tried only by the preceptive part of the Law, we could not be
justified; for so long as any thing is lacking of that conformity which the Law
requires, it is impossible that the Law should judge us righteous. Therefore
there remains nothing but a fearful expectation of a most dreadful sentence of
condemnation to be passed upon us, if we will venture to be tried for our
eternal estates by any thing that is in our selves. For this reason, holy men
in Scripture have always renounced their own righteousness, David prays,
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living
be justified, Psalm. 143.2. If God will not withdraw his anger (says Job) The
proud helpers do stoop under him. How much less shall I answer him, and choose
out my words to reason with him, whom, though I were righteous, yet would I not
answer, but I would make supplication to my judge, Job 9.13, 14, 15. I know
nothing by my self (says Paul) yet am I not hereby justified, 1 Cor. 4.4. And
therefore he professes, That he accounted all things but dung, that he might
win Christ, and be found in him, not having his own righteousness, which is of
the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which
is of God by faith, Philip. 3.8, 9.

And indeed every man that sees himself in the glass of the Law, will see a
necessity of another righteousness than his own, every man (I say) except the
man St. James speaks of, Who having beheld himself therein, goes away; and
streightwar forgets what manner of man he was, Jam. 1.24.

And thus much of Denying-self, in respect of Inherent Grace.

SUBSECT II. Of Denying-self in respect of Common-Gifts.
WE have seen what it is to deny Self, in respect of Grace, I shall now show
what it is, in respect of Gifts.

And 1 What it is for those that want Gifts.

2 What for those that have them.

1 What it is for those that want Gifts.

And here I shall speak (as before) both Negatively and Affirmatively.

1 Negatively, For those that want Gifts, to deny Self in respect of Gifts, is
not,

1 To deny the excellency, usefulness, or necessity of them. None are more apt
to stight and contemn Gifts, than those that are most defective in them. And of
these, some do it out of ignorance, speaking evil of the things that they
understand not, 2 Pet. 2.12. and Jude verse. 10. Others out of pride, being
loath to acknowledge themselves to be wanting in any thing that is excellent.
Others out of a blind devotion to Grace, as if a good opinion of Gifts were
some way or other derogatory from Grace, and these think it a matter of
Self-denial not to think well of any thing that is not grace. But as Grace must
have its due esteem, so must Gifts also. Gifts are excellent, though not so
excellent as Grace. For,

1 They are the purchase of Christ, the fruits of his Resurrection and
Ascension, Ephesians. 4.8. When he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive,
and gave Gifts to men. It was the manner of the Roman Conquerors in their
Triumphs to ascend up to the Capitol in a Chair of State, with their prisoners
following at their Chariot wheels on foot, having their hands bound behind
them, and as they went along, the Victor was wont to throw some Missilia,
certain pieces of Coin, and other rich gifts to be gathered up by the people.

Even so the Lord Jesus when he ascended in triumph up to Heaven, having
spoiled Principalities and Powers, he made a show of them openly, Col. 2.15.
and gave gifts unto men. And this speaks the excellency of them. Princes in
their Triumphs do not give mean gifts, but (...), Royal gifts, they do not
only triumph in their Victory, but in their Liberality also, which makes their
Victory far more glorious.

Even so the Lord Jesus, to make his Ascension more splendid and glorious he
gave Gifts to men, and these Gifts have a Triumphal image and super scription
upon them to this day, they being so notably instrumental in destroying the
Kingdom of Satan and Antichrist.

2 The Operation of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 1.2, 4. There are diversity of Gifts,
but the same Spirit, that is the Author of them all. This the Apostle proves
by induction, verse. 8, 9, 10. For to one is given by the spirit, the word of
wisdom, to another the word of knowledge, by the same spirit; to another the
working of miracles, to another prophecy, to another discerning of spirits, to
another diverse kinds of tongues, to another the interpretation of tongues. But
all these (says he) works that one and the self-same spirit, dividing to
every one as he will.

Hence such as have received Gifts, are said to be made partakers of the Holy
Ghost, Heb. 6.4. And in respect of Gifts, it is as well as of Grace, that the
ministration of the Gospel is called the Ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor.
3.8. and the Manifestation of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.7. And therefore he that
reproacheth Gifts, reproacheth the Spirit of God.

3. Of special use and service in the Church, Ephesians 4.11, 12. He gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith,
and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ. Wherefore Gifts are of excellent use, and
we cannot say, We have no need of them. Were it not for Gifts, the Church
would be in a sad condition: How should the Scriptures be interpreted? How
should the mouths of the Adversaries be stopped, but for Gifts? All are not
Interpreters, all are not able to manage an Argument, nor answer an Objection.
Therefore Gifts must not be contemned, but highly prized.

2 It is not to deny the respect and honor which should be given to those
that have them. Many persons misinterpreting that of the Psalmist [ In whose
eyes a vile person is contemned, Psalm. 15.4.] And that of the Apostle [
Henceforth know we no man after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5.16.] Think there is no
honor to be given to any for their Gifts, while they give no evidence of
their Graces.

It is true indeed, We must not give them that honor which belongs unto men,
as they have Grace, but yet we must also beware that we deny them not the
honor that is due to men as they have Gifts.

Men may be honorable in respect of some good thing which they have, though
concemptible in respect of some better thing which they want. Though men have
nothing but Gifts, yet they are amiable and honorable for their Gifts sake.
Christ loved the young man for the excellency of his moral parts, Mar. 10.21.
Now if Christ loves such, why should not we? Next unto those that have Grace,
come they that have Gifts, though the men be bad, their Gifts are good, and
there is an honor due unto them. The Spirit of God, will be acknowledged in
Gifts, as well as in Grace, seeing he is the Author of both.

3 It is not to deny the labor and industry which ought to be bestowed in
acquiring of them. Austin makes mention of some that neglected the means of
knowledge, because it pufs up, and were willingly ignorant that they might be
humble. But this is by flying the shadow, to embrace the body of sin. It is not
the fault of knowledge, nor of any other gift, that it puffs up, but of our
corruption, which takes an occasion thereby to make us swell. If through
corruption, a man is apt to be proud of his graces (as Mr. Fox once said of
himself, Sometimes I get hurt by my Graces, and sometimes I get good by my
Sins, for by my sins I am made more humble, and by my Graces I am made more
proud) We need not wonder, if through the same, he be apt to grow proud of his
gifts.

But if this be no Objection against our endeavors for Grace, why should it
be pleaded against our endeavors for Gifts? We may not neglect our duty for
fear of any evil that may accidentally come thereof. It is not only lawful,
but a duty to desire and endeavor after gifts, Covet earnestly the best Gifts,
says the Apostle to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 12.31.

It is the study of some, that they may be general Scholars, that they may be
some body in every thing, so it should be in the School of Christ. Whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are
of good report, If there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, we
should think on these things, Phil. 4.8.

Christians should strive to excel one another, not only in Grace, but in
Gifts also; For though Grace be sufficient for a man's self, yet not for himself
relatively considered. Every member has a double office, one to receive in for
himself, and another to Ephesians. 4.16.
give forth to the rest. Now Grace inables a man to receive in, but Gifts only
to give forth. Many have a good treasure within, but want language and other
gifts to bring it forth, and therefore have need to pray, that they may
interpret the meaning of their own hearts for the edification of others.

2 Affirmatively, For those that want Gifts to deny self in respect of Gifts,
is,

1 Not to murmr at the dispensation of God, in giving unto others, that which
for the present, is denied to themselves.

It is an evil, that such as are defective in any thing wherein others do
excel, are by nature very subject to, To think that God deals unequally with
them. What hard thoughts of God have many that are poor, because they are not
so rich as others! and many that are black, because they are not so comely as
others! and many that are diseased, because they are not so healthy as others!
and many that are in thraldom, because they have not the liberty that others
have! What hard speeches against God do many of these sometimes utter! Cursing
the day wherein they were born, and accusing the influences of the Stars, etc.

Thus many not discerning in themselves such abilities and perfections of
mind, as they discover in others, are ever and anon quarrelling at the
Workmanship of God, as if he had not sufficiently polished his work, as if he
had not done it so exactly as he should, wishing rather they had never been
made, than made so imperfect; and some men's dislike of themselves has been so
great, that growing impatient of beholding any longer their own imperfections,
they have laid violent hands upon themselves, and made themselves instruments
of that small measure of annihilation which they are capable of.

The serious consideration of the absolute sovereignty of God over us (we being
in his hands as Clay in the hands of the Potter) would show us what an
unreasonable thing it is, for any one (of what make soever he be) to murmur
in this manner against his Maker; Shall the thing formed say to him that formed
it, Why have thou made me thus? Romans 9.20. Shall the clay say to him that
fashioneth it, What make thou? or thy work, He has no hands? Isa. 45.9.
Has not the Potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel
unto honor, and another unto dishonor? Romans 9.21. Besides, we should
consider what we have justly forfeited by our Apostasy from God; have we not
sinned away the perfections and accomplishments of the mind, as well as of the
body? if so, we are not wronged, though they never be restored. But many times
we charge God foolishly, when the fault is in our selves; we complain of
Nature, when we neglect the means; it may be he has made us capable of
improvement as well as others, but we are slothful, and take no pains, we do
not dig for knowledge as for hid treasure, and therefore no wonder we are
without it. But whatever be the reason that we have not the like gifts with
others, there is no reason that we should therefore murmr against God. This
is a great evil in any one, but far greater in one that has grace; to
overlook our Graces, because we have not gifts, is worst of all. If God has
given us the better part, what cause have we to complain? If we have the gift
of grace, we need not be much troubled, that we have not the grace of gifts.

He that has Grace, has a gift worth all the gifts in the world; and yet as I
have already hinted, there are few or none so deficient, as to be altogether
without gifts, at least without a capacity of attaining some gift or other,
whereby in their places they may be serviceable to the body.

If the foot shall say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the body, is it
therefore not of the body? and if the ear shall say, Because I am not the eye,
I am not of the body, is it therefore not of the body; If the whole body were
an eye, where were the hearing? if the whole were hearing, where were the
smelling? 1 Corint. 12.15, 16, 17. If all had the same gifts, there would
follow a destruction of the whole body, and consequently of themselves too; for
it could not be a body, unless it were made of many members knit together, and
diverse one from another. But Self is not so well pleased with what it has, as
discontented at what it wants; and hence comes murmuring and repining against
God. Here then is Self-denial to suppress all hard thoughts of this different
dispensation of God, seeing he has set the members every one of them in the
body, as it has pleased him, and it is fit that we should subscribe to his
wisdom, and submit to his will therein.

Again, for those that want gifts, to deny Self in respoct of gifts; is,

2 Not to envy those that have them. The Spirit that dwells in us lusts to
envy, says the Apostle, James 4.5. that is, inciteth puts on, and moves
earnestly unto envy. When we behold any excellency in another, out-shining
that which is in our selves (so that, that which before was made glorious, has
now no glory by reason of their glory which excels) Self presently bewrays it
self in this passion of envy, urging us with Festos dies non agit invidia
uncessant importunity by all manner of arguments to malign his person, and
do what in us lies to quench the light of his excellency, and turn his glory
into shame; for this is the nature of envy, to endeavor the destruction of
its object, it being nothing else but an Est tristitia de bono alterius, ut
proprium nostrum bonum impedire vel minuere creditur; ideo incitat ut bonum
proximi, quantum in nobis est, impediamus, and contrarium malum ei procuremus.
Rivet in Decalog.
inward vexation at the good that is in another, for this very reason, that so
much glory or praise seems to be taken from us, as is given to him.

And hence we are provoked in our spirits to do our uttermost to deprive him
of it, and to procure the contrary evil unto him, which if it cannot be
effected, then to endeavor the destruction of his person; as we may see in
the Story of Cain, Joseph's Brethren, Saul, and the Scribes and Pharisees in
their dealing with Christ. It is a special part of Self-denial then in those
that want gifts, not to envy those that have them. Self will be lusting unto
envy, but Self must lose its lusting, we must by no means yield unto it.

When John's Disciples came to him with a complaint, that all the people flockt
after Christ, as fearing an eclipse of their Masters honor (and consequently
of their own) by his interposition, he thus answered them, A man can receive
nothing except it be given him from heaven, Joh. 3.27. Every good gift, and
every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the father of lights,
Jam. 1.17. who gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, v. 5. Now, shall
our Envy is called an evil eye, because all the Diseases of the eye make it
offended with any thing that is light, and shines; as moths eat into the
finest cloth, and the Cantharides blasts the sweetest flowers, so does envy
ever gnaw that which is most beauriful in another whom it hates. Reynolds
Treat. of Pass.
eye be evil because God is good? Matthew. 20.15. we are so far from being
like to God in this, that we do in nothing more resemble the Devil, who being
destitute of true goodness in himself, envieth it in every one else.

We should rejoice at the sight of other men's excellencies, and bless God that
others are more able to do him service, seeing we our selves can do so
little. It should glad out hearts that the glory of God is advanced, whoever be
the instruments. Some indeed preach Christ even of envy and strife, and some
also of good will; notwithstanding every way, whether in pretense, or in truth,
Christ is preached; and says Paul, I therein do rejoice, yea and I will
rejoice, Phil. 1.18. When Joshua told Moses that Eldad and Medad prophesied in
the Camp, and desired him to forbid them, Moses said unto him, Enviest thou for
my sake? would God that all the Lords people were Prophets, and that the Lord
would put his spirit upon them, Numb. 11.29. now if such as Moses such as Paul,
men of such eminent abilities to do service both in Church and State, can be
thus contented, how unbecoming a thing is it, for those that have them not, to
be dis-satisfied? to be neither able to do good ones self, nor willing that
another that is able, should, speaks the most abominable pride that can be
immagined, a more cursed disposition is not to be found in Hell. Another thing
wherein those that want gifts are to deny Self in respect of gifts, is,

3 Not to glory in those that have them. As some are too too apt to envy and
malign them, so others too too apt to Idolize and adore them, attributing all
unto them, as if they were the authors and finishers of their faith; and though
these men may seem to have but little regard to themselves, their own honor
and esteem, while they are thus busied in promoting the good esteem of others,
yet the contrary is most true, for by this means they seek to commend
themselves, lavishing out their praises upon others, that they may return with
advantage back again upon themselves; for hereby they would be thought to be
men of a piercing eye, and an accurate judgment, in that they do approve the
things that are excellent, Phil. 1.10. they would be accounted of the number
of those, who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both good
and evil, Heb. 5.14. so that though they have no achievements of their own to
boast of, yet they are good Judges of other men's; they can tell who does well,
and who does ill, and amongst those that do well, who does best, and such they
like, such they love; yea so confident are they of their own judgment in this
particular, that they make it the common standard, whereby all that honor
which is to be given to men of worth and eminency, is to be tried; and they
will have neither more, nor less given to any one than their own judicious
selves shall allow of.

And hence it is, that in populous places, where there are diverse Ministers of
note, one shall seldom come into any company, but he shall hear one crying up
one, and another another, and a third (it may be) deerying both them; and their
contention many times is so great, which of their Teachers should be the
greatest, that instead of commending, they fall to downright railing upon them,
and one upon another, till at length (being no longer able to endure) they all
break up in a chafe, and resolve never to have fellowship with one another
more. When the one shall say, I am of Calvin, and another, I am of Luther, when
as they meet both in the name of Christian; nay when by most ridiculous
dissension (for we have heard of such (...)) when one shall say, I am of
Martin, and another, I am of Luther, whereas they did but divide Martin Luther,
for they were both of his religion; what must they needs bring but a deformity
and confusion upon the face of the Church, a (...) enough to make up a Chaus.
Calverwel. The Schism. p. 19.
There is not any one thing that occasions more divisions, and sub-divisions
amongst Professors, than this vain-glorying in men, as we see in the Church of
Corinth, while every one said, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas,
and I of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.12. And the reason is this, Culverwel, ib. 22.
they that glory in some excellencies, vilify meaner; nay they vilify choice
ones too: For such as glory in Paul, slight Apollo, and such as admire Apollo,
dis-esteem Paul.

Now such as glory in Paul cannot endure that Paul should be dis-esteemed, and
they that admire Apollo, cannot endure that Apollo should be slighted, and
therefore they that glory in Paul, provoke those that admire Apollo, by
sleighting of Apollo; and they that admire Apollo, provoke those that glory in
Paul, by dis-esteeming Paul, and so both rend the Church in pieces. See Dr.
Reyn. Treat. of Pass. p. 317, 318.
Nothing exasperates our spirits so much: Nothing so much provokes us to anger,
as contempt, from others meeting with the love of our selves. And therefore
when a man already strongly possessed with a love of his own, or his friends
person, or parts, shall find either of them by others slighted and despised,
from whose joynt-respect he hoped for a confirmation of his judgment,
there-hence arises not only a grief, that his expectation is crossed, and his
judgment under-valued, but an eager desire to manifest his displeasure against
the persons who thus contemn him; which is commonly done by such ways and
means as make the All anger ig a kind of disjoyning, or divulsion of things
before joined, Reyn. Treat. of Pas. 332.
breach so wide, that it can hardly afterward be made up again. Therefore for
the preventing of Schism, we must deny our selves, and not cry up one, to the
disparagement of another, but give to every one Romans 13.7.
his due praise.

Lastly, For those that want Gifts, to deny self in respect of Gifts, is,

4 Not to desire, not to endeavor after them for self ends.

Those that want Gifts, ought to covet them earnestly, and earnestly to labor
after them, as I showed before; but not for honor, and applause, not for
preferment and profit, as See Act. 8.18, 19, 21, 22, 23, v.
Simon Magus did, but for the edification of the Church, as the Apostle tells
the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 14.12. For as much as ye are all zealous of spiritual
Gifts, seek that ye may excel to the edifying of the Church.

We see what it is for those that want Gifts, to deny Self in respect of
Gifts; consider,

2 What it is for those that have Gifts.

1 Negatively, For those that have Gifts, to deny self in respect of Gifts, is
not,

1 To deny that they have them. Solomon observes, Prove. 13.7. There is that
makes himself rich, yet has nothing; there is that makes himself poor, yet
has great riches; that is, there are some that make their boast of great
estates, that live after the rate of rich men, when indeed they are worth
nothing, only Trap in loc.
they trick up themselves with other men's plumes.

There are others that are continually complaining of their wants, that live
after the rate of poor men, when indeed they have enough, and more than enough
to live upon.

It is so here, There is that makes himself gifted, yet has no Gifts; There
is that makes himself not gifted, yet has great Gifts.

Some go up and down boasting, as if they did abound in knowledge, and in all
judgment, they can resolve all doubts, put an end to all controversies, and
yet are most grossly ignorant, and have need to be taught the first principles
of Religion; They desire to be Doctors of the Law, but understand neither what
they say, nor whereof they affirm, 1 Timothy 1.7.

Some again, that have attained to a good degree of knowledge, that in the
judgment of others, are fitly qualified for public service, will
notwithstanding be ever and anon declaiming against themselves, as not fit for
any thing.

Now though there seem to be much of Self-denial in such a seeming modest
denial of our own parts and abilities, yet for the most part, there is much
Self-pleasing, and much Self-seeking in it. For,

1 In some, it is nothing else, but an expression of that longing desire, that
they have to know what others think of them, they have a good opinion of
themselves, and they As it is the common property of min, with all other
creatures, to love himself, so it is his particular desire also, being animal
sociate, to be loved by others, because hereby that love of himself which
proceeds from judgment and reason is confirmed. Reynold. Treat of Pass.
desire to have it confirmed by the good opinion of other men; and therefore by
discommending of themselves, they do but administer an occasion to others to
commend them; they speak the more against themselves, that others may speak the
more for them; Its ordinarily observed of some Ministers and others, when they
come off from their public Exercises, they presently begin a discourse of the
meanness, and unworthiness of what they have done. That it was scarce worth the
hearing, that its nothing to what such a one, and such a one can do, etc. But
hearing from their friends, how much they were taken with it, and how all
admire it, and applaud it; to show Usually such professions are but
counterfeit, and that praise which men seem to neglect, or beat back at the
first hop, they readily take at the next rebound Manton, Comment on J^n
Advertisement to the Reader.
how well-pleased they are with this seeming unexpected approbation, and that
their friends may the more admire, they begin to tell them, in how short a time
they did it, how few helps they had, and that they never read any one upon that
subject, etc.

2 In others, but an expression of that pride that they take in slighting such
things, as others do so much admire. There is a pride that arises out of the
contempt of pride, when the mind glories in this, that it has trampled glory
underfoot; and this is (...). M. Anto. lib. 12.
the most abominable pride that is.

3 In others, but an excuse to save themselves from some employment which they
do not affect, as being either less advantageous, or more prejudicial to their
private interests than some others is.

When Moses was afraid to go to Pharaob, as God Commanded, he pleaded want of
Eloquence, Exodus 4.10. Some that have gone to the University with professed
resolutions to enter into the Ministry, meeting afterward with some unexpected
preferment, have changed their resolutions, and for an excuse, pleaded their
want of gifts for so weighty an employment, whereas if they had missed their
preferment, there would have been no want of gifts at all, meaner gifts then
must have been sufficient.

4 In others it proceeds from discontent, that their parts and abilities are
not so great as others.

By all this it appears how much of selfishness there may be in this seeming
Self-denial.

Certainly upon what ground, or for what end soever it be, it cannot be for
the glory of God, to deny those gifts which we have received from him, when
we are called to make a profession of them. Again,

For those that have gifts to deny Self in respect of Gifts, is not

2 To lay them aside, as useless in the dispensation of the mysteries of the
Gospel. It is a woeful delusion that some men are under, to leave off to stir up
the gifts they have received, upon pretense of the immediate inspiration of the
Holy Ghost, to burn their books, and neglect their studies, and to come into
the Assembly without fore-thinking what they shall say, in confidence that the
Spirit of God will dictate to them.

Self-denial is that which herein they do pretend, but the thing which they
principally aim at, is the exalting of themselves, while they would have us
believe, that God deals more intimately and familiarly with them than with any
else-besides.

And that they are exalted above measure, through the abundance of their
supposed revelations, is too too evident; while they cast so much scorn and
contempt upon the means of Gods own Institution and appointment.

But their folly and madness, shall be made manifest to all men. We know that
the Spirit of God is not contrary to himself, and therefore will not do any
thing that shall eclipse the glory of his own appointments. For those then
that have gifts, to deny Self in respect of their gifts, as it is not to deny
that they have gifts, so it is not to deny, to make use of them. But

2 Affirmatively, For those that have Gifts, to deny Self in respect of Gifts.
Is,

First, Not to be proud of them.

It is commonly observed of those that excel in Gifts, that they are many of
them excessively proud; And there are three things wherein their pride does
chiefly discover it self.

Their conceit of themselves.

Their contempt of such as want

Gifts: And,

Their enmity against others that do excel in them.

1 Their conceit of themselves. Selflove, and Self-conceit do always dwell
together, and are mutual causes one of another. There is a The speech of a
selfish man, Proximus egomet mi hi, I am next neighbor, or nearest to my self;
thus he thinks, and thus he speaks, and hence it is that he thinks best of
himself and loves himself best.
proximus mihi, in a Selfish man's breast, and he can easily admit good
thoughts of himself, still viewing his gifts in no glass but selfliking.

This fire of Self-love, though many times it be raked up under the ashes of
most woeful impotencies, and deformities, yet it cannot forbear to smoke forth
the filthy vapors of conceitedness.

The Philosopher observes of parents that they love their children, not because
they are the fairest, but because they are their own.

In like manner, many men admire their own parts and gifts, not because they so
much excel other men's, as because they be their own.

Many are proud of their own blackness, and look upon that in themselves as
their glory, which other men look upon as their shame.

But where this affection meets with a more fertile soil, there it springs, and
spreads more than any where.

If there be any plot in Natures garden better than other; this hemlock, will
grow there, which being at any time fed upon, presently fumes up into the
brain, and intoxicates the whole head.

Hence it comes to pass that many men not ballasted with humility, observing
something excellent in themselves, whereby they are advanced above others, and
admired by all round about them, can scarcely keep themselves upright, but are
ready to be overturned by every blast of a fawning Parasite. (...). Aust. in
Soph. Elenc. l. 1. c. 14
Other men's weaknesses and deformities serve as soils to set off the
perfections of accomplished men with greater luster and glory, which when they
take notice of, they hardly know how to contain themselves in an even temper of
spirit, but are apt to think more highly of themselves than is meet, as if the
world of worthiness had his whole globe comprised in their breasts. And from
this over-high conceit of themselves, because of their Gifts, proceeds,

2 Their contempt of others, that want Gifts. They look downupon such as a
company of poor, silly, contemptible things, as having not for which they
should be regarded.

They will by no means allow they should have any respect given them, they hold
it an abasing of their persons to be in their company, There is Tumor cerebrz,
as well as Tumor cordis, as well a learned, as a stubborn pride, a pride
against the weakness, as against the person of our brother, a pride whereby we
will not stoop to the capacity and edification of him, as whereby we will not
stoop to a yielding and reconciliation with him, that is the swelling of
knowledge, and this of malice. Reynold Treat. of Pass.
an undervaluing of their parts to condescend to the lowness of their
capacities; they will not entertain conference with them, unless now and then
to make themselves sport with their ignorance; they love to be often
reflecting upon such men, and take great pleasure to make them ashamed of their
weaknesses and to see them blush or hang down the head before them.

They will not allow of the commendation of their virtues, or imitation of
their graces, though they be never so Religious, yet because they be plain
Countrymen, or illiterate Mechanics, they are good for nothing, and their
Religion is but blind devotion.

Thus the proud Pharisees, upon a conceit of their own knowledge and learning,
contemned the common people that flocked after Christ and embraced his
Doctrine, as a company of blind, silly, ignorant wretches, fit to be cursed
and destroyed.

This we find in that Reply of theirs to the High Priests Officers, who
instead of taking Christ, as they had been commanded, being very much taken
with Christ, approved of, and commended him at their return, Joh. 7.45, 46.
being asked the question why they had not brought him? they returned this
answer, Never man spoke as this man, to which the Pharisees replied, Are ye
also deceived? Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him? But
this people that know not the Law, are cursed; as if they had said, They are
only some of the rude multitude, unskilful, and unlearned men, that understand
not the meaning of the Scriptures, that run after him, and these are devoted to
destruction; but as for the wise and learned, as for the Pharisees who are
knowing men, and such as shall be saved, they are all against him, not one of
them believes on him.

Now if such as the Pharisees, men of such judgment and understanding, men so
greatly in favor with God, do take no notice of him, why should any one look
after him? As for the judgment of the multitude that follow him, it is nothing
worth, he is the rather to be suspected, because such as they do think so
well of him. This was from that proud opinion and conceit that they had of
themselves, that they thus Semper in allos contumeliosr sunt, quicunque sibi
plus justo placent, and immodicum nostri amorem sequitur fratrum despectus,
Calvin. in 10 c.
vilified and contemned others; they thought themselves the only knowing men,
and therefore that none else were to be regarded.

But it is not the simplicity of the Vulgar only that such men despise, they
know how to trample upon the learned also, even those that have been trained up
in the Schools of the Prophets, together with themselves, and have obtained a
good measure of Learning, so as to be very useful and serviceable in the
Church, yet because they are not such general Scholars, but it may be very
unskilful, in some one or other of the Arts; they make them the objects of
their scorn, and therefore will be sure to decry them in all companies
wherever they come.

There is one thing more wherein the pride of these men does bewray it self,
and that is,

3 Their enmity against others of like gifts with themselves.

Moralists say, that likeness is a cause of love, but experience sometimes
tells us the contrary; for where observe we a greater enmity, than betwixt men
alike; eminent in learning? It is seldom seen that two such (especially if
they be of the same Profession) can approach the Gate of honor, without
justling for the entry, that can hear of Nec quenquam jam far potest,
Caesarve priorem, Pompeiusve parem --
equality without repining, or of priority without indignation. Love runs not
so easily in a collateral or retrograde, as in a downright stream; let men be
uppermost and they will smile upon us, let them conquer, and the Conduits shall
run with wine.

There is a Third Epist. of Joh. v. 9.
Diotrephes in many men's breasts, aspiring to a pre-eminence in every thing, as
if they alone were so many Suns in their particular Orbs, to whom all the other
Stars about them must be beholding for light and influence. And therefore if
they can help it, there shall be none other near them, but such as will humbly
acknowledge their Primacy, such as will be content to see by their Spectacles,
and sail by their Compass.

Of all others these are least able to suffer an Eclipse, which if at any time
it happen (as often by the Validiorum exortu exilia obscurantur.
interposition of a greater light it does) it portends no small disturbance,
and confusion to the whole Society whereof they are members.

We see it in diverse places where there are two Ministers, how the merits of
the one, procures the enmity and opposition of the other; if the people say of
David, he has slain his ten thousands, Saul cannot bear it, but 1 Samuel 18,
8, 9.
eyes him from that day forward, not only Engl. Annot. second Edit.
carefully, and curiously prying into all his actions, to see to what end they
tend, but also beholding, and censuring them with a malicious eye and aspect;
the heart no otherwise so plainly discovering it self, as by the Genesis 4.5, 6.
eye and countenance.

I saw Envy in that painting,
Had a wonderful looking,
For she looktd but awry,
Or over-thwart all baggingly;
And she had a foul visage,
She might look in no visage
Of man, or woman forth right plain,
But shut her one eye for disdain,
So for envy brenned she,
When she might any man see,
That fair or worthy were, or wise,
Or else stood in folks prise.
Chaucer, Romant of the Rose, Fol. 121. And yet for a time it may be he
dissembles his malice, making courtesy the outside of mischief, while secretly
he attempts to work him out of the peoples affections, which if upon trial, he
find impossible to be effected, the delight which he took in meditating so
wicked a revenge, is turned into vexation, and his rage does swell in his heart
so much the more, as it is feign to be suppressed in silence, and disguised
with humbleness; thus when men grow proud of their gifts, do they usually
discover their pride.

Three things therefore are required of all such as have gifts, in full of this
first particular of Self-denial, Not to be proud of them.

1 Not to think too highly of themselves, because of their gifts.

2 Not to contemn others, because of their want of gifts.

3 Not to hate others, because they do excel in them. We have all these in
Romans 12.3, 4, 5. where the Apostle speaking to all those that have gifts, and
commanding them not to be proud of them, gives a threefold reason of so
necessary a Commandment, all which conclude against this threefold pride,
which usually (as we have seen) discovers it self in such, as are proud of
their gifts. The Commandment is in the former part of the third verse, set
down both in the negative, [ For this I say, through the grace given unto me,
to every man that is among you, not to think more highly of himself than he
ought to think] and in the affirmative, But soberly.] The reasons of both, are
in the latter part of that and in the two verses following.

1 From the efficient Cause, or Author of Gifts, and that is God, according as
God has dealt, or distributed, (...). What Gifts soever any one has, he has
them all from God; Nemo igitur superbiat ut suis, let no man therefore be
proud of them, as if they were his own. In as much as God gives them, it shows
that we have none of our own; this should put us in mind of our own penury
and emptiness, which would be an humbling consideration.

It is a very uncomely thing for a man to boast of that which is not his own,
for one that lives by borrowing, to glory in his great estate, and it is very
unjust too; in as much as the glory which is due to his friend, by this means
he transferres upon himself.

By this Argument, the Apostle endeavors to take down the pride of the pust up
Corinthians 1 Cor. 4.7
Who makes thee to differ from another? and what have thou that thou did not
receive? now if thou did receive it, why do thou glory, as if thou did
not receive it? Such stinging interrogations as these (would we but
expostulate in this manner with our own hearts) would quickly prick the
bladder, and let out the wind.

2 From the proportion of Gifts Nemo est in Dei famil^a, qui ralenium non
acceperit public^m aut privatum. Paraens in loc.
according as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith; God has not
given all to one man, but something to every man. There is in the Body of
Christ that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in
the measure of every part, Ephesians. 4.16. Nemoigitur alium contemnat; Let no man
therefore contemn another for what he wants, but esteem and honor him for
what he has.

3 From the communion of Gifts, for as we have many members in one body, and
all members have not the same office, so we being many, are one body in Christ,
and everyone members one of another; so that the Gifts of one member are not
his alone, but another; whatsoever one has, that all the rest have, in as
much as that one has it who is a part of themselves; all have an interest in
it, and benefit by it. Nemo igitur alio invideat, nemo alium odio habeat, Hared
first generates envy, and this again does reciprocally increase hatred, and
both join in mischief. Reynolds Treat. of Pass. 156
Let no man therefore envy or hate another, but every one improve his talent
for the good of the whole body.

In the Natural body one eye does not hate the other, that sees as well, or
better than it self, the right eye does not wish the left put out, that so it
might see alone; one ear does not wish the other stopped, that so it might hear
alone; one hand does not wish the other bound up, that so it might work alone;
nor one foot wish the other cut off, that so it might walk alone; the one does
his office the better for the other.

Again, the eye does not hate the ear, because the ear hears, which the eye
does not; nor the ear hate the eye, because the eye sees, which the ear does
not; the hand does not hate the foot because the foot walks, which the hand
does not; nor the foot the hand, because the hand works, which the foot does
not; but are mutually serviceable one to the other, in procuring the good of
the whole body, whereof they are joint members. Cotton Eccles. c. 4.4
And therefore if we were united in brotherly love one to another, the gifts
of one member would be the joy of the rest, and the honor of one member the
joy of the rest, 1 Corint. 12.26. one finger envieth not another that wears a
Gold Ring, as taking it for an ornament of the whole hand, yea of the whole
body. And thus much of this first particular, wherein those that have Gifts are
to deny Self in respect of Gifts. In the next place,

For those that have Gifts, to deny Self in respect of Gifts, is,

2 Not to presume upon them. As some that have Grace without i. e. Some
particular Gifts which they desire.
Gifts are sometimes ready to despair, so others that have Gifts without Grace,
are most times ready to presume. As their gifts and personal endowments fill
themselves with conceit and admiration, so they expect they should produce the
like effect in others that do observe them, yea that God also should respect
them the more for them. And these are of two sorts, such as presume upon their
Natural gifts, and such as presume upon their Spiritual gifts.

1 Such as presume upon their Natural gifts; these look upon themselves as
curious pieces of Natures Workmanship, and therefore persuade themselves they
are the objects of heavens love. They argue themselves into a delusion thus:
God has imprinted so many Characters of his Image upon my person, enabled my
person with so many rare endowments, embrightned my understanding with orient
beams of knowledge, by which I can find out the most hidden secrets of Nature,
recovered unto reason that dominion and authority, which my unruly and
seditious passions had usurped and extorted from it, beautified my body with
purity of complexion, eminency of stature, proportion of parts; and shall I not
hence conclude that I am greatly beloved of God? Are such Silver vessels made
to dishonor? Is there not rubbish enough in the world besides to be thrown out
of the City of God? Must the same fate take hold on me likewise? I cannot thus
persuade my self. Surely these communicated excellencies from God himself are
strong arguments to me, of the love and good will of God toward me, more than
to many thousands that want them, so that I need not fear that I shall
beacast-away in the end.

Thus do many self-conceited persons delude themselves, vainly imagining that
because of these Natural and Moral accomplishments of theirs, they are made fit
for society and fellowship with God. O would men but seriously take notice of
the conclusions that they make in their secret reflections upon themselves!
they would acknowledge that what they now read is true.

This is that, and all that which bears up the spirits of many great Scholars,
and many of the Gallants and great ones, that sit at the upper end of the
world, with a vain confidence that all is well with them at present, and that
it shall be well with them hereafter.

2 Such as presume upon Spiritual Gifts, these think they have more to be
confident upon than the former; for thus they plead for themselves? We are
enlightened, not only to see into the secrets of nature, but into the more
hidden mysteries of the Gospel, We are the guides of the blind, the lights of
them which are in darkness, instructers of the foolish, and teachers of babes;
in our preaching, we are sometimes sons of thunder, breaking the rocks, and
throwing down the mountains, that are before us, sometimes again, sons of
consolation, raising up the valleys.

Thus our Savior brings them in pleading at the last day, Lord, Lord, open
unto us, for we have prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name cast out Devils,
and in thy Name done many wonderful works, Matthew. 7.22.

To the former of these, I would commend that saying of the Apostle, Romans 2.11.
There is no respect of persons or (...)
accepting of faces with God.

Personal accomplishments shine with an amiable luster in the eyes of men, and
do as it were captivate their affections, and with a secret kind of
enchantment, bewitch the lovers from themselves. It is otherwise with God, they
work not so strongly upon his love; he sees with a clearer eye than any man in
the world, his eye is not terminated upon the elegancy of the outward
appearance as man's is, all things are naked and anatomized in his sight, he
can discern a rotten carcass through a gilded superficies, and see a ghastly
soul through a painted body.

When Samuel was sent to anoint David King of Israel, Jesse made his sons to
pass before him, that he might single out from amongst them one for the Crown;
and when Eliab came before him, he looked upon him, he was taken with the
comeliness of his person, and the height of his stature. and said surely, The
Lords Anointed is before me.

What ground had Samuel thus to conclude? No other but because of the beauty of
his countenance, this gave him a fitness for the Crown in Samuels eye. But God
reproves him for it, and said, Look not upon his countenance or on the height
of his stature, because I have refused him; for the Lord sees not as man
sees, for man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the
heart, 1 Samuel 16.7. It is not the grace of beauty, but the beauty of grace that
affects God. All other excellencies suit very well with sense, but to a
spiritual eye they represent no loveliness at all.

Suppose a man to be the Essay of Nature, to whom every creature should
contribute part of its perfection, who has the largest portion of
intellectuals, quickness of apprehension, firmness of memory, solidity of
judgment, eloquence, courage, wisdom, and policy. etc. yet if he had not
grace, one thing were still wanting, and that the better part too, all else
would be but splendidum nihil, a glorious vanity. God looks at the heart, and
he looks at grace in the heart. What ever the Cabinet be, God respects the
Pearl that is in it most of all. God respects the heart as it has a new
draught of his own image upon it, if this be wanting, though all other natural
perfections be present, yet there is no beauty which God respects.

God did not regard Absalom for his beauty, nor Achitophel for his wisdom, nor
Dives for his honorable descent. These were vile persons in Gods account. And
therefore you that are under this delusion, I beseech you consider seriously of
these things, and bethink your selves of the duty of Self-denial. Be content to
lay your honor, and glory in the dust; Do not fancy your selves the only
excellent upon earth, till you be Saints; Do not glory in the portion you have
received from nature, unless you be enriched with Grace. God will not respect
you for any of these things, if you have no better; it may be he may use you in
some particular service, and reward you with some temporal reward, and
afterward reject you, to be sure, while thus, he will never give you the
Kingdom of Heaven.

When God comes to pick and choose for the Kingdom of Heaven, Not many wise
not many mighty, not many noble men are called: Where is the wise? Where is the
Scribe? where is the disputer of this world? says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.20.
Are not most of them this day without God inthe world? Are not multitudes of
them in Hell already? As for those that presume upon their spiritual gifts, I
would wish them seriously to consider of that answer, that such at the last day
shall have from the Lord, Matthew. 7.23. Then will I profess unto them, I never
knew you, depart from me ye that work iniquity. Men of such excellent gifts as
have been blessed to the conviction, and conversion of many a soul, will be
loath to suspect themselves; But it will be most dreadful damnation, after so
many excellent Sermons preached and printed, so many powerfully moving,
heartbreaking, and heart-melting prayers and tears, etc. for any one to be
damned.

I shall add no more, but pass on to the next particular; for those that have
gifts, to deny Self in respect of Gifts, is,

3 Not to abuse them in the use of them.

Great is the abuse of Gifts, and Self is as much seen in it as in any thing
whatsoever. As,

1 When men exercise them about high things, that are above, either their own,
or other men's apprehensions, whose information and instruction, they are more
especially bound to take care of:

1 Their own apprehensions, when they will be meddling with things, which either
they do not understand, or which cannot be understood.

1 Which they do not understand, when they will take upon them to determine in
matters whereof they have no certain knowledge, nor any wel-grounded
experience. It is observed of many (in some particulars, excellently well
skilled) that they affect nothing more, than to be undertaking, where they
have least ability to perform as they ought. And this is from,

1 An eager desire of glory, and that,

1 In being equal to others, who in some particulars do excel them; They are
impatient of coming short in any thing, thinking it a reflection upon their own
worth, that another should do better than themselves, and therefore they
presently begin to imitate, striving to do the like (though contrary to their
own genius) and so mar all.

2 In excelling others, who in all particulars are even with them. They cannot
endure that others should stand upon the same level with themselves, and
therefore are ever climbing up to the higher ground, till at length they tumble
down lower than before.

2 Self-confidence, and an over-high opinion and conceit of their own
abilities, whereby they fondly imagine they can do any thing as well, or better
than others; they think nothing is too hard for them, but that they shall
either find a way, or make one to their desired glory. As some despairing of
their own sufficiency, shun those employments wherein had they confidence
answerable to their abilities, they might do worthily, so others presuming upon
it, make many fruitless adventures, to the discredit of themselves, and
detriment of others.

Other things might be mentioned to show how much of Self there is in this
Abuse, but they are all, or most of them reducible unto these two Generals,
which indeed are the principal causes of the other Abuse also, which is, when
they will be meddling with things,

2 Which cannot be understood, when they will be aspiring, and reaching after
the knowledge of things not revealed, when they will be trying to unlock and
open those secret and reserved mysteries, which the counsel of God has wisely
shut up, and hid from their eyes.

Some employ all their studies to find out the principles of Metals and to
conjoyn them otherwise than before they have been, that from thence may result
a Catholic Medicine for the perfecting of imperfect Metals, and for restoring
of sick and decayed bodies of what sort soever; and these are they that style
themselves Students in the most Divine mysteries of Hermetick learning.

Some set themselves on work to foreknow, and foretell future events, as
South-sayers, Astrologers, and diverse Enthusiasts.

Some cast it up just how long it shall be to the day of Judgment. Others how
many Centuries it shall last.

Some beat their brains to find out what God was doing before he made the
world: Others to know whether there be not more worlds than one, whether the
stars be not peopled and inhabited in like manner as the earth is.

Some try experiments for finding out the first common matter of all things:
Others that they may see the naked essence of any thing.

Some inquire into the estate of Spirits, and they tell us that some of them
are mortal, also how many years they live: Others into the Hierarchy of Angels,
and they tell us of their several offices and employments, their several
orders, and the number of them.

Some inquire where heaven is to be after the day of Judgment, and tell us
that Christ shall reign upon the earth, and all the Saints with him for ever:
Others dig deep to find out the place of the damned, and they tell us, that at
the center of the earth is the fire of hell, and that it is kindled by the
Primum Mobile, and influences of the Stars.

I might quickly fill up many pages, should I proceed to set down but one half
of the many gross fopperies, and monstrous conceptions, that have been Midwifed
into the world by these, and such like bold and presumptuous inquiries of
fanatic Chemists, and Theosophists; But these few may serve as a sufficient
Induction for the discovery of the Abuse we now speak of, the causes whereof
(to show how much of Self there is in it) are

1 A prurient desire and hankering after knowledge. See Culverwels Treatise of
the light of Nature cap. 13. And Baxter on the Arrogance of Reason against
Divine Revelations.
Men long for the fruit of the forbidden Tree, and would fain be plucking some
Apples from it; they cannot endure that any thing should be concealed from
them, they would have an open and unlimited prospect of the whole compass, and
extent of being: They would know all that is knowable, and so would be as Gods
in point of knowledge, which was that which overthrew our first Parents.

2 An eager desire of glory, and of having the pre-eminence in all things. They
would be thought to be the Nonsuch in the world, both for Philosophy and
Divinity, and therefore See Reynolds Treat. of Pass. 490. and Observations upon
Anthroposophia Theomagica. Sect. 1.
disdaining the common road wherein others have gone before them, they choose to
walk in ways of their own making, studying, if it be possible, to find out
some new concerning Truths, never before discovered.

3 A proud conceit of themselves, as if they had an All-comprehending wisdom,
and were able to see through the nature and reason of all things, yea There be
those which f^^^e out the depth of the highest secrets of God, nothing is
unknown unto them, neither in heaven, nor hell, etc. D^ Espaigne, e Popular
Errors Sect. 2. chap. 7
to fathom the bottomless depths of the counsels of God. This the Apostle
notes as the main cause of men's intruding themselves into things which they
have not seen, that they are vainly puffed up by their fleshly mind, Col. 2.18.
that is, by the conceited Mentem carnis vocat humani ingenii pe spicaciam
quantacunque eit. Calv. in loc.
perspicacity of their fleshly understandings. From hence it is that they do so
Magisterially give sentence upon every thing, nothing must be true or false,
but according as they do apprehend: Though it be the most unquestionable
truth, attested to, and sealed by him that is Truth it self, and cannot lie,
yet if they do not understand See the forementioned Treatise of Mr. Baxter of
the Arrogance of Reason, etc.
the quiddity or nature of the thing, if they cannot find out the causes, the
end, and use of it; if they cannot see a possibility of accomplishing the
matter by natural means; there is then no truth in it, it is but a eunningly
devised fable, and they will not believe it. On the contrary, though it be the
most prodigious lie, yet if they fancy it to be a truth Sibi arrogant
authouitatem de omnibus judicandi, suam censuram, suum judicium pro oraculis
haberi ab omnibus, volunt. Calv. in loc. supradict.
it must pass for an Oracle, they confidently obtrude it upon the world, and
challenge all men's belief of it.

Thus we see how much of Self there is in it, when men exercise their gifts
about high things, that are above their own apprehensions. The next particular
is, when they exercise them about high things that are above,

2 Other men's apprehensions, whose information and instruction, they are more
especially bound to take care of. This is the usual fault of many great
Scholars that are Preachers, that though they do not study such things as are
above their own capacities, yet they preach such things as are above the
capacities of the greatest part of their hearers. In popular Assemblies some
fall upon those knotty disputes and controversies, which at least as they
handle them) were much fitter for the Schools, than the Pulpit. Others do so
cloud and obscure their Sermons with such variety of reading, and ancient
history, such subtle speculations of Metaphysics, such a multitude of
abstruse and difficult terms of Art, uncouth allusions, and hidden method,
that the common people can make nothing of what they say, nor reap any benefit
by it, verily there is much of Self in such kind of preaching, for as much as
it proceeds from

1 Pride and haughtiness of spirit. They think it Self-denial enough that men
of such parts, and learning, and degrees, as themselves, will condescend to
preach to any, they need not condescend lower in preaching to every ones
capacity. They lay aside much of that honor which their Wisdoms might
otherwise have, in that they will daign to preach, shall they lay aside their
learning too? Besides, is it fit the chief Master of the School should teach
the Pettits? Let an Usher be provided for them, for their parts they will take
no pains about them. Thus they leave the ignorant, and unlearned to shift for
knowledge as well as they can; if they can pick any thing now and then out of
their learned discourses, it is well for them, for otherwise they shall never
be taught by them.

2 Desire of credit and applause. They preach in this manner.

1 That the learned may commend them; They would have it known that they are
learned, and that they would have the praise of their learning. They would have
it taken notice of what proficiency they have made in their studies, what
languages they have learned, what Authors they have read and digested, what
controversies they are able to determine, and therefore they desire Ambitio
scenam defider^t.
a learned Auditory, such as may be able to take notice of their learning, and
give them the glory of it. If providence so order it that their lot falls
amongst an ignorant people, it is not long before they grow weary, and they
desire a more knowing people, not a people more knowing of Christ, and his
Doctrine, but more able to know them, and their ability in preaching.

2 That the ignorant and unlearned may admire them. So as they may be admired,
they care not that they be not understood; and indeed they would not be
understood, that they might be admired, seeing the vulgar sort take them for
the ablest Preachers, who tell them of such things as they are least able to
apprehend.

Thus I have shown how much of Self there is in it, when men exercise their
gifts about high things, that are above either their own, or other men's
apprehensions, whose information and instruction, they are more especially
bound to take care of. There is another Abuse of Gifts, wherein Self acts in
like manner, and that is,

2 When men exercise them about low things, that are beneath the dignity of
their own, and other men's understandings, to be much conversant in them. When
they do magno conatunugas agere, take a great deal of pains about Telas quasdam
doctrinae pariunt tenuitate fili operisque admirabiles sed quoad usum frivolas
and inanes. Bacon.
trifles, and impertinent curiosities, such things as are of no great use, or
any considerable advantage, either for the bettering of themselves, or
benefiting of others. To say nothing of Plays and Romances, and the many
voluminous Comments upon some trivial Pamphlet of an old Heathen writer, the
blushes of many great Wits, to have been so laboriously idle, in the compiling
of them, it is lamentable to consider, what more childish toys a great many
Preachers employ themselves about.

Some come up into the Pulpit with mere Fuit quondam tempus illud, quo instar
gravissimae ma^ronae, sucra in publicum procedebat eloquentia: Nunc autem pudet
d^cere, sed piget tacere; hac, ut levis meretricula se lenociniis and fucis
insinuat. Caussin. de form. sac. Eloq. l. 15. So is that honey flowing matron
Eloquence apparrelled, or rather disguised in a Courtesan-like painted
affectation. Sir Phil. Syd. Def. of Poetry.
vapors, and flashes of words strong lines, but slender matter, something to
tickle the ear, but little or nothing to pierce the heart.

Some general precepts of morality they deliver unto their hearers, but they do
it so conceitedly, with such Alazonomastix's observat. on Anima magia
abscondita, p. 144.
chiming and clinching of words, Antithetal Librations, and symphorical
rappings, that to sober men they seem rather like some idle boys playing with
knick-knacks to please their own ears and fancies, than grave Divines, speaking
wholesome words, and giving weighty counsel of life, and manners; so that the
best they do, is but to make the most solemn things ridiculous by their Apish
handling of them: But they are well satisfied, (it being the principal thing
they look for) to be applauded and cried up by the vulgar 2d Lash of
Alazonomastix 207. Men of itching ears, that catch more after an elegancy than
after a promise, and are better pleased with a Criticisme, than with a
practical Truth. Culverwels Schism, p. 18.
that are more taken with smooth nonsense, or superficial flourishes, than
with the deepest knowledge in a careless dress. This is a great Abuse; but
there is one more, which is worse, and indeed the worst that is, viz.

3 When men exercise them about evil things that are against their own and
other men's spiritual good. I will but instance in the wicked and ungodly
opinions that are so rife in these days, which, many men of great parts (for
the Devil has always had Carried about with every wind of doctrine by the
sleight of men, and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive,
Ephesians. 4.14. It seems these Seducers are men of parts [the Apostle describes them
in the same words as the old Serpent is described by whose subtilty we
exchanged Paradise for briars and thistles] Veterators, beaten fellows, men
exercised and skilful to deceive, Artists and Craftsmasters in slight and
subtilty, and stratagems of Deteit. Vines in loc. Sermon. before the Lord Mayor
and Alder. of Land.
such Factors) do make it the chief of their studies to spread and maintain, in
which, as there is the greatest Abuse of Gifts, as all men (not abused into a
more favorable conceit by them) will readily acknowledge, so (as the Scripture
does abundantly testify) there is the grossest self-seeking. Indeed many times
such as are the Broachers of false doctrines, are the greatest pretenders to
mortification and Self-denial; but the Scripture has marked them forth for the
most wretched generation of Self-seekers of any in the world.

Of some it tells us that they speak perverse things, to draw Disciples after
them, Act. 20.30.

Of others, that they serve not the Lord, but their own bellies, Romans 16.18.

Of others, that through covetousness, they make They do most of all aim at
them who are good prize, they care not much for a sheep, that has not a good
fleece. Vines ibid.
merchandise of their followers, 2 Pet. 2.3. and

Of others, that they walk after the flesh in the For particular Instances. See
Parresiastes his Discourse of Enthusiasme.
lust of nucleanness, verse. 10. Having eyes, full of adultery, verse. 14. and
that they allure through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantounness,
those that were clean escaped from them, that live in error, v. 18.

And thus much may serve in brief for a discovery of the several Abuses of
Gifts, and of that of Self that is in them; by which we see what is required
of all such as have Gifts in full of this third particular of Self-denial, Not
to abuse them in the use of them. Namely,

1 Not to exercise them about high things that are above them. Every one has
his proper Gift, and there are objects and employments proper unto every Gift,
to which in the exercise of it, it must be confined. The eye cannot judge of
sounds, nor the ear determine of colors. They must needs spoil what they take
in hand, that will enterprise things beyond their skill. They that are
unlearned (says Peter) presuming to interpret the Scriptures) 2 Pet. 3.16.
do wrest them to their own destruction; And Paul tells us they are but 1 Tit.
10. compared with 1 Timothy 1.6, 7.
vain talkers and deceivers, that take upon them to be Teachers when they
understand neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm It is a very
preposterous course that such men take in the exercise of their Gifts, for
whereas they should exercise to know, they exercise as having known, and so is
their brain delivered of much matter that was never begotten by knowledge. But
where there is a liquorsome defire of vainglory, and an over weening opinion
of ones own ability to second it, there a man will adventure upon any thing,
thinking long till he be doing, though when it comes to the trial, he can do
nothing to the purpose. Here then it would be good to consider wherein ones
glory lies. We are apt to think we have no glory, if we have not as much, or
the same that another has, which is a very great mistake. 1 Cor. 15.41.
There is one glory of the Sun, and another of the Moon, and another glory of
the Stars. The least Star has a brightness, though not the brightness of a
Sun, and that is its glory. Its the glory of the eye that it sees, and the
glory of the ear that it hears, it is no disparagement to the one that it hears
not, nor to the other that it does not see. So it is here. It is glory enough
that we have some Gift or other (though in a lesser measure) whereby we are
made serviceable in the places that God has set us in. It is glory enough for
a private Christian that he can repeat a Sermon, and instruct his family, and
no discredit to him at all that he cannot preach.

But it is foul shame, for any one to desire glory in things above his Turpe
est, quod ne queas, capiti committere pondus: Et pressum inflexo mox dare terga
genu. Proper. See Luke 14.28.
strength and measure, and make show of that which is not really in him. Let
every one therefore, learn that needful lesson of the Apostles, Not to think
of himself more highly than he ought to think, but to think soberly,
according as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith, Romans 12.3. When
David could say, Lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty, then he
could also truly add, Neither do I exercise my self in great matters, or in
things too high for me, Psalm. 131. verse. 1.

2 Not about Quam multarum contentionum and absurdarum quaestionum autores
fuerint Scholastici, dum temere in Dei adyta and abdita penetrare voluerunt,
eorum scripta satis testantur. Sed hoc etiam deplorandum est maxim, quod post
facem verbi Divini nostro tempore rursus accensam, nauseent multis ad
simplicitatem verbi Dei, and iterum in Ecclesiam invehunt spinos as
quaestiones, suisque rationibus res Divinas subjici volunt. Quibus non satis
est ex verbo Dei nosse, (...), nisi etiam ex ingenio suo (...) determinent, qua
si humana me^^ complecti possit rations omnes divinae sapientiae. Quod malum
quas turbas hoc tempore dederit, non est opus multis explicare, res ipsa nimis
loquitur. Rivet. in Exodus cap. 19. Tom. 1.1023. Read Mr. Baxters Treat. of the
Arrogance of reason against Divinity. There is gold enough in the world, and
all necessaries else for outward happiness, but the generations of men make
themselves miserable by neglecting the inward. This is palpably true; and it
would astonish a man to see how they run madding after the noise of every
pompous difficulty, and how stupid and sottish they are to those things which
God has more universally put in their power, and which would (if they made use
of them) redound to their more general, and effectual good. 2d Lash of
Alazonomastix Observat. 28. Again, What is the reason that the world is such a
stage of misery to the sons of men? Is it not from hence? That that which
should be their great guidance, their Religion, and highest Lights of their
minds, is but heat, and squabbling about subtle uncertain points, and footish
affectation of high mysteries, while the uncontroverted sober truths of Virtue
and Piety are neglected, and the simplicity of the life of God despised, as a
most contemptible thing. ibid. his Oration to the men of Ephesus. Sect. 11.282.
To soar after inscrutable secrets, to unlock and break open the Closet of
Nature, and to measure by our shallow apprehensions, the deep, and impenetrable
Counsels of Heaven, which we should with an holy, fearful, and astonished
ignorance, only adore, is too bold, and arrogant Sacrilege, and has much of
that pride in it, by which the Angels fell: For ero similis Altissimo, I will
be like to the most High, was (as is believed) the Devils first sin, Eritis
tanquam D^i, Ye shall be like unto God, was I am sure his first Temptation,
justly punished, both in the Author, and Obeyer with Darkness; in the one, with
the darkness of Tophet; in the other, with the darkness of Error. Dr. Reynolds
Treat. of Pass. 499.
hidden things that are denied them. Secreta Do, The secret things (says
Moses) belong unto the Lord our God; but those things which are revealed,
belong unto us, and to our children for ever, that we may do all the words of
this Law, Deuteronomy. 29.29.

3 Not above the As in a School there are diverse forms, and commonly the most
Scholars are in the lower; so is it in the Church of God, there are Abcdaries,
babes that are to be taught (...) their letters, Heb. 5.13. the first elements
of the Oracles of God, and to be fed with the spoon, or as the Apostle calls
it, Milk. He did not think himself too high to feed with Milk, 1 Cor. 3.2.
Therefore let no Minister be he never so learned, scorn to be an Usher under
Christ, to teach his Petties their a, b, c. If the people had not pleaded their
rotten Charters of Age and Marriage against Catechism, and the Minister had
not thought himself too good to teach them their Letters and first elements,
we had not seen so many children carried about with winds of Doctrine. Pride
(I fear) has made both ashamed of the duty, the one to teach, the other to be
taught, and I would that both were now humble enough to acknowledge the fruit
of that neglect. Vines, The Impostures of Seducing Teachers, etc. p. 7.
capacities of their hearers. In the Church (says Paul) I had rather speak
five words with my understanding, that by my voice I might teach others also,
than ten thousand words in an unknown (though learned) tongue, 1 Cor. 14.19.
Our Savior is said to have taught the people as they were able, Mark. 4 33.
not as he was able to preach, but as they were able to conceive him.

4 Not about Turpe est difficiles habere nugas, and durus labor est ineptiarum,
Martial. Neither Christianity, nor common prudence would have us magno conatu
nugas, break our arm by throwing such light feathers with our whole might, Dr.
Tuckny Form of Sound words. Eo magis utique indignor; aliquos ex hoc tempore,
quod sufficere nec ad necessaria quidem potest, etiamsi custoditum
diligentissime fuerit, in supervacua majorem partem erogare. Non vace ad istas
ineptias, ingens negotium in manibus est, Seneca Ep. 49. I should be seech them
that are in the office of Teachers, that they would take heed to themselves,
and to the doctrine, 1 Timothy 4.16. and that they would teach milk, or meat, and
not wind, and not lead on people first into Criticismes, before they have laid
in them the plain Grammar rule of sound and whole some words, that they may be
Proselites to Jesus Christ, not to an Opinion. Vines Impostures of Seducing
Teachers, p. 12.
trifles, and things of no moment.

5 Not in a way of opposition to the Truth: This is a way wherein many do seek
themselves, but it is the direct way to their own Their destruction is
exemplified and paralleld in three terrible examples, the casting down of the
Angels that fell, the destruction of the old world, the overthrow of Sodom and
Gomorrha: It may make the ears of all Heresie-masters, and their followers to
tingle, when they hear that the three great and famous Monuments of Gods sore
wrath executed by his own immediate hand, are brought in as examples of his
vengeance against that wickedness which above all other pretends exemption and
liberty from the stroke of men. Vines Sermon. before the H. of Com. it the Fast
for the growth of Errors.
destruction, as the Apostle has foretold, 2 Pet. 2.1. But there were false
Prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false Teachers among
you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that
bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. God has given gifts
for edification, Ephesians. 4.12. and not for destruction, save only of the Kingdom
of Sin and Satan, 2 Cor. 10.4.5. Now when men will employ their Gifts quite
contrary to the ends for which they are given, in building up what God would
have pulled down, and in pulling down what he would have built up, it is but
just that they themselves should likewise perish in the ruins of it.

I have now done with this second Subsection Of denying Self in respect of
Common Gifts; In the rest that follow, I shall be more brief.

SVB-SECT. III. Of Denying Self in good Works.
1 NEgatively, the meaning is not,

1 That we may not take See Burges Vindiciae legis.
comfort from them; for

1 God has so ordained, that much of that spiritual peace and comfort which
he dispenses to his people, should be wrought by means of their good Works.
The work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness
quietness, and assurance for ever, Isa. 32.17. And as many as walk according to
this rule A Christian is a new creature, and walks by rule, and so far as he
walks according to his rule, peace is upon him. Sibbs in loc. Souls Conflict.
32.
peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. It is true
indeed, that sometimes such as are careful to maintain good works, have not the
comfort of them; but it is not, because there is not matter of comfort in them,
nor because they may not take comfort from them, but for other reasons. This is
their privilege, that they may take comfort from them; so that in case their
souls be cast down and disquieted within them, they may warrantably charge it
upon them, to be quiet, and to hope in God (as David did, Psalm. 42.5.11.)
which they might not do, in case they neglected them; for

2 Where good Works are neglected, there is no ground of peace at all. If there
be any had, it is not from the Spirit of God, but from Satan (who
transformeth himself into an Angel of light) and it is a very great It is a
deep spiritual judgment to find peace in an ill way. Sibbs ibid.
judgment. There is not one word in all the book of God, that speaks any
comfort in this case, and therefore,

3 Every one is required to prove his own work in order to his own comfort. Let
every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in himself
alone, and not in another, Gal. 6.4. Mark it, then shall he have rejoicing,
that is, when by Gaudebit recto sui examine. Grot. in loc. Si post
explorationem diligentem non remordeat conscientia, habebit gloriam, i. e.
gloriationem, Sasbout in loc.
evident proof out of the word he has found his work to be good.

4 According to this rule we find that holy men in Scripture have fetched in
abundance of comfort from the evidence of their good works. Then the people
rejoiced for that they offered willingly, because with perfect heart they
offered willingly to the Lord: and David the King also rejoiced with great joy,
1 Chronicles. 29.9. This is our rejoicing (says Paul) the testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not by fleshly wisdom, but
by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world, 2 Cor. 1.12.

5 We may rejoice in the good works of others, much more therefore in our own.
And now have I seen withjoy, (says David) thy people which are present here to
offer willingly unto thee, 1 Chronicles. 29.17. I have no greater joy (says John)
than to hear that my children walk in truth, Epist. 3.4.

6 We may rejoice in Gods works, therefore in our own good works, for they are
the works of God. 1 We may rejoice in Gods works. Thou Lord (says David) have
made me glad through thy work, I will triumph in the works of thy hands, Psalm.
92.4. If we may triumph in the works of Gods hands, much more then in the
works of his Spirit. But 2. Such are all our good works, 1 Pet. 1.2.22. It is
God which works in you both to will and to do (says the Apostle) Phil. 2.13.
Upon this account, therefore the Church comfort her self, Isa. 26.12. Lord
thou will ordain peace for us, for thou also have wrought all our works in us.
This cannot be said of any of our evil works, for they are the works of the
Devil, 1 John 3.8. and therefore we can take no comfort in them.

7 We may rejoice in such works as God rejoices in, but God rejoices in our
good works. He rejoices in his own works, Psalm. 104.31. but our good works
are his own works, ut supra.

8 We may rejoice in such works as God accepts, therefore in our good works.
Go thy way eat thy bread with joy, (says Solomon) and drink thy wine with a
merry heart, for God now accepts thy works, Eccles. 9.7.

9 We may rejoice in such works as do evidence our communion with the Father,
and with his Son Jesus Christ; therefore we may rejoice in our good works, for
they do evidence it. If we say that we have fellowship with him (says the
Apostle) and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth: But if we walk
in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, 1 John 1.6, 7.

10 We may rejoice in such works as shall be rewarded with eternal life,
therefore in our good works. Here note two things: 1 That our good works shall
be rewarded with eternal life. This the Apostle expressly affirms, Romans 2.6,
7, 10. That God will render to every man according to his deeds; to them who by
patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory and honor, and immortality,
Eternal life: But to them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but
obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, etc. But glory, honor, and peace
to every man that works good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile. 2
That upon this account we may take comfort from them. This the Apostle did, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept
the faith, hence forth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which
the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day.

By all this it appears that it is no unlawful thing to take comfort from our
good works, as Antinomians teach, and consequently no part of Self-denial.

2 It is not meant that we may not plead them unto God, as expecting favor
and mercy at his hands for them. When God has enabled us to be, and do that
for him which he requires, we may warrantably pray, that he would be, and
do that for us which he has promised.

And thus holy men have frequently Not in regard of any matter of merit, but in
regard of Gods gracious promises. See Eng. Anotat. 2. Ed. upon Isa. 38.3.
done upon all occasions. Thus Hezekiah did, 2 King. 20.3. I beseech thee, O
Lord, remember now how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect
heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. And Nehemiah, chap. 5.19.
Think upon me my God for good, according to all that I have done for this
people. And chap. 13.14. Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and wipe not
out my good deeds that I have done for the house of my God, and for the
Officers thereof. And David Psalm. 26.1. Judge me, O Lord, for I have walked in
mine integrity. And Psalm. 86.2. Preserve my soul for I am holy. And Psalm.
119.22. Remove from me reproach and contempt, for I have kept thy testimonies.
And 31. I have stuck to thy testimonies, O Lord, put me not to shame. And
verse. 38. Stablish thy word unto thy servant, who is devoted to thy fear. And
verse. 94. I am thine, save me for I have sought thy Precepts.

3 It is not meant that we may not have respect unto the recompense of reward
in the doing of them. It is said of Christ, that for the joy that was set
before him, he endured the Cross, and despised the shame, Heb. 12.2. And of
Moses that when he was come to years, he refused to be called the son of
Pharaohs Daughter, choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God,
than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, esteeming the reproach of
Christ, greater riches, than the treasures in Egypt, because he had respect
unto the recompense of reward, Heb. 11.24, 25, 26. And Paul says of himself,
Our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory, while we look not at the things which
are seen, but at the things which are not seen, 2 Cor. 4 17, 18. the Greek is
(...). Quand. nons regardous. Fren.
while we aim at them as our scope or mark; according to that Phil. 3.14. I
press toward the mark for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.
This is the character that is given of all good men, Romans 2.7. that they are
such as by patient continuance in well-doing do seek for glory, and honor, and
immortality. And it is according to the Precept of our Savior, Matthew 6.33.
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God: and of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.24. So run
that ye may obtain. And Col. 3.1. Seek those things which are above, where
Christ sits on the right hand of God. And 1 Timothy 6.12. Lay hold on eternal
life.

Ob. But is not this Self-seeking?

Ans. Yes, But it is such Self-seeking as has much of Self-denial in it.
Consider that of our Savior, Matthew. 16.25. Whosoever will save his life shall
lose it, and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it. There is
a Self-seeking, that is stark naught, and there is a Self-seeking that is very
good, yea our duty; and such is the Self-seeking here spoken of. Christ
requires that we should lose our life in order to our finding it, that we
should lose our finful, and sometimes our natural life, in order to our finding
spiritual and eternal life, and so makes that which is the right Self-seeking
indeed, the end of Self-denial. To glorify God, and to save our own souls, are
ends that every one ought to have in his eye, and all other particular ends
also that are subordinate unto these. We may make salvation our end, and serve
God for this end, but then we must understand it aright, not barely to be free
from wrath, Although that obedience which performed only for fear of
punishment, or expectation of reward, is rightly called mercenary; yet that any
should be secondarily stirred up to do his duty by looking on the reward, or
for fear of punishment also, this is not strange from the Sons of God, neither
does it in any part weaken their solid obedience. Ames Mar. of div. l. 2 c. 1.
(though that may be aimed at) but also to enjoy God fully for ever; and this
must likewise be rightly understood, not chiefly out of love to our selves, It
is an argument of an excellent spirit, when all Self-respects are drowned in
the glory of God, and there is nothing lost therein; for our best being is in
God. A Christian begins with loving God for himself, but he ends in loving
himself, in and for God; and so his end, and Gods end, and the end of all
things else concenter and agree in one, We may aim at our own good, so we
bring our hearts to refer it to the chief good; as a less circle may well be
contained in a greater, so that the lines drawn from both circles, meet in one
middle point. Dr. Sibbs Souls Conflict. 420.421. c. 26.
but of God, and for this end, because hereby we do most of all glorify God.
God is more glorified by my endeavoring to enjoy him, than by any thing else
that I can do, because by this I do own, and acknowledge him to be my chief and
highest end.

Thus I have shown what it is not, Negatively; I shall now proceed to show what
it is,

2 Affirmatively; To deny Self in good Works, is to deny

All Self Ends in the Intention.

All Self-surficiency in the undertaking.

All Self-rules in the Direction. And lastly,

All Self-praise in the review.

1 All Self Ends in the intention. By Self Ends here we are to understand all
such ends as See before chap. 2. sect. 1. p. 18, 19.
corrupt Self uses to propound. Whenever we are in consultation about any
duty, or any thing that we have to do, Self asks the question, Cui bono? What
good will come of it? or what benefit, what advantage will redound to us by the
doing of it? and usually answers it these two ways.

1 By propounding something which in it self is evil, under the show and
appearance of good.

2 By propounding something which in it self is good, under the notion of the
chief good.

1 By propounding something which in it self is evil, under the show and
appearance of good. Many men seem very active and zealous in many good works,
but they have very ungodly ends, that which they aim at in the doing of them,
is some wicked thing. We have diverse instances of this in the Scripture.

1 Balaam, when Balak the King of Moab sent to him to curse the Israelites, he
would consult with God, and professed, that if the King would give him his
house full of gold and silver, he durst not go beyond the word of the Lord to
do less or more, Numb. 22.8-18. Oh how scrupulous was Balaam now! What a tender
conscience had he! one would have thought that the thing he aimed at, was to
do as God would have him, but no such matter, it was to do as Balak would have
him, it was that he might (if it were possible) get leave to curse the people
of God. Thus many men search the Scriptures, but it is to see if they can pick
out any thing that may make for some wicked practice, which they have a mind
to continue, or against some good duty, which they have no mind to perform.
Thus many men flock after Sermons, and one would think that they meant to
practice what they hear, but it is true of them, as God said of Ezekiel. 33.31.
Ezekiels hearers, They come unto the Minister, as the people comes; and they
sit before him as Gods people, and they hear his words, but they will not do
them, for with their mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after
their covetousness; their heart goes after some base wicked lust, or other, and
they hope that something may be said for the countenancing of it, but if not,
they are resolved to follow it notwithstanding. And thus many come with cases
and scruples of conscience, but it is only to get something that may comfort
them in their evil ways.

2 Abner, after a long war that he had waged against David on the behalf of
Ishbosheth Saul's son, he bound himself by a solemn oath to fight for David, 2 Samuel 3.9, 10. So do God to Abner, and more also, except as the Lord has sworn
to David, even so I do unto him: To translate the Kingdom from the house of
Saul and to set up the Throne of David over Israel, and over Judah, from Dan
even to Beer-sheba. One might have thought that Abner had repented of his
opposition against David, but that it was to be revenged upon Ishbosheth, who
had reproved him for going into his Fathers Concubine, verse. 7. And Ishbosheth
said to Abner, Wherefore have thou gone in unto my Fathers Concubine? Then was
Abner very wroth for the words of Ishbosheth, and said, Am I a dogs head, etc.
so do God to Abner, etc. except as the Lord has sworn to David, so I do unto
him. Now he swears to do unto David as the Lord had sworn; this was his duty
before, but he would not do it all this while, till such time as Ishbosheth
crossed him in his lust, and then to cross Ishbosheth he would do his duty. I
will leave the application to the Reader.

3 Absalom, after his brother Amnon had deflowred his sister Tamar, invited him
to a feast; one would have thought he had forgotten the injury, but it was to
cut his throat, 2 Samuel 13.32.

4 Jezabel, proclaimed a Fast, but her end was to take away Naboths life, and
to seize upon his Vineyard, 1 King. 21.15. See Isa. 58.2, 3, 4. verses.

5 Herod, when he heard of the birth of Christ, sent to Bethlehem to find him
out, and charged the messengers to search diligently, and when they had found
him, to bring him word again, for this end (as he said) that he might worship
him, but his intent was that he might kill him, Matthew. 2.8.16.

6 Judas, When Mary anointed the feet of Jesus with costly ointment, was very
angry, that it had not been sold for three hundred pence, and the money given
to the poor. But it was not because he cared for the poor, Exemplum est Judas
multerum privatis commodis obtendentium nomen piet a it is, Grot. (...) loc. The
by poctites own private interest crossed, is that which troubles him, when he
pretends the cause of piety and religion, for which he takes as much care as
Judas did for the poor; Eng. Annet. 2d Ed it. in loc.
but because he was a thief, and had the bag, and bare what was put therein,
Joh. 12.5, 6.

Thus many men (we see) pretend the public good, when it is their own private
benefit, and advantage, that they only aim at; they are very zealous and
active instirring up others to contribute liberally, and such and such good
uses they pretend, but it is that they may steal for themselves, which is
evident, in that they convert so much of what they receive, to their own use
afterward.

7 The Scribes and Pharisees made long prayers, but it was, but for a pretense
while they devoured widows houses, Matthew. 23.14. Thus many make great shows of
holiness, that others taking them to be conscientious and honest men, may trust
them with their estates, and then they will be sure to cheat them. But that no
imputation (in case it should be divulged) may fasten upon them, they still
continue their long prayers, and other religious exercises, trusting thereupon,
that whatever is laid to their charge (they having so great a name for
prosession) it will never be credited.

This then is one way of Selfs answering the question, by propounding
something which is evil in it self, under the notion of good. There is another,
and that is,

2 By propounding something which is good in it self, under the notion of the
chief good. Self never propounds that which is the chief good in deed for its
end in any good work; but some other inferior good under the notion of the
chief good. God is the chief good, and in this sense, there is nothing good but
God, Matthew. 19.17. But Self never propounds God for its end. It often propounds
him for a means in order to some other good beneath him, but it never propounds
him for himself. It is something besides God, that Self acts for in all that it
does; but that which it acts for, it acts for it as it is God, because what ever
it acts for, it acts for it as it is chief good. That which Self acts for as its
chief end in any thing that it does, that it acts for as its chief good; for,
as to be an end, and to be good, are all one, so to be the chief end, and to
be the chief good. Now whatsoever Self acts for besides God (as all that it
acts for, is something besides God) it acts for it as its chief end; therefore
whatsoever it acts for, it acts for it as it is chief good, and consequently as
its God. The chief thing that the Glutton acts for, is the filling of his
belly, and therefore his belly is said to be his God, Phil. 3.19. The chief
thing that the Covetous acts for, is his Money, therefore Money is his God,
therefore Covetousness is said to be Idolatry, Col. 3.5. and a covetous man is
called an Idolater, Ephesians. 5.5. And this is not only true of covetousness but of
every other vice, that it is Unusquisque adorat sua vitia Every one Idolizeth
his own vice. Jerome on Amos. The Politician idolizeth his brain, the Heretic
his fantastical opinion, the Glutton his belly, the Wanton his Mistress, the
Ambitious his honor, the Covetous his money, etc. See more in Eng. Annot. on
Ephesians. 5.5. 2d Ed.
Idolatry; because thereby Self acts for something besides God as its chief
good, and therefore as its God. To act for something besides God, in
subordination unto God, as the supreme end, has nothing of Self in it; such an
end is not to be deemed a self-end. But then it is a self-end when a man acts
for something besides God as his chief end, when something besides God (though
good in it self, and that which may lawfully be aimed at) is the chief thing
that moves him to, and carries him through the performance of any duty, so that
were it not for that thing, he would not set about it, he would not persevere
in it. Thus it is whenever Self has the determining of the Question. That
such a thing is the will of God, and makes for the glory of God, and that
communion with God is to be had in it, are arguments that can do nothing with
Self, but this consideration, that it makes for ones worldly profit, or
pleasure, or honor, prevails presently. Come to a selfish man, and tell him
that this is his duty, that the Law of God requires it that God will be
well-pleased with it, and that he will reward it hereafter in heaven; these
things make no impression upon him; but tell him that he shall get in with
such a party as will promote him to honor, that he shall have a place of
preferment, a good office, that will bring him in so much by the year, and this
wins him presently. This has won off a great many in our days to a form of
godliness, which before they could never endure, and the power whereof for the
present, they still deny. Convictions from the word are pretended, but
convictions from the world are the cause. Where one is wrought upon by
convictions from the word, there are hundreds that are wrought upon by
convictions only from the world. The glory and honor, the pleasures and
profits of the world, are the only things that many of those that seem most
zealous in the Profession of Religion, do most zealously follow after. There
are many whose faces are Christ-wards, but (like Skullers) they row with all
their might to quite contrary objects.

Hence it is that they are said to go away backward, Isa. 1.4. We read of
those that came along with Judas to apprehend Christ, that as soon as he spoke
unto them, they went backward, and fell to the ground, Joh. 18.6. These came as
professed enemies to Christ, others though they come as professed friends, yet
are real enemies to him, and although natural conscience or some common works
of the Spirit, may drive them in an outward profession toward Christ, yet so
strong is their inbred enmity, and secret antipathy against him, and so
powerful their sympathy with the world, that ere long they go backward and
fall to the ground their proper place; Dust to dust, Earth to earth, Ashes to
ashes. Many that for a long time together, have seemed to walk hand in hand
with Christ, have in the interim been going backward, and at last have fallen
to the ground.

Men may be a long time going back before they fall, but observe it,
ordinarily they fall to ground. This is a pretty fallacy, whereby multitudes of
Professors think to cheat their brethren amongst whom they live; in their
outward motion they go forward with the rest of the company (and it may be
will be Ringleaders) but in their inward motion they go backwards. The
Prophet says of Israel, He slideth back as a back sliding Heifer, Hos. 4.16.
Sliding is sometimes an insensible motion, and therefore backsliding is
elsewhere called a drawing back; such is the retrograde motion of these men
many times, one cannot perceive them going till they be gone. This is the
manner of worldling Professors, they keep their eye upon God, and his people,
and then in the mean while slide back, and by little and little steal away that
none may perceive them; or if they be espied, they may answer those that shall
tax them, that they are in the same posture that they were before. Thus it is
with many, and we cannot perceive them presently, the Apostle says, 1 Thessalonians.
2.5. For neither at any time used we flattering words as ye know, nor a cloak
of covetousness God knows. If we had flattered, ye could soon have discerned
that, but we might have been covetous, and ye could not have known it, only
God could have discerned that. Its God only that must judge of the hypocrisy
of diverse, yet there are others whose hypocritical warping, and recidivation is
visible to all that have but one eye open to behold them.

Some men's sins go before, and are manifest, others are secret, and follow
after. It is easy and ordinary for men to pretend one thing, and intend
another; ordinary and common to pretend seeking of Christ, and yet even then to
seek themselves, and the things of the world, more than Christ. Christ told the
people, that came to Capernaum seeking for him, Ye seek me, not because ye
saw the Miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves and were filled, Joh.
6.26. Simon Magus believed, and was baptized, but the chief thing he aimed at,
was that he might be a great man, and that he might get as much then by
giving of the Holy Ghost, as he had got by conjuting before, Acts 8.19. It may
happily go for a Paradox with some, That one that has lived all his days
loosely and vainly, in contempt of Christ, and his Ordinances, should at length
take upon him a profession of Religion, frequent the Ordinances, and practice
several duties of Christianity, merely in pursuance of the world and the things
of the world, but it is a most certain Truth; A wicked man that is unconverted,
may change his way, but he can never change his end. A man may have the same
end in frequenting the Ordinances, that he had formerly when he frequented
Play Houses, or the Stews. He may be much in hearing, praying, fasting, and
talking of the Scripture, and yet seek himself, and the things of the world, as
his chief end in all these ways. See Zach. 7.5. When ye fasted and mourned in
the fifth, and seventh month, did ye at all fast unto me? even to me? and
when ye did eat, and when ye did drink did ye not eat for your selves, and
drink for your selves? The like God says of the ten Tribes, Hos. 7.14. They
have not cried unto me with their heart, when they howled upon their beds,
they assemble themselves for Corn and Wine, and they rebel against me; and in
the 16. verse, They return, but not to the most High. Godliness is profitable
for all things, having the promises of this life, as well as of the life to
come; and Wisdom proclaims, That in her right hand is length of days, and in
her left hand riches and honor.

Hereupon many make use of God and Religion, only to gain temporal things from
him, and so make him who is the last end, and highest good, an instrument or
means to attain that which is far below him. Jehu was very zealous for the
Lord, and marched on furiously in executing the Judgment threatened against the
house of Ahab, but his end was to establish the Kingdom upon himself and his
posterity. The Scribes and Pharisees were very strict and precise, and abundant
in many good duties, they gave Alms, they kept days of fasting and
humiliation twice a week, but their end was vainglory, Matthew. 6.1. and getting
of money, chap. 23.14. so easy a thing it is under the vizard of Religion, to
seek the accomplishment of the basest end whatsoever. The Heathen tells us of
some in his time, who could thus express themselves at their Devotion.

-- Pulchra Laverna,
Da mihi fallere, da justum sanctumque videri
Noctem peccatis and fraudibus objice nubem.
Fair Goddess Laverne, give me so to seem,
That just and holy men may me esteem;
Cloud over my sins, and vail them with the night,
That my deceits may never come to light.
Many desire to appear to be good, and therefore put on the Livery of an
external Profession, but they do not desire to be good and therefore
notwithstanding all the Religious exercises they be conversant in, they may
seek the world, and the things of the world, as much as before. What cares the
Devil, the Prince of this world that rules in the children of disobedience;
what cares he, I say, that some of his vassals now and then offer to God a
sacrifice without an heart? that they draw near to him with their mouth, while
they leave their heart behind them? I have read that it was the Watchword
among the Papists after Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown, My son give me thy
heart; be in heart a Papist, and then go to Church, it matters not. The Devil
can keep his supremacy notwithstanding such an outward compliance with God; and
truly it is but an outward compliance with God in a few external duties and
formalities of worship, that the generality of those that call themselves
Protestants, not to say Professors, are guilty of; With their mouth they show
much love, but their heart goes after their covetousness, as God says of
Ezekiels hearers, Ezekiel. 33.31.

And this is the other way of Selfs answering the Question, by propounding
something which is good in it self, under the notion of the chief good.

Two things therefore are here required by way of Self-denial in every good
work.

1 Not to intend any thing that is evil in it self, though it seem never so
good. If we may not do evil that good may come thereof (as Romans 3.8.) much
less then may we do good, that evil may come thereof. To pervert but a civil
Ordinance (as buying, and selling, etc.) to the fulfilling of any sinful lust,
is a very great wickedness, and that which exceedingly provokes God, Micb.
6.10. Much more to pervert a spiritual Ordinance (as fasting, and praying, and
preaching, etc.) as she did, 1 King. 21.9. and they, Phil. 1.15. This is to
make Christ a servant to Satan, to throw down Christ's Scepter at Satan's feet,
and to make it subservient to the advancing of his Kindgome of darkness.

2 Not any thing that is good in it self, but not the chief good, under the
notion of the chief good. Riches, and Honors, and Pleasures, are good in
themselves, and such things as we may lawfully make our end, but they are not
the chief good, and therefore we may not make any of them our chief end. God
is to be our chief end in every thing that we do, and other things only as
they be subordinate unto God. Whether therefore ye eat, or drink (says the
Apostle) or what ever ye do, do all to the There is required to an action
truly good, that at least virtually it be referred to God, as to the chief
end. Ames Marrow of Divin. l. 2. cap. 3.
glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. Therefore when ever Self propounds any thing
besides God, as the chief motive to persuade us to any duty, we must reject
it. Though never so many worldly advantages be offered us, we may not much
regard them. We must do our duty upon another account; nay though they should
be denied us, we may not neglect our duty: Therefore we must serve God with
as much zeal in private where no man can behold us, as we would do in public,
where the multitude may observe us. We must be as lively and active in time
of adversity, when we are destitute of all things, as we would be in time of
prosperity, when we have all that our heart can wish for. God is attainable
still, in all places, and in all conditions, and it should not much trouble us
that we miss of the less principal end, so that we obtain that which is the
principal.

And thus much of the first particular, The denying all Self Ends in the
intention; The next is the Denying,

2 All Self-sufficiency in the undertaking. If we have any well-grounded
evidence of a spiritual power in our selves to do any thing that is good, we
may not deny that we have it, (as I have shown Sub-sectl. page 45.
before) but yet we must deny that we have it of our selves. Not that we are
sufficient of our selves (says Paul) to think any thing as of our selves, but
all our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. without a fresh income and supply of
grace from him who is full of grace, we can do nothing, as Joh. 15.5. And
therefore we must not go about any thing with Self-confidence, as if we could
do it without him, but still look up unto him for more grace. In every action,
as there must be an expression of our obedience; so likewise of our
dependence. As we must live unto God, so likewise we must live upon God, and
we must live upon him, that we may be able to live unto him. We cannot
glorify God in any thing that we do, unless we make him both the Alpha and
Omega of it. That cannot be to him as the end, that is not from him, as the
cause, and therefore they must needs refer all that they do unto themselves,
that begin all that they do from themselves. Such men out of the just judgment
of God, do often meet with the most shameful disappointment, being not able
many times after their greatest preparations, to answer either their own, or
other men's expectations in their public undertakings. It is but just that God
should leave us, when we leave him first. He is a jealous God, and will not
suffer it, that his glory should be given to another. If we cannot be
content, but we must have the glory of a God, it is not fit, we should be
allowed the honor of a man. When Nebuchadnezzar began to talk of the might of
his power, and of the glory of his Majesty, God drove him from men, and turned
him a grazing amongst beasts. This may be the reason therefore, why so many
men of great parts and learning, are now and then smitten with madness; God
would have us to see that we are beholding to him for our working, as well as
for our being. The serious consideration whereof would keep us from trusting in
our selves, and make us look up to him as the first mover, in all that we have
to do, by which means we should engage him to be with us, and then we should
be sure not to miscarry. Thus of this second particular. The denying all
Self-sufficiency in the undertaking. We are to deny,

3 All Self-Rules in the Direction: As,

1 Tradition. This was that which the Pharisees observed as the rule of their
good works, as we may see, Matthew. 15.2, 3. Mark. 7.3. and Gal. 1.14. The
Pharisaeorum hoc primum fuit dogma, quod negarunt omnia quae spectant ad
religionem scripta esse, id quod Josephus disertis verbis notavit, l. 13.
Antiq. cap. 14. (...). Camero. Praelect. ad Matthew. cap. 19. Operum fol. 166.
first and principal thing they taught (and indeed that which made way for all
the rest both of their principles and practices) was this, That all things that
concerned Religion, were not written, and that the word of God was not a
sufficient rule of life. They held there was a twofold Law, one written, which
they called, Thorah Schebichtah; the other unwritten, which they called Thorah
Begnalpe. This latter they called Deuteronomy, or the second Law, and received
it as a Comment, or Exposition of the former. And herein they differed from the
Sadduces, for the Sadduces stuck stiffly to the five books of Moses, but the
Pharisees said Godwin Mos. and Aaron. l. 1.38.
Let us maintain the Law which our Forefathers have delivered into our hands,
expounded by the mouth of wise men who expounded it by tradition. So that they
observed the Law of Moses, but according to a Law of their own, whereby (as
Christ plainly told them, (notwithstanding they pleaded, it was but a genuine
exposition of it) they made void the Law of God. This principle being granted
(which the Papists very much contend for) there is a door wide open for all
manner of humane inventions and fopperies to enter in, and justle out the
Commands of God. The Papists allege the obscurity of Scripture; and Nos
asserimus in Scriptur is non contineri express totam doctrinam necessariam,
sive de fide, sive de moribus; and pro inde praeter verbum Dei scriptum,
requiri etiam verbum Dei non scriptum, i. e. Divinas and Apostolicas
Traditiones. Bellarm. de Sufficient. Scripturae, l. 4. Tom. 1.
the insufficiency of it, as not containing all that is necessary to be known
either for faith or manners, and hence infer a necessity of something to be
added as a supplement of it, and hereupon challenge an awful respect to their
Traditions, as the unwritten word of God. This they learned from the Pharisees,
whose Religion was nothing else but a medly of superstition, consisting of such
observances for the most part, as were not only besides, but contrary to the
express Commands of God, which was the main reason why our Savior was so
bitter in his invectives against them, calling them Fools, Hypocrites,
Blinde-guides, Serpents, and a Generation of Vipers; and threatening them with
wrath and vengeance above all other sorts of people with whom he had to do.
We read of eight Woes that he denounced against them in one Chapter, Matthew.
23.13, 14, 15, 16, 23, 25, 27, 29. verses. And indeed there is nothing whereby
a people do more provoke the Lord to anger, than this, that they make the
teachings of men (though handed down unto them by never so many generations)
the rule of their obedience. See how he threatened the Jews, Isa. 29.13. For as
much as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do
honor me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward
me is taught by the precepts of men; Therefore behold, I will proceed to do a
mavelous work, and a wonder, for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish,
and the understanding of their prudent men shall he hid. He calls them the
Generation of his wrath (a most dreadful expression) Jer. 7.29. because they
set their abominations in the house which was called by his Name, to pollute
it, and built the high places of Tophet in the valley of Hinnom, to burn their
sons and daughters in the fire, Which (says he) I commanded them not, neither
came it into mine heart. Therefore (he adds) Behold the days come, that it
shall no more be called Tophet, nor the valley of the sen of Hinnom, but the
valley of Slaughter; for they shall bury in Tophet, till there be no place,
and the carcasses of this people shall be meat for the fowls of the heaven,
and for the beasts of the earth, and none shall fray them away. This was the
great aggravation of their sin, and that which God does chiefly remark in the
threatening, that they would adventure upon a way of worship which he had not
commanded. What ever it be, though it carry never so great a show of
Self-denial and Devotion, yet if it has no better rule than tradition, or the
teaching of men, God does not accept it; nay he abhors it, and does usually
(according as he has threatened) most severely If a subject should lend or
give to his Prince a great sum of money, yet if either all, or any part of it,
did appear to his Prince, to be of his own coining, he would be so far from
thanking him, that he would rather arraign him as a Traitor for it. And even
so it is with the Lord, he cannot abide, but is highly provoked with our
will worship, and when we think to please him by doing that which is good in
our own eyes. Hildersham on Psalm. 51. Lect. 77.354.
punish it. This then is not to be our Rule: Nor,

2 The command of Superiors. It was the sin of the ten Tribes, that they
yielded to the commandment of Jeroboam and his Princes, to worship the Calves
at Dan and Bethel, and the wrath of God was heavy upon them for it: Ephraim is
oppressed and broken in judgment, because he willingly walked after the
Commandment, therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a moth, Hos. 5.11, 12. We
are to submit to every Ordinance of man, so that it be not contrary to any
Ordinance of God; but if man will take upon him to command what God has
forbidden, and to forbid what God has commanded, be it never so small a
circumstance; in this case, though he be the greatest man upon earth, and have
never so much power in his hands, we must not regard him. Self indeed will
tell us, that it is better to obey, rather than to lose the favor, and to
incur the displeasure of great ones, If you should stand it out with them, you
would be sure to lose your preferment, you would have no respect in the place
where you live, every one will be ready to trample upon you, wherefore it is
best to yield. Thus Self will persuade us, but we Non persuadebis etiamsi
persuaser is.
must not be persuaded, we must resolve to undergo any thing, rather than
dis-obey God by obeying of man. When Nebuchadnezzar commanded Shadrach,
Meshech, and Abednego, to worship his Golden Image, they told him, They were
not If God command any thing, we must look more at the Quis, than at the Quid,
but in the commands of men, we must look at the Quid, what it is that is
commanded, more than the Quis, who commands. The commands of men may be such,
that the best obedience is to disobey. Buroughs Expo. on Hos. cap. 5.470.
careful to answer him in that matter, Dan. 3.16. It will not bear us out in
any thing that we do, that it was commanded by the authority of man, unless
we can prove it to be agreeable to the command of God also. Nor is it
sufficient that we have

3 Example. Self stands much upon example, especially,

1 The example of Forefathers: When the Prophet delivered a message from God
unto the Jewish people in Egypt, reproving and menacing them for that gross and
abominable Idolatry that they committed when they had seated themselves in
several parts of that land, they told him plainly that they would not hearken
unto it, but were resolved to persist in their Idolatrous practices still, for
this reason, because their Ancestors had done so before them. Jer. 44.17.
We will certainly do (say they) whatsoever thing goes forth out of our own
mouth, to burn incense to the Queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings
to her, as we have done, we, and our Fathers. They pleaded the example of
their Forefathers. Thus many in our days being told of their superstition,
presently make answer, Shall we be wiser than our Forefathers? Had not they
souls to save as well as we? They would not have done as they did, had it not
been lawful.

2 The example of great ones. This was that which the Pharisees objected
against believing on Christ. Have any of the Rulers, or the Pharisees believed
on him? but this people that know not the Law are cursed, Joh. 7.48. And
amongst our selves it is a great objection against many duties, that so few of
the Gentry do put them in practice.

3 The example of the Multitude. This was Demetrius his argument against Paul
on the behalf of Diana, That all Asia and the world did worship her, and
therefore the doctrine of Paul, that they be no gods which are made with
hands, was false and not to be suffered. This Paul (says he) has persuaded
and turned away much people, saying, That they be no gods which are made with
hands, so that, not only this our Craft is in danger to be set at naught, but
also that the Temple of the Great Goddess Diana should be despised, and her
magnificence should be destroyed, whom all Asia and the world worshippeth,
Act. 19.26, 27. This has always been, and is still the common plea, We do as
the most do, a great many eyes can see more than one or two; and hereupon they
exclaim against Professors, for their singularity, because they will not be
content to do as the rest of their neighbors do.

These be the examples that Self usually propounds for our direction, but none
of them are our rule. As for the first, God threatens to visit the sins of the
Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth Generation of those that
hate him, Exodus 20.5. this is chiefly meant of those that continue in the sins
of their Parents. For the second, the Apostle tells the Corinthians, You see
your calling Brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many
mighty, not many noble are called, etc. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27. And for the third, our
Savior tells us, that the way the most do walk in, is the way that leads to
destruction. Mat. 7.13, 14.

The Rule that God has given us to observe, instead of all these, and whatever
else Self at any time prescribes for our direction in any of our undertakings,
is his Law set down in the Scriptures. To the Law, and to the Testimony, Isa.
8.20. We have a more sure word of Prophecy, 2 Pet. 1.19. This is sufficient
to direct us in all particular actions, whether of Religion, or Justice, to
acquaint us with every good path, Prove. 2.9. to make us perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. and therefore God requires that
we should have an eye to it in every thing that we do, that so we may not turn
to the right hand, nor to the left. Therefore as for the Doctrines, the
Commandments, and Examples of men, they are no further to be regarded than as
they are agreeable unto this Law of God; it is Gods Prerogative Royal to give
Law to the Conscience, he will not suffer a Creature to usurp it, neither may
we. And thus of this third particular of Self-denial in respect of good works,
the denying all Self-rules in the direction. The last is,

4 All Self-praise in the review, Praise is nothing else but a reflection of
Excellency, now there is a twofold Excellency that men are apt to reflect upon
themselves in the review of any good work they have done.

1 An excellency of Power; Is not this great Babylon (said Nebuchadnezzar) that
I have built for the house of the Kingdom, by the might of my power, and for
the glory of my Majesty, Dan. 4.30. So they, Amos 6.13. Have we not taken us
Horns by our own strength?

2 An excellency of Merit; Wherefore have we fasted (say they) and thou see
not? Wherefore have we afflicted our soul and thou take no knowledge? Isa.
58.3. They thought they deserved something for their fasting and praying, and
therefore that God wronged them, in not giving them that they came for.

Two things therefore are here required.

1 Not to glory in any thing that we have done, as if we had done it by our
own strength, without any help or assistance from God; Beware that thou forget
not the Lord thy God, in not keeping his Commandments, least when thou have
eaten and art full, and have built goodly houses and dwelt therein, and thy
silver and thy gold is multiplied, then thine heart be lifted up, and thou
forget the Lord thy God, and thou say in thine heart, my power, and the might
of my hand has gotten me this wealth; but thou shall remember the Lord thy
God, for it is he that gives thee power to get wealth, Deuteronomy. 8.11, 12, 13,
14. -- 17, 18. Thus says the Lord, let not the wise man glory in his wisdom,
neither let the mighty man glory in his might, but let him that glories, glory
in this, that he understands and knows me, that I am the Lord, which
exercise loving kindness, judgment, and righteousness in the earth, Jer.
9.23, 24. We have this treasure in earthen vessels, (says the Apostle) that
the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. 4.7. And the
Weatons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling
down of strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.4. and therefore telling what himself had
done, as much more than had been done by the rest of the Apostles, he corrects
himself, and acknowledges the efficacy of the grace of God, I labored more
abundantly (says he) than they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which was
with me, 1 Cor. 15.10. And thus should we say after every performance, we have
labored in such a duty (and it may be more than others) yet not we, but the
grace of God which was with us; we should say, as Numb. 23.23. What has God
wrought! wondering at the mercy and goodness of God toward us, in inabling us
to do in any measure that which he requires of us, which otherwise we could
not have done; as David, 1 Chronicles. 29.14. Who am I, and what is my people, that
we should be able to offe so willingly after this sort!

2 Not to glory in any thing that we have done, as if we thereby deserved any
thing at Gods hands.

1 We cannot deserve any thing by the payment of a Dare enim vel reddere
alicuidebitum, non est mereli, sed satisfacere, Rivet in Psalm. 19.170. a.
debt; Which of you, (says our Savior) having a servant plowing, or feeding
Cattle, will say unto him by and by, when he is come from the field, Go and
sit down to meat, and will not rather say unto him, Make ready wherewith I
may sup, and gird thy self, and serve me till I have eaten and drunken? --
Does he thank that servant because he did the things that were commanded him?
I trow not; so likewise ye, when ye shall have done all those things that are
commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was
our duty to do, Luke 17.7, 8, 9, 10.

2 We cannot deserve any thing that is not our own; but our good works are
not our own, we do them not by our own strength, we are not sufficient of
our selves to think the least good thought, but all our sufficiency is of God,
it is he that works all our works in us, and for us, that works in us both to
will and to do of his good pleasure. When we have done any thing for God, we
must say as David, if we will say truly, O Lord, of thine own have we given
thee, for all things are of thee; we have nothing but what we have received,
we can do nothing but as it is given us from above, even from God who is the
giver of every good and perfect gift. It must be something therefore which we
did not receive from God that we do for him, else we cannot merit by it. But
who has first given to him (says the Apostle) [let him speak] and it shall
be recompensed unto him again, for of him and through him are all things;
Romans 11.35.

3 We cannot deserve by any thing that is unprofitable, and of no advantage
unto God; but such are all our good works, they are profitable indeed to our
selves, and other men, but not to God. Can a man be profitable unto God (says
Eliphaz) as he that is wise may be profitable unto himself? Is it any
pleasure to the Almighty that thou art righteous? or is it gain to him that
thou make thy self perfect? Job 22.2, 3.

4 We cannot deserve to be rewarded by the doing of that which bears no Ubi
enim est magna inaequalitas, ut si principatus detur alicui pro aliquasententia
cum judicio prolata, non est meritum sed donum simpliciter. River. ibi
proportion to the reward; but betwixt our good works and the reward, there is
no proportion; our good works are not tanti, they are not so much worth, that
eternal life should be given for them; our light performances cannot (in this
sense) work for us a far more exceeding eternal weight of glory. Therefore
when ever any such proud conceits of deserving do arise in our hearts (as rise
they will, so long as any thing of Self is in us) we must endeavor to
suppress them, casting our selves wholly upon the Free Grace and mercy of God
in Christ, pleading his righteousness, and expecting whatever we stand in
need of upon his account. And so much for this third Subsection of denying Self
in respect of good works.

SVBSECT. IV. Of denying Self in respect of (...), the things that are in the
world, 1 John 2.15. (...), the things of the world, 1 Cor. 7.33. (...), the
things that are upon the earth, Col. 3.2. (...), earthly things, Phil. 3.19.
(...), the things of the flesh, Romans 8.5. (...), carnal things, 1 Cor. 9.11.
(...), the things that pertain to this life, 1 Cor. 6.3. (...), things
present, Romans 8.38. etc. 1 Cor. 3.22. (...), things that are seen, 2 Cor. 4.18.
(...), temporal things, ibid.
worldly Enjoyments.
THere is much by way of Self-denial also required in respect of worldly
enjoyments, all which may be reduced unto these three heads, Pleasures,
Profits, and Honors, according to that of the Apostle, 1 John 2.16. All that
is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of
life.

For the right understanding of the Duty, as it is to be practiced in reference
unto these things, I shall speak to it (as before, in reference to the former
particulars) both Negatively, and Affirmatively.

1 Negatively, It is not meant that we may not make use of Creature Comforts,
but only in case of necessity; God gives us not only for necessity, but delight
also. There was no necessity that there should be Wine at that Marriage Feast
in Cana of Galilee, Joh. 2.1. yet for the greater pleasure and delight of those
that were bidden, and to show that a more liberal use of the Creatures at such
a time was not unlawful, our Savior turned abundance of water into Wine, and
that the richest Wine too. God gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not,
but especially to Believers; he envies them not the use of Creatures, having
bestowed himself upon them. A Believer has the best right of any unto the
Creatures, and he may more warrantably take comfort in them than any other
can; All things are yours, (says the Apostle to the believing Corinthians)
things present, as well as things to come, 1 Cor. 3.23. It has been an
occasion of much inward trouble and disquietnesse to many (especially young
Converts) that apprehending so much of their own vileness and unworthiness,
by reason of their sinfulness, and being ignorant of their Christian liberty,
they have thought they might not lawfully make use of those outward comforts
and refreshments which God has given to sweeten their way to Heaven; but
certainly, the due circumstances being observed, we may with The care of the
outward man binds conscience, so far as that we should neglect nothing
which may help us in a cheerful serving of God in our places, and tend to the
due honor of our bodies, which are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, and
companions with our souls in all performances. Doctor Sibbes Souls conflict,
c. 13. Sect. 13. Our flesh is to be subdued to reason, not to infirmities,
that it may be a Servant to the Soul, but not a burden. Rein. treat. of Pass.
164.
better leave make use of them than refuse them. There is no virtue in bodily
abstinence considered in it self, nor is it any otherwise profitable than as it
serves to keep the body in subjection to the government of the soul; sometimes
indeed God calls to extraordinary humiliation, and then we must fast, we must
afflict our bodies as well as our souls; and yet even then, if by reason of
weakness we should not be able to hold out in the duty, a moderate
refreshment by eating and drinking is permitted to us.

1 But to fast at Jejunandum quidem est necessitate corporis castigandi ne
superbiat contra spiritum, sed non secundum regulam and praescriptum. Pomeranus,
set times, as if our fasting were more acceptable to God at such times than at
other, to abstain from some meats as if they might not lawfully be eaten; or
to afflict the body, as if the whole of mortification did consist in that; this
is Superstition, and though it should be taught or enjoined us, under never so
much show of Devotion and Self-denial, we may not submit to it. Wherefore if
ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world (says the Apostle to
the Colossians) why as though living in the world are ye subject unto
Ordinances, ( touch not, taste not, handle not, which all are to perish with
the using) after the Commandments and Doctrines of men? which things have
indeed a show of wisdom in Will Worship and humility, and neglecting of the
body (or punishing, or not sparing the body) not in any honor Hoc est pro modo
necessitatis quantum carnisitis est pro sustentatione and conservatione
corporis. Marlorat.
to the satisfying of the flesh, Col. 2.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Some place so much
of their religion in these, and such like forbearances, that they are ready to
condemn all others of Libertinisme and Profaneness, that make not like
conscience of them that they themselves do. Our Savior came eating and
drinking, and they said, (...), etc. Behold a man gluttonous, and a
wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners, Matthew. 11.19. It is hard
escaping a Censure when blind Zeal is to be Judge. Men cannot endure that
others should make bold, where they themselves, out of a superstitious conceit,
dare not so much as meddle.

The greatest contests amongst Professors, many of them do arise from hence,
that they will not allow one another their just liberty in things indifferent,
but making more sins than God has made, condemn one another at their own will
and pleasure, without any warrant from the Word at all, what is this but to
usurp the place and authority of God; There is one Lawgiver that is able to
save, and to destroy; who art thou that judge another? Jam. 4.12. It is not
for us to make either sins or duties. To condemn men for that which the Law of
God does not condemn, is to judge the Law it self, Jam. 4.11. and consequently
to condemn God, as if he had not made it strict enough.

We should consider, that the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. what liberty
soever any one takes, so it be not inconsistent with these, it is no other
liberty than God allows.

2 It is not meant, that we should leave our particular Callings, and There is
no opposition between these things, so as it should be necessary for all that
desire to serve God, and seek his Kingdom, to give over their worldly
callings, neither is this the way to perfection, as Papists have dreamed. No
man has warrant to spend his whole time in private Devotion, upon pretense
that he will forsake the World. Mr. Hildersham, Lect. 50. on Joh. 4. p. 214.
quite give over our worldly business -- Let every man (says the Apostle to
the Corinthians) abide in the same calling wherein he was called, 1 Corinthians.
7.20. and in the twenty fourth verse, Brethren (says he) let every man
wherein he is called, therein abide with God. He censures it as disorderly
walking in some of the Church of the Thessalonians, that they did not work at
all, but were busybodies; now them that are such (says he) we command, and
exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work and eat their
own bread, 2 Thessalonians. 3.11. We are to be diligent in our Callings, that so we
may live of our selves, and not be chargeable unto others through our own
neglect.

Many get into Churches, and then presuming that they shall be maintained,
they learn to be idle, wandering about from house to house; and not only idle,
but tatlers also, and busybodies, speaking things which they ought not, 1 Timothy 5.13. but he that has commanded relief in case of necessity, has
forbidden it in case of idleness and sloathfulnesse, so that if any will not
work, neither must they eat, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. If we have Families, we must
endeavor also to provide for them; If any provide not for his own, At hodie
summa habetur pietas, si quis domi relictis liberis and uxore, out etiam
grandaevis parentibus, vel Jerosoly mamadeat vel in Monasterium abdat sese sib
Victurus, out fortassis etiam ventri. Vide quo impudentiae ventum sit in
Ecclesia Christi. Nec impari prorsus dementia desipiunt hodie and Catabaptista.
Relictis enim uxoribus, liberis, and familiis, etc. tanquam attoniti and
fanatici homines circumcursitant, atque ita se pomoe ia regni Christi
propagaturos dejerant: quum interim and rem familiarem concoquant subvertamque
totam and Ecclesiam Christi miris modis obiurbent. Bullinger in loc.
and specially for those of his own house, he is worse than an infidel;
instead of denying himself, he has denied the faith, 1 Timothy 5.8. But it is
not enough that we provide for our own, we must labor in our Callings, that
we may have to give to others that are in need. Let him that stole steal no
more, but rather let him labor, working with his hands the thing which is
good, that he may have to give to him that needs, Ephesians. 4.28. it may be we
have none of our own to provide for, howsoever, The poor we have always with
us, Matthew. 26.11. and therefore we must follow our Callings, that we may be
able to provide for them, Prove. 31.19, 20. but this is not all. Suppose a man
have enough for himself, his own, and others that need, he must nevertheless
have a Calling, and follow it diligently; every man will be doing, therefore
he must have a Calling to be busied in.

God set Adam to dress the Garden, and to keep it in the state of Innocence,
Genesis 2.15. notwithstanding the dignity of his condition, the variety and plenty
of provision that he had without any cost or pains of his own, he was not
to live idly, but to exercise himself in the work of a Engl. Annot in loc.
Gardener, Greenhil, Lect. on Ezekiel. c. 16.49. p. 288
he was to work though not for a living. It is a great fault in many of the
Gentry, that because they have great estates, therefore they abandon themselves
wholly to Pleasure, spending their time in Hunting, and Hawking, and Gaming,
without doing any thing that tends to public good. This was the iniquity of
the Sodomites, Ezekiel. 16.49. for which by a shower of Fire and Brimstone out of
Heaven God destroyed them, Genesis 19.24, 25. and if for the same iniquity any one
should say, that some of the greatest Families in England are at this day
ruined, he would not conjecture amiss; To be sure, it has been the ruin of
some of the greatest Professors amongst us, the first beginning of whose
Apostasy from the truth, having been found to be the neglect of their Callings.

3 It is not meant that we may not accept of any Honorable employment being
fitly qualified for it, and orderly called unto it; It is the ambition indeed
of some that carries them forth after eminent employments, but it is an
unworthy imputation of pride and vainglory, which some envious ones cast upon
others (that are men of another spirit than themselves, as God said of Caleb,
Numb. 14.24.) who seeing more to disconrage them in respect of the Service (the
temptations that attend it, the account that must be given of it at the last)
than to encourage them in respect of the Honor, do notwithstanding so far
deny themselves as to engage in them.

David was censured by his envious Brother, who told him, that he knew his
pride, and the naughtinsse of his heart, for that he was come down (as he
said) that he might see the Battle; yet he undertakes to fight with Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.30. Self-denial does not consist in that seeming modesty that is so
much cried up by many men; there is many times as much Self-seeking in
refusing, as in accepting of great employments; God had much ado with Moses
before he could See before Subsect. 2. page 93.
persuade him to preach to Pharaoh. We forbear our duties many times, lest the
envious World should misconstrue them, looking more to what we shall be
thought to be, than to what we should resolvedly be. Thus Negatively; but
now secondly, Affirmatively, to deny Self in respect of worldly enjoyments is
to deny That Opinion that Self has of them. That Affection that Self bears to
them. That Course that Self takes for them. That Use that Self would make of
them; and lastly, That Possession that Self would keep of them.


1 That Opinion that Self has of them; Self thinks they are the chiefest good,
and that the only happiness is to be found in them.

Note here these three things.

1 All men in the general, and in a confused way desire to be happy; there is
implanted in every being an appetite of, and tendency unto good, which in
sensitive Creatures is no more than a propension or natural inclination unto
that which is their Bonitas est perfectio naturalis cujusque rei juxta suum
essendi modum, per quam sit appetivile bonum dicit rationem perfecti quod est
appetibile, Tho. p. 1. q. 5. Art. 1. ad. 1.
perfection in their kind, and they tend unto it, not of themselves properly,
but as Other Creatures are shot more violently into their ends, but man has
the skill and faculty of directing him: self, and is as you may so imagine, a
rational kind of Arrow, that moves knowingly, and voluntarily to the mark of
his own accord. Culverwel. Light of Not. c. 15.155.
determined unto it by another, namely, by God, who is the Author of their
beings. But in intellectual and rational Creatures, as Angels, and Men; it is a
motion of their wills, by which they move after it according to the guidance
and direction of their l judgments. Now, all men agree in this, that they
would be happy, and that they must go to something out of themselves for it.
Man is not a Self-sufficient Creature, in his best estate he was negatively
poor, and did precariously subsist upon a richer goodness out of himself; he
was then taught to go abroad for his happiness, having nothing of his own to
live on, but what he freely received from another; but now he is privatively
poor, he has suffered the spoiling of his goods, which he had when he first
began the world, and therefore is in continual motion after something which may
fully repair his losses, and re-invest him in his former glory and happiness
again.

2 What man's Happiness is, wherein his chiefest good does consist, and how it
may be obtained, is fully declared in the Gospel. What is the Gospel but
tidings of felicity, and true blessedness? good news for miserable and undone
man; it is nothing else but a Directory to guide him to the chief good, that
which points unto him where his great strength lies, wherein his only
happiness does consist, and how he may be possessed of it, by putting him
into the way that leads unto it.

1 It determines the fruition of God to be man's chiefest good. God absolutely
considered is the object of all our happiness, less than whom we cannot have,
more than whom we need not have, to make us happy. He only is an object
proportionate to that vast and boundless desire of felicity and goodness that
is in man, which cannot be satisfied but by the fruition of an universal good,
which God only is. Look besides God, and you shall see but some scantlings of
goodness, a few gleanings of happiness, some shadowy representations of
perfection, and the reason is, they are Particularity speaks as much penury and
emptiness as is imaginable.
particular beings, (...) Luke 10 41.
many things, and so have but some inconsiderable drops of goodness in them;
they have not an universal fullness, which is no where to be found but in God
himself.

2 As it holds forth God absolutely in himself, as the only object of our
happiness; so it likewise holds forth Godman relatively, as the only way and
means to the fruition of this object, wherein the formality of our happiness
does consist. Christ is the Way, and no man comes unto the Father but by him,
Joh. 14.6. (...) The word signifies a manuduction, or a leading by the hand to
God. Vid. Leigh. Crit Sac.
(...), through him we have access unto the Father, Ephesians. 2.18. He suffered
once (...), that he might Or lead us by the hand. (...). Max. Tyr. Dissect.
1.9.
bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3.18.

3 Notwithstanding all men desire happiness in the general, and are directed
to it in the Gospel, yet there is a great mistake concerning it in the most.
All men agree in this, that they would be happy, but few agree in that wherein
their happiness does consist. Some think it consists in one thing, (...). Max.
Tyr. Dissectat 1.4.
some in another, but few in that, wherein it consists indeed. The brutish man
thinks to find it in pleasure, the covetous in money, and the ambitious in
honor. Thus like the men of Sodom, that being struck blind, wearied
themselves in vain to find out Lots door, they go groping up and down, if
peradventure they might feel after it, and find it, but tread not one step in
the way that leads unto it.

Though the Gospel hold forth God in Christ as the chiefest good, and persuade
men to look upon him under this notion, yet they being blinded by the god of
this world, apprehend their chiefest good to be in other things, and suppose
that if they can be possessed of them, they are made, if they lose them, they
are utterly undone, which is the common language of carnal men that know not
God. Such persons though they do not expressly say, There is no God, yet in
their practice they speak as much, and in their thoughts they persuade
themselves so, as Psalm. 14.1. The fool has said in his heart, There is no God.
He will not, he dare not profess openly that there is no God, and that it is
in vain to serve him, and to walk humbly and preisely before him, expecting to
be happy by him alone; no, this he will not speak openly, but profess with
the rest of the people, to serve the same God that they do, but in his heart
secretly he persuades himself that it is so, and that Religion is but a policy
invented to keep men in order, and that they do best who provide most for
themselves here, and that it is better to make sure of a little here, than to
expect greater matters upon uncertainties hereafter. I am afraid I have read
the language of many a fools heart here present, who resolves with himself (as
I said before) to seek happiness in the general, but will not seek it where the
Gospel tells him it is to be found, who gives it may be a Gospel-direction
the hearing, and can be content the Minister should speak of God, and declare
unto the world, that this felicity and happiness that is so much sought after
by every one, is only to be found in him; but he will not, he cannot bring
about his mind to close with it. He has many anxieties upon what he has
heard, and now and then some half persuasions, some languishing velleities,
some faint wishings and wouldings after God but he cannot blow up these
smothered thoughts into one real hearty resolution for him; he has one eye
still upon the world, and creature-injoyments, and is resolved to keep his
hold, fearing that if he should once let go, he might quickly sink, and never
recover himself again.

Now whence is this, but that his judgment is depraved concerning the chief
good? and therefore he concludes, there is no other happiness than what may be
had in earthly things: Therefore though God make never so great offers of other
things unto him, though he tell him of grace and glory, he regards it not;
nay though he offer himself unto him, though he tell him, He will be his
exceeding great reward, upon condition that he will walk before him, and be
perfect, he makes no other reckoning of it, then as he apprehends some
earthly thing to be meant by it. Even as the Jews, who when Christ told them,
He was the bread of God that comes down from heaven, and gives life unto the
world, were much affected with it, and said unto him, Lord evermore give us
this bread, Joh. 6.34. But when afterward they understood it was such bread as
was to be eaten by faith, they cried out, This is an hard saying, who can hear
it, verse. 60. Worldly men cannot endure to think of being happy by God alone,
they cannot conceive its possible, that that good which is in the creatures,
should be found in him without the creatures. They only judge of what is
before them, they apprehend no other reality, and believe no other than what
they apprehend; therefore whatsoever is said of spiritualls seems a mere
contradiction unto them, an utter impossibility: Therefore they say in their
hearts, There is no God, no heaven, no life eternal, because they see not
things that are invisible. They wonder what men mean when they talk of being
happy in a way of communion with, and conformity unto God, they count them a
company of fools, and mad men that will forgo that happiness which they might
have in this present world, for they know not what imaginary happiness (so they
judge it) is in another world to come. Hence they are prejudiced against the
ways of godliness, and think it not only a vain, but a dangerous thing to be
Religious.

The name indeed of Religion sometimes serves their turn (as when they live in
places where it brings in gain or credit) and then they make a profession; but
the thing it self they abominate, as being the greatest let and hindrance to
that wicked, worldly design of theirs, which under that profession they mainly
prosecute. But where a profession is not of any such use and advantage, they
abandon that too, and so become either notoriously profane and dissolute, or
at best but civilly honest. And thus they continue until such time as their
eyes be opened to see into the emptiness and vanity of all things here below,
the word of God having no effectual operation upon them before; for while they
imagine their only happiness is to be found here, they will neither be, nor
do what is necessarily required in order to their finding it elsewhere. It is a
good sign of a man's repentance, and turning to God, when his judgment is
rectified concerning these things, that whereas before he thought his chiefest
good to be in them, he now looks upon them as altogether destitute of it, and
therefore must have something better than the best of them to make him really
happy, as we see in Solomon after his recovery from his fall, who could then
say, Vanity of vanities, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity, Eccles. 1.2. And in
Paul after his conversion, who tells the Philippians that he counted all
things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord,
for whom he had suffered the loss of all things, and did count them but dung,
that he might win Christ, and be found in him, Phil. 3.8, 9. Such a light is
set up in the soul at its first conversion, as discovers unto it the excellency
of those things that are spiritual and eternal, in comparison of which, all the
outward glittering glory of temporal things is darkened, so that it sees no
glory in them by reason of the glory that does excel. And yet sometimes it is
apt to be misled by those false representations of these things, that fancy
and imagination not well governed, now and then gives of them, upon a shallow
apprehension of a greater good in them than indeed there is, taken from the
senses. These things are suitable unto the senses, and Self (a remainder
whereof is in the best) earnestly contends that what testimony they give of
them may be accepted. The b^st therefore had need to be very watchful, and
above all things to strengthen faith, whereby they shall have an evidence of
things not seen, and then the things that are seen, will have no such influence
upon them, but they shall be enabled thereby to give a peremptory denial to
whatsoever shall be suggested by Self on their behalf, which is the first
thing that is here required. The next is,

2 That Affection that Self bears to them. Set your affection on things above,
and not on things on the earth, Col. 3.2. For the grace of God that brings
salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us to deny ungodliness, and
worldly lusts, Tit. 2.11, 12. In particular,

1 That love that Self bears to them: Self judging them to be the chiefest
good (as we showed in the former particular) loves them as the chiefest good.
Love is the immediate issue and natural product of the judgment; no sooner
does the judgment conceive any thing to be good, but a child of love is born
presently, and sucks the breasts. If men judge this or that to be good, they
cannot choose but be in love with it, and proportionable to the degrees of
goodness, that they discover in the object, are the degrees of love that they
bear unto the object. If it be goodness apprehended in a remiss degree, the
love is but a remiss love, if in an intense degree, the love is intense, if
they apprehend it to be all in all, they love it with all their hearts; the
understanding makes the primary discovery of the object, the judgment
determines concerning the goodness of it, and the will takes it upon trust from
the judgment.

Now it matters not whether it be a real good or not, if it do but appear to
be so to the judgment, that is enough to draw the will after it. If I be
lifted up (says Christ) I will draw all men unto me; if I be lifted up on
the Cross, lifted up from the Grave, lifted up from earth to Heaven, but
especially if I be lifted up in men's judgments, if they once lift me up
above themselves, above all other persons and things, so as to give me the
pre-eminence, so as to make me all in all in order to the obtaining of the
chief good. So it is with the World, if it be lifted up in draws all men unto
it; if the Devil once carry up the glory of the World to an exceeding high
Mountain and show it from thence, it draws all men unto it. This effect it
had upon David, when he judged his worldly estate to be a mountain, when he
looked upon it as a mountain exceeding high and strong; when the world, and the
glory thereof appears as a mountain lifted up above all, that men cannot look
beyond it, then it draws their affection up unto it.

Love is of the nature of Fire, which is no sooner kindled but it soars
upwards speedily, constantly, because its element is above; so it is with this
affection of love, which is no sooner inkindled in the Soul, but the sparks
thereof fly upwards to that appearance of good which is above. It is true,
these things that men vent their love upon, are things upon the earth, and
opposed, Col. 3.1. to the things that are above, and to are really below; but
though they be really below, yet they are seemingly above, because the
judgment looking round about on every side, can see nothing above them, and
therefore concludes they are the supreme good; as you know it is with
Children, that because some Mountains seem to touch the Sky, conclude
therefore that there is nothing beyond those Mountains; so it is with worldly
men, who because they can see nothing beyond or above their mountain of
worldly enjoyments, do therefore conclude that there are no better things, and
consequently terminate their love upon them; there must of necessity therefore
be a change of the judgment that this affection be not mis-placed. The
mis-placing of this affection upon a wrong object is of a more heinous nature,
and dangerous consequence than ordinarily is imagined.

Men make nothing of loving the world, they think it no way inconsistent with
love to God. But what says the Scripture? Love not the world, nor the things
of the world, if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him,
1 John 2.15. Ye adulterers, and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship
of the world is enmity with God? Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the
world, is the enemy of God, Jam. 4.4. Thus the Scripture speaks in the
general. In particular, concerning the love of riches, No servant can serve two
Masters, for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will
hold to the one, and despise the other, ye cannot serve God and Mammon, Luke
16.14. The love of money is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.10. Concerning the
love of Honor, it tells us, that many among the chief Rulers (of the Jews)
believed on Christ, but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him,
lest they should be put out of the Synagogue, for they loved the praise of men
more than the praise of God, Joh. 12.42, 43. That Christ denounced a woe
against the Pharisees, Luke 11.43. and bade the multitude and his Disciples
beware of them, for that they loved the uppermost rooms at Feasts, and the
chief seats in the Synagogues, and greetings in the Markets, and to be called
of men, Rabbi, Rabbi, Matthew. 23, 6, 7. and as for (...).
lovers of pleasures more than God, it ranks them with the most notorious
ungodly persons that are in the world, 2 Timothy 3.4. that love therefore that
Self bears unto these things must be denied. And,

2 That desire that Self has after them; Mortify your members which are upon
the earth, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which
is Idolatry, Colos. 3.5. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors house, thou shall
not covet thy Neighbors Wife, nor his Manservant, nor his Maidservant, nor
his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is thy Neighbors, Exodus 20.17. I
have coveted no man's silver, or gold, or apparel, says Paul, Acts 20.33. I
have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content, I know how to
be abased, and I know how to abound; every where, and in all things I am
instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry; both to abound, and suffer
need, Phil. 4.11, 12. Give me neither poverty nor riches, Da mihi panem
statuti mei, Give me the bread of my allowance, (...) Matthew. 6, 11 (...), Jam.
2.15.
feed me with food convenient for me, says Agur, Prove. 30.8. When thou
sit to eat with a Ruler, consider diligently what is before thee, and put
a knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to appetite, be not desirous of
his dainties. Eat thou not the bread of him that has an evil eye, neither
desire thou his dainty meats, Prove 23.1, 2 3 -- 6. Daniel purposed in his
heart, that he would not defile himself with the portion of the Kings meat,
nor with the wine which he drank, Dan. 1.8. Let us not be desirous of
vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another, Galath. 5.26.

3 That delight that Self has in them; There be many that say, Who will show
us any good? Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us, thou have
put gladness in my heart, more than in the time that their corn, and their
wine increased, Psalm. 4.6, 7. Thus we must deny that affection that Self bears
to them.

3 That course that Self takes for them; Self, rather than want any pleasure,
or profit, or honor it has a mind to, will adventure upon Rem, Rem, quocunque
mode Rem, is the keeping of the Worldlings Song.
any kind of wickedness whatsoever, cosen and cheat with Laban, Genesis 29.25.
steal with Achan, Josh. 7.21. lie with Gehezai, 2 King. 5.22, 25. and with
Ananias and Saphira, Acts 5.3.8. slander, with Ziba, 2 Samuel 16.3. and 19.27.
pervert an Ordinance, and suborne false witnesses with Jezabel, 1 King. 21.9.
rebel with Absolem, 2 Samuel 15.12. set up false Worship with Jeroboam, 1 King.
12.28. Curse the people of God with Baalam, Numb. 22.21. betray Christ with
Judas, Matthew. 26.47. and Apostatize with Demas, 2 Timothy 4.10. these and such
like are the wicked and ungodly courses that Self puts men into, in order to
the obtaining the riches and honors, and delights of the world; all which must
be denied if we mean to come after Christ. When Simon Magus offered a sum
of money for the gift of the Holy Ghost, Peter said unto him, Thy money perish
with thee, Acts 8.20. Moses when he was come to years, refused to be called
the Son of Pharaohs Daughter, choosing rather to suffer affliction with the
people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, esteeming the
reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt, Heb. 11.24, 25,
26. And this is required of every one in the like case, we must resolve to
want every thing, rather than get any thing in a sinful way, For what is a man
profited, if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul? or what
shall a man give in exchange for his soul? Matthew. 16.26. and yet how small and
inconsiderable a part of the World is it, for which the greatest part of men
do run the hazard of loosing their precious souls? a faint breath of popular
applause, a penny, a momentany pleasure, etc. but to go on. As we must deny
that course that Self takes for these things, so we must deny

4 That use that Self would make of them; Self would make no other use of them
but to satisfy the flesh, that which it gets in a sinful way, it would spend
in a sinful way, but in this Self must be denied. Make not provision for the
flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, Romans 13.14. The time is short, it
remains, that both they that have Wives be as though they had none; and they
that weep, as though they wept not; and they that rejoice, as though they
rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though they possessed not; and they that
use this world, as not abusing it, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. we must use what we
have from God for God, Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first
fruits of all thine increase, Prove. 3.9. Whether ye eat or drink do all to
the glory of God, 1 Corinthians. 10.31. We must deny

5 That possession that Self would keep of them; Self would have us keep them,
when God would have us part with them, and that is, when we can no longer keep
them but we must part with Christ; in this case Self must be denied, and we
must willingly forsake all, according to that in Luke 14.33. Whosoever he be
of you, that for saketh not all that he has, he cannot be my Disciple. And
thus much for this Fourth particular, of denying Self in respect of worldly
enjoyments. The Fifth is.

SVBSECT. V. Of denying Self in respect of worldly Sufferings.
OF this also (as I have done of the former) I shall speak both Negatively, and
Affirmatively.

1 Negatively, It is not meant that we may not at all judge them to be evil,
so as not to conceit any Some out of their high and ay ery imagination, and out
of their Iron and flinty Philosophy, will needs think outward good and ill,
together with the affections of grief and delight stirred up thereby, to be
but opinions and conceits of good and evil only, not truly and really founded
in Nature, but taken up of our selves. But though our fancy be ready to conceit
a greater hurt in outward evils, than indeed there is (as in Poverty, pain of
Body, loss of Friends, etc.) yet we must not deny them to be evils. Sibbes
Souls Conflict. c. 13. Sect. 6.215.
hurt to be in them; so far as they do deprive us of any good, (and there
is some good that they do deprive us of) so far they may be accounted to be
hurtful, Psalm. 144.10. indeed being sanctified they work in us, Romans 5.3, 4.
and for us, 2 Cor. 4.17. a far greater good than any they do deprive us of;
and in respect of that we may say, It is good that we have been afflicted, as
David does, Psalm. 119.71. but this is accidental to the nature of the things
themselves, they have no good in them, nor can they do us any good of
themselves; they are so far from making us better, as of themselves, that
without the effectual working of the Spirit of God with them, they make us
far worse than ever before.

2 It is not meant that we may not be at all a verse from them, so as not to
endeavor any way to decline them; so far as they may be truly judge to be
evil, so far they may be justly hated, and declined by us. The Sea Reinolds
Treat. of Pass. 114.
unalterable object of our hatred is all manner of evil, not only that of
deformity and sin, but that also of destruction and misery. This affection God
has implanted in our nature for the conservation of our wel-being, which he
requires us not only to desire, but also by all lawful means (such as he
himself has appointed) to endeavor, which cannot be done without an inward
abhorring of whatsoever is really prejudicial to it, such as may cause us to
fly from it; and therefore it is not to be condemned as sinful, and
consequently not to be denied. We find that even in our Savior, when that
bitter Cup of sufferings was put into his hand, though in respect of the
appointment of his Father, as it was a means of fulfilling his eternal Decree
concerning the Salvation of the Elect, there was a ready willingness to drink
it up, Joh. 18.11. yet in respect of the anguish that thereupon seized on his
Humane Nature, there was a very great averseness from it. And therefore he
prayed earnestly once, and again, yea a third time, Father, if it be possible,
let this cup pass from me, Mat. 26.39.

3 It is not meant, that we may not be at all sensible of them, so as not to
grieve and mourn under them. God requires that our affections should be
exercised As God any way discovers himself, so the Soul should be in a
suitable plyablenesse. Then the Soul is as it should be, when it is ready to
meet God at every turn, to joy when he calls for it, and to mourn when he
calls for that, to labor to know Gods meaning in every thing. Sibbs Souls
Confl. c. 8. Sect. 3.102.
sutably to all his Dispensations; that when he pipes to us in his
Providence, we should dance, and when he mournes to us in his Providence,
we should mourn too, Mar. 11.16, 17.

There are times when the Lord calls to mourning, and we do provoke him
exceedingly when we do not observe them, as we may see, Isa. 22.12, 13, 14.
And in that day did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping and mourning, and to
baldness, and to girding with Sackcloath; and behold joy and gladness, slaying
Oxen, and killing Sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine, Let us eat and
drink, for to morrow we shall dye. And it was revealed in my ears by the Lord
of Hosts; surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till you dye,
says the Lord of Hosts.

The Prophet Jeremy complains unto God of the men of Jerusalem, for their
stupidity, and insensiblenesse under his corrections: O Lord (says he) are
not thine eyes upon the truth? Thou have stricken them, but they have not
grieved; thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction,
Jerem. 5.3. It is a grievous evil not to grieve when God brings any evil upon
us; we should be sensible of the least stroke of the Rod, and humble our
selves under the mighty hand of God upon us in any affliction. Many think it
the strength of their grace that they can bear affliction without grieving, but
the truth is, it is the strength of their corruption, by reason whereof they
have stupid sottish hearts, and do not take notice of the hand of God in any
thing that befalls them. What strength is it to bear what we do not feel?
Any one can do that, even one that has no Grace at all. This then is not to
deny Self; But,

2 Affirmatively, To deny Self in respect of worldly sufferings, is,

1 Not so to judge them to be evil, as to conceit a greater hurt to be in
them than indeed there is. Self will tell us they are the greatest evil in the
World, whereas they are nothing to spiritual and eternal evils, but light
afflictions in comparison of the evil of Sin, and that far more exceeding
eternal weight of misery that it works for all such as live and dye in it; when
Self therefore speaks in this manner to us, we must give it a peremptory
denial.

It is storied in the Book of Martyrs, of George Tankerfield, that immediately
before his going to the Stake to be burned, (being then at an Inn in Saint
Albanes) he prayed his Host to let him have a good Fire in his Chamber, which
accordingly he had, and then sitting on a form before the Fire, he stretched
out his leg to the flame, and when it had touched his foot, he quickly
withdrew his leg, showing how the Flesh did persuade him one way, and the
Spirit another; Acts and Mon. l. 10. 1535.
The Flesh said, O thou Fool, will thou burn and need not? The Spirit said,
be not afraid, for this is nothing in respect of fire eternal.

Acts and Mon l. 10. 1371.
The like is storied of the good Bishop and blessed Martyr Mr. John Hooper, Sir
Anthony Kingston his Friend coming to him a little before his death, thus
expressed himself to him; I am sorry to see you in this case, for as I
understand you be come hither to dye. But alas, consider that life is sweet,
and death is bitter, therefore seeing life may be had, desire to live, for
life hereafter may do good. To this the Bishop replied; True it is, Master
Kingston, I am come hither to end this Life, and to suffer Death here, because
I will not gainsay the former Truth that I have heretofore taught amongst you,
and I thank you for your friendly counsel, although it be not so friendly as I
could have wished it. True it is, Mr. Kingston, that Death is bitter, and Life
is sweet, but alas, confider that the Death to come is more bitter, and the
Life to come is more sweet; therefore for the desire and love I have to the
one, and the terror and fear of the other, I do not so much regard this
death, nor esteem this life.

2 Not to be so averse from them, Some of the Christians in the primitive times
would not cast one grain of Frankincense into the fire up on the Heathen Altars
to save their lives.
as to endeavor by any sinful means to avoid them. Self will bid us sin rather
than suffer, but we must not adventure upon the a least evil of sin to avoid
the greatest evil of suffering. Condaeus tribus ipsi a Carolo nono Galliarum
Rege propositis, missa, morte, and perpetuo carcere; respondit, se, Deo favente
primum nunquam electurum, ex duobus reliquis vero alterum voluntati Regis
liberum relinquere.
The three Children in Daniel told the King, when he threatened to cast them
into a burning fiery Furnace, for not worshipping his Golden Image, If it be
so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us; but if not, be it known unto
thee, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship thy golden Image which thou
have set up, Dan. 3.17, 18. Such a resolution must be taken up by every one
that means to come after Christ, which although in the opinion of worldly
Politicians and Time-servers it be folly and madness, will be found to be
wisdom in the end; when after (by their sinful compliance) they have escaped
the hands of them that kill the body, they fall into the hands of him that
kills both Body and Soul in Hell.

God is not wont to let such men go unpunished; nay, he will be sure to meet
with them, either in this life, by terrifying their Consciences, or by bringing
upon them those evils they thought to escape; or in the life to come (if they
repent not before) by appointing them their portion with unbeleevers and
hypocrites, in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, where shall be
weeping, and wayling, and gnashing of teeth for ever.

1 By terrifying their Consciences. Acts and Mon. l. 8.914
Mr. Bilney in the days of King Hen. 8. by the persuasion of some friends
abjured, but oh! what an Hell did he feel in his Conscience afterward! Sermon.
7.
Master Latimer in a Sermon before King Edward thus expresses it. I knew a man
my self, Bilney, little Bilney, that blessed Martyr of God, who what time he
had borne his Faggot, and was come again to Cambridge, had such Conflicts
within himself, that his friends were afraid to let him be alone, they were
feign to be with him day and night, and comfort him as they could, but no
comforts would serve; and as for comfortable places of Scripture, to bring them
unto him, it was as though a man should cut him through the heart with a sword.

And in another Sermon preached in Lincolnshire, he has these words concerning
it; That same Mr. Bilney, who was burnt here in England for Gods Words sake,
was induced and persuaded by his Friends to bear a Faggot at the time when the
Cardinal was aloft, and bare the swinge; now when the same Bilney came to
Cambridge again, a whole year after, he was in such an anguish and agony,
that nothing did him good, neither eating nor drinking, nor any other
communication of Gods Word, for he thought that all the whole Scriptures were
against him, and sounded to his Condemnation, so that I many a time communed
with him, (for I was familiarly acquainted with him) but all things whatsoever
any man could allege to his comfort, seemed unto him to make against him.

Acts and Mon. l. 8.938
Mr. ^ainbam the year following, having in like manner abjured, was released
and dismissed home, where he had scarce a month continued, but he bewailed his
Fact and Abjuration, and was never quiet in his mind and Conscience until the
time he had uttered his fall to all his acquaintance, and asked God
forgiveness before the Congregation, in those days in a Warehouse in
Bow-lane, and immediately the next Sabbath after, he came to Saint Austines,
and stood up there before the people in his Pew, there declaring openly, with
weeping tears, That he had denied God, and prayed all the people to forgive
him, and to beware of his weakness, and not to do as he did, for said he, If
I should not again return unto the truth (having the New Testament in his
hand) this Word of God would damn me both Body and Soul at the Day of
Judgment. And there he prayed every body rather to dye by and by, than to do
as he did, for he would not feel such an hell again as he did feel, for
all the worlds good.

Thus severely did God chastise these two good men for a time, showing them
what Hell meant by some few scalding drops of his immediate Wrath let fall upon
their Consciences, thereby making them thoroughly sensible of the desert of
their most horrible Sin, in renouncing his most blessed Truth; to the undaunted
and constant profession whereof, notwithstanding out of the superabounding
riches of his grace, he recovered them again, so that most resolutely and
cheerfully afterward they sealed it with their blood.

But it happened otherwise to that unparalleld example of Divine Justice, Francis
Spira, who after his Abjuration being suddenly Thunderstruck with the
terrible and amazing Sentence of his eternal Condemnation, was plunged
irrecoverably (for ought that appeared to the contrary) into the bottomless
gulf of Despair.

This wretched man being accused to the Popes Legate, for professing and
teaching some of Luthers opinions, this especially, That we must only depend
on the Free Grace, and unchangeable love of God in the death of Christ, as the
only sure way of Salvation; and being summoned to appear before him; after some
consideration had of the manifold danger he was in, and resolution taken up to
stand to his profession, and to maintain his Doctrine, notwithstanding he
began to think with himself what misery this his rashness would bring him
unto, that he should lose his substance gotten with so much care and travel,
undergo the most exquisite torments that malice it self could devise, be
counted an Heretic of all, and in the conclusion dye shamefully.

Hereupon he goes to the Legate, and acknowledges his fault, in entertaining
an Opinion concerning some Articles of Faith, contrary to the Orthodox and
received Judgment of the Church of Rome, professing his hearty sorrow for it,
and humbly begging pardon for so great an offense. The Legate perceiving him to
faint, pursued him to the uttermost, caused him to subscribe this Confession,
and made him promise that at his return to his own Town he would declare it
to the people, acknowledge the whole Doctrine of the Church of Rome, and abjure
the Opinions of Luther as false and Heretical. Spira having promised in this
manner, forthwith addresseth himself for his journey homeward, but as he went
along, thinking with himself, how impiously he had denied Christ and his
Gospel at Venice, and engaged himself to do it the second time in his own
Country, he thought he heard a voice speaking unto him in this manner.

Spira, What do thou here? whether goeft thou? have thou unhappy man, given
thy handwriting to the Legate at Venice? yet see thou do not seal it in
thine own Country; thou can not answer for what thou have already done,
nevertheless the gate of Mercy is not quite shut, take heed that thou heapest
not sin upon sin, lest thou repent when it will be too late. This filled him so
full of doubts and perplexing thoughts, that he knew not which way to turn,
nor what to do; but afterward being arrived in his own Country, and advised
by his friends, telling him, That it was requisite he should take heed that he
did not in any wise betray his Wife and Children, and all his friends into
danger, seeing that by so small a matter as the recitiug of a small Schedule,
which might be done in less space than half an hour, he might both free
himself from present danger, and preserve many that depended on him; he goes to
the Praetor, and proffers to perform his foresaid promise made to the Legate,
and the next morning he desperately enters into the public Congregation,
where Mass being finished, in the presence of friends and enemies, and of the
whole Assembly, yea and of Heaven it self, he recites that infamous
Abjuration, word for word as it was written; then was he sent home restored to
his He was a Civil Lawyer, an Advocate of great rank and esteem, endowed with
outward blessings of Wife, and eleven Children, and wealth in abundance.
Dignities, Goods, Wife, and Children; but no sooner was he departed, but he
thought he heard a direful voice, saying to him, Thou wicked wretch, thou have
denied me, thou have renounced the covenant of thy obedience. thou bast broken
thy vow; hence Apostate, bear with thee the Sentence of thy eternal Damnation.
He trembling and quaking in body and mind fell down in a swoon, and from that
time forward never found any peace, or ease of his mind, but continuing in
uncessant torments, he professed that he was captivated under the revenging
hand of the great God, and that he heard continually that fearful Sentence of
Christ, that just Judge, and was utterly undone. Phisicians were sent for, but
they could effect nothing by their skill upon him, and therefore after they had
understood the whole truth of the matter, wished him to seek some Spiritual
comfort. They that came to administer Spiritual comfort to him, propounded many
of Gods promises recorded in the Scripture, and many examples of Gods mercy;
but My Sin (said he) is greater than the Mercy of God. They told him: that God
would have all men to be saved; he answered, He would not have damned
reprobates to be saved, I am one of that number, I know it, for I willingly
and against my knowledge denied Christ, the Mercy of God extends not to me, nor
any like to me, who are sealed up to Wrath, I tell you I deserve it, my own
Conscience condemns me, what needs any other Judge? Some bade him consider
the example of Peter, who denied Christ thrice, and with an Oath, and yet
Christ was merciful to him. He answered, In that he was pardoned, it was not
because he wept, but because God was gracious to him; but God respects not me,
and therefore I am a reprobate, no comfort can enter into my heart, there is no
place there but only for torments, and vexings of spirit; I tell you, my case
is properly my own, no man ever was in like plight, and therefore my estate is
fearful. Then roaring out in the bitterness of his spirit, he said, It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Some whispering said,
that he was possessed, which he over-hearing it, said, Do you doubt it? I
have a whole Legion of Devils that take up their dwellings within me, and
possess me as their own, and that justly too, for I have denied Christ.
Whether did you that willingly or no? (said they) That is nothing to the
purpose (said he) Christ says, Whosoever denies me before men, him will I
deny before my Father which is in Heaven; Christ will not be denied, no not in
word, and therefore it is enough, though in heart I never denied him. They
asked him, whether he thought there were worse pains than what he endured for
the present? he said, That he knew there were far worse pains, for the
wicked shall rise to their Judgment, but they shall not stand in Judgment;
this I tremble to think of, yet I desire nothing more than that I might come to
that place, where I may be sure to feel the worst, and be freed from fear of
worse to come. Why do you, (said they) esteem this so grievous a sin, when as
the learned Legate constrained you to it, which he surely would not have done,
if your former opinions had not been erroneous? He answered, All those many
sins that in the former part of my life I committed, then did not so much
trouble me, for I trusted that God would not lay them to my charge, but now
having sinned against the Holy Ghost, God brings all my sins to remembrance,
and thus guilty of one, guilty of all; and therefore it is no matter whether my
sins be great or small, they are such, as Christ's Blood, nor Gods Mercy belongs
to me. God will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardneth; this is it that gnaws my heart, he has hardened me, and I find that
he daily more and more does harden me, and therefore I am out of hope; I feel
it, and therefore cannot but despair. I tell you, there was never such a
Monster as I am -- I knew that Justification is to be expected by Christ, and I
denied and abjured it, to the end I might keep this frail life from adversity,
and my Children from poverty, and now behold how bitter this life is to me! and
God only knows what shall become of this my Family, but surely no good is
likely to betide it, but rather daily worse and worse, and such a ruin at
length, as that one stone shall not be left on another. But why should you
(said A Doctor that came to comfort him.
Gribaldus) conceit so deeply of your sin, seeing you cannot but know that many
have denied Christ, and yet never fell into despair? Well (said he) I can see
no ground of comfort for such, neither can I warrant them from Gods revenging
hand in Wrath, though it pleases God yet to suffer such to be in peace; and
besides, there will a time of change come, and then they shall be thoroughly
tried, and if it were not so: yet God is just, in making me an example to
others -- I assure you, it is no small matter to deny Christ, and yet it is
more ordinary than commonly men do conceive of -- as often as a Christian does
dissemble the known truth, as often as he approves of false worship, by
presenting himself at it, so often as he does not things worthy of his calling,
or such things as are unworthy of his calling, so often he denies Christ; thus
did I, and therefore am justly punished for it. Some time after this, came in
two Bishops, one of them being Paulus Vergerius, desired him to pray with him
the Lords Prayer; Spira consented, and went on with some enlargement upon
several Petitions, to whom when he had done they said, You know that none can
call Christ Jesus the Lord but by the Holy Ghost; I perceive (replied he) that
I call on him to my eternal Damnation. They told him, he was in a spiritual
desertion, and therefore should not believe what Satan suggested to him, but
those rather whom he judged to be in a good estate, and more able to discern
of him than himself; believe us (said they) we tell you that God will be
merciful to you. O here is the knot, said he, I would I could believe, but I
cannot. Then he began to reckon up what fearful Dreams and Visions he was
continually troubled withal, that he saw the Devils come flocking into his
Chamber, and about his Bed, terrifying him with strange Noises, that these were
not Fancies, but he saw them as really as the standers by; and that besides
these, he felt continually a racking torture of his mind, and a continual
butchery of his Conscience, being the very proper pangs of the Damned wights in
Hell -- Desperation it self continually tortures me, and now I count my present
estate worse than if my Soul, (separated from my body) were with Judas, and the
rest of the Damned; and therefore I now desire rather to be there, than thus
to live in the body. After this again, one told him, that he was not to
believe himself, but rather him that was in a good estate; and I testify to
you, (said he) that God will be merciful to you; Nay (answered he) for
because I am in this ill estate, therefore can I believe nothing but what is
contrary to my Salvation and comfort. But you that are so confident of your
good estate, look that it be true, for it is no such small matter to be
assured of sincerity. A man had need be exceeding strongly grounded in the
truth, before he can be able to affirm such a matter as you now do; it is
not the performance of a few outward duties, but a mighty constant labor, with
all intention of heart and affection, with full desire and endeavor
continually to set forth Gods glory; there must be neither fear of Legates,
Inquisitors, Prisons, nor any Death whatsoever. Many think themselves happy
that are not, it is not every one that says, Lord, Lord, that shall go to
Heaven.

One that came to see him, told him, that he had been with him at Venice some
eight weeks before. O cursed day! (said Spira) O cursed day! O that I had
never gone thither, would God I had then dyed. Afterward came in a Priest,
bringing with him a Book of Exorcismes to Conjure the Devil out of him; whom
when Spira saw, shaking his head, he said, I am verily persuaded indeed, that
God has left me to the power of the Devils, but such they are as are not to be
found in your Letany. To Vergerius by many Arguments, exhorting him to believe.
Belike (said he) you think I delight in this estate, if I could conceive but
the least spark of hope of a better estate hereafter, I would not refuse to
endure the most heavy weight of the Wrath of that great God, yea for twenty
thousand years, so that I might at length attain to the end of that misery
which I now know will be eternal; but I tell you, my will is wounded.

He exhorted the company that were present, in this manner; Take heed to your
selves, it is no light or easy matter to be a Christian, it is not Baptism,
or reading of the Scriptures, or boasting of faith in Christ (though even these
are good) that can prove one to be an absolute Christian. You know what I said
before, there must be a conformity in Life, a Christian must be strong,
unconquerable, not carrying an obscure profession, but resolute in expressing
the Image of Christ, and holding out against all opposition to the last breath
-- Many there are that snatch at the Promises in the Gospel, as if they did
undoubtedly belong to them, and yet they remain sluggish and careless, and
being flattered by the things of this present World, they pass on their course
in quietness and security, as if they were the only happy men, whom
nevertheless the Lord in his providence has ordained to eternal Wrath, as you
may see in Saint Lukes rich man; thus it was with me, therefore take heed.

He disdainfully refusing some meat that was brought him by one of his Nephews,
the young man charged him with hypocrisy and dissimulation, to whom he
replied -- I am a cast away, a Vessel of Wrath, yet dare you call it
dissembling and frenzy, and can mock at the formidable example of the heavy
Wrath of God, that should teach you fear and terror? But it is natural to the
flesh, either out of malice or ignorance to speak perversely of the works of
God; The Natural man discerns not the things of God, because they are
spiritually discerned.

One of his familiar friends chanced to say, that certainly he was overcome
with Melancholy, which he over-hearing, answered; Well, be it so, seeing you
will needs have it so, for thus also is Gods wrath manifested against me --
you see Brethren what a dangerous thing it is to stop or stay in things that
concern Gods glory, especially to dissemble upon any terms, what a fearful
thing is it to be near, and almost a Christian! Never was the like example to
this of mine, and therefore if you be wise you will seriously consider
thereof. O that God would let loose his hand from me, that it were with me now
as in times past! I would scorn the threats of the most cruel Tyrants, bear
Torments with invincible resolution, and glory in the outward profession of
Christ till I were choked in the flame, and my body consumed to ashes.

Now seemed to be verified upon him, that whereof in the beginning he had
been so seasonably forewarned, that if he proceeded to fulfill his wicked
promise of Abjuring in his own Country, he might happily repent too late. Now,
if God would withdraw his hand from him, if it might be with him as in former
days, he would do and suffer any thing for-Christ; but upon no terms might
his wish be granted, all hope of mercy was quite cut off from him; so that
afterward (his purpose of mischieving himself by a Knife that he had hastily
snatched up, being by his Friends prevented) with indignation he cried out, I
would I were above God, for I know he will have no mercy on me. And thus being
in continual torment, by little and little he wasted away, until at length he
appeared a perfect Anatomy, expressing to the view nothing but sinews and
bones, and at last without any show of hope or comfort, yielded up the ghost.
Let none wonder that I have been so large in telling this man's Story, some it
may be have forgotten it, others not so much as heard of it, and amongst all
the examples of this kind, there was none more fit that I could pitch upon,
whereby to make it known in what a dreadful manner God sometimes punishes
Apostate professors in this life, by terrifying of their Consciences. He
punishes them sometimes also,

2 By bringing upon them those evils they thought (by means of their sinful
compliance) to escape. Acts and Mon, l. 10.1710.
Cranmer signed a Recantation (as he confessed himself afterward) contrary to
the truth he thought in his heart, for fear of Death, and to save his Life, if
it might have been, but he was forced to suffer notwithstanding his
recantation; as soon as ever he had signed his Recantation, the Queen signs
the Writ for his Burning, and then was he in a far worse condition than
before, having neither inwardly any quietness in his own Conscience, nor
outwardly any help in his adversaries.

In the Story of William Wolsey a godly Martyr, that was burned at Ely, Acts
and Mon. l. 10.1558
this amongst other things is recorded, that while he was in Prison he
delivered some money to be distributed amongst his friends, and to one Richard
Denton above all the rest (besides the money that he sent him) he desired this
Message might also be delivered, that he marvelled he tarried so long behind
him, seeing he was the first that did deliver him the Book of Scripture into
his hand, and told him that it was the Truth, desiring him to make have after
as fast as he could. This Message being delivered, Denton returns this answer,
I confess it is true, but I cannot burn. But he that could not burn in the
Cause of Christ, was afterward burned against his will, when Christ had given
peace to his Church; for some years after, his House was set on fire, and he
going in to save his goods was burnt in it. Thus God sometimes punishes
Apostates here, howsoever (if they repent not) he will be sure to punish them
hereafter.

3 By appointing them their portion with unbeleevers and hypocrites, in the
Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, where shall be weeping, and wayling,
and gnashing of teeth for ever. So it is foretold, Revel. 21.8. The fearful
and unbeleeving shall have their part in the Lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death. And it cannot be otherwise, for Christ
has said, Whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my
Father which is in heaven, Matthew. 10.33. and if so, there is no remedy but he
must to hell. How much better were it for us then, by harkening unto Christ,
and doing our duty, to expose our selves to the greatest of those evils which
men can only bring upon our Bodies, and are but for a time, than by harkening
unto Self, and committing of Sin, to make our selves obnoxious to the least of
those evils which God can bring both upon our Bodies and Souls, and also are
for eternity. Without doubt, did we but believe it, we should not be so
averse from them, as to endeavor by any sinful means to decline them; which is
the Second particular required by way of Self-denial in respect of worldly
sufferings. The next is,

3 Not to be so sensible of them as either to be impatient under them, or by
any sinful means to endeavor to come out of them. It is our duty to be
sensible of our sufferings, but we must take heed we be not over-sensible.
Self will be murmuring and repining against God, and quarrelling with
Instruments; but we must by no means give way unto it, but labor with
quietness and calmness of spirit whatever our cross be, to bear the burden of
it. So Paul exhorts the Romans, Romans 12.12.14. Be patient in tribulation,
bless them that persecute you, bless and curse not. So he himself practiced,
1 Cor. 4.12, 13. Being reviled we bless, being persecuted we suffer it, being
defamed we entreat. So Peter exhorts servants, 1 Pet. 2, 18, 19, 20.
Servants, be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the good and
gentle, but also to the froward; for this is thank-worthy, if a man for
conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully; for what glory is
it, if when ye are buffered for your faults ye shall take it patiently? but if
when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable
with God.

What an hard lesson is this to flesh and blood? and how few professing
Servants are there (to say nothing of others) that make any conscience of
learning it! yet it must be learnt, it must be practiced; and therefore the
Apostle adds, verse. 21, 22, 23. For even hereunto were ye called, because
Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example that ye should follow his
steps; who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; who when he was
reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not; but committed
himself to him that judges righteously.

Nothing is more grievous to us than to suffer wrongfully; to think we should
be so abused when we do not deserve it, this goes to our very heart: I, but
let us look upon the Lord Jesus, let us consider how undeservedly he was
abused, and then it will not be so grievous; he did no sin, neither was guile
found in his mouth, he never injured any, but went about every where doing
good, and yet what base usage had he in the World! how ill was he requited!
He was scorned, reviled, betrayed, falsely accused, blindsolded, buffeted, spit
upon, crowned with a Crown of thorns, and at last most shamefully Crucified,
and yet took all this patiently; shall we then think much to suffer a little,
when our Savior has suffered so much before us? Why, the Disciple is not
above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord; It is enough that the
Disciple be as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord. If they have called
the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his
household? Mat. 10.24, 25.

I have read of one Elzearius a Noble man, that when his Wife wondered at his
exceeding great patience in bearing injuries, he thus answered her; You know,
sometimes my heart is ready to rise with indignation against such as wrong me,
but I presently begin to think of the wrongs that Christ suffered, and say thus
to my self(desiring to imitate him) Although thy Servants should pluck thy
beard, and strike thee on the face, this were nothing to what thy Lord
suffered, he suffered more and greater things; and assure your self (Wife) I
never leave off thinking of the injuries done to my Savior, till such time as
my mind is still and quiet. There is enough in this consideration to quiet our
spirits in the greatest sufferings. But besides, it cannot be said of any
thing that we suffer (as it might of all that Christ suffered) that it is not
deserved, It may be said so in allies sometimes, in respect of men, but never
in respect of God; we have sinned, and thereby have deserved worse than the
worst that can be suffered in this world. Have we then any reason to
complain? Wherefore (says Jeremy) does a living man complain, a man for the
punishment of his sins? Lam. 3.39. It is of the Lords mercies that we are not
consumed, because his compassions fail not, verse. 22. if he should deal with
us according to our deservings, he might justly cast us into Hell.

Were we but thoroughly convinced of this, had we but once the real sense and
feeling of it in our selves, there would be no such anguish and vexation in
any of our sufferings here, as many times we find to be in them, and we
should be much strengthened against those temptations, whereby Self and Satan
joining with it, would carry us into any sinful way to ease our selves of them,
which is another thing that we must have a special care, while we are in a
suffering condition to watch against. The Cross is very irksome and tedious to
the flesh, and therefore as it is unwilling to come under it, so it is
unwilling to continue under it; but as we must willingly take it up, so we
must patiently bear it; as we must not refuse it when Christ will lay it on,
so we must not reject it till Christ will take it off. It is lawful to use
means to free our selves of our troubles, but all means are not lawful to be
used. We must resolve to abide them all our days, rather than by the
committing of the least sin to free our selves of them.

This was the resolution of that most learned and pious Martyr Acts and Mon. l.
11.1664.
Mr. Philpot, as he expresses it himself in a Letter to John Careless,
written while he was in the Stocks in Bonner's Coal-house; The Devil rages
against me, I am put in the Stocks in a place alone, because I would not
answer such Articles as they would charge me withal, in a corner, at the
Bishops appointment, and because I did not come to Mass when the Bishop sent
for me; I will be all the days of my life in the stocks by Gods grace, rather
than I will consent to the wicked generation.

In the eleventh of the Hebrews we read of the Jewish Martyrs in the time of
the Old Testament, that they were tortured, not accepting deliverance; they
might have had their lives if they would but have complied with their
Adversaries in their wicked Idolatrous practices, but they would not accept of
their lives upon such terms, they thought it much better to be tortured upon
the rack of this World, than upon the rack of a damnable Conscience.

The like we read of our English Martyrs, l. 8.1130.
Mistress Anne Askew, when she was at the Stake had Letters sent her by the
Lord Chancellor, offering her the Kings Pardon if she would recant, but she
refusing so much as to look on them, returned this answer, That she came not
thither to deny her Lord and Master.

l. 14.1372.
Bishop Hooper, when a Box was laid before him with a Pardon in it (as was
said) from the Queen, at the sight thereof cried out, If ye love my Soul, away
with it, if you love my Soul away with it.

(...)
George Marsh, when the Deputy Chamberlain of Chester showed him a writing
under a great Seal, saying, that it was a Pardon for him if he would recant,
answered. That he would gladly accept the same, but for as much as it tended
to pluck him from God, he would not receive it upon that condition.

l. 11.1459.
Master Bradford, when the Lord Chancellor promised him, that if he would
return again, and do as they had done, he should have the Queens Mercy and
Pardon, made this reply; My Lord, I desire mercy with Gods mercy, but mercy
with Gods wrath, God keep me from. Many more might be instanced in, but these
may suffice; I shall now pass on to the next Sub-section, which is,

SVBSECT. VI. Of denying Self in respect of our Relations.
THis is the last particular to be explained, and I shall dispatch it in a
word.

1 Negatively, it is not meant that we should deny the workings of Natural
affection toward them. God requires that we should love all men, Romans 13.8,
9. even our very enemies, Luke 6.32. -- 35. and that we should express our
love by doing good to all men, Gal. 6.10. even to our enemies, Prove. 25.21.
Romans 12.20. now if we be thus bound to all, much more therefore to some; if
thus to our enemies, much more therefore to our friends, to our kindred, to
those of our own family. We are some way related to all men, in as much as
we are all of one blood, Acts 17.26. and therefore we must love all, and do
good unto all; but there are some to whom we are more especially related, and
those we must love with a more especial love; the nearer the relation, the
dearer the love, and the more endearing must the expressions of it be. And in
this sense that particular precept to Husbands of loving their Wives, Ephesians.
5.28. and to Wives of loving their Husbands, Tit. 2.4. must be understood. To
be without natural affection is made a note of the foulest wicedness, not only
in the Gentiles, Romans 1.31. but also in the professors of the Gospel, 2 Timothy
3.3. of whom the Apostle says, that if any provide not for his own, and
specially for those of his own house, he has denied the faith, and is worse
than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. The Pharisees taught the people (even as the
Papists do at this day) that if any one Consecrated his estate to God, he was
exempted from his duty of releeving his poor Parents; if he could say to his
Father, or Mother, It is Corban, that is to say a gift, by whatsoever thou
might be profited by me, then he should be free, and they suffered him
no more to do ought for his Father, or his Mother. But our Savior sharply
reproved them for it, telling them, that they rejected the Commandment of God,
that they might keep their own tradition, Mar. 7.9. and that they made the
Word of God of none effect through their tradition which they had delivered,
verse. 13. therefore that must be warily understood, which he elsewhere says,
If any man come to me, and hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and
Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, he cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14.26. We
see it cannot be understood absolutely (Christ means not so) but only in some
certain respect, when our love to them, and our love to Christ are
incompatible, I shall thus explain it; We are to hate Father and Mother, Wife
and Children, Brethren and Sisters, as we are to hate other men. We are not to
hate them absolutely, so as in no respect to bear any love unto them, for we
are commanded to love them, and to do good unto them, even the worst of them,
as I have showed above; but in some certain respect, as they are enemies to
God, and to our serving of God; so we not only may, but we ought to hate them,
and in this respect David pleads it unto God as an argument of his sincerity;
Do not I hate them O Lord that hate thee, and am not I grieved with those that
rise up against thee? I hate them with perfect hatred, I count them mine
enemies. Now what follows? Search me, O God, and know my heart; try me, and
know my thoughts, Psalm. 139.21, 22, 23. in this respect we are to hate our
nearest relations, and it is a special evidence of true love to Christ so to
do. And therefore,

2 Affirmatively, to deny Self in respect of our Relations is,

1 Not to connive at them in any way of sin, if we be Superiors. It was
commanded in the Law of Moses, If thy Son, or thy Daughter, or the Wife of thy
bosom entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other gods which thou
have not known, thou, nor thy Fathers, thou shall not consent unto him, nor
hearken unto him, neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shall thou spare,
neither shall thou conceal him; but thou shall surely kill him, thine hand
shall be first upon him to put him to death, and thou shall stone him with
stones that he dye, because he has sought to thrust thee away from the Lord
thy God, Deuteronomy. 13.6 - 11. That this for the substance of it shall be in force
in the times of the Gospel, is foretold in the Prophecy of Zechary, I will
cause the Prophets, and the unclean spirit to pass out of the Land, and it
shall come to pass, that when any shall yet Prophecy, then his Father and his
Mother that begat him shall say unto him, Thou shall not live, for thou
speak lies in the name of the Lord; and his Father, and his Mother, that
begat him shall thrust him through when he prophesies, Zechary 13.2, 3.

A Blessing was pronounced upon the Tribe of Levi Levitae in punitione
Idololatrarum, puta adorantium vitulum aureum, Exodus 32.28. Non miserti sunt
amicorum and cognatorum ac fratrum and filiorum suorum, sed occiderunt eos
aeque ac alios, perinde ac si eos non novissent, imo non vidissent aut ad
spexissent. A Lapide. Qui certe vergem sensus. Rivet. in Decal. 1. Tom. 1354.
because in the execution of Justice upon the Idolaters, Exodus 32.27. they had
no respect to their nearest relations, Deuteronomy. 33.8, 9. And of Levi he said, Let
thy Thummim and thy Urim be with thy holy one, who said unto his Father, and
to his Mother, I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his Brethren,
nor know his own Children.

Asa was commended for removing his Mother Maachah from being Queen, because
she had made an Idol in a Grove, 1 King. 15.13. but old Eli sharply reproved,
and threatened with a terrible Judgment, for his too much indulgence to his
Sons, 1 Samuel 2.27, 28, 29. Wherefore kick ye at my Sacrifice, and at my
Offering which I have commanded in my habitation, and honor thy Sons above
me, to make your selves fat with the chiefest of all the Offerings of Israel
my people? wherefore the Lord God of Israel says, I said indeed that thy
house, and the house of thy Father should walk before me for ever; but now the
Lord says, Be it far from me, for them that honor me I will honor, and
they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed. Behold, the days come that I
will cut off thine arm, and the arm of thy Fathers house, and there shall not
be an old man in thy house, verse. 30, 31. He had reproved his Sons before,
when their evil report was brought unto him, verse. 23, 24. but this was not
enough D^bebat eos fust^bus and carcere coerce^e, quia erat pater and
Magistratus. Paraeus in L^c.
he was a Judge in Israel, and therefore should have punished them; which
because he did not (being loath to cross them) therefore God threatens him in
this manner here, and afterward says concerning him, Behold, I will do a
thing in Israel, at which both the cares of every one that hears it shall
tingle; in that day I will perform against Eli all things which I have spoken
concerning his house; when I begin I will also make an end, for I have told him
that I will judge his house for ever, for the iniquity which he knows;
because his Sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not. And
therefore I have sworn unto the house of Eli, that the iniquity of Elies house
shall not be purged with sacrifice nor offering for ever, 1 Samuel 3.11, 12, 13,
14. But suppose he had been but a private person, and so not able to restrain
them himself, his duty had been to have brought them to the Judge, for so the
Law in that case required, If a man have a stubborn and rebellious Son, which
will not obey the voice of his Father, or the voice of his Mother, and that
when they have chastened him will not hearken unto them, then shall his Father
and his Mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the Elders of his City,
and unto the gate of his place, and they shall say unto the Elders of his City,
this our Son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our voice, he is a
glutton, and a drunkard, Deuteronomy. 21.18, 19, 20. where observe, that they were
first to chasten him themselves, before they brought him to the public
Magistrate.

And this God still requires of all Parents, that when by admonition and
reproof they can prevail nothing upon their Children, they should try what may
be done by correction. Chasten thy Son while there is hope, and let not thy
soul spare for his crying, Prove. 19.18. Withhold not correction from the
child, for if thou beatest him with the rod he shall not dye, thou shall beat
him with the rod, and shall deliver his soul from hell, Prove. 23.13, 14. The
rod and reproof give wisdom, but a child left to himself brings his mother
to shame, Prove. 29.15. Correct thy Son, and he shall give thee rest, yea be
shall give deligt unto thy soul, verse. 17. By these Scriptures it appears, that
correction is an Ordinance of God, and a means by him appointed, not only in
order to the credit and quiet of the Parent, but the Salvation of the Child
also, and therefore cannot be neglected without manifest danger of his eternal
Damnation. Now, what Parent that has any bowels of compassion in him, can
endure to think that through any neglect of his, his Child should be cast
into Hell? It pitties some to hear their Children crying here, but how will
they endure to hear them roaring in Hellfire hereafter? How will they endure
to hear them cursing them at the Day of Judgment, and crying for vengeance
upon them, for not restraining them from those sinful Courses that brought them
to so great a misery? But to proceed, To deny Self in respect of our Relations,
is,

2 Not to comply with them in any way of sin, if we be inferiors. This was the
sin of Ahaziah, He walked in the ways of the house of Ahab, for his mother
was his counselor to do wickedly, 2 Chro. 22.3. This likewise was the sin of
Herodias, who upon her Mothers counsel asked John Baptists head, Matthew. 14.8.
Though with all humbleness and readiness of mind we are bound to entertain
the counsel and command of our Parents, and to submit unto them, yet if in any
thing they run cross to the Counsels and Commands of God, we must choose to
incur their displeasure, and to undergo the greatest evils that can possibly
follow upon it, rather than to yield unto them.

Acts and Mon. l. 11.1758
A notable example of this we have in the Story of Mr. Julius Palmer, a Martyr
in Queen Mary's days, who being persecuted by the Papists, and turned out of
his living, was brought to such extremity that he had not wherewithal to
find himself bread; whereupon he went to his Mother, hoping to obtain at her
hands certain Legacies due to him by his Fathers last Will, which he should
have received certain years before; his mother understanding his state and
errand by two of his friends (whom he had sent before to entreat for him) as
soon as she beheld him on his knees asking her blessing, as he had been
accustomed to do, Thou shall (said she) have Christ's curse and mine
wheresoever thou go. He pausing a little as one amazed at so heavy a
greeting, at length said, O Mother, your own Curse you may give me, which I
never deserved, but Gods Curse you cannot give me for he has already blessed
me. Nay (said she) thou wentest from Gods blessing into the warm Sun; when
thou were banished for an Heretic out of that Worshipful house in Oxford, and
now for the like knavery art driven out of Redding too. Alas Mother (said he)
you have been misinformed, I am no Heretic, for I stand not stubbornly
against any true Doctrine, but defend it to my power. Well (quoth she) I am
sure thou do not believe as thy Father and I, and all our forefathers have
done, but as we were taught by the new Law in King Edwards days, which is
damnable Heresy. Indeed I confess (said he) that I believe that Doctrine
which was taught in King Edwards time, which is not Heresy but truth, neither
is it new, but as old as Christ and his Apostles; If thou be at that point
(said she) I require thee to depart from my house, and out of my sight, and
never take me for thy Mother hereafter. As for money and goods I have none of
thine, thy Father bequeathed naught for Heretics; Faggots I have to burn
thee, more thou gettest not at my hands. Mother (said he) whereas you have
cursed me, I again pray God to bless you and prosper you all your life long;
and so (with abundance of tears trickling down his cheeks) he departed from
her, not knowing which way to turn his face.

There is one thing more that is required by way of Self-denial in respect of
our Relations, and that is,

3 Not to adventure upon any Sin, either of Omission, or Commission for their
sakes, whether we be superiors or inferiors.

l. 11. 1415
Rawlins White, another of the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, being led forth
to be Burned, was brought to a place where his poor Wife and Children stood
weeping, and making great lamentation, the sudden sight of whom so pierced his
heart, that the very tears trickled down his face; but he soon after as though
he had misliked this infirmity of his flesh, began to be as it were
altogether angry with himself, insomuch that in striking his breast with his
hand he used these words, Ah Flesh, stayest thou me so? Would thou feign
prevail? well, I tell thee, do what thou can, thou shall not by Gods grace
have the victory.

l. 11. 1464
Master Bradford being in Prison, one of the Earl of Derbies Servants came to
him, saying, My Lord has sent me to you, he wills you to tender your self,
and he would be a good Lord unto you; To whom Mr. Bradford replied, I thank his
Lordship, but in this case I cannot tender my self more than Gods honor. Ah,
Master Bradford, said the Servant, consider your Mother, Sisters, Friends,
Kinsfolk, and Country, what a great discomfort will it be unto them to see you
dye as an Heretic; Mr. Bradford answered, I have learned to forsake Father,
Mother, Brother, Sister, Friend, and all that ever I have, yea even mine own
self, for else I cannot be Christ's Disciple. And so much for this Sixth
Sub-section, wherewith I shall here end the Explication, and shut up this
second Chapter.

CHAP. III. The Demonstration.
HAving shown what Self-denial is in the general, and what it is in respect of
Inherent grace, Common gifts, Good works, Worldly enjoyments, Worldly
sufferings, and our Relations in particular; I come now to demonstrate the
necessity of it, and for this I shall need do no more, but show the
impossibility of coming after Christ without it.

Arg. If it be impossible for any one without Self-denial to come after
Christ, then whosoever will come after Christ, must of necessity deny himself.

But it is impossible for any one without Self-denial to come after Christ.

Therefore whosoever will come after Christ, must of necessity deny himself.

To come after Christ (as I have expressed it in the Doctrine) is to come after
him in the way of holiness unto eternal happiness. Now, that it is impossible
for any one without Self-denial to come after Christ in the way of holiness
unto eternal happiness, will manifestly appear in the proof of these two
particulars following.

1 That it is impossible for any one to come after Christ unto eternal
happiness, without coming after him in the way of holiness.

2 That it is impossible for any one to come after Christ in the way of
holiness, without denying himself.

For the first of these, That it is impossible for any one to come after Christ
unto eternal happiness, without coming after him in the way of holiness, I prove
it by these three Arguments,

Arg. 1. If it be impossible for any one without coming after Christ in the way
of holiness to enter into the kingdom of God, then it is impossible for any one
without coming after Christ in the way of holiness, to come after him to
eternal happiness.

But it is impossible for any one without coming after Christ in the way of
holiness, to enter into the kingdom of God.

Therefore, it is impossible for any one without coming after Christ in the way
of holiness, to come after him to eternal happiness.

By the Kingdom of God here, is meant the Kingdom of glory, Mar. 10.37.
compared with Mat. 20.21. into which Christ himself is entered, 1 Timothy 3.16. and
unto which he brings all those whom he brings to eternal happiness, Heb. 2.10.
and out of which it is certain there is no happiness, as is evident, Mar.
9.47. where to enter into the Kingdom of God is all one with entering into
life, verse. 45. and that which is opposed unto it is, To be cast into Hell,
where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched, verse. 48.

The Proposition then is undeniable, the Assumption is proved by these
Scriptures, Verily I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of
God as a little child, Mark 10.15
he shall not enter therein. No man having put his hand to the Plough, and
looking back is fit for the Kingdom of God, Luke 9.62. Verily, verily I say
unto thee, except a man be borne again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God,
John 3.3. Except a man be borne of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God, verse. 5. Know ye not, that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with man
kind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners,
shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Now the works of the flesh
are manifest, which are these, Adultery, Fornication, Vncleaneness,
Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath,
Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and
such like; of the which I tell you before, as I have also told you in time
past, that they which do such things shall not enherit the Kingdom of God,
Galath. 5.19, 20, 21. For this you know, that no Whoremonger, nor unclean
person, nor covetous man who is an Idolater, has any inheritance in the
Kingdom of Christ, and of God, Ephesians. 5.5. Blessed are they that do his
Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in
through the gates into the City, for without are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and
Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a
lie, Revel. 22.14, 15. See Mat. 5.19, 20. and chap. 7.21. and the Parable of
the ten Virgins, chap. 25.

Arg. 2. If it be impossible for any one without coming after Christ in the
way of holiness to see God, then it is impossible for any one without coming
after Christ in the way of holiness, to come after him to eternal happiness.

But it is impossible for any one without coming after Christ in the way of
holiness to see God.

Therefore it is impossible for any one without coming after Christ in the way
of holiness, to come after him to eternal happiness.

The happiness of the Kingdom of Glory consists in seeing of God, 1 Cor.
13.12. 1 John 3.2. therefore Christ pronounces of the pure in heart, that they
are blessed, for this reason, because they shall see God, Matthew. 5.8. therefore
the impure, that is, such as live and dye without holiness, must needs be
cursed, for they shall never see God, Heb. 12.14. Follow pence with all men,
and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.

Arg. 3. If it be impossible for any one without coming after Christ in the way
of holiness, to escape eternal Damnation in Hell fire, then it is impossible
for any one without coming after Christ in the way of holiness, to come after
him to eternal happiness.

But it is impossible for any one, without coming after Christ in the way of
holiness, to escape eternal Damnation in Hellfire.

Therefore it is impossible for any one, without coming after Christ in the way
of holiness, to come after him to eternal happiness.

The Proposition none will deny that understands, and believes what eternal
Damnation in Hellfire is; the Second part is proved by these testimonies of
Scripture, The Son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather
out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity; and
shall cast them into a furnace of fire, there shall be wayling and gnashing of
teeth, Matthew. 13.41, 42. Ye Serpents, ye generation of Vipers, how can ye
escape the Damnation of Hell? Chap. 23.33. Then shall he also say unto them on
the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels, chap. 25.41. -- Whose fan is in his hand, and he
will thoroughly purge his floor, and will gather the Wheat into his Garner, but
the Chafe he will burn with fire unquenchable, Luke 3.17. The hour is
coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall
come forth, they that have done good unto the resurrection of life, and they
that have done evil unto the resurrection of damnation, John 5.28, 29. Seeing
it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble
you -- When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty
Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7, 8, 9. Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities
about them, in like manner giving themselves over to fornication, and going
after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of
eternal fire, Epist. of Jude, verse. 7. But the fearful, and unbeleeving, and
the abominable, and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters,
and Liars, shall have their part in the Lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the Second Death, Revel. 21.8.

Thus I have proved the first Particular, That it is impossible for any one to
come after Christ to eternal happiness, without coming after him in the way of
holiness.

The Second, That it is impossible for any one to come after Christ in the way
of holiness, without denying himself, I prove thus.

Arg. If it be impossible for any one to come after Christ in the way of
holiness, without denying one, that will never consent that he should walk in
the way of holiness: but (if he be not denied) will certainly lead him into
the way of sin; then it is impossible for any one to come after Christ in the
way of holiness without denying himself.

But it is impossible for any one to come after Christ in the way of holiness,
without denying one, that will never consent that he should walk in the way of
holiness, but (if he be not denied) will certainly lead him into the way of
sin.

Therefore it is impossible for any one to come after Christ in the way of
holiness without denying himself.

The reason of the Consequence is, because,

1 Self will never consent that any one should walk in the way of holiness. One
that is at enmity against God, and neither is, nor can be subject to the Law
of God, will never consent that any one should walk in the way of holiness; but
such is Self, Romans 8.7. The carnal mind is enmity against God; for it is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be,

Again, one that lusts against the Spirit, and is contrary to the Spirit,
will never consent that any one should walk in the way of holiness; But this
is true of Self, Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the
spirit against the flesh; and these are contrary the one to the other.
Therefore Self will never consent that any one should walk in the way of
holiness. But,

2 (If he be denied) will certainly lead him into the way of sin. For,

1 He is wholly deprived of virtue, whereby he should be inclined to do well.
For I know that in me (that is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing, Romans 7.18.

2 He is wholly depraved by the opposite habit of Vice which succeeds, for,
Contrariorum immediatorum necesse est alterum inesse subjecto capaci, alterum
non inesse; that being absent, this must needs be present, and fill up its
room, being immediately contrary to it. Hence, in the Scripture, an homogeneal
corruption is attributed, not only in the general to the whole man, but also to
every part of it in particular, Cum igitur peccatum duo dicat, aversionem ab in
commutabili bono, and conversionem ad bonum commutabile, and ex ordine Divina
providentiae a scientia ceciderit in ignorantiam, a bonitate in malitiam, a
potentia in infirmitatem; ab unitate potentiarum in concupiscentiam; sequitur
nec defective solum, sed etiam effective hominem ignorare quid sit bonum suum
and quae sint media perveniendi ad illud; id est, non solum potest dici, quod
non scint, sed etiam quod false presumit esse quod non est. Ferrius Scholast.
Orthod. specime, c. 19. Sect. 3.
as to the understanding, Genesis 6.5. Romans 8.5. to the Conscience, Tit. 1.15. At
voluntas non potest non velle quod inde cavit intellectus. Cum ergo falsum
tantum intelligat, etc. sequitur ut voluntas velit tanquam bonam, quod vere
bonum non esse nec posse, non vesse, ib. Sect. 5. Nam etsi electiva facultas in
homine maneat quam diu mane^ homo, quam nihil eripire potest, certum est tamen,
ingenitam pravitatem vetare ne (...) been utatum homo and id eligat quod vere
bonum fit secundum Deum. Rivet. com. in Exodus c. 2. 752. c. 1.
to the Will, Genesis 8.21. to the affections, Romans 1.24. and to all the members
of the body, Romans 6.19.

3 Being thus deprived and depraved, as he does nothing that is good, Romans 3.
There is none that does good, no not one, verse. 12. so whatsoever he does is
evil, as it follows, Their throat is an open sepulcher, with their tongues
have they used deceit, the poison of Aspes is under their lips; whose mouth is
full of cursing and bitterness, their feet are swift to shed blood; destruction
and misery are in their ways, and the way of peace they have not known, verse.
13, 14, 15, 16, 17. And it must needs be so, for Operatio sequitur esse, as is
the Habit, so is the Action that proceeds from it; but there being no other
Habit in Self, but such as inclines him to sin (being wholly deprived of that
power whereby he should will well, as I have shown above) it follows that he
does nothing but sin, and therefore (if he be not denied) will certainly carry
one into the way of sin.

Now, that it is impossible to come after Christ in the way of holiness,
without denying such an one, etc. cannot be doubted, for not to deny such an
one, is, to come after him in the way of sin; and, to come after him in the way
of sin, is not to come after Christ in the way of holiness; and, to come after
Christ in the way of holiness, and not to come after Christ in the way of
holiness, are contradicents, and that both should be true, is impossible, for
Posito uno ex contradicentibus, removetur alterum, and contra; the affirmation
of the one, is the denial of the other, therefore to come after Christ in the
way of holiness without denying ones Self is impossible, therefore to come
after Christ to eternal happiness, therefore to come after Christ at all;
therefore, whosoever will come after Christ must of necessity deny himself,
Quod erat demonstrandum; Self and Christ are irreconcilable adversaries not
only opposita, but contraria, they are adversa, two overthwart neighbors that
will never agree, but are directly opposed one to the other continually. They
lead their followers into contrary ways, and therefore it is impossible for
any one to come after both; No man can serve two Masters, for either he will
hate the one and love the other, or else he will hold to the one and despise
the other, ye cannot serve God and Mammon, Matthew, 6.24. And this shows that
Self-denial is necessary, not only Necessitate precepti, as it is a duty, but
also Necessitate medii, as it is a means, it being the only Removens prohibens
that which removes the impediment, that which takes out of the way, that that
lets and hinders our coming after Christ, without which it is certain we can
never come after him. Thus of the Demonstration, the Application follows.

CHAP. IV. The Application,
THe Doctrine being explained, and demonstrated, comes now to be applied, and
first by way,

SECT. I. Of Information.
IF this be so, that Self-denial is of such necessity, that without it, it is
impossible for any one to come after Christ; Then there are but few that do
come after Christ. The reason is, because there are but few that do deny
themselves. That there are but few that do deny themselves, will plainly
appear, if we set aside all those,

I Amongst Ministers.
That are blind and ignorant, dumb dogs that cannot bark, Isa. 56.10.

That desire to be Teachers of the Gospel, understanding neither what they say,
nor whereof they affirm, 1 Timothy 1.7. wresting the Scriptures to their own and
other men's destruction, 1 Pet. 3.16,

That are sloathful and negligent, lazy Dogs that will not bark, sleeping,
lying down, and loving to slumber, Isa. 56.10. that hide their talent, Mat.
25.18.

That spend more of their time in the Kitchen, in the Fields, in the Barn, and
the Marketplace, Matthew. 20.3. than they do in their studies.

That never think of their Sermons till Friday night, or Satterday; that is,
that never study till needs they must.

That are covetous and catching greedy dogs, which can never have enough, that
look all of them to their own way, every one for his gain from his quarter,
Isa. 56.11.

Some will spend and some will spare, and some will lay it up in store,
A cure of souls they care not fore so they mow money take,
Whether her souls be won or lore, her profits they will not forsake.
Chaucer, The Plowmans Tale. fol. XCVII.
With change of many manner meats, with song and solace sitting long,
And fills her womb, and fast fretes, and from the meat to the gonge,
And after meat with Harp and Song, and each man mote hem Lords call,
And hot spices ever among, such false faytours foul bem fall.
ibid. fol. XCIII.

That feed themselves, but not the flock; that eat the fat, and cloth
themselves with the Wool, but do not strengthen the diseased, nor heal that
which is sick, nor bind up that which is broken, nor bring again that which is
driven away, nor seek that which is lost, but with force and with cruelty do
rule over them, Ezekiel. 34.2, 3, 4.

That are given to Luxury and Riot, that say, Come ye, I will fetch Wine, and
we will fill our selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day,
and much more abundant, Isa. 56.12.

That are the greatest Fashion-mongers of any in their Parish, that put
themselves into strange apparel, that powder their hair, and trick up
themselves in such sort, as they seem to be rather Actors in a Play, than
Preachers of a Crucified Christ.

That love the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief seats in the
Synagogues, and greetings in the Markets, and to be called of men, Rabbi,
Rabbi, Mat. 23.6, 7.

That love to have the pre-eminence amongst their Brethren, with Diotrophes, 3
Epist. of John, verse. 9. and therefore praete with malicious words against
others more worthy than themselves, as he did, ibid. verse. 10.

That get such Assistance as may serve as a foil, and may not be able to
eclispe them, and if they have any such endeavor to remove them, envying them
because they do excel, and hating them because they find better acceptance
among the people than themselves.

That speak perverse things, to draw Disciples after them, Act. 20.30.

That do (...), serve some opinion already taken up by some rising party, and
wrest the Scripture for the justification of it.

That make parties, and maintain Factions amongst their people, by that means
to carry on their own ends the better.

That make use of the favor and authority of some Great man, to overawe their
people, from marking their misdemeanors, and prosecuting of them.

That hate those of their Brethren, that deal most faithfully with them, in
telling them of their faults, and can in no wise endure to be reproved.

That hate the most godly in their Parish.

That will not countenance the people in examining their Doctrine with the
Baereans, lest they should come to be as wise as themselves.

That dare not purge their Congregations, seperating the precious from the
vile, at the administration of the Sacraments, least their Tithes should not
be paid.

That are Time-servers, and Man-pleasers, Gal. 1.10.

That speak placentia, smooth things, Isa. 30.10. especially to great men,
daubing them with untempered mortar, seeing vanity, and divining lies unto
them, saying, Thus says the Lord God, when the Lord has not spoken, Ezekiel.
22.27, 28.

That would be accounted University men, when indeed they are not.

That make use of such words in their Sermons as they do not understand, not
know how to pronounce, that they might be thought to be learned.

That bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's
shoulders, but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers,
Mat. 23.4.

That having put their hands to the Plow, do afterward look back, Luke 9.62.
that leave off preaching, when they have gotten great estates. -- All those

II. Amongst Magistrates.
That count Religion a matter of indifferency; whether there be preaching, or
no preaching; Sabbaths, or no Sabbaths; Sacraments, or no Sacraments, all is
one to them, like Gallio, they care for none of those things, Acts 18.17.

That take up a form of godliness, to keep up a good opinion of themselves
amongst the godly, but deny the power of it, according to that Atheistical
precept of Machiavel, Oportet Principem religentem esse, religiosum nefas.

That notwithstanding they make a great profession, yet refuse to be members of
any particular Church of Christ upon earth, being loath to acknowledge the
power of Church Officers over them, and fearing to be called to account for
their irregular proceedings, the command of Christ to the contrary
notwithstanding.

That make and foment Divisions amongst Professors, the better to rule them
all, according to that devilish principle, Divide, and impera.

That have no zeal for God in any thing wherein their own private interest is
not concerned.

That care more to be great, than to be good.

That desire the society and company of good Ministers, only by that means to
be the more honored before the people, 1 Samuel 15.30.

That hear them gladly so long as they preach general truths, but when they
once come to reprove them for their Herodias, the darling sin that apparently
reigns in them, then they cast them off, it may be persecute them, as Herod did
John the Baptist.

That follow the administration of Justice only as a Trade for gain; that love
with shame, Give ye, Hos. 4.18.

That make use of their authority chiefly for the raising of themselves, their
Families, and Allies, without respect to any thing but consanguinity and
affinity, Isa. 22.25.

That care not to undo a Nation, so they may set up themselves upon the ruins
of it.

That cast off the rule of the Law, and govern Arbitrarily, rendering no other
account of many of their actions; but, Sic volo, sic jubeo, stat pro ratione
voluntas.

That overawe men from their right by the fear of their authority, the thing
is unreasonable to be yielded to, a most unjust thing, yet being set on by
some friend whom they have a mind to pleasure, though they do not peremptorily
require it to be done, yet they intimate so much as that they would not be
well pleased if it should not be done, which is enough to the poor oppressed
Defendant, (searing to make so great a man his enemy) against all right to part
with his right.

That carry their Bias in their Pockets and can clap it on, and take it off as
may best serve their turn to play their own game.

That are Willows, and not Oaks, that will turn with the stream which way so
ever it runs.

That first make a necessity, and then plead it as a just reason of their
unreasonable undertakings.

That set some a work to act the part of enemies to the state, purposely to
betray others, or to get intelligence of the enemies proceedings.

That help the ungodly, which was the sin of Jehosaphat, for which the Prophet
Hanani reproved him, 2 Chronicles. 19.2.

That spare those whom God would have destroyed, which was the sin of Saul, for
which Samuel reproved him, 1 Samuel 15.17, 18, 19.22. and of Ahab, for which one
of-the Sons of the Prophets prophesied his destruction, 1 King. 20.42.

That make good Laws, and are the first that break them themselves.

That do greatly multiply to themselves silver and gold, contrary to that,
Deuteronomy. 17.17. and their heart is lifted up above their brethren, verse. 20.

That are as Heifers, that are taught, and love to tread out the corn, Hos.
10.11.

That build up what they have destroyed, and destroy what they have built up.

That are not a terror to evil works, but to the good, contrary to that, Romans
13.3. that bear the sword in vain, contrary to that, verse. 4.

III. Amongst Husbands.
That do not love their Wives, but are bitter against them, Col 3.19.

That do not provide for them, Exodus 21.12.

That do deal treacherously with them, Mal. 2.15.

That love them more than Christ. Luke 14.26.

That follow their wicked counsel, Genesis 3.17.

That neigh after their neighbors wives, Jer. 5.8.

IV. Amongst Wives.
That do not love their Husbands, Tit. 2.4.

That will not submit unto them, Ephe. 5.22. Col. 3.18. Tit. 2.5.

That tempt them to sin, Genesis 3.6. Judge. 14.15. Job 2.9. 1 King. 11.3, 4.

That are Complotters with their Husbands in any wickedness, Acts 5.2.

That encourage them to any thing that is evil, 1 King. 21.5.

That despise them in their hearts, and scoff at them for their zeal in the
ways of God, 2 Samuel 6.20.

That loathe their Husbands, Ezekiel 16.45.

That cast their eyes upon others to lust after them, Genesis 39.7.

That take Strangers instead of their Husbands, Prove. 7.19.

V. Amongst Parents.
That honor their Sons above God, 1 Samuel 2.29.

That do not restrain them from their sinful courses, 1 Samuel 3.13. but suffer
them to have their own wills, Proverbs 29.15.

That do not chasten them betimes, Prove. 13.24.

That let their soul spare for their crying, Prove. 19.18.

That mis-place their affection upon the unworthiest of their Children, Genesis
25.28.

That provoke them to wrath, Ephesians 6.4. and discourage them by their harsh and
austere, and unnatural carriage toward them.

That lay up ill-gotten goods for them, Hab. 2.9, 10.

VI. Amongst Children.
That love Father and Mother more than Christ, Mat. 10.37.

That approve of their sins, and live in the practice of them, Psalm. 40.13.
Jerem. 7.18.

That prefer the Father before the Mother in their respects, or the Mother
before the Father, honoring one, and despising the other.

That honor them only in show and pretense, 2 Samuel 14.32. Mat. 21.28, 30. but
for their own ends, 2 Samuel 14.33. That set light by them, Ezekiel. 22.7.

That despise their instruction, Prove. 15.5. and their commands, Prove. 30.17.

That despise them when they grow old, Prove. 23.22.

That reproach them, Genesis 9.22, 25. 1 Samuel 15.3. and curse them, Prove. 30.11.
and give them froward and perverse answers, Genesis 34.29.

That conceit themselves wiser than their Parents, fitter to manage their place
than they, 2 Samuel 15.3.

That upbraid them with what they have done for them, Luke 15.28.

That envy the expressions of their Parents love to their other Brothers or
Sisters, Genesis 37.4. Luke 15.28, 29.

That think much to relieve their Parents in their wants, Mar. 7.10, 11, 12.
Jer. 22.13. Mal. 3.5. Col. 4.1.

That rob them, and waste their estates, Prove. 28.24.

VII. Amongst Masters.
That pinch them in their Diet, that defraud them of their Wages, Genesis 31.7.

That will not allow them time for Meditation, and prayer in secret, but call
them up early to their work, and as soon as they be out of their Beds set them
about it.

That do not instruct them in the Principles of Religion, that do not command
them to serve the Lord, Genesis 18.19.

That do not restrain them from profaning the Lords Day:

That covet their Neighbors Manservant, or his Maidservant, and entice them
away.

VIII. Amongst Servants.
That are not obedient to their Masters with fear and trembling, in singleness
of their heart as unto Christ, but serve them with eye-service, as
men-pleasers, not as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the
heart, with good will doing service as to the Lord, and not to men, Ephesians. 6.5,
6, 7. Col. 3.22, 23.

That can be content to be subject to Masters that be good and gentle, but
not to the froward; that cannot out of Conscience toward God endute grief,
suffering wrongfully; that cannot when they do well and suffer for it, take it
patiently. Contrary to that, 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20.

That being reproved, answer again, contrary to that, Tit. 2.9.

That purloyn, showing no good fidelity; contrary to that, verse. 10.

That are prodigal of their Masters time, but sparing of their own, will spend
little or none of that in the service of God.

IX. Amongst Buyers.
That dis-commend the Commodity before they have bought it, saying, It is
naught, it is naught; that they may get it at an undervalue, but when they are
gone their way then they boast, Prove. 20.14. glorying and applauding themselves
in the good bargain they have made.

That say in their hearts, and in their words too (it being their Principle)
Let the Seller look to himself, I Will buy as cheap as I can.

That do wish for their Neighbors goods, that they might have them, either
for nothing, or for half the worth, and if it could be so, would count it the
best Market that ever they made.

That get some to entice the Seller, bribing Servants, etc. that he may by
that means be the more easily persuaded to part with his commodity.

That take advantage of the Sellers ignorance, or necessity.

That swallow up the poor and needy, even to make the poor of the Land to
fail.

That borrow other men's money, and pay them out of extorted Purchases, gotten
by that money.

That do ingtosse Commodities, and fore-stall the Market.

That join house to house, that lay field to field till there be no place, that
they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth, Isa. 5.8.

That will out-bid another, purposely to get the bargain from him, before they
know his mind, whether he will not give the same price.

That buy stolen goods, or things which the Seller has no power to alienate.

That buy upon the Sabbath Day.

X. Amongst Sellers.
That over-commend their Commodities, saying, They are so good, or of such a
sort, that they gave so much for them, and were offered so much for them, when
their Consciences in the mean while tell them that they do but lie.

That raise up false reports, saying, that they are grown scarce, that there is
like to be War, etc. (which they know to be false) purposely to make them go
off the sooner.

That promise to use men kindly, and to sell cheaper than others (when they
intend no such matter) purposely to draw men in.

That invite men into their houses, and give them good entertainment, but
afterward set it down in the prizes of the Commodities that they buy.

That raise an ill report of their neighbor Tradesmen, to get off their
Customers.

That go to the Alehouses, and spend so much upon their Chapmen till they
make them drunk, that they may make a better bargain.

That make a great profession of Religion, that they may be the rather trusted.

That sell one thing for another.

That say, When will the New Moon be gone, that we may sell Corn? and the
Sabbath, that we may set forth Wheat, making the Ephah small, and the Shekle
great, and falsifying the balances by deceit? That we may buy the poor for
silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes; yea, and sell the refuse of the
Wheat? Amos 8.5, 6.

That sell unlawful Commodities, as Cards and Dice, Beauty spots, etc.

That ask double the price; that so they may abate.

That make this their Principle, Let the buyer look to himself.

That sell good Commodities at first, that they may put off bad afterward.

That sophisticate their Wares.

That keep false Accounts.

That keep all till a dear time.

That murmur when God sends a plentiful year, because they cannot sell so dear
as before.

That rejoice at the news of a Shipwreck, wherein some store of the Commodity
that they sell is cast away, because then that which they have will not lie
upon their hands, but go off at any rate.

That will allow no time for Family prayer, and reading of the Word, lest they
should lose some Customers in the mean while.

That will not keep up Family duties, for fear of displeasing such Customers as
do not affect religion.

If we set aside all these, how few will there be left that do in deed, and in
truth deny themselves, and consequently, how few that do come after Christ!

Obj. But must all these be set aside for such as do not deny themselves? Are
none such to be taken for Self-denying persons?

Answ. None such as do live in any of the forementioned Evils, either of
Omission or Commission, are to be taken for Self-denying persons. To live in
any one sin is inconsistent with Self-denial, for that consists in integrity
Vires on Numb. 14. Sermon. before the Parl.
of aversion from sin, and conversion to God, Quoad Assensum and conatum,
though it does not exclude all sin, yet it excludes all reigning sin; it will
not endure that a man should cast off some sins, and retain foam other in
deliciis; nor will it allow that one should plough here, and make a bawk there;
though one should do never so many things, with Herod, Mar. 6.20. yet if there
be but one thing lacking, as in the young man, Luke 18.22. such an one does not
truly deny himself in any thing, and though he abandon never so many evils,
yet if he continue in the allowed practice of but one known sin with Naaman, 2
King. 5.18. he does but deceive himself, his religion is in vain, Jam. 1.26.
As he does not come after Christ in the way of holiness, so he cannot come
after him to eternal happiness.

Obj. I but when all these are set aside, it may be those that are left,
namely. those that do in deed and in truth deny themselves, will for all that
be found to be the greater number.

Answ. No, for the Apostle tells us, that All seek their own, not the things
which are Jesus Christ's, Phil. 2.21. which I am sure is true of all Natural
men, and they are the greatest number even under the Gospel, for many are
called, but few are ^hosen, Mat. 20.16. therefore there are but few that do
deny themselves, and consequently but few that do come after Christ.

Obj. Well, suppose there are but few that do come after Christ, what follows
then?

Answ. Why then it follows

1 That the greatest part are Hypocrites, for to profess to come after Christ
(as all that call themselves Christians do) and in the mean while to seek
themselves, and not Christ, is to play the Hypocrites, and you know what is
their portion, Job 8.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. and Chap. 15.34. and Mat.
24.51.

2 That every one has cause to be jealous of himself, and to try what manner
of person he is. But of this beneath Sect. 2. Subsect. 2.

3 That there is great need of preaching and pressing this Doctrine of
Self-denial, and therefore I shall apply it secondly by way,

SECT. II. Of Exhortation.
TO all you who have not as yet begun to deny your selves, that you would now
begin to do it. You have yielded long enough, yea too long; the time past of
your life may suffice you to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when ye
walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine (Witchcraft, Hatred,
Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, Murders,
Gal. 5.20, 21.) Revellings, Banquetings, and abominable Idolatries, 1 Pet. 4.3.
Oh! for the Lord Jesus Christ his sake, for your own precious souls sake yield
no longer, though you have never in all your life denied your selves hitherto,
yet now take heart to do it; To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not
your hearts, Heb. 4.7. If you mean not to deny Christ, then deny your selves;
if you will not deny your selves, you must needs deny him, for he asks for
Self-denial. And who would deny Christ? Who in this Congregation can find in
his heart to deny the Lord Jesus? Do you not say he is your Lord, and your
King, your Savior, and your Redeemer? one that shed his most precious Blood
for you, and can you find in your heart to deny such an one? Nay if you would
not have Christ deny you, if you would not have him laugh at your calamity, and
mock when your fear comes, when your fear comes as a desolation, and your
destruction comes as a whirlwind, when distress and anguish comes upon you,
being ready to receive the dreadful Sentence of your eternal Condemnation
before his terrible Judgment Seat, if then you would not have him profess
unto you that he never knew you, nor say, Depart from me ye that work
iniquity, Matthew. 7.23. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels (Matthew. 25.41.) take heed that you deny
him not now, by not denying your selves. I have spoken already by way of
conviction to your judgments, I shall now speak by way of persuasion to your
affections; and oh! that by persuading I could persuade!

The Poets feign of Orpheus, a Musician of Thrace, that in playing of his
Harp, he was so skilful that he would stop the current of Rivers, tame wild
Beasts, and make Woods and Mountains follow after him. How happy should I think
my self if any thing that I shall say might be of that powerfully-moving
virtue, and efficacy upon the stocks and stones, and beasts in men's likeness,
that are before me, as (contrary to their Natures) to make them follow after
Jesus Christ! Could I say much more than I can, nay, could I say whatsoever can
be said by the tongues of men and Angels, to persuade you, it would be more
than needs, there being nothing that man naturally is more averse from, than
the practice of this duty.

Were I to persuade to Self-love, and Self-seeking, a word would suffice in any
Assembly, the motion would be as readily embraced as made; but to persuade men
against themselves, to persuade them to pluck out the right eye, to cut off the
right hand, and to crucify the old man with the lusts thereof; Hic labor hoc
opus est, this is the most difficult thing in the world; and therefore unless
the Lord, together with that which shall be spoken to the ear, be pleased to
speak effectually by his Spirit to the heart, I shall but sing to the deaf,
Cathedram habet in coelis qui corda docet. He has his Pulpit in Heaven that
teaches hearts. He has your hearts in his hand, and he can turn them as the
rivers of water, Prove. 21.1. It is hard to convince the judgment that it is a
duty, and harder to persuade the will to practice it; but in the day of his
power who can do whatsoever he will, Eccles. 3.14. Who works both to will
and to do, Phil. 2.13. Ye shall be both willing and able to perform it,
Psalm 110.3. in confidence of his assistance therefore I shall endeavor to
work your affections to a liking of this duty; you have heard in the
Demonstration of the Doctrine the necessity of it, and that were argument
enough (me thinks) to move you forthwith to begin, if you would but consider
it, Necessary things do not come under deliberation.

One that has a Gangrene in his Arm or Leg, does not deliberate (unless
he be a Madman) whether it be best to cut it off, for he knows that
otherwise it will perish his whole body, and therefore cries out, Ense
recidendum est, ne pars sincera trahatur. And this is that which our Savior
told his Disciples, Woe be to the World because of offenses, for it must needs
be that offenses come -- Wherefore if thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut
them off, and cast them from thee, it is better for thee to enter into life
halt and maimed, rather than having two hands, or two feet, to be cast into
everlasting fire. And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from
thee, it is better for thee to enter into life with one eye, rather then having
two eyes to be cast into Hellfire, Matthew. 18.8, 9. There is no remedy, but
either you must do the one, or suffer the other; either you must deny your
selves, or you must to Hell; for so he tells you, who knows what will become of
you in the other world. Now indeed, if you think it better to be in Hell to all
eternity hereafter, than to be in the Purgatory of Self-denial now for a time;
if you had rather undergo those everlasting Torments that are there, than
endure the pain and anguish of denying your selves here, then walk in the
sight of your eyes, and the way of your heart, do evil as you can, with both
hands greedily, till the measure of your iniquities be full; but if you think
you shall not be able to abide the gnawing of the worm that never dies, nor
the burning of the Fire that never goes out; Oh! then immediately resolve upon
the practice of Self-denial, for necessity is laid upon you, and woe be to you
if you deny not your selves; There remains nothing for you, but a certain
fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the
adversaries, Heb. 10.27. For we know him that has said, vengeance belongs
unto me, I will recompense says the Lord. And again, The Lord shall judge his
people. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, verse.
30, 31. For our God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. I shall add no more to
this, but that which I shall now insist upon as the maine thing to persuade
you, is, The excellency of Self-denial.

The more excellent any thing is, the more taking it is, every one would have
that which does excel; an excellent countenance, an excellent carriage, an
excellent speech, an excellent attire, etc. why now, if you would have that
which is most excellent, and that which will make you most excellent, here is
something for you, The most excellent duty of Self denial.

In the Church of Corinth they were very ambitious of Gifts; says the Apostle
to them, ye do well to covet Gifts, but yet I show you a more excellent way,
1 Cor. 12.31. and that is it which I shall now show unto you.

The way of Self-denial is the most excellent way, there is a manifold
excellency in Self-denial, as will appear in the particulars that follow.

SVBSECT. I. Motives to Self-denial from the excellency of it.
The first Excellency of Self-denial.
1 IT is a Christians strength and sufficiency; there is no greater evidence
and demonstration of strength than ability to deny ones self. A Self-denying
man is the strongest man in the world, Fortior est qui se, quam qui fortissima
vincit Moenia-which is the same with that of Solomon, (...) Graec. (...). Plut.
de ira cohib.
He that is slow to anger is better (because stronger) than the mighty, and
he that rules his spirit, than he that takes a City, Prove. 16.32. Strength
is especially seen in three things, in bearing great Burdens, in enduring great
Labors, and in overcoming great Enemies. A Christian while he denies himself
can do all these.

1 He can bear great Burdens; the more weight is laid upon him (as it is
(...). Sympos. l. 8.
said of the Date-tree) the more he rises up under it; he can take up his
Cross, and carry it with ease; he can undergo the greatest sufferings
without repining, without murmuring; under the heaviest affliction he can say
with Paul, Our light affliction -- 2 Cor. 4.17. The reason why affliction is so
burdensome is, because we are not enough humbled, there is some proud flesh
that cannot endure to be touched, let that be mortified, and affliction will
not offend. Compressisti a timore tuo superbiam meam, and mansuefecisti jugo
tuo cervicem meam, and nunc porto illud and leve est mihi, says Confess. l. 10.
c. 36.
Austin, Thou have taken down my pride (O Lord) and tamed me to thy yoke, and
now I carry it, and it is very light.

2 He can endure great Labors; he can walk and not faint, run, and not be
weary, Isa. 40.31. He is not weary in well-doing, Gal. 6.9. he never says of
any duty wherein he is exercised, as they, Mal. 1.14. Behold, what a weariness
is it! Gods Commandments are not grievous to him, 1 John 5.3. He is not
sloathful in business, but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, Romans 12.11. he
labors in the Word and Doctrine, if he be a Minister, 1 Timothy 5.17. and in
Prayer, Col. 4.12. gives himself continually to both, Acts 6.4. he continues
instant in prayer, though but a private Christian, Romans 12.12. Prays without
ceasing, 1 These. 5.17. three times a day with Daniel, Dan. 6.10. Seven times a
day with David, Psalm 119.164. he can wrestle in prayer with Jacob, Genesis 32.24.
pray in prayer with Elias, Jam. 5.17. offer up prayers and supplications with
strong crying and tears, as our Savior, Hebrews 5.7. He can meditate in the
Word day and night, Psalm. 1.2. Dig for knowledge as for hid treasures, Prove.
2.4. and Plough up his fallow ground, Jer. 4.3. in a word, he can do all
things, Phil. 4.13. his body sometimes tires, but his mind holds out to the
last, Mar. 14.36, 37.

3 He can overcome great Enemies; he goes on conquering, and to conquer;
nothing is able to stand before him.

1 He can overcome the World, 1 John 5.4. both the men, The Saints resisted
their enemies to death, by resisting their own corruptions first. Sibbs Souls
Conflict.
1 John 4.4. and the things of the world, 1 John 2.15. not only the good things
of the world, as pleasures, profits, and honors, ibid. v. 16. Act. 8.20. Phil.
3.8. but the evil things, as tribulation, distress, persecution, famine,
nakedness, peril, and the sword, Romans 8.35. In all these things (says Paul)
we are more than Conquerours (...) we do overcome, verse. 37.

2 He can overcome the Devil, 1 John 2.13, 14. who flees from him, Jam. 4.7.
falls down like lightning before him, Luke 10.18. and is bruised under his
feet, Romans 16.20.

3 He can overcome the Flesh, Gal. 5.24. that is, Self, the greatest enemy of
all, and Gentes facilius est Barbaras impatientesque alieni arbitrij regere,
quam animum suum continere and tradere sibi. Sen. de Benef. l. 3. nulla major
est Victoria, quam vitia domuisse; innumerabiles sunt qui urbes qui populos
habuere in potestate, paucissimi qui se. Quest. Not. l. 3.
hardest to be overcome. For,

1 All other enemies are without, but this is within him, Mat. 12.29.

2 All other enemies act against him in the strength of this; without this
enemy joining with them, All the hurt Satan and the World do us, is by
correspondency with our selves. Sibbs souls Conslict.
they can do nothing.

3 This is an enemy in the appearance of a Friend; Naturally he affects him as
his best friend, yet he can fight against him as his worst enemy, and in
fighting overcome him, and keep him under. O what a discovery of strength is
this! If we speak of strength, Lo! here is strength indeed, there is no
strength like to this. Natural strength is little worth, Psalm 90.10. and
strength to sin is no strength at all, it is but (...), strength falsely so
called, Posse malum non est posse, Evil is from a deficiency. Self is called
the strong man, but all his strength is from a Disease; As a man in a violent
Fever, he is stronger than at other times, but it is because Nature is
weaker. A selfish man is strong to do wickedly, but to do good he has no
ability at all; he sinks under every burden, tires, in every duty, is not able
to withstand any Temptation, but is taken Captive by the Devil at his will and
pleasure, 2 Timothy 2.26. Here then is the excellency of Self-denial, that it
inables a man to do that which no Natural man in the world can do; you
complain of weakness, how unable you are to bear Afflictions, to hold out in
performances, and to resist temptations; do but learn to deny your selves,
and you will have no longer cause to complain of weakness; get but a
Self-denying frame of spirit, and strength will not be wanting, you shall be
able to do all, to suffer all, to overcome all; nothing will be impossible to
you. And there is this further in it, that the more you do deny your selves,
the more you shall increase in strength; as the Old man grows weaker and
weaker, (as by continued Acts of Self-denial it does) so the New man grows
stronger and stronger, and therefore it may be truly said of all Self-denying
persons, (and it is only true of them) They go from strength to strength, till
they all appear before God in Heaven, Psa. 84.7.

The second Excellency of Self-denial.

2 It is a Christians beauty and perfection; Beauty is that which makes one
amiable and desirable, that which draws the (...) Quod nunc bonum significat,
per initia pulchrum designabat, quod dignum multa esset Spectatione. (...).
Scal. de subt. ad Cardanum, Fxerc. 300. S. 3.
eyes and hearts of the beholders after it; now there is nothing does this so
much as Self-denial. Self-denial makes one lovely in the sight of men, of
Saints, and of God himself.

1 In the sight of men; a Self-denying man is (as the Suctoraus.
Historian says of Titus the Roman Emperor) Delicia humani generis, the
delights of Mankind, the very darling of the World. Even Natural men have a
perceiving of the loveliness of Self-denial, so that although they cannot
affect a man for his Religion, which they do not understand, yet so sarre as
they discover any thing of Self-denial in him, as in matters of Justice, in
which they have some skill, they are wonderfully taken with him.

It is said of those Converts in the second of the Acts, that they continuing
daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking of Bread from house to house,
did eat their meat with gladness, and Simplicito de coeur. Fren.
singleness of heart, praising God, and having favor with all the people,
Act. 2.46. they were such as did walk uprightly, or (as it is elsewhere, 2 Cor.
1.12.) in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, pretending
one thing, and acting another for the carrying on of their own ends; but their
practices did exactly accord with those Principles of godliness which they did
profess, and this brought them into favor with all the people, and many
joined themselves to them daily, verse. 47.

2 In the sight of Saints. There are none that the hearts of Saints do more
run out upon, than those that are most eminent in Self-denial: My heart is
toward the Governors of Israel, that offered themselves willing among the
people, says Deborah, Judge. 5.9. That is, I do exceedingly Deodati in loc.
love them, because notwithstanding their peaceable Offices and Dignities, they
have been willing to partake in the labors and dangers of the War, against
the enemies of God and his people; somestayed at home, minding their own
business ( verse. 16, 17) and neglecting, the care of the Public, but these
laid aside all respect to their private concernments; and whereas others (it
may be) were pressed to the service, these were Voluntaries, and came of their
own accord, and for this it was that Deborah was so much affected toward
them; Oh! (says she) my heart is toward them, I see an amiablenesse, a
desireablenesse in them.

3 In the sight of God; this makes one amiable and desirable, not only in the
eyes of men, and of Saints, but of the great and glorious God himself, the
desire of his soul is to the beauty of Self-denial. By this very Argument the
Spouse is exhorted to deny her self, Psalm 45.10, 11. Hearken (O daughter) and
consider, and incline thine ear, forget also thine own peole, and thy fathers
house; here is Self-denial. Now, mark what follows, so shall the King greatly
desire (or covet) thy beauty; to note, that her Self-denial is her greatest
beauty, and that which renders her most pleasing and acceptable to her Husband.
Oh! what a Beauty is here, that pleases every eye that looks upon it, and how
transcendently excellent, that even ravisheth the eye of him that is Beauty it
self!

Three things (as Ad pulchritudinem tria requiruntur, Primo quidem integritas
sive perfectio. Quae enim diminuta sunt, hoc ipso turpia sunt, and debitae
proportio, sive consonantia, and iterum claritas. Vnde quae haebent colorem
nitidum, pulchra esse dicuntur. par. 1. q. 39.8. c.
Aquinas observes) are required to a perfect Beauty, Integritas, proportio
debita, and claritas.

First, Integrity, that there be all the parts, and nothing lacking to make up
the whole.

Secondly, Proportion, that there be a suitableness in the several parts one
to another.

Thirdly, Cleernesse, that they be all well-favoured; now see all these in
Self-denial.

1 Integrity; Self-denial lets every grace have its perfect work (for it is
only Self that hinders) and so a Christian comes to be perfect, entire, and
lacking in nothing, which is the Argument of the Apostle, whereby he exhorts
to patience, Let patience have its perfect work, that ye may be perfect and
entire, wanting nothing, Jam. 1.4. Self-denial carries a man forth after them,
perfection of every Grace in all the degrees and acts of it. A Self-denying man
will be adding faith to faith, till he come to have all faith; and love to
love, till he come to have all love; and patience to patience, till he come
to have all patience, Col. 1.11. and as he will be adding one degree and act
to another of the same grace, so of every other grace to that grace. He will
give all diligence to add to his faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to
knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness,
and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity, 2
Pet 1. 5, 6, 7. till he come to the fullness of the stature of a perfect man
in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 4.13. he aims at perfection in all parts and points
of Christianity, he has respect unto all the Commandments of God, with
David, Psalm. 119.6. not only the tithe of Mint and Cummin with the Pharisees,
but the (...), the weightier matters of the Law, which they neglected, Matthew.
23.23. He makes conscience to do all that God commands, and to do all that
God commands, and to leave all that God forbids; be endeavors to have a good
conscience in all things, Heb. 13.12. both toward God, Acts 23.1. and toward
men, Acts 24.16. he labors to be holy, as he that has called him is holy, in
all manner of conversation, (...), in every creek and turning of his
conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15. this is that that makes his conversation truly
lovely, and wonderfully wel-pleasing in the sight of God.

Therefore the Apostle prays on the behalf of the Colssians, That they might
walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work,
Col. 1.10. without this there is no beauty; as in the Natural body, when some
principal part, as an Eye, or an Arm, or Leg is wanting, therefore no beauty
in one that does not deny himself; for though he do never so many things, yet
still there is something lacking, as in the young man, Luke 19.21. being
weighed he is found wanting, Daniel 5.27.

Christ does not find his Works perfect before God, Revelations 3.2.
therefore he is not well-pleased with him; therefore though he love him, as
he did that young man, it is but with a common love, not that love that he
bears to a Saint, in whom is the beauty of Self-denial, who follows him fully,
as Caleb, Numbers 14.24. and fulfills all his wills, as David did, Acts
thirteen, twenty two. Besides this, there is

2 Proportion, which is Comeliness arises out of the fit proportion of diverse
members to make up one body, where every member has a beauty in its self, and
is likewise well suited to other parts. A fair face, end a crocked body; comely
upper parts, and the lower parts ancomely suit not well, because comeliness
stands in oneness, in a fit agreement of many paris to one; when there is the
head of a Man, and the body of a Beast, it is a monster in Nature. And is it
ont as monstrous to have an understanding head, and a fierce untamed heart?
Sibbs Souls Conflict. 139, 140.
another thing wherein beauty does consist, and is also in Self-denial; where
there is Self-denial, there is not only Integrity, but Symetry and proportion;
a comely proportion,

1 Of graces unto graces: A Self-denying man is one that has grace for grace,
(...), that is, grace answerable unto grace, and not only in Christ(as John
1.16.) but in himself also. He has knowledge answerable unto zeal, and zeal
answerable unto knowledge; love answerable unto faith, and faith answerable
unto love; godly sorrow answerable unto godly joy, and godly joy answerable
unto godly sorrow; for while grace is not hindered (as while Self is denied it
is not) it puts forth it self in all the powers and faculties of the soul
alike. As in the body, when there is no obstruction, the nourishment is equally
distributed to all the members, and the growth of one is answerable to the
growth of another. It is true indeed, that some, that are eminent in the
exercise of some particular Graces, are as defective in others; but the reason
is from the opposition of the corruptions contrary to those Graces, not so much
weakened as others are. If corruptions were alike mortified, Graces would be
alike exercised.

2 Of Actions unto Graces, If these things be in you, and abound, says the
Apostle (having spoken of adding several Graces one to another in the precedent
Verses) they make you that you shall neither be barren nor unfruitful, 2 Pet.
1.8. Self-denial will not suffer any grace to lie dead in the soul. A
Self-denying man lives up to the height of his Graces.

Obj. This no doubt has an exceeding great beauty in it, but God only sees it;
what proportion is in men's Actions unto their Graces, we cannot discern?

Ans. True, but there is another that you may discern; namely, the proportion,

3 Of Actions unto professed Principles. A Self-denying man lives up to his
Principles; he professes that Sin is the greatest Evil in the World, and he
lives answerable to this profession, by abstaining from all appearance of evil,
1 Thessalonians. 5.22. manifesting his hatred even of the garment spotted with the
flesh, Epi. Jude, v. 23. Again, he prosesseth that the glory of God is to be
preferred before all persons and things in the World, and he lives answerable
to this Principle, by for sakeing father and mother, brother and fister, Matthew.
10.37. houses and lands, and all that he has, Luke 14.33. when they come in
competition with it; he so lives, as if there no See Buroughs Mos. Choice. 315.
talking of any of the Principles of godliness, yet they might be found in his
life and conversation.

4 Of Actions unto Actions; many men in their preaching, and praying, and
conference, seem to be like Angels, but take them out of these duties, and
they are but as other men, nay far worse; do but observe them in their
dealings with men, and they will be found to be stark naught, and to have
nothing of the power of godliness in them, there is no suitableness in their
ordinary and common actons, to their actions in matters of Gods Worship. These
are the It is a shameful thing, for men that make profession of Religion, not
to be raised above Moralities; now when the men of the World that have skill
in this, shall see that godliness teaches men to be just, and that theirs is a
more acurate Justice then that which is in the World, this convinces men; but
when they shall see men talking so much of godliness and Church Discipline, and
yet when they come to deal with them, they are so cunning, and will fetch over
men as well as any, and men know not where to find them; these are burdensome
members to a Church that wrong Religion. Buroughs Mos. choice, 317.
blots and the reproaches of Christian Religion, which teaches men to make
conscience not only of the duties of the First Table, but of the Second also,
which a Self-denying man does, and is therefore the only cred it and glory of
it. A Self-denying man denies all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and lives not
only godly, but righteously and soberly in this present world, Tit. 2.12. he
acts in all things by the same rule in all places, in all companies; he is as
conscientious and acurate in his dealings with men, as in his dealings with
God; his life is spun out aequali stamine, with an even thread; there is no
incoherence, no inconsistency in any of his Actions, he is not zealous in some
duties, and lukewarm in others, but alike zealously affected in all. Let men
take him when they will, and where they will, he is still the same man, they
shall find no in-and out dealing by him. This is his beauty, this makes him
deservedly amiable in the eye of the world. There is one thing more required to
beauty, which is also to be seen in Self-denial, and that is

3 Cleernesse; Self-denial (as it is said of Wisdom, Eccles. 8.1.) makes the
face to shine, it wipes off all that soyls and dis-colours the brightness of
it. A Self-denying man is fair as the Moon, and clear as the Sun, Cant. 6.10.
he is filius lucis, a Child of Light, walking in light; his light shines
before men, so that they may see his good works, Matthew. 5.16. he holds forth
the virtues of him that has called him out of darkness into mavelous light.
Grace moves it self aright, and gives its Pulcher a (...). equidens velim a
(...) deducere, cum pulchritudo magnam partem coloris sit, a (...). Hinc Cicere
4. Tusc. Corporis quaedam opta figura membrorum, cum coloris quaedam suavitate,
dicitur pulchritude. Etiam pulcher cui (...). Beckman, de Origin. Lat. Ling.
color in him. He is purer than Snow, whiter than Milk, more ruddy than
Rubies, his polishing is of Sapphire; his face is as the face of an Angel, he is
altogether lovely.

The Third Excellency of Self-denial.
3 It is a Christians dignity and pre-eminence. Self-denial is that which
differenceth man from man, Saints from men This you have in that of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.3. For whereas there is among you envying and strife, and
divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men? Envying, and strife, and
divisions wheresoever they be, do speak abundance of selfishnesse, and if
these abound amongst Professors, they become like the men of the World, who are
not able to deny themselves in any thing either toward God, or man. A selfish
walking, is a walking after the manner of men, or (as the Apostle elsewhere
phraseth it) according to the course of this world, Ephesians. 2.2. it is
Self-denial that is the maine differencing Character of those that are Saints,
from those that are but mere men; this argues they have another spirit with
them (as it is said of Caleb, Numb. 14.24.) and this is their excellency.

The excellency of any man lies in his spirit, now of all men, a Self-denying
man has the most excellent spirit, a spirit so incomparably excellent above
others, that in regard thereof he hears in the Scriptures, the only excellent
upon earth, A man of understanding (says Solomon) is of an excellent spirit,
Prove. 17.27. Heb. is of a cool spirit, a cool spirit is a Self-denying spirit,
a spirit that burns not with the fire of Choler, (or as Solomon elsewhere
expresses it, Eccles. 7.9.) that is not hasty, to be angry upon every
provocation, such a spirit is an excellent spirit, as having something in it A
good man is wiser than himself, stronger than himself, holier than himself;
there is something in him mere than a man. Sibbs Souls conflict. 111.
above it self; something Supernatural and Divine, which no other spirit in the
world has besides.

The Fourth excellency of Self-denial.
4 It is a Christians glory and honor. Glory is the shining forth of
excellency, and Honor is the reflection of it. Now as there is nothing wherein
the excellency of a man's spirit does more shine forth than Self-denial, so
there is nothing that does more reflect it. A Self-denying man is the most
honorable man in the World; and not only in Gods eye, Isa. 43.4. but in the
eyes of men also. When he goes out to the gate through the City, when he
prepares his seat in the street; the young men see him and hide themselves, and
the aged arise and stand up; Princes refrain speaking, and lay their hands on
their month, the Nobles hold their peace, and their tongue cleaves to the roof
of their mouth; when the ear hears him, then it blesses him; when the eye sees
him it gives witness to him, because he delivers the poor that cry, and the
fatherless, and him that has none to help him; the blessing of him that is
ready to perish comes upon him, and he causes the widows heart to sing for
joy; he puts on righteousness and it cloatheth him, his judgment is as a Robe
and a Diadem. He is eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame; a father to the
poor, and the Cause which he knows not he searches out; and he breaks the
jaws of the wicked, and plucks the spoil out of his teeth. Unto him men give
ear and wait, and keep silence at his counsel. After his words they speak not
again, and his speech droppeth upon them; and they wait for him as for the
rain, and they open their mouth wide as for the latter rain. If he laugh on
them they believe it not, and the light of his countenance they cast not down.
He chooses out their way and sits chief, and dwells as a King in the Army, as
one that comfort the mourners, Job 29.7, 8, 9, etc. Many think the way to
Honor is to seek themselves, and to set up themselves above others; this is
from pride, the most foolish, and the most befooling lust that is. The way is,
to deny our selves, and to stoop to the meanest employment wherein God and our
generation may be any way served. Before honor (says the Wise man) is
humility, Prove. 15.23. those that honor God by denying their own honor, God
will be sure to honor, 1 Samuel 2.30. and so will men too.

When David had danced before the Arc, Michal the daughter of Saul said, How
glorious was the King of Israel to day, who uncovered himself to day in the
eyes of the handmaids of his servants, as one of the vain fellows shamelesly
uncovereth himself? To whom David thus replied, It was before the Lord, which
chose me before thy Father, and before all his house, to appoint me to be
Ruler over the people of the Lord over Istael; therefore will I play before the
Lord, and I will yet be more vile than thus, and will be base in mine own
sight; and of the maidservants which thou have spoken of, of them shall I be
had in honor, 1 Samuel 6.22. This is the way not only to have honor, but to
hold it, and which is more, to be upheld by it. Honor shall upheld the humble
in spirit, Prove. 29.23.

The Fifth excellency of Self-denial.
5 It is a Christians peace and tranquillity. None have more real comfort and
contentment in their spirits, than those who do most conscientiously deny
themselves; this must needs be an argument, a special argument of the
excellency of Self-denial. There is nothing that the heart of man is more set
upon than pleasure and contentment, and there is nothing that does more deter
men from this duty of Self-denial, than a fear that they shall not enjoy that
satisfactory pleasure and contentment in the practice of it, that they do for
the present, while they have their conver sation in the lusts of their flesh,
fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind (Ephesians. 2.3.) for the
accomplishment of their own base ends. And therefore it is of great concernment
for the making you in love with this duty, that you be thoroughly convinced of
the real joy and contentment, satisfaction and ease that is to be found in it,
it may happily sound as a Paradox, but there is a real truth in it, That the only
way for a man to enjoy himself, is to deny himself; then (wesay) a man enjoyes
himself, when he takes comfort and delight in all that he has, and all that he
does; a man destitute of comfort and contentment, that can take no delight in
any thing, we say of such a man, that he does not enjoy himself; why, in this
sense Self-denial gives a man the sweetest enjoyment of himself of any thing in
the world. In your patience (says our Savior) possess ye your souls, Luke
21.19. there is much Self-denial exercised in patience, now this is prescribed
as a means to keep possession of our Souls, exercise patience, and you will be
able to keep possession; What is that? why to keep your Souls in order, and
under your command, for then a man has the possession when all is in his
power, and at his disposal; it is not barely the being in his house, but the
having it in his own power, for a man may be a Prisoner in his own house; so
then, to possess our Souls, is to be able to keep the peace in them, to keep
them in such order that we can maintain a sweet calm, and quiet frame and
temper in them, that they be not turned out of doors by any boisterous and
unruly passions, and this is done by Self-denial, and cannot be done without
it.

A selfish man is besides himself, though he seek himself in every thing, yet
he does not find himself in any thing, he is dispossessed of himself, being
either carried away captive by his wandering desires after something that he
wants, or kept close prisoner by his cares and fears of something that he
has; he has no real peace at all within himself, no solid joy and contentment
in his life.

Obj. You will say, that cannot be so, for we observe that none do live more
merry lives, none are so jocund and merry as such men, and that it is not
possible the life of Self-denial should yield half so much pleasure and
contentment as theirs does?

Answ. I answer, what joy and pleasure, what peace and contentment soever they
have, it is no real joy, no real peace and contentment, as Solomon says, Prove.
14.13. Even in laughter the heart is heavy; so it is with many of them, even
in their revelling and roaring fits, when you would think they had sung away
care, and drunk away sorrow, there is heaviness at their heart, the guilt of
some sin as heavy as a Millstone upon their Conscience; they have many
heart-qualmes, though they put never so good a face upon the matter, the joy
and pleasure that they have, is but as the joy and pleasure of a man in a
dream, As when a hungry man dreameth, and behold he eats, but he awaketh
and his soul is empty; or, as when a thirsty man dreameth, and behold he
drinks, but he awaketh, and behold he is faint, and his soul has appetite,
Isa. 29.8. or as the joy and pleasure of a Madman, who has no rational ground
for his joy in any thing, it is but the working of imagination, and will
quickly end in real sorrow, as it is threatened, Isa. 50.11. Behold all ye that
kindle a fire, that compass your selves about with sparks, walk in the light
of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled, this shall ye have at
mine hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow,

Nothing will so furiously fly in the face of Conscience at the last, as the
horrid Sin of Self-seeking, though men will not see the aggravation of it now,
they shall see it then, and yet many have some glimpses of it in this life; and
this is the reason why they are so puzzled concerning their title to heaven and
happiness, and why their evidences are so litigious, and snarled, because of a
secret lurking of Selfishnesse as yet not thoroughly denied, and while it is
thus, it is impossible there should be any true peace in the soul; What peace
(said Jehu) so long as the Whoredoms of Jezabel remain? a King. 9.22. There
is no peace says my God to the wicked, Isa. 48.22. false Prophets may speak
peace, and a seduced heart, but God will not speak it, whose sole Prerogative
it is to speak and give it. The Wisdom from above is first pure, and then
peaceable, Jam. 3.17. there must be purity before there can be peace, the word
which is translated pure, signifies chaste, the Wisdom that is from above is
first chaste; now what is Self-denial but the chastity of the Soul, in keeping
its conjugal love for Jesus Christ? where this is, there is peace, peace is an
inseparable companion of Self-denial; Thou will keep him in perfect peace whose
mind is stayed on thee, Isa. 26.3. O the joy and peace that Self-denying men
have!

1 They have abundance of joy and peace in their acting for Christ, Great peace
have they which love thy Commandments, says David, Psalm. 119.156. and nothing
shall offend them.

2 They have abundance of joy and peace in suffering for Christ, I am filled
with comfort, I am exceeding joyful in all our tribulation, says Paul, 2 Cor.
7.4. I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in
persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake, 2 Cor. 12.10. Mr. Philpot Acts
and Mon. l. 10.1668.
in a Letter to the Lady Vane thus writes, The world wondreth how we can be
merry in such extreme misery, but our God is omniptent, which turns misery
into felicity; believe me, (dear Sister) there is no such joy in the world as
the people of Christ have under the Cross; I speak by experience, therefore
believe me, and fear nothing that the world can do unto you, for when they
imprison our bodies, they set our Souls at liberty with God; when they cast us
down, they lift us up; yea, when they kill us, they bring us to everlasting
life.

And in Ibid.
another Letter to the same Lady, I that am under the Cross with you (thanks
be to God therefore) have felt in the same more true joy and consolation, than
ever I did by any benefit that God has given me in my life before, for the
more the world hates us the nigher God is unto us, and there is no perfect joy
but in God, wherefore Christ said, In me ye shall have joy, but in the world
affliction; blessed be God which sends us this affliction, that we might
perfectly joy in him.

In 1669.
another Letter to the same Lady; We have more to be glad touching our selves
of this time, than we have had any time before, in the which we have so ready
a way to go unto God, and so good an occasion to show our duty in glorifying
his holy Name, for if we be imprisoned in this cause, we are blessed, if we
lose all that we have, we are blessed an hundred fold, if we dye we are
blessed eternally; so that in suffering of persecutions all is full of
blessings.

In 1670.
another Letter to the same Lady; O blessed are they that mourn in the world
to Godward, for they shall be eternally comforted. God make my stony heart to
mourn more than it does. I have so much joy of the reward that is prepared for
me, most wretched sinner. that though I be in a place of darkness and
mourning, yet I cannot lament, but both night and day am so joyful, as though I
were under no cross at all; yea in all the days of my life I was never so
merry; the Name of the Lord be praised therefore for ever and ever; and he
pardon mine unthankfulness. Our enemies do fret. and fume, and gnash their
teeth, to see and hear that we under this grievous affliction in the world,
can be so merry. We are of them counted as desperate persons, for the certain
hope and feeling which we have of our everlasting salvation; and it is no
marvel, for worldly men cannot perceive the things of God, they are mere
foolishness and an abomination to them. Be thankful unto our God mine own dear
helper, for his wondrous working in his chosen people. Pray instantly that this
joy be not taken from us, for it passes all the delights of this world. This
is the peace of God which surmounteth all understanding, this peace the more
his chosen be afflicted, the more they feel, and therefore cannot faint,
neither for fire, neither for water.

3 As they have abundance of joy and in their actings and sufferings for
Christ, so likewise in their enjoyments from Christ. There is no comfort in
Wife or Children, or Houses or Lands, till a man has denied himself in them.
Comfort does not arise from the mere enjoyment of these things, but from the
enjoyment of Christ in them; now till a man deny himself in them, he can have
no enjoyment of Christ in them, nor any evidence that they are sanctified to
him.

Saint James exhorts those that are rich to rejoice in this, that they are made
low, Jam. 1.10. to be poor in spirit, while one is rich in estate, is great
cause of joy indeed, we may rejoice in this; and now, do you need any help to
conceive of the excellency of Self-denial in this respect? Can you not easily
tell your own hearts, there is abundance of excellency in peace and
quietness? Any thing for a peaceable quiet life you say, Pacem te poscimus
omnes. You know what an excellency there is in Natural and Civil peace, there
is a far greater excellency in spiritual peace. This is a peace that passes
all understanding, Phil. 4.7. no man can fully understand what the happiness
of those is that do enjoy it.

Here then is the excellency of Self-denial, that though it break all peace
with Sin, and Carnal Friends as such, yet it preserves our peace with God, who
as he is the worst enemy, so he is the best Friend.

The Sixth Excellency of Self-denial.
6 It is a Christians safety and security; It secures him,

1 In time of temptation. So long as he denies himself, there is no temptation
can prevail against him. The Devil comes, but finds nothing in him, and
therefore goes as he comes, without doing him any hurt at all. He that is
born of God (says the Apostle) keeps himself ( i.e. by denying himself) and
that wicked one touches him not, 1 John 5.18. he touches him not, tactu
scil. corruptivo, with an infectious touch, so as to make any impression of his
Devilish nature upon him; he stands upon his guard ( il se guard seymesme
Fren.) and keeps off the Devil, so that he cannot reach him, much less fasten
upon him with any temptation. And the reason is evident, till a man yield, the
Devil cannot overcome him; all that he can do, is but to solicit, and
importune him, he cannot force him into any act of sin whether he will or no:
Whatsoever he effects in any temptation, is by consent had from sinful self
first, which by a resolute self-denial being withheld, his most devilish
enterprises come to nothing. Self-denial quenches all the fiery darts of the
devil.

2 In time of persecution. When destruction and misery do on every side
threaten him, yet even then, being in a way of Self-denial, he is safe, and
nothing can hurt him. He is sure to be preserved; Either so,

1 That no evil shall befall him, Psalm. 91.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
verses. Dan. 3.25,-27. Or if any do,

2 That it shall work for his good, Romans 8.28. Sometimes

1 For his temporal good, by advancing his outward condition, Genesis 41.40.
Always

2 For his spiritual good, by mortifying his corruptions, Is. 27.9. and
quickening his graces, Job 36.10.-15. And

3 For his eternal good, by increasing his glory, 2 Cor. 4.18. which shows that
he is safe from the greatest evil, and indeed that which only is to be
feared, namely, the suffering the wrath of God to all eternity in Hell. The
assurance whereof must needs deliver him from those souldistracting thoughts
and fears, which usually seize upon others, and bring them to their wits end,
when such dangers stare them in the face, as their ill-boding consciences tell
them, may at one stroke both kill them and damn them. And Justum and tenacem
propositi virum, non civium ardor prava jubentium, Non vultus instantis
Tyranni, Mente quatit solida; neque Auster, Dux inquieti turbidus Adriae, etc.
Si fractus illabatur orbis. Impavidum ferient ruinae. Horat.
therefore though the earth be removed, and the mountains be carried into the
midst of the Sea, though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the
mountains shake with the swelling thereof, he will not be afraid; though an
Host should encamp against him, his heart shall not fear; though war should
rise against him, yet in this he will be confident, being fully persuaded,

1 That the worst that can befall him (though never so painful to the body) is
but of a short continuance, Luke 22.53.

2 That in the mean time, he has the presence of God with him, to support him
under it, Isa. 43.2.

3 That if it kill him, it sends him home to his Fathers house, where he shall
never suffer more, but be everlastingly happy, Rev. 21.4. And

4 That his happiness there shall be so much the Majora certamina majora
sequuntur praemia. Tertu. Our light afflictions work for us, (...), a more than
hyperbolieal eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.
greater by how much the greater his misery was here, 2 Cor. 4.18. whereupon he
is ready not only to be bound, but to dye for the Name of the Lord Jesus,
whenever he is called to it, Act. 21.13. and therefore follows him fully with
Caleb, Numb. 14.24. and whither soever he goes with the hundred and forty and
four thousand, Rev. 14.4. which being the effect of Self-denial, upon the
assurance of safety that it gives him which nothing shall ever be able to
endanger; how abundantly does it speak the excellency of it!

The only thing men have in their thoughts in time of danger, when they are in
jeopardy every moment, and their lives do hang in doubt before them, is, how to
provide for their safety, and if there be any thing not impossible to be done
in order to their security, they will not stick to do it; but here is the
undoing of the most, they mistake the lesser danger for the greater, to avoid
the danger of suffering in their bodies for a while here, they run the hazard
of suffering both in body and soul to alleternity hereafter; the folly and
madness whereof would seriously be considered, for would we not so account
it, if any one to avoid the pain of a cure, should choose to dye of his wounds?
And is it not the greater madness, rather than endure to be opposed or
persecuted, for one to choose to be damned? This I say, would be seriously
considered. We forbear our duty many times lest such a man should become our
enemy; whereas by our forbearance, we make God our enemy. We are convinced it
is a duty, there is an express command of God for the practice of it, but such
an one is an enemy to it, and therefore in point of prudence we think it best
to forbear; but is it any prudence to make God our enemy? Will not this be
found to be a prudential foolery, and madness in the end? We would be out of
danger, but this is the way to bring our selves into the greatest danger of
all; for by this means, instead of falling into the hands of man, we are in
danger of falling into the hands of God; and as the Apostles says. It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10.31 for our God
is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. Let us not then fear them which kill the body,
but are not able to kill the soul, but rather let us fear him, which is able to
destroy both soul and body in Hell. Let us sanctify God in our hearts, and
make him our fear and our dread, carefully avoiding whatsoever is displeasing
in his sight, and Honzo time Deum, and mundum ridebis. Austin.
then we need not fear what men can do unto us. This is the sixth particular
to show the Excellency of Self-denial.

The seventh Excellency of Self-denial.
7 It is a Christians freedom and liberty. A self-denying man is the only free
man; as for others of what rank or order soever they be, they are all slaves.
There is not a selfish man in the world, but is in worse than Egyptian or
Turkish bondage, led captive by no better than the Devil; so the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.26. That they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil, who
are taken captive by him at his will. They think themselves the only free men
while they do as they please, walking in the way of their heart, and in the
sight of their eyes; but the truth is, they Those that think it their only
happiness to do what they will, that they might be free cross their own
desires, for this is the way to make them most perfect slaves. Sibs
Soul-Conflict.
are the veriest slaves, led up and down like so many brute beasts, that have
no dominion over their own actions. Ye know (says the Apostle) that ye were
Gentiles, carried away unto these dumb Idols, even as ye were led, 1 Cor.
12.2. yea they are carried unto their own destruction, not considering that it
is for their lives; as Solomon notes of him that follows the lewd woman, He
goes after her streightway, as an Ox goes to the slaughter, or as a fool to
the correction of the stocks, as a bird hastes to the snare, and knows not
that it is for his life, Prove. 7.22.23. In this condition were all self-denying
men, till such time as they could deny themselves (as Ephesians. 2.2. And you has
he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins, wherein in time past ye
walked according to the course of this world, according to the Prince of the
power of the air, who works in the children of disobedience, amongst whom
also we had all our conversation in time past) and this was their shame,
because while it was thus, they were the servants of sin, Romans 6.17. and of
corruption, 2 Pet. 2.19. and yielded their members servants to uncleanness, and
to iniquity unto iniquity, Romans 6.19. and all this while they were free from
righteousness, verse. 20. and this was their shame, verse. 21. What fruit had you
in those things whereof ye are now ashamed?

Sin is the most shameful evil, because it is the greatest debasing of
Excellency, and that for this reason, because it brings a man into the most
shameful vassallage and slavery of any thing in the world. All slavery is
shameful, but this the most shameful, because hereby the humane nature is most
abused, being used to a quite contrary end to that for which it was made. The
end of man is to glorify God, and to enjoy him for ever, in these two his
chief good does consist; but by sin neither of these are attainable, for as in
sin there is no conformity unto God, so there is no communion with him; and
therefore a sinner, as he does nothing for the glory of God, so he does nothing
for his own good, whatsoever he does while he sins, it is to his own hurt, and
the greatest hurt that a creature is capable of; because the more he sins, the
more he deprives himself of the chief good; because the more he sins, the more
he deprives himself of God. Now a selfish man, such an one as cannot deny
himself, cannot cease from sin, 2 Pet. 2.14. and therefore cannot cease from
doing himself mischief, therefore he works out his damnation, in every thing
that he does, destruction and misery are in all his ways; which shows that he
is in the most wretched and miserable bondage of any in the world.

It is nothing, that what he does, he does willingly, for the more willingly
any one acts to his own hurt, the more wretched and miserable he is, as when a
man cuts and wounds himself, as every selfish man does, the woeful effects
whereof, though for the present he does not feel, if free grace prevent not, he
will certainly rue to all eternity.

His heart is so set upon his sinful ways, that there is no turning him out of
them, neither promises on the one hand, nor threatenings on the other, are
sufficient to reclaim him. He feeds of ashes, a deceived heart has turned
him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my
right hand? Isa. 44.20. Though he be convinced in his conscience, as many times
he is, that the course he takes will be his ruin, yet he is so miserably
inthralled by his lusts, that he cannot give over. Though the Adulterer know,
that by means of a whorish woman, a man is brought to a piece of bread, and
that the Adulteress will hunt for the precious life, that she has cast down
many wounded, yea that many strong men have been slain by her, and that her
house is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death; though he know
that the dead be there, and that her guests are in the depths of hell, yet he
will not obey the voice of his teachers, nor incline his ear to them that
instruct him, to remove his way far from her, and not to come nigh the door of
her house, but after her he goes, he goes the way to her house in the
twylight, in the evening, in the black and dark night till strangers be filled
with his wealth, and his labors be in the house of a stranger, till a dart
strike through his liver, and his flesh and his body are consumed. Though the
Covetous man knows that when he dies, he shall carry nothing away, and that
his glory shall not descend after him, yet how does he labor to be rich!
rising up early, and sitting up late, and eating the bread of sorrows! though
he hear that Covetousness is Idolatry, and that the love of the world is enmity
against God, and how almost an impossible thing it is for a rich man to enter
into the Kingdom of heaven, though God himself say it, he will not believe it,
he is resolved to have something of the world, though he lose his soul for it,
and therefore will fawn and flatter, lie and dissemble, cousen and cheat, do
any thing, submit to any thing, so he may but get a penny by it. Who has woe?
who has sorrow? who has contentions? who has babbling? who has wounds
without cause? who has redness of the eyes? They that tarry long at the wine
(says Solomon) they that go to seek mixed wine, and yet the Drunkard will not
beware, he looks upon the wine when it is red, when it gives his color in
the cup, when it moves it self aright, though at the last it biteth like a
Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder. His eyes behold the strange woman, and his
heart utters perverse things; he is as he that lies down in the midst of the
Sea, or as he that lies upon the top of a Mast. They have stricken me (says
he) and I was not sick, they have beaten me, and I felt it not; when shall I
awake? I will seek it yet again.

How miserable is the condition of these men, that are made to serve in this
manner to their own destruction! and yet it is not by any outward force upon
them, only they are drawn away of their own lust and enticed. Some perceiving
they have of their own wretchedness, but alas! they cannot help themselves,
they can do nothing in order to their recovery. Though the most effectual means
be propounded, they have no heart to make use of them, they are fettered with
their lusts as with chains, and cannot move one step in the way that leads to
life.

Here then is the Excellency of Self-denial, that by means thereof, as nothing
can constrain us to do any thing that is for our hurt, so nothing can restrain
us from doing any thing that is for our good. So long as we deny our selves,
neither men nor devils can stop us in our way. The greatest hindrances in the
way to heaven are from within; if there be none from within, those from without
can do nothing. How should this make us in love with Self-denial! we prize our
civil liberty, why should we not prize our Haec est absoluta libertas, in
seipsum habere maximam potestatem; inaestimabile bonum est suum fieri. Sen. Ep.
75.
spiritual liberty as much? any why not much more? How happy do we think our
selves, when without any let or hindrance we can follow our earthly Callings,
and do what is of concernment to our well-being in this world? Would we not be
much more happy, if without any let or hindrance we could follow our heavenly
calling, and do what is of concernment to our well-being in the world to come?
This is no motive to such as think it their only liberty to sin, but to such as
prize their spiritual and eternal good, being convinced that by the free
exercising of themselves unto godliness, it is only attainable, it will be a
prevailing argument not only to begin, but to continue the strictest course of
Self-denial according to the precepts and practice of their Savior.

The eighth Excellency of Self-denial.
8 It is a Christians Sovereignty and Dominion; Christians are frequently in
Scripture styled Kings, and the reason is, chiefly from that Sovereign Power
and Dominion they have over themselves, their own lusts and passions, which
they obtain by Self-denial. For as in the Civil government of others, he has
the Royal power who has the Negative voice, whereby he can stop all
proceedings, so that nothing can be done but according to his liking; so it is
in the spiritual government of ones self. When a man by denying himself can
hinder the outbreaking of his corruptions, when by a peremptory No. he can
withstand the importunity of temptations, and keep in his spirit, that it stir
not one way or other, but according to the dictates of reason rightly informed
by the word, he may be truly said to reign. And he reigns not only over
himself, but the He is made full Lord of the four elements, and constituted
Emperor of the world. He is in the fire of choler, and not burned; in the
water of phlegm, and not drowned; in the aerie sanguine, and yet not blown away
with every blast of transient pleasure; he descends also into the sad earthy
Melancholy, and yet is not buried from the sight of his God. He stills the
raging of the sea, be clears up the lowering heavens, and with his breath blows
away the clouds. He sports with the beasts of the earth, the Lion licks his
band like a Spaniel, and the Serpent sleeps upon his lap and stings him not. He
plays with the Fowls of heaven, and the birds of the air sit singing on his
fist. All the Creation is before him, and be calls every one of them by their
proper names. See the second Lash of Alazonomastix. p. 183. and Mastix his
Letter. Sect. 11.
world also, for by this means he makes every thing become tributary, and work
for his good; not only that which he has, but that which he has not also,
not only that which is for him, but that which is against him too, so that he
has the most Sibi imperare maximum est imperium. Sen. Latius regnes avidum
domando Spiritum, quam si Libyam remotis -- Gadibus jungas, and uterque Poenus.
Horat. Car. l. 2. Od. 2. Serviat uni.
ample Dominion, the most noble Empire, the most glorious Monarchy of any in
the world.

As for others, they are so Kings, that they are also Refraenet prius
libidines, spernat voluptates, iracundiam teneat, coerceat avaritiam, ceteras
animi labes repellat; tum incipiat aliis imperare cum ipse insprobissim is
dominis, dedecori ac turpitudini, parere desierit. Dum his quidem obediet, non
modo Rex, sed liber habendus omnino non erit. Cic. Parad. Roctius appellabitur
Rex, quam Tarquinius, qui nec se, nec suos, regere potuit. Idem 111. De Finib.
slaves, for while they rule over other men's bodies and estates, they are
slaves to their own and other men's lusts, and therefore to speak properly, they
do not reign at all, being not able to rule their own spirits, nor to keep
under their own bodies, which every self-denying man does, and therefore is not
only the most glorious, but indeed the only true King, the consideration
whereof, I would offer unto those that are so ambitious of getting up into some
great place of honor and command amongst men as very proper and effectual for
the making them in love with Self-denial.

The Ninth Excellency of Self-denial.
9 It is a Christians gain and advantage. A self-denying man, if selfish men
might be judges, is the greatest loser in the world, but verily he is the
greatest A selfish man loses by his gains, but a Self-denying man gains by his
losses.
gainer, for though he part with all, it is for him that is All in All, it is
for the Pearl of price, Matthew. 13.44. for the Lord Jesus together with whom,
he has all things freely given to him, Romans 8.32. All things that pertain to
life and godliness, 2 Pet. 1.3. He is sometimes called to forsake father and
mother, brother and sister, yea even all that he has for Christ's sake, Luke
14.33. but he is no loser, for by so doing, he gains an hundred fold in
this world, and eternal life in the world to come, Matthew. 19.29. Behold I pray
you ( In a letter to certain godly Brethren. Act. and Mon. l. 10. 1666.
says Mr. Philpot) what he loses, who in this life receives an hundred for
one, with assurance of eteternal life? O happy exchange! Perchance your outward
man will say, If I were sure of this great recompense here, I could be glad to
forsake all, but where is this hundred fold in this life to be found? Yes
truly, for instead of worldly riches which thou do forsake, which are but
temporal, thou have found the everlasting riches of heaven, which be glory,
honor, and praise, both before God, Angels, and men; and for an earthly
habitation, thou have an eternal Mansion with Christ in heaven for even now,
thou art of the City and Household of the Saints with God. For worldly peace
which can last but a while, thou do possess the peace of God which passes
all understanding, and for the loss of a few friends thou art made a fellow of
the innumerable company of Heaven, and a perpetual friend of all those that
have dyed in the Lord from the beginning of the world. Is not this more than a
hundred fold? Is not the peace of God which we in this world have through the
faithful imitation of Christ (which the world cannot take from us) ten thousand
fold more than those things that most highly be esteemed in the world without
the peace of God? The peace of the world is no peace, but mere anguish, and a
gnawing fury of hell.

The tenth Excellency of Self-denial.
10 It is that which fits a man to do the greatest good. Self-denial is a
communicative grace, that which inables a man to give forth freely, that which
he has freely received. It makes a man a good Steward of the manifold grace
of God, 1 Pet. 4.10. To give a portion to seven, and also to eight, Eccles.
11.2. It is a Key that unlocks the heart, and unlocks the head, unlocks the
hand, and unlocks the house, and makes all things common, as there is occasion,
for the good of others, Act. 2.44. A Self-denying man, like Job, will not eat
his morsel alone, but invite others to partake with him, Job. 31.17. He is not
churlish, as Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.11. but courteous and liberal as Boaz, Ruth 2.8.
Self-denial will enable a man to love his neighbor as himself, not only him
that is his friend, but him also that is his enemy. It will enable him to bless
them that curse him, to do good to them that hate him, and to pray for them
that despightfully use him, and persecute him (as it is required, Matthew. 5.44.)
thereby approving himself to be the child of God, who makes his Sun to rise
on the evil, and on the good, and sends rain on the just, and on the unjust,
verse. 45. Self-denial suffers long, and is kind; Self-denial envieth not,
does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, but is of public and
general influence for common good; making a man willing to spend, and be spent
for the Church (and State) where he lives, though the more abundantly he love
them, the less he be loved of them, 2 Cor. 12.15. Oh what an excellency is
here! what an excellency does this put upon a man! Vir bonus, commune bonum,
and bonum quo communius, eo melius, A good man is a common good, and good the
more common, the more excellent it is. God delights to employ such persons in
the most honorable services, and usually does the greatest things by them, as
we may see in the story of Moses, Joshuah, and David. Saul sought himself,
therefore God removed him, and raised up David to be King in his stead, to
whom also, he gave testimony, and said, I have found David the Son of Jesse, a
man after mine own heart, which shall fulfill all my will, Act. 1.^ 22. But how
did he it? It is said, He served his generation, verse. 36. This is recorded
as David's excellency. The excellency of any thing is in the usefulness of it.
It is the excellency of the Angels, that they are (...), Heb. 1.14. and this is
the excellency of Saints that they are fitted for their Masters service, and
that which fits them for it, is Self-denial. If a man purge himself from these,
he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified and meet for the Masters use,
and prepared unto every good work, 2 Timothy 2.21.

The Eleventh Excellency of Self-denial.
11 It is the greatest preservative of union. Is there any excellency in Union?
Behold (says David) how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell
together in unity! It is like the Hac similitudine sen exemplo (...)
fragrantissimae, ^^avitas and uti litas pacis and concord^ae ostenditur.
precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, even Aarous
beard, that went down to the skirts of his garments Monet David hac
similitudine, jejunam ae sterilem, h. e. miseram fore hominum vitam, nisi
fraterno consensu foveatur. Moller. in loc.
As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the mountains of
Zion, Psalm. 133.1. why then there must needs be an excellency in Self-denial,
for there is no such preservative of union as Self-denial. It is a soddering,
uniting grace, it takes away all that divides and keeps at a distance. Several
Expedients have been thought on for the reconciling of the present differences
amongst Professors in these days, but certainly there is nothing like to
Self-denial for the effecting of it. If men could but deny themselves, there
would not be that causeless giving, and taking of offense as there is, the
only causes of all the Divisions that are amongst us.

You see what a manifold Excellency there is in Self-denial; Now to help you in
the practice of it, take these following Directions.

SUBSECT. II. Directions for the Practice of Self-denial.
The first Direction.
1 BE exact in the examination and trial of your own hearts and ways for the
finding out of the selfishness that is in them.

Self-trial is a duty necessarily requisite to the practice of Self-denial.
This is clear in that exhortation of the Prophet Jeremy, Lam. 3.40. Let us
search and try our ways, and turn unto the Lord. To turn unto the Lord, does
necessarily presuppose the denying of our selves; for there must first be a
turning from Self, before there can be a turning unto the Lord. Now that we
may do thus (says the Prophet) Let us search and try our ways; as if he had
said, It is a grievous affliction and calamity that is now upon us, and surely
it is not for nothing. We cannot expect that the Lord should turn unto us in a
way of mercy and blessing, unless we turn unto the Lord in a way of repentance
and obedience. Let us therefore consider our ways, if they be not the ways
of the Lord, that we now walk in, we must of necessity turn out of them before
we can turn unto the Lord, and this we cannot do, unless we search and try
them; for those that are out of their way, and yet think they are right, will
never turn back, but go on further and further, till they quite lose
themselves. It is evident then from this Scripture, how needful it is in order
to the practice of Self-denial, that we search and try our ways; And
certainly, if ever we mean to do any thing to purpose herein, we must make a
thorough search and scrutiny into our hearts and ways, an exact inquiry into
our principles, our rules, our ends, and aims in all our undertakings, we
must thoroughly sift our thoughts affections that we may see what bran of
selfishness lies at the bottom: For how can a man deny himself, that does not
understand any thing in himself that should be denied? The first step toward a
cure, is to find out the disease.

It would be very advantageous therefore, and that which would much conduce to
our success in this work, to have much in our thoughts these two things; The
possibility of being deceived, and the difficulty of the discovery: The one
would provoke us to jealousy, the other would quicken us to diligence.

1 The possibility of being deceived. We should enter upon the examination of
ourselves with such a supposition as this, 'There may be much more of Self in
me than I have ever yet taken notice of. It is good to have a holy jealousy
of our selves; this would make us very cautelous and wary in the trial of our
selves; as when a Magistrate meets with a suspicious person, it makes him
inquire the more narrowly into him, that so he may discover the better what
he is.

Object. But I have been of the opinion a long time that I have denied my self,
and have had much peace and comfort in it, why then should I suspect my self,
and thereby create new troubles in my conscience?

Answ. 1. When the strong man keeps the house all is in peace, Luke 11.21. So
long as Self bears rule, and there is nothing to disturb him, no wonder that
all is quiet.

2 Some that have thought so, have notwithstanding at the last found that they
were deceived, Matthew. 7.22.

3 It is more than probable, that thou art the man, because that thou art
unwilling to come to the trial, Joh. 3.20, 21.

4 Unless thou have very good grounds so to think of thy self, it is but a mere
fancy and imagination, Jer. 44.20.

5 The comfort that this gives, will quickly vanish, Eccles. 7.6. and leave the
greater anguish and vexation behind it, Isa. 50.11. But

6 Grant it be true, as thou say, yet let him that stands take heed lest
he fall, 1 Cor. 10.12. A self-doubting Christian will stand, when a self
confident one will fall.

Give me leave therefore to set before you a few instances out of the word,
the serious consideration whereof may provoke you to jealousy.

1 It is possible for a man to have a form of godliness, and yet to be
altogether under the power of Self, 2 Timothy 3.2.5. For men shall be lovers of
themselves having a (...) speciemant imaginem. Grot. L'apparerce. Fren. A
lively image, or face of godliness drawn to the life.
form of godliness. Self and the Form do very well agree, wheresoever they
meet, for though to live in the least sin, cannot consist with the power of
godliness, yet to live in the greatest, may consist with the form of godliness,
because there is nothing in the form to contradict self.

2 It is possible for a man to hear the Word, and to receive it with joy, and
yet not to have learnt in any respect truly to deny himself, as he that
received the seed into stony places, Mat. 13.20, 21. Herod heard John Baptist
gladly, (...), sweetly, Mar. 6.20 yet he could not deny himself, he kept his
Herodias still, and for her sake afterward beheaded him, verse. 27.

3 It is possible to be much conversant in the performance of the strictest
duties, and yet to have respect to the satisfying of some base self-end in all
that is done; as they, Isa. 58. of whom God says, They seek me daily, and
delight to know my ways, as a Nation that did righteousness, and for sook not
the Ordinance of their God, they ask of me the Ordinances of Justice, they
take delight in approaching to God, verse. 2. and yet he tells them, Behold in
the day of your East ye find pleasure, and exact all your labors! Behold you
fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness! verse. 3.4.

4 It is possible to desire and endeavor after spiritual gifts, and yet to
aim at nothing else but self-advancement in ones endeavors after them, as
Simon Magus, Act. 8.19.

5 It is possible to be a zealous preacher of Christ, and yet to preach only
out of envy and strife, and not of good will, Phil. 1.15, 16.

6 It is possible to pretend much to liberality, and to speak much on the
behalf of the poor, and yet be very covetous, as Judas, Joh. 12.6.

7 It is possible to be zealous and active in reformation, and the execution
of justice, and yet to do all to serve ones own turn, as Jehu, 2 King. 10.16.

8 It is possible to be zealous in reproving of others, and yet continue in
the same or worse evils at the very same time, as the Hypocrite, Matthew. 7.3, 4,
5. and the hypocritical Preacher, Romans 2.21.22.

9 It is possible to be very confident of cleaving unto Christ, and yet
afterward to deny him to save ones self, as Peter, who, when our Savior told
the Disciples that they should all be offended because of him, presently
returned this answer, Though all men shall be offended because of thee, yet
will I never be offended: and yet afterward he denied him thrice, and twice
with cursing and swearing, Matthew. 26.70.74.

Many more instances might be given, but these may suffice, to show how easily
we may be mistaken in our selves, and our actions, and therefore how needful
it is, to begin and to proceed in this work of self-trial with a godly
jealousy. More may possibly be discovered than at first we could have
imagined was in us, and yet when we have done all, much will lie hid. And
therefore there is another thing that should also be much in our thoughts, and
that is;

2 The difficulty of the discovery. The heart of man is deceitful above all
things, who can know it? Jer. 17.9. Two things there are which render it very
difficult, Self-conceit, and Self-love. Naturally we have a good opinion of
our selves; though we be black, we think our selves comely, and though it
be not so, we would fain have it to be so; and Quod volumus, facile
credimus, because we would have it so, we easily believe it is so. Therefore
others more commonly see more of Self in us, than we do our selves, specially
if they have an evil eye toward us, for enemies, though they be bad judges,
yet they are quick discerners, because in them that affection is lacking, which
in others blinds their eyes, that though they see, they cannot discern the
faults that be in their friends. There is a difficulty also in respect of the
thing it self, which is to be sought out, especially if the ways that we walk
in be good in themselves, such as are commanded, such as are commended in the
Word. There is something of Self will creep into the best actions, and there
are many secret Fibrae, many small sproutings forth of Self, which but to an
Eagle-eyed Christian are undiscernable. We must not therefore only look into
our own hearts, and into our own ways, but into the Looking-glass that God
has provided for this end, namely his word. This is no flattering-glass, but a
glass that will truly represent unto us not only the face and complexion of
our outward actions, but of the inward and secret workings of our hearts. And
this work of examination must be our daily work: Self-denial is a daily work,
and therefore we must try our selves daily. If we are to enterprise any
thing, it will be good to examine which way our hearts work beforehand, that
so we may not displease God, by pleasing of our selves, nor lose him by seeking
our selves. While we are in the action, let us carefully take notice of those
secret overtures and assaies, that Self will be ready to make toward some
sinister end, or other, that so when we come to the review; when the action is
ended, we may be able to say in this particular, namely that which tended
much to the glory of God, Self was very backward; in that particular; namely,
that which made for my own advantage, honor, or applause, Self was very
forward; Self would fain have been doing here, but there, it would have done
just nothing.

To help you in this Examination, put these Questions to your own Consciences:

1 Whether you can resolve before hand against satisfying your lusts (either by
doing any thing that is forbidden, or omitting any thing that is enjoined)
although for the present you have no opportunity for it or temptation to it. It
may be sometimes such a particular sin comes into your thoughts, which but at
such a time and place, etc. cannot be committed, both which for the present
are wanting, and you are much pressed in your spirit to resolve against it; Now
if you be loath to resolve against it, if you would still be at an
indifferency, if you be unwilling to come under an engagement, it is an ill
sign.

2 Whether you do effectually strive against every known sin, diligently making
use of all the means you know to be appointed by God for the subduing of it,
and carefully avoiding all the occasions that may possibly lead you to it; if
not, what may be the reason? It may be you are tempted to uncleanness, you
will pray against it, but you will not fast and pray, you will not keep under
your bodies, and bring them into subjection by temperance and hard labor, etc.
It may be you will deny to commit the act of Adultery, but not to look upon a
Maiden.

3 Whether you can deny your selves when you have an opportunity for the
satisfying of your lusts, when you have a fit season for self-seeking, and
compassing your own ends? Whether or no you can deny your selves.

1 In time of power and authority. Magistratus judicat virum, there is a great
deal of difference in some men from what they were before, when once they are
advanced into places of Power and Authority, because that is a fit season for a
selfish man to serve himself in; but a self-denying man is the same afterward,
that he was before. See 2 Samuel 6.14. Neh. 5. throughout.

2 In time of advantage gotten over enemies. See 1 Samuel 24.4, 5.

3 In time of great danger, when either sin or suffering must be chosen. See
Dan. 3.17, 18. Heb. 11.25.

4 In time of being in favor with great ones. God had brought Daniel into
favor and tender love with the Prince of the Eunuchs, yet he would not defile
himself with the Kings meat, at his request, Dan. 1.8, 9, 10. Heb. 11.25.

5 In time of great applause and honor. See Act. 14.14, 15.

6 In time of secrecy. See Genesis 39.11.

7 When your affections are eagerly set upon a thing. See 2 Samuel 23.16, 17.

8 When affronted and wronged and the passion is up, and you are bent upon
revenge. See 1 Samuel 25.32.

4 Whether you can be contented to be denied by others.

1 It may be in words you will undervalue your selves, but you cannot endure
that others should undervalue you.

2 It may be you will refuse places of honor, but not endure that others
should take the refusal.

5 Whether you can endure to hear others commended, and to see them advanced
without repining, not thinking it any reflection upon your selves.

6 Whether you can willingly and cheerfully be instrumental in honoring of
others, that seem to slight and contemn you.

7 When persons count you no thanks, but render evil for good, whether then you
can rejoice in the good that you have done for them, and cheerfully go on to do
them good, as before.

8 Whether you can be content to deny your selves when none can take notice of
it, as

1 When you be alone, or in a strange place.

2 When few do the same that you do, it being a duty not in fashion, etc.

9 Whether you can deny your selves when it comes to be your owncase. See 2 Samuel 12.5.

10 Whether you can deny your selves in little things, as meat, and drink, and
apparel, giving place to others, etc.

11 Whether you can deny your very Self-denial. See Luke 17.10. and 1 Cor. 4.4.

By questioning with your selves in this manner you may come to know what of
Self there is in you, which is the first thing that is to be done in order to
the practice of Self-denial.

The second Direction.
2 When upon Examination you have discovered in this or that particular, how
much you are acted by a self-interess, then enter into a serious and solemn
consideration of the horrible evil, and the exceeding sinfulness thereof.

I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies, says David,
Psalm. ^1 19.59. Though it be only expressed here, that David turned his feet
unto Gods testimonies, yet it is implied that he denied himself, this being a
necessary antecedent to it; but how came it to pass that he did so? why he
tells us in the former words; I thought upon my ways, I considered the evil
of them, and then turned out of them. He went on very confidently and
contentedly before, but it was because he did not consider whither he was
going, he did not ponder his paths; but as soon as he began to reflect upon
himself, and to consider where he was, and whither he was going, how he
dishonored God, and defiled his own soul in those ways, he presently makes a
stop, and turns about unto Gods testimonies. This is the reason why men go on
so long time together in a sinful course, why they walk in the way of their
heart, and the sight of their eyes, without any regret of conscience: It is
because they do not consider what they are doing, nor whither they are going,
like the young man, Prove. 7.22.23. that being enticed by the lewd woman, he
goes after her streightway, as an Ox goes to the slaughter, as a Bird
hastes to the snare, and knows not, i. e. considers not that it is for his
life. God notes this as the cause of his peoples rebelling against him, and
their continuance in their rebellion, Isa. 1.3. Israel does not know, my people
does not consider. Oh! if ever we mean in good earnest to deny our selves, and
to follow the Lord fully in the paths of righteousness and holiness, let us
every day steep our thoughts in a serious meditation of the exceeding
sinfulness of self-pleasing, and self-seeking, of making provision for the
flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. As a man will not come after Christ in
obedience to his call in the Gospel, till he apprehend it to be good, yea
absolutely best for him so to do; so he will not give a peremptory denial to
the requests and commands of Self, till he apprehend it to be evil, yea the
greatest evil in the world to yield unto them. Therefore whenever we
discover any thing of selfishness in any of our actions, that we are biased
in any particular by a selfish principle to the promoting of a selfish
interest, in opposition to the interest of Christ, let us not think on it
sseightly, but seriously, let our thoughts dwell upon it, debating and
discussing the matter in and out to the uttermost, considering the nature, the
causes, the effects, and aggravating circumstances of it.

I have shown you before the Excellency of Self-denial, now consider the evil
of selfishness.

1 As the Apostle says of the Love of money, 1 Timothy 6.10. so it may be truly
said of Self-love, that it is the root of all evil. This is the most breeding
sin, you may graft any wickedness upon this stock. See 2 Timothy 3.1. there the
Apostle brings in a black Catalogue of the vilest sinners, and he puts selfish
men in the front. In the last days (says he) perilous times shall come, for
men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, beasters, proud,
blasphemers disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection. This is a sin with an Imprimis, the Commander in chief in the black
Regiment of Lusts; It is the Devils Generalissimo.

See what a Hinc ficae, hinc venena, hinc falsa testamenta na scuntur; hinc
furta, hinc peculatus, expilationes, direptionesque sociorum and Civium; hinc
opum nimiarum potentiae non serendae; postremo etiam in liberis civitatibus
existunt regnandi cupiditates, quibus nihil nec ^e trius, nec saedius
excogitari potest. Cic.
number of Evils are wrapped up in this one Evil.

1 The Evil of Injustice. Justitia est suum cuique dare, Justice consists in
giving to every one his due, according to our Saviors rule, Matthew. 22.21.
Render unto Casar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are
Gods, and that of the Apostle, Romans 13.7. Render unto all their dues, tribute
to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to
whom honor. Now Self keeps back both from God and man that which is their due.
1 From God. Our souls are his, Ezekiel. 18.4. our bodies his, 1 Cor. 6.19. but
Self keeps back both from him, it imployes all the powers and faculties of both
as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin. 2 From men. Self is the cause of
all that unjust dealing, that defrauding and going beyond one another; of all
that extortion and oppression that is in the world. Self will not suffer the
proud man to give honor to whom honor is due, nor the covetous man to give
tribute to whom tribute is due; nor the envious man to give love to whom love
is due; nor the merciless man, mercy to whom mercy is due.

2 The Evil of Idolatry. A Selfish man is the man of sin, that exalts himself
above all that is called God; he makes himself his god, he falls down and
worships himself, making himself his ultimate end in every thing he does, and
walking by his own rule, etc.

3 The Evil of Unthankfulness. If he has any thing more than others, he
boasts as if he had not received it, if he has any thing less, he murmures
as if he had not his due.

4 The Evil of Unbeleef. Christ has said, Whosoever will save his life shall
loso it, and whosoever will lose his life for my sake, shall find it, Matthew.
16.25. And that it is better (for him) to enter into life halt or maimed,
rather than having two hands, or two feet, to be cast into everlasting fire,
Matthew. 18.8. but he will not believe it, and so makes Christ a liar.

5 The Evil of Unmercifulness. By seeking himself he loses himself, by
endeavoring to save himself, he destroys himself. This is the greatest
cruelty in the World. See Prove. 11.17.

6 There is much of the Devil in it: When Peter tempted our Savior to save
himself from the shameful death of the Cross, he said, Get thee behind me
Satan. He calls him Satan, not only because he tempted him, but because of
the sin to which he tempted him. All sin is the Devils, Vel per modum
imaginis, vel per modum servitutis, either by way of likeness, or service to
him, selfishness is so in both respects.

7 It is the great Makebate in the world, the great divider, it divides men
from God, and men one from another.

8 It is the only hindrance of men's closing with Christ. The young man could
not close with Christ, because he could not deny himself.

9 This causes God to reject all our services, Isa. 58.5.

10 It is a contradiction to our prayers. Latimer said of Peter, that when he
tempted Christ, he forgot his Pater noster, for that was, Thy Kingdom come,
Thy will be done.

By these, and such like considerations, the horrible Evil of Selfishness may
be discovered, which is the second thing to be done in order to the practice
of Self-denial.

The third Direction.
3 When upon serious consideration you have discovered the horrible Evil, and
exceeding sinfulness of your Selfishness, be much in the duty of Humiliation,
labor in the strength of Christ to affect your hearts with godly sorrow for it.

Without deep humiliation, the consideration of the Evil of Selfishness, will
be to little purpose. Turn ye to the Lord with weeping, says the Prophet,
Joel 2.12. It is promised, Jer. 50.4. In those days and at that time, says
the Lord, the children of Israel shall come, they, and the children of Judah
together, going, and weeping, or weeping as they go, and seek the Lord. If ye
will return unto the Lord in the practice of Self-denial, ye must go weeping
as ye go. Know this, that a thorough reformation of any evil, must have the
foundation of it laid in a deep humiliation. Many persons have attempted the
denial of themselves in some particulars, but because they have not been first
thoroughly humbled with the consideration of their sin in seeking themselves in
a sinful way, they have fallen off again to an eager and hungry prosecution of
their own ends, though in opposition to the interest of Christ, as much as ever
before.

The fourth Direction.
4 Lay the Axe to the root of the tree, endeavor as much as in you lies to
abate the strength of Original corruption.

It is but in vain to stand lopping off some particular branches, and let the
root alone, though you lop off never so many, it will bring forth as many more.

1 Consider the ^oot bears the branches, the branches do not bear the root,
Romans 11.18. that is, the root is the main support of the branches; so here. All
manner of actual sins are dependent upon the root sin. The root administers
strength, and sufficiency to all the branches; it is the only self-sufficient
sin. The branch cannot bring forth fruit of it self, Joh. 15.4. As the branch
has its being from the root, so likewise its fruit, therefore when once cut
off from the root, it withers; But though the branches wither, the root withers
not, but brings forth new branches, and new fruit in them. There is hope of a
tree if it be cut down (says Job) that it will sprout again, Job 14.8. There
is fear that this will sprout again. Nebuchadnezzar saw in a Vision, a goodly
Tree, concerning which one cried, Hew down the Tree, and cut off his branches,
shake off his leaves, and scatter his fruit; Nevertheless leave the stump of hu
roots in the earth with a hand of iron and brass, Dan. 4.14, 15. This Daniel
thus explains unto him, verse. 26. whereas they commanded to leave the stump of
the tree roots, thy Kingdom shall be sure unto thee; So though you hew down
the branches, yet if you leave the root, the Kingdom of Self will be sure for
ever.

2 Consider the root has as many branches under ground as above ground, Hos.
14.5. He shall cast forth his roots as Lebanon. Now in Lebanon there were very
goodly trees, and they cast forth their roots far and wide under ground. Thus
does original sin; It is a certain truth, that so much corruption as at any
time discovers it self in any of our actions, so much corruption there is in
our hearts. Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks; and out of
the heart proceed murders, adulteries, etc. says our Savior. The only way
then to abate the strength of sin in the branches, is to abate it in the root.

The Fifth Direction.
5 Single forth thy darling sin, thy peccatum in deliciis, thy Delilah-sin. In
a sense I may say (as the King of Syria to his Captains, when he joined battle
with the King of Israel) Fight neither with small nor great, save only with
the King, this King-sin, this Master-corruption. I fight, says the Apostle,
not as one beating the air, 1 Cor. 9.27. Unless ye fight against this sin,
ye do but beat the air.

Though the root bear all the branches, and send up sap into them, yet there
are some that partake of the root more than others, there are some that are
fruitful branches, there is a branch of corruption makes strong for it self;
This darling fin is a kind of root. Though all the branches be from the root,
yet one branch has many sprigs growing forth of it, which it does maintain, 1 Timothy 6.10. says the Apostle, The love of money is the root of all evil. If you
can deny this, you will be able to deny all the rest, therefore David's chief
care was to keep himself from this sin, I have kept my self from mine
iniquity, Psalm. 18.23.

The Sixth Direction.
6 Take heed of sinning against light, either by committing any known sin, or
omitting any known duty.

This may provoke the Lord to give you up to your lusts, and then it will be
impossible for you to deny your selves. See Romans 1.21.24.

The Seventh Direction.
7 Never parley with a temptation, either to the commission of any known sin,
or to the omission of any known duty.

1 Not to the commission of any known sin; I say any known sin, which you know
is either expressly, or by consequence forbidden in the word. For if you be
moved to the doing of any thing, which (for ought you can understand from the
word) is neither expressly, nor by consequence forbidden, and this thought
presently arise in your hearts that it is unlawful, and therefore may not be
done. Here a parley is not only lawful, but a duty; that is, before you lay a
restraint upon your selves (so as not to do it) out of a respect of
unlawfulness, you are to consider it, whether there be any such respect of
unlawfulness put upon it by any negative command of God; for neither we, nor
any other creatures either in heaven or earth, can make more sins than God has
made, nor may we out of conscience lay a restraint upon our selves, where God
has laid none.

Many persons have much wronged themselves in this particular, by laying a
conscientious restraint upon themselves from the doing of some actions, and the
enjoying of some things, which in their own nature are indifferent, and the
forbearance whereof is not absolutely necessary, nor (it may be) in respect of
their particular case, always expedient; and hence they have yielded to the
doing of such actions, and the enjoying of such things oftentimes with wavering
consciences, even before they have been fully convinced of the lawfulness of
them, so as to have done what they did out of faith.

Some (as it is ordinary amongst the Papists) think they may not lawfully eat
flesh, nor drink wine, though the necessity of their bodies be such, that they
cannot live without it, or that they may not lawfully eat above one meal a day,
and that a very spare one too, whereas their stomach calls for more. Now while
this opinion and conceit lasts, they dare not think it may be done, and yet
the appetite, and necessity of nature is such, that it often puts them upon the
use of these things notwithstanding, and then afterward conscience flies in
their face for self-pleasing, and hypocrisy, and they have gone up and down
disquieted and perplexed all their days. And there is this snare in it
likewise; It often puts men upon the commission of some things that are
expressly forbidden, and the use of some things absolutely unlawful. As amongst
the Papists, many that are in Orders (as they express it) think it unlawful to
marry; yet these, having not the gift of continency, fall often into the sin of
Fornication and Adultery; and hence again conscience is disquieted.

The case of such persons must needs be very wretched and miserable, which is
plainly implied by the Apostle in those words, Happy is the man that condemns
not himself in any thing which he allows, Romans 14.22. He cannot be happy,
whose conscience does accuse him for the doing of that, which he esteems as
lawful to be done; for this man is as it were rackt betwixt two opinions, of
the lawfulness and unlawfulness of what he does; he thinks he may not do it,
yet, that it is not unlawful in it self, and others do it, therefore he does
it; and while he is doing it, notwithstanding his opinion of the lawfulness of
it in the general, yet he condemns himself, his doing it in particular, and
makes himself worthy of condemnation too, in doing it before he be persuaded
out of the word of God, that he approves of it, though indeed he do, and
therefore it follows, verse. 23. And he that doubts, is damned if he eat,
because he eats not of faith, and what soever is not of faith, is sin; that
is, whatsoever is done by any one out of a wavering conscience, not fully
assured that the work he does is pleasing to God, as having warrant from his
word, to him it is sin.

Now as we are not to do any thing which we think is unlawful, while we
think it is unlawful; so we are not to forbear out of conscience of avoiding
sin, merely by the not doing of it, until we be assured that it is a sin to
do it, but search the mind of God in the Scripture concerning it, whether it
be a sin or not, and if not, we are not to forbear it under that notion; nay
though we should be enjoined by men to forbear such things as are lawful in
themselves, under this notion of unlawfulness, we are not to yield unto them.
Let no man judge you (says the Apostle) in meats and drinks, or in respect of
an holy day, Col. 2.16. and let no man beguile you of your reward in a
voluntary humility, verse. 18. as if he had said, Permit no man to usurp a
power of domineering over your consiences, and of judging them guilty in these
things, which now are not forbidden; and let no man take the prize which is
held forth unto you, by drawing you aside, under pretense of voluntary
humility, to those opinions and observances. The reason he subjoyns, verse. 20.
For you are dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, therefore you
ought not be subject to them. What rudiments and ordinances these were, he
shows in the following words. Touch not, Taste not, Handle not. These were the
doctrines and commands of superstitious men, and (you see) they were of
forbearance of those things which God had not forbidden, and therefore he
calls them, Ordidinances after the commandments and doctrines of men, verse.
22. and in the next verse, will worship, which (notwithstanding the show of
wisdom and humility that is in it, in neglecting the body, yet) has nothing
of either of them in truth and reality, and therefore not to be yielded to
upon any command of any man whatsoever.

This then (you see) is clear, that we are not to forbear in things lawful
(if we have occasion to use them) under pretense of avoiding sin, if God has
not forbidden the use of them; yet here this rule takes place, Till you know it
not to be a sin, do it not. For when any thing is questionable, it is good to
take the safest course, namely to forbear, it may be there is sin in doing it,
but I am sure there is none in forbearing, I will not run upon a hazard while
all is well.

But now to come to that which is mainly intended, If it be a known sin to
which you are moved, then do not Ea deliberanda omnino non sunt in quibus est
turpis ipsa deliberatio. Cic. Off. l. 11.1.
deliberate whether you may do it or not; for it is already supposed that you
know you may not, and now the case is clear, you may not do it, therefore do
not admit of aparley, but give a present denial. A remarkable instance for this
we have in the story of Joseph, Genesis 39.7, 8. And it came to pass after these
things, that his Masters wife cast her eyes upon Joseph, and she said, Lie
with me, but he refused, and said, How can I do this great wickedness, and
sin against God? Well, see how she follows him after this, and how he
persists in denying her, verse. 10. And it came to pass as she spoke unto
Joseph day by day, that he hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, or to be
with her, yet she gives not over, for verse. 11. when Joseph went into the
house to do his business, and there were none of the men of the house there
within, she caught him by his garment, saying, Lie with me; but he left his
garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out; he stays not to parley with
her, not so much as to reason with her against her lewd motion, because the
temptation came to such an height, it was more safe to fly from it than to
fight with it, and by this means he preserved his chastity. Nothing is better
in this case than a peremptory denial. When Abishai would have persuaded David
to have slain Shimei, he gave him a peremptory denial, saying, What have I to
do with you, ye Sons of Zerviah? So our Savior, when Peter tempted him to
save himself, he gave him a peremptory denial, Get thee behind me Satan.
There is but little hope of denying our selves when once we so far yield, as
to consult and parley in time of temptation. In any temptation, if Satan can
but obtain thus much, he has gotten half the victory. It is a sign a besieged
enemy will not long hold out, when once he yields to a Treaty. We see this in
Eve, the first that ever was tempted, and the first that ever was overcome by
temptation; Satan said unto her, Yea, has God said, ye shall not eat of
every tree of the Garden? If this was the beginning of his speech, it was very
abrupt, but some think the words do presuppose a precedent parley, wherein he
made his entrance into the matter in a more rhetorical manner. She should have
done as the deaf Adder that stops his ear, and will not hearken to the voice of
the Charmer, charm he never so wisely, Psalm. 58.4, 5. but she had a mind to
hear what Satan could say, and so ere she was aware, was persuaded by him to
taste the forbidden fruit. Thus Balaam after he had consulted with the
temptation, yields to curse the people of God, Numb. 22.22. he had a great
mind to the reward that was promised, and therefore consulted how far he
might yield. It is dangerous entertaining thoughts how far we may yield, where
we should not yield at all. While we think to yield but a little, we yield
altogether.

If you would therefore deny your selves, follow this Direction, Do not
deliberate in a case determined already by God himself. Cyprian being commanded
by the President to deliberate whether he would obey, or be killed? he made
answer, In re tam sanct a non est deliberandum, in a matter wherein the glory
of God is so much concerned, I may not deliberate. Take this course then, when
you are tempted to any thing that is sinful, chide away the temptation with an
angry denial, say, Get thee hence Satan. It is true Christ suffered himself to
be tempted again and again, three times following, before he put the Tempter
to flight; but this is not imitable by us, he had strength enough whereby to
overcome the temptation when he would, yet you see in the third temptation
(for our imitation) he said, Get thee hence Satan. If you give not a
peremptory denial at the first, you give the Devil some hopes of prevailing,
and you will never be rid of a temptation till you have done it. As for
example, A beggar comes to your door, and is importunate for something, you
tell him you have nothing for him, the times are hard with you, you cannot
serve every one that comes, with much more to this purpose; but all this will
not make him be gone, till you say peremptorily, let him stay never so long,
you will give him nothing, and then he goes his way. Why thus you must do with
Satan, which if you do, within a while he will leave you. Resist the Devil
(says the Apostle) and he will fly from you, Jam 4.7. The French have a
Proverb, When the Spaniard comes to parley of peace, then double bolt the door;
so when Satan comes to treat of sinning, bar up the doors, give him no
audience. He shoots in Satan's bow, that thinks by parlying with him to put him
off.

2 Not to the omission of any known duty; I say as in the former particular, a
known duty, that which you know is either expressly or by consequence commanded,
else you are not to do it upon any terms under that notion; for as we cannot
make that to be a sin which God has not made a sin; so we cannot make that
to be a duty, which God has not made a duty. Where there is no Law (says the
Apostle) there is no transgression; so where there is no Law, there is no
obedience. Whatsoever therefore we do as matter of obedience unto God, must
have a command from God, else it is will worship, and that is abominable.
Cultus non institutus non est acceptus, In vain do they worship me (says our
Savior) teaching for doctrine the commandments of men, Matthew. 15.9. God
threatens the ten Tribes, that they shall commit Whoredom, and shall not
increase, because (says he) they have left off to take heed to the Lord, Hos.
4.9, 10. that is (as some) in point of worship, that worship which they thought
was most suitable to their own politic ends, that worship they set up, but by
this they provoked the Lord. It is not enough if it be no where expressly
forbidden, if it be not commanded, we are not to do it. Though our ends and
aims be never so good, we may not do evil that the greatest good may come
thereof. Therefore when we are moved to do any thing under the notion of a
duty, and we are not fully persuaded out of the word that it is a duty, we not
only may, but ought to deliberate till we can certainly inform ourselves. And
yet, while we believe it to be a duty, and cannot by any means be convinced
to the contrary, though in reallity it be not so, yet we must do it, because
an erring conscience binds; for till we be fully convinced that we may and
ought to omit it, we cannot omit in faith, and if not in faith, we should
condemn our selves to omit it. But now on the contrary, If it be a duty, and
we know it to be a duty, if now we have a temptation to neglect it, we may
not parley with this temptation, but forthwith set upon the performance of it.
When thou saidest, seek ye my face, my heart said unto thee, Thy face Lord
will I seek, said David, Psalm. 27.8. I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy
Commandments, Psalm. 119.60. When it pleased God (says Paul) who separated me
from my mothers womb, and called me by his grace, to reveal his Son in me,
that I might preach him among the heathen, immediately I consnlted not with
flesh and blood, Gal. 1.16.17. By faith Abraham when he was called to go out
into a place, which he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyea, and
he went out, not knowing whither he went, Heb. 11.8. This is that which God
expects whenever he commands us any thing, that we should obey without
disputing, without reasoning, without answering again. It is the Devils policy
to gain time, to prevail with us to put off duties, for then he knows it is
more than probable that we will omit them. Some are always promising, but
seldom or never performing, semper victuri, always beginning to live, but
never live in good earnest. All will come to nothing, till we come to an
unchangeable resolution of doing our present duty.

The Eighth Direction.
8 Never go to the uttermost extent of your lawful Liberty. Virtus consistit in
medio, Virtue lies in the middle betwixt two extremes, there is a twofold
middle.

1 Of participation, when that in the middle partakes of both the extremes, as
lukewarm betwixt hot and cold, it partakes something of both, but this is not
the middle here meant; there is another, and that is,

2 Of abnegation, when that in the middle partakes of neither. This is the
middle here meant when we are neither in the defect, nor in the excess in the
use of our lawful liberty. We should sin, not to use things indifferent at
all, and so likewise to over use them. It is dangerous being in the extremes.
He that would not fall into the River, must not go too near the brink. He that
will go as far as he may go, is in danger to go further than he should go. If
we go one mile in the way of lawful, take heed we go not two in the way of
non-expedient. All things are lawful for me (says Paul) but all things are
not expedient, 1 Cor. 10.23. There are many things indifferent, and we may
lawsully use them, but we may sin in using them, if we observe not the rule of
expediency. This is the rule to be observed in the use of things lawful in
themselves. How much is expedient? so far we may go in the use of them, but no
further. It is not enough that the things be lawful in themselves, but are
they expedient? are they necessary? Here many persons foulely err, that care
for no more but to know that such things be lawful they will have them, they
will make use of them, though in the use of them they be scandalous. They
think because there is no hurt in them, they may take liberty to satisfy their
lusss in them. There is much danger in this, and the rather, because of the
pretense of liberty. It was the complaint of old, Licitis perimus omnes, many
sin exceedingly, and go to hell for sinning in the use of things lawful and
indifferent. Though the things be lawful in themselves, yet when men shall let
out their hearts inordinately upon them, and spend so much time in giving
themselves pleasure and contentment in them, that they indispose themselves for
the service of God, they sin exceedingly in the use of them. That which is said
of the Law, may be said of sports and pleasures, and other things that are
indifferent. The Law is good if a man use it lawfully, 1 Timothy 1.8. So these are
good if we use them lawfully. God has given us liberty to use them, but not
to use them as we please. Brethren (says the Apostle) ye have been called
unto liberty, only use not your liberty for an occasion to the flesh, Gal.
5.13. This then shows how necessary this Direction is in order to Self-denial.
We must not only abstain from those things that are absolutely unlawful, and
so deny our selves, but we must also watch over our selves in the use of those
things that are lawful, if we do not, the flesh, that is, Self, will take an
occasion thereby to carry us on to those things that are absolutely unlawful. A
man that is peremptorily bent to go to the uttermost bound, would go further if
he could, and oft-times by Gods permission he does, and then he is in
thraldom; for the end of our liberty, is the beginning of our bondage. Take
heed therefore you do not too much indulge your selves in the use of things
lawful. Let your moderation be known unto all men, the Lord is at hand. It is
lawful to marry, to rejoice, to use this world, etc. But this I say brethren,
the time is short. It remains that both they that have wives be as though
they had none, and they that weep as though they wept not, and they that
rejoice as though they rejoiced not, and they that buy as though they possessed
not, and they that use this world as not abusing it, 1 Cor. 7.29.

The Ninth Direction.
9 Take heed of being under the power of any thing. This was Paul's resolution,
All things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the power of any
thing, 1 Cor. 6.12.

Two sorts there be that are under the power of things indifferent.

1 Such as think they may not be without them, but are bound in conscience
always to make use of them, supposing that otherwise they should not stand
fast in their Christian liberty, and therefore will make use of them at all
times, and in all places, and companies, without any regard to the consciences
of their weak brethren, who are thereby offended.

2 Such as think they cannot be without them, but must needs have them, or
else they can take no comfort or contentment in their lives. There is a great
deal of difference betwixt these two, the former sort think they may not, and
so put a pretense of duty upon the use of them, these think they cannot, and so
make it a matter of necessity. It is a flattering kind of tyranny that under
pretense of necessity seizes on such men. It is true we are made under the
power of some things, Lege naturae, by the Law of nature, but there are other
things that we are under, Lege peccati and mortis, only by the Law of sin and
death. To eat, and drink, and cloth our selves, and now and then to recreate
our selves, etc. These are things the Law of nature binds us to, but that we
must have meat and drink of such several sorts, and clothing of such fashions,
or else we cannot enjoy our selves, this is not from the Law of nature, but
sin; It is only from our own lusts that we are under the power of these
things. And while we cannot deny our selves in these trifles, how do we think
we shall ever be able to deny our selves in things of greater concernment?
Self-denial must be universal, which cannot be, so long as we are under the
power of any thing indifferent. We may use them, but first we must endeavor
to bring them under our power. We are never fit to use any thing that we are
slaves to. We say of fire, That it is a good servant, but a bad Master; so we
may truly say of these things, they are good while they be our servants, but
bad when they become our Masters. This was one of the vanities that Solomon
observed, Eccles. 10.7. That servants did ride upon horses, and Princes walk
as servants upon the earth. To see beggarly rudiments, beggarly elements of
meats and drinks, etc. (as the Apostle calls them) be-jading Princelysouls,
this is not only vanity, but vexation of spirit to behold. These things were
made to be our servants, and we to be the servants of God only; but man
having revolted from his Creator, is become a subject, nay a slave to the
creatures. It was the curse upon Canaan, Genesis 9.25. A servant of servants shall
he be, and this curse they lie under that are servants to the creatures. This
is the vilest servitude that is, a man may be in other service, and yet
Christ's freeman, but so he cannot be in this; No man can serve two Masters,
as Christ himself has told us, Matthew. 6.24. We cannot serve God and Mammon.
The Church in the Revelation, is described to be clothed with the Sun, and
having the Moon under her feet, Rev. 12.1. The Moon is the emblem of all things
here below, and we should labor to be above them, above them in our love and
desire, our delight, and our conversation; this is to overcome the world, yea
to reign over it. Let us labor to be at an indifferency for the having, or
wanting of these things which perish with the using. I have learned in all
estates to be content (says Paul) I know how to be abased, and how to
abound, how to be full, and to be hungry, both to abound, and to suffer need.
Till we learn this, we shall never be able to deny our selves.

The Tenth Direction.
10 Keep under your bodies.

This was Paul's practice, 1 Cor. 9.27. So fight I, not as one that beats the
air, but I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection. Herein consists a
principal part of Self-denial. The Grace of the Gospel teaches us to deny all
ungodliness, and to live soberly, Tit. 2.11. that is, to moderate our appetite
after meats and drinks. The body must have its due, so much as will make it
serviceable to the soul, but not too much, for then it will not be in
subjection to the soul, but usurp an uncontrollable power over it. There is a
mutual sympathy betwixt the soul and the body, and the soul too often
sympathizeth with the body, and follows the temper of it, especially when it is
pampered, when it is stuffed with those things that provoke and stir up lust. A
man that is choleric is disposed to passion, another that is sanguine to
wantonness, another that is melancholic to discontent, etc. Every man if he
know himself will find, that in respect of the temper and constitution of his
body, he is more or less inclined to some peculiar kind of sin, or other. Now
in this case the way to deny ones self, is not only to work by spiritual
arguments upon the mind, but to endeavor to alter the temper of the body, by
withholding as much as may be whatsoever may feed that humor that is
predominant in it to the prejudice of the mind. Here then that advice of the
Apostle is good, Not to make provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts
thereof, Romans 13. ult. The body is the souls instrument, if it have according
to its lusts, it will be altogether unserviceable, and then though the soul
have never so much skill, it will accomplish nothing worthy of Self. If the
organ be out of tune, the Musician can make no melody. There is a
proportionable allowance of meats and exercise for the body, which (if it have)
render it more able to attend the soul, and serve it in its noblest operations,
but when this proportion is exceeded, it has the quite contrary effect. Beware
therefore of too much indulgence to the flesh, you will never be able to deny
the lusts of the mind, while you cannot deny the lusts of the flesh, and its
just with God that our souls should be in subjection to our bodies, when we
endeavor not to keep our bodies in subjection to our souls.

The Eleventh Direction.
11 Study your own nothingness.

It was a Precept much in use amongst the Stoics, one of those Sects of
Philosophers that ran-countred Paul at Athens, Act. 17.18. Vox merino adscripta
oraculis; and quae a Deo est, aut certum non sine Deo. Lepf. Physiolog.
Stoicer. l. 111. E coelo descendit (...), Juvenal.
(...), Know thy self; and certainly it is a Precept, that (if rightly
understood) is of great use amongst Christians, especially in this point of
Self-denial. A man will never thoroughly deny himself, till he thoroughly know
himself. As the reason why men seek God no more, is because they know him so
little; so this is the reason why they seek themselves so much, because they
know themselves so little. Men are apt to think themselves something, when
indeed they are nothing, Gal. 6.3. they forget themselves to be but men, they
remember not that they are but creatures; and hence it comes to pass, that they
set themselves in the place of God; that they set up their own wisdom against
Gods wisdom, their own will against Gods will, their own interest against Gods
interest, as if they were the only independent beings, the only
selfsufficient beings in the world, as if there were no Lord over them to whom
they must be accountable in any of their undertakings. This was the reason why
Pharaoh refused to let the Israelites go to serve the Lord in the wilderness,
because he thought there was no Lord above him, as youread, Exodus 5.2. And
Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice to let I srael go?
I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go. This was the reason of that
proud vaunting of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.30. Is not this great Babylon that I
have built, by the might of my power, and for the glory of my Majesty! It was
because he knew not that the most High rules in the Kingdom of men, and
gives it to whomsoever he will, verse. 25. This was the reason why Herod took
that blasphemous acclamation of the people to himself, Act. 12.22. This was the
reason why those lukewarm Laodiceans said, They were rich, and increased with
goods, and had need of nothing; they knew not that they were wretched and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, Rev. 3.17.

By all these instances it is more than evident, that while men continue
ignorant of their own nothingness, and because of that, do think of themselves
above what is meet, they will never deny themselves, they will never
acknowledge God the Creator as their last end, and so take him for their chief
good, nor God the Mediator as the only means to the enjoyment of it. Oh
therefore if you mean to do any thing in this duty of Self-denial, if you would
not content your selves only with the notion of this duty, but would willingly
be under the power of it, then begin this day, and continue hence-forward to
study what poor inconsiderable nothings you are. It was David's question while
he was musing on this Theme, Lord what is man that thou regardest him! or the
Son of man that thou think on him! Psalm. 144.3, 4. It is quaestio diminuens,
a diminishing question, and the answer therefore is, He is vanity, verse. 4.
for weakness he is a worm, for sinfulness a beast, for selfishness a Devil. Oh
it were well if we could resolve to study this question. We are apt to ask
this question of others in a way of scorn and contempt, when we hear such a
one named, we are ready to say, Why what is he? and when any thing affronts
us, What are you? Sure you do not understand your self, etc. Oh it were more
fit a great deal to retort this question upon our selves, and say, What am I,
and what is my fathers house, that I should take upon me in this manner as I
do! This is one of the most necessary points of Catechism, wherein we should
be instructed, this would be a good help to Self-denial, and indeed there is
much of Self-denial in it. Study therefore your own nothingness.

1 In point of being, you are nothing. Consider your selves in comparison of
God, and what are you? If the whole world be but as the drop of a bucket, and
the small dust of the balance (as the Prophet speaks) how inconsiderable a
part of that drop, and that dust are you? If all the Inhabitants of the earth
are reputed as nothing in his sight, as Nebuchadnezzar speaks, Dan. 4.35. how
inconsiderable a part of that nothing are you! Consider your selves absolutely,
and what are you? why once you were nothing, and now you are but one remove
from nothing, and you may quickly be reduced to nothing whenever God
pleases. Your beings are environed with nonentity, and border upon it, you do
but precariously subsist upon the first being, as the streams do upon the
fountain, and the beams upon the Sun. If God should withhold his conserving
influence, you would quickly return to your first nothing again, and be as if
you had never been, and wherein then are you to be esteemed?

2 In point of working, you can do nothing. Without me (says Christ) you can
do nothing, Joh. 15.6. As without God we are nothing, so without Christ we
can do nothing.

1 Not any thing at all. Acti agim^^, that we move being first moved by God,
is true as well in Naturals as in Spirituals. In him we live, move, and have
our being, Act. 17.28. Not only our esse, but our operari is dependent upon a
cause without our selves.

2 Not any thing that is good. As there is none that is good of himself but
God, so there is none that does good of himself besides God. There is none that
does good, no not one, Romans 3.12. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to
think a good thought (says the Apostle) but all our sufficiency is of God, 1
Cor. 3.5. All our ability (as of our selves) is to do evil. They are wise to
do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge, Jer. 4.22.

3 Not any good thing well. As when left to our selves we fail in the matter,
so likewise in the manner. We know not what to pray for as we ought, Romans
8.36. nor how to pray as we ought, Jam. 4.3. Ye have not, he cause ye ask
amiss.

3 In point of propriety you have nothing.

1 Your beings are not your own. Neither your souls, ( All souls are mine,
says God, Ezekiel. 18.4.) nor your bodies, 1 Cor. 6.19. What? know ye not that
your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you, he adds, and ye are
not your own. (1 You did not make your selves, God formed the body out of the
dust of the earth, and breathed in the soul.)

2 You did not redeem your selves, for you are bought with a price, therefore
says he, Glorify God in your body and your spirit, which are Gods; mark it,
Which are Gods, verse. 20.

2 Your estates are not your own. It is certain you brought nothing into the
world, and it is as certain you can carry nothing away. Naked came I into the
world, and naked must I return, says Job. When David had prepared in great
abundance for building of the Temple, he said, Lord of thine own have we
given thee, 1 Chronicles. 29.14.

4 In point of merit, you deserve nothing.

1 Not the least temporal mercy. I am not worthy of the least of all the
mercies, and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy servant, says
Jacob, Genesis 32.10. he speaks of temporal mercies. Ye do not deserve the least
crumb of bread; the least drop of water, the worst rag to cover your nakedness.

2 Not the least spiritual mercy. Not the least measure of grace, not the least
measure of comfort. It is not meet to cast the childrens bread unto dogs.

3 Not the least eternal mercy; Not the least degree of glory. The rich man in
Hell, could not have one drop of those Rivers of pleasures, Psalm. 16.11. If we
cannot deserve that which is temporal, much less can we deserve that which is
spiritual, least of all that which is eternal. When we have done all; though
we could do as much as all the Angels in heaven, yet in the conclusion we
must say, We are unprofitable servants, and we must cry Grace, Grace, unto
the salvation we are made partakers of.

These four things put together, show abundantly what silly sorry things we
are, and the serious consideration of any one of them would be enough, much
more of all together, to bring down those high and towering imaginations that
exalt themselves against God and Jesus Christ, and make you vile and base in
your own eyes.

This would teach you these three things; three special points of Self-denial.

1 Not to depend upon your selves, not to lean to your own wisdom, not to
follow the imaginations and counsel of your own hearts. When a man shall think
with himself in this manner, I am nothing, and I can do nothing; I cannot do
any thing of my self, not any thing that is good, not any good thing well,
either for body or soul, the result must needs be this, Why should I then go
out in my own strength? Why should I be self-confident in any thing that I am
about to do, as if I could compass it by my own strength, or my own policy?
There is abundance of Self in this. When men are called forth to act in any
private duty or public service, how apt are they to go out in their own
strength, and to act in confidence of their own parts and abilities; As Peter,
he would confess Christ, and stick close to him, come what would of it,
whosoever should forsake him, he would not flinch. Now to help against such
thoughts as these, what better than to act in the sight and sense of our own
nothingness? When we come to preach, or pray, or discourse, or administer
justice, or buy or sell, etc. to think thus, Lord of my self I can do nothing,
but mine eyes are wholly upon thee.

2 Not to ascribe unto your selves, this would enable you to say, Non nobis
Domine, Not unto us, Not unto us, O Lord, but to thy Name be the praise and
glory. There is abundance of Self in this, in arrogating and ascribing all, or
part to our selves, as if in some things we might thank our selves, and were
not beholding either to God or Christ. We are very prone if we have any
thing, or if we have done any thing that is praiseworthy, to take the glory of
it to our selves.

1 If we have any thing that has an excellency in it, we are apt to boast,
as if we had not received it; which fault the Apostle took notice of, and
sharply reprehended amongst the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4.7. If we have a fairer
face, a more comely body, a more elegant speech, etc. If we have a quicker
apprehension, a more acute judgment, a more faithful memory, etc. we are apt
to think, if not to boast, as if we had it from our selves, and were not
beholding for it to another. Now what an excellent means for the curing of this
pride and vainglory is the consideration of our own nothingness! that what we
are, we are by the grace of God; as the Apostle, By the grace of God I am that
I am; It is free Grace has made a difference, where there was none by nature.
The neglect of this makes us rob God of abundance of glory.

2 If we have done any thing that has an excellency in it, we are too much
taken with it.

1 We spend time in reflecting upon it in our own thoughts, in admiring our
selves for it, thinking how bravely we came off, and how every one admires us,
how every one praises us, etc. and scarce lift up one thought to God to bless
him. Thus Nebuchadnezzar reflected upon his building of Babylon; Is not this,
says he, great Babylon that I have built?

2 We would fain have others take notice of it, as Hezekiah after his sickness
would show his Treasures. Jehu would have his zeal observed, the Pharisees must
needs blow the Trumpet. We have a kind of longing that others should take
notice of that which we our selves do. If we know any thing, it does us no
good, unless some take notice that we are so knowing. There is an itching
desire in us to have every thing we do, made public. Hence are those frequent
stories of our selves, what we did, and what we said.

3 If others do commend us, we are tickled with delight in the hearing such
discourses, this is the reason of the old Proverb, Obsequium amices, etc.
flattery begets friends.

4 We are ready to enter into the lists of contention whenever any does but
question our worth in any particular, or deny it. Oh what chafing and fuming is
there, what arrogating expressions, what disdainful language, what odious
comparisons and reflections!

Now all this would be helped, could we walk in the sight and sense of our
own nothingness, then we should be as Peter, when he had restored the lame
man, Act. 2.12.

3 Not to seek our selves. Paul tells the Philippians that all men seek their
own things, and not the things of Christ, that is, all natural men. Naturally
there is such a disposition in us, that we would ingross all to our selves,
we would have all the praise, all the honor, all the profit and advantage to
our selves, and we cannot endure that any one should be above us, or before
us, that any ones interest should prevail besides our own. And what is the
reason, but that we have not learnt the lesson of our own nothingness? Were
we once nothing in our own eyes, we should be content to be nothing in the
eyes of others: Could we despise our selves, we should be content that
others should despise us. Were we but once sensible of our own unworthiness,
we should not take it ill that others have so much, and we so little, in all
estates we should be content.

See then how useful this Direction is in order to the practice of Self-denial;
many a one that is convinced of this duty, and has begun the practice of it,
is ready to say, I am fully persuaded that it is my duty to deny my self, and I
have made some trial of it, but yet I find nothing in the world more cross and
contrary to flesh and blood; I find I cannot do it. Oh! how hard is it to be
contented to do good, and not to be seen in it! I am neglected and slighted,
and I cannot bear it; men do not give me that honor and respect that is due,
and I cannot be without it. Oh! for any direction, any help to make this duty
easy and delightful to me! Why, this is the Direction that I have now given
you, this has been a tried Receipt, and never failed of a cure. When once you
are thoroughly sensible of your own nothingness, it will be easy to deny your
selves in all these particulars. If a great man come to you, one whom you
highly esteem and honor, you can hardly deny him, but if another come that is
of no worth, whom you do not value, you can deny him with ease, and make
nothing of it; so it is here, when once you come to see your own nothingness,
etc. And till it be thus, it will be very irksome and tedious, very hard and
difficult, if not impossible to deny your selves in any thing. You will have
such reasonings as these, What such an one as I? Shall I bear it, to be thus
crossed? thus affronted? thus abused? Is it fit that I should be thus dealt
with? but on the contrary, when you are nothing in your own eyes, you will say
as Mephibosheth in the like case, 2 Samuel 19.28, 30. That which will break a
proud man's heart, will not break an humble man's sleep.

The Twelfth Direction.
12 Study the nothingness of all worldly things.

This Direction is as necessary as the former; for our Savior has said,
Whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all that he has, cannot be my
Disciple, Luke 14.33. St. James tells us, That the friendship of the world is
enmity with God, Jam. 4.4. St. John, That if any man love the world, the love
of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2.15. he divides the world, and the things
of the world into these three, The lust of the flesh, The lust of the eye, And
the pride of life, verse. 16. viz. Pleasures, Profits, and Honors. These are
the three things that worldly men lust after. This is the worlds Trinity which
they worship for their god, and in which they place their summum bonum, their
chief good and happiness. Till men be thoroughly convinced of the nothingness
of this Idol, till they be able to say of this Idol in particular (as Paul
does of an Idol in general) We know that this Idol of the world, is nothing in
the world, they will never deny themselves, nor follow Christ fully. And the
reason is manifest, for while a man has such a conceit of the things of this
world (whether pleasures, profits, or honors) that they are the only good
things, the only necessary things, that he stands in need of, to live a
blessed and happy life, his affections will be so strongly carried forth after
them, if he have them not, that he will not be taken off from an inordinate
pursuit after them, and if he have them, he will by no means be persuaded to
relinquish them, nor ever leave off giving himself carnal contentment in the
use of them, for any of the great and glorious things offered him in the
Gospel, which he looks upon as imaginary notions only, having no truth or
reality at all in them.

1 Such a man will endeavor most after these things: Either he will wholly
neglect all Religion, or if he take up a profession, it is but for this end,
that he may thereby get these things.

1 He will wholly neglect Religion. See the Parable, Luke 14.18, 19, 20. Joh.
12.42.

2 If he take up a profession, it is that by this means he may get these
things, Act. 8.20, 21. See Joh. 6.26. Romans 16.18. Philip. 3.18. 2 Timothy 3.2.5.
So true is that, Job 8.11.

2 If he have these things, he will not relinquish them, either he will not
part with these things at all, or else but seemingly for a time.

1 He will not part with them at all, Luke 18.23. Act. 19.25. Joh. 5.44.

2 If he part with any of them, it is but for a time, Matthew. 13.20, 21, 22. 1 Timothy 5.11.2 Pet. 2.18.

It is necessary therefore in order to Self-denial that your affections be
taken off from these things, for which end you must be much in the study of
the nothingness of them, and that in these four particulars.

1 In point of discrimination. There is a difference indeed betwixt men and
men, but these things do neither make it, nor argue it.

1 They do not make a difference. They make a difference indeed before men,
Jam. 2.2, 3. yet not before the best of men, Psalm. 15.4, 16.3. Howsoever not
before God, Romans 2.11. Luke 16 23.

2 They do not argue it, Eccles. 9.1. Many think God loves them, because they
have a greater share of these things than others have, but these things are not
Gods Love Tokens, he gives them in greatest abundance to his enemies. The
Turkish Empire is but a crust given to dogs. Luth.

2 In point of reparation. These things are short of our losses. They can
neither recover what we have lost, nor recompense it.

1 They cannot recover what we have lost. Three things we have lost, which
these things can not regain.

1 The Image of God. Now these things contribute nothing to the regaining of
it. They do not make us good men, but rather worse, Ecceles. 5.13. Mat. 13.22.

2 The favor of God. These things cannot purchase it again. They cannot make
satisfaction to the justice of God, Psalm. 49.7, 8. 1 Pet. 1.18.

3 Communion with God. These things do not fit us for it, Jam. 2.5.

2 They cannot recompense the loss of any of these. Some things there are which
when we have lost, we cannot recover again, but yet we may get other things
instead of them, that will make amends, but the things of the world will not
make amends for the loss of any of these, Mat. 16.26. Can any thing make amends
for the loss of the chief good?

3 In point of satisfaction. They can neither satisfy our desires, nor our
expectations.

1 They cannot satisfy our Crescit amor nummi, quantum ipsa pecunia crescit.
desires, Eccles. 1.8. and 4.8.

2 Not our expectation. See Luke 12.20.

4 In point of security. They cannot deliver us either from temporal or eternal
evils.

1 Not from temporal evils. Not from contempt, Psalm. 107.40. Not from Non domus
aut fundus, non aeris acervus, etc.
sickness, Psalm. 49.9. Not from death, Luke 12.15.

2 Not from eternal, Prove. 11.4. Luke 16.24.

The serious consideration of these things would teach us, 1 Not to set our
affections upon them, Prove. 23.5. 2 Not to labor immoderately after them, Isa.
55.2. 3 Not to venture upon any sin for the obtaining of them, Act. 8.20. Heb.
11.25. 4 Not to omit any duty for fear of losing them, Dan. 6.10.


The Thirteenth Direction.
13 Have an eye continually to the recompense of reward.

This Direction I take from the example of Moses, recorded Heb. 11.24, 25, 26.
In the 24. verse, ye have his Self-denial, he refused to be called the Son
of Pharaohs daughter; and in the 25. verse. ye have the reason of it, He had
respect unto the recompense of reward; 1 You have what he did. 2 Why he did
it. First, What he did, He refused, (...), he denied, the same word that is
in the Text, he denied to be called the Son of Pharaohs daughter. Here is a
strange denial indeed, such a piece of Self-denial as a carnal heart cannot
sufficiently wonder at. May the wisdom of the world be judge in this case, it
will be censured as the grossest act of folly that ever any man in the world
could be guilty of; for Quis nisi mentis inops, who but one besides himself,
who but a mad man, that has not the use of his reason, and knows not what he
does, would refuse such an honor? Thus if Moses should be arraigned at the
tribunal of Carnal reason, he would be found guilty, and be condemned for
the veriest fool in the world. I, but to be sure Moses was no fool, he knew
what he did well enough, he had something else in his eye, which he knew
would abundantly recompense the loss of all that honor and pleasure which he
might have had, had he continued the Son of Pharaohs daughter. And therefore
he peremptorily refused that which with so much show of reason he was
importuned to accept, For he had respect unto the recompense of reward, which
is the second thing, why he did it.

Sometimes when a man refuses a good offer, and we come to hear of it, though
for a great while we very much wonder at it, yet at last we conclude, that
he would not have done it for nothing, but that there was something in the
matter that every one knows not of; that he had something in his eye which he
preferred before it; and so we may say of Moses here, he would not have
refused all this honor out of an humor, Moses had somewhat else in his eye;
and what was that? Why it was the recompense of reward, and the respect he had
unto that, quite took away all respect unto the honors and pleasures of
Pharaohs Court.

We see then that if we would deny our selves, it will be good for us to have
continually in our eye, the recompense of reward.

Two things there are to be opened in this Direction.

1 The Object. 2 The Act.
1 The Object, and that is the recompense of reward, (...) retributio mercedis.
Men are afraid of this duty of Self-denial, for fear they shall undo
themselves: I but no such fear, this is the way to make themselves. For he is
faithful that has said it, and he is able to make it good. He that will lose
his life shall find it. Whosoever denies himself for the Lord Jesus, in
obedience to his command, for his glory, he shall not lose his reward, there
is a reward promised, and it shall be a recompense, that is, such a reward as
shall abundantly make amends for all.

This recompense of reward is twofold.

1 The recompense of reward in this world. 2 The recompense of reward in the
world to come.
This distinction you have in Matthew. 19.29. Peter said unto Christ, verse 27.
Behold we have forsaken all, and followed thee, what shall we have therefore?
Christ answers, Every one that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters,
or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my Names sake, shall
receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life. In Mark 10.29. it
is more express, Verily I say unto you, there is no man that has left house or
brethren, etc. but he shall receive an hundred fold, now in this time, houses,
and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, and in the
world to come, eternal life. In Luke 18.30. it is, In this present time.

1 Then there is a recompense of reward for all that deny themselves in this
world, in this present time. They shall be so far from being losers, that they
shall be the greatest gainers, they shall have an hundred fold, houses,
brethren, etc. Let all the Merchants in the world say here, whether there be
any gain like to this; you count ten in the hundred a great matter, but here is
an hundred for one. What a rich return is here! for one pound here is an
hundred.

And this is according to the tenor of the Scripture all along. In the keeping
of thy Commandments there is great reward, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 19.11.
Behold the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth, says Solomon, Prove.
11.31. As for those that seek themselves in a sinful way, it is said of them
too, That they have their reward, Matthew. 6.2. I but that is far differing from
this. 1 That is rather of their own choosing, than Gods giving. 2 It is an
effect of common providence, it comes not to them by promise. 3 It is given in
wrath, not in love. 4 It is such as godly men are afraid of, Psalm. 17.14. 5 It
is only in this life, but this in the life to come also, so that it is but an
earnest-penny of a full payment hereafter.

Quest. But what have they?

Answ. Why consider, 1 They have many times a great increase of the same things
in specie, in which respect, the latter end of Job was better than his
beginning. 2 Though they have not the same things, yet they have all that
comfort, and contentment which those things would afford if they had them. 3
They have all this an hundred fold more than before, so that if they had an
hundred houses for one that they lost, etc. they could not have more comfort
and contentment than nowthey have.


2 There is a recompense of reward for them in the world to come, Luke 14.14.
Things present are yours (says the Apostle to the Corinthians) and things to
come also; and who can tell what those things are? We know what we are, says
St. John, but not what we shall be; Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has
it entered into the heart of man to conceive, what things God has prepared for
them that love him. Say what you will of them, you cannot say too much, they
are beyond our apprehensions, and therefore may well exceed our expressions.

Our Savior comprizeth all in these two words, Life Everlasting, in which
note, 1 The greatness of the reward, it is Life. 2 The continuance of it, it is
Everlasting.


1 The greatness of it, it is life, and what greater reward can be given to a
guilty prisoner than his life? of all things in the world there is none to be
compared to this, Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his
bodily life, but what is that to spiritual life? This is comprehensive. As by
death in the first Covenant all the evils written and not written are meant: So
by Life here, all good things whatsoever, that are needful to make the
soulfully and completely happy

1 It shall be a life of Perfection. There shall be the presence of all good,
and an absence of all evil. Grace shall be then in its triumph, and so shall
comfort too. Sorrow and sighing shall fly away.

2 A life of Glory, (...), 2 Cor. 4.17. Massy glory. The very body shall be
made like unto Christ's glorious body, Phil. 3.21. When Christ who is our life
shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory, Col. 3.4.

2 The continuance of it; it is Everlasting. Life without end. Therd is no
death, death dies at the beginning of this life. I am he that lives, and was
dead (says Christ) and behold I am alive for evermore, Rev. 1.18. And because
I live, ye shall live also, Joh. 14.19. We shall be for ever with the Lord.
For ever; Oh comfortable word! Were it not for this it would be but a small
recompense of reward, but this makes it infinite; and oh! an infinite reward
for a finite service! How is this Lord! Can we speak of this, and hear it
without wonder? By the consideration of this, those that are in heaven can
setch in all the comfort that they shall to all eternity enjoy, every moment.
Thus you see the Object. Now consider,

2 The Act, which is eying, or having respect to this recompense of reward.
Moses had the recompense of reward in A (...).
his eye. The Object affects not, but as it is apprehended, it will have no
influence upon our wills and affections to prevail to Self-denial, unless we
have it in our eye, unless we behold it. Two things then are herer equired.

1 To think upon it. To eye a thing is to have it in our thoughts. The
expression is figurative, and this is one thing meant by it, that we have it
much in our thoughts. I shall branch out this head into two particulars.

1 Think upon it solemnly and seriously. It is not a transient thought or two,
now and then occasionally that will do the deed, it must be a serious
thinking; we must think on it over and over, again and again; we must have it
continually running in our minds. Finally brethren (says Paul) whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, etc.
If there be any virtue, any praise, think on these things, Phil. 4.8. As we
are to think on our duty, so on our reward also. If there be any virtue, any
praise. We yield unto Self oftimes out of forgetfulness, not only out of
forgetfulness of the Precept, which tells us what we should do by way of
obedience, but also out of forgetfulness of the promise, which tells us what
we should expect, by way of recompense and reward. Not thinking of the end,
makes us go out of the way. The reason why men seek the things of this world so
much, is, because they miude earthly things; to this the Apostle opposes the
having our conversation in heaven, Phil. 3.21.

2 Think seriously upon it in time of temptation. This is a special season; Now
if ever, we should have heaven in our eye. Moses refused, having respect unto
the recompense of reward, whereby is intimated, that he had it in his eye at
that instant when he was tempted to yield. When any business of concernment is
proposed, before we determine any thing, we say, We will think upon it.

Now there are two things that wise men use to think on in such cases. 1 What
they shall get on the one hand: And secondly, What they may lose on the other,
and accordingly they resolve. Let us do so in this case, when we are tempted
to seek our selves in any base sinful way, let us consider, if we do this, we
may happily get a little pleasure that will last for a season, and yet that is a
question; I but if we deny our selves, and do it not, we shall have pleasure
that indures to all eternity; if we do it not, we may likely lose the favor
of men, some preferment, etc. I but if we do it, we shall surely lose the
favor of God, we shall be shut out of heaven.

The next thing here required is:

2 To aim at it as our end. When a man aims at a mark, he has it in his eye,
looks off from all other things, and fixes his eye upon that alone. This then
is another part of the Direction, Aim at the recompense of reward, that is,
make it your design, and the scope of all your actions that you may attain it.

1 This would make things of the world of small account with us.

1 The good things of the world, as pleasures, profits, and honors. See Heb.
11.9, 10-35. verse.

2 The evil things of the world. Christ for the joy that was set before him,
endured the Cross, and despised the shame, Heb. 12.2. Paul speaks of his
manifold sufferings, as but one light affliction, while he looked not at the
things that are seen, but at the things that are not seen, 2 Cor. 4.17.

2 This would turn the scales in any temptation. You know a man sets at naught
all things (whatsoever they be) that will not further him to the attaining of
his end, which his heart is set upon as his chief good; and therefore offer him
never so much, he will not regard it, if it make not for his end; and though
never so many difficulties way-lay him, he makes nothing of them, that so he
may attain his end. Thus it is with one whose heart is set upon the recompense
of reward, though the Devil come with temptations of pleasure or profit,
saying, All these will I give thee, yet he prevails not so, when with
afflictions, etc.

3 This would make us press forward with strength of resolution in our
Christian race, so that nothing should be able to turn us out of our way. See
Phil. 3.14. Come to one that is running a race, and tell him of such a merry
meeting, such a good bargain, etc. he will not hearken, there is no talking to
him; So it is with a Christian, that has nothing more in his thoughts than
that he may come to the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus.

The Fourteenth Direction.
14 Set faith a work, be much in the exercise of faith.

Faith has a mighty influence upon the soul to the inabling of it in the
practice of this duty of Self-denial. Read over the Eleventh of the Hebrews,
wherein you have a little book of Martyrs, containing the Acts and Monuments of
a number of Saints before Christ's coming in the flesh, all which by the
exercise of this grace of faith, overcame the world, the Devil, and Self, the
greatest enemy of all.

Quest. Wherein lies the power of faith to carry a man through this duty of
Self-denial?

Answ. 1. Faith does mightily convince a man that it is his duty to deny
himself. Till a man be convinced that it is his duty, he will never deny
himself, till he see that he is obliged, he will never make conscience of
it. This is the first thing wherein the power of faith is seen in inabling a
man to deny himself.

Now faith does this three ways.

1 It takes special notice of the command of Self-denial. As,

If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, Mat. 16.24.

Be not conformed to this world, but be ye transformed, Romans 12.2.

Be kindly affectioned one to another, with brotherly love, in honor
preferring one another, verse. 10.

Mind not high things, but condescend to men of low estate, verse. 16.

Be not wise in your own conceits, ibid.

Recompense to no man evil for evil, verse.

Let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to edification, Romans
15.2.

Let nothing be done through strife, or vainglory, but in low liness of
mind, let each esteem other better than themselves, Phil. 2.3.

Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of
others, verse. 4.

Whenever one is tempted (in any sinful way) to seek himself, faith (if it
be exercised) brings in some command or other to the contrary. Faith deals
much in the commands. As it carries the soul out of it self for subsistence, by
virtue of a promise, so it carries it above and beyond (nay contrary to) it
self in operation and working, by virtue of a precept. Faith is the principal
grace that brings the soul into obedience unto Christ in Gospelduties,
therefore the obedience of the Gospel, is called the obedience of faith, Romans
16.26. Now this it does, first by setting before the soul some command or
other, which must be considered of, before any thing be done one way or
other. But this is not all; Besides this,

2 It makes a full discovery of the true mind and meaning of it. It tells, not
only that there is a command, but what it is that is commanded. It discovers
not only in the general, that it is a duty, but also in particular, wherein it
lies. It is not enough that we have a command, but it must be rightly
interpreted. When men judge of a command by their own wisdom, they give no
other interpretation of it, than may accord with their own lusts, so making it
to speak as they would have it. And thus it is before faith, Men conceit they
can serve God and themselves too, God and Mammon well enough, whatsoever the
command says to the contrary notwithstanding. There seems Indeed to be some
contradiction, but they know how to reconcile it, by the fair and candid
construction that they make of it. And hence they will have to do with the
command as well as others, for though in one sense (they grant) it makes
against them, yet in another (which they put upon it) it makes nothing at all
against them, if it make not for them; so that they often plead that for their
justification, which is the only thing that condemns them. Saul interpreting
the command by carnal policy, qualifies it so, as might serve his own turn, and
therefore notwithstanding the command, he thinks he might do as he did; and
afterward stands upon it, that he had performed it, 1 Samuel 15.13-20. I, but
now, when faith comes, it gives the true sense of the Command, and will not
suffer carnal reason to be the Interpreter, but tells the soul, This is the
meaning and nothing else. And it silenceth all objections to the contrary, so
that the soul has nothing to say or plead against the Command in any of the
specialties of it, but that all is holy, just, and good, and must be obeyed.
Faith stops the mouth of carnal reason, and brings it to a nonplus. Faith
brings in the command with spiritual evidence and demonstration. Now a thing is
then demonstrated, when a man sees that it must needs be so, and cannot be
otherwise, when all objections are answered, and nothing left to create the
least shadow of doubt or scruple concerning it, but it presently vanishes
before the brightness of the appearance of the evidence of it. When this is
done, then

3 It mightily over-awes the conscience with the authority of it. When faith
has told, what it is, that is commanded, it then proceeds to tell who it is
that does command. It discovers the stamp of Divine authority, the image and
superscription of a Deity deeply impressed upon the command, and over-awes the
heart with that. It ushers in the command with a Thus says the Lord, and this
it sets,

1 Against our own wills, Thy Kingdom come, Thy will be done, is the voice of
faith in the soul, Not my will, but thine Lord. Faith tells the soul, It is fit
that God should have his will in every thing.

2 Against the wills of others, We ought to obey God rather than men, was
Peter's answer, Act. 5.29. If it be the will of God, no matter what it is, not
who be for it, or against it, faith will certainly put a man upon the practice
of it. Faith convinces the soul what an abominable evil it is, to refuse to
obey any of Gods commands, That rebellion is as the sin of Witchraft, and
stubbornness, as iniquity and Idolatry, 1 Samuel 15.23. by which means it
prevents all deliberation and consultation with flesh and blood, so that the
soul is fully resolved, presently to do its duty come what will of it. This it
does by convincing the soul of the Sovereignty of God over it, which is
necessary to Self-denial, for while a man thinks that he is sui juris, and
that there is no Lord over him, he will never deny himself, but serve himself
as his last and highest end in all that he does. This was the reason why they
spoke vanity every one with his neighbor, with flattering lips, and a double
heart, Psalm. 12.2. they said, Our lips are our own, who is Lord over us, verse
4. Now faith discovers the quite contrary, that there is a Lord over us, even
The most High God possessor of heaven and earth, Genesis 14.19. and that he has
an absolute Sovereignty and Dominion over us, to do with us what he pleases,
and to require of us what he will.

1 Jure creationis, by right of Creation, Psalm. 100.3. which though it be
knowable by reason, yet not so clearly, nor so convincingly as by faith, Heb.
11.3. But especially,

2 Jure redemptionis, by right of redemption, 1 Cor. 6.20. which we know only
by faith, and yet reason can make the inference from it, that therefore we
should not live to our selves, but to him by whom we live the second time. By
this means the soul sees Self-denial to be a duty as clear as the light.

Answ. 2. Faith does mightily convince a man of the danger if he do not d^^y
himself, and of the benefit if he do. It assures a man that if he seek
himself, it will not be for the better, but for the worse; and on the
contrary, that if he deny himself, it will be for the better, and not for the
worse. This is that which very much hinders men from venturing upon this duty
of Self-denial, they doubt whether it would not be better for them to seek
themselves, and worse, if they should do otherwise. Now faith puts it out of
doubt that it would not be better, but worse, if they should seek themselves,
and on the contrary, etc.

Faith does this two ways.

1 It mightily over-aws the soul with the terrible threatenings denounced
against Self seeking on the one hand.

2 It effectually persuades it with the precious promises made to Self-denial
on the other.

1 It mightily over-awes the soul with the terrible threatenings denounced
against Self-seeking on the one hand.

This it does two ways.

1 It brings to mind the many threatenings that are in the word denounced
against it, and fully convinces the soul of the truth of them: As

Whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father
which is in heaven, Mat. 10.33.

He that finds his life, shall lose it, verse. 39.

Whosoever will save his life, shall lose it, Matthew. 16.25.

Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words in this adulterous and
sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when be
comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy Angels, Mark. 8.38.

If ye live after the flesh ye shall dye, Romans 8.13.

If any man de file the temple of God, him shall God destroy, 1 Cor. 3.17.

He that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption, Gal. 6.8.

The fearful, and unbeleeving, and the abominable, and murderers, and
Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all liars shall have their part
in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death,
Rev. 21.8.

2 It makes a clear representation of the dreadful evils contained in these
threatenings, tells the soul what a woeful wretched case it should be in, if
ever these threatenings should be executed upon it.

By this means it works fear in the soul, and makes it tremble at the thoughts
of Self-seeking, which is a special means to keep us from it. By faith Noah
being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an Ark
to the saving of his house, Heb. 11.7. This it does by giving the soul a sight
of God in these threatenings.

1 As able to execute them, Who knows the power of thine anger? Even
according to thy fear, so is thy wrath, Psalm 90.11.

2 As resolved to execute them upon all such as resolvedly go on in a way of
self-seeking, Lest there should be among you man, or woman, or family, or
tribe, whose heart turns away from the Lord our God. Lest there should be
among you a root that bears gall and wormwood, and it come to pass when he
hears the words of this Curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I
shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine heart, to add
drunkeuness to thirst. The Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the
Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the Curses that
are written in this book shall lie upon him; -- And the Lord shall separate him
unto evil, out of all the Tribes of Israel according to all the Curses of the
Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.18, 19, 20.

2 It effectually persuades it with the precious promises made to Self-denial
on the other hand.

This it does likewise two ways.

1 It brings to mind the many promises that are in the word made unto it, and
fully convinces the soul of the truth of them. As

Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my
Father which is in heaven, Mat. 10.32.

He that loses his life for my sake shall find it, verse. 39.

Every one that has for saken houses, on brethren, or sisters, or fathers, or
mothers, or wife, or children, or lands for my sake, shall receive an hundred
fold, and shall inherit ever lasting life, Mat. 19.24.

If we be dead with him, we shall also live with him, if we suffer, we
shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.11, 12.

To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the Tree of life which is in the
midst of the Paradise of God, Rev. 2.7.

He that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second death, verse. 11.

To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, and will give
him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which us man knows,
saving he that receives it, verse. 17.

He that overcomes, and keeps my words unto the end, to him will I give
power over the Nations, and he shall rule them with a red of iron, verse. 26,
27. And I will give him the morning star, verse. 28.

He that overcomes, the same shall be clothed in white raiment, and I will
not blat out his name out of the book of life, but I will confess his name
before my Father, and before his Angels, Rev. 3.5.

Him that overcomes will I make a Pillar in the temple of my God, and he
shall go no more out, and I will write upon him the Name of my God, and the
name of the City of my God, which is New Jerusalem, which comes down out of
heaven from my God, and I will write upon him my new Name, verse. 12.

To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I
also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne, verse. 21.

2 It makes a clear representation of the great and glorious things contained
in these promises, and gives the soul assurance of them.

The Apostle tells us of faith, that it is the substance of things hoped for,
the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1.

1 The substance (or subsistence) of things hoped for, it gives them a
substantial being long before they be, as if they did already actually exist.
Hence the object of faith is present, that is, faith considers it as present.
Faith believes that God does answer before he answers. As God in answering,
sometimes prevents our asking, Isa. 65.24. Before they call, I will answer; so
when faith is exercised, it prevents Gods answering. Before the Lord gives, I
know I have it. Faith reallizeth the blessings promised, before they have a
being. When mercies are but in their principles, in their conception and birth,
when they are but in their cradle and swaddling bands, faith speaks as
gloriously of them as if they were fully acted and grown up before the eye. And
therefore it is,

2 The evidence (or demonstration) of things not seen, not only because it
apprehends them (which neither sense nor reason does) but because it apprehends
them (and discovers them unto the soul) as clothed upon with so much certainty
and reality. When a man can discern no ground of encouragement, either by sense
or reason, faith spies it presently. Now this has a mighty influence on the
soul to carry it on in a way of Self-denial. -- While we look not at the things
which are seen, but at things which are not seen, says Paul, We count our
sufferings but a light affliction, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18.

By this means it begets hope in the soul (as by the other fear) and this makes
one resolute to undertake any service, though never so difficult, and ready to
undergo any suffering, though never so dangerous, in obedience to the will of
God, for his glory.

This it does by giving the soul a sight of God in these promises.

1 As able, Abraham, staggered not at the promise of God through unbeleef, but
was strong in faith, giving glory to God, being fully persuaded that what he
had promised, he was able also to perform, Romans 4.20, 21.

2 As faithful, to accomplish them. Through faith also Sarah her self received
strength to conceive seed, and was delivered of a child when she was past
age, because she judged him faithful who had promised, Heb. 11.11.

Answ. 3. Faith sets a-work all other graces which are requisite to be
exercised in any one act of Self-denial, and secures them in their working.
This appears partly in the former particular (by what has been said of fear
and hope) but I shall speak more directly and fully unto it in this. There is
not any one act of Self-denial, but to the performance of it, there is required
the acting of several graces in their kind, so that if any one of these graces
should not be acted, there would be no acting of the rest, and consequently
no Self-denial, the act of Self-denial would be prevented. Now faith has a
mighty influence upon every grace to set it a work according to the nature and
quality of the duty that is to be performed, and to maintain it in its
working, so that it shall prevail. I will show this in these four particulars.

1 That to every act of Self-denial, is required the exercise of several graces.

2 That if any one of those which are required should be stopped and hindered in
its acting, there would be a stop of all the rest, and consequently no
Self-denial.

3 That faith has a mighty influence to set all of them a work.

4 That faith secures them in their working.

1 To every act of Self-denial there is required the exercise of several
particular graces, several graces must be exercised in the judgment, and in
the will, and in the affections. See an instance in Moses his Self-denial, Heb.
11.25, 26, 27. of grace exercised,

1 In his judgment, He esteemed the repreach of Christ greater riches than
the treasures of Egypt, verse. 26. (...), accounting or judging, or having
accounted or judged, etc.

2 In his will, he refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs daughter, verse.
24. and chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season, verse. 25.

3 In his affection, He forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the King,
verse. 27.

Some acts of Self-denial consists merely in the exercise of grace, others are
performed by the exercise of grace. These are the inward acts of Self-denial,
which are terminated within the mind, these are the external acts. To both are
required the acting of several graces. As grace is not single in its being, so
not in its working, as there is a connection of graces in the habit, so likewise
in the operation.

2 If any one of those which are required, should be stopped and hindered in its
acting, there would be a stop of all the rest, and consequently no
Self-denial. As there is a conjunction, so likewise there is a dependence of
the several graces one upon another, a conjunction in their being, and a
dependence in their working, so that if one be stopped, all the rest stop too.
As it is in a watch, if one wheel stop, all the wheels, when they come to the
motion of that wheel stop too. When there is required three or four particular
graces, to the making up of one and the same act of Self-denial, if any one of
them be wanting there is no Self-denial. As for example, If Moses had not
esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt, he
had not refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs daughter; if he had not had
courage to fortify him against the fear of the wrath of the King, he had
never left Egypt as he did. Thus you see the two first particulars cleared.
Now consider,

3 Faith has a mighty influence to set all of them a-work, as many as are
required in any one act of Self-denial. Faith is a working grace, but herein it
has the pre-eminence that it is the first grace that sets all the rest a-work.
Hence all the works of grace are said to be the works and fruits of faith, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. Faith (says St. James) if it have not works is dead, being alone,
that is, it is counterfeit faith, Jam. 2.17. therefore he shows that the esse
of faith, is seen in its operari, I will show thee my faith by my works, verse.
18. And he further confirms it by the instance of Abraham's faith, See thou
how faith wrought with his works, and by works was faith made perfect, verse.
21. Now lest any should think that these works spoken of, are the proper works
of faith, as such a particular grace (as every grace has its proper works) it
may easily be shown out of Scripture, that there is no good work that is not
the fruit of faith. As from that Heb. 11. Without faith it is impossible to
please God, by which the Apostle argues, that the works of Enoch were works of
faith, because they pleased God, verse. 5. God is pleased with good works, Col.
1.10. Now if there be any such without faith, God is pleased without faith.
Again, the Apostle says, The life that I now live, is by faith, but the life
that he then lived was the life of grace, the life of good works which he did
not live before, Gal. 2.20. so that the truth is evident. Faith is the Primum
mobile, as the spring-wheel in a Watch that sets all the rest a going, or as
the weight in a Clock. Austin says, Amor meus poudus meum, co feror quosunque
feror, My love is my weight, by that I am carried whithersoever I am carried;
But what is the weight that moves love? Why the Apostle tells us, That faith
works by love, Gal. 5.6. And as for other graces, you have instances enough
in Heb. 11. All the grace that Abraham and Moses, etc. exercised in those
eminent acts of Self-denial there recorded, was set a-work by faith. By faith
Abraham, etc. By faith Moses, etc.

Faith sets grace a work proportionably to the height of the act of Self-denial
that we are called to, it does not only stir up grace, and set it a working,
but it makes it work to such a height as is requisite to the greatness of the
present exigency. See a notable instance in Abraham, Romans 4.19, 20. And being
not weak in faith, he considered not his own body now dead, and he staggered
not at the promise through unbeleef, but was strong in faith giving glory to
God, and therefore against hope believed in hope, verse. 18.

4 Faith secures them in their working. I had fainted (says David) unless I
had believed, Psalm. 27.13. It is said of Moses, that through faith (...), he
endured, Heb. 11.27. Christ told Peter that Satan had desired to have him, but
that he had prayed that his faith might not fail, and therefore Satan could
not have him, Luke 22.32. Paul exhorts that above all things we should take
unto us the shield of faith, Ephesians. 6.16. he calls it a shield, because as the
shield does cover all the other parts of the Armor, so does faith all the
other graces. In 1 These. 5.8. he calls it a breast plate, because it secures
the heart, therefore he says, By faith we stand, 2 Cor. 1.24.

Answ. 4. Faith brings in the mighty power and strength of God to our
assistance, and therefore must needs be able to carry us through this duty of
Self-denial. Though of our selves, in our own strength, we can do nothing,
yet in the strength of God we may do it with ease. Now faith brings in
Auxiliary forces from heaven, engages the Almightiness of God with us. There
is a kind of Omnipotency in faith ( all things are possible to him that
believes, Mark. 9.23.) and this is the reason of it. It is said of Stephen,
Act 6.8. that he was full of faith and power. Where faith is, there is power,
even the mighty power of God -- the greatness of his power toward us who
believe, Ephesians. 1.19. It is said, 1 Pet. 1.5. that we are kept by the power of
God to salvation, but through faith, the power of God through faith. In Matthew.
9.22. Christ tells the woman that had an issue of blood, Thy faith has made
thee whole, why? it was the power of Christ that made her whole; I but it is
attributed to her faith, because her faith set the power of Christ a work for
that end.

Thus you see wherein the power of faith lies to carry a man through this duty
of Self-denial, and therefore what reason you have to make use of it in this
particular.

The Fifteenth Direction.
15 Keep in mind your former experiences.

1 The experiences which you have had of Self-seeking.

2 The experiences which you have had of Self-denial.

1 The experiences of Self-seeking, in these two particulars.

1 What experiences you have had of the evil of Self-seeking.

2 What experiences you have had of the ways and means whereby you have been
drawn to it.

1 The experiences of the evil of Self-seeking.

1 Of the evil of sin in it. 2 Of the evil of suffering by it.
First, What experiences you have had of the evil of sin in it. Before you
were exhorted to consider what evil of sin there is in it, here to remember
what evil of sin you have found in it by your own experience.

1 Has it not made you neglect many a duty? as praying, hearing, meditating,
etc.

2 Has it not made you venture upon many a sin? as lying, swearing,
defranding, etc.

3 Has it not often put you upon a course of sinning for a long time together?

4 Has it not made you profane the Ordinances of God? using them 1 As means
for compassing your base ends. 2 As cloaks for hiding them.


5 Has it not made you sometimes ashamed of Religion, so that you durst not
confess Christ openly, before a Christ-deriding world?

6 Has it not been the cause of your unfruitfulness, and unserviceableness in
the places where you have lived, so that few have been the better by you?

7 Has it not made you unfaithful to the trust that has been reposed in you;
so that you have been a staff of broken reed to those that have leaned on you?

8 Has it not hindered you from receiving much good from those, to whose
precepts you should have attended, and whose example you should have imitated?
It may be, if you have been in any measure observant as you should, you may
have found some, if not all of these evils; now whatsoever you have found, call
it to remembrance, and whatsoever you shall find, take special notice of it,
that you may never forget it.

Further, consider how this evil of Self-seeking in any, or all of these, or
any other particular evils, has at any time appeared to your consciences, as
exceeding and out of measure sinful; what strange apprehensions you have had of
the vileness and baseness of it, how loathsome it has been unto you, how you
have censured and condemned your selves for it, and resolved against it. This
would be a special means to prevent your relapsing for time to come. When we
have lost our apprehensions of the vileness and baseness of any sin, we are
then ready to return unto it again upon any new temptation; and we lose our
former apprehensions, when we are not careful to record them in our memories,
and frequently to recollect them. Keep in mind

Secondly, what experiences you have had of the evil of suffering by it, in
three particulars.

1 The frustration of your hopes. How often have you promised your selves great
matters, but have been deceived? Looked for gain, but have met with loss; for
honor, but have met with scorn and contempt.

2 The accomplishment of your fears. You have been afraid of poverty, of shame,
of reproach, and to avoid it have dissembled your profession, and yielded in a
base servile compliance with men of corrupt minds, but by this means it has
come upon you.

3 The vexation of your spirits. You have been allured in time of temptation
with the pleasure of such sins; but oh, what an evil and bitter thing have you
found it afterward! what an hell have you had in your consciences!

This likewise would be a special preservative, but men forget. A woman when
she is in travel has sorrow (says our Savior) but as soon as she is
delivered of the child, she remembers no more the anguish, for joy that a
man is born into the world, Joh. 16.21. When men have fallen by their iniquity,
oh then you shall hear them promise and vow great matters, if ever God spare
them, they will become new men, they will never do the like again, they will
be more wary for time to come; but within a while, when the fear of the
present danger is past, they will be venturing again. It happens to these
according to the Proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit again, 2 Pet,
2.22. When they are stomach-sick, they cast up their sweet morsels with
loathing and abomination, but they are no sooner well, but they lick them up
again. Oh therefore keep fresh in your memories what an evil and a bitter thing
you have sometimes found it, to seek your selves in a sinful way, that you may
tremble at the thoughts of doing the like for time to come as long as you live.
Keep in remembrance

2 The experiences you have had of the ways and means whereby you have been
drawn to it. We are not ignorant of Satan's devices (says the Apostle) 2 Cor.
2.11. but most times we are forgetful of them, which is the reason that we
are ensnared the second time. That which has prevailed with you to
self-seeking has been (it may be) either, 1 Some overweening thought of your
selves, or 2 An over-high conceit of the things of the world, or 3 Neglect of
watchfulness, or 4 Dallying with a temptation, or 5 Harkening to evil counsel,
or 6 Following evil example.


Well, what ever it is that you have found to have been at any time the cause
of it, keep it in remembrance; by this means you will be the better able to
shun it for time to come. A man that at such a place has missed his way, will
be sure to remember it against the next time, to avoid it. One that has been
deceived by a Cheat, will know him too well to trust him another time. We say,
well, I will know you again another time for this. So should we say, when we
have been deceived by this or that, to seek our selves. This is the way to have
skill to overcome a temptation, by this means we shall be able to espy the
snare at the first glance, and to perceive whither the temptation tends; for
Satan comes with fair shows and pretenses; a man that has not observed his
methods and wiles, is presently carried away as mistrusting nothing, but
another that has had experience, and taken notice of them, will always
suspect the worst, and therefore will be the more wary and circumspect. Be
mindful likewise of

2 The experiences you have had of Self-denial.

1 The experiences you have had of the good of Self-denial.

2 Of the means whereby you have been enabled to deny your selves.

First, what experiences you have had of the good of Self-denial.

1 Of the good that is in it. 2 Of the good that comes by it.
1 What experiences you have had of the good that is in it, as

1 Have you not found that the more you have denied your selves, the more you
have grown in grace?

2 Have you not found that the more you have denied your selves, the more
fruitful you have been in every good work?

3 Have you not found that Self-denial has made the strictest duties easy and
delightful?

4 Have you not found that the more you have denied your selves, the more
easily you have born the cross?

5 Have you not found that the more you have denied your selves, the more
serviceable and useful you have been in your places?

6 Have you not found that the more you have denied your selves, the more
freedom you have had from temptations, and the more strength to withstand them?

2 What experiences you have had of the good that comes by it?

1 Have you not found much peace of conscience? 2 Much boldness and assurance
in the presence of God? 3 Abundance of joy and comfort? In a word, 4 Have you
not had an hundred fold for all that you have at any time in a way of
Self-denial parted with for Christ?
This will be a good means to make you persevere and hold on in the practice
of this duty, when you can say you have learned by experience how good it is.
Laban you know was a Self-seeking person, now calling to mind what good (as
he judged) he had found in that way, he resolves to hold on in it still, and
therefore by this argument he endeavors to persuade Jacob to tarry with him,
that he might make the most of him, as he had done before. I pray thee (says
he) if I have found favor in thy eyes, tarry, for I have learned by
experience, that the Lord has blessed me for thy sake, Genesis 30.27. This was
the reason why those Idolaters were so peremptorily resolved to persist in
their Idolatry, to burn Incense to the Queen of heaven, and to pour out
drink offerings to her, Jer. 44.17. They told the Prophet they would do as they
had done, they and their Fathers, their Kings, and their Princes in the Cities
of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, for then they had plenty of
victuals, and were well, and saw no evil. Now if selfish men make use of their
experiences, that because they have prospered in an evil way, therefore they
will go on in it, much more should those that have begun to deny themselves.
And therefore the Apostle to prevent the Apostasy of the Hebrews, bids them
call to mind the former days wherein they had denied themselves, Heb. 10.32.
where though it be not expressly mentioned what good they had then found in the
way of Self denial, but only what they expected, yet it is implied, for though
the greatest part of their recompense was reserved till hereafter (and
therefore he does chiefly urge them with the respect they had had to that, as
the main thing whereby they were induced to deny themselves as they did, which
he exhorts them still to continue, as being the strongest argument to prevail
with them to persevere) yet they had something in hand, seeing the reward of
Self-denial is not only in the world to come, but in this world also, as was
shown before. This would be a good means also to prevail with us to renew our
practice of this duty after any backsliding. Then shall she say, I will go
and return to my first husband, for then it was better with me than now, Hosea
2.7.

Secondly, What experiences you have had of the means, whereby you have been
enabled to deny your selves.

You have heard of a great many helps and directions, and it may be you have
found many of them true by experience, that when a temptation has been upon
you, you were almost gone, your feet had well nigh slipped; but then when you
were ready to yield, the serious consideration of the evil of Self-seeking kept
you back; or such a command, such a promise was set home upon your spirit; or
the respect that you had to the recompense of reward, that was it that withheld
you. Well, whatsoever it was, be sure not to forget it, keep it in remembrance
against a time of need, as long as you live, and resolve to make use of it
again and again. Thus David did, Psalm. 73. in the beginning he tells you of a
temptation wherewith he had been assaulted, and how well-nigh it had
prevailed; after this he tells you what it was that kept him, verse. 17. He
went into the Sanctuary of God, and advised with him there; now see the
conclusion that he makes upon this, verse. 28. It is good for me to draw near
to God; as if he had said, this is the best course that I can take whenever
I am tempted, that the temptation do not prevail against me; I have found it
so now by experience, and therefore will not neglect it. A man that has found
good by such a Receipt, will lock it up and make use of it again upon the like
occasion.

The Sixteenth Direction.
16 Walk in the Spirit.

This Direction you have in Gal. 5.16. Walk in the Spirit, and you shall not
fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

Here note two things.

1 A Precept, Walk in the Spirit. 2 A Promise, And ye shall not fulfill the
lusts of the flesh.
The Promise gives assurance of the End, which is Self-denial, Ye shall not
fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

The Precept prescribes the Means in order thereunto, Walk in the Spirit: as if
he had said, If you would not obey the flesh in the lusts thereof, but be
able to deny it, then be sure you take this course, Walk in the Spirit.

Two things are here meant by Walking in the Spirit.

1 To follow the Motions of the Spirit. 2 To exercise the Graces of the Spirit.
Then.
1 If you would deny your selves, follow the motions of the Spirit, Walk
according to the motions, and by the directions of the Spirit; resign up your
selves to the governance and guidance of the Spirit. This is the first thing
meant by Walking in the Spirit, it is the same with Walking after the Spirit,
Romans 8.1.4. and being led by the Spirit, verse. 14. The Spirit is sent in
pursuance of the Fathers design in Election, and of the Sons in Redemption, and
he acts not only by conviction and conversion at the first, but by continual
guidance and direction afterward, being as a voice behind us, saying, This is
the way walk in it; putting us in remembrance when we are forgetful, and ready
to neglect our duty; warning us of the danger when we are about to turn to the
right or left hand in the commission of any sin; stirring up in us such
thoughts as these, This is a temptation, therefore we must shun it; This is a
fit season for such a duty, therefore we must close with it; moving and
persuading us to duty, by laying before us, the authority of Gods command, and
the goodness of the promise; dissuading us from sin, and striving with us that
we may not commit it, by arguments drawn from the terror of the Lord revealed
in the threatenings.

As the Devil draws men unto sin, by putting it into their hearts (as it is
said, he put it into the heart of Judas to betray Christ, Joh. 13.2.) so the
holy Spirit draws us to duty, by putting into our hearts to do that which is
good.

Now if we would follow these motions of the Spirit, to do our duty, we
should not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. For,

1 This is certain, we cannot follow the lusts of the flesh, and the motions
of the Spirit at the same time. We may follow the lusts of the flesh, and the
lusts of the Devil at the same time, because they are both one, but not the
lusts of the flesh, and the motions of the Spirit, because the flesh lusts
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary
the one to the other, Gal. 5.17. So that when we follow the motions of the
Spirit, we go quite cross to the lusts of the flesh.

Object. Well, but we may afterward.

Answ. Now mark for answer.

2 We shall not be left of God to fulfill the lusts of the flesh, till first
we have refused to follow the motions of the Spirit.

1 The Scripture all along alleges this as the cause why men are given up to
their own lusts. My people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none
of me; so I gave them up unto their own hearts lust, and they walked in their
own counsels, Psalm. 81.11, 12. So Romans 1.24. Wherefore God also gave them up to
uncleanness, through the lusts of their own hearts; And for this cause God gave
them up unto vile affections, verse. 26. Because that when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their
imaginations, verse. 21. because that which may be known of God was manifest in
them, for God had showed it unto them, verse. 19. And even as they did not like
to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to
do those things which are not convenient, verse. 28.

2 The Spirit is engaged to be with us while we follow his motions, so, that
though we be tempted, we shall not be overcome by temptation. The Lord is
with you, while you be with him, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. Now as Paul, Romans 8.31. If God
be for (or with) us, who can be against us? Thousands of Devils and
temptations may be against us, but they cannot prevail against us; Therefore
David, Psalm. 16.8. because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved. When
the Spirit is leading us, if we continue to follow him, he will continue to
lead us on still, and while we are led by his Conduct, we walk under his
Protection, so that no temptation shall overcome us. Paul was sorely tempted,
there was given him a thorn in the flesh, the Messenger of Satan to buffet him,
2 Cor. 12.7. Now the motion of the Spirit was, that he should continue
praying, which course he continuing, he obtained this answer, My grace is
sufficient for thee, my strength is made perfect in weakness, verse. 9. so that
the temptation could not prevail; it was his affliction, but not his sin. While
we are acted by the motions of the Spirit, we have the power of the Spirit
helping our infirmities, Romans 8.26. The Spirit helps our infirmities, (...),
bears together with us against the adverse oppressing power of any thing that
comes against us. Now the Spirit is a Spirit of power, and stronger than the
Spirit that is in the world, 1 John 4.4. Not by might, nor by power, but by my
Spirit, says the Lord, Zach. 4.6. Though it does not presently subdue all our
corruptions, yet it inables us (if we follow him) to go on conquering and to
conquer; we have our daily victories. It does not suffer a man to spend his
time in fruitless resistances, but gives sin its deaths wound, so that though
there be an inhabitation of sin, yet there is no domination, sin shall not
reign over him, Romans 6.14. It roots up the strongest and most deep-rooted lusts
and corruptions, it levelleth the highest imaginations, and takes down all that
exalts it self against Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4.

3 Believers find by experience that they are never more free from yielding
unto Self, than when they most carefully follow the motions of Gods Spirit.
This was one of the first things that I took notice of in my self. After a
temptation had prevailed, then I could say, If that I had followed such a good
motion that I had before, I had not come to this. Whence I gathered this rule
(as having found it so by experience) that if a man follow the motions of the
Spirit, he shall not be left to fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

Beware therefore of neglecting the motions of Gods Spirit, for by this means
it is quenched, and then either, 1 It will not move at all, or 2 It will not
move effectually.


1 It will not move at all. Before there were frequent hints and items given,
ever and anon good suggestions, but now there is a cessation, you are seldom
troubled with them, the Spirit lets you alone, so that you are off and on, in
and out in your obedience, very unconstant in the performance of holy duties,
scarce pray for a week together, etc.

2 If the Spirit do move, yet not effectually. If the Spirit speak, its only
by way of conviction, not of persuasion, it makes you sensible of your duty,
but not willing to perform it. Before you found it with your selves, as David
says it was with him, no sooner did the Lord say, Seek ye my face, but your
heart answered, Thy face Lord will I seek. I but now it is otherwise, you have
many strong impressions upon your spirits many impulsions, but all comes to
nothing.

3 Now is Satan's opportunity. When the holy Spirit departed from Saul, he was
presently haunted with the evil spirit. If Gods Spirit move not, Satan's will;
If Gods Spirit move not effectually, Satan's will. And then how is it possible
that any one in such a case should not fulfill the lusts of the flesh?

Oh therefore,

1 If the Spirit of God move, if you have a good thought put into your minds to
perform such a duty, do not put it off, but close with it presently, and
thankfully say, as David, O Lord God, keep this for ever in the imagination of
the thoughts of the heart of thy servant, and prepare his heart unto thee, 1 Chronicles. 29.18. See Cant. 5.4.

2 If the Spirit of God awakens conscience, and tells you it is a sin; Oh take
heed 1 Of stifling that conviction; and 2 Of going on resolutely in opposition
against it. This not only grieves, but vexes the holy Spirit of God, Isa.
63.10.


2 If you would deny your selves, exercise the graces of the Spirit. This is a
second thing that is here meant by walking in the Spirit, so the phrase is to
be understood, verse. 25. If ye live in the Spirit, walk in the Spirit, that
is, seeing you are made partakers of spiritual life, let your walking be
answerable thereunto, i. e. Spiritual, which consists in the exercise of grace.
This also is a special preservative from fulfilling the lusts of the flesh. A
little grace well exercised does much this way. Thou have a little strength,
says Christ to the Church of Philadelphia, and have kept my word, and have not
denied my Name, Rev. 3.8. Now if a little grace well exercised do thus, what
will not a greater measure and strength of grace well exercised do? Why
consider, the exercise of grace is that which makes little grace great grace,
and weak grace strong grace; as by trading, the Talents increased, Matthew.
25.20. Now where grace is in its strength, a man is not easily prevailed upon
by the lusts of the flesh, but on the contrary, where corruption is high, and
grace low, there corruption does frequently get the better, and temptation
usually carries him away; And so it is when grace is not exercised, though it
be strong grace, for strong grace not exercised, does by little and little
languish and decay, as Rev. 3.2. Now when grace is thus impaired, it is unable
to resist and withstand corruption, and if grace do not withstand it, what is
there that can? And if corruption be not withstood, we must needs be
overborn by it. By this it appears, how needful it is to be much in the
exercise of grace, if we mean not to fulfill the lusts of the flesh, for the
soul is continually acting, and it must needs be acted by one of these two,
for this is the nature of immediate contraries (such as grace and corruption
are) as has been shown before.

Besides, by the exercise of grace, the soul is kept in an holy, heavenly
frame, and then temptations are not so suitable; The Devil, that observes the
season for a temptation, takes that for the fittest, when our hearts are out of
frame, then he will be sure to set upon us; but when our hearts are kept in a
holy frame and temper, he cares not so much to meddle with us, because then
he has no such hopes of prevailing. Therefore be much in the exercise of
grace in every action, in every condition, in every duty both toward God and
man, in every creek and turning of your conversation.

The Seventeenth Direction.
17 Avoid all occasions of Self-pleasing.

Self is apt to take an occasion many times when it is not given, therefore you
should be wary of giving it any occasion; so the Apostle, Gal. 5.13. Brethren,
ye have been called unto liberty, only use not your liberty for an occasion
to the flesh. There is a time for every thing under the Sun, but no time, no
season for Self, there is none allowed by God, and none should be suffered by
us. There are certain seasons fit for the purposes and devices of self, many
occasions for sinful enjoyments, but he that would deny Self, must carefully
shun these occasions. Self defires an occasion, but all occasion must be cut
off from Self, as the Apostle in another case, 2 Cor. 11.12. In 1 Timothy 5.14.
The Apostle exhorts young women to keep at home, etc. that they give none
occasion to the Adversary; there are many Adversaries without us, that quickly
take an occasion to speak reproachfully, but the great Adversary is within,
which (when occasion serves) will act reproachfully. No wonder if men act
shamefully, to the dishonor both of themselves, and the Religion they profess,
when they avoid not the occasions in which Self is apt to put forth. What the
Prophet says of the Wild Ass, may fitly be applied to Self, Jer. 2.24. In
her occasion who can turn her away? All they that seek her, will not weary
themselves, in her month they shall find her. It is difficult turning away of
Self in its occasion, give Self but an opportunity, and it acts presently.

Men need not weary themselves to gain a Selfish man, in their month they shall
find them, they even prevent a temptation, but if you give them an occasion,
you have them presently. Achan saw, and presently he must have the Babylonish
Garment; so Gehezi, so Judas. Self takes an occasion many times by the
prohibition of the Commandment, as Paul tell us, Romans 7.8. much more by
indulgence, when men do even tempt and provoke themselves to the commission of
any vile and base act. Give Self an occasion, and you expose your selves to the
greatest danger in the world. An occasion unto Self, is as fire unto Gunpowder,
Behold how great a fire a little spark kindles! We are in danger of
committing the greatest sins, when we will adventure upon the least. He that
will touch pitch shall be defiled with it; and therefore we are commanded to
hate even the garment spotted with the flesh, and to avoid the very appearance
of evil; Though there be no reallity, yet if there be but an appearance, we
must stand at a distance. This indeed is a special help to Self-denial, not
only to forbear the act of sin, but all occasions that may invite to any
sinful act.

The Eighteenth Direction.
18 Frequently renew your Govenant with God.

If you be true believers, you are within the bond of the Covenant, howsoever
you profess your selves such; you say you are baptized, and claim the name
and privilege of Believers upon that account. Now see what you then
Covenanted; you did then promise and vow, to forsake the Devil, and all his
works, the vain pomp and glory of the world, with all covetous desires of the
same, the carnal desires of the flesh, so that you would not follow, nor be
led by them. Here is the strictest engagement to Self-denial, that possibly can
be, and this you must either Here Novices in Religion commonly begin to balk,
and no wonder, seeing few are called to any strict personal account of that
which others have undertaken for them at their first admission into the Beadrol
of Christians. But if the contents of that triple Vow were distinctly and fully
unfolded unto us, as soon as we had any knewledge of good and evil, and all
the several branches of Gods Covenant with as great care and solemnity as often
inculcated, as Moses commanded the Law should be to the Israelites children;
and lastly, the Vow it self confirmed and ratified, by our personal
protestation, in the sight of the Congregation; the fear as well of God, as of
shame before men, in whose presence we made this good profession, would bind
many of us to more Christion behavior, than the best of us as the world goes,
dare make show of, as also restrain us from many deadly enormities, which now
admonished of, we will not account any sins. Dr. Jackson Treat. of Justif.
Faith cap. 22. sect. 413, 414.
own, and stand to as your Covenant, or you must renounce your Baptism, and
will you renounce your Baptism? Therefore solemnly engage unto that in your
own persons, which was then engaged unto in your names by your Susceptours, and
frequently renew your engagement; Let not many days pass any one week without
some solemn repetition of this Selfdenying Vow before the Lord; The reason why
men seek themselves so much, is because they remember their Covenant so little.
It is said of the strange woman, that she forsakes the guide of her youth,
and forgets the Covenant of her God, Prove. 2.17.

You will find this a great help in time of temptation, to consider that you
are under a Covenant-engagement: What, shall I break my Covenant with God? We
count it a shameful thing to break a promise, much more to break a Covenant,
wherein there is a stipulation on both sides, so solemnly made and ratified.
Now its far worse to break with God.

A man is obliged to Self-denial by the Command, but there is a double
obligation by the Covenant, for in that a man has consented and solemnly
promised; the Command is Gods engagement upon him, but his promise is his own
engagement upon himself. Reason then on this wise, whenever thou art tempted:
I am engaged by Gods command, and there can be no objection against that; but
besides, have I not solemnly promised? Is not the oath of God upon me? and
shall I not perform it? Shall I be worse than my word? Worse than my oath with
God? I have sworn, and I will perform it (says David) that I will keep thy
righteous judgments, Psalm. 119.106.

Besides this, it will be good sometimes to make a It is good in this case to
help the soul with a firm resolution, and to back resolution with a vow, not
only in general, but particularly of something within our own power -- for by
this means the beart is perfectly gained -- Strong resolution discovers
sincerity without any hypocritical reservation and bollownesse -- Resolution as
a strong stream bears down all before it; Little good is done in Religion
without this, and with it all is as good as done. Dr. Sibbs Souls Conflict.
cap. 28.442.
particular Covenant for Self-denial; that is, seriously and solemnly to
promise that in and through the strength of Christ, you will carefully avoid
such and such particular ways, wherein at any time you have given contentment
to the flesh. I have made a Covenant with mine eyes (says Job) why then should
I looks upon a Maid? Job 31.1. and that come what will of it (if God give you
life and liberty) you will perform such and such particular duties that at any
time you have neglected. David swear unto the Lord, and vowed unto the mighty
God of Jacob, surely I will not come into the Tabernacle of my house, nor go up
into my bed. I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids,
until I find out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of
Jacob, Psalm. 132.2, 3, 4, 5.

Till you be able thus to bind your selves, you will never be constant in
your obedience, but you will play fast and loose with God. Let me put this
Question to you: Have you not often been under convictions of sin in neglecting
such a duty, and have not such thoughts as these come into your mind. It is
best to promise by a solemn Vow and Covenant unto God, that I will never
neglect this duty more; have you not been much pressed and urged by the
importunity of conscience, to enter into such a Covenant, to make such a Vow?
and have you not been afraid to do it, lest afterward you should not omit it
with so much ease as before, and therefore have put it off from time to time?
Well, consider what has been the issue? Has not this refusal to engage,
brought you within a while to a total omission of the duty? Again, It may be
you have been much pressed in spirit to covenant against such a particular sin,
but you have been loath to be bound up, and therefore have satisfied
conscience with some purposes against it, you have resolved you would not
commit any more, and you have made that to serve the turn, notwithstanding you
have been ever and anon put in mind by some secret whisper of conscience to
make a solemn Covenant and Vow against it: Well, see what has come of it, have
you not relapsed again and again into that sin, notwithstanding all your
purposes and resolutions against it? Has it not proved the stumbling block of
your iniquity? You will never be able to deny your selves in abandoning any
evil, as you ought, till you be willing to come under the strictest engagement
that is against it.

The Nineteenth Direction.
19 Imitate the Lord Jesus Christ.

See what an example of Self-denial he has given you.

1 Though he was the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. and Jam. 2.1. The brightness
of the Fathers glory, Heb. 1.3. yet be sought not his own glory, Joh. 8.50.
Though he was in the form of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal to
God, Phil. 2.6. yet he made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the
form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of man, and being found in
fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the Cross, verse. 7.8.

Now, think with your selves what the glory is, that of right must At the very
instant wherein the Son advanced our nature into the highest pitch of dignity,
by admitting it into the unity of his sacred person, that nature so assumed,
was worthy to be crowned with all glory and bonour; and he in that nature
might them have set himself down at the right hand of the Throne of God -- If
he had minded only his own things, he might at the very first have attained
unto the joy that was set before him; but looking on the things of others, he
chose rather to come by a tedious way, and wearisome journey unto it, not
challenging the privilege of a Son, but taking upon him the form of a mean
servant. Whereupon in the days of his flesh, be did not serve as an
honorable Commander in the Lords Host, but as an ordinary Soldier; he made
himself of no reputation; for the time, as it were, emptying himself of his
high State And Dignity. Bishop Usher, Mystery of the Incarnation of the Son
of God. page 10.
needs accompany the personal presence of God in a man, whom he has taken up
to be one person with him. Consider what glory it is that Christ has now in
heaven since his ascension and session at Gods right hand there; why, this was
his right and due the very first moment of his Incarnation; only he was
contented to be a while without it, for the accomplishing of the work of our
Redemption.

2 Though he was the Heir of all things, Heb. 1.2. Though the earth was his,
and the fullness thereof, 1 Cor. 10.26, 28. yet he sought not his own wealth,
but became poor for our sakes, 2 Cor. 8.9. The foxes have holes, and the birds
of the air have neasts, but the Son of man had not where to lay his head,
Matthew. 8.20.

3 Though all power in heaven, and in earth was given to him, Matthew. 28.18. yet
(being called to suffer) he would not save himself, Matthew. 16.23. Though he
could have pressed Legions of Angels, yet he would not permit any one to strike
a blow in his quarrel, Matthew. 26.52, 53. but voluntarily subjected himself to
the power and force of his blood-thirsty enemies.

I might here multiply particulars, but that I hasten to a conclusion. There is
scarce any one duty of Self-denial, but we have an example of it in the
practice of our Savior, and therefore it is requisite that we have it
continually in our eye. And it will be of great advantage, what ever it be
wherein we are called to deny our selves, not only by way of Direction for it,
but by way of Because the soul never works better than when it is raised up
by some strong and sweet affection, let us look upon our nature as it is in
Christ, in whom it is pure, sweet, calm, meek, every way lovely. This sight
is a changing sight. Love is an affection of imitation, we affect a likeness
to him we love. Let us learn of Christ to he humble, and meek, and then we
shall find rest to our souls. The setting of an excellent Idea and platform
before us, will raise and draw up our souls higher, and make us sensible of
the least moving of spirit that shall be contrary to that, the attainment
whereof we have in our desires. He will hardly attain to mean things, that
sets not before him higher persection. Sibbs Souls Conflict. c. o. 137.
Motive to it, which is the reason that from hence, the several duties of
Self-denial are so frequently in the Scripture pressed upon us.

1 By our Savior himself, Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am
meek and lowly in heart, Matthew. 11.29. When the mother of Zebedees children
desired that her two sons might sit, the one on his right hand, and the other
on the left hand in his Kingdom, and the other Disciples were moved with
indignation against the two Brethren, he called them unto him, and said, Ye
know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, but it shall
not be so among you; but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your
minister; and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant,
even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to
give his life a ransom for many, Matthew. 20.27, 28. So after he had washed his
Disciples feet, Joh. 13.5. he said unto them, Know you what I have done to
you? Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say well; for so I am. If I then,
your Lord and Master, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one
another feet. For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have
done unto you, verse. 14, 16.

2 By the Apostles. We that are strong (says Paul) ought to bear the
infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves. Let every one of us
please his neighbor for his good to edification, For even Christ pleased not
himself, Romans 15.1, 2, 3. Again, 2 Cor. 8.7. exhorting them to liberality, he
thus presses the exhortation, verse. 9. For ye know the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor,
that ye through his poverty might be rich. And Phil. 2.2. pressing to love
and concord, thus he persuades them, verse. 3.4. Let nothing be done through
strife or vainglory, but in lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better
than themselves. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on
the things of others. Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ
Jesus, who being in the form of God, made himself of no reputation, but humbled
himself, etc. verse. 5.6, 7. Peter exhorting servants to be subject to their
Masters, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward, and that
even when they do well, and suffer for it, they should take it patiently, gives
this reason, 1 Pet. 2.21. for even hereunto were ye called; because Christ
also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps,
who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth, who when he was reviled,
reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself
to him that judges righteously, verse. 22, 23. He that says he abides in
him, ought himself also, so to walk, even as he walked, 1 John 2.6.

The Twentieth Direction.
20 Be much in Prayer.

After the putting on of the whole Armor of God, to which the Apostle exhorts,
Ephesians. 6.16, 17. he prescribes Praying always with all prayer and supplication
in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance, verse. 18. in like
manner after all the Directions that have been given to help you in the
practice of Self-denial, this I would commend unto you, as without which, all
other means are ineffectual.

Consider Self-denial is not of our selves, but of God, who only can take us
out of our selves, Dr. Sibbs Souls Conflict.
God must enable you or else you will never do it. Self-denial is the gift of
God.

Object. 1. Why is it required then?

Answ. Not because it is in your power, but because it is your duty.

Object. 2 Well then, God can give it if he please.

Answ. True, he can, but will not, unless he be sought to for it. Ye have
not, because ye ask not, Jam. 4.2.

Object. 3. But if I pray, will he hear me?

Answ. Try, and see what will come of it.

Consider, God is a God hearing prayer, Psalm. 65.2. and he has said, Ask and
it shall be given you; Seek, and ye shall find; Knock and it shall be
opened to you, Matthew. 7.7.

Object. 4. But will he give this? this gift of Self-denial?

Answ. He is the giver of every good and perfect gift, Jam. 1.17. and this is
one of them.

Object. 5. But my want is so great, etc.

Answ. He gives liberally, bountifully.

Object. 6. But I have nothing to move him.

Answ. He gives freely, Isa. 55.1.

Object. 7. It may be once or so, but what if one come often, again and again?

Answ. He upbraideth not.

Object. 8. But it is only to some that he gives thus liberally and freely,
he will not do so to such an one as I am.

Answ. To all men. He gives to all men liberally, Jam. 1.5. that is, to all
that ask of him, all that ask in faith, verse. 6.

Obj. 9. But what if he has decreed not to give?

Answ. What if he has decreed that he will give? the one is as likely as the
other. Be not solicitous concerning the will of his decree, but attend to the
will of his Precept.

Object. 10. But I have prayed, and yet cannot deny my self.

Answ. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, Jam. 4.3. Ask in faith,
ask importunately, ask again and again. Paul prayed thrice against the thorn in
the flesh, that it might depart from him, and at length obtained a gracious
answer, 2 Cor. 12.8, 9. Therefore pray continually, pray without ceasing, and
it will not be long ere thou get the victory.

Draw me, we will run after thee, Cant. ^.4.

Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, Jer. 31.18.

A [ It was no ill wish of him that desired God, to free him from an ill man,
himself. Dr. Sibbs Souls Conflict cap. 5.62.
malo homine] meipso Libera me Domine. Luther.

THE END
Books Printed, and sold by Tho. Johnson, at the Golden Key in St.
Pauls-Church-yard.
THe History of Fourfooted Beasts and Serpents, deseribing at large their true
and lively figure, their several names, conditions, kinds, Ver^ues, Countries:
Of their breed, and the wonderful work of God in their creation, preservation,
and destruction. Together with the Theater of Insects, or Lesser living
Creatures, as Bees, Flies, Caterpillars, Spiders, Worms, etc. A most elaborate
work By T. Muffet, Dr. of Physic, in Folio.

The Lord Francis Bacon's Natural History, in Folio.

Lexicon Auglo-graco-latinum Novi Testamenti, or a Complete Alphabetical
Concordance of all the words in the New Testament, both English, Greek, and
Latin, in three distinct Tables: Showing also the several significations,
Etymons, Derivations, force, and emphasis, and diverse acceptations of each word
in Scripture. A work of very great use for the furtherance of
Scripture-knowledge.

Spiritual refinings in two parts. The first treating of Grace and Assurance
(both practically and controversally) delivered in 120. Sermons. The second
treating of Sin, with its Causes, Differences, Mitigations, and Aggravations,
the deceitfulness of Man's heart, of Presumptuous and reigning sins, and of
Hypocrisy and Formality in Religion in 42. Sermons. By Anthony Burgess, Pastor
of Sutton-Colfield in Warwickshire. Folio.

A brief Exposition on the twelve Small Prophets. By George Hutcheson, Minister
of Gods word at Edenborough. Folio.

Physiologia Epicuro-Gassendo-Charltoniana, or a Fabric of Science Natural
upon the Hypothesis of Atoms, founded by Epicarus, repaired by Gassendus,
augmented by Walter Charlton, Dr. in Medicine, and Physician to the late King
Charles. Folio.

A Choice Garden of all sorts of rarest Flowers, with their nature, place of
birth, time of flowring, names and virtues to each plant, useful in Physic,
admired for beauty: As also a Kitchinggarden furnished with all manner of
Herbs, Roots, and Fruits, for Meats or Sauce, with the Art of planting an
Orchard with all sorts of Fruit Trees, etc. By John Parkinson Herbarist to the
late King. Folio.

The Lusiad or Portugal's Historical Poem written in the Portugal Language. By
Luis de Camoens, and put into English by Richard Fanshaw, Esquire Folio.

Elise or Innocence become guilty, a New Romance, made English by Jo. Jennings,
Gent. Folio.

Trigonometrie, or the manner of calculating the sides and Angle of Triangles
by the Mathematical Canon, Demonstrated by Mr. Will. Oughtred in Quarto, both
in Latin and English.

A clear and full Vindication of the Church and Universities of England in
their Orthodox Tenets, and Righteous Practices, against the Calumnies of the
Anabaptist, and other Sectaries. By Jeffery Wats, B. D. and Rector of Much
Leighes in Essex. 4o.

Universal Redemption, Asserted and Cleared from the Restrictions of Mr. John
Owen in his Book called, The Death of Death, in the Death of Christ. By John
Horn, Preacher of the Gospel at Lyn in Norfolk. 4o.

The Fullness and Freeness of Gods Grace in Christ, declared, 1 In the point of
Election, by a middle way between Calvin and Arminius, and different from them
both. 2 How God orders and appoints men to their final end. Some to honor,
some to dishonor to Eternity; In an uniform body of Divinity. By Francis Duke.
4o.

Will. Bagnals Ghost, or a Continuation of that Witty Poem, the
Counter-scuffle, with some Characters. By William Gayton, Esquire 4o.

The English Parnassus, or a Help to English Poesy, containing a short
Introduction to that Art, a Collection of all Rhyming Monosyllables, the
Choicest Epithets and Phrases, with some general forms upon all occasions,
Subjects and Theams, Alphabetically digested. By Joshua Pool, M. A. of
Clare-Hall Camb. Author of the English Accidence.

The History of the French Academy, erected at Paris, by the late famous
Cardinal de Richileiu, and consisting of the most refined Wits of that Nation,
showing its Original, and Establishment, its Statutes, Days, Places, and
manner of Assemblies, etc. With the names of its Members, a Character of their
Persons, and a Catalogue of their works, written in French by Mr. Paul
Pellison, Counselor and Secretary to the King of France. 8o.

Theses Sabbaticae, or the Doctrine of the Sabbath, wherein its Morality,
Change, Beginning, Sanctification are clearly discussed. By Tho. Shepherd,
Pastor of the Church of Christ at Cambridge in New England. 8o.

Subjection to Christ in all his Ordinances and Appointments, the best means to
preserve our Liberty; With a Treatise of ineffectual hearing the Word, by the
same Author. 8o.

The Art of Short-writing by Characters, fair, short, swift, easy, and
legible. First invented by J. Willis, afterward more illustrated by H. Dix,
and now more largely composed and completed; With an additional table of
words, and every way made easy to the meanest capacity. By Tho. Retcliff. 8o.

A Treatise concerning Euthusiasme, as it is an effect of Nature, but is
mistaken by many, for either Divine Inspiration, or Diabolical Possession by
Meric Casanbon. D. D. 8o.

Martial's Epigrams, translated with sundry Poems and Fancies. By R. Fletcher,
8o.

The Rogne, or the Life of Guzman de Alfarache, the Witty Spaniard, in two
parts, 8o.

Diatrita fidei Justificantis, qua Justificantis, or a discourse of the Object
and office of Faith, as justifying; distinct from other Objects, Acts and
Offices of the same Faith, as sanctifying; wherein the Lutheran and Protestant
Doctrine is asserted against the Pontificians, Socinians, Arminians, and
others. By John Warner, Pastor of the Church of Christ, at Christ Church in
Hampshire.

A View of the Jewish Religion, containing the manner of Life, Rites,
Ceremonies, and Customs of the Jewish Nation throughout the world at this
present time, together with the Articles of their Faith as now received. By A.
R. 8o.

The Triumph and Unity of Truth in two Treatises, Intended as a preservative
against the many Errors and unhappy Divisions of these times. By Jo. Robinson,
M. A. and Minister of Gods Word.

The Birth of a Day, or a Treatise representing the Vicissitudes of all humane
things, with their Causes and sacred uses, by the same Author.

Brachy-Martyrologium, or a Breviary of all the greatest persecutions that have
befallen the Saints and people of God from the Creation to our present times.
Composed for the help of memory into English verse. By Nich. Billingsley of
Mart. Col. Oxon.

A Copy of the Covenant of Grace, with a discovery of several false pretenders
to that eternal Inheritance, and of the right Heir thereunto, with such safe
instructions as will enable him to clear his title, and to make it
unquestionable. By Robert Bidwell, Minister of Gods word, etc.

Englands Warning-peece, or the Prophetical Trumpeter, sounding an Allarm to
England, exhibiting the fate of Great Britain, past, present, and to come; such
wonderful things to happen in these seven years following, as have not been
heard of heretofore. By John Huydon. Gent. 8o.

The Examination and Trial of Old Father Christmas at the Assizes held at the
Town of Difference, in the County of Discontent. Written according to Legal
proceedings, by Josiah King, of Modbury in Devon. 8o.

A Grave opened, or a View of the Chambers of Death, a Poem alluding to
Weaving; entitled, The Silver Shuttle, and other Divine Fancies and Epigrams,
by the same Author.

Tabulae Suffragiales de terminandis fidei litibus ab Ecclesia Catholica fixae,
etc. Authore Thoma Anglo ex Albtis East-Saxonum. 12o.

A Manual of Divine Considerations in English, by the same Author.

A Treatise of Spiritual Infatuation, being the present visible disease of our
English Nation. Delivered in several Sermons at the Hague, by W. Stamp, D.D.
Sometimes Minister of Gods word at Stepney near London, 12o.

Man's inbred Malady, or the Doctrine of Original sin maintained: As also the
Necessity of Infant Baptism. By George Burches, late Rector of Wood-church in
Cheshire.

The Academy of Eloquence, or a Complete English Rhetoric, etc. By Tho.
Blount, Gent. 12o.

Mount-Ebal levelled, or Redemption from the Curse by Jesus Christ, maintained,
and practically improved. By the Reverend Mr. Elk. Wales, Minister of the Word
at Pudzey in Yorkshire, in 8o. Now in the Press.

AN INDEX
Directing unto the Principal words and things in the foregoing TREATISE.
A.
ABCdaries, there are many such in the Church of God. 127 Abilities, Pretended
denial of our own parts, and abilities; The causes of it in diverse sorts. 92,
93, 94 Ability, the delusion of those that begin to reform their lives upon a
conceit of their own ability to do good. 58, 59 Abuse of gifts wherein it does
consist. 112 Abuses in Preaching, 117, 118, etc. Acti agimus. 351 Action, in
every action as there must be an expression of our obedience, so likewise of
our dependence, 152. The Scripture is a sufficient rule to direct us in all
particular actions. 161 Adam, he might in the state of innocence, impetrare,
but not mereri, obtain by working, but not deserve, 64. he was to to exercise
himself in the work of a Gardener in that state. 173 Adversity, we must be as
lively and active in adversity as in prosperity. 151 Adulterer, how he is
inthralled. 298 Affectation of high mysteries. 126 Affections, they must be
exercised sutably to all Gods dispensations, 193. the workings of natural
affection not to be denied. 220 Affirmation, Self will affirm that which is not
to be affirmed both of sins and duties, 28. speaks many times in bare
affirmations only, without arguing the case, or urging what it says by the
strength of seeming roason. 29 Afflictions, they can do us no good of
themselves, 192. we may lawfully hate and decline them, ibid. but we may not
judge them to be the greatest evil, 195. nor endeavor by any sinful means to
decline them, 196. nor be impatient under them, 204 (...), quid per initia
designaverit. 269 Ambitio, scenam desiderat. 119 (...). 57 Ann Askew martyr,
her saying at the stake, 219 Angels, their excellency what. 307 Antinomians.
their doctrine concerning fetching comfort from good works refuted. 133
Arminians, boast of a power within themselves, to make themselves new
creatures. 54, 55. their condemnation if they perish, will be of all men's most
just, they will have least to plead for themselves, 57 Assurance, the sense of
the least grace sufficient to it. 47
B.
BAcksliding, what it is, and the manner of it opened. 145 Baptismal covenant,
the frequent renewing of it pressed. 412 (...). 369 (...). 273 Baynham Martyr,
his abjuration, and trouble of conscience for it. 199 Beauty, what it is, 269.
three things required to a perfect beauty, 272. self-denial a Christians
beauty. 269 Believer, he has the best right of any unto the creatures. 168
Bilney Martyr, his abjuration, 197. and trouble of conscience for it. 198
Boasting, for a man to boast of that which is not his own, is very uncomely and
unjust. 103 Body, it is to be kept under, 345. Every man if he know himself,
will find, that in respect of the temper and constitution of his body, he is
more or less inclined to some particular sin or other, 346. It is the souls
Instrument. ibid. Bondage, not a selfish man in the World, but is in Worse than
Egyptian or Turkish bondage. 295 Bradford Martyr, his saying, 220. and 230
Broachers of false doctrine, a wretched generation of self-seekers. 122 Burden,
a self-denying man can bear great burdens. 265 Buyers, a discovery of their
selfishnesse in diverse particulars. 253
C.
CAlling, several reasons why we are to be diligent in our particular callings.
171, 172, etc. Catechism, the rotten charters pleaded by many against it, what
they are, 127. one of the most necessary points of Catechism, wherein we
should be well instructed, 350 Cathedram habet in coelis qui corda docet, 261
Censure, its hard escaping a censure, when blind zeal is to be judge. 170
(...). 275 Chief good, man's judgment depraved concerning it. 180 Children,
they must be corrected. 226 Christ, he was not a pencilin his tongue, and a
sponge in his life and conversation, but a walking Commentary upon his own
doctrine. 17 Christians they should strive to excel, not only in grace, but in
gifts also. 80 Chemists. 115 Cleernesse, requisite to a perfect beauty, 278
Coming after Christ, two things meant by it. 11 Command of superiors not to
be the rule of our obedience. 158 Commands of God, not the measure of our
Power, but of our Duty, 7. and 422. If God command, we must look more at the
Quis, than the Quid. 159 Commodities, unlawful to be sold. 256 Conceitednesse,
96 Confidence, It is not our Confidence, but the ground of it that argues our
estate to be good, 48. the danger of being confident of the goodness of our
spiritual condition, without looking after the evidence of inherent grace. 52
Conscience, several ways of silencing it, prescribed by self, 25, 26. Nothing
will so furiously fly in it is face at the last, as the horrid sin of
self-seeking. 286 Consent, what ever the Devil effects in any temptation, is by
consent had from sinful self first. 291 Consideration of the evil of
selfishnesse a special help to self-denial. 319, 320 Consummating grace. 59.60
Contests, the greatest contests amongst professors, many of them, do arise
from hence, that they will not allow one another their just liberty in things
indifferent. 170 Contradiction, To come after Christ without denying self is a
contradiction. 240 Conversion, natural men can do nothing to prepare themselves
for it. 68 Conviction from the Word, and from the world. 144 Cooperation, to
expect that God should john his strength with ours, and cooperate with us,
has not more of ignorance than of arrogance in it. 61 Corruption attributed in
scripture, not only in general to the whole man, but to every part of it in
particular. 239 Covenant, we are frequently to renew our covenant with God,
412. the benefit of making a particular covenant for self-denial. 415 Covetous
man how he is inthralled. 299 Counsel, in a selfish heart, the first and great
engine that moves all the lesser wheels of opposition against Christ, 24. what
counsel self gives, shown in two particulars. 25 Cranmer Martyr, his
recantation. 212 Creatures, a believer has the best right of any unto the
creatures. 168 Cross, the custom of carrying unto the place of execution, 13.
several acceptions of the word, 14. Every man must begin at his Christ's Cross,
before he can be a good proficient in Christ's school. ibid. Cultus, non
institutus non est acceptus, 337 Cure, the first step toward a cure is to
find out the disease. 301
D
DAmnation; It is impossible for any one without coming after Christ in the
way of holiness, to escape eternal damnation in Hell fire. 235 Darling-sin. 327
Debt, the covenant of works being broken, man stands bound unto God in a
twofold debt. 71 Deceit, we may be deceived in thinking that we have denied
our selves. 311, 312 Deformity, Other men's deformities serve as foiles, to set
off the perfections of accomplished men with greater luster and glory. 97
Deliberation, necessary things come not under deliberation, 262. We may not
deliberate in a case already determined by God. 336 Deliciae humani generis.
270 Delight, God gives not only for necessity, but delight also. 167
Delilah-sin. 327 Delusion of those that begin to reform upon a conceit of
their own ability to do good. 58 Denial threefold, argumentative, judicial, and
hostile. 22 Deserving, in the state of innocence there was non-deserving, but
now, not only non-deserving, but ill-deserving too, 65 Desire, we have an
itching desire to have every thing we do made public. 356 Devil, what his
first sin was, 126. what his first temptation, ibid. he can keep his
supremacy, notwithstanding an outward compliance with God, 150. a self-denying
man can overcome him, 267. what ever he effects in any temptation, is by
consent from self, 291. all sin is his, vel per modum imaginis, vel per modum
servitutis. 324 Devil's Generalissimo. 322 Devotion, blind devotion to grace.
75 Dignity, Self-denial a Christians dignity, 279 Diligence in our particular
callings, reasons for it. 171, 172, etc. Discontent, Self is not so well
pleased with what it has, as discontented at what it wants. 84 Disease, the
first step to a cure is to find out the disease. 310 Dispensation, none in the
duty of Self-denial. 7 Do, Self-denial inables a man to do the greatest good.
305 (...). 244 (...). 76 Drunkard, what bondage he is in. 299 Dulce bellum
inexpertis. 8 (...). 268 Duty, We may not neglect our duty for fear of any
evil that may accidentally come thereof. 80
E
ELzearius a Noble man, his saying to his Wife. 216 Employments, there is many
times as much self-seeking in refusing, as in accepting of great employments.
174 End, Not thinking of the end, makes us go out of the way, 371. Self never
propounds God for its end, 142. what is to be accounted a self-end, and what
not, 143. A wicked man may change his way, but he can never change his end. 147
Ends, Self Ends. 137 Enemies, bad Judges, but quick discerners, 314. Christ and
Self the greatest enemies, 24. A Self-denying man can overcome great enemies.
267 Enemy, Self the greatest enemy of all, 268 Enjoy, the only way for a man
to enjoy himself, is to deny himself. 283 Enjoyments, worldly enjoyments ranked
under three heads, 167. the opinion that Self has of them, 175. Self-denial
gives a man the sweetest enjoyments. 284 Envy, what it is, 85. the evil of it,
86. Ministers apt to envy one another. 101 Eternal life described. 369 Evidence
of inherent grace, the danger of being confident of the goodness of our
spiritual estate without looking after it, 52 Evil of selfishness discovered in
several particulars. 321, 322 Examination, we should be exact in the
examination and trial of our own hearts and ways for the finding out of the
selfishness that is in them, 308. Helps in it, 316 Example, the most
compendious way of teaching is by example. 16. Example of forefathers not to
be the rule of our obedience, 159. nor the example of great ones, nor of the
multitude, 160. An example of Self-denial given by Christ, 417. the advantage
of having it continually in our eyes. 419 Excellency, the excellency of any man
lies in his spirit, 280. nothing wherein the excellency of a man's spirit does
more shine forth than in Self-denial. ibid. Excellent, the more excellent any
thing is, the more taking it is, 264. the most excellent duty of Self-denial.
ibid. Exercise of grace, the benefit of it, 408, etc. Expediency, the rule to
be observed in the use of things indifferent. 340 Experiences, former
experiences must be kept in mind, viz. experiences of the evil of self-seeking,
392, 393, etc. Experiences of the ways and means whereby we have been drawn
to self-seeking, 396. the benefit of remembering them, ibid. Experiences of the
good of Self-denial, 397, 398. the benefit of keeping them in remembrance. 399.
experiences of the means whereby we have been enabled to deny our selves. 400
Extremes, It Is dangerous being in the extremes. 340 Eye, evil eye, why envy
is so called. 86 Eying the recompense of reward, what? 370, 371, etc.
F
FAith must be exercised, 373. a special help to Self-denial, ibid. wherein the
power of it lies to carry a man through the duty of Self-denial, 374. it deals
much in the commands, 375. stops the mouth of carnal reason, and brings it to a
nonplus, 377. it is the evidence of things not seen, 384. sets awork all other
graces, 385. it is the primum mobile, 389. secures the other graces in their
working, 390. brings in auxiliary forces from Heaven. 391 Families, what has
been the cause of the ruin of many great families in England, 173
Fashion-mongers. 244 Fasts, superstitious fasting. 169 Fear, many fear to
follow Christ, the unreasonableness of it, 15. many fear to discover their
graces, when they doubt it will be to the prejudice of their worldly interess,
the evil of it. 53 Filius lucis. 278 Flectit, non cogit. 8 Foiles, Other men's
weaknesses and deformities serve as Foiles to set off the perfections of
accomplished men with greater luster. 97 Forefathers, their example not to be
the rule of our obedience. 159 Form of godliness, men may have it, and yet be
the veryest wretches in the world, 4. what has won so many off unto it in
our days. 144 Francis Spira, his story. 220, etc.
G
GAin, Self-denial a Christians gain, 304 Gentry taxed for their
voluptuousness, 173 Gifts, the excellency, usefulness, and necessity of gifts,
75, 76, 77. honor to be given to such as have gifts for their gifts sake, 78,
79. Gifts must be industriously labored after, ibid. Christians should strive
to excel in them, 80. what gift it is that is worth all the gifts in the world,
83. those that have gifts are apt to grow proud of them, 95. and to contemn
others, 97, etc. and to envy others, 100. God respects none for their gifts
without grace, ibid. the abuse of gifts wherein it consists. 112, etc. Glory,
what it is, 280. Self-denial a Christians glory. ibid. Glorying in such as have
gifts, many prone to it, the end that such aim at, 87, 88. the evil of it, 89.
we must not glory in any thing that we have done, 163 (...), 347 God, the
object of our happiness. 177 Good, Self-denial enables a man to do the greatest
good, 305 Gospel, what it is, 176. it declares what man's happiness is, wherein
it does consist, and how it may be attained, 176, 177, multitudes that live
under it perish eternally. 1 Gospel-Obedience; what is necessary to our
entrance upon it, and perseverance in it, 4 Gospel-Principles, we should be
careful to acquaint our selves with them, and to charge them home upon our
consciences. 33 Grace, we must not deny the presence of it, where it is, 43. a
little must be owned, though in the midst of many corruptions, 45. it is a
powerful thing, ibid. must be discovered, 53. the work of grace is
supernatural, 54. Initial, augmenting, and consummating grace, 59, 60. the
conceit of the Massilienses about it, ibid. Grace cannot be merited, 64.
preventing grace, 69. benefit of living in the exercise of grace. 408 Graces,
several graces required to any one act of Self-denial, 386. as there is a
conjunction, so likewise a dependence of the several graces one upon another.
387 Grief, a grievous evil not to be grieved when God brings any evil upon us.
194
H
HAbit, such as the habit is, such is the action that proceeds from it. 240
Happy, All men in the general desire to be happy. 175 Happiness, what a man's
happiness is, wherein it does consist, and how it may be attained, fully
declared in the Gospel, 176, 177. A great mistake in the most concerning that
wherein our happiness does consist. 178 Hatred, the unalterable object of it,
all manner of evil, not only that of deformity and sin, but that also of
destruction and misery. 192 Heathens not acquainted with the lesson of
Self-denial. 10 Hermetick learning. 114 Hindrance, the greatest hindrances in
our way to Heaven, are from within. 301 Honor, Self-denial is a Christians
honor. 280 Hooper Martyr, his saying to Sir Anthony Kingston, 195. and at the
stake when a pardon was set before him. 219 Humiliation for the evil of
selfishness, a special help to Self-denial. 325 Hunting and hawking. 173
Husbands, a discovery of their selfishness in diverse particulars. 249
Hypocrites, 313. hypocritical Preacher, ibid. the Hypocrite always perverteth
the practical, as the Heretic does the Theorical rules of Scripture, 49
I
IGnorance, the Mother of presumption, as well as of despair. 8 Imitation, we
are to imitate Christ. 417 Indifferent, we may sin in using things
indifferent, if we observe not the rule of expediency, 340. great contests
amongst Professors, from hence, that they will not allow one another their just
liberty in things indifferent. 170 Initial grace. 59, 60 Integrity in a
self-denying man, 272, 273 Ipse dixit. 30 Justice, what it is. 322
Justification, what it is, opened, 70. righteousness of sanctification cannot
justify, 71, 72. what the righteousness whereby we are justified is. ibid.
K
(...), 293 King, a self-denying man, the only true King, 303, others are so
Kings, that they are also slaves. ibid. Kingdom, impossible without
Self-denial to enter into the Kingdom of God. 232 King-sin. 328
L
Labor, a self-denying man can endure great labors, 266. the particulars
enumerated. ibid. Lex naturae, peccati and mortis. 343 Liberty, Ignorance of
Christian liberty a cause of much trouble to young converts, 168. Self-denial a
Christians liberty, 295. never go to the utmost extent of our lawful liberty.
339 Licitis perimus omnes. 341 Life eternal described. 369 Light, the danger of
sinning against light, 328 Lines, strong lines, but slender matter, 120 Living
in sin, to live in any one sin is inconsistent with Self-denial. 257 Longing,
we have a kind of longing, that others should take notice of that which we
our selves do. 356. Looking-glass, the Word is the Lookingglass wherein we are
to view our hearts and ways, 315. It Is no flattering-glass. ibid. Love, what
is the cause of it, 184. it is of the nature of fire, 185. Self-love, and
self-conceit do always dwell together, 95, 96. Love runs not so easily in a
collateral or retrograde, as in a down right stream. 100
M
MAchiavil, his Principles. 246, 247 Madness, the reason why so many men of
great parts and learning are smitten with it. 153 Magistrates, a discovery of
their selfishness in diverse particulars. 242 Magistratus, indicat virum. 317
Man is not a self-sufficient creature, 176. in his best estate he was
negatively poor, now he is privatively poor. ibid. Marsh Martyr, his saying,
219 Means, Men complain of nature when they neglect the means, 83. It is lawful
to use means to free our selves of our troubles, but all means are not lawful
to be used, 218 Merchants; an appeal to them concerning the greatest gain. 356
Merit, grace cannot be merited 64. no such thing as meriting in the state of
innocence. ibid. Merit, of congruity, the doctrine of Papists and Arminians
concerning it, confuted, 66, 67 Merit of condignity, arguments against it, 164,
165, 166 Middle, twofold, of participation and abnegation. 339, 340 Ministers
apt to envy one another, 101. A discovery of their selfishness, in diverse of
particulars, 242. they should not scorn to be Ushers under Christ to teach his
Petits their ABC. 127 Missilia. 76 Moon, an emblem of all things here below.
345 Moralities, a shameful thing for those that profess, not to be raised above
moralities, 277 Moral swasion. 55 Mortification, there is an affliction in it,
which whosoever means to be a Christian indeed, must daily undergo, though God
should never call him to suffer persecution, 14 Motions of the spirit, the
benefit of following them, 403. the danger of neglecting them. 406, 407
Murmuring, many murmr because that is denied to themselves that is given to
others, 81. the unreasonableness of it, 82
N
NAme, many contenting themselves with the bare name of Christians, continue to
live the lives of Pagans, 3. 181, 182 Natural men can do nothing formally good,
67. nothing to prepare themselves for conversion. 68 Nature, men complain of
nature when they neglect the means. 83 Necessary things come not under
deliberation. 262. Necessity, God gives not only for necessity, but delight
also. 167 Negative voice, he has the royal power that has the negative
voice. 302 Neighbor, Self and Christ are two overthwart neighbors that can
never agree. 241 Nonentity, our beings environed with it, and border upon it.
350 Non nobis Domine. 354 Non posse pretenditur, non velle in causa est. 46
Nothing, were we once nothing in our own eyes, we should be content to be
nothing in the eyes of others. 357 Nothingness, we must study our own
nothingness. 347. our nothingness declared in several particulars, 350, 351,
etc. we must study the nothingness of all worldly things, their nothingness
declared in sundry particulars. 361, etc.
O
OBedience, what is not to be the rule of our obedience, 156, 157, 158, etc.
what is to be the rule of it. 161 Obsequium amicos, etc. 356 Occasions of
self-pleasing, carefully to be avoided. 410 Opinion that self has of worldly
things. 175 Operari, not only our esse, but our operari is dependent upon a
cause without our selves. 351 Ordinance, to pervert, but a civil ordinance to
the fulfilling of any sinful lust, is a very great wickedness, much more to
pervert a spiritual ordinance. 150 Original sin. 326, 327 Orpheus a Musician, a
fiction concerning him, applied. 260 Overtures, those secret overtures that
Self makes, are carefully to be taken notice of. 315 (...). 66
P
PAcem te poscimus omnes. 290 Palmer Martyr, his sayings to his Mother. 228,
etc. Paradox. 283 Parents must correct their children, 226. the selfishness of
Parents discovered in diverse particulars. 250 Parley, never parley with a
temptation, 329. he shoots in Satan's bow, that thinks by parleying with him,
to put him off. 337 Parts, pretended denial of our own parts and abilities,
causes of it in diverse persons, 92, 93 Patience, much of Self-denial exercised
in it. 284 Peace, God has ordained that much of that spiritual peace which he
dispenses to his people, should be wrought by means of their good works, 129.
Self-denial a Christians peace. 283 Pelagian forge. 68 Persecution, Self-denial
secures a man in time of persecution. 292 Persuasion, It is not our persuasion,
but the ground of it, that argues our estate to be good. 48 Philpot Martyr, his
resolution, 218. his Letters to the Lady Vane, 287, 288. his Letter to certain
gedly Brethren. 304 Plays, the laborious idleness of many great wits in
compiling of them. 120 Pleasure, there is nothing that the heart of man is more
set upon. 283 Posse malum non est posse. 268 Power, want of power is pretended
but want of will is the cause why those that are godly do no more than they do.
46. two sorts under the power of things indifferent, 342 Praise, what it is.
162 Praising of God, what it is to praise God aright. 62 Prayer, many will pray
for the killing of their lusts, even while they are loath that God should hear
their prayers, 36. we should be much in prayer for Self-denial, 421. several
doubts about it answered, 422, etc. Preachers, who they be that the Vulgar take
for the ablest Preachers, 119. Hypocritical Preachers. 313 Preaching, abuses in
preaching, 117, 118, etc. Presumption, men are apt to presume upon their gifts,
though they have no grace, 106. two sorts of such persons. 106, 107 Pretenses,
It Is ordinary for men to pretend one thing, and intend another. 146 Preventing
grace. 69 Pride, It is not humility but pride, not to acknowledge whatsoever
good God has wrought in us, 43. spiritual pride is in the best of men, though
it be one of their greatest infirmities, yet it arises out of their chiefest
excellencies, 62, 63. men that have gifts apt to grow proud of them, 97, 98.
there is a twofold pride, a learned and a stubborn pride, 97. many proud of
their own blackness. 96 Principles, Self has many wicked and cursed
Principles, whereby it mis-leadeth the generality of the world, diverse of them
mentioned, 31, 32. we should be careful to acquaint our selves with Gospel
Principles, and charge them upon our consciences, 33. Self does violence to
Principles of reason and revelation. 39 Profession of Religion, two kinds of
it, 2. many rashly and inconsiderately adventure upon it, 3. and 8. It is a
shameful thing for those that make a Profession, not to be raised above
moralities. 277 Professors, worldling professors, what their main end is. 145,
146 Proportion of graces to graces, 275. of actions to graces, 276. of actions
unto actions. 277 Proximus, egomet mibi. 95 Prudence, worldly prudence, 294.
Prudential foolery 295 Pulcher, unde. 279 Pulpit, some come up into the Pulpit
with mere vapors and flashes of words, strong lines but slender matter, 120.
He has his Pulpit in heaven, that teaches hearts 261 Purgatory of
self-denial. 263
Q
QUestion, what the question is that Self asks when we are about to do any
thing, 137. how it answers it, 138, 139 and 143 Questions, to be propounded to
our selves for the finding out of our selfishness 316, 317, etc.
R
REason, seeming reason to be distinguished from that which is reason indeed,
30. faith stops the mouth of carnal reason, and brings it to a nonplus. 377
Reasoning, a twofold reasoning with self, 23 Receipt, a tried receipt that
never failed of the cure. 358 Recompense of reward, we may have respect to it
in doing of good works, 134. it must be eyed, 363. what the recompense of
reward is, 365, 366, etc. what it is to eye it. 370, etc. Reformation, the
reformation of any evil must have the foundation of it laid in a deep
humiliation. 325 Regenerate, it is the regenerate man only that can deny
himself. 19 Reign, all reigning sin excluded by Self-denial, 257. Every self
denying man, reigns not only over himself, but over the whole world. 302
Relations, not to connive at them in any sinful way if we be superiors, 223.
not to comply with them in any sinful way if we be inferiors. 227. the
nearer the relation, the dearer the love, and the more indearing must the
expressions of it be. 221 Rem, Rem, quocunque modo Rem, the keeping of the
worldlings song. 189 Resolution, All will come to nothing, till we come to an
unchangeable resolution of doing our present duty. 339 Respect of persons, none
with God. 108 Revelations, the delusion of those that rely upon pretended
Revelations, and there upon neglect to stir up the gifts they have received,
94. the folly and madness of such persons. 95 Right, a believer has the best
right of any unto the creatures. 168. Righteousness of sanctification cannot
justify, 71, 72. the righteousness whereby we are justified, what it is,
ibid. Romances, the laborious idleness of many great wits in compiling them.
120 Ruin, two things there are that ruin those that perish under the Gospel.
1 Rule, what it is that God has given to be our rule in all our undertakings,
and the sufficiency of it. 165
S
SAfety, Self-denial a Christians safety, 291 Scriptures, the sufficiency of
them for our direction. 161 Secreta Deo. 125 Self, what it is, 18. the greatest
enemy to Christ, 24. must not only be arraigned, and convicted, but
condemned, 34. and executed, 36. it will affirm what is not to be affirmed
both of sins and duties, 28, 29. it is a bottomless gulf that sucks in all
before it, 37. makes every thing become tributary, 38. therefore must be cut
short of its allowance, 38. what ever it acts for, it acts for it as its God,
142 Self-confidence. 113 Self-consulters, of whom they take counsel. 23
Self-denial, exceeding painful in the practice of it, so that no unregenerate
man is able to endure it, 3. it is the first lesson, howsoever it be the last
that is well learned. 15 Self Ends, 137. what is to be accounted a self-end,
and what not, 143 Self-hatred, necessary to Gospel obedience, our entrance upon
it, and perseverance in it. 4 Selfish, a selfish man is besides himself. 284
Self-love the leading affection, and that which exercises a sovereignty over
all the rest. 2. self-love and self-conceit do always dwell together. 95, 96
Self-praise must be denied. 162 Self respects, it is an argument of an
excellent spirit when all self-respects are drowned in the glory of God. 136
Self-seeking, there is a self-seeking that is very good, and a self-seeking
that is stark naught, 136. Nothing will so furiously fly in the face of
conscience at the last as this sin. 286 Sellers, a discovery of their
selfishnesse in diverse particulars. 225 Semper victuri. 339 Sermons, such as
have no command over their own spirits, no fit hearers of them. 12, 13
Servants, a discovery of their selfishnesse in diverse particulars. 253
Servitude, some kind of servitude in all religions. 15 Shame, sin the most
shameful evil, 297. brings a man into the most shameful vassalage. ibid Sin,
original, 326. darling sin, 327. it is a kind of root. 328 Sovereignty, the
serious consideration of the absolute sovereignty of God over us, will show us
the unreasonableness of murmuring against him. 82. self-denial, a christians
sovereignty. 302 Soul, too often sympathizeth with the body, 346. how it is to
be considered in the practice of self-denial. 19 Spira, his story, 200, etc.
Spirit, the excellency of any man lies in his spirit. 280 Spirit, the spirit is
sent in pursuance of the fathers design in election, and of the Son in
redemption. 402 Splend idum nihil. 110 Strength, self-denial a Christians
strength, 265. Strength especially seen in three things. ibid Suffering, the
cause why men are afraid of it, 2. and why impatient under it. ibid (...). 48
Symmetry, where there is self denial, there is not only integrity, but
symmetry and proportion. 275
T
TAnkerfield martyr, his saying. 195 Temptation, what the first temptation was,
126. never parley with a temptation, either to the commission of any known sin,
or omission of any known duty. 328 Testimony of Gods Spirit always accompanied
with the testimony of our own. 48 Theosophists. 115 Time, it is the Devils
policy to gain time. 339 Tradition, the doctrine of the Pharisees and Papists
concerning it, 154, 155. to make it the rule of our obedience, provokes God
exceedingly. 156 Trifles, we should not exercise our gifts about them. 128
Trinity, the worlds Trinity, what, 359 Trial, Self-tryal, a duty necessary to
Self-denial. 309 Tumor cerebri and cordis. 97 Tyrant, the grand Tyrant under
which all natural men lie, is Self. 40
V
Virtue lies in the middle betwixt two extremes. 339 Vir bonus commune bonum.
306 Ultimum virium. 67 Union, Self-denial the greatest preservative of union.
307 Unlawful commodities. 256 Voluntaries, the Disciples of Christ must be
voluntaries, not prest-men. 8 Vow in Baptism frequently to be renewed. 412,
413 Use, We are never fit to use any thing we are slaves to. 344 Usefulness,
the excellency of any thing lies in its usefulness. 307
W
WAlk, to walk in the spirit, what is meant by it. 401, etc. White Martyr, his
saying as he went to the stake. 230 Willingly, the more willingly any one acts
to his own hurt, the more wretched he is. 298 Will Worship abominable. 337
Wives, a discovery of their selfishness, in diverse particulars. 250 Wolsey
Martyr, his message to Denton, who turned Apostate. 213 Works, never suo jure
in the first covenant, 64, 65. we may take comfort from our good works, 129.
and rejoice in them, 131, 132. there is no good work, but what is the fruit of
faith. 389 Worlds Trinity. 359 Worlding-Professors, what their manner is. 145,
146 Worldly-men cannot endure to think of being happy by God alone. 181
Worldly-things, the many wicked courses that men take for worldly things
enumerated. 189
Y
YOung converts meet with much trouble through ignorance of their Christian
liberty. 168
Z
Zeal, It Is hard escaping a censure when blind zeal is to be Judge, 170. A
self-denying man has knowledge answerable unto zeal, and zeal answerable unto
knowledge. 275
A Table of the Scriptures briefly opened and illustrated in the foregoing
TREATISE.
The first number shows the Chapter, the second the Verse, the third the Page.

Chap. Verse. Page Genesis. 02 15 173 03 01 335 30 27 399 32 10 352 39 07 334 00
08 ibid. Exodus. 04 10 093 12 36 040 20 05 161 Leviticus. 12 06 016 Numbers. 22
08 138 00 22 335 Deuteronomy. 13 06 223 21 18 226 33 08 224 00 09 ibid. Judges.
05 09 271 I Sam uel. 02 27 224 03 11 226 15 13 376 16 07 109 18 08 101 00 09
ibid. 21 13 053 II Samuel. 03 09 139 00 10 ibid. I Kings. 20 27 037 21 20 041
22 08 023 Psalms. 002 01 024 014 01 179 015 04 078 024 05 130 000 11 ibid. 045
10 271 000 11 ibid. 073 28 401 084 07 269 092 04 131 119 59 319 133 01 307 139
22 223 000 23 ibid. 144 03 349 000 04 ibid. Proverbs. 07 22 320 14 13 285 16 32
265 17 27 280 30 07 037 Ecclesiastes. 09 01 361 10 07 344 Canticles. 01 05 045
05 02 ibid. Isaiah. 1 4 144 41 21 030 44 20 298 48 2 049 22 286 50 11 ibid. 58
3 162 64 7 046 047 65 1 069 24 384 Jeremiah. 2 24 411 44 17 159 Lamentations. 3
40 309 Ezekiel. 21 26 043 Daniel. 04 14 327 Hosea. 4 10 338 16 145 5 11 158 12
ibid. Micha. 6 10 150 Matthew. 4 10 336 6 2 367 7 9 222 9 22 391 10 21 079 38
013 11 16 193 17 ibid. 12 29 039 16 25 135 26 362 18 8 263 9 ibid. 19 17 142 28
011 29 366 20 15 086 23 13 156 14 141 25 11 052 12 ibid. 20 409 29 060 Luke. 9
23 014 10 41 177 14 22 068 069 26 222 15 21 065 19 21 274 21 19 284 John. 1 16
275 2 1 168 3 6 019 6 34 180 7 45 098 46 ibid. 14 6 177 18 6 144 11 193 19 15
035 17 013 Acts. 2 46 270 3 13 035 14 ibid 8 19 147 13 22 307 Romans. 1 31 221
2 7 135 11 108 4 5 070 5 19 071 6 6 019 7 9 026 8 7 024 8 067 16 048 26 014 31
404 35 267 11 18 326 12 3 102 4 103 5 ibid. 13 14 346 14 22 331 16 26 375 I
Corinthians. 1 12 089 3 4 279 4 019 4 7 104 6 12 342 10 23 340 31 151 12 15 084
16 296 17 ibid 26 105 14 19 127 15 41 124 II Corinthians. 3 8 077 4 17 135 18
293 369 372 12 7 405 Galatians. 5 16 401 17 019 24 267 25 408 6 4 130
Ephesians. 4 16 080 104 5 10 027 28 221 6 16 390 Philippians. 3 14 373 19 142
21 371 4 8 080 370 Colossians. 1 11 273 24 014 2 15 040 16 076 332 18 116 20
169 21 170 3 1 185 I Thessalonians. 2 5 146 5 8 390 II Timothy. 1 6 046 7 ibid
3 1 322 3 221 3 512 Titus. 2 4 221 11 245 12 016 Hebrews. 5 13 127 6 4 077 9 14
067 10 32 399 11 1 384 5 389 24 363 370 James. 1 10 290 2 17 388 3 17 286 4 5
084 7 337 11 170 12 ibid I Peter. 1 15 274 4 10 305 II Peter. 1 5 273 6 ibid 2
22 395 3 16 123 I John. 2 15 359 16 167 3 8 132 20 048 III John. 9 100
Revelation. 3 2 409 8 408 12 1 345

Errata ita poterunt emendari.
PAge 2. line 2. after Religion, make a full period, and begin the next word
with a great letter, thus, Notwithstanding all the preaching, etc. Page 7. l.
25. for errors, r. error. p. 10. l. 14. blot out [(...)] and read (...), p.
13. l. 17. blot out [i. e.] and read (...), etc. and set down Plutarch, with a
mark referring to it in the Margin, l. 30. for handsome, r. transome, p. 14. l.
14. r. By cross is meant affliction, etc. p. 21. l. 17. for that that, r. than
that, p. 35. l. 27. for. debate, l. devote, p. 36. l. 23. r. 3. There is an
hostile Self-denial, etc. p. 47. l. 2. r. assingat, p. 106. l. 25. r. ennobled,
p. 155. in the Margin r. Bellarmin enervat, p. 169. l. 14. blot out this figure
[^] p. 178. in the Margin for (...) r (...) all along, (...), etc. p. 201. l.
2. blot out the comma after doctrine, and make it after notwithstanding, p.
217, l. 15. for allies, r. all ours, p. 224. in the Margin for qui certe vergem
sensus, r. qui certe verus est sensus, p. 338. l. 30. r. If he be not denied,
p. 239. l. 17. in the Margin, for inde cavit, r indicavit, l. 19. for bonam, r.
bonum, and for quod vere bonum non esse, nec posse non velle, r. quod vere
bonum non est, nec possit non velle, l. 22. for (...) been utatum, r. ne (...)
been utatur, p. 244. l. 22. r. Assistants, p. 252. l. 17. r. that pinch their
servants, etc. p. 267. l. 22. for overcome, r. over-overcome, p. 273. l. 2.
blot out the comma after them, and read after the perfection of, etc p. 328. l.
10. r. a branch that corruption, etc. p. 346. l. 32. r. worthy of it self, p.
373. l. 13. make the comma after not, and read, yet he prevails not.

Mr. Polwheile of Self-denial.


