A True and Faithful NARRATIVE (for substance) Of a Public Dispute BETWEEN
Mr. Tho. Porter, and Mr. Hen. Haggar; CONCERNING INFANT BAPTISM. In the Parish
Church of Ellesmer in the County of Salop, on the 30 of April, 1656.

By one who was present at, and a diligent observer of, the Debate.

ROMANS 16.17, 18. Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions
and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them.

For they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly,
and By good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.

Nemo est qui non videat Paedobaptismum nequaquam humanitus fabrefactum fuisse,
qui Tanta Scripturae approbatione fulciatur. Nec satis speciose nugantur, qui
objiciunt, nusquam reperiri, vel unum Infantem per Apostolorum manus fuisse
baptizatum. Etsi enim id Nominatim ab Evangelistis non narratur, quia tamen
neque rursum excludantur i^i, quoties familiae alicujus baptizatae incidit
mentio; quis inde, nisi Insanus, raticcinetur non fuisse baptizatos? --

Quod autem apud simplicem vulgum disseminant, longam annorum seriem post
Christi Resurrectionem praeteriisse, quibus incognitus erat Paedobaptismus: In
co foedissime mentiuntur, siquidem nullus scriptor tam vetustus qui non ejus
Originem ad Apostolorum seculum Pro certo referat.

Calv. Instit. Lib. 4. Cap. 16. Sect. 8. LONDON, Printed for John Clark, at the
Entrance into Mercers-Chappel, at the lower end of Cheapside. 1656.

An Advertisement to the Readers.
READERS,
WHether friends or foes, staggering or settled, I though it not only expedient,
but needful (having had perfect understanding of all things (concerning the
debate) from the first) to acquaint you with the occasion of this Contest, and
the rather that some things here may be hinted, which could not be so
conveniently set down in the body of the Narrative.

Mr. Porter being called to Preach the Gospel in Ellesmer, on Feb. 13. 1655.
did in his Sermon take occasion (as he thought he was bound) to vindicate
himself (with a spirit of meekness) from some asperpersions which (some of the
rebaptized judgment (that was his phrase) had cast upon him. Whereupon some
best known for distinction by the name of Anabaptists) did write a Letter to
him, desiring him to come the next monthly Lecture to make good what he had
delivered, and that then and there, there should be some (God willing) to
dispute with him about Infant Baptism. Mr. Porter came the day appointed, Nath.
Gillow, Jo. Capper, Jo. Edwards, Ma. Edw.
and proved four of the Anabaptists in Ellesme, arrant LIARS (though I cannot
learn that they have taken shame to themselves for their sin of Lying, nor
given any satisfaction to Mr. Porter. As if Lying were a natural ingredient
into Anabaptism (as Bullinger in answer to an Objector said) nor can you show
me ONE MAN of them, who is not blemished with some of the foresaid
wickednesses, I mean Lying, Sedition, Idleness, etc.) At which time also, it
was agreed, that on the last of April a Public Dispute should be held, in the
Parish Church of Ellesmer aforesaid, about Infant Baptism. ( N. G. and J. C.
stating the question thus, All Infant Baptism is unlawful) and that either
Hen. Haggar, or James Brown, or Richard Newton, should enter the lists with Mr.
Porter, and that each side was left at liberty to bring a Moderator with them.
The day being come, Mr. Tallants was desired to be Moderator for Mr. Porter;
and Mr. Brown was designed to be Moderator for Mr. Haggar. Not long after the
dispute was begun, Mr. Haggar and Mr. Brown, cried hard for Scripture, express
Scripture to prove the lawfulness of Infant Baptism. Mr. Porter answered, That
if he must fight with them, they must give him leave to choose his weapons,
prov^ded he brings them out of Gods Armory. Beside, he said his adversaries
were unreasonable to press him to that task which he never undertook. Mr. Brown
said, he had Mr. Porters Letter to show for it, Mr. Brown was desired to
produce and read the Letter (if he had any to such import) in the presence and
audience of that great Congregation, but none was read. Then Mr. Porter said,
he would make a short cut of the Debate, offering to Mr. Haggar that if he
would produce one express Stripture to prove Infant Baptism unlawful, for his
part he would lay down the Wasters. Mr. Haggar said, He came not on that
account (disliking and disowning the stating of the question by his brethren)
but to make good the Baptizing of believers by clear Scriptures. Then M. Porter
also offered, that if they would produce one express Scripture (in their sense)
to prove the lawfulness of Baptizing actual believers, or visible Saints, he
for his part would lay down the wasters. Mr. Haggar said, He came to hear what
could be said out of Scripture in justification of Infant Baptism. So that
though the Adversaries kept a great bawling for Express Scripture (as to
Infant Baptism) yet they could not prove their own way of Baptizing by any one
express Scripture. And is it not meet the same law should be taken and given?
It was observed, that Mr. Brown for very indignation did gnash with his teeth,
as if he would have bitten; and did knit his fist together, as if he would have
beaten Mr. Porter therewith: (so mighty was Truth and operative) and it was
very remarkable, that when Mr. Porter propounded any argument, Mr. Haggar could
not be prevailed with (though often pressed thereto) to answer directly and
briefly, but used Circumlocuti^ns to inveigle the people, (a piece of his
cunning craftiness, whereby he lies in wait to deceive, as the Apostle speaks,
Ephesians. 4. 14.) But Mr. Porter told him, that he hoped old birds would not be
caught with chafe. Toward the close of the Dispute, an ancient professor R. L.
desired to speak a few words, v^z. Mr. Haggar had Preached in that place
(pointing to the Pulpit) about two years ago, that InfantBaptism was
Antichristian, and that he with others came to hear a confirmation of that
Doctrine by Scripture, and (though Mr. Haggar was desired, yet) not one
Scripture was alleged. To which Mr. Haggar replied, that perhaps he might then
deliver that Infant Baptism was not true Baptism, or that the Baptism of Christ
was not to be found in the Church of England. To which Mr. Porter replied, It Is
blasphemy, being ready to make it out; and added withal, that he, to his best
observation, could not find in the New Testament any of years Baptized, but
either they were Jews or Heathens: and if Mr. Haggar and his disciples, would
acknowledge themselves to be such, much good do it them with their new way of
Baptizing. Then Mr. Haggar read out of the Bible, Deuteronomy. 28.18, 19, 20. in the
audience of the people, and Mr. Porter read Isaiah 65.23. After which Mr.
Tallant sweetly concluded with Prayer, and so the Congregation was dismissed.

Judge. 19.30. Consider of it, take advice and speak you minds.
A True and Faithful NARRATIVE (for substance) Of a Public Dispute BETWEEN
Mr. Tho. Porter, and Mr. Hen. Haggar, CONCERNING INFANT BAPTISM.
THere was a great Congregation (consisting of many hundreds, yea of some
thousands) assembled together in the Parish Church of Ellesmer. After filence
had been desired, and some things premised and assented unto, for the better
carrying on of the debate; Mr. Porter made a proposal, that (it being
acknowledged to be the work of the Lord) Prayer might be made to the Lord, for
his direction, assistance, and blessing in so great an undertaking. Mr. Haggar
declared his judgment, that he could not join in Prayer (as things stood) much
less be the mouth of Prayer in that juncture of time; nay, he conceived it
needless, for the business had been commended to the Lord in Prayer, before
himself and his party came into that place. But if (says he) you be pleased to
pray, we will not interrupt you in prayer. Mr. Porter replied, that, Sir, there
lies a scruple on my spirit, whether it be fit for me to maintain a Disputation
with you, who do refuse to join in supplication with me, who have (without
vanity be it spoken) sought the Lord in secret also as well as you; and I must
tell you beside, many are seeking the Lord in my behalf this day, whose prayers
(I trust) will be prevalent. Notwithstanding, because I judge it fit and
needful to begin with Prayer, and you have promised not to interrupt, the
reverend and godly moderater Mr. Tallants is desired to begin the action with
Prayer. Mr. Tallants declared, that he held it fit and meet to put up a few
petitions to the Lord: which being done accordingly by him, Mr. Porter
expressed himself in these or the like words following.

Mr. Port. What I have to say concerning Infant Baptism, may be reduced to
three heads. viz.

1. The Precept of Christ. 2. The Practice of the Apostles. 3. The privileges
indulged to Infants of believing Parents. And I hope a threefold cord is not
easily broken.
For the Precept of Christ.

See Matthew. 28.19, 20. I shall crave leave briefly to give the sense of these
words, (as I humbly conceive) that the strength of my argument, (grounded on
this Scripture) may be the better discerned. Our Lord Christ having received a
plenipotencie from the Father, verse. 18. All power is given to me; does here
give to his Apostles a Commission, or rather an enlargement of their
Commission, viz. Teach all nations, -- The word ought to be rendered Disciple,
else there might seem to be a Tautologie in christ's expression (be it spoken
with reverence) teach -- teaching, ve. 20. And pious and learned Cameron hints,
it may be rendered to Proselyte, which is all one to Disciple. -- Now we know,
when a Master of a family became a Proselyte of the Jewish Church, his whole
Family were made Proselytes too. Now who are to be discipled? all Nations, in
distinction from, and opposition to the Jewish Nation. For the Apostles were
confined before within the pale of Judea; now their Commission is enlarged, To
Disciple all Nations; which universal expression (without doubt) comprehends
Infants, a considerable part of any Nation (as the children of the Ninivites
were of the City of Ninive, Foundat. of the Fort discovered. page 61.
Jon. 4.11.) and Mr. Haggar himself does include them in that little large word
All, Romans 5.18. By the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men
to justification of life. Now, if Mr. Haggar were not partial, he might
include Infants here in Matthew, as well as there in the Romans. And surely if
our Saviors intent had been to have excluded Infants, he would have made an
exception, which had been seasonable and needful in this Commission.

Mr. Haggar. It Is said by Mr. Porter, that the word Teach, must be rendered
Disciple all nations, else Christ must be accused of Tautologie. No such
matter, for the words hold forth, a teaching before Baptism, and a teaching
after Baptism; before Baptism; and a teaching after Baptism, to build them up
in the faith, as appears by the practice of the Apostles, Act 2.41. to the end
of the Chapter, and Act. 8.5, 12.

Mr. Porter. Did I say, else Christ must be accused of Tautologie? no, else
there might seem to be a Tautologie in Christ's expression, being spoken with
reverence, (though Spanhemius Si (...) simpliciter tantum significaret docere,
(...) reperiretur in Christi verbis. Spanh. Dub. Evang. part. 3. Dub. 27.
is bold to say, if the word signifies simply to Teach, a Tautologie would be
found in Christ's words) Surely I must expect to be misrepresented behind my
back, since you do misrepresent me before my face, and that in the audience of
so great a Congregation, to whom I appeal.

2. There is no express mention made of Teaching in either of those places of
the Acts forequoted.

3. If there were, yet the instances are not alike, if Matthew and the Acts be
compared. For here in Mat. 28. is a great act enjoined, Teach, or rather
Disciple -- Secondly, the manner how it is to be performed, by Baptizing and by
Teaching. Indeed, if the words had run thus, Teach and baptize -- and teach,
there had been some color for your exception. But the word Teach or Disciple
(...).
is in the Imperative mood, and the other two are (...).
Participles.

4. These words in Matthew do not necessarily prove that teaching must precede
baptizing, but rather the contrary, baptizing before teaching. For baptizing is
set down before teaching, in verse. 19. and teaching, in verse. 20. Though we
must distinguish between a Church to be constituted, and a Church already
constituted. Abraham must be taught before he be circumcised; but his children
of eight days old, must be circumcised first, then taught. Thus when a
Proselyte of the Gentiles embraced the Jewish religion, profession preceded
circumcision, but it was not so with his children. Thus now where the Gospel
is first preached to Jews or Gentiles, when the Parents gave their names to
Christ, for themselves and for their family, the whole household is discipled
Luke 19.9.
. So I come to the first Argument, grounded on this Scripture.

The Disciples of Christ may be baptized;
Some Infants are the Disciples of Christ; therefore
Some Infants may be baptized.
Mr. Haggar (as it seems his manner is) made a large Oration to the people, but
nothing in answer to the Argument.

Mr. Porter. I pray you Sir give me an answer to my Argument, by denying or
distinguishing. So far as I can collect from your rambling discourse (which
for the future I desire you to forbear, and to speak less or more to purpose)
I conceive that you seem to deny the Minor, which I prove out of Act. 21.4, 5.

At which the people laughed.
Mr. Brown. But you cannot prove Infants disciples in Scripture.

Mr. Porter. If I prove their Discipleship out of Scripture, surely it is found
in or by Scripture, as Act. 27.2, 11. Paul reasoned out of the Scriptures.

Mr. Brown. Show me where it is written in Scripture, that Infants are to be
baptized, if it were written there, I could read it there.

Mr. Porter. And so you may read it there, if you were not blind; and who so
blind as he who will not see? But I shall stop your mouth presently, Redemption
freed from restraint.
you have published in your book, that the sprinkling of Infants is an
Antichristian idol; where is this Sir written in Scripture.

Mr. Brown. What is this to the Baptizing or discipling of Infants, etc?

Mr. Tallants. It is written in Scripture, Disciples are to be Baptized; it is
written in Scripture, Infants are Disciples; therefore, it is written in
Scripture, Infants are to be baptized. I pray you Mr. Porter prove them
Disciples.

Mr. Porter. I was about it (but was interrupted by Mr. Haggar and Mr. Brown,
who are like a Lapwing that makes the greatest noise when furthest from the
nest) and produced Act. 21.4, 5. From whence I thus argue: They who did
accompany Paul in his journey were Disciples; But some Infants did accompany
Paul in his journey; Therefore some Infants are Disciples.

Mr. Haggar. (Having read the place quoted) I find that the Disciples with
their wives and children brought Paul onwards on his way, but not that the
children are called Disciples.

Mr. Brown. There was no mention made of Infants in those words, how then do
they hold forth Infant Baptism?

Mr. Porter. I have showed some Infants are to be Baptized, because they are
Disciples; I am now upon proving that Infants are disciples. And what though
Infants are not here expressly mentioned, they are not to be excluded; nay,
Children are here mentioned, Infants are Children, therefore Infants -- And I
confirm it by a parallel phrase, Phil. 1.1. To the Saints at Philippi, with
the Bishops and Deacons; so here, Disciples with Wives and Children. Now if
Bishops and Deacons must not be shut out from being Saints (in the Philippians)
then neither Wives nor Children from being Disciples (in the Acts.) Scripture
you see must expound Scripture. See also 2 Chro. 20.13. Gal. 5.24.


Mr. Haggar. We know Deacons were Saints before they were Deacons, Act. 6.3.

Mr. Tall. What is this to the purpose? Proceed Mr. Porter.

Mr. Porter. I further prove them ( viz. some Infants) Disciples, by Act.
15.10. Why tempt ye God, to put a yoke on the neck of the disciples, etc. They
on whom the false teachers would have laid the yoke of circumcision were
Disciples; but the false teachers would have laid the yoke of circumcision on
Infants (as well as grown men.) Therefore Infants (as well as grown men) were
Disciples.

Mr. Haggar. Prove that they would have laid this yoke on Infants.

Mr. Porter. They who would have had the Disciples circumcised after the manner
of Moses, would have laid this yoke on Infants, as well as grown men; But the
false teachers would have had the Disciples circumcised after the manner of
Moses See Exodus 1.5.24. Here the people hist and laughed at him, and stamped
with their feet for indignation.
Therefore --

Mr. Haggar. We deny the Conclusion. We come not to answer Arguments, but to
hear Scripture for Infant Baptism. And there is no duty to be practiced, but
it is in as plain terms in Scripture as this, He that believes shall be saved.

Mr. Brown. Why do you, Mr. Porter, suffer those young men (that stand by you)
to carry themselves so uncivilly? Nay, I saw your self smiling.

Mr. Porter. Who these young men are I know not, they came not with me, they are
strangers to me, I have no command of their gesture. I could desire you and Mr.
Haggar to carry your selves so gravely and soberly, that no occasion may be
given of hissing and laughing at you. I know none but women and Mr. Haggar who
will deny the Conclusion. And for my self, it is true, I smiled, but it was at
you and your brothers folly. And whereas Mr. Haggar you imply you must have
express Scripture for every duty to be practiced, you pray before and after
your Sermons, do you not? and where have you express Scripture for that
practice? and an hundred more? As 1. Prayer in family twice a day. 2.
Worshipping of the holy Ghost. 3. Trusting in Christ's satisfaction and merits.
4. Women's receiving the Lords Supper. 5. Receiving it with reverence,
repentance, rejoicing, etc. 6. Using the Lords titles and properties, with
reverence, faith, knowledge, etc.

Mr. Haggar. Pray continually, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.

Mr. Porter. There is no express mention made of prayer before and after
Sermon in that Scripture. So that you see you must and do prove it by
consequence (else you must fling up this, and a great part of your Religion,
both for things to be believed and practiced) mark that (good people) whether
this be express Scripture for prayer before and after Sermon. And were you not
partial in your self, you cannot but be convinced, that Infant Baptism is
comprehended in Matthew. 28.19. as well as prayer before and after Sermon, in 1 Thessalonians. 5 17.

Mr. Tallants. Two hours have been spent in Canvasing the first Argument. You
have heard (beloved) what has been said concerning the Baptizing, of Infants,
on Scripture grounds of their Discipleship; and what has been alleged in
answer thereto. Both Arguments and Answers must be left to the judgment of
this great Congregation. I pray you, Mr. Porter, proceed to another head.

2. For Practice and Example.

1. Example.
Mr. Porter. I begin with 1 Cor. 10.2. And were all Baptized unto (or into)
Moses in the cloud, and in the sea. If some men's exposition may be admitted,
the words hold out a clear instance of Infant Baptism, Dan. Heinsius.
viz. They were all from the least even to the greatest (even to Moses himself)
baptized in the cloud and in the sea.

Mr. Haggar. All here spoken of were believers.

Mr. Porter. That is a paradox, and contrary to express Scripture, for some
were unbelievers; Heb. 3.18, 19. And to whom swear he that they should not
enter into his rest, but to them that Believed not? So we see that they could
not enter in, because of belief. Besides, it is expressly said in this Chapter,
1 Cor. 10.5. With many of them God was not well pleased. And they are called
Idolaters, v. 7. Fornicators, v. 8. Tempters of Christ, v. 9. Murmurers, v. 10.
All whose carcases fell in the wilderness for unbelief, Heb. 3.17.

Mr. Haggar. No Infants were baptized into Moses, but such as are expressly
called our Fathers, verse 1. All our Fathers were under the cloud; therefore not
Infants.

Mr. Porter. They who came out of Egypt, and passed through the sea, were
baptized into Moses; But Infants, as well as grown men, came out of Egypt and
passed through the sea; Therefore Infants, etc. Exodus 10.9. And Moses said, We
will go with our young, and with our old, with our sons, and with our
daughters, etc. and verse. 24. Let your little ones also go with you. Exodus
12.37. And the children of Israel journied from Rameses to Succoth, about six
hundred thousand on foot that were men, besides children. Besides, (Mr. Haggar)
have you not children?

Mr. Haggar. Yes Sir.

Mr. Porter. Though you are a Father as to them, yet you your self were a child
once as to your Parents. So the Apostle calls these fathers, as to the Jewish
generation in Paul's time, when yet some of them were children as to their
Parents, at the time of baptizing here spoken of. Now if all the Jewish
children that came out of Egypt, and passed through the sea, were baptized into
Moses, then Christian children may be baptized into Christ now: But the
Antecedent is true, therefore the consequent also.

Mr. Brown. If all that went through the Red sea were baptized, then their
Cattle and Goods were baptized. (Which moved laughter among the people)

Mr. Porter. An absurd expression. The Apostle speaks of persons, you of things.

Mr. Haggar. Though Moses was a type of Christ, and though it were admitted
that Infants were baptized into him, yet it does not follow that Infants in the
time of the Gospel must be baptized.

Mr. Porter. If Infants in the time of the Gospel be as capable of being
baptized by water into Christ, as those Jewish Infants were capable of being
baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea, then it follows. But Infants
are as capable of being baptized into Christ now, as they were into Moses; and
show me (if you can) any material difference.

2. Example.
Mr. Porter. Act. 16.15. She (i.e. Lydia) was baptized and her household. Whence
I argue thus, If Lydia and her household were baptized, Genesis 45.18, 19. Number.
3.15.
then some Infants were baptized (for in Scrirture language house or household
are put for children) But Lydia and her household were baptized, therefore some
Infants --

Mr. Haggar. I find nothing here of children being baptized.

Mr. Porter. Either Lydias husband, or Lydias servants, or Lydias Infants were
baptized; but neither Lydias husband nor servants, therefore her Infants --

Mr. Haggar. Lydias servants were baptized, who are called the brethren in
Lydias house, whom Paul comforted, verse. 40. now children were not capable of
being comforted.

Mr. Porter. 1. There is no express mention made of opening the heart of any
but of Lydia, and yet her household was baptized.

2. You say in your book Foundat page 6.
, If she had an husband he was baptized, for she and her household was baptized.
May I not as well say, If she had children, they were baptized, for she and her
household were baptized? were you not partial in your self?

3. In answer to verse. 40. The word house is not in the Original Beza.
, but that he went unto Lydia, who might be in some other house, for ought
appears out of the Text. And those brethren, whosoever, or wheresoever they
were, might be comforted, and yet her children be baptized. Children are
capable of Baptism, though not of consolation.

3. Example.
Mr. Porter. Act. 16.33. The Jailer was Baptized, he and all his straitghtway.
Whence I argue thus, If the Jailer and all his were baptized, then some Infants
were baptized; but the former is true, therefore the latter.

Mr. Haggar. By all his are to be understood his servants, not his children,
because it is said, verse. 32. The word was spoken to all that were in his house;
and verse. 34. He rejoiced, believing in God with all his house.

Mr. Porter. Servants are no more expressly mentioned then children; and if
you include Servants, how can you exclude Infants?

2. These all his, cannot be the same with those verse. 32. for the word his,
signifies of him, his natural offspring, begotten of him; and who are more
properly his then children? And therefore the holy Ghost of purpose changes
the phrase, All in his house, verse. 32. All his, verse. 33. Whereas if he had
meant the same, he would have set down the same phrase, He and all that were in
his house were baptized; but in stead of that, to show a difference, he says
here, He and all his, See the like phrase in Romans 8.9. 2 Timothy 2.19.
to distinguish between the Apostles preaching and baptizing.

3. Nor the same with All his house, verse. 34. For though (I deny not but) the
Jailer believed in God according to verse. 31. yet the words might and are to be
read thus; After he had believed God, he rejoiced all his house over, he
daunced (as it were a Galliard, as the word signifies) and leaped for joy in
every room of his house.

Mr. Haggar. I confess my ignorance in the Greek Then Mr. Haggar is an
hypocrite, for he professes skill therein in one word. Foundat. p. 68.
tongue: but so it has been read and understood till of late time.

Mr. Brown. What is the word in the Original?

Mr. Porter. (...) -- it is an adverb, q. domesticatim, in every room of his
house where he came.

Mr. Brown. But the word is elsewhere taken for the whole family or house,
either in Scripture, or some Greek Authors and Lexicons.

Mr. Porter. On my credit the word is used no where else in the New Testament,
but in this place.

2. Of all men you have least reason to fly to humane Authors from holy
Scripture, since you have cried so often for Scripture, Scripture.

Mr. Brown. To the point, to the point: (thus when he was pincht he cried often)

Mr. Tallants. You have heard several Examples of Infant Baptism, and what
replies have been made. The pertinency of those instances, and of the answers,
is left to your judicious consideration. Go on I pray you (Mr. Porter) to
another head.

3. Privileges of Infants.

1. They are Church members. Whence I argue thus, Church Members may be
baptized; Infants of believing Parents are Church Members; therefore such
Infants may be baptized.

Mr. Brown. Where is it written that Infants are Church members? let us have
Scripture first, what have we to do with Arguments?

Mr. Tallants. Have patience a while, and you shall have Scripture, Mr. Porter
is coming to it.

Mr. Haggar. Infants are not Church members, because they cannot do the offices
of Church Members, as to belief, pray, admonish, etc. Prove them to be visible
Church Members.

Mr. Porter. This is all one, as if Mr. Haggar should deny Infants to have a
rational principle, because they cannot put forth all the rational acts of a
grown man.

2. They who are of the visible body of Christ, are visible Church Members (as
an hand and foot are visible members, because they are of the visible body) But
Infants of believing Parents are of the visible body of Christ; therefore --

Mr. Hrggar. Prove that Infants of believing Parents are of the visible body of
Christ.

Mr. Porter. They who have Christ to be their Savior, are of the visible body
of Christ; but Infants of believing Parents have Christ to be their Savior;
Therefore -- Foundat. p. 61. lin. 12.
The Minor Mr. Haggar acknowledges in his book forecited, That some Infants
are saved by him ( i. e. Christ) all will grant. And a little after, They ( i.
e. Infants) dying in their Infancy are saved by virtue of Christ's death -- And
if he should deny it (for he is off and on) Scripture says expressly, Ephesians. 5.
23. That Christ is the Savior of the body; and sure that is a visible body,
where there is use of water and of the word, as v. 26. Now is Christ a Savior
of any, who is not of the visible body?

At this the people laughed
Mr. Brown. The invisible Church is larger then the visible.

Mr. Porter. An absurd expression. It Is well known and generally received, that
the invisible Church contains only the good; but the visible both good and bad,
Mat. 13.47, 48.

Mr. Tallant. Many be called (there is the visible Church) but few are chosen
(there is the invisible) Mat. 20.16.

2. Privilege.
Mr. Porter. They belong to the Covenant of Grace, and the Covenant of Grace to
them. Whence I argue thus, They who belong to the Covenant of Grace may be
baptized (for they to whom the thing signified belongs, to them the initiall
sign cannot be denied) but some Infants belong to the Covenant of Grace;
therefore Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12, 15. which was a Covenant of grace: and 30.6.
with Romans 10.6, 7, 8, 9.
some Infants may be baptized.

Mr. Haggar. I do not understand what is meant by the sign and thing signified.

Mr. Brown. We have nothing to do with Arguments, you are to bring Scripture.

Mr. Porter. I have affirmed nothing yet, but what I have confirmed by
Scripture.

Mr. Haggar. Where was it to be read in Scripture, that Infants are to be
baptized? Pure Socinianism.
I deny any thing to be Scripture, but what is written in so many words and
syllables in Scripture, because Scripture is that which is written, as the word
signifies.

Mr. Porter. I have showed you diverse Scriptures, wherein (if you wipe your
eyes) you may read that it is written, Some Infants are to be baptized.

2. Scripture is either explicit or implicit; that is, either expressed or
implied as Jam. 4.5 Many things are said to be written and read in Scripture,
which are but employed; as Mat. 26.24. Mar. 9.12, 13. Luke 24.46, 47.
Do ye think that the Scripture says in vain, The spirit that dwells in us
lusts to envy? The Apostle calls this Scripture, but where is this
proposition in so many terms or syllables written in Scripture?

Mr. Haggar. It Is written there in that Text.

Mr. Porter. This is just like your answer to Mr. Baxter, who alleges Christ
proving the Resurrection of the dead by consequence, Luke 20.35, 36, 37. You
answer Foundat. p. 47, 48.
That the dead are raised is written in Luke; a weak and shifting answer. Is
the resurrection expressly written in Exodus 3.6. or implicitly only, and so
by consequence? You your self cite Page. 20.
some of our own Poets (in allusion to Act. 17.28.) For we are also his
offspring. These words are to us Scripture now, but were they Scripture when
the Apostle spoke those words, and you cited them out of Aratus? So Christ and
James call that Scripture, which is there by evident consequence, and not in
express words, as those in Aratus. But to reassume my argument. They to whom
the Covenant of Grace belongs may be baptized; But to some Infants the Covenant
of Grace does belong, as may be proved, Act. 2. 38, 39. Be baptized, for the
promise is to you and to your children --

Mr. Haggar. Here Mr. Haggar made a large Exposition to darken the counsel of
God by words without knowledge. Job 38 2.
The question was, Men and brethren what shall we do? verse. 37.

The Apostle answers, 1. Laying down the duty, verse. 38. Repent and be
baptized. 2. The promise, And ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost.


This is the promise made to them, and only to so many of them as the Lord
shall call. Now Infants cannot repent, nor believe, both which are required to
Baptism.

Mr. Porter. The promise is the Covenant Act. 3.25.
, Gal. 3. often interchangeably are the one put for the other, because the
Covenant runs upon promises.

2. Whatsoever is meant by the promise, surely the extraordinary gift of the
holy Ghost cannot be meant (as you insinuate) because those gifts do not
pertain to all whom the Lord shall call.

3. Peter's Sermon was very officacious on the hearts of the Jews his hearers,
verse. 37. So that it is true, they cried out, What shall we do? Upon which
Peter directs them to leave their Judaism, and to embrace Christian Religion,
and to be baptized. To encourage them thereunto, he tells them, the promise is
to, them and their children -- So that that exposition which crosses Peter's
intention, is not to be admitted; But Mr. Haggars exposition crosses Peter's
intention -- Because it is a discouragement from, and not an encouragement to,
what Peter did exhort them unto. For they might say, we shall be losers by the
exchange, for as we are Jewer, we and our children are circumcised (the
Covenant and initiall sign thereof belong to us and ours) but if we turn
Christians, we indeed shall be baptized (as a sign of our being in Covenant)
but not our children, what shall become of our poor little ones? The Apostle
answers, The promise is to you and your children -- The Covenant else is
contracted by Christ's coming, contrary to the whole tenor of Scripture.

Romans 15.
Mr. Haggar. Sir, If the Apostle had written all this you have said, it were
true, but the Apostle says, The promise is to them, and to as many of their
children as God should call.

Mr. Porter. The promise is tendered just in the same tenor, as to Abraham,
Genesis 17.7. I am thy God, and the God of thy seed. These words, whom the Lord
our God shall call, properly belong to the Gentiles, when the Gospel is first
preached to them. For these Jews were for the present under the Call, so were
not the Gentiles at that time. Therefore the first part of verse. 39. is set
down in the present tense, The promise I S; and the latter part in the future
tense, Whom the Lord our God SHALL call. Now if this clause were to be referred
to the first part, would it not have been a grand discouragement to the Jews?
for they might well say, we indeed are under the Call of God, but who knows
whether ever our children shall be called?

Mr. Haggar. Children are not capable of being called, because they cannot
hear, nor understand, nor can they believe. Yet those words, Mark. 16.16. He
that believes not shall be damned; are not to be understood of children: 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.
No more then those words, He that works not, shall not eat.

Mr. Porter. Children are capable of an internal call by the Spirit (how else
are they saved dying in infancy?) though not of an external call.

2. What though they cannot hear? the children of the Gentiles called, are no
more to be excluded from Baptism, then the children of the Jews from
circumcision, who yet could not hear, understand or perform that condition,
Genesis 17.1. -- Walk before me.

3. Your illustration of Childrens not working -- added to Mark. 16.16. does
cut the throat Mr. Higgar starred at this word, saying, What a word is that? M.
Porter said, the meaning is, it did take away the life and strength of his
Argument.
of your answer. For if faith and repentance be not required to Salvation, then
not to Baptism, a sign of Salvation. Besides it is all one, as if you should
say, (as you have said) Infants are not Church Members, because they do not all
the acts of Church Members.

3. Privilege.
Mr. Porter. They are Saints holy by Covenant. 1 Cor. 7. 14. Else are your
children unclean, but now are they holy. Whence I argue thus: Saints may be
baptized; some Infants are Saints; Therefore some Infants may be baptized.

Mr. Haggar. They are not visible Saints, not Saints by calling.

Mr. Porter. I have proved they are capable of an internal call, and that they
are visible Church Members; Therefore they are Saints by calling, and visible
Saints. But Sir, Those whom Paul calls and judges to be holy are visible Saints;
but he here calls and judges Infants to be holy; Therefore --

Mr. Haggar. By this text you may as well prove unbelievers to be holy; for he
that is sanctified is a Saint or holy, but the unbeliever is said here to be
sanctified -- Therefore legitimation is only here meant.

Mr. Porter. To be santified here, and to be holy, are two distinct phrases.
When the Apostle says, The unbeliever is sanctified, he adds, by the wife, by
the busband. But when he says, Children are holy, that is laid down simply,
without any such addition. There is an inherent holiness, of which certainly
some Infants are partakers; and a relative or federall holiness, of which all
children of believing Parents are without doubt partakers. Now it is apparent,
that legitimation is not meant. That holiness is here meant, which is the
proper and immediate result of faith in one of the Parents; but legitimation is
not the proper and immediate result of faith; Therefore legitimation is not
here meant.

Mr. Haggar. Prove that legitimation is not the result of faith. I say it is.

Mr. Porter. That which is common to believers and unbelievers is not the
result of faith; but legitimation is common to believers and unbelievers -- For
there is a true and lawful marriage among the Hethens, and their children born
in Wedlock were not bastards but legitimate, yet are no where, nor in any
propriety of speech can be, called holy. Besides, the word here is opposed to
unclean Isa. 52.1. Hag. 2.13. The constant meaning of holy in Scripture, is 600
times taken for being separated to an holy use. If I call Mr. Haggars children
holy, would any man imagine that I called them legitimate not bastards?
i.e. such who are unfit for Gospel ordinances.

Mr. Brown. This holiness is the result of an unbeliever.

Mr. Porter. You contradict the Apostle quite and clean, especially in his
scope; for when the Gospel was first Preached among the Heathens, sometimes
the wife and not the hustand did embrace the Gospel; and so contrarily, the
husband and not the wife. In process of time, the converted Corinthians sent a
case of conscience to be resolved (not whether their children were bastards,
they could resolve that themselves at home, but) whether they might
conscientiously cohabit with their unconverted yoke-fellows. The Apostle
resolves the case plainly, they might cohabit, verse. 12, 13. And gives this
reason, verse. 14. For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by (in or to) the
wife) by the believing wife (as Beza reads it, and finds it so in some copies)
etc. which is more then lawful 1 Timothy 4.5. A wicked man has a lawful use of
the creature, but not an holy use.
; which he confirms by this, Else were your children unclean, but now they are
holy. Is it not as clear as the sun, that holiness here is the result of faith
of one Parent? (For what is an unbeliever, but one that does not embrace or
profess the Gospel? and then what is a believer but the contrary?) The
infidelity of one unbelieving Parent rent cannot divest his children of
Covenant holiness, if the other parent be believing. Only to reassume my
argument, I pray you (good people) take notice, that it is granted by Mr.
Haggar, Here they were nonplust again.
that Saints may be baptized, and it is proved by Scripture that Infants are
Saints, and yet Mr. Haggar will not assent to the Conclusion here, as he denied
it elsewhere.

Mr. Tallant. The people have endured the heat of the day, and have stood long
in the crowd, I am afraid we shall be too injurious to them, therefore go on
(if you think fit) to another Privilege.

4. Privilege.
Mr. Porter. It Is written, Act. 10.47. Can any man forbid water, that these
should not be baptized, which have received the holy Ghost, as well as we?
Whence I argue thus: They who receive the spirit of Christ may be baptized; but
some Infants receive the Spirit of Christ: Therefore some Infants may be
baptized.

Mr. Haggar. You must put in, As well as we.

Mr. Brown. What did Infants receive the Spirit of Christ as well as the
Apostles?

Mr. Porter. What if I did say so? it would not help you, nor hurt me. You have
acknowledged your ignorance in the Original, it is therefore to no purpose to
tell you, (...) s^cut and nos. Beza.
that the words may be read, even as we, and so the phrase is rendered, Act.
15.8. (Even as he did to us.) And it cannot be denied that some Infants receive
the Spirit aeque, though not aequaliter; as well, though not so much: water in
a spoon is water, as well as that in a barrel. Infants then may receive the
Spirit as well for quality, though not for quantity, as the Apostles did. And
so the Apostle himself expounds it, Chap. 11.17. Forasmuch then as God gave
them the like gift as he did to us -- Mark, 1. Pet. 1.1. Like precious faith
with us.
the like gift. Else if you will needs understand it of the measure, you will
contradict your own practice for time past, and overthrow it for time to come.
For you must never baptize any, unless you are sure they have the same measure
of the Spirit. I shall therefore reassume my argument with that addition. They
who receive the Spirit of Christ, as well as the Apostles, may be baptized; but
some Infants receive the Spirit of Christ as well as the Apostles; Therefore
some Infants may be baptized.

Mr. Haggar. Who are here to be baptized? verse. 46. These who spoke with
tongues, these who magnified God, these who heard the word, verse. 44. Can any
man hinder that these should be baptized?

Mr. Porter. Do you baptize none but such as these? The emphasis lies on these
words, Which have received the holy Ghost.

Mr. Haggar. I deny that Infants receive the Spirit of Christ as well as the
Apostles.

Mr. Porter. They who receive the spirit of Regeneration, receive the Spirit of
Christ as well as the Apostles; but some Infants receive the spirit of
Regeneration; Therefore some Infants receive the Spirit of Christ as well as
the Apostles.

Mr. Haggar. By the Spirit is meant the gift of tongues, as appears verse. 46.
And children are not capable of Regeneration, because they are not capable of
hearing the word, by which the children of God are begotten: Jam. 1.18. Of his
own will begat he us with the word of truth.

Mr. Porter. Admit miraculous gifts were meant, the Argument is not weakened but
strengthened; for if the gift of tongues entitle to Baptism, much more the gift
of Regeneration. Besides, those miraculous gifts are common to Hypocrites and
others, but Regeneration is proper to Gods elect.

2. As for that in James, you may as well exclude children from eating, because
they cannot work, as children from Regeneration, because they cannot hear the
word, the usual instrument of Regeneration 1 Pet. 1.23.
. The Spirit of Christ does that in Infants (saved) without the word, which he
does not usually in adult, but by the word.

3. It Is a Paradoxe that Infants are not capable of the Spirit of Regeneration;
for Romans 8.9. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

Mr. Haggar. Yea a Man, not a Child.

Mr. Porter. The word (...) Aliquis.
signifies any one, Man, Woman, or Child, as Joh. 3.3. Except a man (the same
word) be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. And verse. 5. Except a
man (the same word) be born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God.

Mr. Brown. Those in Romans 8.9. do not reach Infants, for the Apostle did not
write his Epistle to Infants.

Mr. Porter. A weak reason. Though the Apostle did not write to Infants, Romans
9.8., 11, 27.
yet he did write of Infants.

Mr. Haggar. A weak reason Sir? you your self have bewrayed your weakness in
proving nothing. Good people, Mr. Porter has proved nothing -- only he has
used Tropes and Figures.

Mr. Porter. You Mr. Haggar are a party, and therefore not fit to be judge. If
you had not a brow of brass, you durst not say, I have proved nothing. Whether
I have proved something or nothing, I leave it to the judicious hearers, before
whose tribunal I am content to stand or fall.

Mr. Brown. You have used but Sophistry.

Mr. Porter. I leave that to your self, who are most verst in it. Mr. Brown
was here mute.
I pray you show me the Sophistry I have used in any Argument or Scripture, and
convince me before this great Congregation.

Mr. Tallants. Show it, show it, if you can, where does the Sophistry lie Sir?
You have heard what Mr. Porter has brought for the proose of InfantBaptisme.
If you can prove that Infants ought not to be baptized, produce your
Scriptures, and you shall be heard.

Mr. Haggar. It Is hard to prove Negatives, we came not to prove a Negative.

Mr. Tallants. I think it fit therefore to break off this dispute, and to
conclude with Prayer Which Mr. Tallant did, but it was observed that though Mr.
Haggar kept off his hat, yet Mr. Brown put on his, and kept it on his head all
the while Mr. Tallants prayed.
especially considering that the Congregation or most in the Congregation have
stood in the crowd for the space of five hours.

(...).

THE END.

