Poor Robbin's Parley with DR. WILD, OR, Reflections on The HVMBLE THANKS for
His Majesty's Declaration FOR Liberty of CONSCIENCE.
NOW that the Dust (Sir!) pretty well is laid
which by your Capering you lately made.
When several Poetasters of the times,
Run out ha-loo to Bull-bait your bold rimes,
Chatt'ring at you as Troops of smaller Fowl,
Are wont against (Minerva's bird) the Owl;
And your late Tipsi'd muse ('it is hoped again,
Has after this large cast settled her Brain.
Vouchsafe t'admit your Brother to your sight,
Who yet comes more to parley then to fight.
When first the Hawkers Baul'd in the streets Wild's name,
A lickorish longing to my palate came;
A Feast of wit I looked for, but, alas!
The meat smelt strong, and too much sauce there was,
The Northern March, who would not grieve to see it,
Forced to claim kindred with a Ballad-sheet?
Methoughts it could not be, Wild's noble vain,
Should dwindle thus into a Dogg'rel strain,
Whose Muse of yore did on a Loyal string,
Triumphant Georgicks, and brave Carols sing,
His Language flowing, and his fancies fine,
Rich as his face, and sparkling as his wine
That he should now in hobbling Meetre creep,
That (like his Sermons) only invites to sleep.
But IN le not rob you of the glory due
Unto this Doughty Feat, on second view
I find there is cause to guess (Sir!) 't may be you.
Who but a Doctor skilled in all the Arts,
To mince a Text in four and Twenty parts,
So apily could Commence his humble Thanks,
With Threescore Lines about Star-Readers pranks,
With Tales of pimping Cuckolds, picking Fobs,
Going to Stool, and such grave witty Bobs,
Upon your Priesthood tell us Sir; of late
Have you not Exercised nigh Billingsgate?
We hereby find without a figure cast,
That still your Wild Phanatick Freaks do last,
The Dragons Tail to the Horoscope does cling,
And in your mouth lies its Envenomed sting,
Which makes you Hiss at Reverend Prelates thus,
And seek once more to start, the old lusty Puss.
'Cause you have got your rambling Liberty,
So great, So universal and so free
Must sacred Functions taste your Railleree.
Must you go dream, and wish the Rotchet may,
To the Lay Elders Motley Coat give way?
The lofty Miter to the Blew-bonnet vail,
And grave Cassock to curtailed Jump strike sail;
Shall Wild-boars that not long since trampled down
Our thriving Vines, and crushed them on the ground?
Now d^ess our Vineyards, or they feed our Flock
Who brought our Royal Shepherd to the Block?
No, let such Vultures Lurk in Bushes Cold,
Whilst still our Loyal Swans their Steeples hold;
But tell me Wild! Is It not a Bull, or worse,
We shall ha'th milk, yet you would fain be Nurse?
It Is plain you mean to starve the little brood,
Or (what some fear) would bring them up with blood;
You Would have all Join, even the Quakers too,
(Insects that first crawled out upon's from you)
And yet each Line betrays your cursed intent,
Is only old Divisions to foment,
To scoff at Clergymen of all degrees,
And saucily to Style them Judases
Is sure to Abuse this Act of Grace, the King
Indulged your Preaching not your Libelling;
To try your Tempers was his Royal will,
And you are but on your good Behaviou^s still;
Since your long Silenced Tongues again set free,
And gowty Toes to have their liberty,
Methinks henceforth they should in Pulpits prance,
And not thus wantonly in Sonnets Dance;
Fie! Fie! A Minister and Lampoon! give'ore
Here Is other fish to fry, play the fool no more
In Rhyme, but now begin on the other Score.
Hark how the Thickscull'd Rams of your Fold bleat,
Away then with your Pipe, and give them meat;
The kinder Sisters too, come thronging round,
From Theeving-Lane, White-Chappel, Horsly-down;
Whose free Benevolence more Treasure brings
Then all our Tithes and Easter-offerings;
Besides their Loving zeal's so great some say,
They know how to oblige another way;
Up, precious Man! then with a melting Tone,
A pious Goggle, and Counterfeit groan,
With tedious prayers, holy sayings abused,
Good words forty times to no purpose used;
Strange Raptures, and Face wrinckled as if there
The Gospel were Transcribed in Character;
Hold forth, till not one Handkerchief's left dry,
But all do weep, though not one Soul knows why;
By such your well known Arts, thou wilt get o'th sudden,
Good Wine, good Candles, good refreshing Pudden;
And for Tyth-piggs the Curate may Defy,
Since all the Sows belong unto thy Stye.
POOR ROBIN.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1672:


