Saving Faith Set forth In Three Dialogues, or Conferences: 1 Between Christ
and a Publican. 2 Between Christ and a Pharisee. 3 Between Christ and a
Doubting Believer.


Whereunto is added TWO SERMONS One of them Preached before the Parliament the
other Before the Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON.

By VAVASOR POWELL, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Ibbitson for Li^ewell Chapman, at the Crown in
Pope's Head Alley. 1651.

THis Author has another Treatise Extant, called Christ and Moses Excellency,
etc. Distinguishing and explaining the two Covenants, also treating on the
Promises belonging to both Covenants; Directing to a right understanding of
them.

To the Right Honorable the Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.
Most Noble, and honorable Senators,
FOrasmuch as you were pleased, so to own me, and this rude, and plain speech
of mine, as to command me to the Pulpit, and order it to the Press.

I now humbly present it to you, with a small portall (or short Epistle) for
the Edifice, it self, (being so little, and built with so many unhewne stones,)
deserves not a great Porch, or Gate before it. That which I intended in this
Discourse, and that which I do, (and shall) aim at and endeavor, in my whole
Course, was, and is the Exaltation of Christ, and the humiliation, and abasing
of the Creature.

Christ was once humbled that we might be exalted, and he is now exalted that
we might be humbled. I may say without flattery, that God has honored you
much, and you have honored him not a little: Yet observe that Honor is a
forerunner, either of the raising of Christ in men's hearts, Deuteronomy. 4.24
and esteem, or a sign of the utter ruining, breaking and sinking of them. The
Lord is jealous for his own, and zealous for his Sons glory; Esa. 9.7.
and though he be willing to impart his grace unto all, Esa. 42.8.
yet his glory he will not give to any other.

There be two hard Lessons, which are as the Alpha and Omega, in Gods Book.
The one is to deny our selves, and the other, to give glory to God: And he is
the compleatest Scholar in Christ's School, who is best versed in this divine
learning.

Ye Worthy Rulers (of our Israel) Consider how God has exalted You in the
hearts of his People, over the heads of your Domestique Enemies, and in the
eyes of your Foraigne foes. Now what does the Lord require for all this from
you again? but that you walk humbly, and give his Highness his deserved, and
due Glory.

Though Moses and Aaron, (two choice Christians, and Champions) did lead and
govern Israel for a long time, Number. 20.12.
(notwithstanding many dangers and difficulties) yet they were at last shut out
of Canaan, because they did not sanctify God, at the waters of Meribah. Also
Eli (who was forty years a Priest of the Lord) was taken away, 1 Samuel 2.29.
and his posterity cut off, because he honored his sons above the Lord. Would
you stand your selves, and keep the honor which God has given you? and would
you have your posterity to prosper, and to have a name in the world, when you
are gone out of it? then make it your business to exalt Christ. Oh remember
that God pulls down some, Ezekiel. 31.14.
to the end that others might not exalt themselves. The Lord of Hosts (says
Isaiah) has purposed to stain the pride of all glory, and to bring into
contempt all the honorable of the earth. Esa. 23.9.
There is a day coming, when all flesh shall be humbled, and the Lord alone
exalted; and that day shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, Esa.
2.11.12.
and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low. Humble your
selves therefore, and exalt, neither your hearts, nor your gates, Seek not
great things for your selves, Jer. 45.5.
and let there not be a lie in your right hands, Esa. 44.20 Mal. 2.16.
neither cover violence with a garment. Propound nothing to your selves to seek
for, but the honor of Christ, and the Saints, and Nations interest, (wherein
your interests and safeties are involved, and included.) Neh. 5.14.18.
Imitate good Nehemiah, who did twelve years hard service freely. And that
because the bondage was heavy upon the people. The Lord has hitherto made you
friends to the Saints, and Fathers to the Nation. So that the former has been
countenanced, and both preserved through Christ, by your means.

Likewise your zealous and glorious Acts of Justice against sin, and your
religious Acts of Grace (to the souls of men) in the propagating and promoting
the Gospel, Especially those of Wales.
do, and will remain engraven, (not in Marble but) in the minds of us and
our posterity.

And for the making of your actions yet more incomparable, (if your more
public and weighty business permit) to set some time, and persons aside, to
hear, and relieve the private petitions, and grievances of the widows,
distressed, imprisoned, oppressed, and those that have suffered for Christ's
cause and your: Job. 31.16 19.
that you may be able to say with Job: That you have not withheld the poor
from their desire, nor caused the eyes of the Widow to fail: nor seen any
perish for want of clothing, nor any poor without covering.

Another desirable thing is, that all the REMAINDERS of Paganism, Popery and
Superstition, may be taken away, and that the places formerly consecrated, by
Bishops, and still adored by the ignorant and superstitious (who call the
Churches, and houses of God) may be declared to have no inherent holiness in
them: Also that the heathen names of days, and months may be abolished, that
so the people may learn to speak the language of the Scriptures, and not of
Ashteroth: and that Jehovah and not Jupiter; Christ and not Saturn, may be
named; and written by us who profess our selves to be among the best, and the
resormedst of Christians.

And that you may (to use the Apostles phrase) be perfect, and wanting nothing,
to represent you excellent and eminent: Learn to say with Nehemiah, that
though the former Governors were chargeable to the people: Neh. 5.15.
and even their servants bare rule over them: Yet so did not I (we) because of
the fear of the Lord This shall be the prayer of him (for you) who can say as
Deborah: Judge. 5.9.
My heart is toward the Governors of Israel (England) that offered themselves
willingly among the people, bless the Lord.

Your Honors much obliged, and most faithful servant, for Christ and in his
way. Vavasor Powell.

Three Divine Dialogues, OR, Conferences.
The first, between Christ, and a Publican.
The second, between Christ, and a Pharisee.
The third, between Christ, and a doubting Believer.
The first Dialogue, between Christ and a Publican.
IN the great day of the Feast Jesus stood, and cried, saying, if any man
thirst, let him come to me, Joh. 7.31. Then drew near all the Publicans and
Sinners for to hear him, Luke 15.1. And he said unto one of them:

Jesus, Poor Publican, What makes thee draw near to me?


Publican, Because they say (Lord) that thou art a friend of Publicans and
Sinners, Matthew. 11.19.


J. So I am, and thou art welcome my beloved friend, sit down therefore with
me, and my Disciples, Mat. 9.10.


P. Good Master, though I am unworthy to come into thy presence, yet through
thy leave, I Will sit here at thy feet to hear thy gracious words, Mar. 7.25.
Luke 10.39. Joh. 12.3.


J. How know thou that my words are gracious?


P. Lord I have heard thee say, that Publicans and Harlots, shall enter into
the King dome of heaven, before the Pharisees which think themselves far
better then us, Mat. 21.31. Luke 18.11.12.


J. And what say the Pharisees to that?


P. They murmr among themselves, and say, This man receives sinners, and
eats with them, Luke 15.2.


J. Did thou ever hear me preach besides that time?


P. Yes, once besides, and it was the best, and comfortablest Sermon that ever
I heard.


J. Do thou remember any of it?


P. Yes, (though I have a bad memory, yet) I remember thou did say, If a man
had a hundred sheep, and did lose one of them, he would leave the ninety and
nine in the wilderness, and go after that which was lost, until he find it:
and when he had found it, he lays it on his shoulders rejoicing, and when he
comes home, he calls together his friends, and neighbors, saying unto
them, rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep that was lost.


J. Is that all thou do remember?


P. No, I remember somewhat more, that thou did speak of a woman, that had
ten pieces of silver, and when she had lost one piece, she sought for it till
she had found it, and then called her neighbors together to rejoice with her:
Also thou spakest of a man that had two sons, the one that lived still at
home, and was obedient to his father; the other that went away from his father,
and spent his fathers means among harlots, till he came to poverty; and yet
when he returned to his father, his father did receive him willingly, and made
him great welcome, and entertainment.


J. Well done my friend, thou have well remembered; but do thou know why I
spoke these comparisons?


P. No Sir, I do not well know that.


J. It was to comfort, and encourage the Publicans and great sinners, that did
hear me, and to silence the Jews that did murmr, because they came to bear
me, and because I received them.


P. It is true Lord, there were many of us there then, but we did not know what
thou did mean by the lost sheep, the lost piece, and the wicked son.


J. I did mean thy Countrymen, and companions, the Publicans, Harlots, and
Sinners, that are in a lost condition, because of your sins, and wickedness
in the eyes of others (as the Pharisees) quite lost, and adjudged to perish for
ever.


P. But who was it Lord, that did seek for the lost sheep, and the lost piece
of silver?


J. It was I, who am the Savior of sinners, and the Shepherd of the sheep,
that am come to seek and to save that which is lost, Luke 19 10. Matthew. 18.11.


P. Lord I am one of those that are lost, what shall I do to be saved? Acts
16.31.


J. I am the way, and the door, if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and
whosoever believes on me, shall not perish, but have everlasting life, Joh.
14.6. and 10.9. and 3.15.16.


P. Lord can thou save such a sinner as I am?


J. Yes, I have power to save, and power to destroy, but I came not to destroy
Greek, (...) the souls of men.
men's lives, but to save them, Jam. 4.12. Luke 9.56.


P. And art thou willing Lord, that I should be saved?


J. Yes, I am willing that all should be saved, and come to the knowledge of
the truth, 1 Timothy 2.5.


P. But, Lord, I am a wicked and a sinful man, Luke 5.8.


J. I know (dear soul) thou art so; But, I came not to call the righteous,
but sinners to repentance, Matthew. 9.13.


P. But Lord, I am not an ordinary, but an extraordinary sinner.


J. Notwithstanding poor man, hearken for thy comfort, There was a certain
Creditor, that had two debtors, the one ought five hundred pence, and the other
fifty; and when they had nothing to pay, be frankly forgave them both, Luke
7.41.42.


P. But Lord, I am a greater sinner then either of them both, for I have
nothing, but sinned all my life time.


J. What though, I am come to deliver those, that were all their life time
subject to Or the bondage of sin.
bondage, Heb. 2.15.


P. Lord be merciful to me being a sinner, for I think there is not a greater
sinner upon earth then I am, Luke 18.13.


J. I am merciful, and I will be merciful, and will pardon thy sins, Jer.
3.12. Heb. 8.12.


P. Lord, I am such a sinner, I deserve no pardon, for I have wearied thee with
my sins.


J. Though thou do not deserve pardon, and though thou have wearied me with
thy sins, yet I will pardon thine iniquities for my own names sake, Esa. 43.25.


P. Lord, I do think my sins are so great, that it is impossible for them
to be pardoned.


J. Do not think or say so, for all things are possible to him that
believes, Mark. 9.23.


P. But my sins are so red, I think all the water in the sea cannot wash them
away.


J. Though thy sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow, and though
they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool, (if thou will turn to me
from them) for my blood can cleanse thee from all sin, Esa. 1.18. 1 Ioh. 1.7.


P. But Lord if I should turn to thee from them, yet they are written down,
and thou will not blot them out, Ier. 18.23.


J. I am be that blotteth out thy transgressions, yea, have blotted out as a
thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins: return therefore
unto me, for I have redeemed thee, Esa. 43.25. and 44.22.


P. But if I should return unto thee, yet when I sin again, thou will
remember my sins.


J. No, I will pardon thee, and thy sins and iniquities will I remember no
more, Heb. 10.17.


P. Oh Lord! I am the child of wicked parents, and thou ha said, thou will
visit the sins of the fathers, upon the children, to the third and fourth
generation.


J. If a wicked father begets a son, that sees all his fathers sins which he
has done, and considers, and does not such like; that son shall not bear
the iniquity of the father; Ezekiel. 18.14.20. Ezekiel. 16.3. to the 13.


P. But Lord, were there any wicked parents that had good children?


J. Yes, many, as wicked 2 Kin. 16.20. with 2 Kin. 18.3
Ahaz had good Hezekiah: So 2 King 21 21, 22. with 2 Kin. 22.2
Idolatrous Amon, zealous Josiah, and ungodly Saul, had godly Jonathan.


P. Lord, what if I be a Bastard, and the child of whoredom?


J. That does not hinder thee neither to be saved, for my servant Jud. 11.1
with Heb. 11.32.
Jepthah was a Bastard; so was my servant Phares who is reckoned in my own
Genealogy. Compare Genesis 38.18. and 29 and Ruth 4.12. with Mat. 1.3.


P. But Lord, is there not such a Scripture, that a Bastard shall not enter
into thy Congregation until the tenth Generation.


J. Yes there is such a Deu. 23.2
Scripture, and that should make people shun the sin of whoredom, but that
does not exclude men, that are borne Bastards after the flesh, if they be borne
again of the Spirit, either out of my Church on Earth, (now in the days of
the Gospel) or yet out of Heaven.


P. But what Lord, if my father was a Bastard?


J. Neither does that binder, for Zarah the brother of Phares (who was a
Bastard) begot my two wise and godly servants Ethan and Heman, compare Genesis
38.30. 1 Chronicles. 26. with Psalm. 88. and Psalm. 89. the titles of both being of
Heman, and Ethan.


P. Oh Lord, I am a very old sinner, and have one foot already in the grave,
and I fear it is too late for me now to be called.


J. No, it is not too late, for I call some at the ninth hour, yea some at the
Which is but one hour before night, or a little before Death.
eleventh hour. And I will pour out of my Spirit upon old men in these Gospel
days, Mat. 20.6.9. Joel 2.28. with Act. 2.17


P. But Lord, I have committed such great and heinous sins, both by speaking,
and doing, that I am afraid it is in vain for me to seek mercy.


J. Though thou have spoken, and done evil things, as much as thou could,
yet return unto me, and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon thee, for I
am merciful, Jer. 3.5.


P. How shall I look upon thee Gracious Lord, for I have multiplied sins
against thee.


J. As thou have multiplied sins, so will I Or will abundantly pardon.
multiply pardons, if thou will return unto me the Lord, Esa. 55.7.


P. Oh but Lord, I scarce think, that any so wicked as my self were saved, for
I was an Idolater, an Adulterer, a Thief, a Drunkard, and what not, that was
wicked.


J. Such were many of my servants that are now in heaven, but I according to my
own kindness, and pity to them, saved them by washing, sanctifying, and
justifying them, by my own Or power
Name, Blood, and Spirit, 1 Cor. 9.6, 9, 10, 11. Tit. 3.3, 4, 5, 6, 7.


P. Oh but merciful Savior, I was a Ringleader of others into sin, and I
enticed, and drew many into wickedness, and therefore my case is far worse
then others.


J. As thou wast a Ringleader, and Enticer of others into sin, so I can make
thee a guide and leader of others into, and in the way of righteousness, as I
made thy Countryman Levi and others.


P. But that which makes me fear most, is because I was a Blasphemer, Reviler,
and Persecutor of thy people, yea many of thy Saints, did I shut up in Prison.


J. Yet thou shall have mercy, because thou did it ignorantly through
unbelief, 1 Timothy 1.13.


P. Oh but Lord, I find my heart is hardened, through the deceitfulness, and
custom of sin, that I cannot hope it will ever be otherwise.


J. I can, and will take the stony heart out of thy flesh, and I will give thee
a heart of flesh, Eze. 36.26.


P. Lord will thou do all for me?


J. I must do all for thee, for without me thou can do nothing, Phil. 2.13.
Joh. 15.5.


P. Lord, what then shall I do?


J. Before I teach thee what thou must do; I will first show thee, what I have
done, and suffered for thee.


P. Good Master I desire to know that.


J, 1. I left my own glory, and came into the world to save thee, and such
sinners as thou art, John 17.5. 1 Timothy 1.15.

2. Though I was the only Son of my Father, and in his own form, and equal
to him; yet I took upon me the form of a servant, for thee and thy brethrens
sake, Joh. 1.14. Phil. 2.6, 7, 8.

3. Though I was Heir of all things, and Possessour of heaven and earth, yet I
became poor and hungry, that thou might be made rich, Heb. 1.2. Genesis 14.19.
and 2 Cor. 8.9.

4. Though I deserved honor, and glory; yet I was reviled, threamed, and
persecuted by my own creatures, and all for my good will to thee, Heb. 2.9. 1
Pet. 2.23.

5. Though I had no sin, yet I was made sin that thou poor sinner might
escape sin, 1 Pet. 1.19. and 2.22, 2 Cor. 1.21.

6. Though I was a Lawgiver, and Lawmakers, yet I became under the curse of my
own Law, that I might redeem thee from that curse, Esa. 33.22. Gal. 3.13.

7. When I had power over mine own life, and no man could take it from me, yet
I laid it down for thee, that thou might have life, Joh. 10.18. Romans 5.6.9.
1 Ioh. 3.16.

8. Though I was my fathers delight, and an object of his love from
everlasting: yet I became an object of his wrath, for my love to thee, Prove.
8.30. Psa. 88.16. and 102.10.

9. When thou wast an enemy, and stranger to God my father, I made peace
between him, and thee, and reconciled thee to him by my death, and jufferings,
Romans 5.10. Col. 1.20, 21. Ephesians. 2.12, 13.

10. When thou were a slave to the Devil, and a firebrand of hell; I did rescue
thee from the power of the one, and redeem thee from the plague and punishment
of the other, 2 Timothy 2.25. Amos 4.11. Heb. 2.14, 1 These. 1.10.


P. Oh Lord I did not deserve any of this from thee.


J. True thou did not deserve it, but yet I did it freely, and out of my love
to thee, Romans 3.24. Ephesians. 5.2.


P. Are all my sins, Lord, satisfied for, and done away by thy death.


J. Yes, they are perfectly satisfied for, and absolutely don away out of my
fathers sight, never to be imputed again to thee, 2 Cor. 5.19.


P. And is there nothing now in the way that hinders me to be saved?


J. No, there is nothing, for I have taken all things out of the way, that
hindered thee to be saved, Col. 2.14.


P. And am I to do nothing to be saved?


J. No, nothing at all toward thy own salvation, for I have bought thee from
death, and purchased thee life, and salvation, 1 Cor. 6.20. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
Ephesians. 1.14.


P. Shall I then be saved Lord?


J. Yes, if thou will believe, and trust wholly and only upon me, and upon my
righteousness and merits, thou shall be saved, Joh. 3.36. Romans 9.33. and To.
10.9.11.


P. Lord I would believe, but I partly am afraid to believe; and partly, I am
so weak I cannot believe.


J. Thou poor fearful heart, fear not, but be strong Esa. 35.4. But tell me
why thou art afraid.


P. Least I should presume, or least I should believe, and have no ground for
my faith.


J. It is not presumption for thee to do what I command thee, but it is
obedience, and is not my word of promise a sufficient ground for thy faith? 1
Ioh. 3.23. Joh. 5.24.


P. Do thou then Lord command me to believe?


J. Yes, fear not, believe on me, and thou shall be saved, Lu. 8.50. with Act.
16.31.


P. But Lord though thou command me, yet I have no power to believe.


J. I will write my law in thy heart, and will enable and give thee power to
believe, Heb. 8.10. Mat. 12.21.


P. Lord if thou will also give me power to believe, I will acknowledge I am
nothing, but what I am in thee; and that I have nothing, but what I have
received from thee.


J. Do thou not believe?


P. Oh yes, now Lord I do believe, Ioh. 9.38.


J. This is the work and gift of God that thou do believe; for flesh and
blood has not wrought this in thee, Ioh. 6.29. Ephesians. 2.8.


P. Oh Lord, I do acknowledge it to be thy work, but I am afraid I shall loose
this faith again.


J. I that am the Author of thy faith, will also finish it: be therefore of
good cheer, for thou art one of my Fathers children, and of my Saints, and my
spirit shall abide in thee for ever, Heb. 12.2 John 1.12. John 4.14. John 7.38
39.


P. Lord I have sinned against thy father, and against thee, and I am unworthy
to be called either his Son, or thy Servant, Luke 15.21.


J. Son, thy sins are forgiven thee, sin no more, Luke 5.23. John 8 11.


P. Lord I am afraid I shall sin again, though I desire, and resolve never
to do it. But what Lord, if I should sin against my will?


J. Thou can not sin willingly and wilfully; for my seed of grace will
remain in thee, and if thou sinnest through weakness, and frailty, I will be
an Advocate, and propitiation for thy sins, 1 Ioh. 3.9. 1 Ioh. 2.12.


P. Is it then thy will Lord, that I should have forgiveness of my sins, and
doubt no more?


J. Yes sure, for these things have I spoken, that thou should have a full
assurance, and doubt no more.


P. But what if Satan, when he sees me sin, will tempt me to doubt again?


J. Say unto him, that I am faithful and just to forgive thee thy sins, and
that my blood cleanses thee from all sin. 1 Ioh. 17.


P. But Lord wilt not thou have me to confess my sins?


J. Yes, I will have thee confess them, be sorry for them, and forsake them, 1
Ioh. 1.9. Prove. 28.13.


P. But Lord, is it thy mind, that I should always be sorrowful?


J. No, but it is my mind, rather that thou should always rejoice, and have
strong consolation, Phil. 4.4. Heb. 6.18.


P. Oh Lord, I cannot choose but cry, and mourn and be ashamed, and hate my
self for all my former wickedness, and ungodliness Ezekiel. 16.61.


J. Thou may do that, and yet hold fast thy confidence; for the spirit of
mourning, and the spirit of grace, and adoption, may be in thy heart at once,
and the one not destroy the other, Zac. 12.10.


P. Lord how is that?


J. Thou may mourn at the sight of thy sins, as they were committed against
me, and for thy denying, selling and crucifying me, and yet thou may believe
(because I have said so) that they are all pardoned. As Joseph's brethren,
cried, and complained for their guiltiness in selling him, yet they were glad
that he was alive, and could help them in their distress, Genesis 42.21, 22.


P. Now Lord thou have taught me, what I should do in respect of my self; but
now Lord I would do something for thee.


J. Come then and follow me, Mat. 9.9. And he arose and followed him.


The second Conference between Christ, and a Pharisee.
Pharisee. THen one of the Pharisees came to him, and asked him, what shall I do
to work the work of God Joh. 6.28?


Jesus. This is the work of God, that thou believe in him (viz. me) whom he
has sent, Joh. 6.29.


Ph: But Master what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life, Mat.
19.16.


J. If thou will be saved by doing, then keep the Commandments.


Ph: I have kept them all from my youth, Mat. 19.20.


J. Then thou art no sinner.


Ph: Yes, we are all sinners; but I thank God I am not as other men are,
Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or even as this Publican, Luke 18.11.


J. Why, what do thou more than this Publican?


Ph: I fast twice in the week, and give tithes of all that I possess, and
concerning the Law, I live blameless, Luke 18.12. Phil: 3.6.


J. Have thou never read, that they which followed after the Law of
Righteousness, have not attained to the Law of Righteousness, Romans 9.31.


Ph: No, I never observed that, but I remember another text, where God says, I
gave them my Statutes, and showed them my Judgments, which if a man do, he
shall live in them, Ezekiel. 20.11.


J. Do thou then think to go to heaven by doing?


Ph: Not by doing only, but by doing good, and departing from evil.


J. But does not the Law say, cursed is he that observes not all things that
are written in the words of the Law to do them, Deuteronomy: 27.26.


Ph: Yes, that is, whosoever breaks the Law is accursed, unless he repents
for it


J. The Law does not say, unless men repent for breaking it, they are
accursed, but it says absolutely they are cursed, and I say whosoever keeps
the whole law, and yet offends in one point, he is guilty of all, Gal. 3.10.
Jam: 2.10. Mat: 5.19.


Ph: I say so too, that except men keep the law of Moses they Acts 15.1.24.
cannot be saved, and whosoever Joh. 7 49
know not, and keep not the Law, they are accursed.


J. Do thou know the Law?


Ph: Yes, I know the Law, for I am instructed daily out of the Law, by our
Zeph. 3.4
Doctors of the Law and holy Priests.


J: The Priests have done violence to the Law, and they that Jer. 2.8.
handle the Law know not the Lord.


Ph: Jehovah, has said, that the Law shall not perish, from the Priests for the
Priests lips is to keep knowledge, and we are to seek the Law at his mouth,
Jer: 18.18. Mal: 2.7.


J. God has said also, that the Law shall Ez. 7.16,
perish from the Priests, and that they Jer. 31.4
shall not every man teach his neighbor any more, for all shall know the Lord,
from the least to the greatest.


Ph: I perceive thou go about to destroy the Law.


J: Think not so: for I am not come to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it,
Mat: 5.17. Luke. 16.17.


Ph: I Sir, I like that, that we should fulfill the Law, for Moses gave us the
Law, that we should perform it.


J: Yes, Moses gave you the Law, but Joh. 7.19
none of you keeps it, but Mal. 2.9.
you have been partial in the Law. mat. 23.23
Ye pay tithe of Mint, Annis, and Cumming, and have omitted the weightier
matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith.


Ph: It is true, we may come short in some things, but he that keeps the Law
happy is he.


J. Thou that To. 2.17. verse. 23.
restest in the Law, and make thy boast of the Law, through breaking the Law
thou do dishonor God; and causest many to Mal. 2.8.
stumble at the Law, verily I say unto thee, thou To. 2.12.
shall be judged by the Law.


Ph: No, I hope rather, to be justified, then to be judged by the Law.


J. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, by the deeds of the Law, there shall no
flesh be justified in Gods sight, Romans 3.20. Gal: 3.11.


Ph: How then shall I be justified?


J. The righteousness of God without the Law is manifest, being witnessed by
the Law and the Prophets, Romans 3.21.


Ph: What Righteousness is that?


J: Not a man's Phil. 3.9.
own righteousness, which is called, the To. 2.26.
Righteousness of the Law: but the To 4.13.
righteousness which is of God by faith.


Ph: What difference is there between the righteousness of the Law, and the
righteousness of faith?


J: Moses describes the righteousness of the Law, thus, that the man which
does those things which the Law requires shall live by them: but the
righteousness of faith, says, whosoever believes on me shall be saved, To,
10.5.6.11.


Ph: How can men be saved by believing in thee, for thou art but one?


J. As by one Romans 5.7
man's offense death reigned, by one much more, they which receive abundance of
grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by me, who am
the Mal. 4.2.
son of righteousness, Cor. 1.30
and made by God my Father to be righteousness unto men.


Ph: Thou bear record of thy self, Joh. 8.13.


J: Joh. 8, 14.
Though I bear record of my self, yet my record is true. Joh. 5.11
My Father also bears witness of me, and this is his witness, that he has
given life, and this life is in (me) his son.


Ph: But what say thou, how was our father Abraham and his seed (who lived
before thee) justified and saved?


J. Joh. 8.56
Your Father Abraham, rejoiced to see my day, and be saw it, and was glad, for
To. 4.3.11, 13, 16. Gal. 3.14.18.20:
I was before Abraham, and be and his spiritual seed, were justified and saved
by faith in me.


Ph: But was not Abraham justified by works?


J. If Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to glory, It is true,
Abraham's faith was accompanied with works.
but net before God: for what says the Seripture. Abraham believed God, and it
was accounted to him for righteousness, To. 4.2.3.


Ph: If I be not justified by my good works, to what end should I perform
them?


J: Though thy good works cannot justify thee before God, yet they may
glorify God, and be profitable unto men, Mat. 5.16. Tit. 3.8.


Ph: Well then, I am glad my good works be good for something.


J: Yes, thy good works would be good for something, if thy faith ( like
Abraham's) did work with thy works: but thou do not believe, and all thy good
works, thou do, to be seen of men, Iam. 2.22. Mat: 23.5.


Ph: No, I do not do my good works to be seen of men, but to please God.


J: I tell thee that without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb: 11.6.


Ph: But God has said, if a man do well, he shall be accepted.


J. It is not for their well-doing that men are accepted with my father, but
they are made acceptable in me, and their works are accepted for my sake, Ephesians.
1.6. 1 Pet: 2.6.


Ph: But am I no nearer Heaven, that perform good works, than this sinful
and ungodly Publican?


J. Thou Hypocrite that justifiest thy self, and judge another: I tell thee,
that Publicans and Harlots, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven before such
as thou art, Mat: 7.5. and 21 31.


Ph: Oh untrue, and false-doctrine, to say, that those cursed men who know not
the Law, should be saved before us, who are the children of Abraham, Ioh.
7.49. and 8.33.


J: Thou blind, and selfe-conceited Pharisee, understandest thou not the
Scripture? I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, for I am not come to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance. And I say unto thee, unless thou do
believe in me, thou art not the child of Abraham, Mat. 9.13. Gal. 3.26.


Ph: I believe in the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,
whose child and servant I am.


J: If thou did believe in God, thou would also believe in me, but thou
art the child of the devil, and in bondage to this day, Ioh: 8.44. Gal. 4.25.


Ph: How am I in bondage?


J: Thou art under the curse of the Law, and under the power of sin and
Satan; and can never be made free, unless I make thee free, Ioh: 8.34, 35,
36.


Ph: How do thou free men?


J: By my Gal. 3.13
death, and sufferings, I satisfy the Law; by the 1 Cor. 15.55, 57.
power of my resurrection, I overcome death; and by my Spirit, I Mat. 12.28
cast out Satan, and Romans 8.2
subdue sin.


Ph. Sir, I hope to be freed another way, to wit, by my sacrifices prayers, and
good works.


J. Thy sacrifices and thy prayers, are an abomination unto me, and thy works
are not found perfect before God, Esa. 66.3. Prove. 15.8. and 28.9. Rev. 3.2.


Ph. What do thou think to beat me off from my long prayers, and good
works? I hope by these, together with my fasting, and mourning, to lay a sure,
and happy foundation for my soul, for ever.


J. Thou worker of iniquity, that do Esa. 32.6
practice hypocrisy, I tell thee, thy prayers are Ps. 109.7
sin, thy works are done to be seen of men; thou also fastest for Es. 58.4.5
strife, and thy mourning is but hypocritical: therefore instead of laying a
sure and happy foundation, thou Job 36.13
heapest up wrath to thy self, against the day of wrath.


Ph. Sir, I am not a hypocrite, but a true child of God, and I hope I shall be
saved, for I know most good men take me for a godly and righteous man.


J. Though thou do outwardly Mat. 23.28
appear righteous unto men, yet within thou art full of hypocrisy and
iniquity; thou seed of the Serpent, thy Job. 8.13.
hope will perish, for thou can not Mat. 23.33.
escape the damnation of hell.


Ph. I do not fear what thou say, for I am better persuaded of my self.


J. Though thy seared conscience, and hardened heart hinders thee yet from
fearing; yet fear, terror, 'and trembling shall Es. 33.14 Deu. 32.22
surprise, and fill thy spirit, that thou shall roar in Luke 3.17 Mark. 9.43
44, 46.
flames of fire, and in everlasting burnings.


Ph. I have joy and comfort in my spirit often from my performances, and I know
that God will hear my prayers, that I make publicly and privately unto him.


J. Thou painted Sepulcher, have thou not read! that the Job. 20.5
joy of an hypocrite is but for a moment? and that an hypocrite shall not Job
13.16
come before God. And do thou not Job 15.4
restrain prayer before God; and when thou prayest, do thou not do it
publicly to be Mat. 6.5
seen of men?


Ph. I pray in private also.


J. Then it is either when some Esa. 26.16
punishment is upon thee, or else to quiet thy carnal conscience.


Ph. Mr. why do thou reproach me in saying thus?


J. Thou dissembler that Ioh. 5.44
seek honor of men, and not the honor which comes from God: thou art to
expect nothing but shame, and Dan. 12.2
everlasting contempt.


Ph. Sir, thou judge rashly.


J. No, as I hear, I judge, and my judgment is just and true, Joh. 5.30. and
8.16.26.


Ph. How know thou what I am, that thou so judge?


J. I am he that searches the heart, and tries the reins, and I will give to
every one of you according to your works, Rev. 2.23.


Ph. When thou judge the world, what difference will thou make between us
that served God, and the Heathens that served him not?


J. The difference will be this, that your Mat. 23.14. Mar. 12 40. Lu. 20.47.
condemnation will be the greater, because (though ye knew God, yet) ye served
him Mat. 15.9
vainly, falsely, and Esa. 57.4
hypocritically.


Ph. Good Master, I would escape this condemnation, for I believe it will be
great, and thy words begin to terrify me already.


J. I have told thee already, that there is no other way for thee to escape it,
but only by me, but yet thou do not believe me, Joh. 10.25.


Ph. How will thou have me believe in thee?


J. First, I will have thee see thy self to be the 1 Timothy 1 15.
greatest and vilest of sinners, and then see all thy Esa. 64 6
own righteousnesses, services, and performances, to be as filthy and
menstruous rags: And after thou have denied and Eze. 36.31.
abhorred thy self, then cry out, Master, save me, or else I perish; for the
Mat 9.12
whole need not a Physician, but those that are sick.


Ph. I do see my self a sinner, and I am sorry for my sins. And does not
God say, that whosoever confesses and forsakes his sins shall find mercy.


J. I say unto thee (thou lukewarm Professor) Except thou eatest my flesh,
and drinkest my blood; and submittestunto my righteousness, thou can not be
saved, Joh. 6.53.


Ph. Well then; If I cannot be saved by my own works, and righteousness,
Master, let me be beholding to thee to save me.


J. Have thou not read, that Psalm. 3.8.
Salvation belongs only to the Lord, and that men are saved by grace,
without the works of the Law; why then do thou so Deuteronomy. 32 15.
lightly esteem of the Rock of thy Salvation? by seeking to be justified and
saved ( as To. 9 32.
it were) by thy own works: I tell thee again, thou must Phil. 3.9
deny thy own righteousness wholly, and look to be found in my
righteousness only, else thou can not be saved.


Ph. Indeed Master, thou make the way to Heaven very hard.


J. It is so hard, that many shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able,
Luke 13.24.


Ph. If it be as thou say, I am afraid that many of our best Scribes and
Pharisees will come short of Heaven.


J. Thou may be sure of that, for verily I say unto thee, Except thy
righteousness, exceeds the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, thou
shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5.20.


Ph. But Master, there be some that do great works in thy name, shall not all
such be saved?


J. No, for many will say unto me hereafter, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out devils, and in thy name done
many wonderful things; and then will I profess unto them, I never knew you,
depart from me ye workers of iniquity, Matthew. 7.22.23.


Ph. But why should not such rather be saved then cast away?


J. Because they did (as thou do) do all these things to be seen of men, and
to gain honor unto themselves, and so built their Salvation upon this false
foundation, as the foolish builder built his house upon the sand, which in i.e.
Times of trial and persecution. Luke 8.12
time of flood, and winds, could not stand, but fell, Mat. 7.26, 27.


Ph. I see thou do reject me, I thought to be one of thy Disciples, and to
follow thee.


J. No, I do not reject thee, but am very willing to receive thee; but first
consider, what thou do, and what it will cost thee, if thou will be my
Disciple, and follow me.


Ph. What will it cost me Master?


J. Thou must i.e. In comparison of Christ, and when they come in competition
with him. Mat. 10.37.
hate thy father and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters,
and thine own life also; yea thou must go, and sell all that thou have, and
take up thy cross daily, and follow me, else thou can not be my Disciple,
Luke 14.26, 27.


Ph. This is a hard saying, who can hear it, and he went away sorrowful, and
followed him no more, Joh. 6.60.66. Mat. 19.22.


The third Dialogue between Christ and a Doubting Believer.
Christ. COme unto me al ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest, Mat. 11.28.


Believer. Oh Lord, I am a poor heavy laden sinner that would come unto thee,
but cannot come.


Ch: It is true O soul, no man can come unto me, except the Father which has
sent me draw him, Joh. 6.44.


Bell. How then Lord shall I come unto thee?


Ch: I and my Father are one, and we give power to the faint, and to them that
have no might, we add strength, Or increase.
Joh. 10.30. Esaias 40, 29.


Bell: Lord, I am altogether without strength, therefore draw me unto thee, and
I will come.


Ch: I will draw thee unto me with the cords of a man, with bands of love, and
with loving kindness, Hos. 11, 4. Ier. 31.3. Ioh. 12.32.


Bell: But Lord now I look upon my self, I see I am unworthy to come unto
thee; yea, unworthy of the least of thy mercies.


Ch: So said my servant Mat. 3 11.6
John the Baptist, and Gen 32.10
Jacob, and Luke 7.7. Mat. 8.8.
others. yet do not judge thy self (as the Acts 13.46.
Jews did) unworthy of eternal life.


Bell: If such men as John Baptist, and Jacob did judge themselves unworthy; how
many thousand times more uxworthy am I, a wretched and wicked sinner?


Ch: It is true, neither they, nor thou, As the Prodigalls Father did his son
Lu. 15.21, 22.
could be worthy of your selves, but yet I am willing to account you worthy,
Luke 20.35. and 21.36. Rev. 3.4.


Bell. But Lord, if there were any thing that were good in me, it might a little
encourage me to come unto thee, but I find nothing but evil in me.


Ch: Do thou not know, that without me thou can Ioh 15.5.
do nothing; and that a man can Joh 3.27.
receive nothing, except it be given him from heaven. Why then do thou stay
away from me who must Esa. 26.12.2, 12.
work all thy works in thee. And

2. Because thou see nothing but evil in thee, thou should the rather come
unto me, who am the Zac. 13.1
Fountain wherein thy unclean soul must be washed; and unless I Eze. 36.25.
and 1.9
wash thee thou can not be clean, nor have any Joh. 13.8
part in me.


Bell: True Lord, thou art the Fountain and wel-spring of life, and it is thy
blood (and nothing else) that can wash away my sins: but how can I come near to
thee, who am so wicked, that for ought I know, have counted thy blood an Heb.
10.29
unholy thing.


Ch: Thou poor, Ac. 2.36.41
dear, and doubting soul, what if thou had had a hand in crucifying me (as
the Jews had?) yet cannot I forgive thee, as I did many of them. But thou have
not accounted my blood an unholy thing, for thou still desire to have thy
sins washed away by it.


Bell: What the Jews did, they did ignorantly; but I have sinned against
knowledge, which makes my sins worse then theirs.


Ch: If thou have finned against knowledge, yet thou have not sinned so, but
that thou may be forgiven: For my dear Disciple Peter sinned against
knowledge, when he denied with an oath that he knew me not, Mat. 26.72.


Bell. Oh but yet my sins are worse then his, for his sin was but one sin, and
that a sudden and short sin; but I have sinned many sins and continued long
in them.


Ch: So did my beloved servant David (who was a man according to my own heart)
commit several sins together, as Murder, Whoredom etc. and continued a
while too in his sins.


Bell. Oh but Lord, those servants of thine, though they sinned against thee,
yet they expressed a great deal of sense of their sins, and sorrow for them;
but I can neither be sensible of, nor sorrowful for mine.


Ch: Oh sweet soul, thou mistakest, and forgettest thy self, for thou do
often confess thy sins before me with sense, shame, and sorrow. And I hear
thee daily bemoaning, and complaining, and saying I have Job 7.20. Psalm: 51.4.
Lam. 5.16
sinned against the Lord, woe is me for I am undone.


Bell: Oh good Lord, it is not without cause that I cry, woe is me I am undone;
for I think there is no soul in such a dangerous, and desperate condition, as
mine is in.


Ch: Why do thou think, and say so?


Bell. Because I have sinned that unpardonable sin against thy spirit.


Ch: Oh thou poor and precious soul, thou do but think so, and fear so:
But tell me how can thou sin, that sin against my Spirit, and yet pray for
more of my Spirit, and so much prize my Spirit as thou do?


Bell: Oh Lord, I have often grieved, and quenched thy Spirit, and is not this
to commit that unpardonable sin?


Ch: My own dear and loving children may, and do sometimes grieve my spirit
by sinning, and quench the gracious motions of it, and yet do not sin that
unpardonable sin, Ephesians. 4.30. 1 These. 5.19. Esaias. 63.10.


Bell: Oh but I can think no less, but that I have committed that sin, for I
have had hard, cruel and desperate thoughts in my heart, against the Holy
Spirit.


Ch: Though (my child) thou have had such thoughts in thy heart, yet thou have
not spoken evil of my Spirit (as the Jews did) which is the sin of blasphemy,
and that unpardonable sin, Mat. 12.24, 28, 31. Mark. 3.22, to 30.


Bell: Lord I am not sure but that I have spoken evil words of thy spirit; for
I know I have many times uttered vile, bitter, and cursed words.


Ch: Notwithstanding thou did through the violence of thy temptations and in
the bitterness of thy Soul speak such words (as my servants Job, Job 3.1 to
13 and 10: 18 and 23.15, 16. Ps. 31.22. and 116.11. Ier 20.14, etc. Jonah 4.3,
4, 9. Mat. 26, 72, 74
David, Jeremy, Jonah, and Peter did) yet thou have not done despite (nor
sinned maliciously and wilfully) against my Spirit of grace as Reprobates do,
Heb. 10.29.


Bell. Oh I have been and still am very wilful, and have often sinned wilfully,
and thou say in thy word that if any sin wilfully after they receive the
knowledge of the truth there remains no more sacrifice for sins. Heb. 10.26



Ch: Thou dear soul, have not I heard thee often in prayer complaining of,
and bewailing thy sins, and beging earnestly for power against them; therefore
it is rather against thy will (then wilfully) that thou do sin.


Bell. Oh but I find sins in power in my soul, which if I were a Saint they
would not be so.


Ch: My servant Paul found sin so strong in him that he confessed he was
carnal, and sold under sin; and that he found a law in his members, Sin was in
power in Paul when it could carry him captive.
warring against the law of his mind, and bringing him into captivity to the
law of sin, Romans 14.23.


Bell. Oh but neither Paul nor any other Saint, has sinned presumptuously as I
have done.


Chapter My servant David prayed, that he might be kept from presumptuous sins,
for he was subject thereunto; Psa. 19.13. It is probable that David sined
presumptuously in killing Vriah.
and so are the best of my Saints.


Bell. But Lord I have rebelled against thee.


Ch: So did my servants of Is. 1.2. and 63.20.
old but I have received Ps. 68.18
gifts for the Rebillious: and to me belongs mercies and forgiveness, though
thou have rebelled against me, Dan. 9.9.


Bell: Oh but my Rebellion is the worst Rebellion of all, for I have rebelled
against the light: I have professed thee, and yet I have belyed thee, and made
an hypocritical profession; I seemed like Judas, to be thy friend, whilst in
my heart I did not love thee.


Ch: The house of Israel and the house of Judah dealt treacherously against me
the Lord, and belied me, and Ephraim my dear son, compassed me about with
lies, yet was I gracious to them, Jer. 5.11.12. Hos. 11.12. with Jer. 23.6. and
31.20.


Bell. But Lord Ephraim was never so wicked as I am, and guilty of such
Lukewarmnesse, Hypocrisy and Backesliding as I am guilty of.


Ch: Yea, Ephraim was as a cake not turned. And Ephraim fed upon wind, and
provoked me to anger most bitterly, yet my bowels did still work toward
Ephraim, that I could not destroy him, Hos. 8.8. and 12.1.14. with 11.8.


Bell: But I increased in sin, and the more mercies I received the more my heart
was exalted.


Ch: Even so did Ephraim sin more and more, and according as he was filled so
his heart was exalted, Hos. 13.2, 6.


Bell: But Lord what did thou do to Ephraim?


Ch: I drew them with the cords of a man, and with bands of love, and I was as
the dew unto them, Heb. 11.4. and 14.5.


Bell: Oh but I have forsaken the Lord, and backeslided from thee.


Ch: So did Israel and Judah, Jer. 2.13. and 3.6. and 4.16.


Bell: But Lord I find that my heart is bent to continual backesliding, yea, my
backeslidings are increased.


Ch: So were Hos. 11.7 Ier. 5.6.
they yet I healed their backslidings, so will I heal thine also, Hos. 14.4.
Jer. 3.14.22.


Bell: But I fell into gross sins that has dishonored thee, and caused
thine enemies to blaspheme.


Ch: So did my servant David, 2 Samuel 12.14. and other of my Saints.


Bell: I but then he did mourn and repent greatly for his sins, but I cannot do
so, for I find my heart as hard as an Adamant.


Ch: So my people Isreal's hearts formerly, were as hard as a Rock, Adamant,
and Flint, Jer. 5.3. Ezekiel. 3.9.


Bell: Oh but I have been long (yea ever) troubled with this hardness of heart.


Ch: Though thou have, yet I will take the stony heart out of thy flesh and I
will give thee a heart of flesh, Eze. 36.26.


Bell: But I cannot repent me of the hardness of my heart.


Ch: What though, yet I am exalted to give repentance unto thee, Act. 5.31.


Bell: Oh but I do not find that I am sensible enough of my sin; for if I were
I should mourn, and be ashamed for all the wickedness which I have committed
against thee.


Ch: When thou do see me whom thou have pierced, and when thou see that I
am pacified toward thee; then thou shall mourn, loath thy self, and be
ashamed, for all thy sins and abominations which thou have committed against
me Rev. 1.7. Ezekiel. 6.9. and 16.63.


B. But Lord I am a very great sinner, and I would feign see the nature and
number of my sins, that I might truly repent me of them, and be humbled for
them.


C. If thou did se all thy sins with their nature, number, and aggravations:
thou could never look upon them, Genesis 4.13. Mar. 27.3, 4, 5.
but with despair as Cain and Judas. And it is not so much the sight of sin as
the sight of my Love, Grace, Goodness, and Glory, that will lead thee to
repentance, and humble thee for thy sins. Luke 7.42.47. Zach. 12 10. Romans 2.4.
Esa. 6.5.


B. Oh Lord I know I am as wicked a sinner and as ungodly a wretch as ever
lived: but though I know this yet methinks I am not broken with the sense
thereof, I cannot weep nor shed tears for my sins, Oh no! I go many times to
prayer and to hear Sermons, and there is no more working, nor relenting upon
my soul, then if J were a dead stock, or stone.


C. Oh my dear soul do not thou belie thy self, for I have heard many a
sorrowful sigh coming from thy heart, and I have seen many a tear drop from
thine Eyes: Ezekiel. 9.4 Psalm. 34.17 Zack. 12.11. Heb. 5.7.
and I will yet pour out more of the Spirit of mourning upon thee. But what if
thou did not find these things in thy self, yet I have offered up strong
cries and tears unto my Father for thee.


B. Oh Lord that I had but faith to believe that for my self.


C. Have faith in me, and be not faithless but believing. Mar. 11.22. Ioh.
20.27.


B. Lord I find so much Atheism and unbelief in my heart that I have often
times questionings in my self concerning God, and concerning the Scriptures,
and word of God.


C. These are the temptations and suggestions of Satan, and my own Disciples
were, and are troubled with them. Luke 24.25.


B. Oh Lord, J am troubled with a thousand temptations.

Yet fear not (my loving and dear Child) for though thou have diverse
temptations, Jam. 1.2. 1 Cor. 10.13. Heb. 2.18. 2 Pet. 2.9
yet it is that which my best Saints have had, and I will not suffer thee th be
tempted above what thou art able, but I will succor thee in thy temptations,
and I will make away that thou shall escape, and be deliver out of temptation.


B. But I think that no Saint has such temptations as mine, for sometimes, I
am tempted to kill my self, and sometimes to kill others; insomuch that J
cannot look upon any weapon, waters, or the like, but I am ready to do my self
away therewith.


C. Satan tempted me to cast my self of the Pinnacle of the Temple and he also
tempted many of my dear Children, to destroy themselves: but do not thou
hearken to the Accuser (for he does accuse thee to me and me to thee) but
rather say unto him, Mar. 4.5. Rev. 12.10 Job. 12.31.
Satan it is written, my Lord Jesus has overcome thee, and I hope through his
blood, and through his might, and spirit to overcome thee likewise: say also my
God has commanded me not to kill another, Exodus 20.13. Act. 16.28 Job. 13.15
nor to do hurt or violence to my self: therefore get thee behind me thou
lier, murderer, and Enemy, for I will put my trust in Christ though he kill
me, and I will endeavor to live to serve him, though he should afterward
damn me.


B. Though I do sometimes resolve against Satan's temptations, and labor to
resist them: yet I find my temptations are renewed; and I am not able to
withstand them, for they come in as a flood upon me.


C. I that say unto the proud waves hitherto shall thou come but no further; I
will by my spirit put the Enemy (Satan) to flight when he comes in like a flood
against thee. Job. 38.11 Se Esa. 59.19. marg.



B. But Lord I find I am not only troubled with fear and sad temptations: but
also with strong and powerful corruptions.


C. I will subdue all thy iniquities, and thy sins shall not have dominion over
thee, Mich. 7.19. Romans 6.14.


B. Oh but this does much trouble me, that I do not find any love in my heart
to thee. Deuteronomy. 30.6 1 John 4.19.



C. What though thou do not, yet I will circumcise thy heart and thou shall
love me: and when thou apprehendest my love to thee, thou will love me again.


B. I have sinned (Lord) against thy mercies and abased thy love, yea loved my
sins more then thee, therefore I cannot think that ever thou will look upon me
with any love or delight.


C. So did my servant David, 2 Samuel 12.8, 9. Hos. 2.5, and 14.4. and 2.9.
and my people Jsrael do, yet as I loved them, so will I love thee freely, and
betroth thee to me in loving kindness and mercy.


B. But Lord I have not only sinned against thy mercies, but against thy
corrections, and chastisements also.


C. So did my people Israel formerly do, Esa. 57.17 18.
for when I smote them they went on frowardly in the way of their evil heart,
but I lead them and restored comforts to them.


B. I bui my condition is worse then all that, for I have been long under the
means of grace, and yet I am altogether fruitless; and like the barren
Fig Tree.


C, Thou troubled soul in me is thy fruit found, Joh. 15.5. Psalm. 92.12, 13 14.
and I will purge thee, and thou shall bring forth fruit abundantly, for they
that are planted in my house shall flourish and be fat and like a green Olive
Tree.


B. I Lord, its true, if J were a branch in thee and a true member of thy
house, then I could believe these promises of thine; alas! I am neither of
both, but separated from thee, and thy people.


C. Do not say that thou art none of mine (for I have bought thee with my
blond) and do not speak that thou art separated from my people; Esa. 56.3.5
for I will give thee in mine house, and within my walls, a place, and a name,
better then the name of Sons and Daughters.


B. Sure if I were not an outcast and a Reprobate, I should not be thus (as I
am) in a wilderness condition.


C, Israel was accounted an outcast and she cried out; Jer. 30.16.17, 22.
yet I was then a God to her, and she a people to me.


B. Oh if I were but one of thine, I should then count my self the happiest in
all the world.


C. Fear not my Spouse, for I am thy Husband, and thy Father.


B. If I were one of thy Children thou would not hide thy self from me as
thou do.


C. I have hid my self and my face from some of my Prophets and people of old
and yet it was in love to them, and so it is to thee, Psalm. 88.14. Esa. 8.17.
and 64.7.


B. But thou have hid thy self from me, and thou seem also to be angry with
me. Esa. 54.5. Jer. 31.9.



C. Fury is not in me (toward thee) and though I be angry, yet my anger is but
for a moment, Esa 27.4. and. 54.8.


B. Yet Lord thou have been angry with me a long time, for thou have for gotten
me.


C. Zion did say so, the Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me:
yet I had not forgot her; for she was graven upon the palms of my hands Esa
49.14, 15. Ier. 51.5.


B. But Lord if thou had not forgotten me, thou would never have left me,
in such a wilderness and barren condition as I am in.


C. I have allured thee into the wilderness, that I might speak comfortably
unto thee. Hos. 2.14.


B. I have been may years in trouble, and terrors and wanting peace in my
soul, which could not possibly have been, if I had truly believed in thee.


C. But now will I speak peace unto thee, and I will guide thee into the way of
peace. Psalm. 85.8. Luke 1.79.


B. How Lord will thou speak peace unto me, i. e. The Prea chers Lips that
preached peace.
and guide me into the way of peace?


C. I will create the fruit of the lips Peace, Peace, and my spirit shall be in
thee and his fruit shall be peace to thy soul: Esa 57, 19. and 55.12.


B. But Lord thy word says; there is no peace to the wicked.


C. No not to a man that will persist in his wicked way, and does not, nor will
not believe in me, but thou art one of those that I bore the chastizement of
thy peace, and one of the Children of peace: Esa 53.5. and 54.13.


B. But Lord how can I have peace, seeing a man cannot have peace before (and
without) he does believe?


C. Thou shall have faith and peace, and I will give peace through believing:
2. These. 3.16.6.


B. But Lord then J must know that I am one of thine.


C. Thou shall know that I am the Lord thy God, and that thou art one of my
people: Ezekiel. 34.30.


B. Oh how shall I know that.


C. My spirit shall bear witness with thy spirit that thou art my Child. Romans
8.16.


B. But how shall I know that it is thy spirit that bears this witness, and
that it is not the spirit of delusion?


C. Thou may know that by its power in working in thy heart which no other
spirit can work alike: as also by the earnest and fruits there of: 2 Cor. 5.5.
and 7.22. Gal. 5.22, 23.


B. Lord what else shall I believe, besides being one of thine?


C. Do thou believe that?


B. Yes Lord, J do believe, that thou art Jesus the Son of God and the Savior
of the world: Act. 8 37. Joh. 6.69. and 11.27.


C. But do thou believe that I am thy Savior.


B. Lord I do believe that there is no other way to be saved but only by thee:
Act. 4.12.


C. But do thou believe that thou shall be saved by me.


B. Lord I do believe, help my unbelief: Mark 9.24.


C. To thee it is given to believe: Phil. 1.29.


B. Now Lord I do believe.


C. What do thou now believe?


B. I believe that thou loved'st me and did give thy self for me, and that
thou art my Lord, and my God, and that I am justified and shall be saved by
grace: Gal. 2.20. Joh. 20.28. Act. 15.11.


C. How came thou tobeleeve this?


B. Lord it is by thy gift and work that J do believe it: Ephesians. 2.8. Heb 12.2.


C. Well; now thou do believe, what will thou do?


B. Lord what will thou have me to do? Act. 9.6.


C. If thou love me keep my words: Ioh. 14.23.


B. What are those words of thine?


C. Search the Scriptures, for they are able to make thee perfect and wise unto
salvation, and to furnish thee for every good work: Ioh. 5.39.2 Tim. 3.16.17.


B. But Lord how shall I understand thy word?


C. I will make known my words unto thee: Pro. 1.23.


B. But Lord is there no danger of my departing and falling away from thee now
I do believe?


C. No, the Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be removed, but my loving
kindness shall not depart from thee: Esa 54.10. Ier. 32.40.


B. Lord I will keep thy precepts with my whole heart Psalm. 119 69.


C. I have redeemed thee, that thou should serve me without fear, in
Holiness and Righteousness, all the days of thy life: Luke 1.69.


B. Come ye Children and I will declare what my Lord has don for my soul.

My SOVLE shall make her boasts of the LORD, the humble shall be are this and
be glad, and magnify the LORD with me, and let us Exalt his Name together:
Psalm. 34.11.2, 3.


FINIS.

