THE Holy Scriptures Clearing it self of Scandals: OR, AN ANSWER To a BOOK
written by Richard Farnworth, who is commonly called a QUAKER, bearing this
Title, Truth cleared of Scandals.

In this ANSWER, You have the substance of a Dispute at Harliston in
Staffordshire, between Richard Farnworth and the Author, in the year 1654.

Written by Tho. Pollard, a member of the Church of Christ, gathered in, and
about, Leichfield.

Prove. 18.17. He that is first in his own cause, seems just; but his
neighbor comes and searches him.

Whereunto is added, Certain Considerations and Queries concerning those people
called Quakers; with desire of an Answer.

As also, a POSTSCRIPT, Manifesting their folly in pretending a necessity of
using the terms Thee and Thou to a single person.

By Henry Haggar, a servant of Jesus Christ, and of the Congregations of his
Saints.

Printed at London, by J. C. for R. Moon, at the seven Stars in Paul's
Churchyard, near the great North-door, 1655.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THe LORD has been pleased to bring us into the World in such an Age, that if
we thoroughly weigh our Mercies, they have been, and are, very great. Surely we
may say in this Nation, That we are p^rtakers of such Blessings and high
Favors, that the Generations past have not enjoyed (...) If we call to mind
the days past, what Superstition instead of a pure Worship, our eyes beheld;
and what Tyranny was then exercised, in forcing Men's Consciences to such a
Worship, that was so exceeding contrary to the Word of GOD. O that we were so
sensible, as we should, who it is that has wrought such a deliverance for us:
surely we may say, This is the LORD's doing. O that every Soul that partakes of
this Mercy, by being delivered from such Tyranny; that, I say, this godly
resolution were in us, as was in the Prophet David, Psalm 71.6. My praise shall
be continually of thee. And, Psalm 145.2. Every day will I bless thee, and I
will praise thy Name for ever and ever. O, I say, if we consider how many
snares have been laid to ensnare poor Creatures with; but we may say, Hitherto
has the LORD been with us, and has broken the snares, and set us at liberty:
yet, my dear Friends, the great Enemy of our salvation will be working; and if
he cannot carry on his design by Instruments that are openly profane, or in a
superstitious habit, he can present himself in a show of glory, and pretend
high things: and surely that day is now come upon the earth, that Paul speaks
of, 2 Cor. 11. of a subtle people, that was endeavoring to beguile the
Corinthians, as the serpent beguiled Eve, and from what? mind, the simplicity
that is in Christ; but, says Paul, verse. 13. For such are false Apostles,
deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ; and no
marvel, for Satan himself is tranformed into an Angel of light, therefore it is
no great thing, if his Ministers also, be transformed as the Ministers of
Righteousness, whose end shall be according to their work. But as Paul says to
the Churches of Galatia, so I say to you, chap. 1.8. Though we, or an Angel
from heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you, then that which we have preached
unto you, let him be accursed: and John says in his 2 Epist. 10. If there come
any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into your house,
neither bid him God-speed. O, I say, with the Prophet, If any speak not
according to the Scripture, it is, because they have no light in them. And,
Reader, whosoever thou art that perusest this small Treatise, labor for an
impartial Spirit; and if any thing be to thy satisfaction herein, let GOD alone
be glorified. I have desired plainness of Speech, and to speak the words of
Scripture to answer him, whom thou will find is an opposer of the Truth, as it
is in JESUS; and the LORD give thee understanding. Farewell.

Thine, in the work of the Lord, to my poor power, Tho. Pollard.

The Method observed in this BOOK: is, as follows:
1. YOu have the unsoundness of Richard Farnworth's judgment laid down, in six
Particulars, as he at the meeting stood by to make good; and these I desire the
Reader to observe.

2. You have an Answer to those things he charges me with, in his Book; where
the Reader may see, that this poor man is full of lies, that instead of being
free from sin, he too much takes delight in it.

3. You have that Scripture answered that they so dwell on, against that
Ordinance of Water Baptism, 1 Cor. 1.17.

4. To make their folly manifest, you have that Cavil answered, about the term
Thee and Thou to single person; Which, say they, is a sin to use any other; but
by the Scripture in all ages, you will, as it is plain, find it to be no such
thing, as is proved.

5. You have a discovery of the Church of Christ, how it comes to Mount Sion,
Heb. 12.22. And what perfection I own, and how attained.

6. You have, what he says in his Book he owns, proved to be lies, and not
according to Truth.

7. You have his folly manifested, and the holy Scripture counselling you to
shun the way of such men.

8. Some Queries propounded; with a desire of an Answer.

And, Reader, for your better satisfaction you have the testimony of three
faithful Witnesses, that these six things Farnworth did utter; and also what is
laid down in his Book, that I here say he speaks falsely of me, they are my
witnesses: and upon what ground I then spoke, you have it laid down and
witnessed: and for all the rest of the company there, was out of Gospel Order.

Lawrence Spooner, Vrsula Spooner, Richard Clewly.

The Holy Scripture clearing it self of SCANDALS.
FIrst, you have in this Book the unsoundness of Richard Farnworth's Judgment
in fix Particulars laid down, which being weighed will discover that those
Principles in his Book, that he says, He holds, are not really according to
the Rules of Truth owned by him, but laid down on purpose to deceive.

First, Richard Farnworth said, He was a man wholly free from sin, and not
subject to any one temptation.

Now, dear Friends, let us first make search into the Scripture, to see if any
of the Lord's people have so boasted of themselves, to be in such a condition,
while they carried about with them an earthly Tabernacle.

And first we will take notice of Job; for it is clear, that he had more ground
to have boasted of perfection then any of these men, if we mind what the Lord
said of him unto Satan, Have thou considered my servant Job, how there is none
like him in all the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that fears God
and escheweth evil? Job 2.3. Yet though the Lord had so said of him, let us see
what Job says of himself, read Job 9.20. If I justify my self, my own mouth
shall condemn me: If I say, I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse. And,
Job 42.5. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear: but now my eyes see
thee. Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. From whence it
is plain, That Job did see imperfection in himself, and repented of it: but if
Job had been wholly perfect, then there was no need of repentance: for to
abhor that which is good, and to repent of that, must needs be wickedness.

Secondly, See what the Lord says of David, Acts 13.22. I have found David a
man after my own heart. And yet we never find this man boasting of perfection;
but goes humbly to the Lord, and earnestly begs of him, Psalm. 19.12, 13. Lord,
keep thy servant from presumptuous sins, lest they get the dominion over me: so
shall I be innocent from the great offense. And see Psalm. 18.1. How the Lord is
his rock, his fortress, his God in whom he will trust. And ver. 29. For by thee
have I run through a troop, and by my God I have leaped over a wall. And verse.
30. As for God, his way is perfect, the word of the Lord is tried: he is a
buckler to all them that trust in him. This whole Psalm, David speaks out much
of the Lords goodness to him; but I do not find one word of boasting.

Thirdly, See what the Lord says of Paul to Ananias, Acts 9.15. He is a chosen
vessel to bear my name; and I will show him how great things he must suffer for
my name's sake. Yet see what Paul says of himself, Romans 7.18. I know that in
me, that is, in my flesh, there dwells no good thing: for to will is present
with me; but how to perform that which is good, I find not. For verse. 21. When
I would do good, evil is present with me. And says Paul, 1 Timothy 1.15. This is
a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, That Christ Jesus came into
the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief. By all which we may see, that
Paul has not a word of such boasting, but rather cries out against the fleshly
part, how it attends him, and oft-times keeps him from doing that which he
would.

Fourthly, we will see what is said of John, who was an eminent Apostle, who is
called that Disciple whom Jesus loved; and the Scripture says, He lay in
Christ's bosom, John 13.2,. yet we find that he and Peter, Acts 3.12, to 17.
said unto the people, Ye men of Israel, why marvel ye at this? or, why look ye
so earnestly on us, as though by our own power or holiness we had made this man
to walk? No, he tells them, It is the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob;
the God of our fathers has glorified his Son Jesus, whom ye delivered up. His
Name, says Peter, through faith in his Name, has made this man strong: not
any thing in them, it is plain, does he set up; but says, It was the man's
believing in Jesus, that prevailed with Jesus, who gave him this perfect
soundness in the presence of you all. And in Chap. 4.29. they pray to the Lord
for strength, that they may speak his word with boldness. By all which it is
plain, That they had no dependence on themselves, by their looking to the Lord,
the Rock of their strength, and their Deliverer in their trouble. And further,
see what John says in his 1 Epist. 1.8. If we say, We have no sin, we deceive
our selves, and the truth is not in us. Mind, It is such a deceit, that they
that say so, the Truth is not in them. And James says, Chap. 3.2. In many
things we offend all.

And now, dear Friends, we see what the Scripture says of these men, how high
in the Lord's favor they were; yet we do not find, that any of these holy men
of God, did so justify themselves as this man.

Now consider Reader, and the Lord give thee understanding. If these men, Job,
David, Paul, and John, whose whole work it was, as I may say, to keep close to
the Commandments of God, to see how humbly they walked with God, and how
sweetly the Lord appeared to them in this their heavenly progress, as the
Scripture is full of Witnesses, and that they did not boast of perfection.

This then we may learn, that for these men in our days, who boast of
perfection, and say, they are free from sin; and yet make it their whole work,
to turn away poor souls from the Truth, I mean, the holy Scripture, and
Ordinances: that it is pride in them; for they presume above what is written, as
to call the Scripture carnal, and a dead Letter, and say, It will never bring a
man to the knowledge of God. Now, that these are proud and presumptuous, and
self-willed, see what Paul says of the Scripture, 2 Timothy 3.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
Evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived:
but to keep thee from these, (says he) continue thou in the things thou have
learned, and have been assured of; knowing of whom thou have learned them, and
that from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make
thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus. And he further
says, All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that
the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. By all
which it is plain, That these men are of another mind then the Apostle Paul, for
he vindicates the Scripture and Ordinances in all his Epistles: then, I say, it
is wickedness in these men to speak against the Scripture and Ordinances, as
they do; calling it a dead Letter, and carnal; and say, That all that is gotten
from the Scripture, is but brain-knowledge.

Now, dear Friends, may we not see plainly how they strike at Jesus Christ in
his Ordinances, which do so lively represent him, and which he has born
witness to himself, and confirmed it to us, to be a sure Word of Prophecy, by
many Signs, and Wonders, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost?

And further, dear Friends, let us not forget how wonderfully the Lord has
preserved this Word from the rage of Enemies, not only in the Generations
past, but our days have spoken out much to us. If we look back to those days of
profanation, and wicked toleration, when nothing but superstition had
countenance, and many for conscience sake were sore oppressed: now for us to
consider what we then did see, instead of pure Ordinances, and to take notice
of what we now, through mercy, enjoy; we may say, the Lord has wrought for us
wonderfully: which being laid to heart, it may encourage us to follow the holy
Commandments of Christ Jesus, though we be reproached and called Pharisees by
these men, for observing the Primitive Pattern: for do but try them by their
Works, and you will find, that they carry on a design for Satan, as it appears
by the words of one Foster to me at Coulton in Staffordshire, who said, It was
all one to them if all Bibles were burnt; as many of the Lord's people can
witness. But O you Saints of God! mind the progress of the Lords people, how
they followed after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness,
as Paul exhorts, 1 Timothy 6.11, 12.

Again, let us consider how patient Job was under the hand of the Lord, saying,
The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be the name of the Lord. And
he is brought in by the Apostle, James 5.10. Take, my brethren, the Prophets
for an example of suffering affliction, and of patience: and how they are
accounted happy that endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have
seen the end of the Lord, that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy to
all them that wait patiently on him. And so we find David an excellent pattern
for obedience: he made have and delayed not to keep God's Commandments, Psalm
119.60. O(says David) how I love thy law! it is my meditation all the day.
Thou through thy commandments have made me wiser then my enemies; yea, I have
more understanding then my teachers, for thy testimonies are my meditation. I
understand more then the ancient, because I have kept thy precepts. I have
refrained my feet from every evil way, that I may keep thy word. Thus, dear
Friends, mind David and these men, and you will find they as far differ as
light and darkness; and if David had so much wisdom in this way of keeping
God's Commandments, and Ordinances of Christ Jesus, are proud men and fools,
because they consent not to the wholesome words of Christ, and to the Doctrine
which is according to godliness: he is proud, or a fool, as says the margin, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4.

O what will these scorners do, when the Lord comes from Heaven with his Saints
to render vengeance on all that know not God, and obey not the Gospel? mind
that, and you may easily see, that all them that deride the Word and Ordinances
of Christ, under what term and title soever called, whether Quakers, Ranters or
other Reproachers of God, his Son, his Saints, his Ordinances, and trample the
Blood of Christ under their feet, and do despite to the Spirit of Grace, and
sadden the hearts of his dear Ones, and cause the Truth of God to be evil
spoken of: O to such I say, it had been better for them that they had never
known the way of Truth, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy
Commandment delivered unto them: but it is happened unto them according to the
true Proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit again, and the sow that was
washed to her wallowing in the mire, as says the Apostle, 2 Pet. 2.21, 22.

But O ye Saints, and spiritual Christians, who are troubled to hear the Truth
of Christ abused by such men; See what Paul's counsel is, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. To you
who are troubled, rest with us; abide in the doctrine of Christ, quit you like
men, be strong in the Lord, labor to be steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord; for you know your labor is not in vain in
the Lord. Romans 1.15, 58. The Lord has promised to you such a reward, that all
these evil-speakers cannot rob you of. And seeing it is a righteous thing with
God, to recompense tribulation on them that trouble you, be encouraged to run
the race that is set before you. Follow the holy Commandments, and the pattern
of the Apostles, as they followed Christ, you may be born up above all the
discouragements you meet with, by such as speak evil of the holy Scripture and
Ordinances, which you own as a Rule to walk by; for whatever is done against
any of the Lord's people, that are found doing his Commandments, Jesus Christ
will take all that is done against them, as done to himself, as you may see in
that Acts 9. by the words Christ said to Saul: for you are dear in his sight,
and are continually before him, and his delight is with you, his heart is
toward you; there shall be no want to them that fear him: Rev. 22.14. Blessed
are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of
life, and may enter into the gates through the city.

But O Farnworth, and those with thee, that so impudently boast of perfection,
and judge all to be in darkness, that throw not away the rule of Truth, as you
do; O call to mind your self-conceitedness. Had you ever such ground of
boasting as Job, David, Paul, and John? The Lord never said so of you, or any
that ever went your way, as he says of these men, that you were after his
heart, as David; or his chosen, as Paul; or his beloved Disciple, as John; or
such a one, for doing that which was good, and hating that which was evil, as
Job, that the Lord says, There was none like him in all the Land of Uz(...)
Yet we do not find any of these men thus justify themselves, as you do; and
they never judged so rashly of others, as you do of all men that are not of
your mind, calling them carnal, and saying that they are devils, as I can show
under some of your hands: surely you are coming on apace to them that say they
are God; but your glorying is not good; for you glory in appearance, having a
kind of voluntary humility; but this will not stand you in stead, because you
go about to set up your selves and not the Lord; your own way, and not his way:
and therefore you are the greater Hypocrites. And see what Job says of all
such, Job 8.13. The hypocrites hope shall perish. And Job 20.5. The joy of the
hypocrite is but for a moment. And Solomon says, Prove. 11.9. An hypocrite with
his mouth destroys his neighbor. And do not you with your deluding tongues,
and outside holiness, throwing dirt in the face of Truth; and as much as in
you lies, destroying all men by your Doctrine, which had its rise from Hell and
darkness, and now raigns in the children of disobedience, such as you, who
mind nothing less, then the holy Commandments and Ordinances, as they were
delivered to the Saints, and committed to faithful men, and are of great use to
all the Lord's people; which word discovers all your ways to be from Hell and
darkness, as in the following discourse it will be manifest, that your Opinions
are hatched in Hell, and never came from above, Whence, James says, every good
and perfect gift comes: and then it will plainly appear, that all that follow
you are in the error, and are under a great delusion, to take your bare word
for what you affirm, yea, though it cross the Scripture never so much* But O
consider, ye poor deluded ones, first, The heart of man is deceitful above all
things, Jer. 17.9. Secondly, He that trusts his own heart, is a fool, Prove.
28.26.

The second thing that this Farnworth affirmed, That when Paul spoke those
words in the seventh of the Romans, where he cries out of a body of death, and
of the warfare he had in himself, he said, That Paul was not converted. To
which I answered, O man, mind thy error! what Paul, a Messenger of the Gospel,
and so eminent an Apostle of Christ, and unconverted?

Here let us try by the Scripture whether it be so or no: first, see Acts 9.5,
6. When the Voice from Heaven, which Voice was Christ, that said to him, Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? He trembling and astonished, said, Lord, what
would thou have me to do? The Lord sent him to Ananias: and when he had
manifested his Faith in Christ, by his obedience to Christ, he straightway
preached Christ, in the Synagogues, to be the Son of God. And further, see
verse. 27. of this ninth Chapter, where it was made plain to the Apostles. And
he was with them, coming in, and going out at Jerusalem: and he spoke boldly in
the Name of Jesus Christ, and disputed against the Grecians. And this whole
Chapter makes it evident both in what he did and suffered, that he was
converted. And further, see Romans 1.1. Paul a servant of Jesus Christ; then sure
converted, else no fit Servant for so great a work; and not only so, but,
called to be an Apostle, separated unto the Gospel of God. And pray you mind
who called him to this great work, not himself, but the Holy Ghost, Acts 13.2.
The Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I
have called them. By which it is plain, he was converted before, as I at that
time told thee.

Then thou would turn it, and did say that he spoke of his condition before
conversion in that Romans 7. And this is as false as the other, if the words be
weighed, verse. 22. to 25. For I delight in the law of God after the inward man.
Pray you mind; at that time he did see a law in his members warring against
the law of his mind.

Nay further, if all this had been before conversion, then how could he have
said as he says verse. 25. that with his mind he served the Law of God? for it
is evident that his mind before conversion was only to persecute the Church
and people of God. And here we will bring his own words to witness, 1 Cor.
15.9. I (says Paul) am the least of the Apostles not worthy to be called an
Apostle: mind the reason, Because I persecuted the Church of God. By all which
we may plainly see how contrary to the Scripture, and unfound, this opinion is.
Therefore take heed, poor souls, of following men any further then they follow
Christ, and keep his way. And you deluded ones, that speak against the holy
Scripture in the whole, it is no wonder that you make such tearing it in pieces
as you do. And though you use the Scripture so frequent in your writing, it is
out of subtilty to ensnare souls, as that great deceiver did to Christ, Mat.
4.6.

But one word to the Lords people. Take Scripture-arguments to fight against
Deceivers: and for your progress in the Lords way, take Jeremiah's counsel,
Chap. 6.16. Stand ye in the way, and see, and ask for the old paths: where is
the good way? and walk therein. And then mind the promise: Ye shall find rest
for your souls. And how we may find the way of the Lord, read Isai. 8.20. To
the law, and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in them. Compared with Gal. 1.8, 9.

The Third thing, Farnworth affirmed, that where John spoke those words, If we
say we have no sin, we deceive our selves; he said, John did not here speak of
himself; but the people to whom he spoke these words were unconverted.

In answer to this, mind the Apostles words, 1 Job. 1.3. That which we have
seen and heard, that we declare unto you, that ye may have fellowship with us;
and truly our fellowship is with the Father and the Son. And, These things we
write unto you, that your joy may be full: and this was joy to them: Chap. 3.2.
Now are we the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be: but we
know that when he shall appear we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he
is. And in Chap. 2.24, 25. Let that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard
from the beginning: if that shall abide in you, ye also shall continue in the
Son and in the Father: and this is the promise he has promised us, even
eternal life. And John says, verse. 21 of this chap. 2. I have not written unto
you because ye know not the truth, but because ye know it. By all which it is
plain they were built on the foundation, for else it had been absurd for the
Apostle to have exhorted them to abide in Christ and his commandments, if not
converted; for then the exhortation was of no use; and beside, it is very
improper to advise any man to keep that which he never had.

Again, 2. The Apostle does here press them to persevere, and to go on, and to
walk in the light; then they must know it before.

3. I do not find any Epistle written to any but to the Saints; as Romans 1.7.1
Cor 2.2 Cor. 2. By all which it is plain, To the Saints at Rome, To the Church
at Corinth, To the Saints at Ephesus, To the Church at Galatia, Saints at
Philippi, Saints at Colosse Saints at Thessalonica.

4. The Apostle put himself in: If WE say WE have no sin, WE deceive our
selves. Here he puts himself one of the number.

Not that I go about, as Farnworth falsely says, to plead a continuance in sin:
for I do own, that believers, as they are in Christ, are justified from sin,
and God is satisfied with his Son, as Isaiah says; he looked on the travel of
his soul and was satisfied. But that which I say, is this, That believers do
see some defect in themselves, in their outward man, as they carry about with
them an earthly tabernacle: but through grace, they overcome all defects by
degrees.

And we will see what the Scripture faith from the mouth of other godly
witnesses. See Solomon, 1 King. 8.46. There is (says he) no man that sins
not: with Prove. 20.9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from
my sin? With Eccl. 7.20. Says the wise Preacher, There is not a just man upon
earth, that does good, and sins not. Now then, I say with the Apostle, Let
God and his Word be true, and all men liars. And I do appeal to every godly
soul, for to witness this, who are sensible of flesh and self appearing in them
at one time or other. But dear Saints, look up to the Lord for strength, and
let us be sure, if we would conquer, to fight with spiritual weapons: and let
us take heed of such an opinion, that will be judge himself in his own cause,
and will not be tried by the Scripture, accounting it dead and carnal, and of
no use to bring men to Christ. As when I asked Farnworth how he would witness
the truth of what he affirmed, in that he denied the Scripture; he laid his
hand on his heart, and said, I witness this. Now mind this delusion, as I said
before what Jeremiah says, Chap. 17.9. 1. The heart of man is deceitful above
all things, and desperately wicked; who can know it? 2. He that trusts in his
own heart, is a fool, Prove. 28.26.

And now dear friends, let us take counsel of the Lord, to try the spirits
whether they be of God: for many false prophets are gone out into the world, 1 John 4.1. And verse. 6. We are of God: he that knows God, hears us; and he
that is not of God, hears not us. Hereby know we the spirit of truth and the
spirit of error. From whence we may honestly argue, that if they, and they
only, be the friends of God, that walk in obedience to the commands of God;
then they must needs be enemies that oppose. But the first is clear, Joh.
15.14. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you with Joh. 14.23. If
any man love me he will keep my words; and my Father will love him. And 1 John
5.2* 3. For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments; and his
commandments are not grievous.

And further, dear friends, let us embrace that advice that Peter gives, 2
Epist. 3.17, 18. Beware lest you being led away with the error of the wicked,
fall from your own stedfastness. And to prevent you from falling, his counsel
is. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

Now is the hour of temptation: for if these be not wicked errors, I know not
what is: I mean these which are laid down to your view, which Farnworth did
stand by to vindicate, if his own testimony may stand. O then, what need have
all the Lords people to be upon their watch, now Satan by his instruments is
sifting poor souls out of the Truth, if he can! It is high time to look to our
foundation, that we be built on the Rock Christ, that you be firmly knit to
him, and made one with him; and then the gates of hell shall not prevail
against you.

And you strong Christians, help the weak Lambs of Jesus Christ, that they may
grow in that good way of Christ's commandments, that the Saints of old have
walked in. O be stirring up one another by way of remembrance of the good path
of Christ, which discovers fully all the bypath of iniquity. Oh, I say, let
there not be a want of care among you in your several Societies, to watch over
one another, lest any be entangled by these seducing spirits, and overcome, I
say, by these that throw aside all the Laws and Ordinances of the Lord Jesus,
as they were delivered to the Saints, and ought now by us to be observed: for
you know what the Scripture says of them that turn from the way of Truth; It
had been better for them that they had never known it, then after they have
known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them. 2 Pet. 2.20*
21.

O then, I say to all you that are employed in the Lords work, whether by
Office or Gift, that are faithful Stewards, diligent in feeding the flock of
Christ; remember what the Lord says to such: When the chief Shepherd shall
appear. ye shall receive a crown of glory that fades not away, 1 Pet. 5.4. And
says Daniel* Chap. 12.3. They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of
the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever
and ever.

And if these men be so forward in pulling down the Ordinances of Christ, you
have greater encouragement to follow Christ in his way.

1. You have his own presence promised ( Matthew. 2820.) in the work.

2. See your reward after the work, Joh. 10.27, 28.

Fourthly, Farnworth affirmed that Christ had not a visible Church in the
world; and scornfully said to me. What, a Church in the world! I answered, Yea,
in the world though not of the world, but gathered out of the world.

And 1. See what Paul says, 1 Cor. 1.2. Unto the Church of God which is at
Corinth, sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, with all that in
every place call on the Name of Jesus Christ. Reader, pray you mind, this must
needs be a visible Church:

1. Because this Epistle is directed to a visible place, Corinth.

2. It is as clear, that here were men, and that under this general term
brethren; verse. 10. I beseech you brethren by our Lord Jesus, that you all
speak the same thing, and that there be no division among you, but that you be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.

3. Paul makes mention of households, verse. 11. the house of Cloe; and
Stephanas, verse. 16.

4. He speaks of persons by name, as Crispus and Gaius, and others. By all
which it is clear, this poor man is much beside the Rule of Truth.

Again, see what Paul says unto the Churches of Galatia; Chap. 1.1. Unto the
Churches of Galatia. And mind Romans 16.1. Commend unto you Phebe our sister,
which is a servant of the Church at Cenchrea. Mind how full the Scripture is
to prove this thing, and makes manifest the blindness of this man's
understanding, that will thus oppose the Truth that is so full of wintnesses.

And how does the holy Ghost write to the seven Churches in Asia? And how, I
pray you Farnworth, will you answer that place in Acts 8. when Steven was
stoned, and the Church at Jerusalem all scattered? 1. This must needs be a
visible company, because they were visibly scattered. 2. They were at
Jerusalem, which was a visible place, the Scripture is full for. 3. See whither
they were scattered; some into Judea, and some into Samaria. And Saul he made
havoc of the Church, verse. 3:

But here we may see your subtilty and cunning craftiness whereby you lie in
wait to deceive: for if you can bring poor souls to this, That God has not a
visible Church in the world, then you may easily persuade them to throw aside
all the visible Rule of Scripture, and so make all Doctrine and
Church Discipline of none effect: and thus you would put out the eyes of poor
souls, and then bring them to see with your eyes; and then your words they may
quickly learn, which are only thus, to say they must hearken to a light
within: but, if the light in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness?

And here thy darkness does appear, in denying a visible Church, which is so
plainly proved.

But Reader, by these men, the Rule of trial to try the Spirits withal, is
thrown away, and become of no use to these men, except it be for advantage.

But dear souls, consider, first, that the heart is deceitful; and he that
trusts to it, is a fool. And then to have no other judge in thy own case but
thy self, (as this is their principle) how does it open a door to looseness? And
many poor souls have been so far misled as to say, That which men call sin does
as highly honor God, as that which men call prayer or holy performances: I
say, these things I have heard uttered by mouth, and have seen in print: and if
this be not sad and dangerous, I know nothing.

But to you of the Church of Christ that are by these men called Pharisees and
outward Jews, and branded with reproach; see what Peter says, 1 Pet. 2.20, If
when ye do well and suffer for it ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with
God: for even hereunto were ye called, because Christ also suffered for us,
leaving us an example that we should follow his steps. And in Chap. 4. verse.
14. he says, If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye: for
the Spirit of glory and of God rests upon you. On their part he is evil
spoken of, but on your part he is glorified.

And further, friends, let us call to mind how sweetly the Lord has appeared
to us in the use of Ordinances; and then I hope you will take heed of
entertaining such an opinion, that is so wicked as to overthrow all the
Ordinances of Christ that belong to his Church. O but labor for oneness of
spirit, and you will be terrible to all your enemies as an army with banners.

Fifthly, Farnworth affirmed, that all Ordinances ceased when Christ ascended
and gave the Spirit.

But, dear friends, let us not take the thing for granted, upon his bare word,
because he says so; but let us be like the Bereans, search the Scripture, to
see if the thing be so.

And first, we will mind the commission, and the time when Christ gave it; and
that is clear it was after his resurrection, as the last chapter of Matthew
witnesses at large. If so, then it must be that this commission was given when
Christ entered into his Kingly office; and this his own words make good: for
now says Christ, All power is given into my hands in heaven and in earth: go
ye therefore and teach all nations, and baptize them. And the continuance of
these Ordinances is plain, in the last verse: Lo (says Christ) I am with you
always, to the end of the world. Now this is to me so strong an argument, that
surely it will make a gracious heart tremble to deny it.

2. If this be true that Farnworth affirms, then see how short a time
Ordinances were to be of use in the world. Read Acts 1.1. The former treatise
have I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus began to do and teach, until the
day he was taken up, after that he through the holy Ghost had given commandment
unto the Apostles whom he had chosen, to whom also he showed himself alive
after his passion by many infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days.
Pray ye mind: it seems then by this man's judgment, that Ordinances were to be
of use but forty days: which is very corrupt. And further, then the end of the
world should have been, if this he says be true, when Christ ascended: two
great absurdities; 1. To (...) that Ordinances were of use but forty days. 2.
Then it must follow also, that at Christ's ascension should be the end of the
world: and so all the promises of the Spirit had been nothing worth.

But mind, dear friends, what Christ says to his Apostles: Tarry at
Jerusalem, and go not out thence, till ye have received power from on high: and
when the holy Ghost is come upon you, ye shall be witnesses unto me both in
Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and in all the uttermost parts of
the earth; Acts 1. at large. By all which it is plain, if the Scripture may be
heard to speak for it self, that the Apostles were not so fully fitted for that
great work, to preach the Gospel to every creature, until Christ ascended and
gave the Spirit. Read Acts 2.3, 4, 5. And Christ told them ( Ioh. 14, 26.) the
Father he would send the Comforter, which is the holy Ghost: and this is his
work; He shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you. Then mind; If it be the work of this Spirit
of Truth that comes from the Father and the Son, to bring to their remembrance
what Christ before spoke to them; then it is plain, that the commission is one
part of what Christ spoke to them before his ascension. Yea, there is much
wrapped up in it, that the Spirit was to inmind the Apostles of; and not them
only, but all those now, that carry on the same work, by the same rule, for
one and the same end; namely, To glorify God, to be useful to his Church, and
to all men.

Now we will see how the mind of Christ was when he was gone to heaven; and we
shall find he was of the same mind to maintain Ordinances, as well as when he
was on the earth: and for this, see a plain text of Scripture, Acts 9.6. And
the Lord said unto Saul, Arise, and go into the city, and it shall be told thee
what thou must do. And as the Lord sent him into the city, mind the end the
Lord had, in sending Ananias, who told him as he had received from Christ, what
Saul must do: and this was one thing that Ananias told him, as it is plain,
Acts 22.14, 15, 16. first, that he was chosen of the Lord, that he should know
his will, and see that Just One, and should hear the voice of his mouth: for
(says he) thou shall be his witness to all men, of what thou have seen and
heard. And now why tarriest thou? arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy
sins, calling on the name of the Lord. By which it is plain, that Christ was of
the same mind to maintain Ordinances in his Church, after his ascension, as
before.

But when I instanced these Scriptures, Farnworth said, that this was not
Water Baptism that Paul was baptized with, but the Baptism of the Spirit; as
many can witness.

But I think no sober man will be of this man's judgment: for,

1. Consider, if it were the baptism of the Spirit, it were too high for
Ananias, as he was a disciple, to carry on: and without question, we should
have found Ananias answering Paul, as John confesses in another place; I
indeed baptize with water; but there is one coming after me, he shall baptize
with the holy Ghost.

2. It would be very absurd to give that to men, that is Christ's proper and
peculiar right. But it is no wonder to find these men thus dealing with Christ
himself, that will thus wickedly speak against his Ordinances.

But then he asked me whether my baptism washed away sin. I told him I could
prove that Water Baptism was an Ordinance of Christ, being administered on right
subjects, which are men and women when they believe; and yielding obedience to
it as a command of Christ, I had the answer of a good conscience; and this no
man can have, but by the washing away of sin: for obedience and godliness has
the promise of this life, and of that which is to come: for, blessed are they
that do his commandments. But I do not affirm that any man can have salvation
by virtue of his obedience; but this I say, that the obedient, and they only,
are within the promises; and it will be assuredly performed to them: for,
faithful is he that promises, and he will perform it.

O then, dear Saints, to you that prize the holy commandments of Christ, and
yet live in the use of them, though these men so speak against them; I shall
give you another Scripture, to show Christ's care of his Church, that it may be
well ordered according to his mind, and how long Ordinances are to stand:
beside that of the commission, that shows to the end of the world; this in
Ephesians. 4, 8. which plainly holds out the institution of it: When he ascended
up on high, he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some
Pastors and Teachers. And let us mind the end Christ had in so doing; which
is, for the perfecting of the Saints: by which it appears, that Christ did well
know that the Church would stand in need of help from him. Ah Saints! see his
care of you: prize it then. Secondly, that the work of the Ministry might be
carried on in the Church and world, for the enlarging of his kingdom. Thirdly,
that the body might be edified.

Now Christ having thus carefully provided for his Church, and for all men,
that the Gospel might be preached to every creature; then he tells us how long
Ordinances shall stand, verse.13. Till we all come in the unity of the faith.
Then it is plain, that Ordinances are yet of force: for those who are beloved
for the Fathers sake, the Lord has said he must bring in. The Lord hasten the
day of their coming in, that the Gentiles fullness may be completed. Secondly,
the Church shall be brought to a perfect man, unto the stature of the fullness
of Christ. But yet we see much incompleatness: but O that we were more looking
for this day.

Fourthly, we may see another end Christ had, verse.14. That we henceforth be no
more children tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine: by the slight of
men, and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive.

If we well weigh these words, we may see that Christ did well know, so many
hundred years ago, what would come to pass in the last times. And sure now is
the time: for we see men risen up, pretending high seize, not in a
superstitious habit, but in a show of glory, and filled with feigned words and
fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple; and thus they lie in wait to
deceive: when they cannot work downright at once with a man, then they will
work by degrees: as first, to benum or deaden his affection to Ordinances, and
put him out of love with something that the Church lives in the practice of; as
breaking of bread, calling it carnal: and when they have drawn away his
affection, then they endeavor to stifle him in his judgment, and so ensnare
him. I speak what I know in this thing.

But you dear Saints, that are faithful to the principles of Truth, labor to
embrace that Exhortation, and to walk worthy of that commendation that Paul
speaks of, 1 Cor. 11.1, 2. In the first verse you have the Exhortation, in
these words: Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ. The
commendation is in these words: Now I praise you brethren, that ye remember me
in all things, and keep the Ordinances as I delivered them unto you. And if
this be well pleasing in the sight of God, that we keep his Ordinances as they
were delivered by his servants, and they had this authority from above, and his
presence with them in the work; then it is plain, that these men who thus set
themselves to overthrow the Ordinances of Christ, as they were once delivered,
are the deceivers. For they that will deny a visible Church, that the Scripture
is so full to witness; and will say, that all Ordinances ceased when Christ
ascended: then Paul was too blame to commend the Church at Corinth for keeping
that which Christ had put an end to at his ascension, if what Farnworth says
be true. Again, it is plain, that Paul was a Persecutor at Christ's ascension:
then mind, it must be that Christ did show to Paul this, That he was worthy of
commendation that did keep the Ordinances; and if what Paul spoke were by the
Spirit of God, as without all question he did, then it must follow, that these
have a spirit of delusion coming from hell and darkness, that spits out such
venom against the Ordinances of Christ Jesus, that is so fully confirmed to us
by so strong an Obligation of his own making. I will be with you: mind, if the
Lord Jesus will be with them that obey him, then surely satan will be and is
with them that go contrary to the commands of Christ. And mind Romans 6.16. To
whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are; whether of sin
unto death, or obedience unto righteousness. And I am sure it is well for every
soul that is found faithful to the death, for they shall receive a crown of
life that fades not away, which God the righteous Judge will give to all those
that long and look for his appearing. O then they are the only happy men and
women that are faithful in obedience to every command of Christ.

The sixth thing, Farnworth affirmed, That the Scripture was not of any use to
any man* till he was brought into the condition of them that writ the
Scriptures.

Then it must follow, that the Scripture is only in use for men in Christ, and
not to bring them to Christ; for, says the Apostle, Holy men of God, spoke as
they were moved by the holy Ghost. Then mind, 1. The absurdity will be this,
that the Scripture is not of use to make men holy; but useful only to holy
men, because holy. 2. Then this must follow, that the Scripture is not of use
to teach or show men the way to Christ; but to them that are taught or brought
to him without it. 3. To destroy preaching upon this ground, namely, to
convince and convert souls to Christ, must needs destroy Faith also: for says
the Apostle, Romans 10. Faith comes by hearing; and if by it, then not without
it, mind that: so then to take away the cause, the effect will cease. And it
is plain by the Scripture, that the Gospels preaching, is the cause of men's
believing; for says Paul, verse. 14. How shall they believe in him, of whom
they have not heard? O then Reader, mind, how far this Opinion will plunge a
poor soul, whose condition is such, that he cannot please God without Faith,
Heb. 11.6. Without faith it is impossible, mind, to please God. And in Romans
14.23. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin: so then, to deny the Ordinance of
preaching, by which Faith comes, must needs tend to destroy Faith, and then
please God who can. But let us weigh the design of these men a little: if they
can once bring a poor soul into this condition to disown the Scripture when he
most stands in need of it; that is to say, to bring him to Christ, and to show
him how he ought walk so as to please God: I say, if once the poor creature be
brought into such a condition, then he knows he can easily keep him from
prising it at all.

But let us see how this crosses the end of God's sending his Son into the
World: John says, chap. 3.16. God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son into the world that whosoever believes on him should not perish,
but have everlasting life. Again, Luke 1. witnesses, that Christ was sent of
the Father, to be a light to them that sit in darkness, and are in the shadow
of death, and to guide our feet into the way of peace. And how should we know
this great love of the Father, much less believe it, without the Gospels
preaching? Again, Christ says, He came not to call the righteous, but sinners
to repentance; and, he came to seek and to save that which was lost. By all
which it is plain, that the end of the Gospels preaching to every creature, was
not because every creature did believe this, but that they might hear and
believe. Again, if those three thousand, Act. 2. were converted by the Gospel,
then not without it; and them of Samaria by the Gospel, then not any other way,
Act. 8. and the believing Thessalonians were called by the Gospel; and so were
all the Churches called to be Saints, how I pray you, if not by the Gospels
preaching? Nay, how should we poor sinners of the Gentiles have known of a door
of hope open to us, but by the preaching of the Gospel? nay should we have
known of a Christ that died at Jerusalem, but by the Scripture? or, how should
we know sin to be sin, and righteousness to be righteousness, but by the
Scripture?

Again, see what Paul says, 2 Timothy 3.2 last verse. All Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness: mind, not that man is perfect;
but, that he may be perfect, and thereby thoroughly furnished unto all good
works. By all which it is plain, that the Scripture is of greater use then
these men will have it. And Christ says, The words that I have spoken the same
shall judge you at the last day: and this word shall not return void, but shall
be to all that entertain it a savor of life unto life, but to them that put it
from them, and say it is useless, it will be a savor of death unto death.

But to you who are through Grace members of the Church of Christ, who were
once sinners of the Gentiles, and without God in the world, but are now made
nigh by the blood of his Son, as Paul witnesses, Ephesians. 2.11.

It is good for us, that we have often in our meditations, the great use that
the Scripture has been to us, in helping us to know what sin is, that so we
may avoid it; and it also has showed what righteousness is, that we may be in
love with it. And I pray you let your former experiences of what good we have
received by the word and Ordinances, not to be forgotten.

And further, we find and are made sensible through Grace, that the Scripture
is and has been a sweet and perfect Rule for us to walk by, and we thereby
have been led and guided into the way of Truth and Peace. And we know that all
those that are found faithful in obeying the commands of Christ, and continue
therein, they shall receive a crown of glory that fades not away. And
therefore let us always look unto the Law and to the Testimony, and embrace
that sweet counsel, for the trial of all doctrines; for says the Prophet, if
any speak not according to this, mind, when they come from hell and darkness,
for says he, they have no light in them, Isa. 8.20. O! then all those that go
about to destroy this Rule, they are so in darkness, that as the Scripture
says, They know not at what they stumble, or whither they go, John 12.35.

And though these men say, That they are the only men that know God, and love
God, yet if we see what John says, it will be found otherwise, 1 Epist. 2.3,
4, 5. Hereby, says John to the Church, we do know, that we do know him, mind,
if we keep his commandments; and he that says, I know him, and keeps not his
commandments, what follows? he is a liar; and mind, such a liar, that the
truth is not in him. And he that says, He abides in him, ought himself so to
walk, even as he walked. Now this was Christ's walk, to do the will of him that
sent him, then these men go not Christ's way, but their own, and walk by the
imaginations of their own heart, rather then by the holy Commandments of Christ
Jesus. And also see who they are that love God, John 14.23, 24. and see who
they are that are related to Christ, Matthew. 12.50. He that does the will of my
Father, the same Man or Woman, is Christ's Brother and Sister.

And now having given you his Principles, as he then at the meeting in
Harliston did stand by to maintain, which before the close you have them
weighed, which those Principles he says he ownes in his Book, and see how they
stand together.

But now in the second place, I come to answer to those false slanders he
charges me with in his Book.

First, he says, That I came on purpose to that meeting to cavil, and oppose
the Truth.

To which I answer, That the ground of my coming with other Friends, was to
oppose all doctrines whatsoever, that was not warranted by the Word of God; and
in so doing, I have one greater with me and for me, then all you that so
maliciously speak against me. But O Farnworth! take heed of boasting so of
perfection, until you show better fruit; and when you come to cease lying, I
shall hope some better things of thee.

Now the substance of thy discourse before I questioned thee, was, That you did
witness you were free from sin, and in the possession of the second Covenant.
Then did I bring in those words of John, and told you, That if it were so with
you, then you had attained higher, I said, then that eminent Apostle John had.
And therefore thou dealest wickedly, to say, I brought it in to plead a
continuance in sin: surely, that light which thou say is in thee, is
darkness, else thou would not have spoken thus falsely: but having treated on
this before, I pass it by. Again, I said* Where was your proof, that you was in
this condition? Then he laid his hand on his heart, and said, I witness this.
Then I said to the people, That to trust his own bare testimony without
Scripture, we should leave the word of God and trust the word of a man, and so
bring our selves under that curse, Jer. 17.5. Cursed be he that trusts in
man. And also said, as Jeremiah says in that 17 chap. The heart is deceitful.
And therefore it was good for us to try our own and others by the Scripture.
Read Prove. 28.26.

Then thou, Farnworth said, I told thee of a Church in the world.

Answ. Yea, Christ had a Church in the world, though not of the world; but
gathered out of the world: and for the gathering of it, did not the holy Ghost
say, Act. 13.2. Separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have
called them. And I am sure, that Paul makes this good by many Scriptures, that
he was a Planter of a visible Church. But thou say in thy book, That the
Officers and Overseers of the Church of Christ were invisible: and why? because
made by the holy Ghost which is invisible.

And here the Reader may plainly see thy folly; for as I have already proved a
visible Church, so I will prove visible Officers; as, what was Paul and
Barnabas, but visible men? else their enemies could not have persecuted them.
And read Acts 6.2. Then the twelve called the multitude of the disciples unto
them. By which it is plain, this Church were made up of a visible company. And
the Apostle said unto them, Look you out among you seven men of honest report,
full of the holy Ghost. And the saying pleased the multitude, and they chose
Stephen with others, who are said to be full of the holy Ghost. So that it is a
clear Truth, That visible men were here found in this Church made visible
Officers. But Farnworth, take heed of scorning so clear a Truth.

But one thing Reader, I pray you observe; if it be so as Farnworth says, That
the Officers of the Church of Christ be invisible, then by his own grant he is
none, because he is a visible man. And here is his folly made manifest. And
also he denying a visible Church, you may as plainly see from whence he is
sent, and whose errand he goes on: not of Christ's errand, for then his work
would he do; but it is plain he is of his Father the Devil, who was a liar from
the beginning, else he would never say, that Christ had not a visible Church;
and say, all Ordinances ceased when Christ ascended; and, that the Scripture
would never bring a man to the knowledge of God; and say, that all Ordinances
contained in the Scripture are carnal.

Again, Farnworth says in his Book, That I said the Letter and the Spirit was
inseparable.

I do not so wonder of his taking boldness to lie of me, that dare so
impudently lie of Christ, and of his Word and Ordinances as he has done.

But to answer to this, thou chargest me with this, I then said unto thee, as I
now say, That the Word and Spirtt were one or inseparable, and this, I said, I
will prove by the word of God, 1 John 5.7. For there are three that bear record
in heaven, the Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one.
And further, when I said this, then thou Farnwarth pulledst out thy Bible, and
not before, and laid it on the ground, and said to the people, If that be
Spirit and Life, it would rise it self. I told thee at that time, That what was
contained in that book, which it declared of, and held out to us, was Spirit
and Life.

And here Reader, take not my words, but the words of Christ, John 6.63. The
words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life; mind, that
which Christ spoke they are, and compare this with Job. 12.48. The words, says
Christ, that I have spoken, mind that, the same shall judge you at the last
day: which word is established in heaven, and written for our learning, and is
a perfect rule for us to walk by: and see what Paul says, Romans 15.4. For
whatever were written ofore time were written for our learning, that we through
patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. And mind what Paul
said to the Church, Act. 20.32. at his departure, Now, brethren I commend you
to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to make you wise to
salvation, and to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among them that
are sanctified. And Paul commends Timothy, that from a child he had known the
holy Scripture; and, which is very observable, Paul presses Timothy to
continue in the things he had learned, 2 Timothy 3.13, 14, 15, 16. For, says he,
evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.

And Farnworth, it seems you have not learned to distinguish between Law and
Gospel; for I demand of thee, where any of the words of Christ or his Apostles
are called Letter: see what Paul says, 2 Cor. 3.6. Our sufficiency is of God,
who has made us able Ministers of the New Testament; not of the letter that
kills, but of the spirit that gives life. Now I am sure if Paul and the
other Apostles were alive, you would call them Pharisees, and outward Jews,
Ministers of the Letter, and call Christ a Water-ma(...)r outside-washer, as
you call me; for I am sure, that they that carry on this work, they have their
rules from Christ, and they are the only wise men. And this I say, That for
Baby-sprinklers, and Tythe-takers, and Parish-men, we own no such thing; and
therefore let them run in your number and rank, as men refusing and
rejecting the holy Commandments and Ordinances of Christ as you do; only this
I believe, that many of them do what they do ignorantly: but I fear you do
wilfully speak against Truth.

But O you Scorners, how long will you delight in your scorning, to call the
Holy Scripture a dead Letter and carnal, as you do? But to all of you that are
contentious, and do not obey the Truth, of what rank soever you be, or by what
name so ever called, see your portion, Romans 2.8. Tribulation and anguish upon
every soul of man that is contentious, and does not obey the truth. And see
what Paul says, 2 These 1.9. where he speaks of some men that shall be punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory
of his power: and mind who they are, verse. 8. Them that know not God, and obey
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. O then, what will you do, that speak
reproachfully against the Gospel of Christ?

But let me tell you, it is not all your sayings, that can put off or defer the
Lord's coming: and at that time shall the wicked be turned into hell, and all
the people that forget God, Psalm. 9.17. with Psalm. 11.6.

Then thou Farnworth said, I called the Bible a History. Now let the Reader
mind how this hangs together: first, he said, I set up the Letter, and made
it one with the Spirit: and now says, I call it a History.

Now, Reader, I will declare what I spoke, when I proved what I said all along
by Scripture. He said unto me, That is Letter, and that I had nothing to do
with it, being ignorant of the mystery. Then I said, What will you call this? a
History? yet this I say, That if there be a mystery in the Scripture, then
there must be a History, wherein it is kept, which does declare of it: read,
Ephesians. 5.31, 32. For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and cleave
to his wife, and they twain shall be one flesh. This is a great mystery, but I
speak concerning Christ and his Church. Compare this with Col. 1.21. And you
who were sometimes alienated and enemies in your mind, by wicked works, yet
now he has reconciled in the body of his flesh through death, to present you
holy, and unblamable, and unreproveable in his sight, verse. 22. Whereof I am
made a Minister, according to the dispensation of God which is given to me for
you, to fulfill the word of God, verse. 23. Even the mystery, which has been hid
from ages and from generations, but now is made manifest to his Saints; to whom
God would make known, what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the
Gentiles, which is Christ in you the hope of glory, verse. 26, 27.

Again, God manifest in flesh is a mystery, 1 Timothy 3.16. and the bringing in of
the Gentiles into the Church, to be of Christ's body is called a mystery: read
Ephesians. 3.3, 4, 5, 6. and the word declares it.

Dear Friends, mind the design of these men, that do not only destroy the
Ordinances of Christ, but Gospel Order also; as God is a God of order in all
the Churches of the Saints, and we find, that Christ came into all his Offices
when he was on earth, in an orderly way, 1 John 5.6. This is he that came by
water and bood, even Jesus Christ; not by water only, but by water and blood:
and it is the Spirit that bears witness. Now this must needs be the coming of
Christ into his Offices: for we know, that his coming into the world was as a
man, and born of a Virgin; but his coming into his Offices by water and blood
is witnessed by the Spirit.

And first, we will see how Christ came into his Prophetical Office; and that
is plain, he came by Water: and the Spirit bears witness to it, see Matthew.
3.13. Then comes Jesus from Galilee to Jordan, to John, to be baptized of him.
And there you may further mind, when John said, I have need to be baptized of
thee, and come thou to me? Jesus answered and said, Suffer it to be so now,
for it becomes us: mind, not he only, but us; that is to say, all that will
be followers of him. What is it that becomes us to do? To fulfill all
righteousness. Then he suffered him. And see how the Spirit witnesses this
orderly coming of Christ into his Prophetical Office, v. 16. And when he was
baptized, he straight way went up out of the water; mind that, no Font nor
Basin, for that could not contain him, as is well known: And to the heavens
were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and
lighting upon him. And further, see how the Father commends this righteous
act, in these words, Thou art my well-beloved Son, in whom I am well-pleased.
Here the Lord so fully declares him to be his Son in whom he is well-pleased,
as is not declared in the Scripture that ever he said so before; though I grant
that he were his beloved Son before, though not so declared unto us, till this
obedience to this Ordinance. And see Matthew. 4.17. From that time Jesus began
preach, and to say, Repent, for the kingdom of God is nigh at hand.

See Christ's second Office, that is his Priestly Office, and that he came into
by his Blood, Heb. 9.11. Christ is become an high Priest for ever of good
things to come, not by the blood of others, but by his own blood, verse. 12. and
this the Holy Ghost signified, v. 8. And read Heb. 10.14, 15. By one offering
he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified: whereof the holy Ghost is
witness to us.

And his third Office, namely, his Kingly Office, he came into at his
Resurrection, Matthew. 28.18. All power is given to me in heaven and in earth.
And by virtue of this Authority, he sends out his Apostles to teach all
Nations, baptizing them.

But you Farnworth, and all those with you, that go about to destroy order,
that will not come into the Prophetical Office as Christ came into his, I dare
be bold to say, you are no Ministers of Christ, but of Antichrist; for you are
self-called, and not by the Church of Christ; and speak visions of your own
heart, instead of the wholesome words of Christ. Surely, you would call Christ
and his Apostles Watermen and outside-Washers, if they were now on earth. But
you say, You have the baptism of the Spirit, and therefore the other is nothing
to you. Methinks you should grant that Christ had more of the Spirit's baptism
then ever you had; and yet we find it kept him not from Water Baptism: but he
lays a necessity of it, Suffer it to be so now, for it becomes us to fulfill
all righteousness. And we see Peter speaking to Cornelius and his household,
whom the Spirit was fallen upon, as on the Apostles at the beginning, Act.
11.15. yet this did not hinder them from Water Baptism, but rather fitted them
for it: for says Peter, Act. 10.47. Can any man for bid water, mind, that
these should not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we?
And he commanded them to be baptized. Without question, if Peter were now
alive, you would say he were an Hypocrite, and one that rested in the Letter;
but indeed you show your selves to be no Messengers of Christ; no, not
qualified as the Priests under the Law; for they were such as could have
compassion of the ignorant, and of them that are out of the way; but where is
your pity and tenderness toward any that are not so black-mouthed as you, to
rail against the Scripture and Ordinances, as you do?

O poor Creatures! this I say of you, That ye be objects of pity, and not of
punishment: for I believe, That Christ will never account such worty to suffer
for him, that so deal with him, and his Ordinances and Saints, as you do.

And now to that other slander you cast upon me in your book, saying, That I
said* Christ had not judgment committed to him while he was upon earth.

But here you have spoken as falsely as you have in the other: but this I said,
That Jesus Christ at his first coming came not speedily to execute judgment
upon all that did not receive him: for I say, It is clear to me by his own
words, that his first coming was rather to save the world; and for this, see
Christ's own words, John 12.46, 47. I am come a light into the would, that
whosoever believes on me shall not abide in darkness: and if any man hear my
words, and believe not, mind what follows, I judge him not; for I came not to
judge the world, but to save the world. He that rejects me, and receives not
my words, has one that judges him: the word that I have spoken, the same
shall judge him in the last day. And Christ says, I came to seek and to save
that which was lost, Matthew. 18.11. And, To open the blind eyes, and to bring
prisoners from the prison, and them that are in darkness out of the
prisonhouse, Isa. 42.7. And for this end, that is to say, his own glory, and
for the good of poor Creatures, did he send his Son into the world: read John
3.16, 17. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life: for
God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world
through him might be saved. And having thus found out by the Scripture the end
of God's sending his Son into the world, and of Christ's coming; and it is
plain, that neither Father nor Son did or does take delight in the death of
poor sinners, but rather, that they repent and live. But to say, That Christ
had not judgment committed to him while he was upon earth; this I did not say:
for I say, That Christ had all power in Heaven and Earth committed to him. But
as I have said, so I say again, He came in an orderly way, and, as I may say,
was willing to stay the good pleasure of his Father, and did not take the power
of judgment into his hands so as to execute it, till it pleased the Father to
give it to him, Mat. 28. Now all power is given; mind, it came by gift, and
that from the Father, Col. 1.19. It pleased the Father that in him, that is to
say, his Son, should all fullness dwell.

Now this I say, That in reference to his Godhead, he was equal with the
Father: but as he took upon him our flesh, he humbled himself, and became
obedient to the will of his Father. And he himself says, I came not to do my
own will, but the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work, John 4.3, 4.

And now having found out God's great love to us in sending his Son, and for
what end Jesus Christ came into the world* that they through him might be
saved; and that he did not go about to judge or condemn to Hell immediately
them that refused him; but prayed for his worst enemies, Luke 23. Father
forgive them, for they know not what they do. And how full of pity was Christ
for Jerusalem, that did not pity themselves; see at large Mat. 23.37. his
bemoaning of them; and Luke 19.41. you shall find Christ weeping over them, or
for them, and saying O that thou had known in this thy day the things
belonging to thy peace! but now they are hid from thy eyes.

But what will become of all those that slight his first coming; wherein there
is held out so much love to poor creatures? O, I say, His second coming will be
terrible to all those that refuse to own him for their Prophet and King, to
teach them and to rule over them.

But O Farnworth, what will all you do, that make it your work to draw away
poor souls from the Word and Ordinances of Christ? I say, What will you do at
that day when he comes to render vengeance on all that obey not his Gospel?
let me tell you, It is not your saying, That you are past the eternal
judgment, that will serve your turn: I am sure, that when the books come to be
open, and every man to receive according to the works done in his own body,
whether it be good, or whether it be evil, and receive accordingly; Your
justifying your selves now, will not stand you then in any stead. And if you
would cast your eyes upon these words of Christ now in time, you might see
abundance of pride, folly and ignorance in your selves, in trusting your own
Testimony: read John 5.32, 33. If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not
true; there is another that bears witness of me; and I know, that the witness
which witnesses of me is true.

Now Reader mind, first, The pride of these men, that will thus boast of
perfection upon their own word, without any Scripture-witness.

Secondly, See their folly, in slighting all godly examples; for so it is, that
such precious words of Christ, so pure a pattern, is by this their Principle
disregarded.

And so in the third place is their ignorance made manifest, and darkness
discovered, that they will presume above what is written, and so follow their
own imaginations, and refuse such precious counsel as Jesus Christ has left
for us in the Scripture of Truth. O then it is plain, that these men are of
that number that hearken to lying vanities, and so forsake their own mercies.

But dear Friends, let us see what the Scripture says; and if we be there
enjoined to follow godly patterns, we shall do well in hearkening to it, rather
then to these men that speak thus against examples: read 1 Pet. 2.21. where
Christ leaves us an example, that we should follow his steps, who is a blessed
pattern of patience unto us. Again, see Phil. 3.17. Brethren be followers of
me, and mark them which walk so as you have us for an ensample. And see how
Paul commends the Thessalonians, 1 Epist. 1.7. saying, That they were ensamples
to all that believed in Macedonia and Achaia. And in his 2 Epist. 3. see how
the Apostle carried themselves, laboring night and day, that they might not be
chargeable: and see the reason, that the Church might observe this their good
example, and follow them therein.

Again, poor Creature, consider, how thou judge all men by these terms, of
dippers, sprinklers and water-baptizers, to be all of them in one nature,
persecutors of Christ.

First, see thy folly in ranking all those that follow the holy Commandments of
Christ, with these sprinklers that have not any word of Christ for their rule
and practice, which thou know we own not.

Secondly, see thy ignorance in judging all, without making any difference: for
here thou must needs judge very many that thou did never know or hear of, and
so art guilty of this sin, in speaking evil of them that thou know not.

And thirdly, thou give all men to understand, that thou ownest not the word
of God for thy rule, in condemning all that follow the Ordinances as they were
delivered by Christ equally with those that observe traditions of men in the
worship of God, as Pope, Prelate, and other sprinklers do.

And again, thou say Where did any of us water-baptizers cast out devils,
and drink any deadly thing, and it not hurt us? And where did we shake the room
when we assembled? And where did we give the Holy Ghost?

All such unlearned questions as these, I shall answer in a few words, thus:
These things at the first, namely Miracles, were for the confirmation of the
Gospel; and so we may see the Law was at the first confirmed by Miracles: read
Exodus 20.18. with Heb. 12.18, to the 22. so we find Baptism was confirmed by
Miracles, Mat. 3.16, 17. with Luke 3.21, 22. and so was Prayer, Preaching, and
Laying on of Hands, at the first, confirmed to us by Miracles: and that it was
for this end, to confirm the Gospel, read Heb. 2.3, 4. How shall we escape if
we neglect so great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the
Lord, and was confirmed to us by them that heard him? God also bearing them
witness, both with signs and wonders, and with diverse miracles, and gifts of
the Holy Ghost, according to his own will. And this is such satisfaction to us,
that it is the word of God, that we need not look for a new confirmation of it;
but we have recourse to all the Commandments and Ordinances of Christ as they
are written; and read Mark 16.17, 18, 19, 20. and you will find, those signs
were only to confirm the word. But it lies upon you, Farnworth, and all those
that go about to destroy the holy Scripture and Ordinances thereof: I say, it
lies upon you to show us such a confirmation of that which you bring, and then
we may come to give more credit to your words. But for many of these Questions,
I do not look upon them worth answering.

But one word to you of the Church of Christ: I pray you let us mind what
Israel did in the days of Hezekiah: when liberty was proclaimed by the King,
that the Passover should be kept at Jerusalem; we find that the people did
not look for a new confirmation, but they had a care to keep it in such sort as
it was written. And we find, that by reason of wicked Kings that was before,
the practice of it was lost, in such sort as it is written, from the days of
Solomon to the reign of Hezekiah, there was many years: during the reign of
about fourteen Kings, was, I say, this practice lost, as it is witnessed 2 Chronicles. 30.5. compared with verse. 26. yet we find notwithstanding, what they
had observed in the days of Tyranny; yet I say when liberty was proclaimed,
they had then a care to keep it in such sort as it was written, without looking
for a new confirmation, it being before confirmed unto them. And see how this
their practice pleased the Lord, verse. 27. Their voice was heard, and their
prayer came up to Heaven. O! may not we in these days, learn much from these
words? have not we lived in the days past under Tyrants, and by their means
the Ordinances of Christ as they were practiced by him and his Apostles, I say,
by reason of former Tyranny, it has not been of a long time observed in such
sort as Christ has commanded; but now has the Lord brought us to a day of
liberty, and that by establishment.

O then in the first place, let us give the Lord praise, who has dealt so
bountifully with us, as to set us at liberty from so great Oppressors.

Secondly, Let us learn to keep the Commandments and Ordinances of Christ
according to his appointment.

Thirdly, Let us be sure that we fight against false worships with spiritual
weapons, and no other ways.

Fourthly, Take heed of setting up your selves or your own practices in the
worshipping of God, to infringe the liberties of others; and for thy help
herein, mind that sweet counsel of Christ Mat. 7.12. Therefore all things
whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this
is the Law and the Prophets.

Fifthly, Labor to walk humbly before God, and thankfully to God continually,
speaking well of his Name: it is the only way to enjoy greater mercies from
him. We of this Nation have as great if not greater* cause of returning praise
to the Lord, then Israel had. O that we could in the fear of the Lord weigh our
mercies with those spoken of by David, Ps. 107. And we may say, that what the
Lord then did for Israel, he has now done for England. I desire the Reader to
weigh those words well, and we may plainly see that it is our duty to praise
him for his goodness, and declare his wonderful works done in our days to the
sons of men. O that we were wise to observe the dealings of God, and his
mercies bestowed upon us in this generation!

Sixthly, You that profess to know God and Christ, of what rank or employment
soever ye be, labor to be of a peaceable spirit, as much as in you lies, live
peaceably with all men; for let me tell you, if any be otherwise minded in
thirsting after blood, such, I say, will be very unfit to follow Christ at his
coming, who is the prince of peace. And I pray you mind what Paul says, Tit.
3.1, 2. Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey
Magistrates, to be ready to every good work, to speak evil of no man, to be no
brawlers, but gentle, showing meekness to all men. And again, consider what
Paul says, Romans 13. When Rulers are for the punishing of evil doers and for
the praise of them that do well, then ought every one professing Christ to be
subject, not only for wrath, but also conscience sake. O what cause of
rejoicing have the Lords people to see how time after time there is a
generation of men laying out themselves to deprive the Lord's people of this
liberty, that we at this day enjoy! Consider how the Lord has found out
instruments all along to be as a wall between you and them. O praise the Lord
for such instruments.

Now in the next place, I shall give an Answer briefly to that saying of Paul,
Christ sent me not to baptize but to preach, 1 Cor. 1.17.

I answer briefly, first, It is clear that Paul was an Apostle of Jesus Christ,
as is undeniable; if so, then he was as much concerned in the commission, Mat.
28. 19. as any other: then mind those words, and you will find preaching and
baptizing joined together, And, Paul commanded to preach the whole counsel of
God: and this was one part of God's counsel, that believers should be baptized,
as read Acts 10.47, 48.

Secondly, If Paul was fit to be employed in the greater, then I am sure this
lesser is required. But he was employed in the greater, that is to say, to
preach the Gospel; then Baptism, which is the lesser, is required of him, I
say, by virtue of the commission, Mat. 28.19.

Thirdly, Mind the reason why Paul speaks these words, Christ sent me not to
baptize, but to preach; because these Corinthians were so ready to set up men,
as you may see 1 Epist. 12.13. Paul tells them, Is Christ divided? was Paul
crucified for you? or, were ye baptized in the Name of Paul? And this was the
reason why Paul thanks God he baptized no more of them, Lest any should say,
That I had baptized in my own name.

Fourthly, If the words be honestly interpreted, they will hold out thus much,
that preaching to the dark world that lies in wickedness, is the great work;
and so, such men as Paul fit to be employed in it: and to baptize, that might
be carried on with any other Disciple that did accompany Paul in this great
work.

Fifthly, If you mind the Greek Notes on the Margin of Can's Bibles, it is
thus read, verse 14. I thank God that ye were baptized. And this is then plain,
That Paul was commanded that it should be preached and practiced, and this is
all the reason why Paul thanks God that he did it not, lest any should say I
did it in my own name.

In the sixth place, consider that Text, Mat. 15.24. I am not sent, but to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel. And he commands his Disciples, Mat. 10. Into
any City of the Samaritans enter not, but go rather to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel.

Now, I say, as the Jews were Christ's own and he came of that stock, he came
first and chiefly to turn them from their iniquity, as Paul's work was firstly
and chiefly to preach the Gospel, it being the great work; and that Christ was
first sent first to the Jews, as Paul was sent first to preach, is plain, Acts
3.25, 26. that they might be blessed: Unto you first, God having raised up his
Son, sent him to bless you, in turning every one of you from his iniquity. But
Christ is a light to the Gentiles, though not there spoke of; for John says,
God so loved the world, mind, that he sent his Son to them; and so was Paul by
virtue of Christ's Commission sent to baptize as well as preach: and you may as
well say from that Text, That Christ was not sent to any but to the house of
Israel, as to say, Paul was not sent to baptize: for if you say, Paul says so
himself, who did well know his work, and how far his commission extended, so
may the same be said, and more, of Christ. And now man stop thy mouth for
shame, and cease to cavil with Scripture.

And whereas these men accuse us for not using the term Thee and Thou to every
man: and they say, That it is a sin to use any other term to a single person.

To which I answer, first, as to the term, I could my self freely own it, as it
is a proper speech to a single person: but for to say it is sin, without any
breach of a Law, I cannot believe it; for I will rather believe the words of
Paul, then any of these men: read Romans 4.15. Where there is no Law, there is no
transgression.

But it may be said, If we have any example, may not that bind us?

Answ. If in all ages we find the Lord's people using this term, and they
only, then it is granted, that we err in this thing. And for our clearer
understanding herein, we will make search into the Scripture; and if there we
find the worst of men as frequent in using of it, as the best of men, then the
example is not binding. Before the flood, read Genesis 4.14. where Cain thoued God
in these words, Thou have driven me out this day from the face of the earth.
After the Law was given, there we find in Numb. 16.13, 14. they whom the earth
opened its mouth and swallowed up, they used this term to Moses. And so read
Saul and the Witch, 1 Samuel 28, 11, 12, 13 with Dan. 3. where the Caldeans the
enemies of God's people, used this term as well as God's people: so read Matthew.
4.6. the devil Thoued Christ; so persecutors used this term, Acts 26.24, 25.
where Festus said, Paul, thou art beside thy self, much learning does make thee
mad: so read Mat. 8.29, where the devil said to Christ, Art thou come to
torment us before the time?

By all which I gather, That this term was generally used by all sorts of men
without offense, as the term You and Ye to a single person, without offense is
nationally practiced amongst us; but though these men censure us and all men
that go not their way, yet let us take Paul's advice, I Cor. 10.32. Give none
offense neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God.

But if we consider the way of these men, we may say as Matthew witnesses,
chap. 23.24. They strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel. And if it should be
granted that this should be, yet it will be much like the Scribes and
Pharisees, ver. 23. of this Chap. in their observing those small things, as the
paying of Mint, and Rue, and Annis; but they omitted the great things, as
Judgment, Mercy and Faith. And we will make search into thy ways, and you
will be found a Pharisee in all these; for as they spoke against the doctrine
of Christ, and what was then practiced by him and his Saints, so do you now
judge us for following the holy Commandments of Christ; and as they Pharisees
then judged all that went not their way, so do you, calling all men dead and
carnal, and in the Serpents nature, under what form soever that differs from
you.

Secondly, As to Mercy, you will be found not like those Priests spoken of Heb.
5.1, 2. for they were such as could have compassion on the ignorant, and on
them that are out of the way: but where is this compassion amongst you toward
them that go not your way? for you make it your work to turn men from the
Truth, as it is recorded, and so are Pharisee-like, and without Mercy toward
them that differ from you, as these were.

Thirdly, As to Faith, The Pharisees they were enemies to the Gospels preaching
by which Faith comes, Romans 10.14, 15. and they looked for justification by the
Law, as you do now by following the imaginations of an evil heart; and as they
spoke against the Ordinances of Christ then, so do you now. And why? I say,
There is an evil heart in you, because I say many of you are now through
unbelief departed from the pure way of the Lord, which evil heart the Church is
advised to take heed of, Heb. 3.12.

Or more briefly thus: The Pharisees they boasted more of themselves then any
other people, as you may see in Luke 18.10, 11, 12. and all along in Christ's
progress they were his great Enemies; and by their resting in the Law, and
speaking against the Gospel, it is clear, they were corrupted in their
judgment.

And so are these men boasting of perfection more then any other people, as
this Book declares, and in their whole progress they make it their whole work
to overthrow the rule of Scripture and all the Ordinances thereof, as they are
recorded, and as Christ has commanded us to observe to the end of the World,
and so set up themselves and their own fancyes, as the Pharisees did.

Secondly, As to Mercy, this was far from the Pharisees: read John 9.22. This
they agreed of, that if any man did confess Christ, he should be put of the out
Synagogue; implying, that such men were not fit to be communicated with; by
which it is evident, that all mercy and pity to such as forsaked them to follow
Christ, was turned into hatred. And is not your mercy and pity turned into
hatred toward all men that go not your way, but declare against it as they
commanded, your mercy is turned into bitterness as appears by your words
calling men devils, and Saints deceivers, and the Church of Christ Antichrist,
and the Gospel Letter, and the Ordinances carnal; and so by your words we may
easily see what your hearts be full of; instead of mercy, malice; instead of
pity, persecution; I mean, with the tongue, which is a weapon that strikes
deep; and such hands I shall suspect, if they had power, because I cannot but
see the heart filled with malice, by the filth that proceeds from their mouth:
for see what Matthew witnesses, chap. 12.33, to the 38. Out of the abundance of
the heart, the mouth speaks. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart
brings forth good things; but an evil man out of the evil treasure brings
forth evil things. And if this be not evil, to say the Scripture is of no use
to bring men to Christ; and, that Christ has not a visible Church in the
World; and, that all Ordinances ceased when Christ ascended: I say, it is
evident, this poor man is such an Enemy to himself in so speaking against the
Truth, that mercy and good fruit is I fear far from him.

Thirdly, As to Faith, the Pharisees must needs be far from it, because they
were such enemies to the Gospels preaching, by which Faith comes: and that they
were so, read Matthew. 12.24. Mark 8.31. Acts 4.18. and by their putting the
Gospel far from them, they were in such a sad condition, that Paul says, They
were broken off: and how? through unbelief: mind, and read Romans 11.20. And
thus by putting away the Gospels preaching, they were without faith; and so all
they did in the worship of God was nothing worth.

So you in denying that the Gospel should be preached or heard to this end that
men may believe in Christ; I mean, the word of the holy Scripture, you your
selves must needs be Pharisee-like, far from Faith; and so like them also in
this, in hindering others as much as possibly you can. Now as Faith in Christ is
manifest in obedience to Christ, so ought all men to take the Scripture for
their rule in Faith and Obedience, and to observe what Christ has in his word
of Truth commanded. Then thou, Farnworth, and all the rest that speak against
the words of Christ as they are recorded: are Pharisee-like without faith also.
And to that Scripture, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. where the Author tells the Church of
the Hebrews, They are come to mount Sion, and to the City of the living God,
and to the heavenly Jerusalem, etc. I say, the Church of Christ are so come to
mount Sion, as the Church of the Jews was come to Mount Sinai.

Now let us mind what the Lord said to Moses, Exodus 19.2. And the Lord called
to him out of the mountain, saying, Thus shall thou say to the children of
Israel, Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bore you on
eagles wings, and brought you unto my self: now therefore if you will obey my
voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then see what the Lord promised unto them,
then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people; for all the
earth is mine: and ye shall be unto me a kingdom of Priests and an holy Nation.
These are the words which thou shall speak unto the children of Israel. And
compare this with Deuteronomy. 4. at large: but mind verse. 2. Ye shall not add to
word which I command you, neither shall you diminish ought from it; but keep
the commandments of the Lord your God as I command you. And mind two great
encouragements.

The first is from verse. 7. What people is there that have God so nigh unto
them, as he is to us, if we walk in obedience to him?

Secondly, he tells them, That all this Law is righteous which he set before
them, that so they, might be in love with it. And you may see in chap 5, and 6.
how fully Moses holds out the Law to them; and they that were found abiding in
it, and walking by the rules thereof, all those privileges and promises
aforementioned they had an interest in: but those that turned aside from the
holy Commandments, as the Lord had commanded by his servant Moses, they, I say,
were deprived of all those privileges and promises there spoken of; for with
many of them God was not well pleased, for they were overthrown in the
wilderness. and read Psalm. 106. and 1 Cor. 10.5, to the 13.

So, I say, to the best of my understanding is the Church of Christ come to
Mount Sion, and it is clear, that Christ is King there by the Father's
appointment, Psalm. 2. Isaiah 9. Rev. 15.3. And when Christ came into his Kingly
Office, he gave out Ordinances for his Church to continue in; and to such as
are found doing his Commandments, and continue therein, they, I say, and only
they, are within the pale of all those privileges and promises that the
Scripture bears witness to, and declares of. Now see Acts 3.23. That soul that
will not bear Jesus Christ, that soul shall be cut off. And this is the wind
of the Father, That his Son we should hear in all things. And see what Christ
lays upon his Church, Mat. 28.20. by way of duty, That they are to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you. And they that come up to him in
obedience, they, I say, have an interest in all those privileges; and my
Reasons are these:

Reas. 1. Grounded on verse. 25. having before held out the Promises; Now (says
be) see that ye refuse not him that speaks: and then see how the holy Ghost
in minds the Church what sad judgments befell them that refused him that
spoke on earth, which words relate to the Law given by Moses: much more shall
we not escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from heaven: for John
says, The Law came by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, John
1.17.

Reas. 2. Grounded on verse. 28. We receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved,
let us have Grace, that we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly
fear.

But now the Question between Farnworth and my self, was Whether he was in the
possession of these privileges he sa^^ he was?

But Reader consider, I pray you weigh the words a little with what he has
before affirmed, and you will find he lies, and speaks not the Truth.

First, it is clear, That these promises are to a visible Church, as the Law
was given to a visible Church* then he denying a visible Church, he cannot have
any right to these promises as he is a visible man.

Secondly, If these Hebrews had been in the possession of these things, that is
to say, the new Jerusalem, then for the holy Ghost to have warned them to take
heed of refusing him that spoke from heaven, had been in vain.

Thirdly, Then they needed not that exhortation, To hold fast Grace, as the
Margin reads it; verse. 28. That we may serve God acceptably; for that were
fully done already if in the possession of it.

Fourthly, The Scripture says, All liars are without; then they are not
possessed of this enjoyment: and that Farnworth is a liar, is plain, else he
would never say, That all Ordinances ceased when Christ ascended; and, That
Christ has not a visible Church: and see what liars shall be possessed of,
Rev. 21.8. They shall have their part in the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone for ever, which is the second death.

Fifthly, If they, and only they are blessed, that do his Commandments, and
they shall have right to the Tree Life, then there is nothing but Curses, Woes
and Misery to all them that make it their work to keep poor souls out of these
promises, by persuading them to a slight esteem of the Ordinances of Christ.
And here is the pride of these men discovered, that will boast of privileges
before they have any right to them.

In the next place, I shall speak a word of perfection. And this I say, That I
own a perfection in Christ to be attainable in this life, thus: that is to say,
by believing in Christ, and obedience to Christ: add this James tells us, That
Abraham's faith wrought with his works: and by works was faith made perfect.
And Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness: and he
was called the friend of God, Jam. 2.22, 23. Now I say, this faith that works
by love, persuades that soul wherein it is, to yield obedience to Christ; and
God the Father is fully satisfied with his Son in the behalf of such a one. Now
I say, that such a one may slip through infirmity or neglect of duty to God:
but see what John says to such, 1 Ep. 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to for give us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. And this is by Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a
propitiati-through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. To declare, I
say, at this time his righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier
of him which believes in Jesus.

And truly Reader, for my part, I know no way to attain perfection, but by
believing in Christ, and yiedling obedience to Christ; and this I own: the
Gospels preaching does fully hold out the great love of the Father in giving
his Son to die for us; which Gospel being preached, is the means of faith, and
is a perfect rule for all to walk by. But for a perfection in glory to be
attained on this side the Grave, this I utterly disown. As also what Farnworth
said to me at Harliston, That the resurrection and eternal judgment was then
past in him; I own not but disown; for I believe the resurrection of the dead,
both of the just and of the unjust, as Paul says, Act. 24.15.

And now Reader, you having a view of these men, that their principles are very
unsound: and why? I say, these men, because what Farnworth then affirmed,
others of his company stood by to maintain. And in a few words, I shall give
you briefly what one Daniel Bott a brother in the Gospel, resident at a Town
near Tamworth in Warwickshire, who was once deluded by them, but now through
mercy is brought back, to the joy of his heart, and rejoicing of the Lord's
people; and this I received from his own moth, That the said Farnworth and
others did press him to lay aside the form of Scripture, and he would (they
said) have visions and revelations immediately. Now consider, Reader, whither
would they plunge a poor soul, if they can once bring him to slight that form
of sound words, and that form of doctrine which was delivered unto us?

And further, he says to me, That he heard one George Fox say these words: I
am that eternal Spirit that gave forth the Scripture: and he told me, He did
believe, that Fox did think when he spoke this, that there was none present but
these of his own judgment. And I assure the Reader this, that I cannot gather
that the said Daniel does speak any thing out of malice; for I judge the man,
to the best of my understanding, one truly fearing God, and one that can say
much of their delusions, and that they are false Prophers, by their
endeavoring to turn him from consenting to the wholesome words of Christ, and
that doctrine which is according to godliness.

Now Reader, if thou do thoroughly consider what is before laid down, that
this Farnworth did stand by to maintain, you may plainly see what spirit this
poor man is possessed with; and if it be the work of the Spirit of Truth, to
lead his into all Truth, then this man is led by an evil Spirit; and this
appears in its operation; and by the evil fruit it brings forth, you may see
what the Tree is. And this is evil to say, That all that is gotten from the
Scripture, is but brain-knowledge, and a great deal of suchlike stuff he is
filled with. If any man make search into them by questioning them, else let
them alone in their road of speaking, and they will present a fair gloss before
you. This I have experience of.

And now Reader to his principles, that he says in the beginning of his book
he owns, as worship in the Spirit he owns he says.

Ans. To this, if the way of worship that Jesus Christ has commanded, and has
promised to be present with them that so worship him to the end of the world,
be spiritual worship, which worship is plainly laid down in the Scripture; then
all that refuse to take the words of the Gospel for their rule and direction in
the worship of God, as thou Farnworth do say falsely, that say you own the
worship in the Spirit, but by your denying the rules you are Pharisee-like,
that say and do not.

Secondly, Thou say, Thou ownest the Church of Christ.

Answ. But here thou lie, in thy saying Christ has not a visible Church, and
so thou shuttest thy self out both of Church and Ministry of Christ by thy own
grant, as being a visible man.

Thirdly, Thou say, The teachings of Christ thou ownest.

And here thou speak a lie also, as is evident by thy calling the Ordinances
carnal, which Christ taught his Disciples, Mat. 28. Mark 16.

Fourthly, Thou say, Thou ownest the baptism of Christ.

Answ. But here thou lie also; for believers to be baptized is by Christ's
Commandment, and he gave himself and example to us herein; and this thou
call an image and idol.

Fifthly, Thou say, Prayer in the Spirit thou ownest.

And Reader mind, for this man to pray for himself, etc is perfect and freed
from all acts of sin, and past the eternal judgment, as he says; then I say,
by this we may see, that prayer is useless as to himself; and for his prayer
for me, I do not desire it, neither do I believe it is his judgment to pray for
others, by his wicked censuring all men that go not his way. But this I further
say, That by his fruit he brings forth it is made evident, that he is a
stranger to the Spirit of Truth; for this Spirit it leads into Truth, then it
does not lead out of the Truth; and I demand of thee Farnworth where ever the
Spirit of Truth did or does contradict the written word. But to ask thee such a
Question, who art, as it is evident, possessed with a Spirit of error, I do not
look for satisfaction from thee. And now Saints, you having briefly a discovery
of this man's folly, let us labor to take Solomon's counsel, Prove. 23.4. Cease
from thy own wisdom: with Prove. 3.1. My son, forget not my law, but let thy
heart keep my commandments. Verse. 5. Trust in the Lord with all thy heart, and
lean not to thy own understanding.

It is high time for the Lords people to be continually upon their watch, now
Satan is thus transforming himself like an Angel of light, that we be not
overtaken with his devices; but this I hope, dear friends, you well know, that
it becomes the Lord's people to speak the things which become sound doctrine,
that so we may stop the mouths of all our adversaries: for now is that day
come that Paul speaks of, 1 Timothy 4.3 For the time will come when they will not
endure wholesome or sound doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they heap
to themselves teachers, having itching ears, and they shall turn away their
ears from hearing the truth, then mind what such come to, they shall be turned
unto fables. And it is the Apostles counsel to the Hebrews, chap. 3.1 2. Take
heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in
departing from the living God: and for your direction herein, mind verse. 13.
But exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of you be
hardened through the deceit fullness of sin. For, verse. 14. we are made
partakers of Christ: How? if (says the Apostle) we hold the beginning of our
confidence steadfast unto the end. For as it is plainly laid down in this
Chapter. That the unbelieving Israelites came short of temporal Canaan; so
without question will it be with all those now, that turn back from the holy
Commandments delivered unto them: For the just shall live: How? by faith; but
if any man draws back: What follows? my soul shall have no pleasure in him.
Heb. 10.38. And he that once puts his hand to the Lord's plow and looks back,
is not fit for the kingdom of God.

And it is worth the observing, how Paul tells the Romans, chap. 1. 16. I am
not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God unto salvation:
to whom? to every one that believes: mind that, for therein is the
righteousness of God revealed from faith; to faith, and (says Paul) as many as
walk according to this rule, peace be unto them. And let us mind Paul's
counsel, Romans 14.19. Let us therefore follow after the things that make for
peace, and things where with one may edify another. And as Paul advises the
Church, Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and it
there be any praise, think on these things: those things you have both learned
and received and heard, and seen in me, do and the God of peace shall be with
you. And as Paul said to the Church at his departure, Act. 20.32. so I say to
you, Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is
able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them that are
sanctified.

And to thou Farnworth, and the rest that walk up and down and live idly
without a calling, if you would observe the Scripture for your rule, you would
see what Paul says, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. For even when we were with you, this we
commanded you, that if any would not work he should not eat. O see thy folly in
going about to deceive, which thou art not called to by God nor man according
to the rule: and what would be the condition of all people in our Nation, if
this were generally practiced?

Certain CONSIDERATIONS and QUERIES.
Dear Brother in the Lord,

OUr near relation that we have one to another in the bonds of the Gospel, does
engage me to manifest my unfeigned love unto Christ and unto thee, in answering
thy desires in propounding some Queries, by which we may examine and try the
Spirits of these men, who say they are Jews and are not, that so they may be
found liars, and their falsehood and folly may be made manifest, and all that
yet fear the Lord may beware of giving heed to their cunning-devised fables,
lest they be led away with the error of the wicked, and so fall from their own
stedfastness: and to that end, my desire is, that they will consider their
cunning craftiness, wherewith they lie in wait to deceive, by handling the word
of God deceitfully; sometimes denying it to be of any authority at all, and
sometimes confessing it to be indeed a declaration of the mind of God, but
nothing comparable to that light which is within them; yet other times they
will make use of it for their own ends, that so they may (as Paul says) by
good words and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple. And therefore,
that their snares may be broken, and poor souls delivered; I shall commit
certain things in the first place to their considerations, who desire to escape
the error of the wicked, and to attain to the resurrection of the just, by
patient continuing in well doing, waiting for the appearance of Christ.

Consid. 1. The words of Paul, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. that such are false
Apostles, deceitful workers transforming themselves into the Apostles of
Christ; (and no marvel) for the Devil himself is transformed into an Angel of
light, therefore it is no great thing, if his Ministers be transformed into the
Ministers of righteousness, whose end shall be according to their works. And
that this is so,

Consid. 2. That all the false Prophets that came to deceive, did always
preach their lies in the Name of the Lord; saying, Thus says the Lord, when
the Lord had not spoken: and thus they covered their deceits over with the Name
of the Lord, and by that means led people away from the word of God, to walk
after the imaginations of their own hearts, or light within them, and to
despise the word of the Lord, even as these people do: see Jer. 23.16, 17.

Consid. 3. That this is also the work of deceivers now under the Gospel, to
prophecy in the Name of Christ, yea, and to do wonderful works in his Name,
and yet Christ bids them depart from him, for they were workers of iniquity,
and he knew them not: see Matthew. 7.22, 23.

Consid. 4. That all those that teach in the Name of Christ, are commanded to
preach the word of God and Christ, even the holy Scriptures, which are able to
make us wise unto salvation; and if any man teach otherwise, and consent not to
wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the doctrine
which is according to godliness, is he proud, or a fool, knowing nothing: see 1 Timothy 6.3, 4.2 Tim. 3.15, 16, 17. chapter 4. 1, 2 3.

Consid. 5. That when Paul left the Church in a dangerous condition, because of
deceivers that he knew would come after his departure, he did not commit them
to the light within them, to be guided by that, but unto God, and to the word
of his grace, saying, That was able to build them up, and to give them an
inheritance amongst them that are sanctified: see Acts 20.32.

Consid. 6. That when Christ had to deal with those that boasted of the light
within them* He answered, that if the light within them were darkness, how
great was that darkness? from whence we may observe, that those that pretend to
walk by the light within them, were in the greatest darkness, according to the
words of Christ: see Mat. 6.22, 23.

Consid. 7. That God has sent forth his Light and Truth into the World, to
lead and guide men to his holy Hill, and to his Tabernacles; and that the Light
which he has sent forth is his Word and Commandments: Thy word is a lamp to
my feet, and a light to my path. Psalm. 119.105. And the commandment is a lamp,
and the law is light, and reproofs is the way of life, Prove. 6.23. by all which
it is clear, that the light which is in a man, is not able to lead a man to
happiness; but the Word and Commandment of the Lord is able to save our souls
if we receive it with meekness, James 1.21.

Consid. 8. That the Commandments of the Lord are pure enlightening the eyes;
and the entrance of his words give light and understanding to the simple, Psalm.
19.8. Psalm. 119.130. therefore let us, To the law and to the testimony; and if
any man speak not according to that, it is, because there is no light in them,
Isa. 8.20.

Consid. 9. That none of the true Prophets of the Lord that ever came after God
had given forth his Law and Testimonies by Moses, did ever open their mouths
against it, to undervalue it, or turn peoples hearts away from it, to despise
it, and to walk after the imaginations of their own hearts and light within
them, as these people now, do.

Consid. 10. That it was the eminent work and evident mark of the false
Prophets so to do; for which cause the curse came upon them, and all the people
that followed their pernicious ways.

Consid. 11. That all those Teachers now, that come after God has given forth
the Gospel of Grace and Peace by Jesus Christ, and do labor to turn peoples
hearts from the pure Commandments thereof, by despising and undervaluing it, by
calling it ink and paper, and a dead letter, are false Apostles and deceitful
workers, although transformed into Ministers of righteousness, as the Devil
himself is transformed into an Angel of light; which the Apostle Paul, Gal.
1.8, 6. says, Are accursed.

Consid. 12. That all those Teachers that come from Christ, which contend
earnestly for the Faith once dlivered to the Saints, and do preach the
wholesome words of our Lord and Savior, and labor to persuade people to hear
his sayings and do them* and to walk in all his holy Commandments and
Ordinances; they are that true and faithful Servants of Jesus Christ, the
children of God, and the seed of the woman that the Dragon was wroth with, and
made war against, because they keep the Commandments of God, and have the
testimony of Jesus, Rev. 12.17.

Now I shall propound certain Queries, with a desire of an Answer.
1. WHether the Light that is in any man, if it be of God, does not lead him to
his Law and Testimony, and not from it as some affirm? See Isa. 8.20.

2. Whether these men that despise and undervalue the holy Scriptures
(preferring the Light that is within themselves, above and before the
Scriptures,) whether, I say, we may not justly conclude, that their Light
within them is darkness, and then, how great is that darkness? for if they
speak not according to this word, it is, because there is no Light in them? see
Matthew. 6.23. compared with Isa. 8.20.

3. What true Light, which is of God, is there in any man, that the holy
Scriptures does not speak, and declare according to Psa. 119.130. The entrance
of thy words gives light, and gives understanding to the simple? see also
verse. 105. with Psalm. 19.8. Prove. 6.23.

4. What does that Light that is in any man teach him that is good, more then
the holy Scriptures teaches him? see Psalm. 110.96. I have seen an end of all
perfection; but thy commandment is exceeding broad. Now if an end of all
perfection, then an end of that Light that these men pretend to have in them;
but no end of Gods precepts, for they are exceeding broad.

5. What evil does that Light, which is in any man, reprove and forbid him to
do, that the holy Scriptures does not reprove and forbid? according to 2 Timothy
3.16, 17. It is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be perfect, and thoroughly
furnished unto good works.

6. Whether was there not a greater Light in the Lord Christ, then ever was in
any man else, or ever shall be? according to these Scriptures, John 1.9. chap.
8.12.

7. Whether did he not declare it, and make it manifest to the sons of men,
both by his words and actions, more then ever any man else could do? according
to these Scriptures, Joh. 12.49, 50. Whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the
Father said unto me, so speak I: and, as the Father gave me commandment, even
so do I, chap. 14.31. Again, All things that I have heard of my Father, I have
made known unto you, chap. 15.15.

8. Whether did not the Apostles of the Lord declare and testify the same
things to others, that they heard, and saw, and learned of him? according to
these Scriptures, 1 John 1.3. That which we have heard, which we have seen with
our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of
life: That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you: and Acts 20.27.
Paul says, He had not shunned to declare unto them all the counsel of God.

9. Whether we came to know any of these things that Christ or his Disciples
did, or, whether we can know them, but by the holy Scriptures: or, how can we
know, that either Christ or his Disciples were ever in the world, but by the
holy Scriptures? consider and judge. If these things be so,

10. Then whether is there not a greater light shining to us in the face of
Jesus Christ, through the New Testament, which he has sealed with his own
blood, then we can possibly expect to come from the heart or brain of any man
now living or to live until Christ himself shall again appear?

11. If a greater light now shines through Christ by the New Testament then
ever has, or by men or Angels can shine to the sons of men; then whether is it
not folly and madness for any man now to refuse this light of the glorious
Gospel of Jesus Christ, to walk by the light and dictates of his own heart,
which is deceitful and desperately wicked, who can know it? Jer. 17.9. even as
a man should light a candle to walk by, when the sun shines in his full
strength.

12. Whether may we not now, according to Paul's directions, Gal. 1.8, 9.
account all men or Angels accursed, that refuse the light of the glorious
Gospel thus shining unto us, and choosing rather to walk by another, that is to
say, by the light within them?

Lastly, if the spirit of truth, when it comes into a soul, shall lead him
into all truth; then whether may we not safely conclude, that they have none of
the spirit of God, which err from the truth of the Gospel as it was once
delivered to the Saints, and under value those words of Christ, which himself
(who had the spirit without measure) said, They are spirit and they are life:
and if they were not so to any man, it was because they believed not, John
6.63, 64. For how can we know, that the dead shall rise and come to judgemens,
but by the holy Scriptures of Truth?

This much by Henry Haggar, a Servant of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and the
Congregations of his Saints: with a desire of an Answer by any who will, or can.

POSTSCRIPT.
ALthough there is much spoken in the former part of the Book in answer to the
vain conceit and impudedent practice of these foolish men, in using the term
Thee and Thou to all single persons whatsoever, by which they break the
Commandment of the Lord, which is, That we give no offense to Jew, nor Gentile,
nor to the Church of God: Therefore I thought it fit to put down these
following lines, to make their folly manifest. First, They affirm, that the
word Thee and Thou is only proper to a single person, and none else; in which
they belie the Scriptures, and deceive themselves and others, as appears,
thus: Deuteronomy. 25.17, 18. Remember what Amalek did unto Thee, how he met Thee by
the way, and smote the hindmost of Thee, when Thou wast faint and weary, etc.
Thus you see plainly the word Thee and Thou, is as well proper to thousands, as
to a single person: see also 27.9, 10. Secondly, That the word or term You was
used by Christ, and that to a single person, is evident, Luke 22.31. where
Christ says, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has desired to have You, that he
might sift You as wheat; but I have prayed for Thee, that Thy faith fail not.
Here we see, that the Lord Christ used the word You, as well as the word Thee,
to a single person: by all which it is evident, that it is no sin, nor yet an
improper speech, and therefore the people of God may and ought to use it upon
occasion: and they which do affirm it to be a sin, do blasphemously conclude,
that Christ was a sinner. And thus is their folly made manifest.

Henry Haggar.
FINIS.

