DASPHOKTONI'A:

THE BLASPHEMER SLAIN With the SWORD of the SPIRIT: OR, A PLEA For the
GODHEAD OF THE HOLY GHOST.

Wherein the Deity of the Spirit of God is proved in the demonstration of the
Spirit, and vindicated from the Cavils of John Bidle.

By an Admirer and Worshipper of the Trinity in Unity.

London, Printed by T. M. for Joh. Rothwell at the Fountain and Bear in
Goldsmiths Row in Cheap Side.

Christian Reader,
ALL Heresies come from Hell; the Apostle calls them the Doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2. and the ancient Ignatius, (...) Ad Trallenses.
The inventions of the Devil.

All Heresies lead to hell; S. Peter styles them, (...), Damnable Heresies.
Epiphanius, 2 Pet. 2. 1. Haeres. 74
(...), The Gates of Hell; they involve (though some men think otherwise) both
the Seducers and the Seduced in everlasting vengeance, in the Ad Ephesians.
judgment of Ignatius.

Amongst all Heresies, none are more dangerous nor infectious then such as
assail the Sacred Trinity, God blessed for ever. These are most dangerous,
because they raze the whole foundation of Christian Religion, and by reason of
the blindness, curiosity, wantonness, pride, etc. of man's wit, the most
infectious.

In all Ages of the Church Satan has bestirred himself to sow and disperse
these Heresies. I intend not a catalogue of all (see this in Daneus) but in
stead of all, the Story of this one, denying the Deity of the Holy Ghost, in
this short Treatise confuted.

It was at first taught by Arius, implicitly: Epiphan. Haeres. 74.
after him, publicly maintained by Macedonius, Niceph. Hist. l. 9. c. 42, 47.
the furious Bishop of Constantinople: After him propagated far and near by
Marathonius, Eleusius, and their Associates. It was censured and condemned in
the second Council at Haeres. 74. Constantinople, by 180 Bishops, upon this
occasion met together; and confuted largely by Epiphanius; yet it lived
obscurely in aftertimes, as is observed by Daneus and Haeres. 42.
Prateolus; and in the last Centurie began again to fly abroad, broached by
Servetus, and dispersed by Socinus and his followers.

What endeavors have been used to infect, and prevent the Infection of the
Belgic Churches with this Heresy is discovered by the Cloppenburch ann. 51.
Hoorn. bec. praefat. ad Socin. confutat. par. 1. Mares. hydra Socinianis. Dr.
Cheynell rise and growth of Socin.
Learned Cloppenburch, in his Compendiolum Socinianismi Co^futati, in the
Preface. What stickling amongst us in these times of distraction, is most
lamentable to rehearse; the whole body of Socinianism, that hydra of
Blasphemies, that Racovian Catechism (which walked only in the dark, and in
the Latin tongue in the Bishops times) is now translated into English, for the
more speedy corruption of the people; many bold Factors for these Blasphemies,
which in those times durst not appear, do now both publicly, and from house to
house disseminate their Heresies without fear: amongst these is Mr. John Bidle,
who both in print and private does deny the Godhead of the holy Ghost, and
dispute against it.

David thought it Psalm. 119
time for God to work, when men made void his Law; and thou (Reader) can not
but think it seasonable for his servants to watch, and for thy self to stand
upon thy guard, when the enemy is sowing tares.

Bless God for those watchmen who stand upon the Towers to give warning of thy
approaching danger, and take warning at the sound of the Trumpet, that thou
Ezekiel. 3. Heb. 13.
may deliver thy soul, and thy blood may not be upon thine own head: This
will be grievous to us, and unprofitable to thee.

(...), Fly from Atheistical Epist. ad Trall.
Heresies, was the last counsel of dying Ignatius to the Trallenses; agreeable
to the grave advice of Solomon, Proverbs 19. Cease my son; to hear the
instruction that counsels to err from the words of knowledge. O that this
counsel might take with thee. But we have a further request to thee, Reader,
Labor that thou may stand fast, rooted, and grounded, and established in
the faith. In Infectious times, it is usual to take Antidotes, and wear
Amulets: in these times of seduction it is no less necessary to arm our selves
against prevailing Errors.

This Book of Mr. Bidle's is not now at first confuted; the Reverend and
Learned Mr. Estwicke has some years since answered it in a Just Treatise; and
since him Dr. John Cloppenbu^ch has in Answer to it, put forth a Plea for the
Deity of the holy Ghost in the Latin tongue, in the year 1652. This short, and
full Manual, written by a Workman that need not be ashamed, though in modesty
he conceal his name, is added for thy advantage. In it thou shall find the
Arguments proving the Deity of the holy Ghost fully asserted, against Mr.
Bidles Cavils; the Sophisms which Mr. Bidle makes use of to darken truth, and
pervert thy faith, clearly refuted, as Epiphanius Haeres. 74.
has it, (...), To the stopping of the mouths of gainsayers, and the
satisfaction of the Docible. That the Spirit of Wisdom may be given thee to try
all things, discern the things that differ, and hold fast what is good, is the
Prayer,

(Reader) Of thy Servants for Christ's sake, JA. CRANFORD. ARTH. JACKSON.
Imprimatur ED. CALAMY.


To the READER.
THere is scarce any Truth contained in the Scriptures that has not been
opposed by Heretics in some ages of the Church; and amongst the rest, this
Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, has not been without exception; nay indeed,
it has found as much resistance as any other, partly from the ignorance of
men, that could not apprehend it; partly from the pride of men, that will
believe no truth, but what does fully suit and comply with their (though
corrupted) reason: It is very observable how the Antitrinitarian Devil has
transformed himself into several shapes; sometimes telling us that there was
but one Person, only it was called by three several names, and so they made a
Trinity of words, but not of persons: Thus he spoke in the mouths of the
Simonians, Montanists, Noetians, etc. sometimes telling us, that the three
Persons are three Gods, and so they give us a Trinity of Divine Essences, not
of Persons only, so he spoke in the Tritheitae: Sometimes telling us, that the
three Persons are only three qualities; so he spoke in the Aetiani* These
Heretics, like Samsons Foxes, though their heads looked diverse ways, yet
their tails were tied together, and firebrarnds in them, to set the standing
Corn of the Church on fire. Particularly, the Deity of the holy Ghost has been
opposed at sundry times, and in diverse manners: Some Heretics saying, It was
only a name; some saying, it was a man; many saying, That it was not God but a
Creature, Danaeus de haeresibus.
as the Arians, Origenists, and especially the Macedonians; which last
pestilent Error has been of late revived, and particularly defended by John
Bidle, in a Pamphlet entitled, Twelve Arguments, etc. whereby the Deity of the
holy Ghost (as he pretends) is clearly refuted; wherein, although I profess, as
in the presence of God, I find nothing but common, trivial, absurd and foolish
Arguments; yet I observe the spirit of the man to be extraordinarily lifted up,
as if he had said that, which would puzzle all the Universities in Europe to
answer. He tells you in his Epistle, That he had waited upon, and contested
with sundry Learned men, and could never get a satisfactory answer: nor I
doubt, ever will in his own judgment: I fear God has given him up to a spirit
of delusion, to believe lies: To convince an Heretic, is but a little below a
miracle; and therefore it is not that I expect in this Treatise, but only the
establishment of those that are yet free from this infection, and the reducing
of them who have followed this wretched Apostate out of the simplicity of their
hearts.

I am sensible that this Treatise of Bidle's is fully answered by learned Mr.
Estwick, to which Mr. B. has never yet made a reply, nor ever will be able:
But there are many that are unwilling to bestow either pains or cost about
books of that nature, and so that error does yet spread, and diverse (as I am
informed) are lately infected with it. I was therefore importuned to put forth
a short and plain confutation of Bidle's Treatise, which might require less of
the Readers money and patience, and so might serve as a common Antidote against
that Pestilential Doctrine. Which motion I did at first utterly reject, being
conscious to my self of mine own utter unfitness for such a work. And had I
been left to my self, I should sooner have put my finger in the fire, then my
pen to paper upon such terms. But being solemnly almost adjured, by the honor
of God and good of souls, and being uncessantly urged; I confess, I durst not
deny, lest I should prefer mine own credit, (which I thought might be justly
blemished by publishing my weakness in print, with a Noverint universi, as
thousands have done before me) I say, lest I should prefer my credit to the
glory of God (which was here so nearly concerned, and I hoped might be a little
promoted by mine endeavors). I therefore consulted not with flesh and blood,
but immediately betook my self to the work. And if such fools as I write,
learned men may thank themselves, who suffer so many pestilent books to lie
unanswered (as are daily put forth) with what satisfaction to their own
consciences, I know not; but I am sure with the great prejudice of the Church,
and dissatisfaction of pious souls. I wish they would seriously lay this to
heart, and take heed they be not found among them that wrap their talents
(whether they be preaching or writing talents, all is one) in a napkin. And in
this work I confess I was helped by the labors of some that went before me,
Mr. Estwick, Dr. Cheynell, and Cloppenburgius; though I may safely say, there
are some things added of mine own, which, I hope, may not be altogether useless
and inconsiderable. Such as it is, here thou have it: read, consider, examine,
seriously, diligently, reverently, and the Lord open the eyes of thy mind that
thou may receive this truth in the love of it. So prays he

Who passionately labors for thy conviction and conversion, Philopsychus
Philal^thes.

TO THE FOLLOWERS OF Mr. BIDLE.
WHoever thou art, thou and I are both to appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, and there among other things, to give an account of all our words,
whether true or false, whether good or evil. Thou and I have each a soul to
save, of incredible, and inexpressible worth: and if ever thou art saved, it
must be by the operation of that holy Spirit which thou have so wickedly
un-Godded. It is like thou have heard many Discourses, and thou have read this
book of Bidles, and thou have used all ways to strengthen thy self in that
opinion which thou have taken up. I do here beseech thee in the name of the
great God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou would read this Treatise of
mine thoroughly, consider it impartially, and remember thou art in the presence
of a God that searches thy heart. Take heed lest while thou disputest against
the holy Ghost, thou be not found among them that sin against the holy Ghost;
It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. Truth is as cheap as Error, and
much more delightful and advantageous. What is the Chafe to the Wheat? Be not
ashamed to relinquish thy opinion: It is no dishonor to yield to truth; it is
much more dishonorable to stand out against it. If thou art ashamed of the
holy Ghost, be sure he will be ashamed of thee before men and Angels at the
last day. Thou art at present in the gall of bitterness, and there is but one
way for thee to escape; that is if God would give thee repentance to the
acknowledging of the Truth, and that thou may recover thy self out of the
snare of the Devil: which I confess will not be done without great difficulty;
partly because intellectual distempers are in most incurable; partly because
there is that in the Scripture, which if it be pulled in pieces from the
analogy of faith, and rigidly insisted upon, as to the letter of it, may
easily be wrested by wanton wits to their own destruction; partly because where
men wilfully blind themselves against the light, God does judicially shut their
eyes, and harden their hearts, that they may stumble and fall, and rise no
more. But though it be difficult, yet it is not impossible: There are many that
can say, Whereas I was blind, now I see: And therefore let me persuade thee, in
the fear of God, to remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, lest God
come against thee quickly, and take away all thy remaining light, and leave
thee in darkness, thence to depart into utter darkness. To prevent that misery,
let it not be grievous to thee to peruse these few leaves heartily and
faithfully; only take this Caution with thee, do not expect that I should so
clear up this great mystery, that thy reason should be able to fathom it; How
then should Divine mysteries be unsearchable? This is not the first, nor only
Truth that has been rejected because of its noncompliance with reason. Thou
may rememher that the wise Athenians rejected the Doctrine of the
Resurrection, because they could not reconcile it with their reason. The
preaching of the Cross was to the Corinthians foolishness, because it suited
not with their reasons. Take heed of stumbling at this stone: Let the boldness
of those heathens teach thee sobriety of mind; and let their folly and unbelief
teach thee not to be faithless, but believing. If thou will be poisoned in the
midst of Antidotes, as thy sin is the greater, so thou will certainly purchase
to thy selfsorer damnation. I have here done my duty in warning, if thou
perish, thy blood will be upon thine own head. But that better things may befall
thee, and such as accompany salvation, is the hearty prayer of him,

Who mourns for thine Apostasy, and would rejoice in thy recovery, P. P.

THE DEITY OF THE HOLY GHOST PROVED.
BEfore I come to answer Mr. B's. Arguments, I shall lay down some Arguments to
prove the Deity of the Holy Ghost. I shall not follow his way, in contending
more by number and multitude, then strength and force of Arguments, in
multiplying words without weight: I shall forbear to bring many Arguments, that
might be alleged, and that upon good grounds; and shall only cull out some
chief ones, and vindicate those which B. has cavill'd against. And thou
blessed Spirit, the Spirit of Truth, plead thine own Cause, send out Thy Light,
and Thy Truth, that they may guide me in the handling of this Controversy,
that Thy Divine Majesty may be fully vindicated, Thy people solidly
established, and Thine enemies may be either converted or confounded. Amen.

Arg. 1. He whom the Scripture calls the Great and the True God, is God: But
the Scripture calls the Holy Ghost the Great and the True God: Ergo; The Holy
Ghost is God.

I make that addition in the Promises, the Great and True God, because it is
known and confessed that Magistrates are said to be Gods, though they are never
so called; but there is something added by way of qualification and diminution,
I have said you are Gods; but you shall die like men, Psalm. 82. 6, 7. So, I
have made thee a god to Pharaoh, Exodus 7. 1. A made god, and a god to Pharaoh.

The Major will be confessed: All the doubt will be about the Minor: For the
proof, I shall only urge two places of Scripture.

The first place is, Acts 5. v. 3. Why has Satan filled thine heart to lie
unto the Holy Ghost, compared with the end of ver. 4. Thou have not lied to
men, but to God: So that in the Apostles judgment these are equivalent terms,
to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to lie to God.

For the confirmation of this Argument (though it is in it self so clear, that
he that runs may read it; yet) I shall add four considerations.

1. They are said to lie to the Holy Ghost, because only the Holy Ghost knew
their sin, he only searched their hearts and knew their hypocrisy; and
therefore ver. 9. they are said to tempt the Spirit of the Lord, that is, to
try whether he could discover their sin, and would punish it.

2 Peter's intent was to aggravate their sin by this expression of lying to the
Holy Ghost, that it was committed in a more special and immediate manner
against God; Now if the Holy Ghost were only an Angel, as our Adversary
asserts, it had been as great a sin to lie to Peter, Gods extraordinary
Messenger, as to lie to the Holy Ghost; because, as B. himself says, what is
done to any Messenger redounds to him that sends him; whether the Messenger
were Angel or Apostle, that varies not the case; For though Ambassdors may
differ in their private conditions, yet all of them do equally represent their
Lord and Master.

3 Peter does make a Dichotomy here, acknowledging only two sorts of lies, a
lying to men, and to God. But according to our Adversaries opinion, here should
have been a trichotomy, Peter should have said, Thou have not lied to men, nor
to the Holy Ghost only, but to God: But now seeing the Apostle has made only
two members of the Division, Thou have not lied only to men, but to God also:
Choose which you will, for one of the two you must acknowledge, either that the
Holy is man, or God.

4. Consider that Peter in the fourth verse, does explain what he meant by that
phrase in the third verse: Thou have lied to the Holy Ghost; this he explains
thus, Thou have not lied to men, to a creature, but to God, to the Holy Ghost
which is God.

By what has been said, B's first Exception falls to the ground; which is
this, That a man may lie to God, and yet lie only to his messenger, because
what is done to Gods messenger, is done to God.

Answ. It is true, that a sin committed against Gods messenger, is committed
against God, but withal Peter does here intimate, that this was not only
committed against God in that common and general respect (in which indeed al
sins and all lies are committed against God) but that it was in a special,
immediate, and extraordinary manner committed against God, that is, against the
Holy Ghost, as he before expressed it.

But this Exception he himself distrusts, and therefore he flies to another,
and that is, he finds fault with the traslation, and tells us, that the Greek
word (...) being joined with an Accusative Case, does signify the same with
(...), that is, to be-lie and counterfeit, and so the words must be rendered,
Why did thou be-lie or counterfeit the Holy Ghost. But neither will this
relieve him, for (although it might be instanced that (...) with an Accusative
Case signifies to lie, and though the fourth verse does interpret the third,
(...) being there put with a Dative, and so necessarily signifying to lie, yet)
if his Exposition were true, the force of the Argument is not at al abated;
still it holds though in other terms, Thou have in counterfeiting the Holy
Ghost, not counterfeited men, but God.

Another place to the same purpose we have, 1 Corinthians. 6. 19, 20. What, know
you not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost? -- Therefore glorify
God in your body. The Apostles Argument is this: He whose temple you are ought
to be glorified, served, etc. But you are the temples of the Holy Ghost:
Therefore, He is to be glorified; or in the Apostles words, Therefore glorify
God. What a miserable Argument were this? if the Holy Ghost were not God: It
were in plain english to argue thus, You are the temples of, you are
consecrated to, an Angel, therefore glorify God. For the illustration of this
Argument, compare it with a parallel place, 2 Cor. 6. 16. -- You are the
temples of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them. We are
temples of God in one place, of the Holy Ghost, in another. If this will not
satisfy (as what will satisfy a blind mind and a perverse spirit?) It Is
proper to God to have a temple, as it is proper to him to be worshipped;
especially for such a creature as man to be a temple to, to whom can this
belong, but to the Creator of man? The Adversary of the Holy Ghost talks much
of reason and wisdom, etc. It were to be wished that he would make a little
use of it here. Well, what says he to this clear place? He is resolved to say
something, ne nihil dixisse videatur.

1 He says, Indeed it would follow, the Argument would hold, if it could be
proved that our body is so the temple of the Holy Ghost, as to be his by
interest, and dedicated to his honor.

Well said; but who ever did understand any thing else, or how can any thing
else be understood, especially by him that pretends so much understanding? What
is it for a temple to be erected to one, but for his honor, worship, and
service? was ever temple duly consecrated for other ends?

2 He says, That God is here distinguished from the Spirit. And did not B.
know that we allow a distinction between the Persons, though not in the Essence
of the Sacred Trinity: Also that we distinguish between the Divine nature, and
a Divine person. But this will more fitly and fully be an swered under his 2d
Argument. I might mention 2 Cor. 3. 17. The Lord is that Spirit, and where the
Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty; and many other places, but I study
brevity.

Arg. 2. He to whom Religious Worship is duly and truly exhibited is God: But
Divine Worship is duly and truly given to the Holy Ghost: Therefote, the Holy
Ghost is God.

For the Major our Adversary will not deny it.

The Minor is to be proved. And I shall prove it*

1 By Isai. 6. 1. I saw the Lord sitting upon his throne; this Lord was
worshipped by the Seraphims, ver. 3. they cried, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord
of hosts: This Lord sends a message by the Prophet, ver. 9, 10. Go ye and tell
this people, etc. Now go along with me to Act. 28. 25, 26, 27. where you have
the very same message, and Paul brings it in thus, Well spoke the Holy Ghost by
Esaias the Prophet; Paul says, the Holy Ghost spoke, and in the sixth of
Isaiah, The Lord spoke; nor can it be said (which yet is the only refuge) that
the Lord spoke by the Holy Ghost as being one of those Angels; for he that
spoke, is evidently distinguished from the Angels, ver. 6, 7. you read, one of
the Seraphims flew and touched the lips of the Prophet; then ver. 8. He passes
from the Angels, and tells you, He heard the voice of the Lord.

2 That worship is due to the Holy Ghost, will appear from Psalm. 95. 8. It is
said ver. 6. O come let us worship and bow down, let us kneel before the Lord
our Maker: ver. 7. -- If you will hear his voice, ver. 8. Harden not your
hearts.

But you will say, How does it appear, that the Holy Ghost is here intended. I
answer, By comparing this place with Heb. 3. 7* 8, 9 Wherefore as the Holy
Ghost says, To day, if you will hear his voice, etc. And observe it, Saint
Paul, or who ever was the Author of that Epistle to the Hebrews, brings in the
Holy Ghost speaking thus of himself, Your fathers tempted me, and proved me,
and saw my works forty years: and so ver. 11. I swear they shall not enter into
my rest: Who was it whom they tempted? They tempted the most high God, Psa. 78.
18. Who was it whose works they saw forty years? Who can do those mavelous
works, but God? They are called Gods mavelous works, Psalm. 105. 5. Who was it
that swear? it was the Lord, Numb. 32. 10, 11. The Lord swear saying, -- None
of them shall see the Land. The word in the Original is Jehovah, a name
peculiar to God: And yet here all these things are attributed to the Holy Ghost.

3 Swearing is a part of worship, and we ought to swear by none but God. Now
the Apostle swears by the Holy Ghost, Romans 9. 1. -- My conscience bearing me
witness in the Holy Ghost. Swearing is nothing else but a calling God to
witness, and as God alone is able to judge the heart, whether he that swears,
swears in truth: So he only is to be sworn by.

4 This appears from Revel. 1. 4, 5. Grace be unto you, and peace from him
which is, and was, and is to come, and from the seven Spirits which are before
his throne, and from Jesus Christ, etc. You see Saint John prays to all the
Persons in the Trinity, amongst the rest, the seven Spirits, the Spirit of God
is called the seven Spirits, because of its manifold gifts and operations:
Seven is a note of perfection, and seven Spirits in relation to the seven
Churches: The seven Churches were as liberally provided for, as if they had had
seven Spirits: These seven Spirits cannot be meant of Angels: for 1 These seven
Spirits are put before Christ, whereas the Angels are far below him. 2 The good
Angels would never accept of Prayer or worship, Revel. 22. 8, 9. 3. Nor are the
Angels the fountains of grace and peace: The best of creatures are in the
condition of those wise Virgins, that have oil only for their own use. If it be
said, Here the seven Spirits are put before Christ, whereas Christ being the
second Person should be put before the Spirit. I answer: 1 Nothing can be
gathered from this order: Sometimes the Son is mentioned before the Father, 2
Cor. 13, 14. The reason is, though there be a priority of order among the
Persons of the blessed Trinity, yet there is no precedence in dignity. 2 The
Spirit of God is superior to Christ as Mediator, and so he is spoken of here,
as is evident.

Arg. 3. He in whose name baptism is to be administered, is God: But baptism is
to be administered in the name of the Holy Ghost: Therefore, The Holy Ghost is
God.

For the Minor that cannot be denied, it is express Scripture, Mat. 28. 19.

The Major will easily be proved. 1 If you consider what it is to be baptized
into ones name, it is to be baptized into ones worship, faith and doctrine; and
further to be baptized by the authority or at the appointment of one. 2 If you
consider what baptism is: It is a Seal of the Covenant of Grace: Now in whose
name is baptism to be administered, but in his, who is able to seal to us Gods
part of the Covenant, and to whom we owe the performance of our part? To whom
does it belong to appoint Sacraments, but to God alone? 3. If you consider how
much Paul dreaded the thoughts of it, that any man should say, he was baptized
in the name of Paul, 1 Cor. 1. 13, 14, 15. And no reason can be given, why, if
it was lawful to baptize in the name of any servant or Minister, it were not as
lawful to baptize in the name of Paul, as in the name of any Angel. 4 If you
consider, that Ephesians. 4. 5. One Lord, one faith, one Baptism; where it is not
obscurely implied, that Baptism is to be in the name of none but the Lord, and
also that these three mentioned in baptism are but one, one Lord.

But the Theomachist objects, The Jews are said to be baptized into Moses, 1
Cor. 10. 2.

I answer: 1 There is difference between being baptized into one, and into his
name. Certainly there was as much reason why the Corinthians might be baptized
in the name of Paul, as the Israelites in the name of Moses: And therefore as
Paul abhorred the thoughts of it, that any should be baptized in his name; so
doubtless Moses would not have arrogated it to himself, nor Paul have given it
to Moses.

2 Moses is taken several ways: To omit other senses, sometimes it is taken
for the Law and worship of God, delivered by the hand of Moses: Luke 16. 31. If
they hear not Moses and the Prophets; Why Moses? where was he? and the
Prophets, do they live for ever? It was only the word of God, written by Moses
and the Prophets: Act. 21. 21. Thou teach all the Jews to forsake Moses: so
the meaning of it may be only this; They were baptized or initiated into the
Law and worship of God delivered by Moses; now, what is this to the purpose? Or,

3 The Praeposition (...) may be put for (...), as it is in other places, Acts
7. 35. The Law was given (...), by the disposition of Angels, according to Gal.
3. 19. It was ordained by Angels.

Whereas B. says, We are baptized into the guidance of the Spirit, into the
confession and obedience of it, it being the chief instrument whereby God
guides, governs, sanctifies the Church.

Alas, whither will a wandering creature rove? We use to judge the Papists
sufficiently absurd (and I doubt not but B. will join with us in it) for making
a visible head of the Church distinct from Christ. Now B. makes an invisible
head, the vicar of God and Christ, and that one of those Angels, that are so
far from being heads of the Church, that they are Ministering spirits to wait
upon the heirs of salvation; for so all the Angels are, Heb. 1. 14. Again, It
is wholly against the analogy of faith, and indeed that common sense and reason
that B. so much cries up, that one of Gods servants should be joint
commissioner with him in the appointment or honor of his ordinances; that was
the very reason why Paul would not endure the thoughts of it, as we saw even
now. But indeed the very naming of this far fetched fancy, is enough to confute
it.

Arg. 4. He to whom the Properties of God are communicated, must needs be God:
But the Properties of God are communicated to the Holy Ghost: Therefore, The
Holy Ghost is God.

For the Major, it is unquestionable. The Minor I prove by particulars, I shall
instance only two. 1. The Holy Ghost he is Omniscient. 2. He is Omnipresent.

1 He is Omniscient: 1 Cor. 2. 10 The Spirit searches all things, yea, even
the deep things of God: The very ways of God are said to be unsearchable, Romans
11. 33. and his judgments past finding out; that is, by any creature: and yet
the Spirit searches even the deep, secret things of God. And the Argument is
confirmed by the reason added, Even as the spirit of man: So that as the a
spirit of man is in man, so the Spirit of God is in God, and so is God; for
whatsoever is in God is God. The Son of man himself, as he was man, and every
other creature was ignorant of the day of Judgment; but the Spirit of God knew
it, for that searches even the deep things of God: it knew far greater
mysteries then that, much more that. If it be said, It searches them, that
intimates, that it was ignorant of them; as in a search we look for something
we want. I answer: even God himself is said to search; I search the heart, Jer.
17. 10. God, and so the Spirit are said to search, not in regard of their
former ignorance, but because their knowledge is an intimate and piercing
knowledge.

2 The Spirit of God is Omnipresent: Psalm. 139, 7. Whither shall I go from thy
Spirit? etc. The place is clear and full, and will admit of no answer: But
further to confirm it, I lay down two Conclusions.

1 There is one Spirit that dwells in all the people of God wheresoever they
live: Ephesians. 2. 18. Through Christ both they that are afar off, and they that are
near, have access by one Spirit unto the Lord; Ephesians. 4. 4. One body, one
Spirit.

2 The Spirit dwells in all the Saints: Their very bodies are the temples of the
Holy Ghost: as is expressly asserted 1 Cor. 6. 19. Well, what answers B. to this?

That if the Holy Ghost be Omnipresent, then Satan is Omnipresent, because he
is where ever the word is preached, Mar. 4. And this answer he delivers with as
much confidence, as if he had made a knot that no man nor Angel could unty;
which makes me adore the wisdom of God, that has so far besotted him, as that
he places so much confidence in that, which any man, that has but a dram of
sound reason in him, will acknowledge to be the very weakest passage in all his
book, though it is all weak enough: I confess I fear sometimes (in this
especially) he went against the light of his own conscience. The answer in a
word is this: There is but one Holy Ghost, which is Omnipresent, but there are
abundance of evil spirits: Mar. 5. 2, 8. a legion was in one man: observe, it
is called in the singular number an unclean spirit, and yet there was a legion;
a legion among the Romans ordinarily contained above six thousand.

Arg. 5. He that dictated or was the Author of the Scripture, is God: But the
Holy Ghost was the Author of the Scripture: Ergo, The Holy Ghost is God.

For the Major I prove it:

1 Because the Scripture attributes that word that was spoken and written by
Prophets or Apostles, unto God: Heb. 1. 1. God spoke in times past by the
Prophets. Luke 1. 70. And so 1 These. 2. 13. Paul commends the Thessalonians for
receiving his word, not as the word of man, but, as it is indeed, the word of
God: Hence all the Scripture is said to be (...), of divine inspiration, 2 Timothy
3. 16. or inspired by God; But so it could not be, if it were inspired by any
creature, whether Angel or man: and indeed it cannot be otherwise, because the
Scripture cannot be founded upon the Authority of a mere creature, for then it
would not be infallible, nor would our faith be a divine faith. Let us suppose
that the Holy Ghost were an Angel, as B. affirms: I say, we could not believe
him with a divine faith, nor look upon his word as absolutely infallible;
which, if I mistake not, is fully proved from Gal. 1. 8. Though we, or an Angel
from heaven, should preach any other gospel unto you, then that which we have
preached, let him be accursed: Where evident it is, the Apostle puts himself
and Angels both into the same rank in that respect, and supposes that neither
of them were simply infallible, and that we could not safely rely upon either
of them with a divine faith. But now we may safely rely upon the word and
authority of the Holy Ghost, for that is called a sure word, yea, more sure
then a voice from heaven, as you may see 2 Pet. 1. 19. and therefore so sure
because it was spoken by the Holy Ghost, ver. 21.

For the Minor; it is proved, 1 By that place forementioned, Acts 28. 25. The
Holy Ghost spoke by Esaias. 2 By 2 Pet. 1. 21. Holy men of God spoke as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost: Where the Deity of the Holy Ghost is not
obscurely proved; for he tells us, ver. 20. Scripture is not of private
interpretation; that is, it is not to be interpreted according to their private
preconceived opinions, but according to the mind of the Holy Ghost, who was the
Author of it. A parallel place you have Heb. 9. 8. The Holy Ghost this
signifying, etc. where the mind of the Holy Ghost is made the genuine sense of
the Scripture: now Scripture is to be interpreted according to the mind of
none, but the Author of it. Many other places might be added, but I do not
desire to multiply places.

Whereas B. says, the Holy Ghost is an Angel; that cannot be; for the Holy
Ghost (you see) is the Author of the Scripture, and does fully understand all
Scripture mysteries, but now the Angels are ignorant of them; they knew not the
day of judgment, they are ignorant in great part of Gospel mysteries; 1 Pet.
1. 12. The Apostles preached the Gospel, (...), with, or by the Holy Ghost --
which things the Angels desire to look into: Observe 1, The Angels are clearly
distinguished from the Holy Ghost. 2. The Holy Ghost is the dictator of Gospel
mysteries, the Angels are students, learners in them.

Arg. 6. He who is one in nature and essence with the Father, is God: But the
Holy Ghost is one with the Father: Therefore, The Holy Ghost is God.

The Major will not be denied. The Minor is proved from 1 John 5. 7. There are
three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and
these are one. Consider, 1 If the Spirit were an Angel, there were three
thousand witnesses in heaven. Again, there is a clear variation of the phrase
in the next verse: there it is, they agree in one, (...); but here it is not,
they agree in one, but (...), they are one; it is (...), not the personal
number (...), but (...) the Neutral, to note, that though there is in the
Trinity (...) and (...), a person and a person, yet there is not (...) and
(...), a thing and a thing; though there are three Persons, yet there is but
one nature, but one Essence: Had the Holy Ghost been an Angel, John had
committed a wilful and gross offense in varying the phrase, whereby just cause
of suspicion was given, to think that he was one with God, not only by consent
(for so the water, spirit, and blood are one, they consent in their testimony)
but also in Essence. 3 Look to ver. 9. If we receive the witness of men, the
witness of God is greater: He takes notice only of two witnesses, the witness
of God, and the witness of men: The witness of the Holy Ghost is not the
witness of men; nay the contrary is most clearly employed, that it is the
witness of God.

But this place is no better then its companions, and therefore B. offers
violence to it.

1 He says, This phrase is never taken to signify one in Essence, but always
one in consent.

I answer, This is false; the contrary is evident from Joh. 10. 29. I and my
Father are one: Had Christ meant only one in consent, the Jews would never
have been ready to stone him. Again, he gives this as a reason why none could
pluck his sheep out of his hand, because he had one and the same power, and so
the same Essence with God. For if he had only been one in consent with the
Father, one might as soon have plucked his sheep out of his hand, as out of the
hand of any of his disciples, for they also were one in consent with God.

But B. says, That it is contrary to common sense that three should be one.
Thus it fares with men, when they will make sense and reason the judge of
Scripture controversies: Has B. never read, that the natural man receives not
the things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. that when Peter said, Christ was the Son of
the living God; Christ told him, Flesh and blood has not revealed this to
thee, Mat. 16. That the carnal mind is enmity against God, Romans 8. 7. The truth
is, not only common sense cannot reach these mysteries, but a man must have
more then common faith to subject his reason to them: not that reason may not
clearly discern this mystery in the Scripture, but that it cannot invent or
fathom it; not but that the (...) is clear from the Scripture, that there is a
Trinity; but that reason cannot find out the (...), how can these things be?
All men are Socinians by ntaure, they will believe God and the word of God no
farther then they can see reason.

But B. adds, The Complut. Bible has this place otherwise.

I answer, What then? It must be here as it is in many other cases of the same
nature, that must be overruled by the consent of other Copies.

But B. goes on, and tells us, that this place is not to be found in many
Copies.

I answer, It is certain that ancient Heretics have offered violence to many
Scriptures that did most clearly confute them, as might be instanced in many
other places and yet the providence of God has always countermined their
designs by keeping some Copies pure when others were corrupted by Heretics,
and some perfect when others were defective; and for this particular, it is
certain it was extant in the Greek Copy before ever your fore father Macedonius
broached that Heresy that now you have received. And if in some Copies it be
wanting, it is probable we may thank some of the Macedonian Heretics for
taking it away. But that it was there Originally, and that it ought to be
there, will evidently appear, if you consider 1 The end of the sixth verse,
which does necessarily require that that should follow; for it is given as a
reason, why the Spirit is truth, because there are three, etc. that is, it is
all one with the God of truth, and with the Son, who is called truth; and so
this place is parallel to Joh. 16. 13. He will guide you into all truth, for he
shall not speak of himself, but from the Father; that is, he shall speak nothing
but that wherein the Father and he agrees. 2 From the ninth verse, If we
believe the witness of men, the witness of God is greater, for this is the
witness of God which he has testified of his Son: Now I beseech you, where is
this witness of God here hinted and pointed at, if not in the seventh verse,
unless you will confess with us that the Spirit in the sixth verse is God.
Howsoever if there were not such a place as this in the Scripture, there have
been several other places alleged beyond all exception.

Arg. 7. He to whom those actions are ascribed that are proper to God, is God:
But those actions which are proper to God are ascribed to the Holy Ghost: Ergo,
the Holy Ghost is God.

For the Major, it will readily be acknowledged. The Minor is proved in
particulars.

1 In Creation: The Holy Ghost creates, Job 33. 4. Spirit of God made me: nor
can it be said, God made him by the Spirit as an instrument, for instrumental
causes in creation are ridiculous, and rejected by all men: Luke 1. 31. the
Holy Ghost created the body of Christ, which was neither convenient nor
possible for a creature to do. He that spoke by the mouth of David, made both
heaven and earth, Act. 4. 24. and who that was we read Acts 1. 16. The Holy
Ghost spoke by the mouth of David: To pass by that known and clear place, Genesis
1. 2. The Spirit moved upon the face of the waters.

2 The Spirit works miracles: Miracles are actions above nature; and none can
do acts above nature but he that is above nature: Christ proved himself to be
God by working miracles, Matthew. 9. 5. That you may know the Son of man has
power upon earth to forgive sins, he says to the sick of the Palsy, Arise:
None but God can forgive sins: now miracles are ascribed to the Holy Ghost,
Matthew. 12. 28. Christ cast out Devils by the Spirit of God: and that which adds
weight to it is that parallel place Luke 11. 20. I by the finger of God cast
out devils: What Matthew calls the Spirit, Luke calls the finger of God, or the
Omnipotency of God, which is the same with God, for so the Magicians understood
it, Exodus 8. 19. The Spirit of God was greater and stronger then Christ as man.
Again, Romans 15. 19. Mighty signs and wonders were ^rought by the power of the
Spirit. Those miracles which the Apostles wrought they professed they did not
work by their own power, Act. 4. 12. but by the power and strength of Christ:
And doubtless it had been as sacrilegious to say, they wrought them by the
power of an Angel, or any other creature: And therefore whereas sometimes they
ascribe them to Christ, Act. 4. 16. sometimes to the Holy Ghost, as in the
place now mentioned; sometimes to God the Father, Act. 5. 30. it hence clearly
follows, that every one of these is God; and because the Scripture tells us
there is but one God, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. therefore we conclude, there are three
persons, and these three are one. Again, Romans 8. 11. The Spirit of God raised
up Christ from the dead, and yet he raised himself; I will raise up this
temple, Joh. 2. 19. hence also it follows, that Christ and the Holy Ghost, are
God, and are one God.

3 It is proper to God to govern the Church, and to send Ministers, and yet
this is attributed to the Holy Ghost: Act. 13. 2. The Holy Ghost said, Separate
unto me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them: Was this a
comely dialect for a creature to use? far different I am sure it is from the
language of created Angels, see Rev. 22. 9. So Act. 20. 28. Take heed to the
flock of God over which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers; and compare
this with 1 Cor. 12. 28. and you shall find, that it was God that set officers
in the Church; Jesus Christ himself was sent by the Spirit, Luke 4. 18. Again,
Act. 15. 28. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, that is to the Holy
Ghost in us, to decree: You see the Holy Ghost is the Lawgiver of the Church,
and yet God is the only Lawgiver, Jam. 4. 12.

4 The Holy Ghost acts according to his good pleasure, according to the
counsel of his own will (which is the property of God, Ephesians. 1. 11.) 1 Cor.
12. 11. All these things works the Spirit, dividing severally as he will. And
if you look into the fifth and sixth verses, you shall find that the same
Spirit is called both Lord and God. All creatures must say, Not my will, but
thy will, Lord, be done; Jesus Christ himself, who is far higher then all the
Angels, said it, and the Angels in particular are said not to do their own
will, but to do Gods commandments, harkening to the voice of his word, Psalm.
103. 20. And again, Paul would have gone and preached in Bithynia, but the
Spirit suffered him not, Act. 16. 7. Who is this that undertakes, whom he will
to save, and whom he will to destroy? Non vox hominem sonat: It is not the
language of a Creature, but of the great God. Jesus Christ himself (whom yet
the Author to the Hebrews proves at large to be better then all the Angels,
chapt. 1. and so according to B. supposition, better then the Holy Ghost, yet
he) did not dispense the word according to his own pleasure, as man, but
according to the pleasure of his Father, Matthew. 15. 24. I am not sent, but unto
the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

I might add, that the Holy Ghost sanctifies us, and it would easily amount to
a Demonstration: But I have said enough for the proof of a point, so clearly
expressed in the Scripture: I have done with the Cataskeuastical part; I now
come to the Anaskeuastical, I mean, to detect the fallacies and cavils
wherewith the enemy of the Holy Ghost endeavors to dispute him out of his
Throne and Deity.

And truly one may rationally expect that he that comes to dispute a truth out
of the Church, that has had so long possession; to thrown down a doctrine that
has so firm a foundation in the Scripture; he had need write like Tertullian,
and have as many sentences as words, and as many Arguments as sentences. But
contrariwise, I find in this Pneumatomachist nothing but a heap of words, a
Jury of Arguments that are neither good nor true, bold dictates imperiously
obtruded upon the world without any proof, ancient Landmarks removed, quia ipse
dixit, because the School master would have it so, and such things which non
sani esse hominis, non sanus juret Orestes. You will say, Why then do you
answer him? Because of that of Solomon, Answer a fool according to his folly,
lest he be wise in his own conceit, Prove. 26. 5. Besides, God has in just
judgment sent abroad a spirit of delusion, and there are multitudes that will
sooner comply with a new and erroneous opinion upon the appearance of one
Argument, then embrace a truth upon many good and faithful testimonies; even as
one stroke will carry a man further with the tide, then five against it. And
therefore that I may cut off an occasion from them that seek an occasion to
fall from the truth, that I may leave those inexcusable that are resolved they
will not be convinced, (...), I come to answer his Arguments.

This only in the general: There is one consideration, that will utterly
enervate all his Arguments: It must needs be acknowledged, and B. himself
confesses it, That there are many things that are spoken of God, (...), after
the manner of men, and must be understood (...), so as it do not reflect
dishonor upon God. And therefore when he tells you, The Spirit speaks from
God, hears from God, receives from God, is sent of God, is the gift of God,
changes place, is distinguished from God, etc. The answer in a word is this,
(and it would suffice to stop the mouth of any sober minded man) That all these
things are spoken of the Holy Ghost improperly, and must be so expounded as may
consist with the Divine Majesty of the Holy Ghost, which is so clearly asserted
in other Scriptures, as you have heard.

But I shall add one thing more in the general, That we all confess there is an
order, though not an in equality among the Divine Persons; and so all that B.
objects may be answered, if one do apply it to his several Arguments. But I
come to particulars.

Object. 1. His first Argument is this: He that is distinguished from God, is
not God: But the Holy Ghost is distinguished from God: Ergo, The Holy Ghost is
not God.

Answ. To the Major I answer, He that is distinguished from God really and
substantially, is not God, so your Major is true, otherwise not; for there is a
modal distinction among the persons. and then in your sense the Minor is false;
for the Holy Ghost is not substantially distinguished from God; for though
their persons are distinguished, yet the Essence is the same. But B. foresaw
this answer, and seeing he wanted Arguments, he falls a railing. 1 He calls
this, an ignorant refuge, A bold censure, for a rustic Paedagogue to pass upon
so many learned men, whose shoes he will never be worthy to bear. He adds,
That no man can conceive it in his mind. Alas, vain man, do thou think to
conceive these great mysteries, which the very Angels adore! But come a little
lower, can thou conceive what the eternity of God is? what his infinity or
immensity is? All the conceptions of thy mind are finite. Yet a little lower,
Can thou conceive what a Spirit is? what a soul is? wiser men then B. could
never yet do it, and therefore they can only describe them by negatives, and
tell us what they are not, but cannot tell us what they are. Yet a little
lower, Can thou tell how every quantity may be divided into infinite parts?
what is the nature of the Lodestone? nay, why thy hair is black or white?
Can thou tell what is the essence of a pebble? can thou give the definition
of a feather? Away, vain man, lay thy hand upon thy mouth, and henceforth never
grudg that thou can not conceive such a mystery as this is in thy mind.

But he says, It is a distinction unheard of in Scripture.

Answ. That is false: 1 It is clearly, Joh. 1. 1. The word was with God, and
the word was God: With God; there God is taken personally, the Son was with the
Father. Was God; there it is taken essentially, the Son was God, had the
Essence of God. 2. These three are one. 3. Two things are clear in the
Scripture: 1. That there is but one God. 2. That yet the Father is God, the Son
is God, the Holy Ghost is God. But he goes on to an Argument, as he thinks a
very subtle one.

If the Person be distinct from the Essence of God, then it is either something
or nothing; if nothing, how can it be distinguished (by the way, friend, is
there no distinction, no difference, between something and nothing?) if
something, then either finite or infinite: finite we will not say; if infinite,
then there are two infinites in God, the Person and the Essence. An old
Argument new sodden.

I answer, 1. But what if I should say, a person barely considered is neither
res, a thing properly, nor yet nothing; but modus rei, the manner of a thing:
Had B. studied Philosophy a little better, before he had made such a bold Essay
in Divinity, he would not have wondered at it: The folding of my hands is not a
thing, (for then I should be a creator and make a thing) nor is it plainly
nothing (for there is a difference between my hands folded and stretched out)
but nothing cannot make a difference, as B. says.

2. I answer, by denying the disjunction: Indeed every Essence or being, is
either finite or infinite; but the person singly considered is not a being, but
the manner of a being. Or,

3. The Persons considered with the Essence are infinite, and yet they are not
three infinites, because they have but one Essence, and so one infinity.

But he adds, To talk of God Essentially taken, is ridiculous, because God is
the name of a person. Wretched ignorance! B. does not understand the meaning of
his Adversaries: None ever took God essentially in that sense, for an essence
abstracted from a person: but the meaning is this, that I may a little instruct
him in this principle, We say, God essentially considered, acts, not as if the
abstracted nature of God did act, but because it is an act common to all the
Persons: Thus to create, is an act of God essentially considered, because all
the Trinity creates; but to beget the Son is an act of God personally
considered, because that is an act proper to the first Person.

Obj. 2. His second Argument is this, He that gave the holy Spirit is Jehovah
alone, Neh. 9. 6, 20. Therefore, The Spirit is not God.

Ans. This exclusive Particle does exclude Creatures and Idol gods, but not the
other Persons of the Trinity: So it is used in many other places, Mat. 11. 27.
The day of Judgment none knows but the Father only, and yet Christ as God
could not be ignorant of it, for he knew even the thoughts of the heart, Mat.
9. 4. which is much more; nor could the Spirit be ignorant of it, for that
searches even the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10. so 1 Cor. 2. 11. the
things of God knows, (...) (not only no man, but) no person; for so the word
signifies, but the Spirit of God: Shall any weak or perverse Disputant infer
from hence, Therefore the Father knows them not, or knowledge is not properly
attributable to God as Mr. Goodwin tells us? So Rev. 19. 12. Christ had a name
which none knew but himself; what, did not God the Father know it? So Deuteronomy. 32.
12. The Lord alone did lead them: and yet Christ is said to lead them, 1 Cor.
10. 4, 9. and also the Spirit, Neh. 9. 20. So Psalm. 136. 4. The Lord alone does
great wonders; and yet we have proved that the Holy Ghost does great wonders.

Obj. 3. His third Argument is this, He that speaks not of himself is not
God: But the Holy Ghost speaks not of himself: Therefore The Holy Ghost is
not God. The Minor is proved from Joh. 16. 13.

Answ. This is the fruit of Gods condescensions to unthankful men, they take
occasion to slight him for them: Thus because Christ was pleased to assume the
nature of man, some have rendered him this thanks, to dispute him out of his
Godhead: Thus, because God in Scripture condescends to our capacity, therefore
they have requited him thus, to say that all things must be understood properly
of God, how much soever they tend to his dishonor. Ungrateful wretches! assure
your selves this wicked unthankfulness shall not go unpunished. But to answer:
1. This phrase does note an order, though no inequality in the Divine Persons.
Now as the holy Ghost, in regard of his person, is not of himself, but from the
Father and the Son, so he acts also from them. 2. This phrase does note the
consent that was between the Father and the Spirit; as if Christ had said, The
Spirit shall not speak one thing, and the Father another, but both shall agree;
according to that, There are three that bear record in heaven. 1 John 5. 7.
There is not the single testimony of the Spirit, but the joint attestation of
all the three Persons.

But B. says, This phrase in Scripture, to do a thing not of himself, notes to
do a thing by the teaching, command, authority of another. I answer: There are
many phrases, which are spoken both of God and man; but B. must know, that
things are not attributed to God and man univocally, that is, in one and the
same sense. God is said to repent, and man is said to repent; yet I hope B. is
not so brutish as to think God repents and grieves properly; how then should he
be perfectly happy? God is said to have handsand feet, etc. and so are men; yet
I hope not in the same sense. And yet a man might as well urge these
expressions to prove that God has hands, etc. because when it is spoken of
men, it is so to be taken, as to infer with B. because when a man is said not
to speak of himself, it is meant, he speaks by the direction and at the
appointment of another: therefore it is so to be understood when it is
attributed to God the holy Ghost.

Ob. 4. His fourth Argument is this, The Spirit hears from another, Joh. 16.
13. Therefore, It is not God.

Answ. This Argument is the same for substance with the other, and the same
answer will suffice. But B. foresaw what answer would stop his mouth, and
therefore he lays a strict charge upon us, not to say this is spoken
improperly. Well, but 1. Shall we take it properly, has the holy Ghost bodily
ears to hear? 2. Or was the holy Ghost to learn? was he to seek in Gospel
mysteries? How can that be imagined of him that dictated the Scripture. and
fully under. stood all the meaning of it? Heb. 9. 8. Besides, a Text that B.
himself cites, will not permit this; which is, Isai. 40. 13, 14. compared with
Romans 11. 34. I confess I cannot but admire both the wisdom of God, and the
besottedness of this man, that should cite such a Text that is enough to
overthrow all he says: I beseech you follow his directions, compare those
Texts together; what in one place Romans 11. 34. is said of the Lord, Who has
known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor: that in Isai. 40.
13. is spoken of the Spirit of God; Who has directed the Spirit of the Lord,
or being his Counselor has taught him? The same independency and
selfsufficiency is attributed to them both. Again, that Spirit of the Lord,
Isai. 40. 13. is there called the Lord God, ver. 10. is said to be infinite,
ver. 12. 15. is said to be he to whom sacrifices belong, ver. 16. which is Gods
prerogative; is called God, ver 18. All which, if I listed to prosecute them,
would make so many unanswerable Demonstrations.

Obj. 5. His fifth Argument is this, He that receives of another, is not God:
But the holy Ghost receives of another, Joh. 16. 14. He shall receive of mine
and show it to you: Therefore, The holy Ghost is not God.

Answ. This also is but the same Argument over again, repeated only (I suppose)
to make up the dozen. The answer to the third Argument will suffice for this,
yet something may be added: For suppose the holy Ghost did properly receive any
thing from the Father. yet could he not properly be said to receive any thing
of Christ (especially according to B's. supposition, that looks upon Christ but
as (...), a mere man:) for contrariwise, Christ as man received all his fullness
from the Spirit, Joh. 3. 34. He received the Spirit without measure, Isai. 61.
1. Again, it is not said, he shall receive of me, but of mine; that is, he
shall take my wisdom, righteousness, holiness, etc. and shall apply them to
you; for this is the proper work of the Spirit, and so this makes nothing at
all for his purpose.

Obj. 6. Arg. 6. He that is sent of God is not God: But the holy Ghost is sent
of God: Therefore, he is not God.

Ans. Still the same mistake: the same answer will suffice again (for indeed
for substance this is still but the same Argument): The Holy Ghost is not
properly sent, nor can be, that is, from one place to another, for he fills all
places, as I have proved already, and shall further prove in answer to his
eighth Argument: and therefore this must not be so brutishly understood as if
the Spirit were sent a long journey from heaven to earth: but only this, I will
undertake (says God) that my Spirit shall be a Comforter to you; and this God
might will without any disparagement to the holy Ghost, because the Father and
the Spirit have both one nature, one will, and so what the one wills, the other
wills also, and so the holy Ghost did actually consent to this promise of the
Father; now by consent one equal may send another: Thus Christ who thought it
no robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2. 6. yet was sent of God.

Obj. 7. Arg. 7. He that is the gift of God, is not God: But the Spirit of God
is the gift of God: Ergo, He is not God.

Answ. I confess here are new words, animus tamen idem, but the same sense. In
a word, the Major is false; God gives himself in Covenant to his people, I will
be their God, Jer. 32. 38. Let us see whether his Argument will not as well
disprove the Godhead of the Father, as of the Spirit. He that is the gift of
God, is not God. But God the Father is the gift of God, for he gives himself
(as Christ also is said to give himself, Gal. 2. 20) the conclusion then is
according to B's. principles, God the Father is not God: A conclusion indeed
suitable to the premises, but both to be abominated by every pious soul. But B.
adds, A gift is in the power and at the disposal of another. I answer, 1. That
is false; I may give my daughter to a man to wife, and yet she is not in my
power, for this I cannot do without her consent: So neither can God give the
Spirit without its consent* 2 What if I should grant the Holy Ghost were at the
disposal of Gods will? remember that the Father and the Spirit have but one
will, and so that is no more then to be at its own disposal. 3. This Argument
may be strongly retorted, therefore the Holy Ghost is not a created gift,
because he is at his own disposal, as we have proved in the seventh Argument.

Obj. 8 His eighth Argument is this, He that changes place is not God. But the
holy Ghost changes place, Luke 3 21, 22. Therefore, he is not God.

Ans. 1. Certain it is that God is often said in Scripture taken to change
place, Ps. 18. 9. God bowed the Heavens and came down: Hos. 5. 15 I will go and
return to my place, though elsewhere he is said to be Omnipresent, 2 Chronicles. 6.
18. Psalm. 139. Jer. 23. 24. But he saw the weakness of this Argument, and
therefore he adds this, Nor let any man allege that thus much is said of God,
Exodus 3. for it is not God that came down, but an Angel, as you may see, Acts
7. 30, 35, 38. Which (by the way) is a transition to another Argument: Yet I
shall follow him even in his extravagancies. I answer therefore, 1 This does
not at all weaken our answer; for what though Angels came down at some time,
and not God, yet it remains a truth, that the great God is said to change his
place (though not properly) as has been proved. 2. Nor does it follow, because
sometime an Angel came down and spoke, therefore God never came down nor spoke.
3. God himself is called an Angel, Mal. 3. 1. Christ is called the Angel of the
Covenant: The Angel that wrastled with Jacob, Genesis 32. was the Lord, for Jacob
made supplication to him, Hos. 12. 4. Genesis 32 26. Now worship is peculiar to
God. 4 Evident it is that this Angel, Exodus 3. was the Lord; for he says
expressly, I am the God of Abraham, whereas the good Angels and Messengers of
God never spoke in that manner in the first person: I am thy fellow servant,
said that Angel, Rev. 22. So the Prophets used to speak of God in the third
Person, Thus says the Lord.

Obj. 9. His ninth Argument is this, He that prays unto Christ, is not God:
But the Spirit prays to Christ, to come to judgment, Rev. 22. Therefore. it
is not God.

Answ. It can never be proved that this Text is to be meant of the Spirit of
God, it may very well be meant of any Angel. For 1. Certainly the Angels desire
to see the happiness of the Saints completed. 2. In the very verse before the
Text, there is mention made of a created Angel.

Obj. But then it would not have been spirit, in the singular number.

Ans. There is no necessity of that, for why may not one good spirit signify
more good Angels, as well as one unclean spirit signify a legion, Mar. 5. 2, 9.

But what if it were meant of the Spirit of God? the meaning only is this, the
Spirit speaks in the Spouse, and dictates to the Spouse; though the Adversary
does magisterially forbid us this interpretation, without giving one real proof
against it.

I shall add here what B. has in his twelfth Reason, which indeed properly
belongs to this place. He quotes, Romans 8. 27. The Spirit makes intercession
for us with groans unutterable. The Spirit (says B.) powers out petitions
apart in our behalf.

I answer, The Spirit is said to intercede, because it makes us to intercede:
For proof of this:

1. It is ordinary in Scripture for God to be said to do that which he makes
us to do; thus Genesis 22. 12. God is said to know, when he makes others to know:
thus Christ is said to live in us, Gal. 2. 20. when he makes us to live: So
Mat. 10. 20. The Spirit of your Father speaks in you, which is thus
expounded, Luke 21. 15. -- I will give you a mouth, and wisdom which all your
adversaries shall not be able to gainsay: So that the Spirit speaking in them,
and they speaking by the Spirit, signify the same thing. Thus a Scrivener is
said to write, when by directing our hands he makes us to write. And it is
further to be considered, that there is no action which the creature does, but
there is required a concurrent action of God with it, which many Philosophers
affirm (and that not without reason) to be of the same kind with the action of
the creature: And if so, when the Spirit concurs with us in our intercession,
he may very well be said to intercede. 2 It is the Spirit within us, not
without us, that makes intercession for us, our prayer therefore is called
(...), Jam. 5. 16. happily to note, that it is wrought in us by the Spirit. 3
This interpretation suits best with the Context; all along he is speaking of
the Spirits operation in us, ver. 11 If the Spirit of God dwell in you. Ver.
15. is parallel to this 27. Ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, by which
we cry Abba Father: These are equivalent expressions, the Spirit in us cries
Abba Father, and we by the Spirit cry Abba Father. And the same thing you find
expressed both ways, by the former phrase, Gal. 4. 6. by the latter Rom 8. 15.
which if well considered, will fully answer Bidles Argument. But indeed we need
to go no further for an antidote against B's poisonous interpretation, then the
26 verse, and we may add the 27 verse to it Thence I argue, 1 Such an
interpretation must be understood as helps our infimities in praying: But our
infirmities in praying are helped by the Spirits enabling us to pray, and not
by I know not what intercession of the Spirit apart.

2 Such an intercession of the Spirit must be understood, as teaches us how to
prayas we ought; but it is not a supposed intercession of the Spirit of God
without us that does that: (how the prayer of an Angel, which we neither hear,
nor know, should teach us to pray, is not easy to conceive) but the Spirit in
us enlightening our minds, dictating to us what we should ask, that, and that
alone helps us against our ignorance.

3 Whose the groanings are, his the intercession is: That is clear to any one
that reads the 26 verse. But the groanings are ours, as appears 1. So they are
said to be, ver. 23. 2 They are groanings that cannot be uttered: I suppose B
will not say, but the Spirit is able to utter all his mind. 3. Nor can it
easily be imagined, that the blessed Spirit, which is our Comforter, and the
Spirit of glory, should be subject to groaning. seeing the very glorified
Saints are freed from them, then whom the Spirit cannot be thought to be less
happy or more miserable.

4. If the mind of the Spirit be our minds assisted by the Spirit, then the
intercession of the Spirit is our intercession helped by the Spirit. But the
mind of the Spirit, is meant of our minds, or our desires assisted by the
Spirit; because Gods searching the heart, is given as a ground of Gods knowing
the mind of the Spirit. Now there were neither coherence nor consequence
between the searching of our hearts, and the knowing the mind of the Spirit; if
the mind of the Spirit were to be understood properly.

5. The intercession of the Spirit is according to the will of God. But the
Spirits interceding for us apart, as B. supposes, is not according to the will
of God. Nay that an Angel (for such B says the spirit is) should intercede
for us, is contrary to the will of God; for this is the will of God, There is
but one Mediator, 1 Timothy 2. 6. that is, one Mediator of Intercession, as well
as one of Redemption (as we generally say against the Papists;) for of
intercession he is speaking in that Chapter, ver. 1. And on the other side, it
is the will of God that the Spirit should intercede for us in our sense, that
it should help us in our prayers and intercessions, by convincing, comforting,
inlightning, guiding, and teaching us, by helping our infirmities; and
therefore so it must here be understood.

But he objects, None can intercede for himself. For that, I answer
Intercession is taken sometimes more strictly, when the word is (...), and then
indeed it must always be understood of one that intercedes as a Mediator
between two parties: But sometimes it is taken more largely, and so is the word
(...), often taken for interpellare, or compellare, to entreat, whether for a
man's self, or for another, In Thucydides, pars adversa adversae parti
hostiliter dicitur (...): So that it notes only compellare, whether supplicando
or expostulando.

But he adds, To intercede, notes inferiority; and though in Scripture some
things are spoken after the manner of men, yet no where is any thing said that
argues Gods inferiority to, and dependence upon another.

I answer, 1. This is very false; God says to Moses, Let me alone, Exodus 32.
Does not this expression argue inferiority and dependence too? Yes surely, B.
cannot deny it; but only he must say, it is improperly taken, and must be so
interpreted, as may consist with Gods Majesty and Glory; and so he will also
enervate all his own Arguments. 2. I observe hence, that B. does positively
conclude, that Christ (because he intercedes) is inferior to God, though he
professed he would not meddle with that.

Obj. 10. His tenth Argument is this, Some have been Disciples and Believers,
and yet have not so much as heard whether there be an holy Ghost, Act. 19. 2.
and so they could not believe in him.

Ans. 1. The meaning of the Text is quite mistaken; for they did not doubt
whether there was an holy Ghost or no, they could not be ignorant of this: John
doubtless having instructed them, before he did baptize them, and there being
so many clear testimonies of the Spirits existence in the Old Testament. But
the meaning then is this, We have not heard whether the Holy Ghost be come and
manifested in so eminent a manner, as is promised; for you must consider, that
the Jews after the Babylonish Captivity had lost those glorious discoveries,
and the gracious presence of the holy Ghost, which once they had, this being
one of those five things, wherein they used to complain, the second Temple came
short of the first: And further they knew that God had promised the
manifestation of the Spirit in an extraordinary manner, Joel 2. Now that this
is the real meaning, and not a fancy, I will prove, 1. By a parallel place; you
have the very same phrase Joh. 7. 39. The Spirit was not yet (given, is not in
the Original, only (...)) why? the Spirit was, and had descended upon Christ
long before; but this is the meaning, the gifts of the Spirit were not so
plentifully shed abroad as afterward they were upon the Apostles and others. 2
It appears from the Context, that he speaks of the gifts of the holy Ghost; see
ver. 6. The holy Ghost came on them, and they spoke with tongues and
prophesied. So that I cannot choose but laugh at, and pity the bold and
conceited ignorance of B. who says, It is without example, to take the holy
Spirit for the gifts of the Spirit; whereas you see it must needs be so taken
in the places now mentioned, and in many other places: see Act. 2. 17. Well,
but what if B's interpretation were true? nothing of moment follows. What an
Argument is this? Some were ignorant of the Deity of the holy Ghost, therefore
it is not God: As if a man should argue, B. is a Disciple and a Believer, and
he believes not that the holy Ghost is God; therefore it is not God.

But (says he) Many now tell us, that without the knowledge of this point (of
which they were ignorant) we cannot be saved. Ans. 1. They were not ignorant of
it, as has been proved. 2. But the times or states of the Churches wherein men
live, do much vary the case: according as the means of knowledge are more or
less, an error may be damnable or not. To instance, in the first infancy of the
Church, Circumcision was an error winked at, Act. 15. and 16. 3. but afterward
it proved no less then damnable; Gal. 5. 2. If you be circumcised, Christ shall
profit you nothing: So the Apostles were once ignorant of, and did not believe
the Death and Resurrection of Christ; but if any man now doubt of them, we may
upon much better grounds doubt of his salvation: So though God might wink at
this error in former times, let not B. now think that God will hold him
guiltless in times of so much light and means; let him look to it, God is very
jealous of his honor, and particularly of the honor of the Holy Ghost, Mat.
12. 32.

Obj. 11. Arg. 11. The Spirit of God has an understanding distinct from the
understanding of God for he hears from God, Joh. 16. 13, 14, 15.

Ans. This is the self same Argument with the third and fourth, as you see, and
therefore I pray you go back for an answer. Only one thing he adds, That the
Spirit is said to search the things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10. But to search the
depths of one, necessarily supposes one understanding in him that searches,
and another in him whose depths are searched. Then which nothing is more false
and foolish: For ^ By searching there, is meant nothing but knowing, as appears
from ver. 11. where in stead of searching is put knowing, The things of God
knows the Spirit of God: and again, God is said to search the heart, Romans 8
29. that is, to know it. 2. Does not God know himself! nay, cannot we search
our selves? cannot our understanding reflect upon it self, and search its own
nature? are not we commanded to search, try, and examine our selves?

Obj. 12. His last Argument is this. The Spirit of God wills conformably to
the will of God, Romans 8. 27. He makes intercession for the Saints according to
the will of God. But this Argument is already answered under the ninth
Objection; the sum of what is there at large proved, is this, That the Spirit
is said to pray, intercede, will, because he makes us so to do. And thus I
have detected all the fallacies wherewith the Adversary labored to oppose the
Deity of the holy Ghost: and so notwithstanding all that he has said, it
remains a sure truth, and will do so to eternity, that the holy Ghost is God.
And therefore Trinuni Deo, Patri, Filio, Spiritui Sancto sit Laus, Honor and
Gloria. Amen.

FINIS.

