ABout four years sithence (Christian Reader) there was brought unto me a
Comment or Exposition on the Epistle to the Hebrews, written by a Namelesse and
unknown Author, to the end that having perused and allowed it, it might be
Printed and published the which I also undertook: and finding (as ^ then
conceived) that for the most part it was Learned and Judicious, plain and
profitable, I did so pass it with my Approbation; Yet there were diverse
passages against which I took, as I thought, just exceptions, as disagreeing
with the Scriptures, and the received Doctrine of Our and all other Reformed
Churches, which I would not let pass, before by my Letters I had acquainted
the Author with them, that I might receive satisfaction in those things which I
objected, from whom I received a sober and modest Answer, wherein he did not at
all maintain those errors, but left me to my liberty to expunge what I
misliked; the which I also accordingly did as I thought fit. But the Work being
long, and my time but short, diverse other faults and errors escaped unobserved
by me, they being comprised in few words, and short passages, and so the more
easily passed over without my observation. The which Errors I the rather fell
into, because the Author was wholly unknown unto me, who am naturally of this
disposition, that I neither am, nor desire to be more scrupulous and curious in
observing other men's errors and faults then I have evidence of truth for it;
whereas otherwise if knowing the Persons with whom I have to deal, to be
Heterod and Erroneous in their Doctrine, I should be more wary and observe
their words and works with a more vigilant eye: All which I speak not wholly to
clear my self from all blame, (for I ingeniously acknowledge my inadvertency
and want of due and serious consideration in so weighty a matter) and therefore
being convinced of my error by diverse Letters from men of great Eminency, both
in respect of Place, Learning and Piety, and by mine own more serious
observation, but especially by the Labors of this Learned Author, chiefly
intended to lay open and confute these dangerous Errors and Heresies; I could
do no less (and indeed in respect of my old age and infirmities accompanying
it I could not do much more) then revoke my Approbation of that (otherwise)
Learned Commentary, so far as it maintains these pernic^ous doctrines, that
detract any thing from the Lord Christ's Divinity, and his Supreme and Eternal
Godhead. For far be it from me to derogate any thing from my blessed Savior
and Redeemer, by not acknowledging him the Supreme God Co-essential, Coequal,
and Coeternal with the Father, seeing the Evangelical Prophet in the Old
Testament calls him the Mighty God, Esaias 9. 3 and the blessed Apostle St.
Paul affirms, that Christ who took upon him our flesh, is over all (not Deus
factus, but) God blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5. and therefore seeing this Learned
Book entitled, (...) and (...), asserteth and maintains this truth, and
confuteth the opposite errors, I do most willingly approve it, and allow it to
be Printed and published.

John Downam.

THe' A^throp^phro.

OR, God Incarnate.

SHOWING, That JESUS CHRIST Is the Only, and the most HIGH GOD.

In Four BOOKS.

Wherein also are contained a few Animadversions upon a late namelesse and
blasphemous Commentary on the Epistle to the Hebrews, published under the
Capital Letters G*M. Anno Dom. 1647.

In these Four Books the great mystery of man's Redemption and Salvation, and
the way^^ ^^d means thereof used by God are evidently held out to the Capacity
of humane reason, (...) ordinary understandings.

The Sin against the Holy Ghost is plainly described; with the Cases and
Reasons of the Vnpardonablenesse, or pardonablenesse thereof.

Anabaptisme, is by Scriptur, and the Judgment of the Fathers showed to be an
heinous sin, and exceedingly injurious to the Passion, and blood of Christ.

There were false Prophets among the people, even as there shall be among you,
who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought
them; and bring upon themselves swift destruction, 2 Pet. 2. 1. Contra rationem
nemo Sobrius; contra Scripturas nemo Christianus; Contra Ecclesiam nemo
pacificus (...). Aug. de Trinit. lib. 4. cap. 6.

By EDM. PORTER, ^. D. sometimes Fellow of St. John's 6. College in Cambridge,
and Prebend of Norwich:

London, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1655.

TO The Right Honorable, THOMAS Lord Coventry, Bron of Ailesbury, Peace and
Truth.
My Lord,
I Humbly beg leave to use your honorable name in the dedication of this Book,
thereby to present the expression of a thankful Soul, to my deceased Patron,
your most Honorable, and prudent Father; who even from my Childhood continued
his manifold favors to me, and ceased not until he had planted me in an
employment and probable subsistence in the Church; where I continued peaceably
during his life, and until the pressures of these unhappy Times dislocated not
only me, (though too low God wot, to be an object of public wrath) but also
the strongest bones, and principal joints and nerves of our once most renowned
Church.

To his memory do I owe the first fruits of my public Labors; nor can I offer
them at any other shrine so proper as your self, my Lord, who are his living
Image, whose Name and Title you worthily bear, whose Honor is revived in you,
and the pious and thankful memory of him, during my life will not be
obliterated in me; seeing the very Heathens fansied their Sen. de Benef. l. ^.
c. 3.
Charites (which were but the Emblems of gratitude) to be Virgins, and always
Young, to teach us, that thankfulness should not be Corrupted, or decayed by
time and age; and their great Orator although he was one of the most deadly
enemies of Caesar, who had been newly murdered in the very Senate House, yet
he confessed that he could not find fault with the faithfulness of Cic. lib.
11. Epist. 240.
Matius, for honoring him that was dead, who whilst he lived had been his
Friend and Patron. The Church has t^^ght us further, that death it self does
not dissolve Christians Communion, Hier. in Proaem. l. 18. in Esa.
Viventium, and Dormientium eadem Charitas est: and Aug. de Civit. l. 20. c. 9.
Animae piorum mortuorum non seperantur ab Ecclesia hac. The Church Triumphant
and Militant are but one Church, and therefore did the Primitive Christians
honorably by name Commemorate their pious, and worthy Benefactors at the very
time of their Sacred Eucharist, although they were long before departed out of
this life. So seeing I have not any other means to commemorate my deceased
Lord, I have ma^^ (...) if this, to profess hereby, Mihi erit nomen (...)
benedictionibus; but to you, my Lord, do I present the Book, because possibly
it may do some good to the Living.

For, the subject and matter here handled, is the most noble and high cause in
the World, and the most nearly concerning the glory of God, and the salvation
of man; to which I was drawn by the importunity of some Learned, and Religious
friends; and also by the iniquity of a most blasphemous Book lately Printed,
and called, A Commentary on the Hebrews, written by a namelesse Doctor of
Divinity, who new resideth in this Country, but formerly in Broad-gate Hall,
(so it was then called) wherein he has vented such blasphemies against Jesus
Christ, as (without special revocation and repentance) will in the end bring
both himself, and all his seduced Sectaries to that woeful Broad-gate of which
mention is made, Matthew. 7. 13. Lata est porta -- quae ducit ad perditionem.

The Controversies are not concerning the mighty and glorious reformrtion of a
square-cap, a Surplisse and Cross, and a painted glasse-window, or the like,
(which have been an outside pretendment amongst Vulgars, to bring upon this
Land innumerable Calamities): But that Commentary has laid the axe to the root
and foundation of our Christian Religion, by un-Godding Jesus Christ, and
blasphemously denying his grand, and most gracious Work of Redemption; and it
is feared, that the pernicious doctrines therein contained, have many abetters
and favorers in these dangerous Times; albeit this Commenter is the first of
all the Serpents nest, that dared to peep out and appear in our English print,
who both by this Book, and by his personal insinuations, has already (as we
know) perverted many from the saving truth of the Gospel, to the evident danger
both of theirs, and of his own soul; and his i^pious ambition to be the
Ringleader in this blasphemy, has in this Country procured to him such a
Title and Character as was fastened on Marcion the Heretic by Polycarpus, when
he called him Eusebius. hist. ^ 4. c. 14.
Primogenitum Satanae.

Wherefore, setting before me the honor of Jesus Christ, and the service which
I owe to the Church, and to my Country, and also the care which a Father ought
to have of the souls of his Children; I have endeavored both to detect the
blasphemies of this Commentary; and also to set down (with all such possible
plainness as so weighty a cause would admit), the evidences of our most
necessary and precious Christian faith in the Eternal Son of God; both by
showing his Divine nature, and glorious Godhead, who is our True, Only,
Supreme, and Eternal Jehova, and also the Incarnation of this our God, by
assuming an humane body and soul, and thereby the inestimable benefits which
our Redeemer, and Savior has acquired for us. First, in exempting his
servants from eternal death by his obedience Passive, in suffering death in our
stead; and, Secondly, by meriting eternal life for us by his Obedience Active,
in performing the whole Law of God as a Surety, and Undertaker for us.

These things have I endeavored to set forth, not only by the sacred
evidences of the holy Scriptures, and by the constant doctrine of the
Church-Catholick in several ages thereof; but also by humane illustrations, and
the probable correspondence of our Christian faith, with right reason; Which
thing has been formerly much wished, and thereupon laudably begun in some of
the high mysteries of our Religion long ago by a Writer of good antiquity, to
supply the defect thereof in the elder Writers; whereof he says, Rich. de St.
Vict. de Trin. l. 1. c. 5.
Legi de Deo meo, quod sit Unus, and Trinus, -- sed unde haec probentur, me
legisse non memini -- Abundant in his authoritates, sed non aeque
argumentationes; (i.) We read the high and holy Mysteries of Christian Religion
evidently, and abundantly affirmed by authority of Scripture; but where to read
the proof thereof by humane arguments to convince our Carnal reason, we find
not.

This task I have taken upon me now especially in these dangerous Times, for
that the abounding of moral iniquity, and dogmatical impiety, makes me fear
that Christianity is upon the point of departure from our dear Country, as it
has done formerly from most places both in Asia, and Africa, and also from
some parts of our Europe, where it once flourished as high as ever it did here:
I see false prophets multiply with great applause, and that the greatest number
of the true, godly and learned Prophets are disgraced, discountenanced,
silenced, and left speechless; and in their places, God knows, (for which
this Kingdom generally groaneth) a new Succession is sprung up, like Darkness
succeeding light; Which by an Ancient and Wise Statesman was observed to be a
forerunner and symptom of a Lands destruction, Naevius apud Cicer. de Senect.
Cedo qui vestram Rempub. tantam amisistis tam cito?

Proveniebant Oratores Novi, Stulti, Adolescentuli.

For the like pressures which we now suffer extorted such a sad expression from
the holy and learned Bishop Gregory Nazianzen, when by reason of the
insolences of the domineering Sectaries, he was fain to resign his Church of
Constantinople, saying in a public Oration, Naz. Orat. 46. ad Nect.
Deus Ecclesias, and vitam hanc deseruisse videtur. He feared, that God had
withdrawn his providence from that Church and State. Indeed God did in
after-time remove the golden Candlestick from thence, when he suffered the
Turks to possess that City. God in mercy withold the like Judgment from this
Land, both in our days, and for ever after us. But yet when for the present we
see so many most impious blasphemies not only printed, and published, but also
in show licensed and connived at, and that in so many Congregations unlearned
intruders are crept in, and take upon them to teach others, what themselves
never learned, it seems to me a visible representation of our Saviors words,
foreshewing a fall: For if Matthew. 15. 14.
the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch: at least it seems
to be like that which we have often seen, a poor blind man led by a dog.

Certainly these things must needs make godly Parents very anxious, how their
posterity can be instructed in the succeeding generation. I have heard a most
learned and prudent Gentleman in these Times profess, That (for the reason
before alleged) he would be careful to provide some printed Books of the true
old Clergy of England, that in them the necessary doctrines of Christianity
might be had, when such will not be found in the new verbal time-serving, and
men-pleasing Sermon-makers. This I confess has been a great motive to me for
the penning and publishing this Book, that so I may in some measure lay up both
an antidote, and also a store for the good of the souls of mine own family,
and of others also. Which consideration, my Lord, I am firmly persuaded is
deeply printed in your honorable and pious heart, as being tenderly affected
to your own noble offspring, the surviving Jewels of your most virtuous and
dear Lady, already with God. Which care is imposed upon Parents, by the
intimation of God himself to Abraham the great Patriarch of the faithful, Genesis
18. 19. For I know him, that he will command his children, and his household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord. This, that your posterity
may perform, the Lord grant* It shall be the hearty prayer of

Yours Honors most humble Servant, Edm. Porter.
Norw. March 21. 1647.
AN ADVERTISEMENT to the READER.
BE pleased, good Christian Reader, in order to the perusal of this Book, to
pre-understand a few things.

1. That the Commentary on the Hebrews, so often mentioned, was long since
written in the Latin Tongue by a forreigner, either Johannes Crellius, or some
other Socinian (as I am informed from a noble and Mr. Ed^. Cock.
learned Gentleman residing in Norwich, in whose hands that Latin Commentary
is now extant). And this English Commentary is but a (...) of that Latin one;
And tha^ the Tra^slator is a Doctor of Divinity, as lately has been
discovered. How the said Doctor will quit himself from the crime of Plagiarism,
in concealing the right Author's name, ipse viderit.

2. That because this Doctor contemptu^^sly slighteth the Ni^^^^ Fathers, and
yet ^^ledgeth Eusebius to his own design, but very injuriously; I have bestowed
some leave* in the vindication of that Learned Father, perhaps more then
otherwise would have been needful: yet I have not used the Authority of any of
them that were members of that most Religious Council, except only the same
Eusebius. Indeed AthanasiUs is often mentioned by me, but he was no member
there; for although he were present as a Disputant among many others in the
outward porch, yet being then but in the Degree of a Deacon, he had no voice,
or right of Suffrage in that Council. But if this Doctor under the notion of
the Nicenei Fathers intends a contempt of all those Primitive Doctors, and
others, that since have adhered to the Decrees of that Council; he must thereby
dis-believe the then whole Catholic World: and we with more modesty, and less
liberty profess, we do not believe him, nor his fellows.

3. That I have bestowed the more time in the Question of the visibility of
God, because this Doctor does very profanely slight that great mysterious
apparition of God to Abraham in the shape of three men; which I conceive Genesis
18.
to have been purposely acted as an holy Scene, to teach man, That in
aftertimes God would be really incarnate, and corporally, and hospitably
converse with Abraham in his posterity; which was performed, when the Person of
the Son of God became Emmanuel; and is also spiritually intimated in the
Gospel, Joh. 14. 23. Rev. 3. 20. and 1 John 4. 13. And also, to give a timely
intimation of a Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Godhead. For, as to the
Eternal Covenant of Grace before the Creation, Three Persons were necessarily
required, (as is showed in the Preface of this Book) so now, because the same
Covenant was renewed with Abraham when he was, newly circumcised; it pleased
the Divine Wisdom to exhibit a glimpse of the same Blessed Trinity. As also
again in the Gospel, when our blessed Savior was Incarnate, and then
Circumcised, and Baptized, (which Sacraments were a new Sealing of the same
Covenant) there was a manifestation of the Three Persons, Matthew. 3.
the Father by a voice, the Spirit as a Dove, and the Son in the flesh. I do
not remember any other so evident Overtures and Apparitions of the Trinity as
these.

4. That I have so largely endeavored the Exposition of those hard places,
Heb. 6. 4. and Heb. 10. 26. because the Commenter has passed them over very
slightly; although the difficulties therein might well busy a Doctoral pen and
brain: But I conceive, he knew, that a true, and sound Exposition, would spoil
his design, of picking Socianisme out of this Divine Epistle to the Hebrews.

5. That the Reader is not to expect Answers to Arguments against the Divinity
of Christ, because the Doctor uses none at all, but only his own magisterial
affirmation without proof; and if he had proceeded by way of Argument, he could
not have used stronger, then had been before published in print by the said
Joh. Crellius: which are also as strongly answered by that Learned man,
Johannes Henr. Bisterfeldius.

6. That, whereas in my first Book, and tenth Chapter, I have affirmed, The
Article of Christ's Descent into hell, not to have been mentioned in any Creed
generally received, till after the days of St. Austin; I am still of the same
mind: Although I confess that this Article is mentioned in that large Symbol,
which is rehearsed in the ninth Tome, in the book called Soliloquia, Chap. 32.
And also in Aug. Soliloq. cap. 32. To. 9. De Temp. Ser. 115. To. 10.
the 10. Tome, Sermon. 115. De Tempore, and there asserted, as if it were cast
into the Creed by St. Thomas the Apostle. My answer is, That those writings
were not Austin's own, but Supposititious, and pinned on him by later Writers,
as is well known and proved by Learned men; Because the same Father in his book
De Fide, and Symbolo (which is undoubtedly Aug. De Fide and symb. To. 3.
his own) disputes quite through that Creed which was then called the Apostles
Creed; and this, in the Presence of a grand Council of all Africa at Hippo, yet
makes no mention at all of Christ's Descent. And although it be true, that the
Doctrine of Christ's descent into Hell, is by the same Father very often
asserted as Catholic; notwithstanding (as I said) it was not in his time
inserted into the Creed.

7. That, whereas in my fourth Book, and 10th. Chapter, I have said, That no
old, or new Anabaptist did ever to my remembrance assert two Baptismes, except
only Marcion: Now, since the writing thereof (which was finished Anno 1647.)
Two English Books came to my hands, one printed, 1646. affirms, that Baptism
may be often administered, as well as the Word may be often preached to one and the
same person. The other book printed 1638, very modestly, and under Correction
affirms, That, Not Scripture, but the Practice and Tradition of the Ancient
Church, is the Only ground whereby we are restrained from twice Baptizing the
same person. But I trust, that the godly Reader will be otherwise persuaded,
when he has perused the Exposition of Heb. 6. 4. which begins at the 4th.
Chapter of my 4th. Book.

8. That my design in penning this Book, was both to discover the great and
dangerous Heresies lurking in that Commentary; And also in my way, to open and
set forth the very foundations of Christian Religion, and to give what
satisfaction I could, to scrupulous men, in the Doctrines, and Disciplines of
this Church. Which has been my practice both in my private, and public
Labors for many years; Especially in these our later Sceptick, and Zetetick
days of New-light; wherein we have many Seekers, that will never find what
they pretend to. Optatus thus writes of the Optat. lib. 6.
Donatists, Dum pro vestro arbitrio quaeritis puritatem, etc. That they sought
for purity by scraping, breaking, and digging up Altars; he wishes them, not
to digg too deep, lest they digg to hell, and there find the Grand Patrons of
Schism, Korah, Dathan, and Abiram. Numb. 16.


9. In the last place the Reader is desired to foreknow, That in this Book we
affirm Jesus Christ to be the Supreme, or most high God; The Jehova, and the
Only God: But with this Caution* That albeit we confidently affirm him to be
the Only God, yet we say not, that Only Jesus Christ is God* for thereby we
should impiously deny the gracious, and comfortable Doctrine of the Trinity of
Persons in the Godhead. We therefore acknowledge, that the Father, and the Holy
Ghost* as well as Son, are also the most high* and Only God; so that not only
the Father, nor only the Son, nor only the Holy Spirit, are the Supreme God;
But that All, and every one of them, are but One, Only, most high God.

I have no more to premise, but to pray, that God would give to the Reader the
knowledge and love of his truth. And to the Author, or Translator of that
Commentary, I tender the advice of St. Austin, Aug. De Anima and Orig. l. 3. c.
15. To. 7.
Considera, quam sit horrendum, ut Omnes hae Haereses sint in uno homine, quae
damnabiles sunt in singnlis singulae. The most profound Clerks may, and have
erred; It is an honor, rather then disparagement, to revoke and recant
heresies. St. Hierom writes thus to Ruffinus, Hier. cont. Ruff. l. 1. c. 2.
Non es tantae authoritatis and famae, ut te errasse pudeat. For, by revoking
Errors, Truth will be advanced, and the God of truth glorified, and no need
will be of hiding your name: you will be known by conformity to truth, unto
those that know not your face; and also in the end, will be acknowledged by
Christ himself; and not otherwise; as one says, Plaut. in Rud. Act. 4. S^* 3.
Si adhibebit Fidem, etsi ignotus est, notus est; Si non, notus ignotissimus
est.

THE PREFACE*
WE are informed by a late Writer, Mr. Cheynel.
that the S^ci^i^^ party would have us to deny Christ to be God, for an
accommodation, and compliance with Jews and Turks: that by such an
insinuation, we may have opportunity to convert them. But we are better taught
by the Apostle, Not to ^^ evil, that good may come of it: and also by St.
Austin, Aug. in Epist. ad Gal. to. 4.
Qui homini de falso bono placere studes, de vero malo displices Deo: and if by
this slight a Socinian should convert a Turk, or Jew to his own religion, the
Turk or Jew would not be thereby a Christian, but the Socinian would more
declare himself to be of the Turkish, or Jewish Religion: for whosoever shall
profess Christianity, and yet un-God the Lord Jesus, his Religion shall profit
him no more, then the Jewish infidelity does them. The devout man St. Bernard
was much troubled with the heresies of Petrus Abailardus, who I think was a
principal Patriarch of the now Socinian tenants, and declared them more fully,
then the more ancient heretics had done; this Abailardus would fain have
persuaded men, that Plato the Heathen Philosopher was a Christian. But St.
Bernard sets this mark upon Bern. Epist. 190.
him, Abailardus dum multum sudat quomodo Platonem faciat Christianum, se
probat Ethnicum. If Jews and Heathens will be contented to be instructed in
Christianity, in the Name of God let us teach them the truth, without
flattering them in their false tenants. It is observed by Paulus Orosius, That
when the heathenish P. Oros. l. 7. c. 19.
Goths petitioned Valens the Arian Emperor, to appoint them Christian
Preachers to instruct them in Christianity, this Emperor sent Arian Priests who
poisoned the poor Goths with their heresy; but it came to pass afterward, by
the just Judgment of God, that those Goths put the said Emperor to flight in
battle, and pursued him so, that they burnt him alive.

Indeed, St. Paul writes, that 1 Cor. 9. 20.
To the Jews he became as a Jew, and to the Gentiles as one without Law. But
this was a compliance Compatiendo, non mentiendo, Aug.
of Compassion only, without any transgression of the Moral Law of God: With
the Jews he complied in Act. 16. 3. Gal. 5. 2.
Circumcising Timothy, only as it was a national custom, but not as a
Sacrament; for if so, himself declared, that Christ should profit them nothing;
so he purified himself, he went to their Feasts, and ascended into their
Temple, these were unsinful compliances. The like he did with the Gentiles, he
conversed with them, and did eat with them, and cited their own Writers; but we
find not that ever he sacrificed to their Idols. In our days a Lecture is set
up for the Conversion of the Jews, (as is said) and for an harmless
compliance with them, it is performed on the Jewish Sabbath (our Saturday); but
we are weil persuaded, that none of the Lecturers will so far temporize with
Jews, as to deny the Eternal Godhead of Jesus Christ; or teach, That the
Messiah is not yet come, or blaspheme the ever blessed and holy Trinity, which
is the Character by which Christians are discerned from Jews and Turks, who
with us confess the Unity of the Godhead, but will not believe ae plurality of
Persons therein. In which unchristian error the Socinian agrees with the Jew*
and this Antitrinitarian doctrine is the Cracovian Leaven, wherewith this new
Commentary on the Hebrews is Leavened.

The Reasons why the Church-Catholick has constantly held fast the doctrine of
the most holy Trinity, are weighty.

First, For the evidence, and authority of holy Scripture, which would be too
long to insist on here, it being clearly declared by very many Theological
Writers.

Secondly, To refute the Heathens cavil against the Unity of the Godhead; for
they could not conceive, how there could be but one God from Eternity; and yet
that this one God should not be solitary; which opinion must needs take place,
except we acknowledge this mysterious doctrine of a Personal plurality in the
substantial Unity of God; therefore to avoid this sadness of solitude, they
fansied a plurality of Gods; for as God said, It is not good that man should be
alone, so man on his own behalf may truly affirm, (as Bishop Goodman has
observed) It is not good that God should be alone, as will appear in the reason
following.

Thirdly, Because this doctrine of the Trinity is the main and prime foundation
of man's Redemption, Justification, and Salvation by the Son of God, which we
believe, and hope, and expect, by virtue of that most gracious Covenant made
between God the Father, and God the Son; and secretly transacted between them
before the Creation. Which Covenant is called, Ephesians. 3. 11.
The eternal purpose of God; and Heb. 13. 20.
The everlasting Covenant; and Rev. 14. 6.
The Eternal Gospel, and must needs be meant in those places of Scripture,
where mention is made of Ephesians. 1. 4.
Electing us in Christ before the foundation of the World: and of 2 Timothy 1. 9.
Calling us according to his own purpose and grace which was given us in Christ
Jesus before the World began: and of 1 Pet. 1. 20.
Christ ordained (for our Redemption) before the foundation of the World. Of
which there is a full discourse in my Third Book, and eighth Chapter.

This Covenant does necessarily imply a plurality of persons in the Godhead;
One, to require, and enjoin; another, to restipulate; and (which is requisite
in all Covenants) a third Person distinct from the Contractors, as a
stander-by, and Witness thereof: So in this Covenant, First, God the Father
requires obedience upon pain of death. Secondly, God the Son undertaketh for
man's performance, or penalty, or both. Thirdly, God the Holy Ghost is witness
between the Father, and the Son: for oftentimes in Scripture we read of the
Spirit bearing witness.

For though the Father, the Son, and the Spirit are all said to bear witness
for our assurance; as, Joh. 8. 18.
I am one that bear witness of my self, and my Father that sent me: and, 1 John 5. 7.
There are three that bear witness in heaven: and, Romans 8. 16.
The Spirit bears witness with our Spirit: But before the Creation, who
could be a witness between the Father, and the Son, save only the Eternal
Spirit of the Father, and the Son?

Nor can it be imagined that this Covenant, and restipulation could be enacted
by One single Person; for the Lawgiver must be considered as a Sovereign
only; and the persons upon whom the Law is imposed, are as subjects: so it
will be dissonant from right reason, to fasten the Legislation, and subjection
upon the self-same person.

Now supposing the Law made, and the penalty determined and set down; it cannot
be denied, that the Supreme Lawgiver has naturally and absolutely a power of
relaxation, and dispensation, so that he may remit the punishment for breach of
his own Law, and of mere grace without any satisfaction, forgive the offender;
but if the said Lawgiver do decree, and by his Word bind himself to punish the
offender; ( as he did when he said, Genesis 2. 17.
In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely dye) hereby he does
confine and restrain himself from using the Imperial prerogative of free
pardon, which otherwise he might have granted: and hence it is that a
Satisfaction must needs be exacted, necessitate hypothetica, as Divines say,
upon supposal of the said decree; and upon this reason Jesus Christ our Surety
becomes liable to his dreadful Passion and death.

Touching the Passion of Christ in Satisfaction of Gods Justice for the sins of
men, the Socinian Writers do utterly deny it, as being unjust to punish one for
another, and especially an innocent for a malefactor; and they call this
doctrine of Christ's satisfaction, as Vossius reports, Ger. Joh. Vossii
Defens. Grotii. c. 13.
Dogma nugatorium, frigidum, falsum, injustum, et horribiliter blasphemum.
Their reasons are very considerable: for they say that God has by his Prophets
and Apostles declared the contrary; as, Deuteronomy. 24. 1^.
Every man shall be put to death for his own sin; Jer. 31. 30.
Every one shall dye for his own sin: he that eats sower grapes, his teeth
shall be set on edge. Eze. 18. 4.
The soul that sins it shall dye. Gal. 6. 5.
Every man shall bear his own burden. 1 Pet. 1. 17.
God judges according to every man's work. The Answer hereunto usually given,
is; That because God does actually punish one for another, it must needs be
just, because God does it: but this answer does not satisfy the Adversary,
neither does it (I confess) satisfy me; for God does not so. Therefore for
the better satisfaction of my self in this weighty question, and perhaps of
others also, I offer to the consideration of the Learned Reader these two
Propositions following:

First, The Passion of Christ neither is, nor ought to be accounted the
punishment of one for another; but the same that offended, the same is punished.

Secondly, The sins of the elect Members of Christ, are not to be accounted
only the sins of the Elect, but are justly charged on the score of Jesus
Christ, being their Surety, and Redeemer.

These two Propositions may perhaps seem at first Paradoxical, but I trust I
shall prove them to be truly Catholic, and Orthodox.

For the first, That Christ's Sufferings are 1. Proposition.
not the punishment of one for another; I have learned from St. Bernard,
Bernard. Epist. 190.
Omnium peccata unus portavit, nec alter jam inveniatur qui forefecit, alter
qui satisfecit, quia caput and corpus unus est Christus, satisfecit caput pro
membris; (i.) One bare the sins of all, so that we cannot say, One forfeited,
and another satisfied, because the head and body are but one Christ, the head
satisfied for the members. So the Husband and Wife are but one person in Law,
an action of debt is not brought against the wife, but the husband: so the
principal debtor, and the Surety are in Law but one person, and either of them
are liable to payment or penalty.

This first Proposition is grounded on the doctrine of Christ's Union and
conjunction with his members: which Union is of such weighty concernment, that
without it, it is impossible to salve, or unfold the mysterious riddles of Gods
operations, and words in the business of man's Salvation; and therefore the
holy Scriptures and ancient Doctors have with very great abundance of
testimonies asserted this necessary truth. See first what the Scriptures say,
Romans 12. 5.
We being many are one body in Christ. Ephesians. 5. 30.
We are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. Gal. 3. 28.
Ye are all one in Christ Jesus. 1 Cor. 6. 17.
He that is joined to the Lord is one spirit. 1 Cor. 12. 2.
By one Spirit ye are all baptized into one body. Ephesians. 4. 4.
There is one body, and one Spirit. This is, because the same Spirit that is in
Christ, is also in his members; and because there is but one Spirit uniting the
head and members, therefore the head and members are but one body, having the
same Spirit residing in both; for so it is said, Ephesians. 3. 17.
Christ dwells in your hearts: and, 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Jesus Christ is in you. 1 Cor. 6. 19.
Your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost. Joh. 15. 1.
I am the vine, ye are the branches, This Union of the members with Christ the
Head, is called by the Apostle a recapitulation: Ephesians. 1. 10.
(...) that is, (as Bishop Andrews observes) Andr. de Nativ. Sermon. 16.
A gathering of all to the head: for as God is one with Christ, as Christ is
God; so we are one with Christ, as Christ is man; who is therefore called
Emmanuel, as being one with us.

Let us next see what the Ancient Doctors conceived of this Union: to avoid
prolixity, I will instance only in St. Austin, who says, Aug. in Psalm. 17.
Christus and Ecclesia est totum Christi caput and corpus. And upon those
words, My God, my God; why have thou forsaken me? and, I cry in the day time,
and thou hear not: and, Let this Cup pass from me: and, Not my will, but
thy will be done, he says, In Psalm. 21.
Christus dicit de te, de me, de illo; corpus suum gerebat, scilicet Ecclesiam,
membrorum vox erat, non timebat mori, sed pro his dixit qui mortem timent. And
again he says, in Ps. 26.
Omnes, in illo, Christi, and Christus sumus, totus Christus caput and corpus.
And upon those words, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? he says, in Ps. 30.
Sic v^cem pedis suscipit lingua, clamat calcas me, in membris Christi,
Christus est, Christus est multa membra, unum corpus. And, in Ps. 100.
Christum induti, Christus sumus cum capite nostro, cum Christo capite unus
homo sumus. And, in Ps. 103.
Omnes nos in Christo credentes, unus homo sumue. And, in Ps. 127.
Multi Christiani, unus Christus, unus homo Christus caput and corpus. And, in
Ps. 119.
Omnes Sancti sunt unus homo in Christo. The sum of all is; That Christ and
his Members are united so, that they are one body, and as one person; for as
the head and inferior parts in one man, are but one body, so Christ and his
members are but one Christ; which the same Father calls, in Ps. 36. Ser. 2.
and Ps. 37.
Christum plenum. And, Corpus Christi diffusnm.

Neither is the Church of England silent in this great mystery of our union
with Christ: for, to show that the grand reason, and the intent and purpose for
which Christ ordained the holy Supper, was especially to set forth this Union
of himself and members to be such as our food is to, and with our bodies, bread
and wine unite themselves to us, they grow into one body with us. So she says
to faithful Communicants, The Exhortat. at the Commun.
That we dwell in Christ, and Christ in us: We be one with Christ, and Christ
with us. And this also was the reason of instituting Baptism; as St. Paul
expresses it to be baptized, Romans 6. 3.
(...), into Christ: and 1 Cor. 12. 13.
(...), into one body; Baptism is the mysterious sign of our entrance into
Christ: But the Eucharist is the mystery of Christ's entering into us: for so St.
John makes the like distinction. 1 John 4. 13.
Hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us: and after him St. Austin,
Aug. in Joh. Tract. 48.
Si been cogitemus, Deus in nobis est: Si been vivamus, nos in Deo sumus: and
indeed this union is principally meant in the Article of the Communion of
Saints, which in our Creed we profess to believe.

This Union in Scripture is called (...), (i.) Communion; The great Sacrament
thereof is therefore called by St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10. 16.
The Communion of the body and blood of Christ: and because our union with
Christ does unite us with the whole Trinity, the Apostle tells us, 1 John 1. 3.
1 Cor. 1. 9.
Our fellowship ((...),) is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ; and
this is also called, 2 Cor. 13. 13. Philip. 2. 1.
The fellowship of the Holy Ghost, the fellowship of the Spirit. But there is a
great difference between our common, or general union with the whole Trinity,
and our special and particular union with Christ alone: for with all the three
Persons, we are united only by the Spirit, because to us is given the Holy
Ghost, which is the Spirit of the Father, and the Son. But with the Son we are
joined, and united in a threefold bond; 1. Spiritu. 2. Carne. 3. Vadimonio. Not
only by his Spirit in us, but also in Nature: for he assumed flesh with us
from the self-same lump of the first man: and moreover he is joined to us in
the strong bond of Vadimonie, or Suretiship in that everlasting Covenant of
Grace before mentioned. Concerning the manner of our union with Christ, one
scruple is to be removed; for if we say that we are really and substantially
one body with him, this doctrine may seem to affirm a personal or hypostatical
union of us men with God, such as is the union of the Godhead, and manhood in
Christ, so we should make our body the body of God, as Christ's natural body is;
and so we make our selves God, as Christ is God: but this must be confessed to
be intolerable blasphemy. Our answer is, That though Christ and his Church are
indeed one body, yet they are not one body natural, and consubstantial, but a
body mystically Political, as a Corporation, a Society, a Fraternity; not
Corpus continuum, but Collectivum, or aggregativum: thus thousands of Soldiers
are One Army; many grains of corn are but One heap; Unae quinque Minae. Plaut,
in Pseud.
many pieces of money are One sum: many letters and lines in one Epistle, we
call Vnas literas. Tully calls one suit of apparel consisting of many parcels,
Cic. Orat. pro L. Flacco.
Vna vestimenta: and we read, Plaut. in Trinum.
Vnos sex dies in Plautus. Just so St. Austin expresses this mystery of
Christ's body upon those words, Psalm. 11. 1. Salvum me fac Domine. Aug. de
Unitate Eccles. Cap. 13. To. 7.
Sic est unus homo qui ait salvum me fac ut ex multis constet: for though
Christ and his members are many Ones, and many Severals, which are not united
by any internal or natural form; yet because they all have one and the same
Spirit of Christ in them, they are united, and made one body, or mystical
corporation, by that one Spirit of Christ, of which it is said, 1 Cor. 12. 13.
By one Spirit ye are all baptized into one body: and of these many severals it
is said, To. 12. 5.
We being many are one body in Christ. So a body Politic consisting of a
multitude of individuals, is made one Corporation by the Charter of the Prince,
and their own agreement: but if upon dissension they be tumultuously gathered,
we rather call them a tumult, then a Corporation. Aug. De verb. Domini Ser. 26.
Da unum and populus est, toll unum and turba est.

Touching the last clause of this first Proposition, That the same that
offended, the same is punished; whereby our sins seem to be charged upon
Christ, as if Christ himself had committed sin, in whom we are assured no sin
was, either original, or actual, as is fully declared in my third Book, Chap.
11. Sect. 2. Yet that this is true, I am to show in the explication of the
second Proposition; which is this,

The sins of the Elect Members of Christ, are 2. Proposition.
not to be accounted, onoly the sins of the Elect, but are justly charged on
the score of Jesus Christ, being their Surety, and Redeemer.

To charge Christ with sin, may seem very harsh, and some Divines in high
reverence of his most holy and innocent Person, are afraid to affirm that
Christ suffered for his own sins. But when the Spirit of God has said, that 2
Cor. 5. 21.
He was made sin, who knew no sin; (...) manifest that both these sayings are
true. First, 1 John 3. 5.
In Christ is no sin. Secondly, Christ was made sin. Bishop Andrews who knew
what he wrote, and said, as well as (...), doubted not to affirm, that Bish.
And. de ^at. Sermon. 9.
The (...) was with us, not only in nature as (...) in sin also, factus
peccatum pro nobis. And this, not only he, but others also, both ancient and
later Doctors have assered; for (besides what I showed out of St. Bernard
before), Gregory Nazianzen says, Naz. Orat. 36.
Quamdiu ego inobediens sum, Christus per me inobediens est: after him St.
Austin says, Aug. in Psalm. 37.
Christus peccaeta nostra, sua vocat, propter corpus ^^um: and Luther also
perceived the great consequences of this union, when he said, Lutheri Epist.
Tu Domine Jesu es justitia mea, Ego sum peccatum tuum: for if but one member
of the body commit an offense, the whole man is chargeable with it.

This truth is of great concernment to be known; for if Christ cannot be truly
charged with sin, how can we possibly justify the proceedings of the Godhead,
when it is said, Prove. 17. 15.
He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just; both are
abominable to the Lord? So then, Christ must be charged with sin, and man must
be discharged of sin, or else neither Christ can justly suffer punishment, nor
can man with Justice be saved. The neglect, or ignorance of this weighty truth,
occasioned the Socinian party to exclaim against us, as if we charged God with
tyranny, in laying the punishment due to us offenders, upon our innocent
Savior; which also drew from Brentius a Lutheran this blasphemy, Deus Brent.
Exeges. in Joh. 19.
Pater, in cruce Tyrannum egit, erga Filium; and in the margin this note is
set, Deus aliquando Tyrannus; an assertion false and blasphemous.

The difficulty of this doctrine consists in two Points: 1. How Christ can be
justly charged with sin, in whom all Christians confess, there was no sin. 2.
How man can justly be acquitted of sin, who (without doubt) never lived one
minute without sin. The truth of both, the Christian Reader may thus apprehend.

In Christ there is a double capacity, or twofold consideration. First, as he
is in himself, a natural body, a private man, or particular person, without any
relation to us; and so no actions of his concern us, or ours him. Secondly, as
he is a part of a corporation Political, or body mystical before mentioned;
(for the head is but a part of the body) in this consideration, his, and our
actions concern us jointly: for if the hand be wounded, the head will say, You
hurt me: so we read, 1 Cor. 12. 26. If one member suffer, all the members
suffer with it; if one member be honored, all the members rejoice with it; now
ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular. If one member of a
Corporation do an injury in the name of the whole, the whole or any one of them
shall be liable to answer for it. If a corporation be indebted, any one member
paying the debt, satisfies for the whole, and for every particular member.

Posthumous a Roman Consul, professing himself to be a Citizen of the Samnites,
and intending to pick a quarrel with that Commonwealth, openly in the assembly
of the Samnites, kicked the Roman Herald, and said, Livi. Decad. 1. lib. 9.
I being a member of the Commonwealth of the Samnites, have done public
injury to the Roman fecial, therefore the Romans may justly make war upon the
Samnites. Just so particular members of this mystical body have done injuries
to God, and are become debtors, so that the whole body is subject to penalty,
but the whole debt and injury is laid upon, and discharged by one, even Christ
the Head, in the name and behoof of the whole body.

These things being premised, let us next consider what extent and operation
this Union, Conjunction, or Communion of Christ and his Members has, and what
effects it produces. Which may appear by the Communion of the Primitive
Christians, twice mentioned in the Acts, where it is said, Act. 2. 44. and 4.
32.
They that believed had all things common. And they were of one heart, and one
soul, neither said any of them, that ought was his own, but they had all things
common. So this Union, or Communion of Christ and his Members does produce that
which Divines call (...), (i.) a mutual communication of properties, which
works and extends it self so far, that the perfections and excellencies
which are originally proper and peculiar to the individual Person of Jesus
Christ, are communicated, and truly affirmed of holy men: So likewise the
infirmities, yea, and the sins also, of such men who are members of Christ, are
communicated to, and affirmed of, and imputed, and ascribed to Christ, as may
be perceived by these instances following.

First, That Christ's proper perfections are communicated to sinful man. The
Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
Christ is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification: which
is as much as to say, the wisdom, the righteousness, and sanctity: which
originally is only in Christ, and not in us; yet it becomes our wisdom,
righteousness, and holiness, because we are One with him. The same Apostle
tells us again, that 2 Cor. 5. 21.
We are made the righteousness of God in him. So that man is righteous, only
because Christ is so, with whom man is united in one body. Thus every true
member of Christ is called 1 Pet. 2. 9. Rev. 1. 6.
a King and a Priest; this is only because Christ is both; and because his
members are one with him, therefore they are so denominated by his perfections.
Upon this ground it is that St. Hierome calls Baptism, Hier. ad Damas Epist.
58. cont. Luciferian.
Sacerdotium Laicum, (i.) a Lay-mans Priesthood, because baptism is the
Sacrament of our entrance and ingrafting into Christ, and so of our union with
him, which union does work a communication of his regality and Priesthood to
us. So Origin says, Orig. in Levit. cap. 16. hom. 9.
Sacerdotium tibi, and toti populo credentium datum est: and so Austin Aug. de
Civit. l. 20. c. 10.
also, Omnes Christiani sunt sacerdotes, quia membra unius Sacerdotis.

Secondly, That our actions and passions, our infirmities, yea, and our sins
also are communicated to Christ, and called his; may appear by these passages:
Christ says, Matthew. 25.
I was hungry, I was naked, I was in prison. Act. 9. 4.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? when these things were not meant of his
own proper and individual person, but only of his servants and members, which
he calls himself; for so he says, Verily in as much as ye have done it unto
one of the least of my brethren, ye have done it unto me. So the Apostle says,
that 2 Cor. 5. 21.
Christ was made sin for us; when in the same breath it is also affirmed, that
he knew no sin. Both are most true, because our sins are his sins, by reason of
this union, as the debt of the principal, is also the debt of the Surety. So
Christ is said to be Rev. 13. 8.
slain from the beginning of the world, even before he was incarnate, because
of Abel who was both his member, and type. Lyranus upon that place says, Lyra.
in loc.
Christus fuit in Abel occisus, and in prophetis exhonoratus: for all the holy
Patriarchs and Prophets who dyed before the birth of Christ, are his members,
as well as others who now live, or shall hereafter live until the end of the
world; even as we read of that birth, Genesis 38. 28.
where the hand came out of the Womb before the other parts; yet it was a
member united to the body as well as the other parts.

Upon that speech of Christ, Matthew. 23. How often would I have gathered thee as
an hen, etc? Orig. in loc.
Origin says, Christ in Moses and the Prophets would have gathered them in
every age before.

Upon that passage in Psalm. 61. 2. From the Aug. in Psalm. 60.
ends of the earth will I cry unto thee, Austin asks this question, What one
man cries from the ends of the Earth? And answers, That it is meant of
Christ, for his Members or Church is that one man. And upon that saying of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 86. 3.
I cry unto thee daily, or all the day long; that is, all the time of the world
continuance. If question be made, how this can be true of any one man? Austin
Aug. in Ps. 85.
answers, That it is meant of the body of Christ, which groaneth under
pressures in all ages, this one man is extended unto the end of the world; in
his Members preceding, and succeeding. Thus he.

Finally, upon these grounds, If it be demanded how any man can be saved,
seeing man daily transgresses the Law? Our answer is, That every true member
of Christ does perfectly perform the Law, in that Christ has done it, who is
one with his members. So if we enquire how Christ could with Justice suffer
death, who never sinned? The answer is, That his suffering was just, because
the sins of his Members, or body, are his sins, in that himself and his
Members are One; for it is as easy to conceive our most innocent Savior to be
justly charged with our sins, as to conceive sinful man to be justly discharged
of all sin, and to be truly called righteous, even the righteousness of God in
him.

Thus much I have thought fit to premise as an Introduction and a needful
Preparative for the reading of these Books. All which I humbly submit to the
Judgment of Superiors, and to the serious consideration of the Christian Reader.

THE Principal Contents of the four Books following.
In the first Book.
THe Authors and spreaders of the Arian or Socinian heresy. Why the title
Saint was of old withdrawn from Churches. That the most high God is the Author
of the Gospel. That the souls of men and women never dye. The article of
Christ's descent into hell is expounded. The Original of Creeds, and what has
been added to the most ancient of them, and why. The meaning of the word Hades
or hell. A full discourse of Ecstasies, Raptures, Inspirations, Revelations,
and Enthusiasmes. Of the apparitions of dead men. Of Angels good and bad, which
conduct the souls of the dead to their receptacles, and mansions in the other
world. A Summary of the blasphemies contained in the said Commentary on the
Epistle to the Hebrews.
In the second Book.
THat to deny and renounce the Godhead of Christ, is the sin against the holy
Ghost. The sin against the holy Ghost is fully described. The eternal Godhead
of Jesus Christ is fully proved. The deniers of Christ's Godhead are of no
better religion, then Jews, Turks, or Antichrist. Of the Deification of Jesus
Christ, and how it is to be understood. The manner how Christ does intercede
and mediate for us in Heaven. The Subjection, and Minoration of Christ, and the
delivering up of his Kingdom at the end of the world, expounded out of 1 Cor.
15. A plain discovery of Original sin. On what Object the Christian is to fix
his mind in prayer. How the most high God became a Priest. Why the Church of
England required adoration when the Lord Jesus is named. That Christ is Jehova;
and what that word signifies.
In the Third Book.
THat the most high God was incarnate. How and when the most high God appeared
visibly to the Patriarchs, and the mystery thereof unfolded. The meaning of the
face and backparts of God. The everlasting Covenant of Grace, made before the
Creation, and after; is plainly set forth. How the Son of God was necessitated
to be incarnate, and to suffer death. That the Obedience of Christ is with
perfect justice and equity imputed to his mystical Body the Church, for the
salvation thereof. The Original of the Soul of Christ, and of other men's souls
is disputed. The Omnipresence of the Spirit of God, and the diversities of the
graces thereof. The curing of the Kings Evil by the Kings of England, and the
Scripturall warrant for the same.
In the Fourth Book.
IN what cases the sin against the Holy Ghost is unpardonable, or pardonable,
is fully showed. The dangerous sin of Anabaptism is showed by evidence of
Scripture, with the History of the ancient Anabaptists. The reasons why the
ancient Christians did defer Baptism till ripe years, or old age, showed to be
carnal. The reason why St. Paul commanded those to be baptized, who had been
baptized before with St. John Baptists baptism, Acts 19. A plain description,
what true repentance is. The meaning of Sins unto death, and sins not unto
death, 1 John 5. 16. The meaning of sins Mortal and Venial, so often mentioned
in the Fathers. In what cases sinners must be prayed for, and in what not;
showed out of 1 John 5. 16.
OBSERVATIONS UPON THE COMMENTARY ON The Epistle to the HEBREWS, published
under the Capital Letters G. M. Anno Dom. 1646.
CHAP. I. The Original and growth of the Arian Heresy.
THe blasphemous heresy of denying the Godhead of Jesus Christ began early,
and after (...) was first broached by one Eusebius hist. l. ^. ^. 28. (...) c. 20.
(...), as Eusebius and Ni^eph. have written; and after him, (...) seconded by
his dis^^ple ^^^odotus, who was an (...) of (...), (afterward called (...))
about the year of our Lord, 197. S^v^^us being Emperor, and (...) Bishop of
Rome. This Theod^^us was a Currier, (...).
or Tanne^ by Trade, and in time of Persecution, for fear of death had denied
Christ, and for very shame, left his own City, and went to Rome, and there
being upbraided for his denial, answered, Epiphan. haer. 54.
Hominem negavi non D^um, i. e. that he den^^d him that was only a man, and
not God; as Epiphanius w^it^th: and afterward he gathered a great Sect joining
in this doctrine, that Christ was a m^e^ m^n. These associates made an
ag^eement to set up a Bishop to be the Prelate, and head of the faction, and so
laying their moneys together, they hired one Natalis a Priest, to take that
office upon him, and indented to give him monthly 150 d^na^i^ for a sala^y:
upon th^se terms Natalis set upon the work stoutly, and became the Prelate of
that doctrine: then God warned him in visions, and that diverse times, to
forbear, not withstanding for Covetousness he slighted the vi^ons, and still
continued in his wicked course; at length God having compassion on him, who
formerly had been a Confessor, and suffered much for Christ in time of
Pe^secution) God sent him a more sharp and terrible warning, for he was most
grievously scourged by Angels all night l^ng, so that in the morning he arose,
and having b^sprinkled his body with ashes, he went to Z^ph^rinus the then
Bishop of that place, and fell down flat before him, confessing, and bewailing
his crime, and showing the Not of the Ang^ls str^pes, but of the persecutors.
p^int of the stripes in his body, so at length the Church readmitted him into
their Communion, and so the heresy ceased for a time.

Afterward, about the Year of our Lord, 269. the same heresy was again revived
by one Paulus, who was Bishop of A^tio^^, but because he was born at a place
called Samosata therefore he is commonly called Paulus Samos^tenus: but now the
heresy lasted not long, for a Council was gathered against this Paulus wherein
he was sentenced to be deprived of his Bishopric, and he refusing to to obey
the s^n^ence, Au^e^ia the Emperor ( though an (...)) at ther^ quest of he
Council by f^rce expelled him, both from his Church and house thereunto
belonging and so this heresy was again for a time consopired.

Afterward in the days of the Emperor Constantine the Great and about the
Year of our Lord, 317. the same heresy was awaked again by one Arius an
African, and a Priest of the Church of Alexandria, and now it spread and grew
so vehemently, that St. Hierome long after complained that the whole world was
turned Arian; for Arianisme so troubled the Church for some hundreds of years,
and caused so much persecution, and blood-^hed, that Athanal. ad solit. vitam
agentes. n. 9.
Athanasius called that heresy one of the daughters of the blood-sucking
horsleach, and Basil Epist. 71. n. 38.
St. hasil called it Bellum d^^bo icum, i. e. a was raised by the Devil against
the Church: for it filled all places with vexations, and deprived many of their
estates, and bereaved the Church of most of her worthy and learned Pastors, and
prevailed so much, that the most eminent Cities of the World were infested with
it; as in the East Constantinople; in Africa, Alexanaria; in Europe, Millane,
and Rom^ it self, insomuch that even Liberius the Bishop of Rome in the days
of the Emperor Constantius, was expelled from his Bishopric, because he
refused to subscribe to an Arian Creed, as Socr. l. 2. c. 29.
Socrates testifies; yea, our own Country Britain was amongst the rest in the
same Emperors days troubled with this heresy, as our own Histories report.
Nor has it been free since the first Reformation; for if we may believe Mr.
Fox* some that were imprisoned in Q. Marie's days for Religion, yet there Act.
and Mon. n. 93.
denied the Godhead of Christ. In Q. Elizabe h's time, two men were burnt in
this City of Norwich one whose name was Hemant, in the Year, 1579. he was burnt
for saying that Christ was a me^r man: and the other whose name was F. K^tt,
was burnt in the Year, 1588. for saying, that Christ was not God, and this some
alive do remember, and our Vulgar Chronicles record. Also in the Reign of King
James one Lega^^ was burnt in Smithfield for the same heresy; and to the
unspeakable sorrow of all well-willers to our Church and Country even at this
day, two Ministers (I think) of this Kingdom, (whereof one is of this Diocese
of Norwich) have publicly in books printed, impugned two persons of the most
sacred and glorious Trinity, John Bi^dle.
one blaspheming the Holy Ghost, and the other the Son of God, severally
denying them both to be God, the one publicly declaring his own name in Print,

Juvena. Sat. ^.
Et magis ingenue Peribomius -- But the other more subtly concealing his own
name, and procuring only G. M. being the Capital Letters of another man's name
to be subscribed to the Preface. It is well enough known who this G. M. is, and
that he is a man of good credit, and was ever accounted honest, and religious,
a Citizen and Merchant, prudent in his way; but yet no man that knows him will
believe that he is the author either of the Commentary, or of the Preface,
being no way bred to meddle in such high controversies of Religion, nor was
ever known to be a favourer of any heretical Sect in former times, and his
friends are yet in good hope, that (although the Writer has inveigled him to
set out this blasphemous book) yet that he was not Conscious of the secret
poison contained in it: for so did Hill. Cont. Arian. n. 7.
St. Hilary most charitably judge in the like case of the L^^^ks who were of
the A^ian Congregations. Arian^s populus recte credit de Filio, quia haec non
audivit ab Arianis, santiiores sunt aures pl^bis, quam cor sace do^is; i. e.
The A^ian people believed rightly in the Son of God, for they did not hear of
the heresy of the Arian Priests, so that the cares of the people were more
religious then the heart of their Priest: and yet he may rightly say of you the
namelesse Author, as St. Basil said of the Arian Priests. Basil. de Spir. c. 7.
n. 26.
Blessed are the cares which never heard you, yea, blessed is his heart if he
never believed you; and I doubt not but when by Gods mercy he shall discover in
what a damning doctrine you have engaged him, he will discharge you, as it is
reported Cornelius Agrippa did, a familiar spirit which attended on him in the
shape of a dog, saying before his death, Abi a me perdita bestia, quae me
miserum perdi^isti; i. e. Avoid reprobate beak, who have even destroyed me a
miserable man.

CHAP. II. Reasons why the Author of this Commentary concealeth his own name.
BUt, Sir, why do you conceal your name? Is it your humility not to be known?
take heed that Christ say not unto you, Luke 13. 25.
I know you not: for you have not only, not confessed him before men, but you
have moreover denied him, and that in his most high, and nearest concernment,
even his Godhead: before our Savior cast out a Devil, he asked his name, and
had an answer, and his name began with Marc. 5. 9.
I. it were meet that your name should be known that it might appear of which
kind you are, that means may be applied according to your quality to cast out
this evil spirit. But if you meant seriously to conceal your self, why did you
cause your Book to be presented to so many of the prime Gentry of this
Country? they all knew the author, for the opinion men had of your abilities,
made them accept of, and to expect something in your book answerable thereunto;
and it was needful they should know you, for the greater advancement of such a
doctrine. But,

Mart. l. 10 ep. 3.
Cur ego labor^m notus esse tam prave? i. e. Why should you make your self
known so wickedly? except you hoped to have a new name of an old heresy, that
Arians should change theit old app^llation, and be called after your name; and
there may be some color for it, for although you have told us no new thing,
but only a revival of many old heresies, yet you are the first that ever in
our English Print published, and asserted them, so that if all the former
Catalogues of the most dangerous heresies were lost, yet we may find more then
enough in your Commentary: but there may be greater reasons why you so
cautelously withhold your name.

First, the danger of the Law de haretico Comburendo; for when a certain
Gentlewoman, by a friend of yours, was told, that some men said you might be
burnt for your book; she modestly replied thus; Sir, they that said so, may
themselves be in danger of burning for being Witches (they foretell so
shrewdly). I have heard that one of your opinion said ( Toll legem, etc?) if
it were not for the danger Toll legem sivis esse certamen. Ambr. Epist. 13.
of the Law, he would dispute down all our Christian Religion; which by your
Comment is done to his hand, as well as you could do it; insomuch that a
Minister of this Diocese, whom I know to be very learned and ingenious,
inquired for your book at the Stationers, using these words. Have you such a
Doctors Book against Christ? But why should you fear the Law? for your very
good friends that know you very well do assure us, that you will never burn for
any Religion, On earth; and for the other World, you have much lessened men's
fears in telling us that after death our souls shall be insensible, until
the resurrection; and more comfort yet, that although our souls shall at the
last day be judged, yet (as is by your own very good friends reported) you have
certified your people, that the torments of Hell shall last but the space of
three days.

Secondly, If your name were subscribed to your Comment, it would appear that
the Author was a Chaplain in Ordinary at Court, and appointed by our most
Religious Sovereign to preach to the Prince his Highness, and the other Royal
Issue; if therefore you with your blasphemous doctrines were made known to his
Majesty, who is so faithful and constant in his Christian Religion, with what
detestation would he exufflate you, as an evil spirit, or as a pestilence, lest
you should infect the souls of the Blood Royal and the Court? St. Hierom said
of one that spoke less against Christ, then you have written, Hier. Ep. ad
Pam. n. 20.
Ego si patrem, si matrem, si germenum, adversus Christum me^^^ auaissem ista
dicentes, blasphemantia ora ^a^erassem; i. e. If I had heard mine own father,
or mother, or my brother sp^aking these words against Christ, I would have torn
they blasphemous mou^hes. It is well known by the Ecclesiastic History, Sozo.
l. 2. c. 26* Soc. 1. 19, 26.
what mischief one single sneaking Arian Priest did in the Court-Royal of
Constantine the Great, in recalling A^ius from banishment, and infecting the
next Emperor Constan^ius with the Arian heresy, which from that small
retriving, overspread the whole Roman World; he had been commended to
Constantine by Constantia his own Sister on her deathbed, and he so insinuated
himself into the Emperor, that on his deathbed he committed his last Will and
Testament to the trust of this Arian Priest, who by his faithful carriage in
delivering the said Will to the succeeding Emperor, obtained his favor also;
then he opened his heresy, and therewith infected the bed-chamber-men, and the
Eunuchs, next the Empress, then the Emperor himself, and presently all
families in the Imperial City fell to disputes and divisions about those
questions as Soc. l. 2. c. ^. ^ ^
Socrates relates.

A third reason why you conceal your name is, because the quality of your
doctrine is such as does require a secret Seminary; it is not such as a
Preacher may publish Mat. 10. 27. 2.
on the house-^op, but as a false light, which shines in the darkness, and is
more fit for a dark lantern, or to be put under a bushel, or in a tub.

-- Pu^chra Laverna Ho^. Epist. l. 1. c. 16.

Da mihifallere, da justum, sanctumque videri
Noct^m peccatis, and fraudibus objice nubem.
Neither truth it self nor her Preachers are ashamed of their doctrine. Tertul.
cont. Valent. n. 52.
Nihil veritas ^rub^scit nisi so (...) abscondi; i. e. Truth is not ashamed but
when she is suppressed: he that in a Christian Commonwealth would sow true
and established doctrine, may be Aug. cont. Faust. l. 18. c. 3.
In terdianus Sator, as Austin's word is, (i.) he may spr^ad it in the
daylight; but he that intends to sow tares must do it secretly; While men
(...) enemy came and (...) Matthew. 13. 25. Evil spirits they are which are
called Nocturni ^emures; (i.) n^ght-go^^i^: when the Jews had crucified the
Son of man there was Mat. 27. 45.
darkness over all the Land; and now when darkness is over all our Land by
reason of d^ss^nsions in Religion, you crucify the Son of God afresh: Heb. 6.
5.
and indeed, haec est hora vestra and potestas tenebrarum: Luke 22. 53.
for though your person be obscured, your doctrine is sprung up into print;
even that doctrine which heretofore lurked in corners, as Psalm. 91. 6.
a (...) that w^^keth in darkness, is now again become as St. Herome
complained of it in his time, Hier. Cont. Rust. l. 2. c. 4. 22.
Arius est daemon^um meridianum, your Arian^sme is a noonday Devil, though
Arius himself have put an honest man's name to his own detestable writings,
Just as heretics in old time put the name of Ev^g. l. 3. c. 31.
Athanasius to the heresies of Apoll na rius. Well! if you will not be known, I
say but as one in Sen. cont. lib. 1. cont. 2.
Seneca said of a lewd person, Discede igno^us ^s^ discede notus es n^mis; (i.)
You are of no ^^te, and yet too notoribus.

CHAP. III. Touching the Preface, Licencing, and approbation of this Commentary.
IN your Preface directed to the Christian Reader (it should rather be to your
dear brethren the Turks, for it savoureth more of that, then of Christianity,
as will be showed hereafter), you tell us that one reason which moved you to
print this book is, [ Because it has received a singular approbation from a
most learned and reverend Divine] the Divine here meant is Mr. John Downam, who
licenced this book, who (as I have heard from a right worthy reverend, and
honorable person) is indeed a right honest, grave, and learned man: now, one
of the singular approbations which Mr. Downam gives of your book, is, that he
calls it a Comment on the Hebrews; whereas you style it a Commentary: now the
word Comment, or Commentum being equivocal, does most usually signify a
figment, an untruth, or fiction; and the old Logic rule is, Analogum per se
positum, flat pro significato famosiori: therefore this learned man well
knowing the falsities in your Commentary (as will be proved anon) did justly
change the word, and called it a Comment. Or if it fell from him unawares, then
there was a providence in it; for truth has so fallen from many unwittingly,
as St. Austine confesses of himself, Aug. Conf. l. 9. c. 4.
that the Spirit of truth works both by men that perceive it, and by them
that perceive it not. Just so does Socrates observe in the Writings of Libanius
the Sophist, who was a great admi^^r of Julian the Apostate: this (...) (a most
Learned man) intending to praise Julian, said of him, Socr. l. 3. c. 19.
O daemonum discipule, daemonum assessor, etc! O disciple of Demons, and
Companion of Demons! Mirum est eum non vitasse verbum ambiguum; (i.) ^marv^l
(says Socrates) that Libanius would not avoid such an ambiguous word, which
does more usually signify Devils, then good Angels. In like manner the
Manichees to avoid the reproach of the name Manes their sounder, which in the
Greek tongue signified Madness, of (...), would needs have him called
Manichaeus, to signify one that poured out Manna, of (...) but yet they had
neglected to double the N, so the name Manichaeus still signified but Aug.
Cont. Faust. l. 19. c. 22.
Insani-fusorem, (i.) a venture of madness, as St. Austin has observed: So
this learned Divine might show you a cast of his learning, and call your book a
Comment, and knowingly too; I say ( knowingly) and I have good reason for it,
because I am assured that Mr. Downam did find fault with many passages in your
Comment, as unsound, and erroneous, and favoring of Socin^anisme, and gave
advertisement thereof to you the namelesse author, as may appear by Mr.
Downam's Letter: which (for the vindication of his integrity) I have here
inserted verbatim, as it was written to a most Learned and Reverend Person, the
true Copy whereof, your self have seen long ago.

Mr. Downam's Letter concerning this Commentary on the Hebrews.
RIght Reverend, and my much honored Lord, I humbly and heartily thank you for
your kind advertisement, and good counsel; for until I read your Lordships
Letter, I knew nothing of the Printing, or publishing of this Comment on the
Hebrews, which makes me not a little to wonder, and somewhat to suspect ill
dealing, in that I should be made (by them that have to deal in it) so great a
stranger to it, seeing I Licenced it, and live in the Town near unto them. But
that you may more fully understand the whole carriage of the business, thus it
was: The Copy was brought unto me by a Bookseller from an unknown Author, and
I was desired to peruse it, that if I approved of it, it might be Licenced,
unto which I condescended, and in reading, I liked much of it, as being
Learned, and well couched together with good dependence; but withal misliked
many passages as very unsound, and savouring strongly of Arminianisme, and
Socinianisme; yet having to deal with a Scholar, I desired to be ingenuous, and
did not (as I might have done) blot out those erroneous lines, and leaves, but
by means of a Gentleman who did mediate and act the business between us, I
wrote a Letter, and by his means sent it to the unknown Author, wherein I
expressed the several Points which I thought erroneous, and where^n I differed
from him, together with my Reasons which induced me so to judge: and after some
time I received his answer full of ingenuity, yet not subscribed with any name,
wherein he neither defended, nor excused those Points and* passages against
which I had taken exceptions, but was contented that I should take mine own
liberty in expunging what I misliked; and having this power put into my hands
by the Author himself, I did accordingly use it, and crossed many passages, and
diverse whole folio-pages, although I confess I passed over diverse things which
I misliked, leaving him to ^he liberty of his own judgment in points which I
thought not fundamentally erroneous, nor much material, unless pressed by way
of consequence. Now if the Author, or the Gentleman his Agent have annexed a
Stet overaga^nst my obl^terations, and the places by me expunged, and yet
notwithstanding have published the whole, with my attestation, I must profess
that they have dealt ill with me, and will do my best to repair my own right,
and reputation: which that I may the better do, I will send for the book, that
I may revize it, and so proceed as I shall see occasion: And thus have I truly
given your Lordship an account of the whole carriage of this business, the which
may be further cleared, and enlarged, if any fitting occasion shall be offered
hereafter. In the mean while and ever I shall remain

Your Lordships in all Christian service to be commanded, John Downam.
May the first, 1646.

This is all the singular approbation which Mr. Downame gave: but what
Christian Magistrates, and the Church used to do with books which set forth
such doctrines as you have done, the Ecclesiastical Histories tell us; Soz. l.
1. c. 20. Soc. l. 1. c. 5.
Constantine the Great commanded the books of Arius to be burnt, and threatened
death to any one that should keep and conceal them. Yet Arius set forth but the
same doctrine that you do. Just so were the books of the Manichees used at Rome
in the time of Pope Leo the first about the year of our Lord, 447. Prosp. in
Cron.
as Prosper writes; yet the Manichees did not more deprave the Passion of
Christ then you have done, and therefore your book cannot expect a better fate
then its forerunners: for of all the great Volumes which former heretics
writ, there is little or nothing at this day to be found, except such fragments
as remain in the Fathers who confuted them, and a few Creeds, and Ep stola
fundamenti in St. Aug. Con^. Epist. fund. 10. 6. c. 5.
Austin, and nothing else of Controversy considerable; and yet I must tell
you, that the books of the Arians were written with far greater art and
learning then your loose writings show; and I assure you, that many Judicious
Divines have said, that they find nothing in your book fi^ to be observed, but
only the errors and heresies, and yet those are so poorly proved, that I may
truly say of your book, as Austin did of the books of Faustus the Manichee,
Aug. Cont. Faust. lib. 16. c. 26.
Faustus scribit -- tanquam libellus ejus surdos auditores vel caecos lectores
esset habiturus -- O hominem dictorem, and alium non cogitantem contradictorem;
(i.) Surely you imagined that your Readers and bearer, should be deaf or blind,
and that none would contradict you, but all acquiesce in your opinion; yet your
writings are so blasphemous, as if they had been written by him that was the
Author of that Libel, which Mr. Fox calls Acts and Mon. n. 40.
Lucifers Letter, and so insipid, as if they had been Erasm. f. 359.
Suibus Scripti, as Erasmus said of such kind of Writers in his time; I wish
they had been dedicated to Vulcan, or strangled with a sponge in their birth;
because I see that they are like the fry of Serpents and other Vermin, and are
by you made only to do mischief until they be caught, and then the height of
their preferment will be as Martial merrily writes of his own Poems, Mart. l.
3. ep. 2.


-- Libelle
Festina tibi vindicem parare
Ne nigram cito raptus in culinam,
Cordyllas madida ^egas papyro
Vel thuris, piperisque sis Cucullas. --
Make haste, and get a Patron, pretty book,

Before the Black guard, or the Master-Cook

Snatch thee as waste-paper for his Kitchen,

To put Spice, Sprats, Frankincense, or Pitch in.

But if they miss this, yet they will not fail of such an end as Arius himself
came to; or of the fate of Volusius his Annals, in Catullus.

Pleni ruris and inficetiarum Catul. car. 37. Mart. lib. 12. p. 62.

Annals Volusi, etc. -- carm. 37.
So I leave them for present to be put into the Black Bill at Cambridge, or the
black Catalogue of the late Gangrana.

CHAP. IV. The Commenters temporizing in unsainting the Apostles, in condemning
Tombs, and in short hair.
THe next thing to be observed in you and your Comment, is your great
Compliance with the tender Consciences of these Times; which they that formerly
observed your very zealous conformity with the then garb, must needs judge that
you intended this new change only as a bait to invite the brethren more
cheerfully to swallow your deadly hook. First, you will not afford the title of
Saint to the holy Apostles, but they are plain John, Peter, Paul, only James is
beholding to you for Sainting him, (if not an erratum of the Printer) Is not
this to show your conformity with the Plague-bill of London? and yet there is
the title Allhallowes, though not the word Saint; and there the word Saint is
withdrawn but from places, and Churches, but you will not allow it to the
persons of Apostles: the Bill had some color for it self; for it was once
ordered in a Council, Council. Constantinop. sub. Constable. 5. An. Domini. 755.
That Churches should not have the appellation of Saint, because of the great
abuse in Image Worship, and because people did then give the title of Saint to
those places, not because the Churches were so named in their dedications, but
because the Images of Saints were set up in Churches, and the name of the Saint
was painted on the Image: So that when men said, Let us go to St. Peter's, they
meant it of the image, when perhaps the Church was not so named: but it was
never ordered by any Christian Council, that the title Saint should be denied
to the persons of the holy Apostles and Evangelists; you see the Scriptures
give that ^itle to whole Companies of people professing Christ, 1 Cor. 14. 33.
who were much inferior to the high Office and sanctity of the Apostles; I
think you would be offended with him that should not style you Doctor, and yet
the Apostles have a better title to Saint, then you to your Doctorship.

And because some are offended with Images of men lately set upon Tombs, as
they have as just cause perhaps to find fault with them, as to be offended with
the memories of Apostles and Martyrs in glasse-windowes ( if all imagery in
Churches be unlawful) you more zealously condemn all Tombs built for memory of
men departed, though they deserved well of us, and therein you condemn the
practice of holy men in Scripture in preserving the Sepul^h^^ of David; even
the accursed Jews did adorn the Tombs of the Prophets, whom Matthew. 23. 29.
their fathers slew, yea, and all Christian Churches in all ages did allow, and
with great cost set up Tombs of holy men and Martyrs, and called them Memorias
Martyrum, i. e. the Memories of Martyrs: the Sepulcher of Christ was much
esteemed by Constantine the Great, and a fair Church built over it, as we read
in Eusebius, and that for the memories of twelve Apostles, Eusebius. de vit.
Constable. l. 3. and lib. 4. Hier. Epist. 53. c. 3. n. 17. Aug. de Civ. l. 22. c. 8.
he built twelve several Tombs in one Church as Constantinople; and in St.
Hieromes time the Tombs of St. Peter and St. Paul were of great esteem in Rome:
In St. Austin's time, and in his Church at Hippo was the Tomb of St. Stephen
set up, though far remote from the place of his stoning: and we find a Tomb set
up or the blessed Virgin Mary in Judaea, as some in Di^nysius and St. Hierome
tell us. Nonna the holy woman Vid. Dionys. vit. and Hier. to. 9. P. 39.
and Mother of Greg. Nazianzen, devoted the whole estate which her son
Caesarius left, to build a costly Monument for his memory, as her own son
Nazian in his Funeral Oration, to her great praise reports, Naz. Orat. 10.
and in the Canons of the Primitive Church recorded by St. Basil. The violaters
of the Tombs of the dead, are Basil. ad Amphil. c. 64. n. 36.
ordered to stand excommunicate the space of eleven years, even as long as
adulterers were. This Commenter surely has an higher conceit of his own
wisdom then any other men have discovered to be in him, that presumes to
control the Practice of Christians in all ages, even to his own time. But
because he thinks his soul shall dye with his body, as souls of other Animals
do, let him for my part provide such a burial for himself as they have of which
we read, Jer. 22. 19.

Also the hair of your head for the greater conformity is (as we hear) shorn
most affectedly close, but the wickedness of your doctrine may well make men
fear, that you have made a fishing-line of your cut hair, with a dangerous hook
at the end of it. In Aug. de oper. Mon. n. 71. Viros fuge ^^tenatos quibus
f^minei crines, hircorum barba, nigrum pallium -- haec Omnia, argumenta sunt
diaboli. Hier. Ep. ad Eustoch. c. 12. p. 53. Acts and Mon. n. 55.
former times there was as great hypocrisy in long hair, as is now in short.
St. Austin found fault with Monks in his time for wearing long hair in
hypocrisy: So did St. Jerom^, and afterward when in a Synod where St. Anselm
sat President; it was decreed that the hair of Clergymen should be rounded
short, yet because of their hypocrisy and wickedness it grew to a proverb,
Quam primum Clericus suscipit rasuram* statim intrat in eum diabous, as Mr. Fox
has noted. Long hair in Sampson and in Nazraites was honorable; it was
Propheticum velamen, as Austin calls it: Instead of a Mos^ical veil, to
signify that there was some holy mystery covered in their typical persons; but
yet when hypocrites masked themselves with it, then King Josephus Ant. l. 19.
Agrippa caused those Pharisaical Nazarites Aug. de Oper. Mon. n 71.
to be shorn: and now also that we perceive that the very shortest hair is
degenerated into hypocrisy, and that this Tonsa Sancti^as, as St. Austin's
word is, does not prove much more holiness then hair. I shall advise Aug. de
Opere Monach. c. 31: ^. 71.
the Reader with merry Martial's words,

-- Brevibus nec creed (...). lib. 5. ep. 49. Neither is this intended to
deride short hair, but to reprove the hypocrisy of it when it is made an
hair-net to catch men withal; which is no new observation, but was of old
discerned in Heathens, as hypocrital, Atque supercitio brevi^r Coma -- Juv.
Sat. 2. and Cicero. Orat. pro Roscio Comaedo. and also suffered to continue
written, and painted in those very Monasteries where short hair-hypocrisie was
then mostly practiced; witness those old riming Verses,

Quod fueram non sum, frater, caput aspice ^ousum. and
Poenas profundi, frauds cap^tisque rotundi.
Et Judae suavium, det Deus ut caveam.
Upon those words of our Savior, Matthew. 10. Th. Matthew. 10. 30. Isych. in
Levit. c. 13.
very hairs of your bead are numbered, Isych^us writes That, hairs signify
our thoughts and imaginations, which are therefore said to be numbered, because
by them we shall be judged.

CHAP. V. How the Commenter complieth with the Arians* of the Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews; of the Nicene Fathers; and how the Father and the Son
may be said to be opposites.
NExt, your compliance and correspondence with the old Arian Heretics is to be
observed; for first you will not acknowledge this Epistle to the Hebrews to be
written by St. Paul, but it must be the Authors only, so that both the Author,
and the Commenter must be alike unknown: just so d^d the Arians, Epiph. hae. 69.
as Epiphanius observes; Aria^ -- Epistolam ad Hebr^os rejiciunt, (...) ipsam
P^uli non ^sse;.i. The Arians r^j^cted the Epistle to the Hebrews, and said
that it was not St. Paul's; but you go further and tell us, that it appears,
that Neither Paul, nor any Apostle was P. 20.
the Author: and this, because you would make this most Divine Epistle seem
invalid, as indeed you have great reason, because it does so evidently declare
against your heresy; your chief argument is drawn from the Postscript, because
it is there said to be written by Timothy, but yet uncertain it is by whom the
Postscript was written, as is confessed; and uncertain again whether it be
meant that Timothy was St. Paul's amanuensis, or his Messenger, the words will
bear both, neither is it any extraordinary or vain thing (as you would have it)
to send Letters by one, of whom mention is made in those Letters, witness
David's Letter sent by Vriah, 2 Samuel 11. 14.
2 Samuel 11. 14. yet such is your frivolous cavil. But to the Point; This
Epistle is by Judicious Divines thought to be asserted for St. Paul's, by the
testimony of Scripture, for St. Peter mentions his very name, 2 Pet. 3. 15.
himself also then writing to the dispersed Jews, so as Beza thought, this
very Epistle is there meant; and St. H^^rome (though he would not conclude for
St. Paul) Hier. Epist. 129. n. 29.
yet confesses that this Epistle was received of the Eastern Churches, and
generally acknowledged to be St. Paul's, which we find to be true; for in the
Canons called the Apostles, which go with the works of Clemens, Clem. Can.
Apost. n. 16. Cyril. cat. n. 8. Naz. Poem. 33 Chrysostom. to. 5. Ser. 61. Eusebius.
hist. l. 6. c. 11.
there are 14 Epistles of St. Paul mentioned, therefore this must be one.* Just
so does St. Cyril of Jerusalem reckon, and so also does Greg. Naz^anz^n in his
Poems; and so does St. Chrysostom: and Eusebius tell us, that St. Paul writ it
in the Jewish Language, but that it was translated either by St. Luke, or by
Clemens, for that it agrees with the style of the Acts of the Apostles written
by St. Luke, and that the style of Clemens agrees with this Epistle. Who
doubts, but that Hier. descript. in Petro.
St. Peter was the Author of that Gospel which goes under the name of St. Mark?
or that Eusebius. hist. l. 3. c. 4.
St. Paul was the Author of that Gospel which goes under the name of St. Luke?
only St. Mark and St. Luke were the Scribes, that from the Apostles mouths
set the Gospels down in writing; Tert. de Pudic. in. 25. Aug. de Civ. l. 16. c.
22. De doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 8. and Exposit. in Romans P. 321.
therefore it is no marvel that some Latins called this Epistle by another
man's name; just as we call those Gospels by other names: and so Tertullian
calls this Epistle to the Hebrews, The Epistle of Barnabas. But St. Austin
does constantly and often assert it to be St. Paul's, and so is it at this day
in this Kingdom acknowledged by the best authority* by which the translation
of the Bible was ratified; yet this self-conceiied Commenter will be wiser then
all, like another Abailardus of whom St. Bernard writes that he would Bern.
Epist. 190.
say, Omnes sic, Ego non sic, ^ll say so, yet I say not so.

Again, to show your conformity with the Arians, you reprove Eusebius his
Mu^tiple Error, for thinking Christ to be consubstantial with the Father, and
you grant him only to be Assimilated to God, which is the same in English with
the Arian word Homoi^^sion; i. e. of like substance; so you would have Christ
to be only like unto God, which is no more then the Scripture affords to our
first parents, who were made not only after the Image, but after the
similitude of God, Genesis 1. 26. and because the Nicene Fathers asserted the word
(...), against Arius, therefore you are unreasonably angry with them also, and
in your passion you write rashly; for you say, [ The Nicene P. 331.
Fathers are not to be thought to have h^ld, that the Son is that one most high
God -- who yet if they should appear in these times, they would be condemned of
an universal Council.] Your impudence is great, in saying those Fathers did not
hold so, and your passion is unreasonable, in saying they should now be
condemned: for if they held not so, wherefore should an universal ( Arian
Council) condemn them? We know that their doctrine was indeed condemned by no
less then Bishop Jewel* f. 362.
ten Councils of Arians, Sex^^nti Episcopi Aria^i. consentiunt Ario. H^^* in
Epist. Auxentii. n. 7.
and it was therefore condemned because (as the principal business for which
that renowned Council was called) they asserted the Son to be Hom^ousion, that
is, to be of the same essence, substance, and Go^head with the Father: which
most true, and wholesome doctrine, all Orthodox* Churches in the World have
ever since, and to this day do maintain; and that Council is for this reason of
most venerable estimation amongst all good Christians, as being the best that
ever was since the Aposties days; and Epiphanius accounts that Council to be
one of the greatest, and most memorable acts that the great Emperor
Constantine did, Constantinus duo maxim^ f^cit, Nicaenam Epiph. haer. 70.
Synodum, and Conse^s^m de Pascha^e; i. e. The two greatest acts that ever
Constantine d^d, were the calling of the Nicene Council, and procuring the
universal agreement for the solemnity of Easter. If those Fathers had heard you
denying the Godhead of Jesus, and his eternal generation; and vilifying him, by
placing him under some Angels; they would have done before you as they did to
Arius; for when he said in that Council, that God the Father was not always a
Father, nor the Son a Son from eternity, and that he was preferred to be a God;
or Deified (as the word is) those godly Fathers at the hearing of these words,
did all stop their ears from hearing any more of his blasphemies, as
Athanasius writes; and yet Arius may yield Atha. cont. Arian. Orat. 1. n. 4.
the buckler to you. You tell us Christ (as he is the Son of God) is page 80.
and page 320.
Opposed to God, and diverse from God: This is a cast of your profound Logic;
indeed the rule in Logic at which you quibble is, Oppositio relativa est,
inter relatum, and correlatum; i. e. That there is an opposition between the
Relative, and Correlative. Now in the Divine persons these terms, Father and
Son, may be truly said to be opposed one to another in Recto. So that we may
say, the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the Father; but we cannot say, the
Father is not God, or the Son is not God, because the opposition lies between
the two relative terms only, and not between the terms and the subject. For
example: A man that has a son is a father, but that father is not that son;
this is true Logic. But you cannot say, that this father is not a man. If
therefore by your new Logic you would prove that the Son of God is not God,
because he is not God the Father, I will put this petition into my Letanie, as
St. Ambrose is reported to have done the like in his, when St. Austin (before
his Conversion) troubled the Church of Millane with his Manich^an disputes, A
Cor. lan. in vita, Aug. l. 2. c. 1.
Logica August^ni lib ra nos Domine, From the heretical Logic good Lord
deliver us.

CHAP. VI. Shows, that the whole design of this Commenter is to confute or
extenuate, and darken the authority and evidence of this Epistle to the
Hebrews.
I Observe again that you have very improperly and perversely nicknamed your
book A Commentary; my reason is, because it is not an Exposition of that Text,
nor so intended by you, but it is an Undoing of the Epistle, an interversion,
and a confutation of it as much as you can: for you have endeavored to
extinguish this great light by which the eternal Godhead of Jesus is so
evidently illustrated. You may as well blow out the light of the Sun; but
though you blow till your lungs crack, that Sun, and this light will still
shine. Tertullian says, That the Epistle to the Thessalonians is of such
clearness and evidence, as if Tert. de Resur. n. 30.
it had been written rad^o ^o^is, with a Sunbeam: And this Divine Epistle does
so clearly demonstrate the Godhead of Jesus, as if St. Paul had writ it whilst
he was in his raptu^e in the third heaven; or that it had been written
immediately with the singer of God; and therefore all your wit and Learning is
employed to darken and blur this our grand piece of evidence; there are many
profound mysteries in this sacred Scripture, the which you are so far from
explicating, that you have only labored to make them more difficult, as
Austin modestly fea ed in himself, Vereor ne exponendo Aug. Expos. in Levit.
quaest. 174. Tul. de Not. Deor. l. 3.
do siat obscurius; and such places as are plain and easy you have labored to
hide. Just as Tull^ said of one, R^m minime dub^am dispu^ando du^iam facis.
Former heretics used to persuade their heresies by alleging Scriptures
positively, but such Scriptures as did so clearly evince them that they could
not gainsay, those they rejected; thus the Manichees slighted the whole Old
Aug. cont. Faust. l. 2. c. 1.
Testament, and the Gospels of St. Matthew and St. Luk, calling them ^b. l. 4.
c. 1.
Genisidium, because of the Genealogies; and therefore Te tullian calls Marcion
Tert. cont. Marc. l. 1. n. 39.
Murem Ponti^um, the M^use of Pontus, because he also rased out, or rejected
such Scriptures as made against him: and the same Father gives this character
of two grand Heretics, Tert. de praescript. n. 30.
Marcion ad materiam suam, caedem Scripturarum confecit: Valentinus materiam ad
Scripturas excogitavit; i. e. That Marcion pared and fitted the Scriptures to
be suitable to his heresies: but Valentinus invented heresies that might seem
to agree with the letter of Scriptures. But you have imitated both these, first
in your endeavor to null the authority of this Epistle; and though you fail in
that, yet in a second place you have labored to conform, and new turkiss this
same Epistle to your heresies, that so it may dance to your pipe; and because
as the same Father says, Id. ib.
Heresies cannot take place without a Scripture pretended, therefore your
Arians laid on load of Scripture to support their errors, Athan. Orat. 1.
cont. Arian. n. 5.
Ariana haeresis cum videret sorores suas haereses public prob^osas haberi,
honesto cultu Scripturarum indui^ur; i. e. When the Arian heresy saw her
sister-heresies to be odious, she de^ked her self with an honorable dress of
Scriptures. Just as you would make this Epistle lispe, and stammer out
Arianisme, even in such places where it speaks most plainly against it. For
instance; where it is said, Heb. 1. 6. Let all the Angels of God worship him,]
and this is taken out of Psalm 97. 7. Worship him all ye gods] where the worship
of Jesus is required from the highest ol all creatures, even Angels; or if any
creature be higher then Angels, whatsoever it be, though it be called god, (as
some creatures are, Psalm. 82. 6.) yet that creature must adore this Son of God:
and the adoration of him, is in other places of Scripture expressed to be the
most humble, lowly, and perfectly entire adoration that can be imagined; for,
Rev. 4. 10. and 5. 14. The Elders worship the Lamb (the Lamb must needs
signify Christ) falling down before him. Just such a prostration as Abraham
used when he worshipped God, falling on his face, Genesis 17. 3. even the same God
who is now inca^nate, and called the Lamb of God. Prostration was used when men
would express an humbling of the whole man, because in that posture, every
part is interested; now because this adoration of the Son of God is so
evidently required in this place, this Commenter, rather then he will
acknowledge him to be the most high God, will allow that adoration which is due
only to the most high God, to be given to a creature: there is a pretty
proverb in Tertullian, Aspis Tert. Cont. Marc. l. 3.
a vipera v^nenum mutuatus est: i. e. The aspe borrowed poison from the viper;
and the Socinian from the Aria^: for the Arian did bow the knee to Jesus,
though he would not confess him to be God, and so this Commenter tells us, P.
7.
[ That Divine reverence is commanded to be given to Christ by standing,
bowing, and falling before him in the very same manner that is due to God
himself, -- because he sustaines the person of God himself, and because in
Christ God himself is worshipped.] Which is the same reason that is alleged by
those that fall down before Images; for they tell us, that in them God himself
is worshipped; though they will not say that those Images are God himself, no
more then this Commenter will acknowledge Christ to be (as indeed he is) God
himself. And though he confess that one of the Persons which appeared to P. 33.
Abraham, and whom Abraham worshipped, (which was the Person of the Son, as
will hereafter be showed) is called Jehova; yet he will not confess this
Jehova to be the Supreme God, notwithstanding that he reads expressly in the
Scripture, that Jehova is a proper and peculiar appellation due only to the
most high God, and in no wise communicable to any creature, as we read, Psalm.
83. 18. That men may know that thou whose Name alone is Jehova art the most
high over all the earth.

CHAP. VII. Showing how the Commenter mis-expoundeth other places which make
against him.
ANother plain evidence which this Jugler labors to elude and frustrate, is,
Heb. 2. 2, 3. where the Apostle prefers the Gospel above the Law, because
the Law was given by God, not immediately, but mediat^ly in the ministration of
Angels. But the Gospel was spoken by God himself, and immediately by himself;
therefore the Gospel is more excellent then the Law Now let us examine who it
was that spoke this Great Salvation or Gospel? and who was it whom the Apostle
heard speak it, but only Jesus Christ? therefore Jesus is here most evidently
said to be the Lord, and the Gospel is declared to have been delivered more
excellently then the Law, because the Gospel was delivered by God himself, that
is, by Jesus Christ, and therefore is by St. Mark called The Gosp^l of Jesus
Christ, Mar. 1. 1. But the Law was delivered by Angels, as we read, Act. 7. 53.
(The Jews) receiv^d the Law by the disposition of Angels; and, Gal. 3. 19. The
Law was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator. Angels are but the
Messengers of Christ, and are much more infer^our to Christ then 2 Kings 4. 29.
Elisha's servant, and staff were to their Master. The Mediator here meant, I
take to be the same Son of God, and not Moses; so does St. Hierome on Gal. 3.
19. In Angelo Mediato^ loquitur, (i) The Mediator spoke in the Angel. So that
the meaning must be, That the Son of God before his Incarnation was the
Lawgiver, by the ministry of Angels: And the same Son of God now Incarnate,
was the Author of the Gospel, immediately in his own person, by himself,
without ministering Angels; and so our Modern Expositors understand this place,
Expos. Eccles. in Gal. 3. 19.
Lex est servorum vox, Evangelium, Domin^, i* e. God spoke the Law by the voice
of his Angel; but Jesus the Lord God himself spoke the Gospel. This plain
Exposition reconcileth any seeming discord between Moses and St. Paul; though
Moses say, Exodus 2^. 1. God spoke all these words, and St. Paul calls it, Heb.
2. 2.
The word spoken by Angels; for so St. Austin observes on those passages in
Scripture, where it is said, Thus says the Lord, when yet it was an Angel or a
Prophet Aug. cont. Adimant. Man. c. 9 n. 8 to. 6.
that spoke it Dixit Deus and apparuit -- and dixit angelus and apparuit, illud
ex persona inhabitantis Dei, hoc ex persona servientis creaturae; i. e. When an
Angel or a Prophet said, Thus says the Lord, both are true, because God sp^ke
in the creature, and the creature spoke from God. And again he says* Judaeus
sic audiat Angelum, Aug. De. 5. haeresibus, c. 4. to. 6. n. 6.
ut intelligat Deum; i. e. the Jew must so hear the Angel, as considering that
God spoke by him. Finally, rather then this Commenter will acknowledge Christ
to be the prime Author of the Gospel, although it is called his Testament; and
albeit Christ is called the Testator; Heb. 9. 16.
yet to shift off this evidence, he tells us, that Testator, p. 182, 183, 184.
signifies the witness of another testament; so Christ is no more then a
witness, or dying Martyr, to testify the truth of the Testament by his death.
This is such a piece of Law-Criticisme that never any good Lawyer knew before;
and such ill Latin, that any good and modest Scholar would be ashamed of. But
Amb. n. 37. de Virgin. and Tull. Epist. 69. Aug. Cont. Jul. l. 3. c. 13.
Libri non erub* s^unt, your black Comment cannot blush. Yet St. Austin said of
Julian, a P^lagian, for asserting an heresy less dangerous then yours, Puto
ipsum libri tui atramentum, erubescendo convertitur in minium.

CHAP. VIII. Shows against this Commenter, that men's souls dye not with
their bodies.
I Must not omit your rare doctrine concerning the souls of dead men. You tell
us, that [ they are void of all sense of time intervening between the time of
our p. 228. and 267.
death, and resurrection; though Scriptures speak as if we should wholly live
till Christ's coming, but it is because thousands of years seem but as one minute
to one that sle^peth, or is dead so long -- and None are entered into heaven,
besides Christ, etc.

I perceive you like not the opinion of those Anabaptists who taught the
Psychopanychian, or sleeping of dead men's souls, neither are you arrived to
the height of the Jewish S^dduces, or heathenish Epicures; for they denied a
resurrection, which you confess; yet you have chose a fair middle way, and
with them you believe that our souls dye with our bodies; and your confessing
of the resurrection, is but a reserve by which you reinforce your doctrine of
the Souls mortality for when you perceived that the words of Christ against
the Sadduces, made also against you, when he alleged Matthew. 22. 32. Exodus 3. 6.
those words, I am the God of Abraham, to prove that Abraham then lived,
because Abraham's soul lived; (for those words were spoken long after Ab^aham
was dead) to avoid this you tell us, that it proves only that Abraham must one
day be recalled to life: so though Abraham's soul was then dead, and therefore
Abraham was not living, yet God is the God of the living; (that is, of the
living* dead* Abraham) because some thousands of years after, Abraham may be
revived: you may do well to reform Church-Creeds, and add to ( The
Resurrection of the body) the resurrection of the soul, which has been always
omitted, because the Church thought, that only the body falls, and that the
body only is c^dav^r, and only of that there will be a resurrection: to the
penitent Thief it is said, This Luke. 23. 43.
day shall thou b^w^th me in P^^^d se; this (...) is not yet come by your
doctrine, though sixteen hundred years are run out since: St. Paul in the
narration of his rapture into the third heaven, confesses he 2 Cor. 12. 2.
knew not whether he were in the body, or out of the body; therefore in his
opinion pos^^bly his soul might be in that heaven, whilst his body was on
earth: and St. Stephen at his Marty^dome said, Lord Jesus, receive Acts 7. 59.
my (...): if his soul was then to dye, I marvel why he would not as well say,
Lord Jesus, receive my body; but surely he thought his spirit or soul was not
mortal: and this is consonant with the doctrine of the best ^ilosophers, who
proved the soul to be separably existible, because they discovered that our
soul has operations, which are ino^ganical; for the intellective faculty uses
the body only as an object, but not as an instrument; and our most excellently
learned Physician, and rare Philosopher Doctor Thomas Brown of Norwich has
taught us, R^lig. Medici part. 1. sect. 35. (...) l. de Ani^^* c. 44. vide
(...) l. 7. c 52. (...) Hes^ch^^m in vita Aris^^ae and Epimenidis. ^. 4^, 46.
That in the dissecting of a man no Organ is found proper to the Reasonable
Soul; and that in the brain of man there is nothing of moment* (...) then in
the Cranie of a ^east. And Tertullian tells a story of one Hermotimus, whose
soul used to leave h^s body for a time, and Evagari, (as his word is) to wand^r
abroad, whilst his body lay like a dead corpse, and to return again, till his
enemies took advantage; and whilst his soul was absent, they burnt his body:
And such another story does Origin tell of the same Orig. cont. Cells. l. 3.
man, whom he calls Clazomenius. Now whether this be true or not, yet it argues,
that in the judgment of these profound Philosophers, the soul possibly may
exist out of the body. I perceive that the Judgment of the Church has but
little power to sway you; for you snatch at any paradox, (though heretical)
that comes in your way. Eusebius tells us, that this very opinion Eusebius. hist.
l. 6. c. 27.
of the souls dying with the body, and rising again with the body, was
accounted heretical by the Church, and that it was in an open Council confuted
by Origin; though Origin himself erred on the other side; and St. Austin in his
catalogue of Heresies, calls Aust. haer. 83. Aug. de Ecclesiast. dogm. c. 15.
n. 72. Basil. hom. de avar. n. 12. Philo. de mundi opificio. p. 31. n. 2.
this of yours, the Arabic heresy, and our humane soul is by him called Anima
substantiva, i. e. a substautivesoul, because it can subsist alone; and of such
men which say their souls are mortal, St. B sil says they have Animam
p^rcinam, a swinish soul; and Philo the learned Jew says, that a man is (...),
i. e. a creature mortal and immortal, because he has a mortal body, and an
immortal soul, and this the Church has taught in all ages, and is so delivered
Ambr. de fide l. 2. c. 3. n. 22.
by St. Ambrose, That the soul of man cannot dye. The sleeping of dead Saints
which you read of in Scripture, is meant just as their rising is, not of
souls, but of bodies, Many bodies of the Saints which slept, arose. Matthew. 27.
52.


But what think you of the soul of Christ? did that die with his body? No
Christian that ever I heard of thought so, perhaps neither do you; or if you
do, I care not: the same argument which the Apostle draws from Christ's
resurrection to prove our resurrection, will be as firm, to prove the
immortality of our souls, by the immortality of his soul, 1 Cor. 15. 16. If
the dead rise not, then is not Christ risen. So if man's soul be not immortal,
then was not Christ's soul immortal; and if Christ's soul dyed not, neither
will our souls dye.

The doctrine of the Souls immortality is so demonstrable by nature, that the
Ancient Christians symbols, or rules of faith, did not expressly declare it as
an article of faith Christian, because even Si in hoc erro quod animas hominum
immortales credam; libe^^er erro, hunc er^orem mihi extorqueri nolo -- aveo
patres vestros (mortuos) videre. Cic de Senect.
heathen Philosophers both confessed, and proved it; but yet in the later
Creeds of the Church, the article of Christ's descent was added, for no greater
cause at first, that ever I could learn or discover, then this as the most
principal, to assert the Immortality of his humane Soul, and thereby to set
forth this true doctrine of the Immortality of all men's souls; and the Church
had great reason for it, because all Christians for some Centuries of years
generally believing this doctrine: In the fag end of the primitive times many
atheistical and Ep^cur^an professors sprung up, and denied this truth
obstinately, and then it became an heresy, and was so recorded by St. Austin
(as is said before) under the title of the Arabic heresy, and so occasioned a
new article of Christ's descent (although it was an old Scriptural received
truth) to be put into the Creed; I am not ignorant, that in Epiphanius the
Epi^u^eans are set down Epiph. haer. 8.
among heretics, who denied this truth, and so are S^oicks, and Pythagoreans,
and Jews, which I take to be something unproper, because none can be called
heretics, except they (at least) profess Christianity* and perhaps Epiphanius
meant such Christians, who in Philosophy were of those Sects, or Jews by birth.

CHAP. IX. Of the most ancient Creed; why so many additions have been made, and
particularly the article of Christ's descent.
THe Reasons that move me to think that the new article of Christ's descent was
added to the Creed, principally to set forth the Immortality of man's soul,
are now to be brought forth to the Readers view. It was a long time before the
Church-Creed went about in writing, (though some private men did so preserve
it) yet it was learned by oral tradition, and so rehearsed Hill. de Synodis
cont. Arian. n. 7.
at baptismes; and this is noted by St. Hilarie, Fides Apostolica non scripta
erat literis, sed Spiritu, Conscriptas sides hucusque nesciverunt Episcopi;
(i.) The Apostles Cre^d or faith was not written by letters, but by the Spirit,
until these days (about the Nicene Council) the Bishops did not take notice
of any written Creeds: and the same Father finds fault with the writing of
Creeds, Fides scribenda est quasi in cord non fuerit, (i.) Hilar. contr.
Constable. l. 3. n. 6.
Faith must now adays be written, as if it had no place in men's hearts: and
although this symbol or Creed were not written, yet it is confessed that it
went about traditionally, and without additions from the Apostles; as
Ter^^llian for his time shows, Ab initio Evangelii Tert. Cont. Prax.
d^cucurrit, ante priores quosque haere^icos; (i.) The rule of faith spread
from the beginning of the Gospel, and before Praxea's her^sies began. And again
he says, (Regulam Tert. de praescr. haeret.
hanc) Ecclesia ab Apostolis, Apostoli a Christo, Christus a D^o tradidit, (i.)
The Church delivered the Creed as it came from the Apostles, and the Apostles
from Christ, and Christ from God: for there is nothing in that Creed, but what
is the express doctrine of Scripture. Now the reason why the Apostolical rule
of faith, or Creed, was not published then in writing, is rendered by Ruffinus
in Cyprian; The Apostles did not deliver this Symbol Cypr* in Symb.
i^ paper or parchment, but by tradition oral, to be laid up in the heart, that
so it might the better appear that the doctrine thereof was really from the
Apostles; for Infidels might have got it into their hands; If it had been
written, and by that color of rehearsing this Creed, hypocritically, might
have undermined the Church, therefore it was delivered rather vocally then in
writing: just as the Commander in War, gives the Word or sign v^cally, and no^
in writing, by which friends are discerned from enemies; which wate hword is
called Symbolum, as the Creed is; that is, a token or signal. Thus far Ruffinus.

The most ancient record of the Christians Symbol^ which I find written, and
without exception (for that which is in the Constitutions of Clemens, I
believe, is much later) is in Tertullian, who was a Writer as himself says in
the year after the birth of Christ, 160. Tert. de Monoga.
which I have here inserted, that the Reader may see how much has been added
to that first Creed, until these days; as I find it in Tertullian, lib* de
Veland. Virgin. principio.

Regula fidei una, immobilis and irreformabilis. Tert. de Velan. Virginibus.


Credendi in unicum Deum Omnipotentem, mundi conditorem Vide Doctrinam
praedicationis Apostolicae apud. Irenae. lib. 1. ^. 2.
and Filium ejus Jesum Christum natum ex Virgin Maria, Crucifixum sub Pontio
Pilato, tertia die resuscitatum a mortuis, receptum in coelis, sedentem nunc ad
dextram Patris, venturum judicare viv^s, and mortuis, per carnis ctiam
resurrectionem.

The only Rule of Faith, unmovable and unreformable, is,

To believe in one God Almighty, maker of the World: and his Son Jesus Christ
born of the Virgin Mary, c^ucified under Pontius Pilate, the third day raised
from the dead, received into heaven, sitting now at the right hand of the
Father, that he shall come to judge the quick, and the dead, by the
resu^r^ction also of the flesh.

This is all, in that place the same again in substance is rehearsed, but in a
few more words, Tert. de Praesc. p. 92. Cont. Prax. p. 379.
Lib. de praescriptionibus, with the mention of the Mission of the Holy Ghost:
and the same again, Lib. Cont. Praxean. mentioning also the Mission of the Holy
Ghost, without any other considerable difference: the same Father in the place
above noted, de praescript. tells us, Haec Tert. de Praescript.
regula, nullas dubitationes habet, nisi quas har^ses in ferunt; (i.) that this
rule of faith has no doubts or dissensions (among Christians) but such as a e
raised by heresies: therefore what doubts and dissensions have been so raised,
is next to be considered.

CHAP. X. Of Heresies, which occasioned ne^ additions to the old Creed.
THat the springing up of the tares of heresy, gave occasion to the Church to
enlarge the Creed, thereby endeavoring to extirpate those errors, it may
appear by these instances, whereof some are undeniable, and the rest very
probable, and have been so thought formerly by Erasm. ad facul. Theol. Sorbon.
others.

1. In the Creed of Ruffinus in Cyprian, is Credo resurrectionem hujus carnis,
i. e. the resurrection of this flesh, because the Origenists would not believe
that the resurrection should be of the same body, but of another new body.

2. By the Nicene Fathers, to the words Jesus Christ, was added Unum Dominum,
(i.) One Lord, against the Arians, who would not confess the Father and the
Son to be but one, One Lord.

3. The same Fathers added the word Homoousion against the said Arians, because
they would not believe that the Father and the Son were both of one Godhead or
substance.

4. The Article of Remission of Sins was added after that the Nova^ian
heretics refused to admit any to their Communion (though they were penitents)
which after baptism had lapsed into sin.

5. Catholic Church was added, because the Donatists had confined the true
universal Church, only to be in the part or sect of Donatus, and in Africa, as
is copiously showed by St. Austin.

6. The Lord and giver of life was added to the article of the Holy Ghost
against the Sect of Eunomius, who denied the Godhead of the Holy Ghost.

7. The Article of Christ's Descent into hell was added later then the forenamed
additions, nor was it put into the Creed so as to be generally received until
the Arabic heresy grew rank, which denied the Immortality of man's soul, (as
this our Commenter does) and was therefore put into the Roll of heresie^ by St.
A^stine* as is said before, because by this article the Immortality of man's
soul is asserted, in that the soul of Christ is confessed to descend to the
same invisible condition that other dead men's souls do.

For what greater reason can be alleged, or has hitherto appeared to us
mortals, why this article of Christ's descending into Hades should be so long
after other articles received into the Church? or what have we learned more by
it then that his soul, as other men's, did subsist during its separation, though
in a state and condition which is not yet revealed to us? There was no Creed
which was generally received, that had the Article of Christ's descent till
after St. Austin's time for ought can appear to me; and though St. Austin often
mentions this Creed which is called Apostolical, and disputes it quite through,
and before a Council also, Aug. de fid. and Symb. n. 57.
yet never mentions the article of descent: and (besides that Creed in
Tertullian before set down) neither the Nicene has it, nor was this article
anciently in that Creed which we call the Athanasian; nor in the Symbolical
hymn which goes under the names of Ambrose and Austin, though it is ancient,
and has been generally received in the Western Church: nor was this Article in
the Confession of the Council of Chalcedon. That it was not in the Creed of
Athanasius at first, has been declared lately by the renowned Primate of
Ireland; nor does it yet sufficiently appear that Athanasius was the writer of
it, only we are sure that all the doctrinal Articles of that Creed are still
to be found in the writings of Athanasius; and there are some passages in the
Fathers and Church-Histories that may incline us to think, that when the
Emperor Jovinian sent to Athanasius for an exquisite draught of the Orthodox
faith, Theod hist. l. 4. c. 4. Ruff. hist. l. 2. c. 1. Naz. Orat. 21. in Athan.
Athanasius answered, That the Nicene Creed was to be observed, and withal
sent him (as Ruffinus writes) a form, or description of his faith; and so also
says Nazianzen; That he sent it in writing, which Nicetos thinks to be this
very Creed. Indeed this article was in the Creed of the Church of Aquileia,
which Ruffinus expounded; and also in some Arian Creeds, before the death of
St. Austin, but not received generally till after his death, as is said before,
and therefore I think it very probable, that as other heresies occasioned other
new articles to be added (as is shown) so this Arabic heresy occasioned this
article of descent.

Now that it may appear, that errors, heresies, and sects were the causes of,
not only new articles, but of a multiplying of new Symbols, Confessions and
Creeds, the Fathers and Histories do evidently declare; for in the days of
Constantius, and also of Valens, both Arian Emperors, when every Sect of
Religion was tolerated except only the Orthodox, and they only were
persecuted, whereof St. Basil complained, who Basil. Epist. 38. n. 42.
then lived and suffered affronts, Occlusa sunt ora piorum, reserata est
quaelibet blasphema tingua; (i.) All pious men are silenced, and any blasphemer
may open his mouth and prattle. In these very times, new Creeds did exceedingly
increase and multiply; insomuch, that St. Hilarie, who then lived, thus
complained of them, Hill. advers. Constable. lib. 3. p. 277.
Scribendae, and innovandae fidei usus in olevit. -- Secundum annos scribitur
-- miserabile est tot nunc fides quot voluntates, etc. -- annuas, and menstraus
de Deo fides decernimus; (i.) Now a fashion is brought in of writing and
innovating Creeds; now faith is subservient to the times, rather then according
to the Gospel, and Creeds are dated with the note of the year, and (which is
lamentable) there are as many Creeds as are several minds, we have yearly, and
monthly new Creeds decreed. And Socrates writing of the same times, calls
those Soc. l. 2. c. 32.
multituder of Creeds a labyrinth, and observes no less then nine new Creeds
published in one Emperors days; insomuch that some of them for distinction,
were dated not only with the name of the then Emperor, but also with the names
of the Consuls of that year. The same Socrates also sets this mark upon Soc.
l. 2. c. 29.
those times, That then, Religion was most weak, when so many Religions were
afoot; and Erasmus sets Erasm. de rat. Relig.
this brand upon those perfidious Arian times, Vbi coepit esse minus fidei --
mox increvit symbolorum numerus; (i.) The less Faith, the more Creeds; as
Lipsius Lips. de Constable. in praefat.
also observed of these later times, Nullum saculum feracius Religionum, steril
us pietatis, (i.) Never more Religions, nor less godliness.

Thus may the Reader perceive the reason both why so many new Creeds were
stamped, and why so many new articles were added to the first Creed, and
particularly, that to assert the immortality of Christ's soul, and so
consequently of every man's soul, the article of Christ's descending into Hades,
or hell, was with others, added to the old Creed.

CHAP. XI. What the word Hades signifies, which we translate Hell, that the
place and condition of souls departed is unknown; of the visions of S.
Hierome, and Curina, and the apparition of Irene deceased.
IF it be examined what the meaning of those words in the Creed is, (...), it
will appear that they signify no more then that the soul of Christ (during its
separation from his body) was existent in such an invisible state, place and
Condition, as the souls of other dead men were: but where and how it was, I
think all the Philosophers, and Theologs in the world cannot by their reading
certainly determine, and yet these are the very same words which are used in
Scripture, Act. 2. 27. for this word Hades signifies Invisible, Act. 2. 27.
Psalm. 16. 10.
and is a word which the heathens used, to signify that the souls of men
deceased, as they are truly and really existent, so that the place and
condition of them was unknown and invisible; and although this word was used by
heathens, and with some mixture also of fabulosity, yet the Scripture retained
it, to countenance so much of it as was true. Our English tongue is I think
defective in translating this, and some other (...)
words; for Hades in heathen Writers signified as well a good, and joyful
condition of souls departed, as a sad, and woeful state: and I have heard that
Mr. Broughton reported, that he had seen the Lords Prayers in an ancient Greek
Manuscript, which began thus Archbish. of Armach.
(...) if this be true then Hades must there, signify (...). But our English
word Hell, is ever with us taken in the worse sense, but yet so it signifies a
state of (...), and permanency of the soul a^ neither ^y^^^ (...) The Ancient
Fathers as they did generally, and dogmatically teach the Immortality of man's
soul. (...) did they as generally teach the doctrine of (...) descending into
Hades, but as they could not tell us certainly the condition of other men's
souls no more could they assure us of the place, and condition of (...)
Christ's soul, though some of them ventured very far and yet much differing one
with another for that saying, (...). Epist. (...) ^. 30.
Psalm. 24. 7. Lift up your (...), (...) gave] is expounded of Christ's ascending
into heaven by Eusebius, and c Hierom, and Theod. (...). incons^^n 1^
The (...), and (...). But the very same words are also expounded of his
descent into hell by Epiph. Ser Mag. Sab n 32.
Epiphanius, and also by Chrysostom. Ser. de P^nt n. 49. ^^ ^^m. quod Christus Deus.
n. 52.
Chrysostom in another place, so that he expounds the same words both ways. I
am therefore persuaded that God has purposely (for reasons best known to his
Divine wisdom) concealed from us mortals the state of souls departed, because I
find in Scripture that d^yers have risen from the dead, but ^ ^^nd not that
they ever made any discovery of that unknown land; no not Lazarus who was dead
four days; and though he lived 3^ years Epiph hae. 6^ 2. Cor. 12. 2.
after his resurrection, as Epiphanius writes nor St. Paul, though he died
not, yet was rapt into the (...) heaven, and tells us that he heard words which
is not lawful for a man to utter: and though he also lived more then 14 years
after yet neither of them revealed it, though the knowledge of it ever was, and
^^^ll is very much desired, and it was the wish of (...) Eras. ad Theol.
Parisiens. ^^ 22. Cle. To. in Recog. princip
Vtinam Paulus (...) ruisset qualiter extent animae, (...) a corpore, and
ubinum extent. (i.) I wish St. Paul was declared in what place, and condision
souls departed (...). And this was an old currositie; for we read in (...),
that before his conversion, he was very desirous to kuow something of the souls
immortality and for himself confesteth) often thought to employ some (...) to
raise dead a man's soul, that so he might be informed; J^st. apol. 2. ^. ^^.
and after him Justin Martyr labors to prove, that men's souls are immortal,
because (as he thought) Conjurers used to raise the souls of dead men: and in
the reign of the Emp. Caligula, one Canius a worthy man, was playing at tables
when a Warrant came for his execution, Sen. de Tranq. c. 14.
so he took leave of his play-follows, and promised them that (if after death
he could) he would appear to them, and certify them of the affairs of the
other World, as Seneca relates, but we find not that he ever returned from the
dead, and though we read in the Ecclesiastical histories that Irene, the
daughter of Ruf. l. 1. c. 5. Soc. l. 1. c. 8.
Bishop Spiridion, (who was a member of the Nic^ne Council) having in her
custody in her lifetime a rich jewel, which was left with her in trust, and
that she having hid it* died, and did not discover the place where she had laid
it, so that the owner demanded it of her father, with bitter menacing words,
charging him with fraud. The holy man went in the bitterness of his soul, to
his dead daughters Sepulcher, and there prayed that the truth might be made
known, and presently he saw an apparition of his said daughter, which revealed
the place where the jewel was hid, and there it was found, yet no tidings from
the other World are mentioned. I know not why I may not think, that this
apparition was a good Angel in the shape of Ir^n^ (for why may not good Angels
appear in the femal shapes, as well as an evil Angel appeared in the likeness
of Samuel?) It is a strange story, that 1. Sam. 2^. Hier. Epist. 53. c. 13. n.
5.
St. Hierom tells of himself, in his trav^l toward Jerusalem, he fell into a
fever, and to men's thinking was dead, and was laid out, and burial was prepared
for him; during this time of his seeming death, he thought he was brought
before a judgment seat, and by sentence of the judge was greivously scourged
for reading secular books, but at the request of them that stood about the
Judge, he was released, and dismissed, and so presently returned to his life,
and senses, and found his eyes full of tears, and his shoulders black and blew
and sore, as if they had bin beaten, so that himself knew not what to think of
it, whether it were an ecstasy, a rapture, or a real emigration of his soul,
for he says, it was more then a sleep and dream. It was a divine monition no
doubt, by a kind of vision, to engage him more earnestly in divine studies, as
himself confesses it did; but what ever it was, yet we are never the wiser
concerning dead men's souls and their state, such another story does St. Austin
tell of Aug. de Cura pro Mort. c. 13.
one Curina, who lay as dead for some days but returning to his senses, tells
them that in this trance he was certified, that the Messenger which was sent to
fetch his soul, mistook him for another man of the same name, hi^ near
neighbor, and indeed it was found that at the same moment, wherein this Curina
was restored to life, the other Curina died: yet neither the dead, which come
to the living, nor the living which (as they imagined) went to the dead, and
returned again, have yet informed us of the other World.

CHAP. XII. A digressive Censure of St. Hierome's an^ Curina's Visions, how
they might be presented; and of Exstasies, Raptures or Trances, both from God,
and from the Devil.
By the way it will not be amiss to digress a little, and discourse how, and
in what manner these apparitions, and visions probably were showed to St.
Hierome, and also to other holy men; for I do not believe that their souls
were then really departed, and totally separated from their bodies: but I think
they were taken in an exstasie, or trance, such as we read of, Act. 10. 10. for
when the vision of the sheet was presented to the soul or mind of St. Peter,
the word there used is (...) and so again when Christ showed himself to St.
Paul in the Temple, Act. 22. 17. he was in a trance, (...). Now an exstasie or
trance is as St. Austin describes it, Cum abripitur animi intentio Aug. de Genesis
ad let. l. 12. c. 6. Ibid. c. 21. n. 69.
a sensibus, (i.) When our soul is elevated, and taken off from the use, and
management of our bodily senses, and is actuated and enlightened by the Spirit
of God, or some Angel. So the same Father says again, Bono Spiri^u assumitur
anima hominis, cum in somnis futura videt -- sic A^gelus apparet Joseph in
somnis; (i.) When in our sleep things to come are revealed to us, our soul is
taken, and informed by some good spirit; as Joseph was by an Angel, Matthew 2.
13. And so also Prosper says, Ecstasis est cum men's aliqua inspiratime
assumitur: (i.) An Ecstasie is when Prosper in Psalm. 115. n 46.
our soul is wholly taken up and employed by some inspration: And St. Bisil
says, That when we read that the Basil. in Ps. 28. hom. 5.
Word of the Lo^d came to the Prophets, we are not t^ think so grossly, as if
God uttered vocal, and audible sounds, or words to them; but that he informed,
and instructed their souls by a more divine way of illumination, though
something like; as we in our ordinary dreams do imagine we hear voices, and
discourses of men, and see our friends, or such like, when they are but the
imaginations of our brain. St. Austin Aug. Epist. 101.
does very fitly resemble them thus, Non erant voces corpor^ae ex^rinsecus, sed
quales apud nos tacit trans^urrimus memori^^r, vel can^ando; i. e. When the
Word of the Lord came to a Prophet, it was not any outward corporeal voice, but
in such a way as we use, when silently in our minds, and by our memories, we
discourse with our selves inwardly, as in running over a business, or an
Oration, or a song, which men usually do only by thoughts, though our tongue
never move; and just so does the holy Po^t Prudentius describe St. Prudent. in
hamartig. p. 187.
John's Revelation:

Corporeus Johannes adhuc, nec carne solutus
Secedenie anima, non discedente videba^.
St. John saw the Revelation, when his soul was not out of his body, but
retired to it self, from the use ^o the body: and St. Basil tells us, Si nos
viveremus anima Basil. hom. Diverse. 3. n. 11.
nuda -- sine carnis velamentis, cogitationes cognosceremus* nunc verbis opus
est: (i.) When our souls have put off the garments of our flesh, then they
shall understand one another by thoughts, as now men do by words. And St.
Austin is of the same judgment, Tunc patebunt Aug. de Civ. l. 22. c. 29.
cogitationes invicem; (i.) That our pure spirits shall perceive, and converse
with one another by thoughts.

Now when our souls are so ecstatically retired from our bodies, as that they
do not so much as contemplate the Phantasmes as their object, then are they in
a fit posture to converse with the Divine Spirit of God, or those immaterial
and heavenly spirits, the holy Angels; and when our souls are so elevated,
then such visions or revelations as are presented to our minds, are as evident
to us, as if they had been sensibly presented to our eyes, or ears: and thus
St. Hierom^ Hier, proaem. in Esai. n. 33.
says, That the holy Prophets were instructed in their Prophecies by God, in
such c^st^sies, and by Angels also: for that which we read, Zach. 2. 3. The
Angel that talked with me; in St. Hier. it is thus read, Angelus qui loquebatur
in me, (i.) The Angel which sp^ke in me: and Ter^ullian says, Ecstasis est qua
Prophe^ia Constat; i. e. Tertul. de anima. c. 21.
Proph^cie does consist in ecstasie; and in the Primitive times of the Church
before the ordinary gift of Prophetical Revelations was ceased. St. Cyprian
tells us, Impletur apud nos Spiritu sancto puerorum innocens Cyp. l. 3. Epist.
14. n. 71.
aetas, quae, in ecstasi vidit oculis, and audit: and loquitur ea quibus nos
Dominus monere dignatur: (i.) With us, children in their innocent age, see and
hear in ecstasies, and declare to us such things as God does vouchsase to
admonish us of: and St. Austin do^bteth not to call that Aug. de Genesis cap. 5.
l. 6.
wonderful sleep of Adam when the rib was taken out of him, an ecstasie, or
divine ^apture, Deus misit ecstasin in Adam -- evigilab^^ plenus Prophetiae, --
inirans in curiam angelo^um; i. e. God sent an ecstasie upon Adam -- he awaked
full of Prophecy -- entering into the Court of angels, and therefore Origin
reckons Orig. in Cant. ho. 2.
Adam amongst the Prophets.

Now when such ecstasies were brought upon men by God or good Angels from him,
the person so illuminated was called (...) but if evil Angels invaded, 2 Timothy
3. 16.
and actuated men's minds, then their ejaculations were called (...),
ethusiasmes, because they proceeded from Satan the heathens god; by which
spirit the Oracles of the heathens gave answers in Pythonists, and that spirit
it was which spoke in men possessed with an evil spirit, so that many times
when the Priest was in an extatical fury or madness, he knew not what the evil
spirit spoke in him or her; just as men possessed did not know what they said
or did, such persons were by the Church called ^nerg^men^, and daemoni^^^, that
is, such as were acted and wrought upon by evil spirits; and therefore
Tertullian translates this Tert. de anima. c. 21.
word (...), amentia, madness they knowing no more what they said, then that
Serpent, in which the devil spoke, when he tempted Eve.

For whereas the Spirit of God in divine exstasies did wonderfully enlighten
holy Prophets, who were therefore called Videntes, (i.) Se^rs; contrarily the
spirit of Satan did mostly darken the minds of his Prophets, and Demoniacks, so
that they perceived nothing of what their lips uttered; and therefore Justin
Martyr said of Justin. lib. 1. ext. n. 6.
such, Sibylla non intelligunt quae dicunt, (i.) These Proph^^^sses do not
understand what themselves proph^sie: and Origin says, Pythia furit, nec sui
compos est, dum promit Orig. cont. Cells. l. 7. n. 36.
(...), (i.) The Pythonisse is mad, when she utters the Oracl^s: and
therefore such are commonly called Arrep^i^i^, men forcibly snatched, and used
but as an instrument by the evil spirit: and the same Orig^n tells Orig. Peri*
Arc. l. 3. c. 3. Hier. in vita Hilarion. n. 10.
us, that Magicians would cause young Children to pronounce Poems which they
never learned: and St. Hierome writes of one Orionus a Demoniack, in whom the
evil spirit spoke with many several voices at the same time.

This is sufficient to show in what manner those extatical apparitions,
probably might be presented to men's souls, and also may be an argument of the
souls sepa^ability, because by this we perceive, it may have operations which
do not at all depend upon the body: and in all these revelations, and
intercourses with Angels good and bad, we cannot receive any certain
intelligence, what the state of the other world is.

CHAP. XIII. Of the apparitions of the dead; and that they are not the souls
of men deceased, but other spirits assuming their shapes.
ALthough the known Inhabitants of both parts of the other Wo^ld, (I mean the
holy Angels, and the infernal spitits) have oftentimes appeared to, and
conversed with mortal men, yet still we are ignorant of the affairs both of
the City of God, and also of the infernal Sodom; howbeit those spirits have
showed themselves in plausible shapes of men, and of our friends and kindred,
and not in such terrible apparitions, as might deter men from any converse with
them: for the Scripture declares, that God and good Angels have appeared in
shapes of men, and that evil An^els have also appeared so, as to S^ul in the
likeness of Samuel, and also to Christ in his temptation: for, no doubt, Satan
conversed with him in the similitude of a man; and the Ecclesi^stical Writers
asfirm the same. Tertullian tells us, that in the Tert. de anima, c. 57.
exorcism^s which the Church in his time used over men possessed with unclean
spirits, the spirit would say, Se esse aliquem p^rentum, aut bestiarium aut
talem gladiatorem defunctum, (i) That they were some of their forefathers* or
some beast-master, or such a fencer deceased: and again he says, that it was
usual with Magicians Ibid.
to tell men, that the spirits which they raised, were the souls of dead men,
and that they could raise the souls of the holy Prophets from the dead. The
like is also observed by St. Chrysostom, that when evil spirits appeared
Chrysostom. Ser. 2. de Laz. n. (...)
unto men, they used to say, Monachi illius sum anima, -- sed non c^edo, quia
daemones dicunt, (i.) I am the soul of such a Monk deceased, but I do not
believe it, because the Devil said so: and again he says, That Idem ibid.
the Devil persuaded Conjurers and witches to murder some young men, making
them believe that the souls of those whom they murdered should become
familiar spirits, and be at the command of those Conju^^rs to serve them, and
fulfill their comm^nds; and in later times, Johannes Wier. de praestig. l. 1.
c. 15.
Wierus writ^s, that to satisfy the curiosity of the Emperor Maximil^an the
first, about the year of ou^ Lord 1500* a certain Magician in his Court raised
spirits representing the shapes of Hector, Achi^es, and David, which visibly
ap^^a^ed ^n the presence of the ^^id Emperor. Many more such instances may be
alleged out of Wri^ers of approved credit; but these may suffice to inform us,
that althou^h many have com^ to us from the other world, yet none have given us
intelligence of the state of things there; for although those apparitions good
and bad have entertained discourse with men; as with Saul, and with the blessed
Virgin, yet of this particular they have been silent; and for this reason
perhaps Poets called such apparitions and gh^sts, Silen^^s umbras, and
therefore they had a pretty fiction, that such spirits as returned to this life
from the dead, first drank of the Virg. Aen. 6.
L^^hean River, to signify, that they were so silent of those affairs, as if
they had forgot what their condition was in the other world, because either
they would not, or could not relate the st^^y of it; even in the holy
Scripture, the place of the dead is called the Land of forge^fulnesse; and that
Psalm. 88. 12.
which the Latin reads, Anima mea habi^asset in infe^no. -- and q^i d^scendun^
in insernum, our English Translation reads, Psalm. 94. 17. My soul had almost
dwelt in silen^e -- and ^hey that go down in^o silence; for this Psalm. 115. 17.
reason as I suppose, Necromancie, or consulting with the dead, is forb^dden by
God* Deu^. 18. 11. not that we should think the dead can at their own pleasure;
or at the desire of the living return to us without the special di^pensation
and appointment of God; for St. Austi^ ass^^^d himself, that if it were in the
power of Aug. de Cur. pro Mort. c. 13.
souls departed to come and converse with mortals, his holy and most loving
mother d^ceased, who followed him by Sea and Land in her life, would nor have
been so long absent from him, but would have come and administered comfort to
him among his man old sorrows, and so he concludes out of the 27* Psalm. My
father, and my mother have fors^ke^ me. But because Psalm. 27. 10.
God having d^termined to conceal from us the state of the dead, and because
men should not delude th^mselves, nor be deluded by Satan, by conversing with
Devils when they were raised in the shapes of men departed this life, therefore
Necromancy is forbidden; and indeed as Origin has well noted upon that Law
Orig. ho. 7* in Esai. 22.
that they that enquire of the dead; A daemonihus quaerunt, qui mo^tui sun^
D^o, (i.) N^cromancers that enqu^re of the dead, do consult with Devils, who
are dead to God.

CHAP. XIV. That the Commemoration of the dead in the prayers of the Church was
intended principally to set forth the Immortality of their souls.
IF it be enquired to what end, or purpose the ancient Church set up that
custom of praying for the souls of men departed, it will appear that the
chief motive hereunto, was to declare the Churches assured belief, that the
souls of men survived after this life was ended, and conrinued in a state of
Immortal^ty: for it cannot appear clearly that the Church had any precept for
it, or any example in the Scripture, and so much is acknowledged by Epiphanius
when he wrote against that Aerius who separated from the Church, partly because
he disliked the custom of praying for the dead; (and chiefly because
Eustatius, was preferred to the Bishopric before A^ ius) I say Epiphanius
Epiph. haer. 75.
confesses, that the Church performed those rites to the dead, Tradi^ione a
patribus accep^a^* (i.) because the ancient Fathers did so before his time, and
from them the Church received that custom; for says he, Quis poterit Ib. n.
22.
statutum matris disso^^^re, aut legem pa^ris? (i.) Who can dissolve the
statutes of the Church our Mother, or the laws of the Fathers? and it cannot
appear to us what benefit the dead receive by the prayers of the living, nor
has the ancient Church fully satisfied us herein, for St. Ambrose prayed for
the deceased Emperor Theodosius, Ambr. de obit Theod. n. 47.
whom he then believed to be in lumine, and San^torum ^^tu; (i.) that he was in
the light of God, and company of Saints, and St. Austin prayed thus for his
godly Aug. Confess. l. 9. c. 13.
Mother deceased, Pro peccatis matris mea deprecor te Deus -- demit^e illi
debita sua, etc. (i.) I beseech thee, O God, for the sins of my Mother, that
thou would forgive her, and yet immediately he says, Credo jam feceris quod
rogo. (i) I believe thou have alread^y done what I now pray for.
Notwithstanding the Church did so pray, and Epiphanius gives this reason why
the names of the dead were Epiph. hae. 75.
mentioned in the Church-prayers: Quia hoc magis fuerit utile, quid commodius?
-- quod credunt praesentes, quod by qui decesserunt, vivunt, and non sunt
nulli? (i.) What can be more profitable to the living, then to be assured that
the dead persons commemorated, do still live, and that they are not
annihilated? So we see the Church had other reasons, which moved them so to
commemorate the dead, though the deceased received no benefit thereby. As, 1.
To commend unto the living, and in their minds to preserve the wholesome
doctrine of our Souls immortality. 2. Their prayers did challenge the
performance of Gods promises, to those deceased, who had lived, and died in the
Lord, as is declared, Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord,
says the Spirit. 3. For the consolation of the living, the Priest declared,
that the sins of such holy men which had lived, and died in the faith of
Christ, were forgiven. 4. The Church gave thanks for their departure to rest,
as acknowledging the mercy of God, by which they were saved, and not by their
own merits. Some Divines think that when St. Paul prayed for Onesiphorus, The
Lord grant unto him, that he, may find mercy of the Lord in that day, 2 Timothy 1.
18. that Onesiphorus was at that time dead, because in the end of the Epistle,
in the salutations there is no mention of Onesiphorus, but of his family only,
2 Timothy 4. 19.

And because there is no state or condition of men in this life, though never
so sinful, which excludes them from the benefit of being prayed for, therefore
some Expositors have thought that when St. John said, There is a sin unto
death, I do not say he shall pray for it, 1 John 5. 16. his meaning is, that
such an one who lives and dies in a soul-destroying sin, (such as shall in
this book afterward be discovered) without repentance, for such a man's prayers
are unprofitable, and vain, not excluding others that die in the Lord, to be
commemorated in the prayers of the living, as Onesiphorus before mentioned, and
in that sense, as is before said, and this is St. Heromes exposition in his
objurgatory Hier 10. 9. Epiad Evang.
Epistle to Evangius, (if it be his own) and so also says the interlineal
gloss with Lyra.

St. Austin being hard put to it to give an account* why the Church prayed for
the dead, and what benefit the dead had by the prayers of the living, by the
questions of Dulcitius, and Paulinus, confesses most inge Aug. lib. de Cur
promort^ c. 1.
nuously, that the dead can have no benefit at all by our prayers here, except
by their good life they were capable of good before their death: and again he
says, Because the Church knows not unto what dead men, Aug. ib. c. 17.
her prayers are profitable, therefore she prays pro omnibus regeneratis,
(i.) for all the regenerate, that none may be omitted.

CHAP. XV. That the Fathers did not believe, that Souls departed were
insensible, as if they were dead, or asleep, because the Saints departed do
pray for the Church Militant, as the Fathers thought.
HAving showed before what the Church Militant did here below, for the
Triumphant part above: it would now be considered, what the Triumphant Church
above, does for us that are on earth, in the judgment of the Fathers.

The ancient Church were so far from thinking that our souls died with our
bodies, that they affirm, and verily believe, that the souls of holy men
departed, and being in rest, did pray for the Church on earth; for so St.
Hierom tells us, the Saints deceased pray for the living; Hier. Epist. 53. n. 17.
for they that had so much charity on earth, as to pray even for their enemies
and persecutors, much more will they now in heaven, pray for the Church. St.
Paul is not less charitable after his departure, then he was before, and so he
wished Heliodor^^, that if he died before Hier. Eipst. 1. n. 1.
Hierom, to pray for him when he was in heaven; so likewise he desires Id.
Epist. 27. n. 7. and
Principia, and Id. Epist. exeg. 140. n. 30
Paula to remember him when they are in heaven. And St. Ambrose professes,
Amb. de fide and Resur. n. 30.
That he expects the intercession of his brother Satyrus deceased, for the
speedier deliverance out of the miseries of this life, and that he hoped the
godly Emperor Id. de Obit. Theod. n. 47.
Theodosius departed, did yet pray to God for his surviving Children, and that
the dead Emperor Id. de Obit. Valent. n. 46.
Gratian, did pray for his brother Valentinian. Of the same Judgment is St.
Chrysostom; Chrysostom. ser. de uno Legisl. to. 6. n. 55.
for he doubts not to affirm, that the Martyrs, and Prophets, and Apostles
deceased, do actually pray for the living: and before him St. Cyprian in his
lifetime contracted with Cornelius, Cyp. l. 1. Epist. 1.
Qui prior e vita discesserit, oret pro sratribus; (i.) That which of them
should first dye, must pray for the survivers: and in an Epistle written to
some Martyrs who were very speedily to suffer death for Christ, he desires
Cyp. ad Marty. n. 98. Naz. Orat. 24.
them to be mindful of him when they were in the honor of Martyrs, with the
Lord. Greg. Naz. tells us, that Athanasius though deceased, yet (as he was
persuaded) did still help and assist the Church; and that his friend St. Basil
deceased, and now in heaven, yet Naz. Orat. 20.
even there poured out prayers for the people. And of his reverend old father
deceased, who had been a long time Bishop of Nazianzum, he says, That he
doubts Id. Orat. 19.
not, but though he were in heaven, yet the same Pastoral care which he had on
earth, remains still with him; and now that he is approached nearer to God,
he does more good for that flock by his prayers in heaven, then he could do by
his doctrine on earth.

This is enough to show what the Fathers thought of the Immortality of the
souls of men; and the same opinion was so generally received of Christian
people in those days, that, as St. Chrysostom reports, they Chrysostom. Ser. 4.
de Laz. n. 42.
would commonly boast, that they should find great friends and assistants in
the other life, because they had many pious friends gone before them; one would
say, My father was a Martyr; and another, My Grandfather was a Bishop; and a
third, Such and such a holy man was my dear friend on earth, therefore we shall
find friends in the other world; Thus far St. Chrysostom. Notwithstanding all,
this that has been said, of which this Commenter cannot be ignorant, yet
against all this evidence, he denies the Immortality of the Soul: Like another
Vrbicus Potentinus, an heretic, to whom Athanasius thus writes, O Potentine,
adversus Scripturas Athan. cont. Poten. n. 30.
divinas, vel totum mundum, tu solus sentis; (i.) Potentinus held an opinion
heretical against the holy Scriptures, and also against the whole world.

CHAP. XVI. Of the departure of our souls from our bodies, and the Conductors
or leaders of them to the other world; and of the places or mansions of dead
men's souls.
IN the last place it will not be amiss to set down what the Scriptures, and
the Ancient Fathers have said concerning the departures, and mansion-places of
dead men's souls, which will be also a strong argument against the Epicurean
doctrine of this Commentary.

The Angels in Scripture are called ministering spirits -- to the heirs of
salvation, Heb. 1. 14. their charge is to keep such in all their ways, Psalm.
91. 11. therefore as Angels conducted Peter out of prison, Act. 12. 7. and Lot
out of Sodom, Genesis 19. 16. so likewise Angels are employed (no doubt) in the
conveying, and placing, and settling departed souls in such mansions as are by
God appointed for them: for so the Scripture declares in the Parable of the
beggar, which for substance is indeed but parabolical; yet for the Circumstance
of the conducters of his soul, the persons are really set forth, so as is usual
in the passage of other men's souls, even as the burial of the rich man is
mentioned, because it was the common custom of other rich men to be buried. It
is therefore said, The beggar dyed, and was carried by the Angels into
Abraham's bosom, Luk 16. 22. And of another sort of Angels conducting souls,
it is said, Thou fool, this night shall they take ^^y soul from thee, Luke 12.
20. So of the place, or mansion of a blessed soul it is said, it was carried
into Abraham's bosom; and This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.
43. but of the mansion of a reprobate soul it is said, that it was placed
(...), (i.) a place secret, hidden, invisible, and of torment; this is the
sum of what we find in Scripture for the present condition of souls
departed, until the last judgment.

And of the last Judgment it is also said, The Angels shall gather his Elect --
from one end of heaven to the other, Matthew. 24. 31. In correspondence to these
overtures of Scripture, the Church-Writers have set down at large their
expositions, and opinions, both for the several sorts of Conductors, and also
for the distinct mansion-places of the souls of Pious, and of Impious Just.
quaest. n. 31.
men. First, Justin Martyr says, Animae hominum ducu^tur ad condigna loca ab
angelis ubi servantur usque ad resurrectionem, (i.) The souls of men are
conducted by Angels to convenient mansions, and there are kept until the
resurrection: and we read in the Constitutions of Clemens, that the Church in
the office of the godly deceased, Clem. Constable. l. 8. c. 47.
prayed thus, Deus Collocet ^um in region^ piorum, -- Angelos placidos ei
constitute, (i.) That God would place them in the region of the godly, and
appoint them gentle Angels: and Iren^^s says, Discipulorum animae Iren. l. 5.
prope finem.
abibunt in invisibilem Lo^um, definitum eis a Deo, and ibi usque ad
resurrectionem ^ommorabuntur: (i.) The souls of Christians shall go into a
place invisible, appointed by God, and there abide until the resurrection. St.
Hierom Hier. Epist. 25. n. 26.
says, Mo^tuos nos, Angelorum turba co^itatur, when we are dead, a multitude
of Angels accompanies us. And again he says of the Martyrs souls, against
Vigilantius, Hier. cont. Vigil. to. 2. p. 159.
Senatoriae dignitatis sunt, ut no^ inter homicidas, teterrimo carcere, sed
libera honest^que custodid -- vecluduntur, (i.) The souls of Martyrs are not
committed to dark prisons, as men-slayers are, but like unto Sena^ors, they are
placed in a free and honorable Custody: and this also is the doctrine of St.
Chrysosto^, Chrysostom. hom. in laud. Mart. to. 1.
Martyrs in caelum ascendun^ Angelis comitantibus, (i.) The souls of Martyrs
ascend into heaven, accompanied with Angels; but of the souls of the reprobate
he says, Malorum animae Chrysostom. de Laz. Ser. 2. to. 5. n. 41. Atha. de Virgin.
n. 24. Basil. exhort. ad bapt. hom. n. 14. Macar. hom. 22.
a metuendis vir^utibus repetuntur, sun^que doctores viae, (i.) The so^les of
evil men are taken and conducted by terrible and aff^ighting powers: which also
Athanasius calls Inclementes angelos, (i.) Churlish and unkind angels: and of
them St. Basil says, Veniet angelus tristis, and animam tuam rapiet ad
Tartara, (i.) A sad d^smal angel will seize on thy soul, and convey it to hell:
and the same is yet more particularly set forth by Mac^^ius of Egypt, Cum
animapeccatirea, e corpore exierit, accedunt Chori daemonum, and sinist^i
angeli, etc. and animam ad parts suas trahunt^ when a guil^y soul deparieth,
troops of evil, and unhappy angels drag it to their ownquarters. These are the
Messengers which are sent for men's souls, some terrible, and feared; others of
pleasant appearance, and desired; the slight apprehension of this truth, and
such Messengers, has occasioned men to fancy, and to paint a meager raw-bon'd
thing with a dart, to be the summoner of men's souls to the other world; which
of these several ^orts of Angels is true?

Now whatsoever common, or distinct and several mansions there are for pious
souls respectively correspondent to their qualities and demeanures on earth;
and so likewise for impious souls in their several degrees, as they are in
bundles gathered, which L^ctantius Lact. de Div. Cult. c. 21. n. 25. Aug. de
Dulc. quaest. n. 89. qu. 2.
calls, Communis custodia, i. e. their common lodge: and St. Austin, Abdita
receptacula, (i.) Secret receptacles; and the Scripture calls them* The
spirits in prison, 1 Pet. 3. 19. yet the Ancient Church did, as we do, reduce
all those mansions to these two appellations of heaven and hell: Ath. de
Incarnat. n. 23.
although there may be several different mansions in hell for the damned, as
well as we read of the blessed in heaven, Joh. 14. 2. In my Fathers house are
many mansions.

CHAP. XVII. Of the blasphemies contained in the Commentary against the Godhead
of Christ, and the Incarnation thereof, and his Redemption of man.
Good Reader, be vigilant now at all the ports of thy soul, and take some
antidote of thy precious Christian faith to corroborate thy heart against the
danger of most deadly poison, for now the Serpents nest, and Pandora's box are
to be opened, containing multitudes of evils, and deadly blasphemies against
the Divine Person of thy dear Savior, and his precious death; all which I must
now present to thy view; and for thy more easy discovery, I will draw them out
in two files, The first contains such blasphemies which deny the Godhead, and
Divine nature of Jesus Christ. The second contains such blasphemies as deny
the Incarnation of God, and the Redemption of man by the Passion, bloodshed,
and death of thy Savior, when he offered himself a full, sufficient expiatory
sacrifice, on the altar of the Cross, and also such as deny the merit of his
active obedience in fulfilling the Whole Law, and performing the Covenant of
God in our stead, on our behalf, and to our benefit; and now they advance

Blasphemies against the Godhead of Jesus Christ.
1. That Christ was by his Resurrection -- consequently dei^ied, Chap. 1 verse.
2. page 3. (it seems the Commenter does not believe that Christ was God before
his death.)

2. That the Creation of the world cannot be referred to Christ, Chap. 1. verse.
10 p. 10. That his making of the world was but the restoring of mankind to a
new state, page 3. (yet all things were made by him -- that were made, Joh. 1.
3.)

3. That Christ had an immense measure of the Holy Ghost, Cap. 1. 9. p. 9. (If
it were immense, how is it a measure? and if by measure, how is it immen^e? is
not this illogical blasphemy? the Scripture says of him, God gives not the
Spirit by measure, unto him, (Joh. 3. 34.)

4. That Christ had a beginning, Cap. 1. 12. p. 13. (Yet of Christ it is said,
His goings forth have been from everlasting, Mich. 5. 2.)

5. That if the Author of this Epistle to the Hebrews had taken Christ to be
the supreme God, he had discou^sed impertinently, C. 1. 10. p. 10. That it is
manifest that Christ is not the Supreme God, C. 5. 5. p. 80. That Christ was a
divine man, C. 7. 22. p. 136. That Christ was opposed to God, Cap. 5. 5. p. 80.
That Christ carried himself as a person diverse from God, and (that he was so)
the thing it self declares, C. 12. 25. p. 320. and p 54.

6. That Christ does not forgive sins of his own authority, Cap. 4. 14. page
70. That Christ has not power of himself to save us, C. 9. 24. p. 192. (Yet
Christ says, The Son of man has power on earth to forgive sins, Matthew 9. 6.
and, Thou shall call his Name Jesus; for he shall save his people from their
sins; M^^. 1. 21*)

7. That the Angels are equal to Christ for duration, C. 1. 10. p. 10. (The
^ngel are creatures, Christ is their Creator, and therefore before them* and of
longer duration, a part an^e, but if he mean that Angels are equal to him for
duration, a part ^^st only, he has said nothing to his own purpose; for so
souls of men, yea, and devils ^^ all endure for ever, but the Son of God is
from everlasting to everlasting; as is showed out of Mich. 5. 2.)

8. That the Lord Christ was not the first Author of the Gospel, but God was
the first, C. 2. 3. p. 19. If the Law had been published by God himself, it had
been m^re excellent then the Gospel etc. C. 2. 2. p. 16. (This blasphemy is
particularly answered before, Cap. 7*)

9. That the Saints in heaven shall no^ ^e under Christ, but besides him, C. 2.
6. p. 23. (What! Check by soul? yet, Philip. 2. 1^. God has pu^ all things
under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the Church; and this
Supremacy is there said to be in heavenly places* verse 20. and, The four and
twenty Elders fall down and worship the Lamb, Rev. 4. 10.

10. That it appears that faith in Christ is not contained in all faith in God,
Cap. 11 6. p. 251. That he that believes in Christ does not believe in him
finally, but in God by him, C. 3. 12. p. 54. (He would have you believe there
is something greater and better then Christ, to believe in Ultimate, and
Terminative.)

11. That Christ must not be compared with that Angel who represented God, C.
12. 25. p. 321. (Yet Christ even in his humane nature exalted, is set far above
all Principalities, and powers, and might, and dominion, and every name that is
named not only in this world, but in that which is to come, Ephe. 1. 21.
Indeed he is said to be made lower then the Angels to suffer death* Heb. 2. 9.
lower in the humiliation of his humane nature; but of his Divine nature alone,
and of his humane, exalted, and so of his whole Person as he is Emmanuel, it is
said, Heb. 1. 6. Let all the Angels of God worship him.

The total sum of all these, is Only this blasphemy, That Christ is not God.

Blasphemies against the Incarnation of the Son of God, and his Work of
Redemption.
1. That Christ the Son of God cannot be said to be Incarnate, more then the
Saints are, Heb. 2. 14. page 31.

2. That the Supreme God can no way be a Priest, C. 5. 5. p. 80. (True, if you
had added this, Except he be Incarnate, and assume humane nature.)

3. The expiatory Offering of Christ for our sins was not performed on earth,
but in heaven, C. 7. 1. p. 116. etc. 8. 4. p. 146. etc. 9. 12. p. 168. That his
offering did not consist in his death, but by his entrance into heaven after
death, C. 9. 7. p. 160. his Priesthood began there, C. 9. 14. p. 171.

4. That Christ was not the Author of the New Testament, but is called the
Testator, only because he was the main witness, C. 9 19. p. 182, 183, 184.

5. That when it is said, Jesus made a surety of a better Testament] Heb. 7.
22. it is not meant that Christ became our surety to God, and took upon him the
payment of our debts; But was a surety of Gods promise, and dyed to assert the
truth of the Covenant, C. 7. 22. p. 136, 319, 348, 357.

6. That Eusebius would not have the Son of God who appeared to Abraham to be
the most high God, Cap. 13. 2. p. 331.

7. That the Nicene Fathers h^ld not that the Son is that one most high God who
is the Father.

These are the Articles of Infidelity, which are affirmed by this Commente^;
against which, (consisting of two Heads, as is said) I will Gods assistance
address two Books following; in the former whereof, The Godhead of Christ
shall be declared; and in the later, the Incarnation of the same Jesus, who is
the true, only, and supreme God, shall be manifested, and thereby the Great
and gracious Mystery of man's Redemption, by our God so Incarnate, will be
unfolded.

CHAP. XVIII. The Conclusion of this first Book, with a friendly Caution to the
Commenter.
BEfore I close up this Book, I desire the Commenter, who denies the Godhead
of Christ, and the Works of Creation, and Redemption by him; to lay to his
heart that saying of St. Austin, Domine, qui In Vita Aug. pro Cor. lan^. lib.
3. c. 42.
non amat te propter opus Creationis, dignus est inferno, quid dicam de to qui
non amat te ^ropter Redemptionem? (i.) Lord, he that does not love thee for thy
work of Creation, is worthy of hell, but what shall I say, of him that does not
love thee for the work of Redemption? And when the same Father heard an
heavenly voice saying unto Idem ibid.
him, Augustine amas me? Dic quantum amas me, (i.) Austin love thou me?
declare how much thou love me. This holy man returned answer, thus. Si ego
Deus essem, and tu Augustinus, vellem fieri Augustinus, ut tu Deus fieres: (i.)
If I were God, and thou were Austin, I would desire to be Austin, that thou
might be God. I do not marvel that he, which denies the Godhead of his
Savior, does labor to prove, and also earnestly desire that men's souls may
die with their bodies, and more yet, that they may be for ever annihilated; or
(if a resurrection, and judgment must needs be) that helltorments may continue
but three days; for although some Schoolmen argue, that it is better to be in
the state of eternal torment then to be annihilated, and so not be at all, yet
I am sure the Scriptures, and Fathers speak otherwise, as of Judas, Matthew. 26.
24. It had bin good for that man if he had not bin bo^ne. Then they shall say
to the mountains, Fall on us, Luke 23. 30. And I doubt not but the devils,
whose continuance is but Misera aeternitas, Aug. de Civ. l. 9. c. 13. Minut.
Foel. p. 330. n. 102.
as Austin speaks E^e^lasting misery, would willingly have an end of being,
wish an end of torment. Minutius Foelix says of some, Malunt extingui penitus
quam ad suppli^ia reparari; i* e. They would rather be for ever dead, then to
be restored to a living torment: and Nazianzen says, Optandum est impr^bis
hominibus, igne Naz. Orat. 10.
aeterno dignis, ut corpus ^orum proti^us extingueretur; i. e. They that have
earned eternal fi^e, may wish that they may never re^urn from death, -- but --
More perire serae, Idem poem. 14. n. 42. Prosp. i^ Sent. 170.
to be like the beasts that perish: because as the first death takes men's
souls from them against their wills: so the Second death, as Prosper says,
Animan nolentem tenet in corpore, (i.) In hell, the souls of the dam^ed shall
be kept in their bodies, against their wills. I have read of one in despair,
that wished that he had been a toad rather then a man; and St. Amb^ose says
Ambr. ad virg. laps. n. 36.
to such kind of men, Beatae vos serae, and volueres quibus nullus me^us est de
inseris; (i.) Happy are the silly beasts and birds, in whom there is no fear of
hell: yea, some have been so affrighted with the thought of those infernal
torments, that they feared to leave this present life: as Seneca reports of
Mecaenas, a noble, but a very Sen. Epist. n. 17.
voluptuous Heathen, that he wished, Deformitatem, debi^^tatem, crucem acu^am,
modo vita prorogetur, (i.) That with continuance of this life, he would be
content to suffer deformity, diseases, yea, and the sharp pain of the Cross:
and of such despairing men, St. Austin says, Si Aug. de lib. arbit. l. 3. c. 6.
quis dixerit, non esse quam me miserum esse mallem, respondebo menti^is; If I
should hear such a man say, I would rather dye, then live in this misery, I
would give him the lie. Now I heartily wish, and pray that this Commenter may
live to see, and revoke, and repent these blasphemies, because I am verily
persuaded, that they are such, of which it is said in the Gospel, that he that
so blasphemeth (and therein lives, and Matthew. 12. 32.
dies impenitent) shall never be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to
come; of which I shall have occasion to speak at large hereafter.

Now that this first Book may not swell to the Readers too much tediousness,
it shall here end; for I am apprehensive by mine own reading of other men's
Books, as they will be of mine; and as Austin said of Aug. de fide. cont. Man.
c. 24.
his own, Ita ^ibri termino, reficitur lectoris intentio, sicut labor viatoris,
hospitio; (i.) The end of a book refreshes a weary Reader, as an Inn does a
weary Traveller.

L. Deo.
FINIS*
THE Second Book.

Wherein is showed, THAT JESUS CHRIST is the True, and Only Supreme, and most
High GOD.

Qui stabilimenta fidei Christianae subvertere nititur; Stantibus eis, ipse
subvertitur. Aug. Cont. Julian. l. 6. c. 1. Qui fidem incertam habent, certam
infidelitatem ostendunt. Athan. Cont. Arian. Orat. 1. LONDON, Printed for
Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Princes Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1655.

THE PREFACE.
HAving in the first Book transacted some of the lighter errors of this
Commentary; I now proceed to the weightier blasphemies therein contained, and
particularly to that of the denial of the Divine nature, and eternal Godhead of
Jesus Christ; which I conceive to be that blasphemy, which the Scripture says,
shall never be forgiven. And because the diligent discussion thereof, will give
a great light to the Mystery of our Savior's Godhead; I have resolved to make
my entrance into that Discourse by handlingt this blasphemy, as it is described
by three of the Evanglists, Matthew. 12. 31. Mar. 3. 29. Luke 12. 10. And because
the Exposition of those places in my way, may (perhaps) to others seem new
(though in truth it is not so) I do here humbly submit mine own opinions
therein unto the Judgment of the Church, and her more Learned and grave Divines.

The GODHEAD OF Jesus Christ.
CHAP. I. Of diverse doubts and difficulties concerning the sin against the holy
Spirit, and diverse opinions thereof.
IF this question be loosely, and negligently handled, what man can be found
free from this sin? for every sin against God may be called a sin against the
holy Spirit; because, as Athanasius Atha. de Commu. essent. p. 625.
notes, Contumelia unius Personae est blasphemia universae plenitudinis
deitatis; (i.) A Comumelie against any one Person in the Trinity is the
blaspheming of the fullness of the Godhead.

But if you say, that by this sin is meant some particular sin or blasphemy
only against the third Person; I ask, Did not Ananias and Sapphira thus sin?
Act. 5. 3. Why has Satan filled thy heart to lie to the Holy Ghost? Yet I
think no sober Divine will pronounce Ananias Orig. in Eze. ho. 1.
absolutely damned. Origin says, Deus non punit bis -- Idem in Man. Tract. 8.
Ananias and Sapphira in hoc seculo recipiebant peccatum suum, ut mu^diores
exirents (i.) God punished but once for once sinning -- Ananias and Sapphira
received the [punishment] of their sin in this world, that they might depart
cleaner to the other world. The Jews resisted the Holy Ghost, Act. 7. 51. and
amongst them was St. Paul, Act. 8. 1. yet the holy Martyr S. Stephen prayed for
them. Simon Magus so basely esteemed of the Holy Ghost, that he offered money
for it; yet St. Peter invited, and exhorted him to repentance, not despairing
of his conversion: and the Church Primitive invited those heretics to her
Communion and fellowship, whose special heresy was the denying the Godhead of
the Holy Ghost, as the Naz. Orat. 37.
Eunomians and Macedonians, whom the Church did therefore call Sec. l. 2.
(...), (i.) enemies of the Holy Ghost; and those that did come in to the
Church, she entertained, c. 35.
and reconciled them, and pronounced Peace unto them.

If every particular offense against the third Person be indeed this
unpardonable sin, what shall become of many Preachers, who, howbeit they be
learned, and well-meaning men, yet many times they err in delivering false
glosses and expositions upon Scriptures: and Isychius says, Qui aliena docent,
in Spiritum bl^sphemant, Isych. in Levit. c. 10.
-- sic peccant qui Prophetarum dogmata non interpretantur ad intentionem
Spiritus; (i.) They blaspheme the Spirit, who interpret doctrines of the
Prophets otherwise then they int^nded. St. Austin says, Donatistae Aug. Epist.
53.
peccant in Spiritum, quia ^xufflant baptisma Catholicae Ecclesiae; (i.) The
Donatists sin against the Spirit, when they renounce the baptism which they
received in the Church-Catholick, because that baptism was administered to them
in the Name of the Holy Ghost; and yet both Austin and the Church did persuade
many of them to return to the Communion of the Church, and also entertained
them: To quench the Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19. and to grieve the Spirit, Ephesians. 4.
30. surely are sins against the Spirit; the meaning is, Aug. de genesis l. 4. c. 9.
Ne contrista eos in quibus est Spiritus; (i.) Do not vex, afflict, or grieve
those in whom the Spirit of God is; and yet how many have been, and still are
quenched by afflictions and Prisons, lest the Spirit of truth in them should
detect the foul practices of men; nay, the holy Martyrs did pray for their very
afflicters; whereby it is evident, that they despaired not of the possibility
of their Conversion, and Salvation.

Some expound this unpardonable sin to be when we resist the motions of Gods
Spirit after we are enlightened, and so sin with knowledge stubbornly and
rebelliously, because it is said, Heb. 6. 4. It is impossible fur those who
were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, etc. if they fall
away, to renew them again to repentance. Upon this place misunderstood,
Novatus, and his Cathari grounded their heresy, that such as fell into sin
after baptism, could not be received into the Church, though they repented; as
we read in Epiphanius. Epiph. hae. 59.
But did not David commit adultery and murder knowingly? did not Peter deny
Christ, not ignorantly, but timerously? both of them after illumination; but
neither of them unpardonably. Do not the most holy Christians upon earth, even
the Elect, and after regeneration, fall into grievous sins? and such men as are
called just, are said to fall seven times, Prove. 24. 16. for there is not found
in any mortal man any such high degree of grace, as to preserve flesh and blood
impeccable; so that if this exposition were true, who shall be saved? Christ
says, That servant which knew his Lords will and did it not, shall be beaten
with many stripes; which St. Austin thus expounds, Non sempiternam, Aug. in
exp. Epist. ad Romans n. 96.
sed severiorem disciplinam significat; (i.) It signifies a more severe, but
not an eternal punishment.

You see the question concerning this sin grows very difficult; and indeed it
is as Athanasius calls it, Athan. to. 3. p. 687, 625.
Tenebricosa, and p ofunda sententia, an intricate and profound sentence, but
yet very advantageous to be r^ghtly understood, that so we may avoid it. The
Lord give us understanding, by whose assistance, I will endeavor to unfold
these two Questions: First, What particular sin that is, which is called the
blasphemy against the holy Spirit: and, Secondly, Why that sin is especially
said to be unpardorable.

CHAP. II. What the sin against the holy Spirit is, and ^ Question.
what is meant by blasphemy?
TO blaspheme ((...)) is to speak ill of, to deprave, to defame, to speak
against the Spirit of God, to traduce and asperse it opprobriously, as the
Pharisees did, Matthew. 12. for when Christ had cast out a Devil by the power of
his Godhead, or Divine Spirit; the Pharisees said it was done by the spirit of
Beelzebub; for what greater obloquie or blasphemy can be invented, then when
God is called Devil? The Pharisees knew that this wonderful work was done by
some power in Christ, which was more then humane, and therefore they knew it
must proceed either from God, or from the Devil, and therefore as St Hilarie
notes, Quia humanam infirmitatem haec Hilar. in Mat. Can. 12.
tanta ejus opera excederent* -- and confiteri, Dei nollent -- dicunt ex
Beelzebub esse; (i.) Because this work exceeded humane infirmity, and the proud
Pharisees would not acknowledge it to be from God, therefore they said it was
from the devil. So in effect they called God, Beelzebub; and Christ a Conjurer;
and this was a blasphemy in the highest degree.

This Pharisaical blasphemy spread far and near, both among Jews and Heathens,
and amongst these it was a common received error, that Christ was a Magician,
as Eusebius notes. There was (in the first age after Eusebius. de Demonst. l. 3.
c. 2.
Christ) Hier. Epist. exeg. 62. Ambr. in symb. n. 21. Lact. de Instit. l. 5. c.
3.
one Apollonius of Tyana, a notorious Magician, that did many strange feats;
amongst the rest, when he was convented before the Emperor Domitian in his
Consistory, to be punished, presently he vanished out of sight: this Apollonius
is by Hierocles in Eusebius compared with Christ, as being equal to him for
miracles, insomuch that the Emperor Lamprid. in Alex. c. 7.
Alexander Severus in his Lararium* or house-Chappel, set up the image of this
Magician, with the images of Abraham and Christ, and worshipped them all; and
some heathens ex^olled this Magician far above Christ, as we read in St.
Austin; and because in the days of Origin Aug. Epist. 4.
some Egyptian Magicians, like Mountebanks, in the open Marketplace, cured
diseases, raised spirits, presented to their view Magical banquets, and seemed
to release those that were possessed by devils: therefore Celsus said that
Jesus performed his miracles by art Orig. Cont. Cells. lib. 1. n. 32.
magic. I say seemed, only, for we learn from our Savior, that one devil is
not cast out by another, and Satan is not divided against himself; and although
(when ignorant people employ one Witch to help them against another) some
present ease may seem to be procured; yet indeed as Austin observes, Non exit
Aug. l. 83. quaest. qu. 79* n. 88.
Satanas per infimas potestates, sed in intima regreditur, regnat in voluntale,
corpori parcens; (i.) Satan is not dispossessed by any infernal power, but
retireth himself into the more inward parts of the possessed; and though he
spare the body, yet he ^yrannizeth more in the soul, and makes his possession
stronger. Because this is a dangerous apostasy, to seek to, or to attribute
the work of God to him, therefore Christ used diverse arguments against it, and
so did the Ancient Fathers, Origin, Athan. Eusebius. Austin, and others, which
having but touched, I omit, to avoid digressions.

The greatest difficulty in this question, is, what our Savior meant by the
words, ( holy Spirit, or holy Ghost) when he said, The blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven: for the understanding whereof, I will lay
down a few Considerations to the Reader, that from them he may gather the true
meaning of that hard saying.

First, That in Christ there are two natures, 1. His Godhead or Divine nature,
by which he is called God over all blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5. 2. His humane
nature, or manhood, made of the seed of David, according to the flesh, Romans 1.
3. The first of these is called Forma Dei; the second is called forma Servi,
both are Philip. 2. 6, 7.
mentioned, Philip. 2. 6. Who being in the form of God; thought it no robbery
to be equal to God, but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the
form of a Servant.

Secondly, Consider, that there are two spirits in Christ; 1. His soul or
humane spirit, of which he says, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit,
Luke 23. 46. Secondly, his Divine Spirit, of which it is said, If any man have
not the Spirit of Christ, he is noni of his, Romans 8. 9.

Thirdly, that (according to his two natures) there are two filiations in
Christ; for, 1. He is called the Son of man, the son of David. 2. He is called
the Son of God.

Fourthly, That (according to those two natures, two spirits, and two sonships)
the Scripture mentions two kinds of blasphemies against Christ, the one
against him as he is the Son of man, and this is pardonable, Whosoever speaks
a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him, Matthew. 12. 32. The
other unpardonable; But* Whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, ^t shall
not be forgiven him, Ibid.

Fifthly, That the appellation, Holy Spirit, in Scripture is taken two ways;
1. Pro deitate, and essentiae omnium personarum, Pa^ris, Filii, Spiritus* (i.)
For the Godhead, or divinity of all the Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
because all are one God, as Matthew. 12. 28. and John 4. 24. 2. It is taken
Personaliter* (i.) properly for the third Person alone; as, Baptizing them in
the N^me of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 28. 19.
and this distinction is acknowledged by diverse late Divines of the Reformed
Churches; Polan. l. 3. c 6
Polanus, Bucan. l. 3. p ^^.
Bucan* Tilen. p. 141.
Tilenus, and Melan. in loc. Com. de Spirit.
Ph. Melanthon.

From these plain, and confessed Considerations, I extract these two
Propositions.

1. That it is no inconvenience to affirm, That those words, ho^y Spirit, or
Holy Ghost, in that place do signify the Godhead of the second Person, Jesus
Christ. 2. That to deny the Godhead of Jesus Christ, is that blasphemy which in
the Gospel is said to be unpardonable: And this is my Conclusion; which
hereafter I hope I shall evidently demonstrate to the Readers satisfaction.
CHAP. III. That the Godhead of the Son is called Spirit, and holy Spirit: that
the words Ghost and Spirit are of the same signification.
LEt it not seem strange that the appellation of one person is given to
another, for as in this place the Godhead of the Son is called the holy Spirit;
so in another place the Godhead of the Son is called the Everlasting Father,
Esa. 9. 6. For unto us a child is born, his Name shall be called wonderful,
couns^llour, the mighty God, the everlasting F^ther. In that he says (a child
is born) it must needs be meant of the Son of God, and the Son is called the
everlasting Father, because he is God, for the Godhead of every person (being
but one in all) is and may be called the everlasting Father: and so the holy
Ghost is the everlasting Father also; because the holy Ghost is God, and yet
this does not confound the three persons, or their several and distinct
pr^prieties and personalities; for albeit every Person is the everlasting
Father, in respect of men and of creatures, because all concurred in the
creation, yet only the first Person has this Personal propriety to be the
Father of the second Person, and so the Father of God, as the Son is the
Father, respectu Creaturarum, (i.) in respect of the creatures; so the first
Person is Father of God and of Man, as that in the Poet (if it were in the
singular number) might illustrate.

-- Hominum sator, atque deorum, Virg. Aene. l. 1.
so God the Father, is the Father of God the Son; that is, the Father of the
Person of the Son, but not the Father of the Godhead of the Son. Pater
Personae, non essentiae; Pater Filii, non deitatis.
We in our Creed confess the Son to be God of God, that, is, God the Son, of
God the Father, but we do not say, Deitas de deitate, Godhead of Godhead.
Neither could the Son of God, call God the Father his Lord, and his God, but
only because the Person of the Son assumed the humane nature, and form of a
servant, as St. Augustino has observed upon that saying, Ps. 22. 10 Thou art
my God from my mothers belly. c Pater est Deus and Dominus Filio, quia in eo
est forma servi; -- De ventre matris Deus meus es tu. Ps. 22. 10. -- Sed ant^
omnia secula Pater est, (i.) The Father is the Lord and God of the Son, because
the Son assumed the form af a servant; therefore it is said in the Psalm, Thou
art my God from my mothers belly, but the Father may be said to be his Father
from eternity.

As every Person is called a Father (so as is said) so also every Person is
called Holy, because the Godhead is holy, and is in every Person; and therefore
it is said, holy Father, Joh. 17. 11. And thy holy child Ie^us, Acts 4. 27. as
well as the third Person is called the holy Spirit, and all Persons together
are so styled, Holy, Holy, Holy, Esa. 6. 3. Revel. 4. 8. and yet the third
Person has a property and personality in holiness, not communicable. But now
we must distinguish thus: Holiness in God is either the holiness of Nature, and
so every Person is holy; or holiness of Office, that is, to be a Sanctifier;
and thus it is the property of the third Person: for although the Father and
the Son do sanctify, yet they sanctify mediately by the Spirit, but the
Spirit sanctifies immediately by himself, so that when sactification is said
to be the work of the whole Trinity you must thus understand it. Pa^er est
fons, Filius exemplar, Spiri^us impressor Sanct^^a^is, (i.) The Father is the
Fountain, the Son is the Pattern, the Holy Ghost is the Stamper or Communicator
of holiness in us and to us; as the whole man is said to see, but he sees
only by the eye.

Next* I am to show that every person is called Spirit: for John 4. 24. God is
a Spirit, and every Person is God, and it is not you that speak, but the Spirit
of my Father which speaks in you, Matthew 10 20* and the last Adam was made a
quickening Spirit, 1 Cor* 15 45 We see there is mention of the Spirit of the
Father, and of the spirit of the Son (for the last Adam, must needs be meant of
Christ) neither are these observations new but are the old Collections of the
Primitive Church writers. St. Basil says, Basil. cont. Euno. l. 3.
Spiritus appellatio est communis tribus personis, (i.) The appellation of
Spirit is communicable to the three Persons, and before him Tertullian says,
Tert. de Orat. c. 1.
Jesus Christus est Spiritus Dei, (i.) Jesus Christ is the Spirit of God.
Athan^sius speaks more home, Atha. de Com. essen. 625. to. 3.
D^^ta^^m verbi, Christus inse Spiritum sanctum vocat. (i.) Christ himself
calls his own Godhead, the holy Spirit: and St. Hi r^me does also as
punctually observe the same. Hier cont. Pala. l. 2. c. 6. n. 23.
Spiri^us sanctus vocatur Spiritus I^su; (i.) The holy Ghost is called the
Spirit of Jesus.

Neither let the English Translation of these words (...) trouble thee, because
they are in some places translated holy Spirit, and in others holy Ghost, and
sometimes they signify only the third Person, as Matthew. 28. 19. But in
another place they signify the Spirit or Godhead of the second Person, as he
breathed on them and s^ld, Receive the holy Ghost, John 20. 22. of which he
also says I am with you always even to the end of the world, Matthew. 28. 28.
which is meant of the comfortable presence of his Godhead, by which Christ is
said to dwell in our hearts: for so also the same word (...), when it
signifies the soul, or humane Spirit of Christ, it is sometimes translated
Spirit, and other times Ghost as Luke 23. 46. Father, into thy hands I commend
my spirit, (that is, my soul) and having said thus, he gave up the Ghost, that
is, his soul and life.

Now for as much as the Godhead of Christ, or God in Christ, is a Spirit, and
also is holy, it may be truly said without any fallacy, both Logica^ly and
Theologically, not only disjunctively, but compositively and jointly, the
Godhead of Christ is an holy Spirit; for of him it is said, Romans 1. 4. that he
was declared to be the Son of God, according to the Spirit of holiness, which
surely is an holy Spirit, by which he is said to sanctify the Church, Ephesians.
5. 26. and Heb. 2. 11. and Heb. 13. 12. And to this St. Austine speaks very
pertinently and plainly, Aug. de Trin. l. 5. c. 11. n. 62.
Quia Deus est Spiritus, potest dici Pater Spiritus, and Filius Spiritus, and
Pater sanctus, and Filius sanctus, Trinitas potest appellari Spiritus Sanctus:
(i.) Because God is a Spirit, it may be said, the Father is a Spirit, and the
Son is a Spirit: and the Father is holy, and the Son is holy, and the Son is
holy; the whole Trinity may be called an holy Spirit.

CHAP. IV. That the blasphemy against the holy Spirit mentioned, Matthew. 12. was
meant of the denying and blaspheming the Godhead of Jesus Christ.
FOr the right understanding of this question* I desire the Reader to take
notice of these few observations following.

1. That this Pharisaciall blasphemy was uttered, and intended only against
the Person of Christ, and therein only against his Godhead, and therefore the
answer of Christ must needs be a Vindication of his Person, and of his Godhead,
for otherwise Christ might seem not to have answered punctually, to the slander
and blasphemy objected, if we shall confess that the blasphemy was against the
Person of the Son, and yet imagine that his answer is only concerning another
Person, viz. the Person of the holy Ghost.

2. Observe again, that Christ does not there make any mention of the blasphemy
against the Person of the Father, (though there was as much reason that he
should as to mention a blasphemy against the third Person.) But he keeps
himself punctually to the second Person himself, against whom only this
blasphemy was spoken, and intended, neither did he at this time go abour to
assert and vindicate the honor either of the Person of the Father, or of the
Person of the holy Ghost, against which Persons, nothing was expressly said, or
meant; but be did only declare the power and Truth of his own Godhead in his
own Person, and therefore he said, If I cast out devils by the Spirit of God,
the k^ngdome of God is come unto you, Matthew. 17. 28. By the Spirit of God, he
means the Godhead residing in his own Person.

3. Thirdly, observe, that as in his Arguments he spoke only of his own
Person, like a good disputant, confining himself exactly ad idem, to the same
thing the Pharisees spoke of; so in his answer, and in denouncing judgment
against those blasphemers, by the rule of right reason he must still continue
his speech of the same Person; therefore in effect he says thus: Although a
word spoken against me as I am a man, and the Son of man may be forgiven; yet a
blasphemy or word spoken against me as I am very God, cannot be forgiven. Or
thus, The villifying, depraving blaspheming, or speaking against my humane
nature, may be pardoned; but the depraving, denying, or blaspheming my Godhead,
my divine Nature, my divine and holy Spirit, shall not be forgiven.

4. Observe again, that the Jews had indeed depraved him in both his Natures.
1. In his manhood thus, Behold, a glutton, a wine-bibber, a friend of publicans
and sinners? Matthew. 11. 19. and afterward, Is not this the Carpenters son?
Matthew. 13. 55. disparaging him for his mean parentage: this is the Exposition
of St. Amb^ose, Ambr. de Spirit. l. 1. c. 3.
In Filium Hominis p^ccare est remissius sentire de carne Christi, etc. To sin
against the Son of Man, is to conceive too basely of the flesh of Christ; --
and they that so sin, are not utterly excluded from pardon. 2. The Jews
blasphemed him now in his Godhead, by denying it, and ascribing the miracle to
confederacy with Beelzebub; and of this blasphemy, which does take away the
very foundation of remission of sins, it is said, It shall not be forgiven.

5. I may add hereunto that those unbaptized Pharisees in probability, did not
intend any obloquy or blasphemy against the Person of the holy Spirit as it is
the third Person; of which they had never been instructed, neither had they so
much Christianity as those disciples at Ephesus, who though they had been
baptized unto John's baptism, yet they had not so much as heard whether there
be an holy Ghost. Act. 19. 2.

Thus having showed that in Scripture, and in the writings of the Fathers and
later Divines, the Godhead of Christ is called a Spirit, and holy, and also an
holy Spirit, and that in St. Matthew, those words, holy Spirit, are to be
understood of the Godhead of Christ, which is for ever united to, and residing
in the Holy Temple of his most sacr^d Body, and Soul: I now reassume my former
Conclusion, That the denying Christ to be God, is the blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost, which is there said to be unpardonable.

Now that in a Doctrine of so great moment and concernment, the Reader may
understand that I do not obtrude any novell and private opinion of mine own
upon him: I will he^e lay down the judgment of so^e of the Fathers, in this
very question; and first of Athanasius, one of the most profound and godly
Divines, that since the Apostles days, the Church ever had; who in his book De
Communi essentia Patris, etc. aith, Arha. to* 3. p. 625.
It is hard to conjecture what our Savior means by those words, He that
speaks against the Sod of Man shall be forgiven, but he that speaks against
the holy Ghost shall not be so given. So that the Son may seem ^o he inf^riour
to the Spirit, and yet the So says, The Father and I are one; -- If he that
says to his brother; Thou fool, shall be cast into h^ll: ^n quam gehenna
gehennarum conjiri^tur is qui ^ss^rit Deum creatu am ^sse? Into what Hell of
Hells will he be cast who calls him that is God, a Creature, and a Servant*
and a Minister only? And a little after, he says: -- D^i^at^m V^rbi, ipse
Christus Spiri^um Sanctum voc^t, and humanitatem suam, Filium Hominis
n^minavit: (i.) Our Savior called his own Godhead, the holy Ghost, and his own
Manhood, he called the Son of Man: -- and of those that blaspheme his holy
Spirit, by blaspheming his Godhead, is this sentence to be understood, -- It
shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in the world to come.
This is the judgment of Athanasius.

To him I add the Opinion of St. Hil^r^, who was contemporary with Atha^asius,
who in his Exposition of that Text, Matthew. 12. 32. says, Hill. in Mat. Can. 12.
p. 731.
Si negetur D^us in Christo, caret omni mis^ricordia: (i.) If a Man deny God to
be in Christ, that man shall find no mercy. And again, he says, Hill. ib. Can.
31. p. 426.
Blasphemia in Spiritum ^st, Christum Deum ^sse negare: (i*) The blasphemy
against the Spirit is, to deny Christ to be God. The same Father in the place
last quoted, speaking of Saint Peter's denial of Christ, says, Because to deny
Christ to be God, is that sin which shall never be forgiven; therefore Peter
denied thus, I know not the Man, because a word spoken against the Son of Man
may be forgiven. The very same conceit has Saint Chrysostom also, in his
Sermon of Peter's denial, and upon these words, -- I k^ow not the Man:] Chrysostom.
to. 6* p. 631.
Non dixit non no^i Deum Verbum, sic enim peccasset in Spi^itum Sanctum, (i.)
Peter, said not, I know him not to be God, for so he had sinned against the
holy Ghost, but I know not the Man. Now whether Saint Peter meant so as these
two Fathers conjectured, I cannot affirm for certain, but by this I find that
the judgment of these two great Doctors was, that the denying of the Godhead
of Christ, is indeed that great unpardonable sin. To this I add the
testimony of Saint Basil, who deserved to be called the Great. He in that
excell^nt Book De Spiritu Sancto, says, Basil. de Spirit. c. 7.
Testificer omni Homini Christum profi^en^i, sed ^um neganti Deum ^sse, quod
Christus nihil ^i proderi^: (i.) I testify to every Man, who professes
himself to be a Christian, and yet de^^ieth Christ to be God; Christ shall
nothing at all profit that man: And if Christ do not profit us in the remission
of our sins, I am sure, our sins shall never be forgiven in this world, or
in the world to come.

CHAP. V. The Opinions of later Divines concerning the unpardonable sin: A
brief Narration of the life and death of Arius, and of Julian the Apostate.
TO the abovenamed Ancients, I subjoyn the opinions of our later Divines, who
in their Expositions and Tractats, where they inquire what particular sin this
is, although they do not agree therein, yet when they inquire what persons have
sinned this sin, they do commonly affirm, for one, that Arius in his Heresy
did s^n thus: and this is the opinion of Polanus, and also of Bucanus and
others. Now the Polan. synt. p. 340. Bucan. Lo. Com. p 174.
only noted heresy of Arius was the denying the Godhead of Jesus Christ*
saying, that he was not from everlasting, and that he was but preferred to be a
God. Just as our Commenter would have him only exalted and deisied.

This Arius was born in Africa, and was a Presbyter or Priest of the Cathedral
Church of Alexandria in Egypt: In that City in the days of the Emperor
Constantine the Great, there were ten Churches (besides Epiph. haer. 69.
the Cathedral.) Just such as we now call Paraecial or Parish-Churches,
wherein ten of the Presbyters of the Cathedral Church, were the incumbents,
and Preachers, of these ten Arius was one, and was more esteemed, and followed
then any of his brethren* It fell out that the Bishop of Alexandria died; Arius
gaped for the place, but mist it, for one Alexander was elected; then Arius
raised a faction, and revived the former Heresy of Paulus Samosatenus,
preaching this damnable doctrine, that Christ was not God. When Bishop
Alexander was informed of this, he convented Arius, and upon examination
discovering his Heresy, excommunicated him: Then divisions appeared, for seven
Priests, twelve De^cons, and seven hundred Virgins had joined with Arius. Great
discord grew among the people, some taking part with A^ius, and others with
Alexander: then the Emperor by Letters commanded both of them to desist from
disturbing his subjects, but this could not appease them: then he called that
famous Council of Nice, of about three hundredth and eighteen Bishops, from all
parts of the Roman Empire. They condemned this Heresy of Arius, and compiled
that Confession of Faith, which remains to this day, and is yet called the
Nicene Creed, wherein the Godhead of Christ is asserted in these words: ^eing
of one substance with the Father, -- and God of God, -- very God of very God:
Arius refusing to subscribe to it, was banished by the Imperial Edict, but was
afterward recalled, and exhibited in writing a Confession of Faith to the said
Emperor, which he allowed of, and upon an oath taken by Arius, that he
believed so, as he had written, the Emperor commanded that he should be
received into the Church. (This equivocating hypocrite had in his bosom
secretly at the same time, another Confession of his own heretical Doctrine
written, of which he meant.) The Emperor was then at Constantinople, Arius and
his associates were going to the Church to require admission, but the Bishop of
Constantinople, whose name also was Alexander, had resolved to keep him out,
having prayed earnestly to God, the day before in the Church, prostrate on the
pavement,* and with tears uttering these words; Domine, Athan. Epist. ad
Serapion. n. 16.
-- si Arius ^ras^in synaxin introducetur, nunc dimittas s^rv^m tuum, -- sin
Eccl^siae parca^ toll Arium, (i.) If Arius must be brought into the Church to
morrow, Lord, now let thy servant depart in peace; but if thou will be
merciful to thy Church, take away Arius.

In the morning, as Arius with a great train was (as is said) going to Church,
presently finding a great looseness in his body, he went aside to the common
boggards of the City, and there voyded his bowels, spl^en, liver and blood, and
was there found suddenly Socr* l. 1. c. 28* Ruff. hist. l. 1. c. 13.
dead, as Socrates relates: so died this blasphemer* Faetida mor^^ faetida
mente, as Ruffinus notes, a stinking death suitable to his stinking soul; --
Cacando as the marginall note is. For a long time after people would point at
that place in detestation of Arius, until a well affected brother of the Arian
sect bought the place, and to smother the fame of that judgment, and Soz. l.
2. c. 28.
the infamy of Arius, he built a dwelling house upon it, as Sozomen reports.

Another, who by our late Divines, is instanced in to have committed this sin
against the holy Spirit, is Beza in Heb. 6. 6. Musc. in Mat. 12. p. 386 Gualt.
in Mat. 12. Polan. p. 340. Buc. p. 174. Soz. l. 5. c. 2.
Julian the Aposta^e, he was the son of Constantius, who was brother to
Constantine the Great, and was by this Emperors command, carefully brought up
in Christianity, wherein he so profited, that he was admitted to be one of the
Clergy, and was appointed; (i) Anagnost. that is, the L^ctour, or Pible-Clark
in the Church of Nicomedia, and (to show his great zeal) he and his brother
Gallus, joined in building a Church over the Tomb of a Martyr, and so precise
he was, that he lived a monastical strict life and after, when he was declared
C^sar, or heir apparent, by his Cousin the Emperor Constantius, for a time he
continued in such a seeming religiousness, that the good Father St. Hilary
styled Hill. adv. Constan. lib. 3.
him Religiosum Dominum, (i.) his Religious Lord: But when he had got the
command of a powerful Army, he rebelled against the Emperor Constantius, and
caused himself openly to be proclaimed Emperor, and (to strengthen the
rebellion) he opened all the old Idol-Temples which had been a long time
disused, and so got the hearts of all heathens, and himself forsook his old
Christian Religion, and turned heathen, caused his baptism to be washed off
with the blood of sacrifices offered to idols, and writ Orations against
Christians, and grew so zealous in the worship of Idols, that in stead of
Julianus he was called Idolianus. Now the Naz. in Julian. Orat. 3.
Apostasy and grand sin of this Julian, was the denying Christ to be God; for
he would not vouchsafe him any better appellation then Galilean, son of Mary'
Carpenters son; he permitted his Officers to do and say all manner of despite
against Christ; Julianus the uncle of this Apostate seized on the Church-plate
at Antio^h, and S^^. 5. 7.
sent it to the treasury; Foelix the questor, having before scoffingly said, En
qualib^s v^sis Mari^ filio ministratur! (i.) See what rich vessels the son of
Mary is served withal! and having robbed the Church in great derision, they
sent Urine to be presented at the holy Table in stead of Wine, as Theodoret
writes. It is Theod. hist. l. 3. c. 12.
therefore plain enough, that Julian did therefore forsake the Christian
Religion, because he did not believe that Christ was God; and indeed, if Christ
be not God, why should any man be a Christian? and for this cause have those
Divines said that this sin of Julian was the unpardonable sin against the
holy Spirit.

Wherefore, God to deter all Professors of Christianity from this damning
blasphemy, has manifestly stretched out his own hand in vengeance for the
exemplary destruction of these two ringleaders in this Grand blasphemy: of
Arius his end you heard before, and upon this Julian his anger appeared more
evidently; insomuch that the Heathens in those days said as St. Hierome
reports, who was an ear-witnesse: O Hier. in Habac. 3. P. 203
how can Christians say that their God is patient and longsuffering, seeing he
has taken away Julian in such anger, and sudden fury! -- and ne mo^i^o quidem
spatio, indignationem suam differ potuit, (i.) and could not for a little
space defer his indignation.

Whilst the Church gr^oan^d under the pressures of this Apostate, the
Ecclesiastical History relates a strange Soz. l. 6. c. 2.
passage of a man, That in a Church had a vision in a dream or ecstasie, he
knew not which, for he saw Apostles and Prophets complaining of the injuries of
Julian, and two of their company went from the rest, as if they went against
Julian; the man for present awaked, but when he fell asleep there again, he saw
in the same manner the two returnning, and saying to the rest, Julian is slain,
which indeed proved true, and at that very time. The same Writer in the same
place before noted, reports that Didymus the famous learned man of Alexandria
(who was blind, yet was a stout disputant against the Aria^ heresy in the
days of Constantius) had a revelation at the same time; for being in a dream
or ecstacy, there appeared to him in the air men riding on white horses, and
saying, Go tell Didymns that Julian is at this hour slain, and bid him signify
the fame to Athanasius. Theodoret also reports of an holy Theod. hist. l. 3.
c. 24.
man, named Saba; that as he was earnestly, and with tears praying against the
tyranny of Julian, suddenly he changed his sad countenance, and looking
pleasantly said to them that were with him, The Boar that rooted up the
vineyard of the Lord is now slain. This proved true, and at the very same time,
though this Saba was distant 20. days march from the place where Julian
Stativis.
died; and because it could never appear by what man Julian was slain, men
might well think it was done by some extraordinary means; for though the
Pe^sian king (against whom Julian made his last war) made great inquiry through
his whole Army, and proposed great honors and rewards by proclamation, to him
that had Soz. l. 6. c. 1.
slain the Roman Emperor, yet ^one could be found to take that honor upon
him. Nay, I find in Socrates, Soc. l. 3. c. 18.
that one Calisius, who was of the train or lifeguard of Julian, reported in
writing that this Julian was wounded and slain, a Daemone, that is, by a good
or a bad Angel (for by Heathens both sorts are called daemones;) upon these
presumptions (which to me seem not unprobable) the Churchmen of those days
did attribute the destruction of this blasphemer to the extraordinary hand of
God; and therefore Nazianz^n in one of his Orations against this Julian uses
this expression: Audi^e angeli, -- quorum opera tyrannus extinctus Naz. in
Julian. Orat. 3.
est; (i.) Hear O ye Angels, by whose Ministry this Tyrant was destroyed.

I might here add the like examples of Gods vengeance showed upon other Arians
as upon Georgius, who was put into the sequestered Church of Athansius; but in
the end, the people fell upon him, dragged him through the City of Alexandria,
beat him, and slew him, and burnt his body to ashes: As also how the Arians
accounted him after his death for a Martyr, as Epiphanius Epiph. haer. 76
notes.

But, Olympus an Arian Bishop perished by a more memorable vengeance, for
having blasphemed the Trinity Pal. ad. an. 510. and Platina in vita Anasta^ii
2di.
as he was in a Bath, three fiery darts were cast at him visibly by an Angel,
and by them he was presently fired and burnt to death, as Palmerius in his
Chronicle reports. But thus much may suffice for the first question.

This Exposition being admitted upon those places in the 3. Evangelists, (as I
do firmly believe it is the true meaning thereof) this question will be clear,
which by other Expositions has a long time much perplexed our Expositours, and
could never give satisfaction to the Reader, nor could the Expositours tell us
certainly upon what persons they could fasten this sin, and therefore Beza in
his notes upon 1 Epist. of Saint John, c. 5. v. 16. tells us, it is the sin
of the Devil, because indeed, as he there states it, it could not be found
clearly in any man.

CHAP. VI. The second question, why this blasphemy of denying 2. Quest.
the Godhead of Christ is said to be especially unpardonable?
THe reason why the denying the Godhead* of Christ, is said to be the
irremissible sin is, because AugEpist. 105.
if Christ be not indeed, the true and only and supreme God, then he has not
redeemed us; and we are and must be for ever, Massa d^mnationis, (i.) a lump of
perdition, and fuel for hellfire; for there is no salvation in any other,
Acts 4. 12. When St. Peter had said, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living
God, Matthew. 16. 16. Christ told him, Upon this Rock will I build my Church,
that is, upon this Confession, that Christ is the Son of God; for the Church is
the nursery Cyp. de simpl. cler. n. 76.
of Heaven, and none can have God for their Father, who have not the Church for
their mother; and the Church is built upon this foundation, and other
foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 3.
11. for, This is life everlasting, that they might know thee the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, John 17. 3. that is, as St. Austin
expounds Aug. cont. ser. Arian. to. 6. n. 17.
it, to know thee, and whom thou have sent to be one true God.

There is no redemption, and therefore no salvation but in Christ, nor can
there be any salvation by Christ, if he be not God; and though Christ be God,
and so a Savior, yet salvation cannot be from him derived to any that do not
believe him to be God. The aforenamed Father, when he desired vehemently to
work upon his Readers he diverse times used this expression: Per Divinitatem and
humanitatem Domini obsecro: I beseech Aug. Epist. 203.
you by the Divinity and humanity of our Lord. And both he and other Fathers in
their Expositions Chry. 4. hom. Antioch. Aug. de Doct. chapter l. 2. c. 16.
of that saying, Be wise as Serpents, Matthew 10. 16. Tell us, that the
Serpentine prudence is, that when he is a^saulted, he exposes his body to
blows, that so he may preserve his head; To teach us, that we also in time of
persecution, Custodiamus caput, Epiph. hae. 37.
id est, Christum in confessione, (i.) though we fail in some inferior points
of Religion, yet to be sure to hold to God in Christ; for Christ is the head of
his Church, and the head of Christ is God, 1. Cor. 11. 3. In Christo caput,
Eusebius. Hist. l. 1. c. 1.
est Divina nature, says Eus^bius; and Saint Hierome gives the reason, Q^oniam
Deitas quae in eo erat, gubernabat, Hier. in loc.
(i.) The Godhead in Christ did govern the humane nature; for whosoever
rejects the Godhead of Christ, does thereby disclaim the only sussicient
means of Redemption; and therefore Fu^gentius says truly, (i.) Christianus
esse non potest, qui^q^is Christum Dominum Deum suum esse non dixerit, (i.) He
that does not confess Fulg. de fide. P 9. n. 1.
that Christ is his Lord God, cannot be a Christian. For such a man's religion
is no better then the religion of Jews and Turks; for both these confess a
God, but Ariani J^daeorum and Judaei Arianorum. Ambros. de incar. c. 2. n. 27
neither of them confess Jesus to be that God. And Carrion in Constable. magno. Act.
and mon. in Hen. 7. n. 52. Atha. eont. Arian. Orat. 2. n. 5. Apolog. 2. n. 16
Apol. de fuga,
Ca^ion in his Chronicle says, that the Arian Heresy did open the door to let
in Tur^isme, and was Praecursor Mahometis, (i.) that Arius was the forerunner
of Mahomet, and so of Antichrist; and Mr. Fox doubts not to affirm, that the
Turk is the principal Antichrist: and the Fathers long ago said as much of the
A^ian Heresy, and very jnstly: For A^hanasius said, Ariana haeresis est
praecursatrix Antcihristi, (i.) The Arian Heresy is the forerunner of
Antichrist; and in another place he says, it is An^eambulo Antichristi, (i.)
the usher of Antichrist: And moreover, he says Ariani -- non Christiani, sed
Ariani ap^ellari volunt, (i.) that they desired rather to be called Arians then
Christians: and again, he says, Ariani non sunt pro Christianis aestimandi,
(i.) that indeed Orat. 2. cont, Arian. n. 5.
the A^ians are not to be accounted Christians, because they opposed Christ in
his Godhead, which is the only foundation of Christianity, therefore with
great reason they are called Antichrists; and therefore Saint Ambrose doubted
not to affirm Ariani sunt Antichristi a Ambr. de fide l. 2. c. 4. n. 22. 1 John
2. 22.
Iohanne designati, (i.) That the Arians are those Antichrists which Saint John
pointed at, 1 John 2. 22. and St. Hilary writidg against Constantius the Arian
Emperor, (in whose days Arianisme so dominered:) Christus expect^tur, quia
Antichristus obtinuit, (i.) that Hill. cont. Constable. lib. 1.
we may now exspect Christ's second coming* because Antichrist is already come:
for nothing can be imagined to be more opposite and contrary to Christ and
Christian Religion, then the denying of his Godhead; therefore is it most fitly
called Antichristianisme. As Christ could not have suffered and died for us,
except he had been Man, so his death could not have satisfied the Justice of
God* nor redeemed us except he had been God, and therefore Athan^sius says,
Quifilium negat quem deprecari Atha. to. 3. P. 695.
potest ut propitiatorem inveniat? (i.) Unto whom shall that wretched man fly
for propitiation for his sins, who rejects the Son of God who is the only
Mediator?

This is that confession which the gates of Hell have always labored to
conquer by the power and cruelty of persecutors; for what did those tyrants
chiefly aim at in all their torments, -- Nisi ut neg^tur Deus in Christo,
Optatus, lib. 3. n. 84.
-- Nega Deum, incende Testamentum: (i.) These were the words of the
tormentors, Deny Christ to be God, burn the Testament, and offer incense; for
if the Godhead of Christ be denied, our Religion is no more helpful to us for
salvation, then Heathenisme was to them. But we confess and firmly believe that
Jesus Christ is God, the supreme God, the only and most high God, and that we
neither acknowledge, nor know any other God; and he that denies this God, and
this Godhead in Christ, falls into that sin, of which it is said, it shall
never be forgiven.

For if the Godhead of Christ be denied, it must needs be confessed that he was
only a creature, and a mere man; and if so, then he cannot be a Redeemer of
us; for can any man imagine, that the death of one mere man, and that but a
tempo^ary death, could satisfy the just wrath of God for the sins of millions,
and redeem us from an everlasting torment? Divines doubt not to affirm, that if
all the created Angels of Heaven could, and for us would suffer death, their
sufferings would not pay our debts, or redeem one soul. God as he is most
merciful, so is he most exactly just, and will have the utmost farthing paid.
St. Austine says truly, N^c Aug. de consens. Evang. c. 14. n. 84.
Dei justitia impedit misericordiam, nec misericordia justitiam, (i.) Neither
does his justice lessen his mercy, nor his mercy his justice: And again he
says, Iusta est gratia Aug. Exp. in Epist. ad To. n. 96.
Dei, and gratia justitia; (i.) The grace or mercy of God is just, and his
justice is g^acious; That which makes the blood of Christ to be of sufficient
value to redeem the world, and to be as St. Peter calls it, The precious blood
of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 19. is the excellent worth of that person whose blood it
is; for because Christ is God, therefore his blood in Scripture is called
Sanguis Dei, Acts 20. 28. The blood of God, the Lamb could not take away the
sins of the world, except he were the Lamb of God, and Agnus-Deus, God the
Lamb; John 1. 29.
nor could a crucified man satisfy for our sins, except they had -- crucified
the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor. 2. 8. nor could our Christian Faith in the death of
Christ advantage us, except we believe as Tertullian says, Christianorum Tort.
cont. Marc. lib. 2. n. 41.
est Deum mortuum ered^re, (i.) The Christian must believe that he that died
for him, was God. And albeit some Heretics and Heathens scoffed at a
crucified God, yet the Church never was ashamed of him. St. Hier. Ep. 1. n. 1.
Hierome says, In judicio gaudens dices, Ecce Crucifixus Deus meus: (i.) At
the last judgment the Christian with joy shall say, See now where my crucified
God is. Our only help and hope for redemption, stands in the Name of the
Lord: for although Christ in regard of his humane nature assumed, be, as David
says, Ps. 89. 19. One exalted chosen out of the people, yet in regard of his
Godhead, God says, I have laid help upon one that is mighty, and that mighty
one is Christ, for Christ is the mighty God of Jacob, Psalm. 132. 2.

CHAP. VII. The Commenter having denied the Godhead of Christ, does also deny
the work of redemption by him, and so Turcizeth, and acts for Antichrist: of
Antichrists mystical body.
OUr Commenter having first resolved to ungod Jesus Christ, in the next place
he denies his great wo^k of Redemption, and tells us that [ Christ d^d not
become our sure^y, nor did take upon him the payment of our debts, but was
only a surety of Gods promise, and died to assert the truth of the Covenant --
as a witness etc p. 136,] and that the ^xpia^ori^ sacrifice for sin, was not by
him off^r^d on earth,] P. 116 146. He talks often of this Covenant, but never
tells us what it is: in his answer it will be expected that he set it forth, if
he know what it is, as is much doubted.

But in the mean time he has showed himself to be a true Porphyrian Logician*
for as I showed before, if Christ be nor the only and supreme God, it must
needs follow, that he neither has, or possibly could offer a sufficient
expiatory sacrifice for our sins; because he that on the Cross was sacrificed
(by the Commenters Creed) was no more then a creature; for grant him the first
blasphemy, that Christ is not God, and the second blasphemy must needs follow.

This is a revivall of a very ancient heresy of Cerinthus in plainer words,
who taught as Irenaeus shows, I^enaeus, l. 1. cap. 25. n. 108.
That Christ descended upon Jesus, when Jesus was baptized, and that before his
passion, Christ departed from Jesus, and left Jesus alone to be crucified:
Christ was the Divine Nature (as this C^rin^hus meant) and Jesus he manhood or
humane nature. So his doctrine was hat Jesus when he suffered was but a mere
c^eature, ust as our Commenter teaches, and this in ^ffect is all one with the
Heresy of the Manichtes, who although they did not deny Christ to be God (as
the Commenter does) yet they would not believe that the Emmanuel or incarnate
God was crucified, but another in his stead, and that a creature too. Whereupon
St. Austin Aug. de fide cont. Man. to. 6. c. 33.
says to them: Miseri, non timetis ne dicatur vobis in judicio, ego cos
liberavi pro quibus pessus sum: ite, ille vos liberet cui meas ascribitis
passiones? (i.) Are ye not afraid, ye wretched men, that Christ in judgment
will say to you, Depart from me, and go to that mere creature, to whom you
ascribe my passion; for I redeemed those only for whom I suffered? Now if
Christ's passion on earth did not redeem us, to whom shall we go for redemption,
seeing he redeemed only those for whom he suffered?

I wish our Commenter would consider another speech of this renowned Father,
who whilst he continued in the said Manichean Heresy, and then living at
Rome, he fell into a dangerous sickness, and was very near death; and because
at that time he did not rightly believe the passiou of Christ, but erred
therein, and yet no more phantastically, or dangerously then this Commenter
does, he said of himself, Ibam ad inferos portans omnia mala quae commiseram
nam Christus pro eis non solverat, cum crediderim crucem ejus phantasticam.
(i.) 1 Aug. Confess. l. 5. c. 9.
was going to hell with the burden of all my sins lying on my soul, for Christ
had not satisfied for me, because I believed not in the truth of his passion:
Now he that believes that Christ is but a mere man, and that his death was
only as a witness, or Martyr to seal a Truth with his blood, and not at all
for man's redemption, shall be so far from receiving the blessing of Redemption
by him, that he shall moreover bring, and accumulate a curse upon himself: For
so the ancient Martyr Ignatius understands these words, Ier. 17. 5. Ig.
Epist. ad Antioch. n. 46.
Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm: that is,
Maledictus est qui dicit Christum nudum hominem juxta Prophetam. (i.) According
to those words of the Prophet, he is accursed who calls Christ a mere man,
and yet trusts in him: And Athanasius doubted Atha. orat. 1. Cont. Arian. 3.
4.
not to say, that the Arians who called Christ a creature, and yet did perform
religious worship to him, (as this Commenter requires) were within the compass
of the Heathens sin, in that they worshipped him, whom they thought to be but a
creature; and therefore he Ath. ad solit. vit. agentes, n. 18. Soc. l. 3. c. 19.
calls them Porphyrianos, because Porphyrie once had been a professed
Christian, and had revolted to heathenism, as Socrates says.

Thus the Reader may perceive that this blasphemous denying Christ's Divinity,
does dissolve our Religion into Heathenisme and Antichristianisme. I have heard
from the mouth of an ancient and most learned Doctor, that Socinus the Father
of our late society of Socinians, was the son of such Parents, whereof one was
by Religion a Turk, and the other a Christian, and that therefore Socinus
labored to bring Turcisme, and Christianisme to the nearest conjunction and
uniformity in Religion, by denying the Eternal Godhead of Christ, as Turks
also do; which grand impiety is so destructive to Christian Religion, that it
may be fitly called the Devils masterpiece; and so the ancient Fathers
esteemed it. Epiphanius called Arius Epiph. haer. 69.
statuam Diaboli, (i.) An Idol set up by the Devil, and St. Hilary said of
it, Mihi diabolus erit, qui Arianus* Hill. Cont. Aux. n. 7.
(i.) He that Arianizeth is no better then Satan; and Athanasius called it
Haeresin totum Diabolum induentem; Ath. ad sol. vit. agentes, n. 19.
(i.) An heresy endued with the whole plenitude of Satan: For the Devils
cannot be saved, and such blasphemers as these shall never be forgiven.

It was the opinion of Theodoret, that the grand Antichrist Theod. haer. fab.
l. 5. n. 17.
of all shall be the Devil, showing himself in the shape of a man, and taking
upon him the name of Christ; now as Christ is but one, and yet has many
members, even his whole Church which is called his mystical body: so the grand
Antichrist (it may be) is but one person, but shall have (and it may be he has
already) great multitudes of members acted and endued with his malignant
spirit, which make up his mystical Aug. de genesis ad lit. l. 11. c. 24. n. 68.
Aug. de doct. Chapter l. 3. c. 37. n. 56.
corporations, which is the Mystery of iniquity: And this was the opinion of
St. Austine, and by him diverse times expressed thus, Diaboli corpus sunt impii,
ipse est little caput, ficut Christus est caput ecclesia: (i.) the wicked are
the body of Satan, Satan is the head of them, as Christ is the head of his
Church: And again, De Genesis l. 11. c. 24.
Corpus Diaboli est imptorum multitudo, (i.) The body of the Devil is a
multitude, setting themselves to work impiety; and again, speaking of those
words, 2 These. 2 4. sitting in the Temple of God] he says, Aliqui intelligunt
De Civit. l. 20. c. 19.
hic non ipsum principem, sed multitudinem hominum cum ipso -- do^c fiat magnus
populus Antichristi, (i.) Some do not here understand only the great
Antichrist of all, but also a great multitude of people with him -- until at
length Antichrist become as a populous nation: and Prosper says moreover,
Antichristus Prosp. de promis. n. 14.
praec^nes mendacii sui habiturus est, (i.) Antichrist shall have preachers to
set forth his lies, who will edify his great body for destruction, such as
Hill. de Trinit. lib. 2. p. 25. n. 1.
also St. Hilary calls, Novi apostolatus sub Antichristo Praedicatores, (i.)
Preachers of a new calling under Antichrist.

Now if amongst other Heretics also may be admitted to be members of the body
of Antichrist, surely none will be more advantageous to him, then those who
blaspheme Christ in his highest title by denying Iren. l. 5. c. ult. n. 124.
his Godhead, Irenaeus, and after him diverse old Writers, conceived, that the
grand Antichrist will appear out of the Tribe of Dan, because of that saying in
Jeremy 8. 16. The s^or^ing of his horses was heard from Dan, and for this
reason (...) thought that amongst the Tribes of Israel which are sealed, Rev 7.
the Tribe of Dan is not mentioned to intimate, that no limbs of Antichrist
shall be sealed to salvation.

CHAP. VIII. Of the hypostaticall union of the Godhead and manhood in the
Person of Jesus Christ, the communication of the properties of each nature, the
life and death of Nestorius, and how Christ is said to be deified
FOr the avoiding of the unpardonable sin before mentioned, it will not be
sufficient to believe and confess that God is in Jesus as a man in a ship, or
as God was in the Prophets, and is now in holy men, who are therefore called
the Temples of the living God, 2 Cor. 6. 16. or as God is every where, who
fills heaven and earth, Jer. 23. 24. For though God be in an holy Man, yet we
cannot say, that God and that Man are one Person, and though God be in Heaven,
yet he and Heaven are not one hypostasis, or subsistence in one Personal
union: but as our soul and body united and composed are one Man, and one
Person, so the Godhead and Manhood united in Jesus, are one Person, one Christ.

Now these two distinct natures, to wit, the Godhead and Manhood, are in Christ
so united, that they will be for ever inseparable; and they are so entwined one
with the other, that no action or passion can be said of the man Christ, which
may not be said of God; the rule of Divines is, Eff^ctus hypostaticae unionis,
est Regula Theolog.
communicatio idiomatum, (i.) The result or effect of the Personal union, is a
communication of properties; which rule is laid, and more plainly expressed by
St Austine in these words. Vnilas Personae Christi, sic Aug. to. 6. cont. Ser.
Arian. n. 7.
constat ex humana and divina natura, ut quaelibet earum, vocabulum impertial
alteri, (i.) The unity of the Person of Christ does so consist of the Divine
and humane natures, that each nature imparteth its appellation mutually to the
other; so that what is properly belonging to the divine nature, is ascribed as
done also by the humane nature; the same is also thus expressed by Theodoret,
Communia Persona evadunt, quae sunt Theod. Dial. impatib. n. 13. P. 398.
propria naturarum, (i.) By reason of this hypostaricall union, those things
which are proper to each nature severally, become common to the whole person:
and hence it is that Christ is called the Son of Man, and the Son of God;
eternal, and yet born the on of David, and yet the Lord of David: of him it is
said, John 3. 13. He that came down from Heaven, even the Son of Man which is
in Heaven:] yet the Manhood did not come from heaven, nor was the Manhood at
that time in Heaven; so again, Christ said to the thief, Luke 23. 43. To day
shall thou be with me in paradise, and yet Christ was not there that day in his
body, nor by his soul, (for ought we know) but only by his Godhead, which was
then in Paradise when his body was on the earth; and hence it is that the
appellation of God is stamped on the humane and infirm actions and passions of
Christ; for though he was crucified through weakness, as it is said, 2 Cor.
13. 4. that is, as he was man, yet because his Divine Nature is for ever
inseparable from the humane nature, he is truly called Deus crucifixus, Hier.
ut sup. c. 6. Naz. Orat. 51. n. 35.
(i.) God crucified (as is showed before out of Saint Hierome,) and Nazian
says, Si quis crucifixum non adorat, anathema sit. (i.) He that does not
worship him that was crucified, let him be accursed.

This great mystery of the hyposiaticall union was prudently discerned by the
ancient Fathers. Origin says, Judaei D^um crucifix^^unt. (i.) The Jews
crucied Origin. hom. 5. in Ps. 36. Orig. in Luc. hom 38. n. 45. Chrysostom. in
synax. n. 35.
God; and the same Father speaking of the tears which Christ shed over
J^rusalem, calls them, Lacrymas Dei, (i.) the tears of God. So St.
Chrysostom calls Christ, (...) (i.) the crucified God. The Prophet Esaias
prophesying of the birth of Christ, Esaias 9. 6. Unto us a child is born]
immediately adds -- his name shall be called The mighty God: and the Church
used the same language. Fulgentius says, Maria Fulg. de great. n. 3.
est genetrix Dei, quia were and propri^ peperit Deum Verbum, (i.) Mary is the
Parent of God, for she brought forth truly and properly God the Word. St.
Hierome says, Virgo Deum puerum peperit, (i.) Mary brought Hier. Ep. 30. n. 8.
forth a child that is God. So Saint Ambrose speaks, Ambr. in sym, n. 20.
Deus natus est ex virgin, God was born of a Virgin; and Athanasius says,
Atha. apol. 2. n. 15. n. 22.
Deus incarnatus, and Deus passus est, God was incarnate, and God suffered.
This doctrine is so true and necessary, that otherwise we could not have been
redeemed: the denying thereof, no doubt, is within the compass of the
unpardonable blasphemy, and the Church accounted such as taught the contrary,
to be in the number of the most dangerous heretics, as may appear by the story
of Nestorius, thus in brief.

This Nestorius was by birth a German, and was admitted Soc. l. 7. c. 29. and
Theod. haer. fab. l. 4. n. 16.
to be a Presbyter, or Priest in the Church of Antioch, from thence he was
preferred to be Patriarch of Constantinople, and there he was a sore vexer of
the Arians, Novatians and Macedonian heretics, and so eager therein, that he
incensed the Emperor against them, using this proud speech; O Imperator, da
mihi Soc. l. 7. c. 29.
terram purgatam h^re^icis, and ego tibi eoelum vetribuam. (i.) If the Emperor
would purge his Empire of heretics, he would assure him of Heaven. He was a
man very cloquent, and so proud thereof, that he disdained to read the ancient
Writers, and so being ignorant of Catholic Doctrine, he fell into this Heresy
of dividing or separating the two Natures of Christ, and particularly teaching
that the Virgin Mary ought not to be called (...), that is, the Parent or
Mother of Evag. l. 1. c. 3^.
God; and because some of his sect would have her called only '(...), that is,
the mother of a man: Nestorius desiring to go in a middle way, would have her
called (...), (i.) the Mother of Christ, but at no hand, the Mother of God: so
his error was in this, that he divided, and rent and severed the two natures of
Christ; that which his crucifiers were not permitted to do to his very
garments; in effect, as Vincentius notes: Nestorius duos vult esse Filios Dei,
duos Christos Vincent. Lirin* c. 17. n. 53.
unum Deum, alterum hominem: (i.) Nestorius would have fancied two Sons of God,
and two Christ's, whereof one should be God, and the other a man; and so by
denying the unity of his Person, he indeed made a quaternity of Persons,
instead of a Trinity against the sentence of the Church as it was long before
the time of Nestorius, recorded by Gregory of Neo-Cesaria, qui Greg. Thaum. de
12. cap. fidei, n. 2.
dicit Christum esse perf^ctu^ homin^m divise, and De^m divise, and non unum
Domi^u^, ei a^a^h^ma; (i.) Cursed is he that calls Christ a perfect man
separately, and that calls him God separately, so denying him to be one Lord
-- God.

For, this erroneous doctrine is destructive to the work of red^mption, if the
Person who died for us was not in his very death, very God so that he (by
reason of that Personal union before mentioned) might truly be called D^us
crucifixus, God crucified; and therefore our Commenter is also in this error,
who will afford Christ no better Title then a Divine Man, p. 136. which is no
more then ^ay be said of a Prophet, an Apostle, or any holy man, whereas he
should acknowledge him to be D^us -- homo, God and Man united.

So St. Austine in one of his Books, had said, that Aug. Retract. l. 1. c. 19.
Christ was D^mini^us homo, but he retracted it -- Quia D^m^nusest, says he,
because he is more then a Man of the Lord, for this Man is the Lord. For this
hypostaticall, or Personal union must be in and go through all the great
dispensations of our Savior's Med^atourship, both in his active and passive
obedience; for otherwise his fulfilling the Law had been beneficial to none
but himself, and his passion could not have sufficed for the whole world
therefore the Personal union was most necessary to that great work, and is
declared both in the Scriptures, and in the Fathers.

For whereas we now read, 1 John 4. 3. Every spirit that confesse^h not that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is Soc. l. 7. c. 32.
not of God.] This place is thought by Socrates to have been corrupted by the
Nestorians; for indeed the old reading was, as we to this day find both in
Hierome, and Prosper, Omnis spiritus qui solvit Je^um, Every Prosper de vocat.
Gent. l. 1. c. 23.
Spirit that divides Jesus; that is, which separateth his Divine from his
humane nature. The Scripture joyneth both in a communion of properties (as is
said before) for Elizabeth calls Mary, Luk 1. 43. The Mother of my Lord:] no
doubt but she meant the mother of her Lord -- God; for otherwise, how was
Christ her Lord? but as David calls him Lord; and as St. Ambrose notes upon
the words, One Lord:] In Ambr. de Spir. sanct. l. 3. c. 17.
Dominatione divini^as est, and in divi^i^ate Dominatus; That in the title Lord
the Lord God is meant. So again, Acts 20. 28. Fe^^ the Church of God, which he
has purchased with his own blood:] that is, with the blood of God; for it
cannot otherwise be understood. So likewise, 1 Cor. 2. 8. They would not have
crucified the Lord of Glory.]

Now I ask who is the Lord of glory, but only God? Consider now that to have a
mother, and to have blood, and to be crucified, though they be such things as
properly belong to the humane nature, yet you see that these humane infirmities
are said of God, because the same Person is both God and Man. To this Doctrine
of the Scripture, agrees the doctrine of the Fathers concerning this
communication of propertics: for because in Scripture, Christ is called the Son
of David, therefore St. Chrysostom without any scruple, says that David is
Chrysostom. sermon. de pseudopro. n. 61.
(...), and because the Scripture calls James, the brother of our Lord, Gal.
1. 19 the same Father says that James was Chrysostom. sermon. de poenit. n. 49
(...), that David was the Father of God, James was the brother of God; and
also St. Austine says, that David was Aug. de 5. haeres. c. 2. 10. 6. n. 6.
Parens Dei, the Parent of God: and O^igen says, Orig cont* Cells. l. 1. n. 33.
Corpus Jesus* est ^orpus Dei, that the Body of Jesus is the body of God.

This Doctrine was held by the Church to be of such great weight and
concernment that after the condemnation of Nestorius the Council of ^halcedo^
added this to the Creed as an Article of Faith, Evangrius, l. 2. c. 4.
Mary the mother of God, and afterward in another Creed ratified by the edict
of Justinus the Emperor. Evag. l. 5. c. 4.
The Virgin Mary is again called the Mother of God. And the Emperor Justinian
built a Church, and called it Evag. l. 5. c. 21.
Templum De^pa^ae, the Church of the mother of God; and Gregory Nazianzen long
before, in an Epistle written to Cledonius, had affirmed, Naz. Orat. seu Epist.
51.
Si quis Mariam non credi^ (...), (i.) He that does not believe Mary to be the
mother of God, himself is an Atheist, and without God. Nestorius for denying
this Doctrine was summoned to the Council of Ephesus, which was called Soc. l.
7. c. 33:
by the authority of the Emperor Theodosius the younger, where Cyril of
Alexandria sat President; the Council deposed Nestorius out of his Bishopric
and the Emperor banished him: In his banishment, his blasphemous tongue rotted
in his mouth, and was eaten out with worms: so he died with a mark of Evag. l.
1. c. 7. Evag. ib.
Gods vengeance on him; as Arius did, and the Church History passes this hard
sentence on him: Ex his miseriis ad sempiterna supplicia migravit, that he
departed out of this misery into eternal torments.

Notwithstanding, all this Thal^ia Arii, this pretty Ath. cont. Arian. or. 2.
n. 5.
Commentary tells us, that Christ is not the supreme God, nor ever was a God
till he rose from the dead, for then he was Consequently Deified: so if he be
God, he must be but of a late Edition. This Doctrine harmoniously agrees with
the Heathens Theology, which also tells us of Dii superi, inferi Medioxumi,
Magni, Minuti, Plaut. in Cist.
Patellani, (i.) High and low, and middle gods; great and small, and Pint-pot
deities. The deifying of heathen Emperors, has as good authority from
Scripture: I have said ye are Gods, Psalm. 82. And Romulus, Mart. l. 5. Ep. 8.
Julius, Augustus, and Dominus Deusque noster Domitianus, are as well God
deified as Christ himself (by this Comment.) And in the Church-Writers,
Deification ((...)) which is the word used by Dionysius,) is ascribed to
mortal men: for that Father shows that an holy Man, endued with the Spirit
of God, may be said to be Deified; that is, assimulated to God, endued D^ony.
Areop. de Eccl. Hier. c. 2. id. epist. 2. n. 10 Naz. or. 37. n. 29.
with, sanctified, and united to God: And in another place he tells us,
Deificatio est imitatio; (i.) Deification is the imitating of God: and to the
same purpose, Nazianzen says, Spiritus nos deificat ((...) is his word) Men
endued with Gods Spirit are Deified, because God is in them, and as it were
mingled with them, and works in them: And Athanasius says, Homines in quibus
est Spiritus, Deificantur, Atha. ad Serapion. n. 26. vid. 2 Pet. 1. 4. Now in
what sense our Savior may be said to be Deified in the later times of the
world, who was the supreme and only God from all eternity would next be
inquired.

CHAP. IX. More concerning Deification, and in what sense Christ may be said to
be Deified.
THe Arians were in this Doctrine something more ingenuous, then this
Commenter, though in them it was also most pernicious; for they Ath. and Hill.
cont. Arian. n. 7.
confessed that Christ was the Son of God, because they knew that the Saints
were so called: and they said, Christ was before time began; because they
believed that Angels and Devils were before the world; and they called Christ
by the Name of God; because the Scriptures call some creature so: But they
would not confess him to have the same Godhead with the Father; for they said
that he was Deus factus, made a God, or Ambros. de cil. div. c. 2. n. 26.
deified, and that he was the Son of God, not by nature, but by gift, or grace,
and not by eternal generation, but by power given, as Kings are called Gods;
for so Saint Ambrose observes, Deus in Scripturis est. Ambr. de fide l. 1. and
lib. 5. c. 1. n. 22 23.
1 Verus. 2 Nuncupativus, nam sunt qui dicuntur Dii, and non sunt. 3 Falsus, ut
D^mones: (i. In Scripture, God signifies, 1 The true God. 2 Such as (...) but
called Gods, and ^re not so. 3 False gods of (...) this Commenter when he was
argued (...) learned (...) this (...) they were (...) confessed, that Christ
(...).

But one of the ^^^pany ^^quired him further to declare how long Christ had
been God, and whether from Eternity? at which question he seemed very angry,
and for present left the room.

Now indeed the Fathers do oftentimes apply this word to Christ, and say, that
he was Deified, and that in time also, and not before his incarnation; for he
could never have been said to have been deified, if he never had been
incarnate; it is only his humane nature that is said to be deified, and not his
Spirit, or divine nature; for the Word cannot otherwise be said to be deified,
then as he is hominified (if I may have leave to use that word) for, Joh. 1.
14. The word was made flesh: signifies that God was made man by his
incarnation, and man was made God by the person I union of the divine and
humane natures, for so he alcame Theanth^opos, and Emmanuel.

The reason is, because when God assumed a body by his incarnation, that body
then became the body of God (as is showed before out of Origin) and so that*
Orig. in Mat. tract. 21. n. 41.
Father expresses himself thus; Christus deificavit humanam naturam quam
suscepit; Christ deified that humane nature which he assumed. Neither may we
think so grossly of this deification, as if the flesh of Christ were turned into
the Go^head, but only because it is joined to the Godhead, and assumed into a
personal union with it; therefore the Name of God is also stamped upon it; so
that we may truly say, the man Christ is God, and yet the body and soul of
Christ still are, and for ever will be creatures. In Aug. Epi. 221.
this sense St. Austin says, Homo versus est in Deum n^c amisit naturam, Man
is become God, and yet man did not lose his humane nature; and thus Athanasius
says, Archangeli semper antea adoraban^ Filium, sed nunc Atha. Orat. 2. cont.
2. Arian. n. 5.
Jesum adorant incarnatum carne, qu^m de^fi^averat: The Archangels did always
before the incarnation, worship the Son of God, but they worship him now in
that flesh, which (by assuming it) he now has deified. For now it is the flesh
of God, as the Scripture calls his blood, the blood of God, Act. 20. 28. and
so the same Father uses th^s word diverse times in the same sense, Atha. orat
2. cont. Ar. n. 5. h. Id. ser. 4. cont. Arian. n. 7.
Non deificatus fuisset homo, nisi verbum fuisset incarnatum. -- And -- h.
Christus carnem assumendo, hominem deificavit: The manhood could not have been
deified, if the Word had not been incarnate; -- and Christ deified man, by
assuming flesh. St. Austin writing upon those words, Paul an Apostle (of Jesus
Christ) not of men, nor by man] Gal. 1. Gal. 1. 1. 1. Aug. exp. in Gal. in
praefa^. n. 97.
1. says 1. Paulus missus est per Christum jam totum Deum, quia ex omni part
immortalem; That Paul is said not to be called by man, because Christ was at
that time wholly God, because now he was perfectly immortal, so he fastened
this deification, or immortality 2. Aug. Retract. l. 1. c. 21.
only on his humane nature* for his divine nature was the immortal God from
all eternity; and Theodoret upon those words God has, highly exalted him.]
Phil. 2. 9. says, Est de carne quae deificata est, nam dominus Theod. Dial. in
confu. n. 12.
gloriae non dicitur glorificari; It Is meant of the flesh of Christ deified;
for as he is the Lord of glory he cannot be exalted, deified, or more
glorified. So Origin Orig. in Levit. hom. 3.
says of a Levitical sacrifice, that it signified, Carnem Christi in coelis
deificandam, that the flesh of Christ in heaven was to be deified, and this
deifying the flesh of Christ is said to be done in heaven, because there it was
glorified and immortal* and on earth he is said to be deified, because of the
Hypostaticall union of his 3. Pet. Diac. apul. Fulg. n. 2.
2 natures, whereby his flesh was indeed Caro Dei, the flesh of God.

By thus distinguishing the two natures in Christ, the ancient Fathers answered
the objections of old heretics, made against the eternal divinity of Christ;
for in the same sense that the Son of God is said to be Phil. 2. 9. Ephesians. 1. 20.
Mat. 28. 18. Act. 3. 13, 15.
deified, he is also in Scripture said to be exalted, to be set far above all
Angels and Principalities, to be made the head of the Church, to sit at the
right hand of God -- to have a name given him above all names, that are named
-- That all power is given him in heaven and in earth, -- that God raised him
from the dead, -- and that Jesus is made an high Priest for ever; all these
sayings and many more of this ^ind are to be understood of the humane nature of
Christ, but cannot be verified of his divine nature. Athanasius does in
general give us this excellent rule, Athan. Ser. 4. cont Ar. n. 7. n. ib.
Quae Christus accepit a Patre, non Filio verbo accepit, sed carni, -- and
again, n. Quae Christus possidet ut Deus, ea postulat ut Filius hominis: Those
things which Christ is said to have received of the Father, he received not to
himself as he is God the Word, but by reason of his assumed flesh, -- and such
things as he required to his manhood, he possesed before by his Godhead; and in
this sense only is the Son of God said to be anointed, and so only is he
called Christ, Ath. orat. 2. cont. Arian. n. 5.
Vnctus est, non ut Deus, sed ut homo Heb. 1. 9.
erat: Theod. Decret. l. 5. n. 17. Luke 2. 52. Ath. ser. 4. cont. Ar. n. 8. and
n. 22.
Erat Verbum, Filius unigenitus ante incarnationem, sed non nominaetur Jesus
Christus nisi post incarnationem, says Theodoret: He was anointed, not as God
but as man, -- he was the Word, the Son, the Only begotton before his
incarnation; but is not named Jesus Christ till his incarnation; so when it is
said, he increased in wisdom, it is meant of his humane nature, not of his
Godhead, as Athanasius expounds it, Profecit non verbum sed caro.

So again, Omnia mibi traditae sunt a Patre.] Nam antea non erat homo: so
again, God has made Jesus both Lord and Christ,] Acts 2. 36. God cannot be
said to make him, but only in respect of his incarnation; for otherwise the
Father is said to beget him, but not to make him.

So again, The Father gives life to the Son;] that is, to his flesh, and as he
is Man. So Christ is said to receive the Spirit without measure;] that is, his
humane nature received the Divine Spirit; for in him the Godhead dwelt bodily;
so, The Father is greater then I;] That is, as I am Man: and he has given him
a Name,] still as he was Man: and in this sense only is Christ said to be
Deified: for nothing was in Christ before his Incarnation, that could receive
any new Title of God, because his pure divine Nature was so before, neither
could that Title be really and properly ascribed to any other God; because
there is no God but he; and therefore Epiphanius does truly affirm, Ante Epiph.
haer. 69.
incarnationem non dicit Christus Deus men's; (i.) Christ did not, say My God,
before his birth of the Virgin, because he has no God, but only in
consideration of incarnation.

CHAP. X. How those words which signify the abasing and minoration of the Son
of God are to be understood of his delivering up the Kingdom, and end thereof,
and of his subjection to the Father.
AS no Title of Majesty, Exaltation or Deification could be newly added to the
Son of God, except he had humbled himself to incarnation: So neither could any
terms or words of minoration and subjection be put upon the same Son of God,
if he had not determined before, and actually afterward performed the assuming
of flesh; for by his incarnation he became capable of such infirm passions, and
thereby is as (showed Tert. cont. Marc. l. 2.
before) he is said to be born -- to grow -- to weep -- to pray -- to thirst --
to suffer -- to die -- and yet to be truly called Deus mortuus; Though dead,
yet God nevertheles S. Hilary upon these words. The Father is greater then I,]
says, Pater est Hill. de Trin. l. 9. n. 3. John 14. 28.
major Filio respectu hominis assumpti, sed Filius non est minor Patre respectu
Deitatis: The Father is greater then the Son, in regard of the Sons assumed
Manhood, but the Son is not less then the Father, in respect of the Sons
Godhead. For in consideration of the Divinity of the Son, he says, The Father
and I are one. John 10. 30.
They are one, and that not only in will, or concurrence of consent, (as the
Arians would have it) but in Godhead: for as the same Father answers them --
Quasi divinae doctrinae inops sermo sit, nec dici a Domino Hill. de Trin. l. 9.
p. 185
potuerit, Ego and Pat^^ unum volumus: (i.) The Divine Scriptures wanted not
words, but Christ would have said, The Father and I consent in will. If he had
so meant.

So St. Ambrose faith of his praying: Christus vogat Ambr. de fide. l. 3. n.
22. c. 3.
ut Filius Hominis, imperat ut Deus: (i.) Christ prayed as he was the Son of
Man for as he is God he commands. And again he says of the death of Christ:
Christus Id. de incarn. l. c. 5. n. 25.
moriebatur, and non moriebatur- secundum hominem -- secundum Dium: (i.) Christ
died -- for he was a Man, Christ was immortal -- for he was God. So the
minoration of the Son of God: Ful^entius says, Exi^^ni. Fulg. de great. c. 2.
n. 3. Phil. 2. 7.
io fuit acceptio formae servilis, the making of himself to be of no
reputation, was by assuming the form of a servant; just as a King does
condescend below himself in the disguise of mean apparel.

But the principal doubt is, how Christ can be believed, and said to be the
true, only, supreme and eternal God, and all one with the Father in the Unity
of Godhead, seeing the scripture tells us, I Corinth. 15. 24.

1 That Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom to God the Father. 1 Cor. 15. 24,
25, 28.
2 That Christ shall reign, till he has put all his enemies under his feet. 3
That then the Son himself shall be subject unto him that put all things under
him: For how can it stand with a supreme God, and an eternal King, to deliver
up his Kingdom, and so to reign but for a limited time until, and then to
become a subject?
1 For answer hereunto, I say first, that Christ's delivering up the Kingdom to
the Father, does not imply any resignation or annulling of his own interest,
nor excluding of himself, or abdicating his own dominion, but a communication
of that power which he received (as he was man) to his Father, who is the same
God with him. For as he is said to deliver the Kingdom to the Father; so the
Father is said to have delivered all things to the Son, Luk 10. 22. All things
are delivered to me of my Father: and Matthew. 28. 18. All power is given unto me
in Heaven, and in Earth. Yet no man will say, that the Father by this gift,
excluded himself from his own dominion; still God is Lord of all things but by
this gift he communicated his Domiuion to the Man Christ, and yet reserved it
to himself.

Now what is this Kingdom that shall be delivered? the Kingdom of Christ is
his Church, his Saint, his Elect, and what kind of delivering is here meant?
were not the Church, and Saints, and Elect Gods Kingdom before? and how are
they said to be delivered up to the Father, who never had been out of his
hands? Aug. de Trin. l. 1. c. 8. n. 60.


I answer with St. Austin, Tradere regnum est eredentes perducere ad
contemplationem Dei: to deliver up the kingdom is to bring his Saints to the
vision, and fruition of God, to present them pure, unspotted, free, and fully
delivered from the bonds, and the ruling power of sin, and of death, which
before had some power over them, and God ruled in them but in part, so that the
dominion of the flesh had also a share in them; but at the last judgment, they
shall be given up free from those intanglements, as it is there said, that then
Christ shall put down all rule, and authority, and power, ver. 24. So that
nothing shall have rule over them but God, and he alone, -- that God may be all
in all, ver. 28. So that this delivering up is but so as Saint Paul desired, 2.
Cor. 11. 2. to present them to Christ as chaft Virgins, and as a Philosopher
said to his disciple: reddam te tibi meliorem. So Christ shall deliver Seneca
de Benef. l. 1. c. 8.
us up to the Father in better condition then he found us, for although God by
his Omnipotency ruled over us before, yet it was but as a King over stubborn
and rebellious subjects; but then the same God shall reign over the same
subjects amended, and wholly, and willingly, and joyfully submitting themselves
to his divine will.

Secondly, where it is said, Christ shall reign till he ^
has put all his enemies under his feet; This does not signify that Christ
shall reign no longer, but that the Kingdom of Christ shall endure until then,
in despite of all the opposition of heresies, Persecutors and Tyrants, or of
the world and the flesh, and that the gates of hell shall not prevail against
it. So that Christ shall reign till then, as a King whose people are
perpetually opposing, resisting, and rebelling against him, but yet the King
still holds his kingdom; so albeit in the Kingdom of Christ, and in his
servants there is strife between the flesh and the spirit, yet still the Spirit
of Christ retains a kingly power in them, for although the flesh lusts
against the spirit, Gal. 5. 17. yet the Spirit helps our infirmities, Romans 8.
26. and God gives us the victory through our Lord Lord Jesus Christ, 1. Cor.
15. 57. Christ reigns during this world, as a Warrior, as the Lord of Hosts;
but afterward he shall reign as a true Melchisedec, king of Sal^m, Prince of
peace: so that his kingdom does not end with the world, but shall be refined
and reformed, not by any change in our King, but in his subjects, and this is
the meaning of this word till in the judgment of Expositors; (...): do not
always signify an utter ces^ation. Orig. 39.
Donec non est definiens tempus. Cyr. Hiero. 17.
. Donec non habet finem, sed consequens quiddam. Th^oph in Mat.
. Donec non adimit posterius. Naz. 28.
. Donec sequens tempus non excludit; (i.) this word until does not so limit us
to the time past, but that it leaves open all time to come, as Mat^h. 28. 28.
I am with you unto the end of the world; does not signify that Christ shall be
with them no longer, and so also it is used, Psalm. 112. 8. and in many other
places.

Thirdly, where it is said, the Son himself shall be subject] 3.
the meaning is not that the Son of God shall cease to be a King, and shall
turn subject, for we are assured that he shall reign over the house of Jacob
for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end, Luke 1. 33. Now what is it
in Christ that is capable of subjection but only his humane nature? for no man
will say that his Godhead can be subjected; and as for his natural ^
body, or humane nature, it ever was, and is, and for ever shall be subject to
his Godhead; for the humane nature is ever ruled by the divine nature: Neither
shall his humane nature ever be depressed, depreciated, or subjected lower then
that preferment which was conferred on it by his Godhead, therefore this
subjection cannot be meant of his own natural body, but it is indeed meant of
his body mystical, his Church, his Saints and Elect which are called his
members and his body, Your bodies are the members of Christ, 1. Cor. 6. 15. and
the Church is his body* Ephesians. 1. 23. Ephesians. 5. 30. this exposition, as it is most
true, so was it also that which the Fathers gave of this hard place, Athanasius
says, Atha. Cont. Apol. n. 22.
. Cum omnes nos subjicimur, tum ipse dicitur subject; When all we are subjected
to Christ, then Christ is said to be su^ject; and Saint Ambrose says, Ambr. de
Fid. l. 5. c. ^. n. 24.
. Christus subjicietur in nobis -- nondum subjectus est Christus, quia membra
nondum subj^cta sunt -- pro nobis ^^^it subjectus, non pro se, et in nobis
subjicietur; Christ shall be subject -- but it is in us -- as yet Christ is not
subject, because his members are not yet subjected -- it is in regard of us
that he must be subjected, not in regard of himself; for so long as h^s
mystical body is not perfectly subjected to the divine will (as is showed
before) the whole Body of Christ cannot be said to be fully subject, and his
mystical body which consists of men overruled by the power and rebellion of
flesh and blood never was yet perfectly subjected to God, nor ever will be
wholly obedient to him, until (after the resurrection,) they shall be thus
delivered up to the Father, perfectly Sanctified Aug. 83. quaest. qu. 69. n. 87.
and cleansed; and thus does Saint Austin also expound it: Subjectus erit]
dicitur de Christo et de membris ejus, Scil. ecclesia cujus est caput -- sic de
universo Christo annumerato corpore, and membris ejus -- Omnes vos unum estis
in Christo, Gal 3. 28. -- Christus universus, est caput cum membris; This
subjection is said of Christ -- and of his members the Church; of which, Christ
is the head. -- -- So there is an universal Christ, signifying the head, and
all the members, as we read, Gal. 3. 28. Y^ are all one in Christ.

By what has been said, I trust the Reader will understand that neither this
Deification, preferment, or exaltation; nor this Subjection which is said of
Christ, does in the least measure, derogate from his Eternal, and Supreme
Godhead.

SECT. II. More concerning the subjection of Christ.
THis speech of Saint Paul, that The Son himself shall be subject,] would be
more thoroughly examined, being one of the grand Arguments, used by A^iu^ and
his Sect, against the eternal Godhead of the Son. Therefore I crave thy
patience (good Reader) whilst I discourse unto thee two questions pertinent.

First, how it can be said, that The Son himself shall 1. Quaest.
be subject, whereas in truth, only h^s Church is then to be subjected more
then it was before, and not his own Person, no not his very humanity; (more I
say, then it was whilst he walked on the Earth) For then he was not only
without sin, but moreover, he was obedient to death, even the death of the
cross? Philip. 2. 8.


For the understanding hereof I premise three considerable observations: First,
the Apostle does not say, the Word shall be subject; for then he must mean that
the Godhead of Christ should be subject, which is impossible: but he says, the
Son shall be subject. Now we know, nothing is more frequent in Scripture, then
that holy men are called the Sons of God, as Matthew. 5. 9. Luke 6. 35. so that
the subjection of the Son of God, does here signify the perfect subjection of
holy men at the resurrection of the just, as will more appear anon.

Secondly, I observe, that whereas he says, The Son himself shall be subject,
and yet cannot mean the natural and individual Person of Jesus Christ, but
only his Church; it must needs declare that the appellation of the Son of God
himself is given and communicated to his elect members, who are his Body
mystical, as being really united to his body natural, and with him who is the
head, they are One body; so that Christ, and his Church are called One Christ,
which by the Fathers, is usually called Plenitudo Christi, and Christus ^^tu^
and Christus Vniverisus. Tertullian in his sense said Tertul. de Poenit. Aug.
^n Jo. Tract. 21.
of this mystery, Ecclesia (est) Christus, cum ad fratrum g^nuate proter dis,
Christum contractas: and so Saint Austine, Christi facti sumus, non so^um
Christani, Plenitudo Christi est caput and membra, C^^istus and Ecclesi.: (i.)
The Church is Christ, so that when you are prostrate at the knees of the
brethren, you touch the knees of Christ -- We are not only Christians, but we
are Christ; the Fullness of Christ is the head, and the members, that is, Christ
and h^s Church.

Thirdly, Observe that it is said, Then shall the Son 3.
be subject] by which future expression, it may clearly appear that the
subj^ct^on here meant, is not yet come to pass, and therefore cannot be
understood of the natural, proper, and individual Person of Jesus Christ: for
all manner of subject^on that can be expected from him, is already perfect in
his own proper humanity, because himself never rebelled against the Godhead.
Nazianzen says of him, Annon nunc subjectus est? an Naz. Orat. 36.
ut de De^ host loque^is? But though Christ in h^s own proper humanity, ever
was, is and will be subject to the Godhead, yet of Christ in regard of his ^ody
Mystical (which is the Church of Elect, and ^s called by her Spouses Id. ibid.
own name) the same Father says* P^cca^ a nostra sumpsit and inobedientiam --
quamd^u eg^ inobediens sum, Coristus per me inobediens est: Cum subjectionem
nostram implev^rit, nosque addu^^r^t, tum ips^ subj^ctus dicitur; Christ has
taken our sins and d^sob^dience on himself, so long as I am inobedient, so long
Christ by me is said to be inobedient, when he has wholly subdued us, and
presented us perfect to the Father, then the Son himself is said to be subject.

The answer to this question, How the Son himself Answer.
shall then be subject? is this* That in Scripture Language, the Church or
Saints and Members of Christ a^e called, and really are with their head, One
whole Christ, they are himself, and therefore their subjection is his
subjection, and so long as they are not fully subjected, the Son himself is not
wholly subject

For if the natural body of Christ be called Christ; (as it is when we say
Christ is buried, when only his body was buried) much rather may his great
Mystcall and P^liticall Body be called Christ, and so it is, 1 Cor. 12. 27. The
Body of Christ, -- all the Members are but one Body, so is Christ: and Gal. 3.
2^. All are one in Christ Jesus; see 1 Cor. 6. 15.

If it were not for this real union of Christ and his Church, how could Christ
truly say, I was hungry, Matthew. 25. 30.
and ye gave me meat; for the meat is meant of that which is given to his poor
Members, and not to his own proper self, and th^s is clearly and often
explained by S. Austine, Aug. in Jo. Tract. 28.
Non enim Christus in capite, and non in corpore, sed Christis to^us in capite
and in corpore: and again, In Jo tract. 108.
Vnus est Christus, caput and corpus, ipsi sunt ego: and again, In 1 Epist. Jo.
tract. 1.
Carni Christi conjungitur Ecclesia, and fit totus Christas ca^u and corpus:
and again, Ibid. tract. 10.
Fil^i Dei sunt c^orpus unics Filii Dei, and ^um ille caput sit, nos Membra,
unus 'est F^lius Dei, and more yet: De Verb. Dei, Sermon. 14.
Caput cum corpore su^, unus est Christus: The Apostle says, Ephesians. 5. 31. We
are member^ of his Body, of his flesh, and of his bones* upon which words, the
same Father says, De Temp. sermon. 234.
Ipse Christus est spensur, and sponsa, sponsus in capi^e, sponsa in corpore.
The sum of what he says is this: We are not to imagine Christ to be only in
the head, for the whole Christ consists of the head and body -- The head and
body are but one Christ -- his Members are himself -- so there is but one Son
of God, for the whole Christ is both Bridegroom and Bride.

By reason of this Union, Christ said, Saul, Saul why Acts 9. 4.
persecutest thou me* For Christ is in Heaven as head, but his Body is on
Earth. If one tread upon the foot, the head cries, you tread on me. Aug. de
Verb. Dei, ser. 49.
Vnita^ est a capite ad pedes; head and foot are united as one Body: and
therefore by the Ancients, Prosp. Psalm. 101.
Those which are strong in Christ are called his bones. The Apostle is the
mouth of Christ, Saint Ambrose wished, would I were Ambr. n. 51, 34
but his Foot: Others, are his Eyes, as the Prophets; Others his hands, as
those that do good, and the poor are his belly: yea, the Prophet calls his
people the apple Zach. 2. 8.
of his Eye.

So it is said, John 3. 13. No man has ascended into Heaven, but he that came
down from Heaven:] For although holy men ascended into Heaven, yet this is a
Truth, because such are included in the plenitude of Christ; Aug. de Verb.
Apost. ser. 14.
In Coe^um non ascend^t n^si Christus, si vis ascendere, ^sto in corpore He
that will ascend, must first be in Christ.

It is said, Col. 1. 24. I fi^l up that which is behind of the affl^ctions of
Christ in my flesh.] We may not think that Christ in his own particular Person
left his Passion insufficient, so as if for our redemption the Apostle should
need to supply his defect; but his meaning is, that something was to be
suffered in the Mystical Body of Christ, (which is his Church) by the holy
Martyrs, for confirmation of Evangelicall Truth; as it is there said, For his
bodies sake] that is, for the edification of his Members, and these Passions of
Martyrs are here called the afflictions of Christ, though they were acted only
on the Person of this Apostle.

If it be here objected, that there is a great difference between the Sonship
of Christ, and our sonship, because he is the Son of God by Nature, and we
only by the Adoption of Grace.

This cannot be denied, but withal we should understand, that although Christ
in regard of his Divine Nature is very God of very God; yet the same Lord Jesus
in respect of his assumed Manhood, is also the Son of God only by Grace by
Adoption and Election; and therefore it is said in regard of this humane
Nature, All power is given me in Heaven, and in Earth; Esaias 42. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 4.
and therefore Christ is called Gods elect Servant; and Saint Peter calls him a
stone chosen and precious; for indeed it was of mere grace, that this Man Jesus
was chosen, and taken into Unity of Person with the Eternal Word; and this is
the doctrine of the ancient Church Aug. de Verb. Dei, ser. 8. De Temp. ser. 84.
delivered by Saint Austine, Susceptio hominis per Verbum erat Gratia, nam quid
meruit ille Homo qui Christus est? and again, Susceptio hominis ipsius in Deum,
tota est gratia, quid meruit homo ille? ^olle gratiam, quid est Christus nisi
homo? quid nisi quod tu? and in his disputes against the ^el^gians he thus
argues, Vnde Christus De Praedest. cap. 14.
homo meruit ut in unitatem personae cum aeterno verbo assumeretur? quid ^nte
egit? and he answers himself thus, ille great aest tantus; ^a gratia fi^
Christianus, qua ille homo fi^ Christus. That is, the taking of the manhood
into God, was merely of grace, for what did that man Christ deserve? What did
he before? by the same grace that a man is made a Christian, this man Jesus was
made Christ.

Finally why should we further doubt, that holy men are called Christ, and the
Son of God; seeing the Ephesians. 3. 17. 1 John 4. 13. Matthew. 28. 28.
Scripture tells us that Christ dwells in their hearts, and that they dwell
in him, and that he is with us to the end of the world; Hereupon Saint Hier^m
writes thus to Saint Austin, ( Hierom. Ep. 80.
) Habitantem in te^d^^exi D^m^num Salvator^m: And Paulinus thus writes to him (
Aug. epist. 58.
) Audiam qu^d in ^^ mihi loquatn^ Deus; And Austin himself writes thus to
Bishop Aurelius, ( Id. ^e opere Monach. cap. 1.
) Jussioni ^^a oporter me ob^^mpera^e, nam Christus in te habitans, ex te
jussi^.

This union of Christ, and his Church is of so great Concernment, that the most
high and Holy Sacrament was set up by our Savior purposely, not only to
signify, but also as an Instrumental means to effect this most holy Union
(which cannot be said of common and ordinary food) and therefore is called by
Saint Austin, The Sacrament of union, as out of many grapes one vessel Ad Fr^^
in Erem ser. 28. Sacramentum unitatis.
of wine is extracted, etc ^just so (says he) of many men one Body of Christ
is composed. I here present unto the Learned Readers consideration, an
exposition of those two difficult sayings of Christ, but I do not obtrude this
conceit Magisterially. He says, John 6. 53. Except ye cat the flesh of the Son
of man etc.] and, Matthew. 26. 26. Take, eat, this is my Body] This he said when
he gave not flesh, but bread: Vide Theophil. in ^o^. 6. 51. This bread may
truly besaid to Vide Theoophil. in John 6. 51.
be turned into the Flesh of Christ, because it is nutrimentally turned into
the flesh of every holy Communicant, because such are truly called the Body,
and members of Christ, and are called Christ: but in profane persons it is not
so turned because they are not the members of Christ, neither does our Savior
say, This is my body, till he had first said, Take, Eat; my learned friend Dr.
Thomas Brown observes, that every Religio ^^dici.
man is a kind of Anthrop^pha^e, because the main bulk of his body went in at
his mouth by nourishment, so this holy Eucharisticall nourishment is therefoie
turned into the Body of Christ, because it is converted into the flesh and
blood of us who are his Body; for thus Christ and his servants become
incorporate and one body. In the vision of Saint Peter it was said, Arise, Acts
10 13.
kill, and eat] the meaning was, that Peter should re? ceive the Gentiles, as
well as the Jews into the Communion of the Church Quasi escam u^ incorporentur
Ecclesiae says Austin; so he expounds that of Saint John, Aug. Hom. 45.
Except ye eat] id est, nisi incorporentur Christo. So also he expounds that
saying, He that comes to Jo. 6. 37.
me, I will not cast him out] Quiveni^ ad Christum, incorporatur ei. And in
that exposition of the Apocalypse which goes under his name, Rev 20. 9. where it
is said that fire came from God and devoured (the persecutors) he says,
Comeduntur ab ecclesia persecutores, id est, incorporantur, the meaning is,
that by the fire of the Holy Ghost, the very persecutors of the Church shall be
converted and incorporated into that mystical Body of Christ; this of the
first question

The second question is, What that is, which in the Saints Quest. 2.
Militant, is not yet nor ever will be in this life fully subjected to God, but
shall be hereafter in the next life?

To this question, this is the answer; That in the Answer.
most holy men living, there dwells a rebellious sin continually unto their
death, which is the same that by the Apostle is called Concupisence; for the
law says, Thou shall not cover: and the Apostle says, The Exodus 20. 17. Romans
7. 7. Gal. 5. 17. Psalm. 94. 20.
flesh lusts against the Spirit, this is that which Divines call Original
sin; of which the Apostle says, Romans 7. 23. I see another law in my members
warring against the law of my mind. Psalm. 94. 20. he calls it a law, because
it has such power over us, as the Edicts of Tyrants have over their Vassals:
this is that sin which ^we^l^th in us, Romans 7. 2. of which he says, v. 24. who
shall deli^er us from this body of death? the deliverance m^st not be exp^cted
in this life; for against this thorn in the flesh did this Apostle pray, ^
but it was answered; My G^^ce i^ sufficient. That 2 Cor. 12. 7.
is, no other deliverance may be had, but power by grace to resist this
temptation, yet not so much power as to annihilate and quite extinguish it in
this life.

If it be here objected that the Holy Scriptures acknowledge Genesis 6. 9. Job 1.
1. Luke 1. 5.
some persons just, and righteous, and perfect ones, as Job, and Noah, and
Zecharie; the answer is, that this perfection does not imply impeccancie or
impeccability, for such just men fall seven times, Prove. 24. 16. Noah was just,
but it is said there, in his generation; such may be called perfect Travelers,
but not perfect Possessors, having not yet finished their course; so a child is
called perfect, which has all his limbs, and lineaments complete yet is far
from a perfect man, and a perfect man is yet far short of Angelical
perfection. Men are called just, who are not Aug. de natura and Great. ^. 38.
free from sin, Justi su^runt, and sine peccato non suerunt.

That this truth has been ever acknowledged by the Church, may appear in that
the Apostle says: ^f we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves: civitas 1 John 1. 8.
Dei o^at^ dimi^te nobis debi^a, the universal Church in the time of prayer
says Forgive us our trespasses. Indeed Aug. de Civit l. 19. c. 22. De peccat.
merito, l. 2. c. 6.
S. Austin confesses, That a man may sometime live without acting a sin; yet
that any mortal man can be without sin, he denies. For when the Pelagians
urged that the Virgin Mary was without sin, he desired to be excused from all
accusation of that Blessed Mother of our Lord God, yet he was assured that all
Saints on earrh would submit to that speech of Ambr. de Jacob l. 1. c. 6. Hier.
ad Ctesiphon cap. 5. Id. Cont Pelag. l. 2. cap. 8.
Saint John, If we say we have no sin, etc. Saint Ambrose says, Non gl^ri^r
quia justus sum, s^d quia redemptus, not glorying in Justice, but in
Justification: St. Hierom says, men are called just, not because they are
without sin, but because they are endowed with many virtues: as Ezechias was a
just man, though he sinn^d* and wept, he did not lose the repute of a just man
for some sins, but he retained it, because withal he performed many just and
worthy actions; besides, a man is ^steemed righteous, when his un^ighteousnesse
is forgiven, as he is ^steemed with God a performer of the Law, whose
transgr^ssions are pardoned. Omnia Aug. Retract. 1. c. 19.
mandata facta deputan^ur, quando qui^quid non fit ignosci^ur.

Now, that the rebellion of flesh and blood, or concupisc^nce does cont^nually
dwell in all mankind, during this life, may clearly appear in the Holy Person
of Saint Paul by his own words: for thus he writes, Romans 7. 19. The go^d that I
would, I do not: but the evil which I would not, that I do.] f we inquire what
evil it is, which the Apostle would not do, and yet did it? it must needs be
answered, that evil concupiscences, or carnal lusts did arise in him, which
he desired to be quit of, and free from, that they might not all be in him: but
because evil concupiscences will ever be in mortal men, therefore his next
care is, that such desires may be r^sisted, so that they proceed not into
action, as he says, Romans 6. 12. Let not sin reign in your mortal body, that
ye should obey i^ in the lusts thereof] he does not say, let it not be, for it
will always be in us: but let it not rule, and p^evail over Grace: So, Gala. 5
16. w^lk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh] he
does say, ye shall not have those lusts, but not fulfill and pe^form them: and
ver. 17. Ye cannot do the thing that ye would] (that is) because ye cannot (as
you desire) be free, and quit from evil desires, so as no evil desires at all
should arise in you, yet resist them, do not obey them; Tene Aug. de Verb. Dei,
ser. 43.
manus, pedes, ocu^o^, etc. withhold your members from acting those carnal
suggestions.

Where he says, What I hate that I do.] We are not Romans 7. 15.
to imagine that the Apostle means, that although he hated fornication,
adultery, rapine, etc. yet he did act these things; but he means that he
hated evil lusts, which yet did continually arise in him, he desired they
might not all be in him. Nolo concupiscere, and tamen con^upisco; O ^i, and
tamen Aug. de verbis Apost. ser. 5.
ago, quamvis membra^^eneo, arma nego. So himself advises, Romans 6. 13 Y^^ld
not your members as i^st ^ments of unrighteousness: Although sinful desires
arise in Id de Temp. Ser. 45.
your carnal heart. Rebellant? r^bella, pugnant? pugna. This is the strife
between the flesh and the spirit, he did continually resist those temptations.
Luctabatur, no^ Id. ibid.
subjug^ba^ur; always str^ving with them, but not overcome by them.

Rom* 8. 8. They that are in the flesh cannot please God.] Though holy men are
in the flesh, yet because they are not overruled by the flesh, they do please
Id. de verbis Apost. Ser. 6.
God Carnem portant, sed non p^rtantur ab ^a.

Where he says, Romans 7. 25. With the mind I my self serve the Law of God, but
with the flesh the Law of sin:] We are not to think that the natural mind or
intellective faculty of this Apostle was free from carnal concupiscence; for
by nature our whole man body and soul is carnal: but the mind here signifies
his understanding, reformed and renewed by the Spirit of God; for the very
natural spirit, or mind of man needs ^ renewing by the Spirit of Grace, as
himself says, Ephesians. 4. 23. B^ r^nued in the Spirit of your mind.

When he says, Romans 7. 17. It is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells
in me:] His meaning is not to excuse himself so, as if he were without sin, and
blameless: But that his Spiritual part, or in ward man did detest that which
his carnal part or outward man did suggest.

Just so does this Apostle ascribe his holy and spiritual actions, not to
himself, but to the Grace of the Spirit, as 1 Cor. 15. 10. I labored more then
they all; yet not I, but the Grace of God which was with me. So 1 Cor. 7. 10. I
command, yet not I, but the Lord. So again, Gal. 2. 20.

The conclusion is, that The Son himself (that is to say) Christ as he is
considered, with the plenitude of his Mystical Body, and so is the Whole
Christ, cannot be perfectly subject, and obedient to the Godhead, until this
mortal has put on immortality, and our natural body be raised a Spiritual
body: when Christ has put down all carnal and sinful rule, authority and
power: for where the Apostle says, 1 John 3. 9. H^ that is b^rn of God sin^eth
not:] He means, that the seed and fountain of sinning is not in his
regenerating, and Spiritual part, by which he is born of God: but he is also
born of flesh, and by that only he sins.

CHAP. XI. Why the unpardonable sin is rather fastened on the deniers of the
Godhead of the Son then on them that deny the Godhead of the other Persons:
BUt why should the denying of the Godhead of the Son be so especially said to
be a blasphemy unpardonable, when as the denying of the Godhead of the other
Persons is also damnable; for first, Saint Basil says expressly more then once,
Qut Spiritum sanctum Cr^^turam vocant, incidunt inblasph^miam Basil. epist.
387. n. 17. 43.
illam irremissi^item: He that calls the Holy Ghost a creature, falls unto
the unpardonable sin; so that Eunomius the Heret^cke who said the Spirit was
the Creature of the Son, was involved* in Basil. cont. Euno. n. 20.
this blasphemy as well as Arius, who said the Son was but a Creature of the
Fa^her^* and therefore called him M^ttendarium, only an Emissarie of the
Father, as Ruffinus reports, and Saint Cyprian cal^eth the Devil Ruff. in
symb. apud Cyp. n. 91.
(who is under the pressure of eternal unpardonableness) both Antichristum and
Antispiritum, an Antichrist and an Antispirit; intimating as much danger in the
one, as in the other For we ^earn in Scripture, that without holiness, no man
shall see God, Heb 12 14. Therefore how can that man expect the gift of
Holiness, who denies the Author of Holiness, which i^ the Holy Ghost.

Secondly, He that denies the Godhead of the Father, is an Atheist, for all
sorts of Religions which confess 2.
a God, do also confess a Fatherhood in that God; even the Heathens called
their Jupiter a Father, but how can an Atheist expect salvation from God, who
denies that there is any God?

For answer hereunto it may be said, that although the denying of the Godhead
of any Person in the Trinity be destructive to salvation, yet this sin is
rather* fastened on the deniers of Christ, then the deniers of the other
Persons. First, because the confession of the Father and the holy Spirit is not
salvificall without the Confession of Christ; for even Heathens confessed both
a Fatherhood, and a Divine Spirit of God, as appears by the confession of
Ne^u hadnezar, Dan. 4. 9. but the Confession of Christ is alone salvificall,
because he is not alone, as himself says, John 8. 16. I am not alone, but I
and the Father which sent me: for the confession of Christ includes Basil. de
(...) c. 12.
the whole Trinity as Saint Basil affirms. Christi app^llatio est professio
totius trinitatis de^larans Deum Patrem, qui un^it, Filium qui unctus est, and
Spi^itum qui est unctio; -- and Saint mb^o^e affirms the same: Amb. de (...)
c. 3.
Christus implicat Pa^rem unguentem, Filium unctum, Spiritum unctionem, (i.)
The appellation of Christ is the profession of the whole Trinity, declaring the
Father anointing, the Son anointed, and the Spirit who is the ointment; and
therefore albeit the form of Baptism was precisely set down to be in the Name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; yet because the Name
Jesus Christ implies all these, Saint Peter mentions only this name, Acts
2. 38. Be baptized everyone of you in the Name of Jesus Christ for remission of
sins: so does Saint Paul also, Romans 6. 3. Galatians 3. 27*

Secondly, the unpardonable sin is fastened on the deniers of the second Person,
rather then on the deniers of the other Persons, because the work of redemption
was immediately wrought by the second Person. For it was the Person of the Son
only that became a Surety for us, and not only a bare Witness or* Testifier
(as the Commenter affirms) the Son only took upon him our nature, and
therein fulfilled the Law for us, and suffered death in our stead for our
transgressions, he only was our Surety and Mediator, and he only was
incarnate, and died, and rose again, and carried our flesh into Heaven with
him, and there still continues a Mediator for us, not by any verbal
pleading, or entreating for our salvation, but by presenting there in the
glorious Sanctuary of Heaven, that humane body and soul, which had actually and
perfectly performed the whole Covenant of God; and therefore even in the most
strict Justice of God, showing that Heaven is due by the said Covenant to all
his mystical Body, for which his natural Body was sacrificed on the Cross
for the expiation of all their sins, which was prefigured by the High Priests
entering into the Sanctum Sanctorum.

All these dispensations and actions which conduced to our salvation must be
ascribed only to the Person of the Son, but cannot be said of the Father, or
of the Holy Ghost. For that was the Heresy of the ^oc. l. 2. c. 15.
Sabellians, who were therefore called, Patripassiani; for these works are
proper to the Son alone. Filius natus, passus, resurr^xisse, ascend^sse
dicitur and non Aug. de Trin. l. 1. c. 5. n. 60.
Pater: As Augustine says, (i.) The Father cannot be said to be born, or
suffer, or to rise again, or to ascend, but only the Sone.

Therefore Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish, Psalm 2. 12. For the
denying of him* is the renouncing of salvation.

CHAP. XII. The Godhead of Jesus Christ showed by Scripture, and by the type of
the Tabernacle.
BEcause the apprehension, and believing of this great Mystery of God Incarnate
is a wonderful consolation to the Christian, and the denying thereof
pertinaciously, a certain note of eternal perdition: therefore the Scripture
has very evidently and frequently declared this weighty truth, both by express
words, and otherwise: for the child to be born of a Virgin, must be called
Emmanuel, Esaias 7. 14. that is, God with us, or God incarnate; and the same
Prophet Esaias 9. 6. gives that child such Titles, as cannot be attributed to
any mere creature, as -- The mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of
Peace. This Prophets words do so agree with the Evangelicall, and Apostolical
Doctrine: (as the Word was made flesh, and the Word was God, John 1. and God
manifest in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3. 16 -- and of whom as concerning the flesh,
Christ came, who* is over all God blessed for evermore, Romans 9. 5.) that Saint
Jerome called this Prophet Hier. proaem. in Isai. n. 33.
Esaias, Non solum Prophetam, sed Evangelistam, and Apostolum; Not only a
Prophet, but an Evangelist, and an Apostle; for as the Prophet before the
incarnation brings in God, saying, I have sworn by my self -- to me every
knee shall bow, Esaias 45. 23. So the Apostle applies that saying to Christ,
being the same God, (but now incarnate) of whom Esaias spoke, Romans 14. 11. As it
is written, As I live says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me. So that the
saying of the Psalmist, Psalm 97. 7. Worship him all ye gods, is applied to
Christ, Heb. 1. 6. Let all the Angels of God worship him.

Neither does the Scripture set forth this great truth only by words, but also
by the visible type of the Jewish Tabernacle and Temple, to teach the people of
Israel where they should profitably seek and find that God, whom they were
appointed to worship, and therefore God confined them to perform their worship
of him at the Tabernacle or Temple; lest they like other Nations, should set up
a God of their own invention, or worship the host of Heaven; seeing men
naturally desire, either a sensible object of their adoration, or at least will
fancy such an one in their brain.

The Israelites (not yet weaned from idolatry) before the Tabernacle was
erected, made a Calf or Ox to worship, just as they had seen the Egyptians
worship before, the like figure in memory of Joseph, as Aug. de Mir. scrip. l
1. n. 74. Ruff. 6. n.
some thought, who had preserved them by corn in the Famine, because that beast
does usually work in Tillage: and because in aftertimes the Jews abhorred
image worship, not admitting any such Statues in their Temple; Therefore the
Heathens thus usually twitted them, Incerti Iudaea Dei -- And Iuvenal says
Lucan. l. 2. Juv. sat. 14.
of them,

Quidam sortiti metu^ntem Sabbata Patrem,
Nil prae^er nub^s, and coeli numen adorant.
(i.) That either it was uncertain what God they worshipped, or that they
worshipped nothing but the Clouds or Heaven. For the Heathens used to set up
visible images before which they performed their adoration not intending to
worship the Images terminative or finally (as our Commenters word is) but they
worshipped them just so as the Commenter says, Christ was worshipped. For they
terminated their worship in their gods, whom they thought to be assistant, and
present in those images, as Arnobius affirms from Arnob. l. 6. n. 115.
the mouths of Heathens, Nos nec era, nec auri argentive ma^e^ias Deos esse
dec^^nimus, sed cos in hi^ colimus, quos dedicatio infert, and efficit
inhaebitare simu^a hris. (i.) We Heathens do not worship the brass or silver,
or gold image, but we worship those gods, which by Dedication-Charmes, are
invited and brought to inhabit the Images. So Saint Augustine alleges, Aug.
de Civ. l. 8. c. 23.
Trismegistus affirming, that Images were as the bodies of their gods, and that
the spirit was by Art (Magic) invited to reside in them. -- Simulachrum Id.
ib. c. 26.
pro corpore, Demon pro anima est. (i.) The image was the body, and a Spirit
was the soul within it. For so indeed Heathens used to do, when they had made
an image to represent their god, they made a Ceremonious Vide Macrob. Satur. l.
3. c. 9. de evocatione Deorum.
Dedication of it to that god, and so inviting him by Charms, and Magical
Conjurations to show himself to be present in that image, as Conjurers (they
say) have had the evil Spirit in a ring or box: And this is diverse times
affirmed by Origin, the manner whereof is partly touched in the Story of the
Dedication of Nebuchadnezzars image.

For the Devil apishly imitating God, endeavored to set up his own worship,
in such a manner as God has appointed for himself. For, Psalm 96. 5. Dii
Gentium Daemonia: (i.) The gods of the Gentiles are Devils.

Therefore as God manifested his presence in the Tabernacle and Temple, where
the Israelites were required to worship God; so the Devil manifested his
presence in Idols, and Idoll-Temples, that so he also might be there
worshipped; and this appears by what we read of Heathen Oracles, and the
Images of Juno and Fortune, which uttered words as Lactantius shows out of
Valerius. Lact de falf* Relig. lib. 2. n. 6.


CHAP. XIII. The Godhead of Christ further proved from the typical Tabernacle
and Temple.
IT will not be impertinent to this business in hand, to inquire why God
confined the Jewish worship to the Tabernacle and Temple, as it is manifest he
did; for, Levit. 17. 3, 4. the Israelites are required upon pain of death to
bring their sacrifices to the door of the Tabernacle. So the public Passover
is to be sacrificed only in the place which the Lord shall choose, Deuteronomy. 12. 5.
and what place that is, we find set down, 2 Samuel 7. 13. The house that Solomon
the son of David shall build; and this building was performed by him, 1 King
8. 20. and God declared his acceptance of that House or Temple, 2 Chronicles. 7.
12. The Lord appeared to Solomon, -- and said unto him, I have heard thy
prayer, and have chosen this place to my self, for an house of sacrifice.

Now the reason why the Israelites were confined to perform their worship in
this place, was, because God would keep them in a perpetual memory and
confession of the Messiah to be incarnate; of whole incarnation both the
Tabernacle and the Temple were but Figures or Types: Templum erat figura
Corporis Dominici, Aug. de Trin. l. 4. c. 5.
says Augustine, (i.) The Temple was the Figure of our Lords Body; for as God
did manifestly show his presence in the Tabernacle and Temple, by a cloud, and
the Glory of the Lord filled both; as we read, Exodus 40. 34. and 1 Kings 8.
10. So did he in the Body of Christ by his great Miracles, Deus erat in Aug. de
Consens. Evang. n. 86.
Templo, -- V^rbum caro factum: (i.) When the Word was made flesh, God was
there as n his Temple.

So that the prudent and religious sort of Israeites in the Typical Tabernacle
and Temple, did indeed worship their god, who as yet was but Typically
incarnate; for the Tabernacle did represent an humane body: Philo and Josephus
both of them Jews by birth and religion, called the Tabernacle (...) Jos. Ant
l. 3. c. 4. Phil. de vit. Mosis, l. 3.
and (...) (i.) A moveable and a portable Temple, as a man's body is: the
covering of it was with skins, as men's bodies are covered, Exodus 26. 14. and
with Curtains, as men's bodies are with Garments; and it represented the Body of
Christ. Ath. Orat. 5. cont. Ar. n. 4.
Corpus Domini is it Amiculum, says Athanasius. (i.) The Body of our Lord, was
the Garment of God. And the two great Apostles Saint Peter, and Saint Paul, in
allusion hereunto call their own bodies Tabernacles, 2 Cor. 5. 1. and 2 Peter
1. 14. Hence it is (no doubt) that so often mention is made of worshipping
toward the Temple of Jerusalem, Psalm 5. 7. and 138. 2. I will worship toward
thy holy Temple; and Psalm 29. 2. Worship the Lord in the beauty of
Holiness; that is, in his glorious Sanctuary: and King Solomen prays,
Hearken to the supplication of thy people Israel, when they shall pray toward
this place, 1 Kings 8. 30. And Daniel prays with his windows open toward
Jerusalem, where the Typical Temple h^d been, and where the true Antitypicall
Temple of Christ's body was to be manifested.

So in effect, the Object of the Israelaticall worship was God present in his
Temple, thereby feeding their faith in the promised Messiah, who was afterward
to reside in his Tabernacle of the humane nature. So that the ultimate Object
of their adoration, was the Son of God: God incarnate, even the same God,
whom we Christians now worship. The Christian Religion was before the Jewish,
in time, and the Church is older then the Temple, or Synagogue. Amb. de sacram.
l 1. c. 4. Aug. Ret. l. 1. c. 13.
Priora sunt Sacramenta Christianorum quam tudaeorum. For the adoration of the
Son of God, did not first begin, when he was incarnate; but as Saint
Augustine truly says, Christian Religion was in former times, but it began to
be called Christian in latter times, when the Son of God took our flesh and
again, Aug. confess. l. 10. c. 43.
he says, The ancient Saints were saved by Faith in Christ to be crucified, as
we now are by Faith in Christ crucified: Christ was the same God before his
incarnation that he is now, and was worshipped by the holy Patria^chs and
Prophets before he was incarnate, as truly as he is by us Christians since.
Before Abraham was, I am, John 8. 58. and Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and
saw it, and was glad. It is therefore a vain and false cavil of this
Commenter, who tell us [Faith in Christ is nor contained in all Faith 1 Page
251. c. 11. v. 6.
in God, -- because in the description of the Faith which was in the ancient
Elders, Hebrews 11. there is no mention of Faith in Christ] Indeed there is no
mention of the word Christ, but the Son of God was believed in by those
Patriarchs, before the same Son of God could be called Christ* for in their
days the Son of God was not yet Christ* for he was not anointed, nor could
he be capable of anointing before he was incarnate (as is showed before) The
Son of God was God from everlasting, but this God was not Christ as yet,
because he was not anointed, otherwise then in the purpose and Decree of the
same God, and typically in the anointing of the Tabernacle, Exodus 30* 26, 27.
and in the unction of Kings, Priests and Prophets. But faith in God must needs
signify faith in the Son of God, who is now the Christ, because there is no
other God but he; for the Father and the Son are the self same One, and only
God.

Now if it be demanded why the holy Israelites worshipped toward the Tabernacle
or Temple, as if God were there only, seeing it cannot be denied that God was
then every where, Filling Heaven and E^^th, Jeremy 23. 24?

I answer in the words of Fulgentius; When God Fulgen. ad Thras. l. 2. n. 9.
is said to be in a place, or to descend and come to it, it is not to be
thought that God changes place, so as to leave one place, and to go to
another, but -- Significat manifestation^m ejus: (i.) It signifies that God
does then manifest his presence in that place, wherein he was before; but did
not show, and declare his presence so, as when he is said to descend. So S.
Chrysostom* me expounds the Mission of the Son. Missio Fili^ qui ubiqu erat
^n^ea, corpoream appar^ntiam Chrysostom. ser. de Pastor. n 58.
significat, non mig^at a loco in locum: (i.) When the Son of God is said to
be sent, who was every where before, it signifies his Corporeal appearing,
and not a change of place.

And because the Godhead did manifest its presence in the Tabernacle and
Temple; therefore the Israelites did there, and toward that place perform their
worship: yet we find that sometimes sacrifices were offered to the Lord, in
other places, as by Gideon, Judges 6. 26. but it was by express command of God.

So did Elias also, 1 Kings 18. 36. but it was not in Judaea, but in Israel
amongst Idolaters* yet with some conformity with the Temple, as is there
mentioned. Eli^s offered at the time of the Evening Sacrifice, which was the
Figure of Christ's death to be at the ninth hour; and this also not without an
instinct of Gods Spirit, for he was a Prophet.

CHAP. XIV. That the Christian when he prays, sets his mind on God in
Christ, as the final Object of his Prayer; (as the Jews prayed to God, then
residing in the Tabernacle, or Temple;) because the now glorified Body of
Jesus, is the Temple wherein the Godhead will for ever dwell.
AS the Israelites prayed to God, whom they conceived to be present in the
Tabernacle* or Temple, so the Christian when he prays, sets his mind on
Jesus Christ, conceiving him to be the Object of his Prayer; for he believes
and considers him to be the Temple, wherein his God is for ever resident, and
in that Temple he seeks his God, where his mercy has been manifested, and
wherein the great work of Man's Redemption has been acted and performed, and so
looks on his God through Christ.

The rubricks of the ancient Church Litu^gies, (as we find in several ages of
the Church) directed men to pray thus: Sacerdos ante O^ationem dicit, Sursum
Cyp. 82. Cyril. 23. Prosp. 3.
corda: (i.) Before Prayer, the Priest said to the People, Lift up your hearts
on high; and so they confessed they lifted them up unto the Lord; that is, to
Christ in Heaven, sitting on the right hand of the Father; for where the
carcass is, there will the Eagles be gathered, Matthew 24. 28. In prayer we
lift up our eyes to Heaven, because our God is in Heaven, Psalm^ 115. 3. And we
say, Our Father which art in Heaven, (as himself taught us to whom we must
pray) because as his Godhead is, and was always there; so his glorious Body
was to be in Heaven, and is, and for ever shall be the Temple wherein the
Godhead is to be sought to, and found. For in Christ dwells all the Fullness
of the Godhead bodily, Colossi^ns, 2. 9. He says bodily, in comparison of
Types and Figures, the Tabernacle was but the shadow of Gods residence* but the
Body of Christ was the Substance and Truth of that shadow.

The inhabitation of the Godhead of Christ in his Body, is described by Saint
John most significantly to this purpose, John 1. 14. The Word dwelt amongst
us.] where dwelling is expressed by the term (...) (i.) God was
intabernacled, which signifies that his Body was the Tabernacle of the
Godhead, as Theodoret Theod. Dial* Imm. n. 12.
observes.

The Leviticall Law is still in force, though not literally, yet in the spirit
or meaning of it, for we must still worship toward the Temple, and our Savior
tells us which is the true Temple indeed. John 2. 19, 21. Destroy this Temple,
and in 3 days I will raise it up. -- But he spoke of the Temple of his body.
For Jesus est Deus, and Templum Dei, says Nazianzen, (i.) Naz. Orat. 43.
Jeius is both the Temple of God and the God of the Temple. And so Saint
Austine says, Christus est Sacerdos Aug. de dog. Eccl. n. 73.
and Sacrificium, est Deus and Tem^lum, (i.) Christ is the sacrificer, and the
sacrifice, he is the God and the Temple. And Origin says, Christus est Templum
in Orig. in Josh. Hom. 17.
utero Virginis formatu^: (i.) Christ is the Temple built in the Virgins womb.
And Athanasius more plainly expresses this Mystery: Digni sunt Ariani, qui
Atha. Or. 5. cont. Ar. n. 4.
^aepe percant, qui prisci populi reverentiam ^rga Templum laudant, sed D^minum
in carne ut in Templo suo adorare recusant: (i.) The Arians have well deserved
perdition, who praise the Jews for their reverence toward the Temple, yet
themselves refuse to worship the Lord i^ the Temple of his Body. Solomon says,
Proverbs 9. 1. Wisdom has built her an house. Who is wisdom but God? and
what house is it? but as Athanasius often expoundes that saying. Corpus Christi
Atha. ser. 3. cont. Ar. n. 6.
est Domus sapien^iae: (i.) The house of Wisdom is the Body of Christ. The
word building in Scripture, is applied to an humane body, as well as to an
house, G^nesis 2. 22. Deus aedificavit costam in mu^erem: (i.) God builded the
woman of Adams rib. and Ru^h 4. 1. Rach^l and Leah -- did build the house of
Israel, -- and in three days I will raise it, John 2. As if it were the
raising of an house. So the Mystical Body of Christ, which is his Church, is
called Gods building, 1. Cor. 3. 9.

In brief, Jesus Christ in respect of his divine Nature, is our God, and the
Temple wherein our God dwells, and that which is truly said to be -- his
rest for ever, Psalm 132. 14. Is his glorified Body now in Heaven.

When we compose our selves to Prayer, we lift up our minds to this God in
that Temple: God -- Incarnate is the final and ultimate Object of our
adoration: there is no way to approach to our God with any hope of obtaining
pardon and remission of sins, but through the open doors of the Temple of his
wounded body: therefore our Prayers are all sealed with Through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

He that makes any approach to God otherwise, then considered in this Temple,
must expect to find him only as a severe and offended Judge, but when he
looks on us through his Son, his severity is sweetened. Filius est dul^edo
D^i: (i.) The Son is Fulg disc. object. Arian. n. 1.
the sweetness of God. When he beholds us through Jesus Christ, he is
pacified and g^acious; the clouds and tempests of Gods anger are assuaged by
the serenity of the Countenance of Jesus, -- Vul^u quo Coelum tempestatesque
s^renat. Virg. A^n. 1.


Are we not therefore called Christians, because we worship God in Christ? To
him Saint Stephen directed his Prayer, Acts 7. 57. Lord Jesus, receive my
spirit. And Saint Paul also.

Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father -- comfort your
hearts: for so Christ had given direction before, John 14. 13. Whatsoever ye
shall ask in my Name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the
Son.

By what has been said, I trust the danger of this Commentors bold assertion
will be discovered, who tells us [ that Christ is not to be believed P. 54.
in finally, but God in Christ] not believing, or not considering that the
Godhead is in Christ. And therefore Christ in respect of this Gohead is to be
believed in, and prayed to finally and ^ermina^ely, as the utmost object of our
Faith, and the Manhood of Christ so endowed with, and united to the same
Godhead is to be believed in, and prayed to Mediately; for by the Incarnation
of the Godhead in Jesus, he became our Advocate, and Mediator, and a Priest,
which is next to be discoursed.

CHAP. XV. That the most high God became a Mediator, and a Priest, and that
Christ is prayed unto, and yet is a Mediator: Every Person in the Trinity may
be prayed unto.
THe Commentor tells us, [ That the supreme God P. 80. c. 5. v. 5.
can no way be a Priest, and therefore Christ is not supreme God, because he is
ma^e a Priest.] This assertion is most false and blasphemous; he that affirms
it, either never was Christian, or else must be an Apostate; because to say,
that the most high and only God cannot be a Priest, is all one as to say, This
God cannot assume flesh* or be Incarnate: For in the same manner, the supreme
God became a Priest, in which he became a Mediator, and both by assuming
humane nature.

For if it be demanded how we can pray to Christ, seeing he is our Mediator
and Priest, who interceedeth, and prays for us, and that by him we approach
to God, so that we may seem rather to pray by him, then to him; and if Christ
be the final Object of our Prayer, who is our Mediator?

To this it may be answered, that Christ is a Mediator, in the same sense that
he is a Priest, and in that sense he prayed. Now he became a Priest, and a
Mediator by ass^ming Manhood; for Saint Chrysostom^ Chrysostom. Hom. Ant. 32. n. 12.
says truly, Christus oraba^ ut homo, nam Deus non ^rat. (i.) Christ prayed
in that he was a Man, for God does not pray. And Saint Austine says, Christus
Aug. de Civit. ^. 20. c. 10.
est Sacerdo* quatenus est Filius hominis. (i.) Christ is not a Priest, but by
being the Son of Man. For although it be said, Romans 8. 26. The Spi it makes
interc^ssion for us: (though the Spirit as it signifies the third Person, was
not Incarnate:) the meaning is only, that the Holy Ghost helps our
infirmities in prayer, as is there said; and nos int^rpellare facit: It
enableth and stirs us up to pray, as Saint Austine Aug. expos. in To. n. 96.
expounds it; not that the Spirit it self prays for us. When Eudoxius the
Arian was newly placed in the Episcopal seat of ^onstan^inople, the first
sentence that he uttered was this bla^phemy, (...) Soc. l. 2. c. 33.
(...) The Father is impious, the Son is pious, at which words when the
people began to raise a tumult, he appeased them by saying, that his meaning
was, that the Father never prayed, but the Son did often pray; his intent was
hereby to insinuate; that because Christ prayed, therefore he was not God, but
was only a creature: which ^s the Argument (which our Commenter uses against
the Priesthood of God) for indeed the pure Godhead cannot be said to pray,
because there is none greater to be prayed unto; therefore God must be
incarnate, before he can be a Priest, or pray; but as he was a perfect Man; so
might he pray for us; and as he was perfect God, so we may and must pray to him.

For all Prayer is directed to God only, but not to the Father only; and
because the Godhead is in every Person, so that every Person is God; therefore
Prayer may be made to any Person and Christ will yet still continue our
Mediator, both to the Father, and to the Holy Ghost, and to himself also; for
he that prays to one Person, prays to all three Persons, for they are all
inseparately involvd one in another. The Father is in me, and I am in him, Joh.
14. 11. and the Father and I are one, Joh. 10. 30. But this is warily thus to
be understood: That the Godhead or Essence of the Father is in the Son, whereby
the Son is called God; but the P^rsonality or Propriety of the Father is not in
the Son; for the Father cannot be called the Son, nor the Son the Father,
otherwise then (as is showed before) that the Godhead in any Person is the
Eternal Father. Divines have observed upon that place, Io. 16. 23 Whatsoever
ye shall ask the Father in my Name] He says the Father, not my Father; for if
he had said, My Father, then the asking had been confined to one Person; for
only one is the Father of the Son of God: but in that he says, The Father, he
does not debar us from praying to the other Persons, because (as has been
showed out of Esaias 9. 6.) every Person is the eternal Father, because every
one is one God.

There is but one God in the three Persons, and that one God, the second Person
(being God Incarnate) is our Mediator; and though he be Mediator, because
Incarnate; yet neither his Mediatourship, nor his Incarnation do nullify his
Godhead, so that our Savior is Mediator for us to himself, to his own
Godhead; so that we may pray to the Son, to hear us for his own sake. For John
14. 14. Where it is said, If ye ask any thing in my Name.] The old reading
was, as may be yet seen in S^. Hierom^, If you ask me any thing in my Name;
and Beza confesses as much, though he imagined that it was taken out of the
Margin into the Text. So Christ is prayed to as he is God, and he is Mediator,
as he is Emmanuel; Every Person is God, therefore every Person is to be prayed
unto; and he that names but one Person in Prayer, does not exclude the rest,
because all are but one God.

This was the Doctrine of the Primitive Church, delivered singularly and
profoundly by Saint Ambrose and Saint Augustine, Vnus Deus in tribus, and haec
tria Amb. in symb. n. 20.
unus D^us, One God is in three Persons, and three Persons are but one God. And
Vnus est Ommipotens and Tripotens Deus, Pa^er, Filius, Spiritus. There is but
one Omnipotent, and Tripotent God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And again,
Singulus horum Deus, and simul Id. de Doct. Chr. l. 1. c. 5.
omnes, unus Deus, and singulus horum plena substantia, and simul omnes una
substantia: Every Person is God, and all are one God; Every one is perfect God,
and all together are but one God. And again, Singula sunt in singulis, and
omnia in singulis, and singula in omnibus, and Id. de Trin. lib. 6. c. 10.
omnia in omnibus, and unum omnia: Every one is in every one, and all in every
one, and every one in all, and all in all, and One is all.

Hence it is that every Person may be prayed unto, and glorified; as in
Scripture the Seraphims cry, Holy, Holy, Holy, Esaias 6. 3. Rev. 4. 8. and the
Christian Church, both ancient and modern, in her Doxologies used to glorify
the three Persons alike, Gloria Patri and Filio and Spiritui; and in her
prayers invoked all, and in her Creeds confessed all,

CHAP. XVI. The Godhead of Christ, showed from the adoration of his Person, and
how God is to be worshipped, being incarnate.
IF it be again demanded, how we can perform Divine adoration to Jesus in the
Temple of his Body, being now God. -- Incarnate, except at the same time we
adore a creature, because his Body still is a creature, for though it be indeed
the Body of God, yet nevertheless, it is a body, and therefore a creature: Or
shall we therefore adore his Body, because it is the Temple wherein God
dwells? If so then, as Athanasius Ath. de incar. n. 22.
objecteth, Adora quoque Sanctos ob Deum inhabitantem. By that reason you may
worship the Saints on earth, because their Bodies are the Temple of God, and
God is in them, and then why should we not worship the Sun and Moon and other
creatures as well; for God is in them, because he is every where. The Manichees
worshipped the Sun, because they thought the Aug. Cont. Faust. l 20. c. 2.
Son of God was there.

For answer hereunto, we are to understand that God is in another manner
existent in holy men and other creatures, then he is existent in the humane
nature of Christ, (as is showed before, chap 8) For the Godhead and Manhood in
Christ, are one Person, but not so in other creatures; God dwells in a Saint,
1 John 4. 16. yet you cannot say that God and the Saint are one person; for if
so, then that Saint must be called God, and should be worshipped as God; but we
profess Hier. cont. Vigil. n. 17.
with Saint Hierome, that we are so far from worshipping a Saint, or a martyr,
that we will not worship an Angel, or an archangel, nor Cherubim, nor
Seraphim; but neither do we refuse to worship God, though he be invested with
his humane nature, his humiliation by taking the form of a servant upon him,
does not ungod him, neither can we separate his Godhead from his manhood, that
so we might worship the pure Godhead alone. Fidelis veneratur Domi^um in
corpore latentem, says Athanasius: the faithful worship Ath. 26. n. Theod
dial. in conf. n. 12.
God though veiled in his body, as we may perform civil worship to our King,
though he be clad in vulgar apparel, yet not worship his apparel, and No man
will say to the King, First put off thy Robe and Crown, Epiph. in Anc. n. 27.
o King, and then I will do obeisance to thee; and if the King should put off
his Robe, yet none would worship the Robe.

So no man can say to Christ, Lay aside thy Body, and then I will adore thee,
but we adore God in Christ, although God be there united unseparably with his
body, and if we could separate his body really from his Godhead, we should not
worship it alone, because it is a creature: and this also is the determination
of Athanasius: Quis tam vecors est ut ita loquatur, Absiste a corpore ut te
adorem? oec? who is so foolish Ath. cont. Arian. or 5. n. 4.
as to say to God, lay aside thy Body, that I may worship thee? or who can show
us his body emptied of his Godhead? Therefore albeit we do not adore his Body
as the Vtimate and uttermost object of our adoration, yet we resuse not to
worship our God with his body Concomitant; for St. Thomas when he saw Christ's
body and touched his wounds, yet he said My Lord, and my God, Ioh. 20. 28. The
women held him by the feet, yet worshipped him, Maith. 28. 9. The Psalmist
says, Exalt the Lord our God, and worship at his Footstool, Psalm 99. 5. What
is meant by his Foostoole? St. Chrysostom tells us, The earth is his
Footstool, Isa. 66. 1. Because the Body of Christ was Chrysostom. ser. de Trin. n.
57.
from Adam, and Adam from the earth, and this body is united to God, therefore
our God (though in it) is to be adored. Some men are offended when they see a
man worship his God, if his face betowards the East, or Communion Table,
suspecting that the worship is done to the Table, or to the East, though they
are told, it is done to God only: as also if in time of divine service, a man
bow his knee to Jesus, when that name is named, some will say, the bowing is
done to a sound, a word, or letters; just so the heathens said, that the
Christians worshipped the Sun, because they assembled on the Sunday, and
because they used to adore God, with their faces turned toward the East, as
Tertullian says, and some also said that Christians worshipped Tert. apol. c.
16. n. 4.
Bacchus and Ceres, that is, Bread and Wine, because at receiving of the
Sacrament they used a reverend adoration of God, as we read in St. Austin; yet
these slanders did not deter the Christians from their Aug. cont. Faust. l. 20.
c. 13.
usual discipline. But these Brethren would think (as I suppose) that
themselves were much wronged, if a man should tell them, that they worship a
Chair, a Form, or Table, because when they pray, they kneel before some of
these. When God appeared to Abraham, Abraham bowed himself toward the ground,
Genesis 18. 2. Will any man say that Abraham worshipped the earth? No, says St.
Ambrose: Non terram, sed Iesum nascitu um e terra and resurrecturum: he
worshipped Amb. de Abrah. l. 2. n. 13.
not the earth, but Jesus, who afterward was to be incarnate, and to rise
again out of the earth. The worship of Jesns is the adoration of his divine
person in heaven, and not of a name, or word, and this adoration, and
genuflection is of a higher consequence, and greater weight, then some
Christians are aware of as will appear by that which follows.

CHAP. XVII. That genuflection to our Lord Jesus was appointed only to be as an
acknowledgment of his Godhead.
Because the great work of man's redemption is founded upon the Godhead of
Jesus, and that the denying, or disbelieving that doctrine, is a certain mark
and character of unpardonablenesse, therefore, good Christian Reader consider
with thy self, what a charitable and prudent care this Church of England had of
thy souls health when, (to keep thee in a perpetual memory thereof, and a
continual confession of this great and weighty truth, she required that when
the Lord Jesus shall be mentioned, in time of divine service, lowly reveren^e
be done; the reason alleged by that Canon is of the greatest concernment that
can Canon. 18.
be imagined [ Testifying their due acknowledgment, that the Lord Jesus Christ,
(...) and eternal Son of God, is the only Savior of the world, in whom alone,
all the Mercies, Graces, and promises of God to mankind, for this life, and the
life to come are fully and wholly comprised] by which words it is apparent,
that the principal intent of that Canon, was for the acknowledgment of the
Lord Jesus to be the true, and eternal Son of God, and thy redeemer, which is
that necessary doctrine which I have endeavored all this while to set forth;
and this is the very same reason that is alleged on those Scriptures, where
the bowing to Jesus Christ is mentioned. For when it is said of Christ, Romans
14. 10, 11. Every knee shall bow to me] the reason follows immediately, --
Every tongue shall confess to God (that is) that every one shall acknowledge
adoration due to this our God. And so again, where it is said, Phil. 2. 10. At
the name of Jesus every knee should bow] the reason follows, verse 11. That
every ^ongue should confess that I sus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the
Father] to signify that therefore bowing to Jesus Christ is required, that by
it he might be acknowledged to be the Lord; and certainly therefore only did
the Church of England require this ado^ation ado^at^on of Jesus, to have a
perpetual, and solemn confession thereby of his Godhead; yet our Commenter
will not confess Jesus to be God, though he do confess that [ Divine
r^verence is commanded ^o be given to Christ by bowiug, etc. in the s^m^ manner
Page 7.
that is due to God himself] in this the Commenter does fully ag^e* with the
practice of the old Arians, who were therefore blame* by Ath^n^sius* because
they performed religious adoration to Jesus, (as the Catholic Atha. cont.
Arian. Or 1. n. 4.
Church did) but yet ^hey would not confess him to be God, and so in effect
they did serve him, whom they thought to be but a creature, and therein
differed not from Heathens: and so St. Basil a gueth both aga^^st the
Sahellians and Arians out of the Church C^^ed, to ^f the Son, and the Holy
Ghost be but creatures; Cur Basil. cont. Sabel. and Ar. ho. 27* n. 17.
non dicimus ^redo in Deum, and in univ^r^am crea^uram? -- Nam si pium est ^n
por^ion^m cre^tu^ae cr^d^re, multo magis in ^^tam: Why do we not say in our
Creed -- I believe in God, and the wo^ld? for if the Son be but a part of the
world, and a c^^atu^e, it is far better to believe in the whole creature th^n
in one part of it. And this also was obse^ved in the Arians Amb. de fill* divin.
c. 3. n. 26.
by St Ambrose, that they did not adore Jesus, because they thought him to be
God, but Vir^ute prae^epti: only because they bel^eved that such an adoration
was enjoined, Philip. 2. 10. their color for it was because the honor of
genuflection is there said to be given to Jesus, by G^d ve^se 9. and so they
would Amb. Hexam. l. 6. c. 9.
have it due to him only by gift, and not by nature; indeed Saint Ambrose
says, that the honor of genuflection was the gift of the Father to the on,
just as the Sc^ipture says; but Saint B^sil does fully show the meaning of
that Scripture, -- God -- Basil. cont. Eunom. l. 4. n. 20.
has given him a name] In humoni^a^, non in divinitate, the gift was given to
the humane Nature of Christ, which it had not of it self, but not given to the
divine nature, that honor was naturally due to it that is, to the Godhead of
Christ. So that the meaning of the Church, and the intent and purpose for which
she appointed reverence to be done to Jesus, was only the acknowledgment, and
confession of his Godhead in detestation of ^ewes, Turks end Arians, which deny
the sa^e; therefore it will seem strange to any learned, or intelligent
Christian, if this ado^ation shall be by any Christian authority forbidden, or
Jesu-worsh^p (as some have in derision called it) shall be made an a^ticle of
accusation, and obloquie, seeing it has been practiced in the Primitive
Church, long before there was any direction for it by any Ecclesiastical Canon,
except only the Canon of Scripture.

But if it be said, that the bowing of the knee mentioned, Romans 14. ^1. be
clea^ly said and meant of the time when Christ shall sit in judgment: I say so
too, and it is true, but therefore not before; for then Heathens, Atheists,
Apostates, Persecutors, Tyrants, yea, and devils, and all the damned shall be
compelled by the rod of iron to confess, and acknowledge and submit to his
Almighty Power and Godhead, when the Saints both then and before have, and
shall with willing and chea^full submission acknowledge Hier. in Ruff. in^ect.
^n. 42*:
him, as Ruffinus in Saint Hierome writes upon these words, Ev^ry kn^e shall
bow] ^l qui voluntate, alii necessitate; the blessed ones will submit
willingly, and the very damned shall be thereunto: compelled good Christian,
will thou not worship thy God without force?

CHAP. XVIII. More of the adoration of our Savior: of his names Jesus, Christ,
Emmanuel, Jehova, and other names of God.
IF it be demanded, why this adoration is required rather under this name
Jesus, then under his other names, se^ing Jesus is also a name given to mere
creatures, as to ^oshua, Act. 7. 45. H^brewes 4. 8. and others? I answer, if
the adoration were intended to the bare name, I think the exception were j^st,
but because we pros^sse to worship only the person Jesus, and yet not every
person so named, but only the person of our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom the
Godhead for ever resideth; who can blame us for worshipping our only Lord God,
and that in time of public worship? for if we should therefore for bear to
worship lesus, because some mere creatures are so named, then by the like
reason we should forbear to worship God, because some creatures are called
gods, as Moses, Exo. 7. 1. and Magistrates, Psa 82. 6. and 1. Cor. 8. 5. but we
worship God only, and no creature, and to God all possible ado^ation is due,
Basil. hom. 14. n. 14.
whether by genuflection or otherwise; Sa^nt Basil says, Ad cultum ^ei, and
Domini I^su, flect^reoportet genua, id est, in the worship of Jesus our Lord
God it is meet we should bow our knees.

But yet if we must worship our God upon the naming of him, it would be
inquired why this name Jesus is so especially insisted upon, why not at the
name Ieh^va, or Emmanuel, or Christ and why not in the naming of the Father, or
the Holy Ghost? To this I say, if none other answer could be given, it might
satisfy any humble Christian, that the great Apostle, Philip. 2. 10. has
insisted only in that name: yet for the Readers further satisfaction, let him
consider, that no Person in the Trinity has any p^op^r Name, but only the
second Person, and the second Person has no proper Name, but only the Name
Jesus. For who can tell me what is the proper Name of the Person of God the
Father, or of God the Holy Ghost? For every Person is God and Lord, every one
is Iehova, every one is I^h, and Eheih, and Adonai* for these names signify
but Lord, and I am and which was. Every Person is El* Potent; and H^^ion* most
High; and Schaddai, Omnip ot^nt; and all the Persons together are E^o im, that
is, Pot^nt, Genesis 1. 1. in the plural number. And all these names are mostly
represented by Interpreters in the words God and Lo^d; and therefore these
names are not proper names of any one Person in the Trinity, but common to all
the three Persons, yet there are other appellations that are severally peculiar
to each several Person, as the wo^d Father, Son, or Word and Holy Ghost; in
some places of Scripture, though the word Father, and Holy Ghost, or Spirit in
other places, is said of all Persons (as is showed before.) The rule of Saint
Austine is, Omnia no^ina naturae, seu ess^ntiae Dei, de Aug. to. 3. n. 76.
singulis Personis dici possunt, sed non nomina re^a^iva, ut Pater, Ve^bum,
Fi^ius; id est, Every name which signifies the Essence and Nature of God, may
be said of every Person; but the Names which import a relation of one Person to
another, are not so said. ^o P. 332. c. 13. v. 2.
our very Commenter could not deny, that Jesus Ch^ill is called I^hova.] For it
is a Name of Essence, or Godhead.

And for the word Christ, it is not to be taken as a proper name, but as
Cognomen, a surname, ( i.) a superadded name, as added to his proper name, and
signifies Anointed, for we cannot imagine that those Kings, and other Holy
Persons, which in Scripture are called Christi, (i.) Gods ano^nted, were so
called as by a proper Name: so here our Saviors pr^per Name was Jesus, his
surname Christ: this Title Christ being added (as for other reasons, so for
this) to distinguish him from other men, who had the same proper Name Jesus, as
you read, Coloss. 4. 11. of another, that being named jesus, is also surnamed
Justus for distinction, and of Bar-I^sus* Acts 13. 6.

Now for the word Emmanuel, we are to understand, that it is not the proper
Name of our Savior, no more then the word Christ is: for where it is said,
Esaias 7. 14. Thou shall call his Name Emmanuel.] The Prophers meaning was not to
set forth the proper Name of the Messiah;

But to set forth the wonderful and real property of his Person, to be (by
the hypostaticall union of two natures in one Person) Theanthropos, id ^st, God
Incarnate, for so the word Emmanuel, signifies God with us.

Therefore Tertullian writing both against the Jews, and also against Marcion
the Heretic severally, when it was objected, that our Jesus was not that
Messiah, which was foretold by Esaias, because he was not named Emmanuel.

He answers, Non solum sonum nominis exp^ctes, sed Tert. cont. Judaeos, and
l. 3. contr. Mar.
sensum, -- quia qu^d significat Emmanuel, venit: id est* we were not to expect
a mere sound and name only; but the thing signified by that word Emmanuel;
for though his Name was not named Emmanuel, at his Circumcision; yet himself
and his Person were really that thing which the word Emmanuel signified, God
with us, though his proper Name was (...); And therefore when our God is named
so, and by his proper and peculiar Name, then surely we may without offense by
us given, adore our God.

CHAP. XIX. That the Name Jesus is the only proper Name of God, because the
pure Godhead can have no proper Name, as the Fathers affirmed.
IF it may appear that the Name Jesus, is the proper Name of God, and so
proper, that God has no proper Name at all, but only the Name Jesus; th^n I
trust no Christian will either dis believe his Godhead, or be offended with
them that do adore this. Jesus; for the better understanding whereof, I will
premise two considerations.

First a distinction of Names which I borrow both from the Ancient and the
Modern Grammarians. For Saint Au^ust^^^ in his Grammar does thus distinguish
Names: Est No^^^ appellativum, ut ligo, and Proprium, Aug. Gram. p. 90.
ut Nero, id est, There is a Noune, or Name appellative, as the word Plough,
and a name proper, as the word Nero. And this distinction is in our vulgar
Grammar* which I apply thus. In the words -- King David -- King, is a name
appel^^^ive, David is a name proper. So Caesar was at first a name proper, but
afterward it grew an appellative of those Princes which succeeded: and j^st so
d^d (...) and Pharaoh, (as some think.) Just so does (...) tell us of the words
Jesus Christ. Jesus est (...) Christus est appellatio, si^ut vesti^us id est,
that Jesus Tert. advers. Prax. n. 55.
is a Name proper, but Christ is an appellative.

2. The second consideration is that the pure Godhead has no proper name. This
I will not presume to dictate magisterially but submit it only as a
consideration to the judgment of the learned Reader; nor would I at all have so
affirmed, if I had not first consulted with, and obtained the resolution of the
Ancients.

Philo the Jew, from those words, Exodus 3. 14 I am that I am] says it is as
much as if he had said; Natura mea est ^sse, non dic^, the nature of God is to
be, and not to be named. And he says further Philo de mutat. nom. n 20.
that God can have no proper name, his own words are, (...). So Dion^sius Arep.
says that God is Anonymus, id est, without any name: and so says, Dionys. Ar.
de Divi. nom. c. 7.
Justin Martyr: ^mpossibile est nomen de Deo proprie dici ((...)) id est, it is
impossible to give Just. paaenet. 1. n. 4.
any proper name to God; the reason why the pure Godhead can have no proper
name, is rendered by Lactan^ius, and that out of Trismegistus: God (says he) is
Anonymus, and therefore has no name, because, Lact. de fall. rel^g. l. 1. c. 6.
he that is but one, needs no propriety of name, proper names are for
distinction, when there are many such, and therefore the heathens who thought
there were many gods, did call them by several proper names: as Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, Venus, etc. And this is also observed by Tertullian, and the
Tert. de Test. anim. c. 2. Eusebius. h^st. l. 5. c. 3.
same reason was given by the famous Martyr Attalus, when he was asked in the
midst of his torments what the name of his God was; answered? God is but One,
and needs no name; names are needful there only where plurality is. You see
the judgment of these Ancients is clear that God (the pure Godhead) neither
has, nor needs, nor can have any proper name.

If it be said, that although God needs no proper name to distingush him from
other gods, because there is no God but one, yet a proper name may be useful
to separate him from creatures; I answer that an appellative name is sufficient
for that purpose, even as the common appellative word Homo, does separate man
from other kinds of creatures, so the appellative word God (not taken
^equivocally) may distinguish God from his creatures.

CHAP. XX. That no creature is called Jehova: the signification of that word
and the reverend esteem of it by the Ancients.
OF all the appellations which are attributed to the only and most high God,
Jehova is and has been esteemed the most fit and ad^^uate. Our Commenter does
truly confess, that Jesus is called Iehova, but yet he does most profanely,
and falsely endeavor to apply this appellation to a created Angel, and that
against the unanimous consent both of the ancient and our modern Divines, who
constantly affirm that this word Iehova is not communicable to any creature as
other appellations of God sometimes are; for the word Iehova as it does imply
the Lord, and Which is, so our Divines do ordinarily interpret it by (...), and
Philo by the words (...), and so it signifies, Philo. de Abrah. n. 7.
The Lord Eternal. Saint Austin tells us that (if there were any such Latin
word) he would translate it essence, Being, and in D^onysiu^ Areop. God is
called, (...); id est, as he is both the independent Aug. l. 3. locut* de
Levit. n. 56. Dio. de div. nom. c. 5. n. 8.
Being, and because all the essence, and being of creatures is given by him:
the same word also does imply eternity, for therefore is our Lord Jesus called,
Rev. 1. 1. Which is, which was, and which is to come, because as Prosp. says:
Quia nunquam defuit, nunquam Prosp. in Sent. n. 38. and Justin. Mart. parae. 1.
p. 18.
decrit, sem^er est, id est* he never was wanting, never will be, for he is
always, which cannot be affirmed of any mere creature; and therefore the Jews
had this word in such reverend estimation, that it was accounted as a crime
capicall to pronounce this word, Philo. devit. Mos. l. 3. n. 11.
except only in time of divine worship, as Philo. testifies, and Josephus
also said, he thought it unlawful to Joseph. Antiq. l. 2. n. 5.
speak that word, otherwise then is said before; and therefore the Jews when
in their writings, or discourse, they desired to signify th^s word, they used
to call it, Philo. do vit. Mosis. l 3. n. 11.
Tetragrammaton. And to me it seems that the Christian Writers had the like
high and reverend esteem of this word, for Naz^anz^ne, and Hi^rom call it,
(...) and (...); id ^st, unnameable, and ineffable, not only for the
difficulty of expressing Naz. Orat. 36. Hier. Epist. exeg. 136. n. 29.
the word, but (as it may seem) in ^egard of the reverence thereof; for this
word Iehova is very rarely to be found in the writings of the Fathers, but when
they had cause to speak of it they signified what word they meant, by calling
it Te^ragrammaton: id est, the word of 4. Letters, just as the Jews did: for
so I find that Eusebius calls it; and so does Origin, and Eusebius. 26. k. Orig.
11. l. Hier. 29. Clem. stro. n. 14. Diodorus Sic. l. 1. sect. 94,
so does Hier^me. But Clemens Alex. has (...) (...) which his interpreter
renders Iehova, the name of four letters; and perhaps the Gnostick heretics,
from this word Iehova borrowed the name of their chief heavenly Prince, whom
they called (...) of which we read both in Ir^naeus, and in Epipha^^^s.

Now albeit this word I hova signify no other thing, but only God yet it is
not therefore to be called the Iren. l. 1. c. 18 Epiph. hae. 62. and hae. 34.
proper name of God no ^o^e then Logical definitions, or descriptions may be
said to be the p^oper name of the thing defined, or described, though they be
adaequate; nor in Divinity do we say that the words Omnipotent, or Eternal
Lord are the proper name of God, though only God is so called. Maximus an
heathen in his Epistle to Saint Aussin confesses, Nom^n Dei proprium
ignoramus; id est, although the Aug. Epist. 43.
Godhead had a proper name, yet man is ignorant what that name is: and if we
did know any proper name of the Godhead, yet as Philo. observes, It were a
sign of greater reverence to call upon him by a name Philo. de vita Mo. n. 11.
lib. 3.
appellative, for (says he) when we speak to our parents, we do not use to
call them by their p^oper names, but appellatively, Father, Mother. And so we
may with reverence call upon the Godhead, using the word Jehova: because it is
not a proper, but an appellative name.

For this word Iehova being rendered Lord: if a man should ask you, what is the
proper name of your God, would you answer that his proper name is Lord? It is
said, Isai. 9. 6. His name shall be called wonderful, and Luke 1. 49. Holy is
his name. If I ask you what is the proper name of your God, would you answer
that his proper name is wonderful, or holy? No, these are not proper names but
appellations; Just. apol. 1. n. 7.
Universally rerum patri, nomen non est imposi^um, says Justin Martyr, the
universal Father of all; has no name: for though we call him God, and Father,
and Creator, and Lord, etc. Non sunt nomi^a, sed appellationes; id est, these
are not names, but appellations (says he) just as the titles of our King are,
His Majesty, his Highness, his Grace, our Sovereign, which no man will say are
the Kings proper name: these are the reasons which moved the Ancients to say,
that the pure Godhead (for so they meant by the most high God) neither has,
nor needs any proper name. But when the Word was made flesh, that is* when
the Godhead was incarnate, and when God was so made man, then good reason that
he should with our flesh assume also a proper name, to distinguish him from
other men* as he did, and that name is Jesus. So the result of all that has
been said is, that the only proper name of our only and most high Lord God is
Jesus; and this is the reason that both the Scripture requires adoration of
God, under the name of Jesus, and the Church also, for the perpetual memory,
and confession of his Godhead does require adoration at such times as his
proper, and only Name Jesus is mentioned. For although we do not say that those
which refuse to worship the Lord Jesus in that manner which the Church
prescribes, when this name is named, do commit the grand sin, yet they may be
truly Si tu neglexeris nomen Dei, delet ipse nomen tuum. August. in Psa. 91. D.
said, that they which do therefore refuse to worship the Lord Jesus, because
they do not believe, nor will confess, and acknowledge him to be the only,
true, and most high God; such men do fall into that sin of which it is said, It
shall never be forgiven.

CHAP. XXI. The Conclusion of this second Book, with the Authors resolute
Confession, of Jesus Christ, to be the most High, and only Lord God.
BY this time the Christian Reader does perceive why the denying of the Godhead
of jesus Christ has been said to be that grand unpardonable sin, and therefore
what great cause and reason we have to be rightly instructed in, and to be
frequently put in mind of this weighty Doctrine, because if Jesus be not the
true, and only, and most high God, and be not so by us confessed, and
believed; we can obtain no Redemption, but must necessarily perish
everlastingly.

In this Confession therefore I set up my rest, and to him in this Faith I
fasten my soul, for all my hope of salvation is included in this Doctrine,
which if it should prove untrue, I might with trembling say as an Heathen did
on his death-bead,

Animula vagula blandul^, etc. Adrian. ap. Spart. Sect. 14.

Quae nunc abibis in loca?
I know no other way in which redemption and salvation can be expected; for
Christ is the way, and the only way, and in this bottom only do I trust, and
venture that which to me is most precious, even my soul, and the eternal state
thereof.

This is that necessary Doctrine, which I have labored all this while to set
forth, and which our God has taught us both by himself, and by his Prophets,
from the beginning of the world. In this therefore I conclude with such
Christian boldness as becomes us in the very foundation of Christian Religion,
in the words of Rich. de S^. Victore: Nonne cum omni confidencia Ri. de St.
Vict de Trin. l. x. c. 2. Jer. 20. 7.
Deo dicere poterimus, Domine, fi error est, a ^^ipso de^^pri ^umu^, etc. id
est, Lord if our Christian Faith be false, and erroneous, thou thy self have
deceived us; for those wonderful works, which have wrought this Faith in us,
could be done by none other but thy self.

With like confidence Athanasius also in a disputation by him held with A^ius
at the Nicene Council, when he affirmed that the Father and the Son were Ath
in disp. cum Ario. n. 27
but one God, Arius told him: Tu Sabellius es qui Patr^m and Filium u^um d^^^^:
(i) Thou art another S^bellius ^n confounding the Father and the Son. But
Athanasius replied, -- TumDominus Sabellius est qui it a dixit, Eg^, and Pa^er
unum sumus: (i) If I be a Sabellian* for saying, the Father and the Son are
one God, then must Christ himself be a Sabellian, for himself h^th so said.

The like boldness and resolution in this very Doctrine Hil^le Trin. lib. ^^.
n. 2.
does Saint Hilary express; Domine, quid me mis^rum de ^e ^^^ellisti, --
Verbis tui^ credidi -- de ^pit me Moses, -- David, -- Solomon, -- Daniel, --
Apostoli -, si c^imen est, nimium legi, Prop^e^is, and Apostolis credidisse,
ignosce Omnipotens Deus, qu^a in his m^ri possum, Emend^ri non possum. Id est,
Lord, why have thou deceived me thy poor creature? I believed thine own words
concerning thine own self -- thy servant Moses, David, Solomon, Dani^l, and
thine Apostles have misled me: If it* be a fault to give too much credence to
thy Law, thy Prophets and Apostles, I beseech thee to have me ^xcused, if in
this Faith I live and die; for I can never recant this Doctrine.

Finally, this was also the constant Profession of that learned Bishop Saint
Basil, for when Valens the A^ian Emperor had by a messenger threatened him with
sequ^stration of his Church, and banishment of his person, if he persisted in
this Doctrine, which he called a foolish doctrine.

The good Bishop answered, u^inam sempiter na sit Theod. hist. l. 4. c. 10.
haec mea insipientia: id est, And so say I, and I pray God, I may never be
withdrawn from that true and most wholesome Doctrine which I have here
delivered, and which our new fashion rational animalls call folly, but that I
may persevere in the Faith and Confession of the Godhead of Jesus Christ unto
my lives end.

And afterward, I doubt not but I shall so continue with the Angels and
Elders, Revelation, 5. 13. saying, -- Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power, be
unto him that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb, for ever, and ever,

Amen. L. Deo.

FINIS.
THE THIRD BOOK.

A^throp^ THe^phro*

THE Incarnation of GOD, And the MYSTERY Of Man's Redemption unfolded.

Tentemus animas quae deficiunt in fide, naturalibus rationibus adjuvare.
Ruffin. in symb. apud Cyp. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be
sold at his Shop at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1655.

THE PREFACE.
HAving in the second Book showed that Jesus Christ is the only, true,
supreme, and most high God, and that there is no other God but he, for that we
are assured that Christian Faith cannot H^l de Trin. l* 7.
admit of two gods. And because we have learned the same in the Holy
Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. And that
the Prophet calls the Son of God, Esaias 9. 6. The mightty God, the everlasting
Father, and that in the Gospel, the Son of God says, John 10. 30. The Father
and I are one, and that all his are the Fathers, and all that the Father has,
are his, John 17. 10. Which shows a perfect communion in one Essence, and
that the Son in Godhead is no way inferior to the Father, but both are equal;
and therefore the Scripture with great reason does promiscuously sometimes name
the Father before the Son, and sometimes the Son is put before the Father;
as John 8. 16. I and the Father that sent me: and Gal. 1. 1. By Jesus Christ
and God the Father. And 2. These. 2. 16. Our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God
our Father. For if Christ were absolutely under, and subject to the Father how
could this be endured, when no Prince will suffer his subject, though he be
never so high and honorable, to write, Ego and Rex, I and my King, as
Chrysostom Chrysostom. tom. 6. ser. 4. n. 55.
notes.

In this third Book, I am to show that the same Only true and most high God
was incarnate by assuming humane flesh from the Virgin Mother, and in that
assumed nature was called Jesus Christ; and in that assumed Manhood performed
the great work of Man's redemption, and therein suffered death on the Cross,
thereby satisfying the Justice, and submitting to the Sentence of God, as an
expiation for our transgressions, and by his most holy life, and perfect
righteousness in fulfilling the whole Law, and so performing the Covenant of
God, for us, and in our stead as our surety; and thereby according to the
Covenant Do this and live) has obtained for his whole Mystical Body, the
kingdom of Heaven, and everlasting life.

To this discourse I am lead by the pernicious doctrine of this Commenter, who
denied Jesus to be the supreme God; and to color this blasphemy, has most
apparently misinterpreted and transverted the holy Scriptures, and wronged the
ancient Nicene Fathers, as has been showed before; and particularly, that most
learned Bishop, and ancient Church-writer, Eusebius, as is next to be showed.

THE INCARNATION of GOD.
CHAP. I. The Vindication of Eusebius, whom this Comment has calumniated, and
falsified.
Upon those words, Heb. 13. 2. Some have P. 331.
entertained Angels] the Commenter says. [ Eusebius in his first Book contends
that one of the Angels was the Son of God, for he will not have him the most
high God, etc.] You have not only all to becommented the Epistle to the
Hebrews, and the Nicene Father, but have written a loud Comment on Eusebius,
who never wrote or said (for ought can appear) that Jesus Christ was not the
most high God. But I am sure, diverse times in his most learned Books, he
teaches true Doctrine quite contrary to yours, when he says, Filius erat ante
aeterna tempora. Eusebius. de Demonst. i. 4. 6. ^.
the Son of God was from eternity* and also particularly condemns this very
Heresy which you have so belabored, under the name of Heresy Artemon,
Theodotus, and Paulus Simosatenus: as has been showed before. Id hist. l. 5.
c. 28. and lib. 7. c. 2.
For this Eusebius was one of those renouned Bishops, who at the N^^ene
Council, against Arius, decreed and subscribed the article Homossion: id est,
that the Father, and the Son are of the same essence and Godhead, whereas some
Arians at that Council refused to subscribe and thereby insinuated (as your
self have done) that there was a greater and a lesser God, and so fell into
the old heresy of Mercion, who said Bas. ho. 27. con. sabel. Soc. l. 2. c. 5.
there were two Gods: 2^ Saint Basil notes one of the refusers was also named
Eusebius who was ^ishop of Nicomedia at that time, and afterward was preferred
to the Bishopric of Constantinople and their lived, and dyed an Arian, but we
have no writings of this Eusebius now extant. The Eusebius whom you mean lived
and dyed Bishop of Caesaria, a man of so great learning and worth, that the
Emperor Constantine said he was worthy to be the Universal Bishop of the Sec.
l. 1. c. 18.
world: this man at first was unwilling to have the word homo^sion put into the
Creed, because it was new, but afterward when he perceived, that it was but
the expression of that Doctrine which is really contained in Scripture when it
is said ( The Father and I are one) he accepted of it, and exhibitted his own
Church-Creed to the Council, and the Council confirmed it, only adding the
word Homo^sion and so published it: as Socrates says, so that it seems the
Soc. l. 1. c. 5.
creed which we call the Nicene Creed was thus penned, partly by Eusebius, and
partly by Hosi^s, and yet we are sent to this Eusebius his first book, but he
does not tell us to which of his first books, (for Eusebius has many first
books) so I must trace him through Eusebius, that I may hit on the place he
means: For I have observed that Eusebius has no less then four times in
several places of his works set down his opinion concerning Gods visible
appearing to the patriarks, and in none of those places has he said that which
this Commenter would pin upon him. first he says in his book, de mons^. l^b.
1. c. 5. as Eusebius. de Demonst. l. 1. ^. 5.
Ruffinui reads it: Audi ut Moses cum qui amicis Dei seipsum ostenderet -- modo
Deum, modo Dei angelum appellet, sic declarans, non hunc fuisse ipsum patrem,
sed ejus filium, qui idem et Deus ac Dominus amicorum Dei, et supremi Patris
Angelus dici consueverit; id est, Hear how Moses calls him who used to appear
to the friends of God, sometimes he calls him God, and sometimes the Angel of
God: and thereby Moses declares that he was not the supreme Father, but his
Son: which son is usually called the God and Lord, of the friends of God, and
also the Angel or messenger of the most high Father.

All that Eusebius in this place affirms is, that he that appeared to Abraham
and the patriarks, was God in the person of the Son, and not in the person of
the Father that it was not the supreme Father, but it was the supreme Son, for
both the Father and the Son, are but one supreme God: the same supreme God
appeared which is both the Father and the Son, and this he proves because, he
that appeared is sometimes called the Angel of the supreme Father, which may
be, and is in Scripture said of the Person of the Son, but not of the Person of
the Father: and yet he says, he that appeared was: Deus and Dominus: id est,
the Lord God of the Patriarks. But Eusebius does not say as you would have him,
that he was not the most high God, only he says he was not the Father, but the
Son of the Father: which no good Christan can find Eusebius. de Them. l. 5. in.
prefat.
fault with in such a mystery; the same Eusebius had said before, in the
preface of the same book. Dei Verbum apud priora secula -- in hominis habitu
apparuit: id est, The Word of God in former times appeared in the habit of a
man. Now, we know that only the Son, or second Person is called the Word as
John 1. 1. and this the same Eusebius affirms again in the 19. Chapter of the
said Book: id est, Idem est Dominus, Eusebius. de Them. l. 1. c. 19.
and Deus, and Christus qui -- Abrahoe visus habitu pacisico -- Iacobo tanquam
Creator -- Mosen specie nubis, and ignis ducebat, etc. id est, It was the same
Lord and God, and Christ which appeared to Abraham in a peaceable shape, and to
Jacob as a wrastler, and lead Moses with a clould of fire. You see that as yet
Eusebius has said nothing to confirm your opinion, but let us see what he
says in his first book of his hystory, for I guess that is the first book:
Deus Abra^ae apparuit tanquam communis homo, -- at ille adorat ut Deum, and
veneratur ut Dominum -- dicens Eus. hist. l. 1. c. 1. Genesis 18. 25.
dominator Domine, qui judicas omnem terram, -- and; quae omnia non ad ^a^^em,
s^d ad fill um referenda sunt. id est, God appeared to Abraham as an ordinary
man, -- but Abraham adored him as God, amd worshipped him as the Lord -- saying
shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? -- all which must be considered
as spoken to the Son, and not to the Father. The result of all that Eusebius
has said, in this business, is, That the most high God of all the earth
appeared to Abraham in the person of his Son, and not in the person of the
Father, But yet it was the same Lord God for Godhead and substance which is in
the person of the Father, and in the person of the Son: therefore he that
appeared was the same God with the Father, but not the same person with the
Father; therefore Saint Austin says very truly, That the Father and the Aug.
cont. Epist. Man^chae. c. 6. n. 7. Aug. de Trin. l. 7.
Son are to be called unum, but not unus, id est, one God for essence, but not
one for person. So he expresses himself in another place upon these words I
and the F^th^r are one] unum secundum essentiam, non seeundum relatum: id est,
One in Godhead, but not so in personal relation, it is very remarkable that in
our Saviors prayer for his Church it is desired, John 17. Theod. hist. l. 2.
c. 8. and. Aug. n. 47 and 174.
22. That they all may be one, as we are one] he does not say, That they and we
may be one, because God and man are not of the same essence, for unum cannot be
said of two several natures, although they be united Aug. Epist. 174.
in one person, or subsistence, sine adiectione, as Austin has observed, as
the soul and body of man united are not unum, except you understand animal, you
may call them one man, one person one living creature; but not absolutely One
because they differ in essence, or nature, but the Father and the Son are
therefore said to be one; because they are but one God, though several
persons, just as Ensis and gladius are unum, they are the self-same thing. So
the Father and the Son are one and the same God though two persons;
Substan^ia^i^ un^^as, personalis pluralitas: id Rye. de St. vict. de Trin. l.
3. c, 8.
est unity of Godhe^d plurality of persons. Therefore the Scripture speaks of
them with great caution both plurally, and singly; Genesis 1. 1. God c^^ated] the
the noune is the plural, but the verb is the singular number; and let us make
man, and -- in our image] this shows a plurality, but yet the persons are
never called Gods or Lords Plurally, but as he who intended to point at one
particular man named Tertullius, described him by thrice repeating: Tullus
Tullus Tullus, Jul. cap. in Mar. Ant. c. 10.
and as the Consulship of Caesar, men used to say that these two Consuls were
Julius and Caesar so when the Scripture would intimate the two distinct persons
of the Father and the Son, it does it by Sugt. in Julio c. 20.
repeating the same word; because there is but one Lord, and but one God, it
will not say Lords, or Gods but The Lord rained from the Lord, -- and The Lord
Genesis 19. 24. Ps. 45. 7. Aug. Epist. 37.
said unto my Lord, -- and God thy God has anointted thee, because the same
God who is in three distinct persons, or properties, is one in Godhead, and in
that one Godhead the three persons are one; and as Austins word is, Vnissimi,
this was the judgment of Eusebius touching the apparition, and the Godhead of
the Son, and Eusebius said no more in this point then diverse other Fathers said
also, both before Eusebius, and after him, as is next to be showed.

CHAP. II. That the most high God appeared visibly to the Patriarchs in the
Person of the Son, and not in the Person of the Father, as the Ancients thought.
THe Fathers in their Expositions of these places in Scripture, where it is
said, No man has seen God at any time, John 1. 18, and yet Jacob said, I have
seen God face to face, Genesis 32. 30. who was therefore called Israel, (i.)
Seeing God, or prevailing with God; and the place Peniel, (i.) the presence of
God: these seeming contradictions are by them thus reconciled. Tertullian Tert.
de Trin. n. 28.
says, Deus Pater inuisibilis, sed Deus Filius visibilis, and descendere
solitus: God the Father is invisible, but God the Son is visible and used to
descend. If it be objected that the Book de Trinitate, was not Tertullians,
(which is an excellent and learned book) Yet that this was Tertullions opinion,
appears in another Id. cont. Marc. lib. 3.
undoubted book; where he says, Christus Abrahamo apparuit in veritate carnis,
s^d n^ndum nata: (i) Christ appeared to Abraham in the flesh, which flesh or
body, was not then born of the Virgin. Clemens Alex. says as much of the
apparition of God to Jacob; Clem. in Paedag. l. 1. c. 7.
Jacob luctatus est cum Deo Verbo, nondum homo facto: Jacob wrastled with God
the Word, before he was Incarnate. Now we know, that only the second Person is
called the Word, and Christ. And this was also the opinion of Origin, who says
that our Lord Jesus Christ, before Orig. in Eze. ho. 6.
he assumed our flesh, descended to the holy Patriarks, and was with Moses: And
again, he says, That Esaias was therefore sawn asunder by the Jews, because
Id. in Esa. ho. 1
he had said, I saw the Lord sitting upon a Throne, Isay 6. 1. Justin Martyr
also says, Deus Pater non dicitur venire Just. dial. cum Try. n. 26.
in locum, sed Deus Filius: the Father is not said to come into a place, but
God the Son is said, and that God the Son was seen by the Patriarks: and this
was also the Opinion of Irenaeus, and he gives a reason Iren. l, 4. c. 37.
for it, thus, God the Son was often seen by men, least men should not believe
that there were any god at all, but God in the person of the father was never
seen, least men by reason of familiarity should contemn God or think that
there could be no God but such an one as is corporeal and visible. Thus you
see, that this opinion was not new in Eusebius time; nor was by him first
invented, or singly mointained for many his Contemporaries, were of the same
judgment, and they also which lived and writ after the death of Eusebius, for
this was the Doctrine of Athanosius, and Atha. Orat. Cont. Arion. n. 8. Hill. de
Trin. l. 4. Epiph. haer. 65. Theod. hae. f. 6. l. 5. n. 17. Mat. 11. 27.
1. Hilarious who both of them lived at the same time with Eusebius, and the
same was afterward, delivered by Epipha^ius, and Theodoret, and the scripture
seems to favor this exposition, for it is said Ioh. 6. 46. Not that any man
has seen the Father -- save he which is of God, (i) none have seen the Father,
but the Son of God, but it is no where said that no man has seen the Son, for
the Father, is not seen but in the Son, and God the Son was seen in his assumed
manhood, and therefore when the disciples desired to see the Father, our
savior told them, he that has seen me has seen the Father Ioh. 14. ^. that
is, God who is the father, can not otherwise be visible, but in the Son, and
not in him but by the assuming of humane nature, by which God becomes visible,
who in his pure God head is invisible, and he that sees God the Son in the
flesh* sees the self same God who is the Father, although the person of the
Father was not incarnate yet the same God is incarnate in Christ, for Col. 1.
15. Christ is the image of the invisible God, that is as Beza notes Christ is
he in whom only the Father does manifest, and show himself visible, so he that
sees God the Son, sees God the Father, for both persons are one God.

By what has bin said it may appear common that opinion of the primitive
Christians was, that it was the person of God the Son which appeared to the
Patriarks, and not the person of God the Father. Now because these ayings are
hard to understand, I think it will not be amiss to discourse the 2 questions
following first how God is said to be invisible, and how yet he has bin, and
may be seen by mortal men. Secondly (seeing there is but one God) how it may be
said, that the Father has not bin seen, and yet the Son has bin seen: In
which discourse I will not promise the reader full Satisfaction, but ^ do
promise him my endeavor.

CHAP. III. How God is said to be invisible. What is meant by the face, and the
after parts of God.
HOw the Invisible God has bin seen by mortal Eyes, and in what sense he is
said to be both Invisible, 1. Quest.
and Visible, will be worthy of our inquisition* because the right
understanding thereof is pertinent to the doctrine of Man's redemption, by the
incarnation of God, and will serve for reconciliation of some Scritures which
at the first hearing may seem to contradict one another, for in the old
Testament it is said Ex. 33. 11. The Lord spoke unto Moses race to face. But
presently after in the same Chapter. ver. 20. God says. Thou can not see my
face, for no man shall see me and live and it follows, ver. 23 thou shall see
my backparts. Yet before this Jacob had said Genesis 32. 30. I have seen God face
to face and my life is preserved, but in the new Testament, it is said No man
has seen God at any time Joh. 1. 18. And again 1 John 4. 12. And S. Paul calls
God invisible Col. 1. 15. and 1 Timothy 1. 17.

For explication of these Scriptures, it is to be understood that when God is
called Invisible it is meant of the pure Godhead, because the Essence, Nature,
substance or divinity is not visible by mortal Eyes, in this sense S. Cyprian
says Deus est visu clarior tactu purior. (i) the Majestio of the Godhead
dazeleth all mortal Cyp. de idoorum vanitate. ^. 77.
eyes and senses and thus, neither the Father nor the, Son, nor the Holy Ghost
can be seen, becase the Godhead of every, and all Persons is one, and alike
invisible, for God is a spirit, and a spirit cannot be seen, and therefore S.
Austin upon those words Tim. 1. 17. The invisible God says hic ipsa tri^it^s
intell^gi^ur non solus Aug. de Trin. l. 2. c. 8. Aug. Epist. 112. Aug. Epist.
111. Tert. cont. Prax.
Pater, (i.) The whole trinity is invisible, and not only the Father, and
again he says. The whole trinity is of a nature invisible, and again he says
out of Ambros. and Hierome. Neither the Father nor the Son can be seen in their
divine nature: For so noe Eye can see them and therefore Tertullian thus
expounds it videbatur Deus a Patriarchis secundum capacitatem hominis non pro
plenitudine Majestatis (i.) Patriarks saw God, not in the plenitude of his
Majesty, but according to the capacity of man, and to this both Ahanasius and
Atha. ad Antio. n. 28. Chrysostom. ho. 48. Antio. n. 17.
Chrysostom agree. Nemo essentiam invisibilis (i.) The essence of God is to
all mortals invisible.

The divine nature, and pure Godhead is that which the Scripture sometimes calls
the face of God, of which God said to Mooses, Thou can not see my face, and
live, so Theodoret, expounds those words divina natura Theod* Dialog. immutat.
Atha. quest. ad Antioch. n. 28. Aug. de Trin. l. 2.
sub aspectum non cadit (i.) the divine nature can not be seen, so does
Athanasius, 1. Anteriora dei significant divinitat^m (i.) the foreparts of God
signify the Godhead, and so S. Austin, often tells us, that the face of God
signifies the form of God, and the afterparts signify the form of a servant,
which is the humane nature. But then how does the Scripture say the Lord spoke
unto Moses face to face, and how could Jacob say I have seen God face to face,
if the pure Godhead can not be seen? And how could Moses tell the Israelites
Deuteronomy. 5. 4. The Lord talked with you face to face in the mount] and yet before
he had said. Deuteronomy 4. 15. ye saw no similitude on the day that the Lord spoke
unto you in Horeb;] I answer, that as in one place of those Scriptures
alleged, the face of God signifies his divinity or Godhead which can not be
seen, so in the other place it signifies Gods presence manifested by words, or
signs, whereby God declare th himself present, as on mount Horeb by fire and
thunder, and in the tabernacle by a cloud, or by a sound and words, so Gods
face, or presence may be where there is no sight of him, and so he spoke to the
people face to face, because they knew for certain that God was there present.
But Jacob saw the face of God, because he saw the face of that man, or that
shape which wrastled with him, when God appeared to him in the form of a man
although Jacob could not see the pure Godhead, and this kind of appearing in an
assumed shape is called by Dionysius. (...). (i.) The appearing of God, from
hence the Dion. Areop. Caelest. Hier. c. 4. Eus. de Them. l. 5. c l. and. 14.
aforementioned Ensebius argued, that because Jacob saw the face of that man
which appeared to him, in (which man was God) therefore he said it was the
person of the Son, and not the Person of the Father, because Eusebius was
persuaded, that the Person of the Father did never show himself in a visible
shape and for this, Eusebius had very great and weighty reasons, of which more
hereafter.

CHAP. IV. More concerning the first question how God has bin, and may be seen.
FOr the further explanation of this question it would be inquired, how it is
said that God is visible, and has bin seen, and this will be understood by
considering how other Spirits become visible, which in their own Spiritual
nature, are as invisible as the divine nature is, for because a spirit has
nothing in it self, which can be an object for mortal Eyes, therefore whenever
Spirits, or Angels, good or bad, are seen of men, it must be by assuming some
shape or body, and mingling themselves with it that so they may become a fit
visible object, because only such things are visible, for ever so many
invisibles whether they be good or bad spirits, Angels, or devils, cannot make
one visible Object, and therefore when we read in Scripture that God appeared in
an Angel, it is not so to be understood as if the invisible God, became visible
by taking upon him the invisible nature of an Angel, for an Angel^^al nature
is of it self as invisible as the divine nature (as is said) because both are
Spirits, but when God is seen in an Angel, the Angel meant, is the corpo^^al
visible shape which God assumeth, and imployeth and uses for that purpose, to
be seen and to converse with man by, for the word Angel does not always
signify a spiritual nature, but any officer employed by God as a Messenger, so
S. John the Bap^ist is called Gods Angel. Mat. 11. 10. in the Original. So that
the visible creature which is used as a Medium to present God visible is, and
may very fitly be called the Angel of God*

As Moses therefore put a Veil over his shining face, which otherwise the
people could not behold, and as the Sun by our weak Eyes is better seen through
the veil of a th^n mist then in its Clear brightness, so in this life God is
visible Only as in a gloss ^arkly 1 Cor. 13. 12. his divine nature in his
glorious brightne^ is invisible, but the Invisible things of God are seen, by
things that are made Romans 1. 20. The divinity can ^ot be s^^e except it be
clothed, and allayed with some mo^e gross and Material veil, and therefore at
what time God showed himself visibly to men, he took some corp^real Creature,
and shape unto him, that so he, who by nature is invisible, might in that
assumed habit, be seen, and this was the resolution of the Fathers* a Filius
Atha. de uni^. T^in n 30. Hill de Trin. l. 5.
visus est Patribus sed in (...) Ma^^, i^, and Filius v^sus est Patriarchis in
specie h^minis (i.) The Son of God was seen by the Ancient (...) but it was by
assuming some Material, and visible shape* as ^^ a Man. So S. Chrysostom
says. The Prophets which saw Chrysostom. ho. 10. Ant^o. Aug. de Civiv l. 5. c. 7.
id. Epist. 11^.
God had not otherwise the express s^ght o^ him sed figuras viderund (i) they
saw him in some assumed figure and S. Austin discoursing of Gods conve^sing
with man in Paradise says* Deus locutus est cum p^im^s hominibus in aliqua
specie corporali -- and again Deus non est vis^^ nisi assumptione creaturae
(i) God talked with first parents, in some bodily shape -- for God can not be
seen, but by assuming some Creature, and writing upon those words Gen 3. 8.
They heard the voice of the Lord God walking] he says quomodo ambulatio Aug.
de Trin. l. 2. c. 10. Prosp. de vit Cont. l. 1. c. 5. and lib. 2. c. 18.
latio dei possit intelligi sine humans specie non video (i) I do not see how
the walking of God can be understood, except we suppose that God assumed an
humane shape. Prosper also the follower of Austin, says Deus non potest hic
videri sine assumptione Elementi -- non sine forma visibilis creaturae (i.) God
can not be seen, but by assuming some Elementarie, and visible form of a
Creature, and this doctrine was so generally received that Austin says again.
Deum apparuisse humanis Aug. de Trin. l. 2. c. 14.
Oculis per Creaturam subjectam, quis dubitat? (i) who doubts that God has
indeed appeared to man's sight, by assuming some Creature. The sum of all is
that God has bin seen, but not in his single, and pure divine nature, but by
assuming, and involving himself in some Element, figure, body, or shape: and
those apparitions of God in the old Testament, did but accidentally point at
the great and principal Appartiion of God described in the new Testament, where
it is said. Joh. 1. 14. The word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us and we
beheld his glory and Coloss 2. 9. In him dwells all the fulness of the
Godhead bodily and 1 Timothy 3. 16. Great was the mystery of Godliness, God
manifest in the flesh. For indeed all the apparitions of God in the old
Testament, were but types, figures, proems, preludes, preambles,
praefigurations, or as dumb shows (If I may so speak) of the incarnation of
the same God in the person of Jesus, all fore-shewing, that the most high and
only God, would in the fulness of time, take upon him men's nature. S. Austine
says of that apparition which Joshua saw, when God appeared to him like a man
of war. Josh. 5. 13. That it was the Son of Aug de 5 haer. c. 4.
God. 1. Jesus Iesum interrogat figurae veritate (i.) Joshua (who is also
called Jesus) -- Jesus the typespake to Jesus who is the truth and substance of
that type, for the ancients made this Construction of all the apparitions of
God in humane shapes to be but as types of the incarnation of the same God as
will appear more clearly hereafter.

CHAP. V. The Incarnation of God foreshewed in types the heresy of the
Anthropomorphites, the first article of the Church of England explained.
GOd began very early to promise, and intimate by words and signs the great,
and profitable Mystery of his own Incarnation, and his gracious work of the
redemption of man: for he said before he created Man. Genesis 1 26. Let us make
Man in Our Image -- and God created Man in his own image] first here is Our
Image, in the plural number, intimating the image of the trinity to be in the
soul of man Consisting in Will, Memory, and Understanding as S. Austin
expounds it, and here is also mention of his own Aug. comp. Ser. Arian. to. 6.
c. 16. Tert. de Resur. Gen 1. 27. Tert. adv. Prax.
Image. in the singular number, that is as Tertullian expounds it more then
once. Deus ad imaginem suam fecit hominem.] Limus iste jam ^unc imaginem
Christi induens futuri in carne Christus Cogitabatur homo suturus (i.) that the
image of God was meant of Christ, who in after ages would take the same shape
of man upon him. And again he says, on those words In the jmage of God
Created he him Sc. an Imaginem Filii, qui homo suturus Orig. in Genesis ho. 1.
(i.) that the Image of God signifies the image of the Son of God, who was to
be a man, and Origin expounding the same words, tells us that the image of God
there signifies Imaginem Salvatoris (i.) That man was made in the same humane
image that one day Our savior would assume and albeit the image of God may
have other significations, as righteousness, holiness, etc. Yet nothing hinders
this exposition to be one, and the jmage thus expounded houldeth when the other
is ceased or much defaced, and what else is the meaning of that saying The seed
of the Woman shall Genesis 3. 15.
bruise the serpents head] But that the Son of God should take flesh of the
Woman, and therein prevail against Satan, and why should both Abraham and
Jacob, require Genesis 24. and 47. 29. Aug. cont. sec. Manichae. c. 23. to 6. Amb.
de Abrah, l 1. c. 9. Hier. cont. Jov. l. 1. c. 5.
that at the taking of an oath, the hand should be put under their thigh (a
strange book to Swear on) but S. Austin expounds it. Abraham prophetabat deum
Caeli^ im eam carnem ^sse venturum, quae fuisset exillo femore propagata (i.)
Abraham prophesied that the God of heaven would assume flesh propagated from
Abraham's thigh and the very same reason is rendered by S. Ambrose and S.
Hie^ome, but most memorable is the passage with Ja^ob, which we read Genesis 32.
22. There wrastled a man with Jacob] This man was God to signify that there
would be a contention between the Son of God -- made man, and Jacobs
posterity; Jacob seemed stronger then the man, and held him, and prevailed, to
signify that Jacobs posterity (who are called by his name Jacob and Israel,)
should so prevail with God incarnate, as to be stronger, and to hold him as the
Jews did, in bonds, and durance, and to nail him on the c^osse Jacob halted]
that is, his posterity would fail and falter in the faith of the God of
Jacob, yet Jacob obtained a blessing] signifying that the Jews, or all true
Israelites, nothwithstanding all their contentions, and injuries done to this
incarnate God, yet by houlding him in faith should obtain a blessing and this
is the exposition of Tertullian lib de T^in. (If that book Tert. de Trin.
be his.) And for the same reason I take it, did it please the only and most
high God to appear to Abraham in the habit of man. Genesis 16. and to converse
with him, and to be entertained at meat by Abraham as a guest, and all this was
acted as a prophetical scean, or show, that Abraham might with his eyes behold
a representation of that great mystery of God incarnate, which one day should
be really performed, when the same God who now conversed with Abraham, but in a
temporary and assumed shape of man, should really become a very and perfect
man, and converse with, and be entertained by Abraham's posterity.

These and such like passages may further infome us in the true meaning, of
those hard words which God said to Moses, when he could him, that he should see
his ^^ (...) but not his face. Ex. 33. 23. What the face or forepart of God
signifies I have showed before that it signifies his divine nature, the Eternal
Godhead, but his back parts signify his later dispensations in assuming our
nature of the Virgin Mother, his birth, his conversation with men, his passion,
death, resurrection, ascension, so that the meaning is, that Moses. viz. the
Mosaical people should in after times, see God, when God should be incarnate.
So Athanisius expounds it posteriores Ath. ad Antio. quaest. 23. n. 28.
dei parts, carnen intellige, quam assum, sit ex Virgin, and per quam
conspectus est (i) by the backparts of God you must understand his flesh taken
of the Virgin^ Marie, in which flesh he was seen, and this also is the
exposition of Origin, on Psalm: 36. hom. 4. and Austin gives a reason why the
incarnation is called the after parts of God. Propter posterita^em
mortalitatis, vel Aug. de Trin. l. 2. 17.
quia poster us ^arnem assumpturus erat (i.) because his mortal, or humane
nature was to be assumed long after Moses time, and later then his divine
nature, which had bin from all Eternity.

Neither does this Doctrine, by asserting the incarnation of God any way
countenance the heresy of the Anthropomorphites, who ascribed corporeal
lineaments and parts to God, and because it is said Esa. 66. 1. heaven is my
throne, and the earth is my footstool, they thought, the divine nature was a
vast body, teaching from heaven to earth as Origin relates of them, Orig in
Genesis ho. 1.
and because they read of the hand, and arm, and eyes of God (simple monks as
they were) they ascribed those parts literally to the divine nature which are
spoken of in Scripture but figuratively, these were the Andian Enrors as we
read in Epiphanius, The odoret and Sozomen, these men thought a body to be
essential to God, as if God could not be God except he had a body: but we say,
the body, or humane nature is not essential to God, no not to the person of the
Son of God, but it is an accessarie assumed, and not into the essential union
with the Son, but into personal union with him being now God incarnate, for he
was God, and the Son of God before his incarnation, so that although the divine
nature, in its own essence, or pure Godhead, is incorporeal, yet the same
Godhead now considered in the Person of Christ, cannot be said to be without a
body, for as Theodoret notes, Christus Theod. dial. 3. n. 13.
significat Deum incorporatum, non incorporeum: (id est,) Christ signifies God
incarnate, and not God incorporeall, because the Son of God, who is the One and
only true God, is now Emmanuel; the Godhead, and the Manhood in him are
inseparably united for ever; and in this sense I conceive the first Article of
Religion in the Church of England is to be p. Art. 1.
understood, which says p. God is without Body] because albeit God never will
be without his assumed Body; yet this Body is not of the Essence of God, for
although the Son of God, never had assumed a Body, nor ever had been incarnate,
yet nevertheless he had been, and shall be God, and the Son of God from
everlasting, to everlasting. This I hope is enough concerning the first
question of Gods visibility, and invisibilitie.

CHAP. VI. The Second question, why the Fathers said that 2 Question.
only the Son was seen by the Patriarks, and not the Father.
IT being granted that the Father and the Son are but one only, and the same
God, allthough distinct in proprieties and Persons,) it would be inquired, why
the Fathers before mentioned, said, that the Son appeared and was seen, when
the Father did not appear, nor was seen; for how can one be seen, and not the
other, when both are one?

Before I enter upon this question, I desire the Reader to take notice of two
things: First, that this discourse is intended to be only concerning such a
sight of God, as mortal men are capable of in this life, because it is not
revealed to us, how man shall see God in the life to come; of which it is said,
Marth 5. 8 Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God] and yet also
the impure shall see God: for every eye shall see him, and they also which
pierced him] Rev. 1. 7. Saint Austine expounding the words, Zach. 12. 10. They
shall Aug. de Trin* lib. 1. c. 13
look upon me whom they pierced] says, The wicked shall not see him in the
form of God, but in the form of a servant because God shall sit in judgment,
as he is clothed with his humane body; that so the judge may be visible to all
that shall be judged for even Satan conversed with our God on earth, being in
his flesh when he tempted him, Matt. 4. But the righteous when they once are in
the possession of the joys of Heaven, shall see God as he is in his Divine
nature, which Divines call, facialem visionem, the beatificall vision, seeing
God face to face, as it is said, 1 Cor. 13. 12. and then happily the distinct
Person of the Father will be visible to eyes glorified; for then the Saints
shall be equal to the Angels, Luke 20. 36. of whom we shall read, Matthew. 18.
10. Their Angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in Heaven.

Secondly, that I do not take upon me peremptorily to affirm, that the Person
of God the Father has never presented himself in any corporeal or visible
shape, for how should I know such a Mystery? And because I find that Saint
Austine says, N^mis temerarium est dicere Aug. de Trin l. 2. c. 17. and 18
patrem nunquam visum pat^ibus -- credibile est Patrem solitum fuisse apparere
mortalibus: (i.) It is too much rashness to affirm that the Father was never
seen -- Nay, it is credible that he used to appear to the Patriarchs: And
Atbanasius says, that although God was sometimes seen in the Person of the
Son, when he was not seen in the Person of the Father; yet he says also, that
at another time all the three Persons Athan. lib. de Com. essentia, n. 24.
were seen by Abraham. Tres Personae sedebaent apud Abraham; (i.) All the three
Persons sat at Abraham's tent.

For what inconvenience will follow, if God show his presence at the same time,
both in several places, and also in several assumed shapes? for he that is at
all times really present in all places, may also manifest his presence where,
and when, and how he pleases. It is confessed that the Person of the Son
assumed an humane body, and was seen, and at the same time the Person of the
Holy Ghost descended in the likeness of a Dove, Matthew, 3. 17. and then also
the voice of the Person of the Father was heard; and again, Matthew, 17. 5.
which Divines say, must needs be from the Person of the Father; because the
Son of God is not the Son of any other Person, but only of the Father.

Indeed it is said of the Father, ^ohn 5. 37. Ye have neither heard his voice
at any time, no^ any time, no^ seen his shape;] and yet his voice was certainly
heard at Christ's Baptism; but Saint Hilary reconcileth both places, telling
us, Pater nec visus, n^^ audi^us est ab illis ^udaeis quibuscum Christus
loquebatur: (i.) Those Jews to whom Hill. de Trin. lib. 9.
Christ then spoke, were not present, when the Fathers voice was so uttered;
yet this does not hinder* but that as others heard his voice: so others might
see his Person presented in some visible shape, besides, who can tell what
Person it was, that said, Let there be Genesis 1
light.

If it were the Person of the Father, then why may we not say, it was the
Father which walked in Paradise, and talked with Adam? Saint Austine moves the
question, Aug. de Trin. l 2 c. 12.
When three men appeared to Abrabam* why may we no^ ^^r they were ^^e thr^e
P^^sons of the Tri^i^ie; seeing neither of those that appeared, is there said,
or so much as intimated to be greater, or less then the other? It is but a
vain cavil of this Commenter, in p 332.
saying, they were no^ God, but Ang^ls, (created) because it is said, Heb 13.
2. some have entertained Angels?] for who knows not that in Scripture very
often the Son of God is called the Angel of the holy Ghost, is said to be sent,
which is all one: and this is enough to verify* that Abraham might entertain
God, and Angels in those Persons, albeit, the Father cannot be called an Angel,
but yet that creature or shape which the Person of the Father did or might
assume may be called his Angel, as is s^id before ch 4. p 119. That the only
and most high God did then appear to Abraham, I do nothing doubt; and our
Commenter confesses him to be called Jehova, which he also confesses to be an
appellation proper to God himself; and in that eighteenth Chapter, and the five
and twentieth verse, He is called the Judge of all the Earth, and yet he will
afford this Jehova, no better honor, then to be a Creature, an Angel, and
Minister, and Delegate, though he does not take upon him to show us any such
Delegation, or Commission, whereby any creature is ordained to be a Jehova, how
many Jehovah's would this Commenter have?

But it was indeed Jehova, that is, the only Lord God which appeared; but
whether in the Person of the Father, or the Son, or the Spirit, or All; Saint
Augustine thought it was an uncertain, and an Aug. ib.
occult question.

This was his judgment, which seems to incline to a probability of the
apparition of the three Persons; Origin in Genesis ho. 4. Epiph. in Ancor. n. 27 1
Full. de praedest. lib 2.
though diverse other Fathers differ from him; as Origin, and Epiphanius, who
thought that the apparition to Abraham was of the Son of God, and two created
Angels* with him: and Fulgentius says flatly, ( id est) That the Son
appeared, and not the Father.

By what has been said, it appears that in the judgment of the Ancient
Church Writers, it was the true Jehovah, which appeared to Abraham; even that
only Jehovah, who is the Father and the Son, and the Holy Spirit in Essence:
although in a Person distinct from the Father, and the Holy Ghost; they all
agree in the apparition of the same God; but they doubt to pronounce what
Person it was; neither will I: but leave this question to the judgment of the
learned Reader, and proceed to show some reasons why Eusebius (alleged by the
Commenter) and our Fathers thought, that only the Son appeared to the
Patriarchs, and not the Father.

Because the Orthodoxe, or Catholic Church did constantly believe, and
confess, that only the Son of God, or second Person, did take upon him our
nature, and became the Son of Man, and that only he was God Incarnate, he
only was born of the Virgin, and conver^ed with the posterity of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob on earth, and only that Person suffered on the Cross, and
died for us; and that neither the Person of the Father, nor the Person of the
Holy Ghost, can be aid, or truly believed to have taken our nature on them,
and to be bo^n of the Virgin, nor to be the seed of the woman, o^ the seed of
Abraham, or the Son of David, nor to have suffered for Man's redemption: And
because all the apparitions of God in the shape of Man, mentioned in the Old
Testament, were but Types and prefigurations of the real Inca^nation of the
Son of God to be exhibited upon promise, in the fullness of time.

Therefore Eusebius, and other Fathers thought, and said, that it was God in
the Person of the Son only which appeared Typically, for that only the
Person of the Son was really to be Incarnate* and that neither the Person of
the Father, nor the Person of the Holy Ghost, did appear to the Patriarchs in
humane shapes, because neither of the^e Persons were to take our Nature on
them, for the work of redemption.

And that this is a fair probable reason may appear, in that the Orthodoxe
Church condemned the Heresy of those that were called Pa^rispassiani, which is
called by Saint Cyril (...): id est, The confounding Cyr. Hier. car. 4
of the Persons of the Father and the Son: which Heresy is recorded not
only by this Eusebius, Eus hist. l 7. c. 4. 5
and by him called the Heresy of Sabellius, but also before him, and before
Sab^llius, by Tertullian, and called the Heresy of Praxeas; and after
Eusebius, Tert. de haer and contr. Prax. Soc. l. 2. c. 15
by Saint Basil. Nazian. Epiphanius, and Augustine. The Heresy is described by
Socrates, The Sabellians are condemned, for saying that the Trinity is only
three Names, and but One Person, for so they affirm that the Father suffered.

Now, I desire the Commenter, to tell us why Eusebius might not say, that it
was (at least sometimes) the Person of the Son which appeared to the
Patriarchs, and not the Person of the Father, as well as all true Christian
Churches do to this day affirm and believe, that the Person of the Son was
^ncarnate, and suffered, and not the Person of the Father; For though the
Church does acknowledge that the Father and the Son are the same God; because
we do not divide the Substance, yet we say, that the Father, and the Son are
not the same Person, because we will not confound the Persons.

The poison which this Commenter would infuse to weaker souls, by saying, that
Eusebius would not have the Angel which appeared to Abraham to be the supreme
God, (which Eusebius never said) is to make men believe, that there is a great
and lesser God, or else that Jesus Christ, is not the One, Only, and very God;
the affirming whereof, is that blasphemy, which himself says, shall not be
forgiven unto men.

CHAP. VII. Of the Incarnation of God the Son, and the reason and purpose why
he was Incarnate.
THe Mystery of the Incarnation of God is frequently in Scripture set forth
unto us, when the Savior promised, is said to be the seed of the woman, the
seed of Abraham, Emmanuel, the Son of David, the Word made flesh, taking the
form of a servant, and most evidently of all Heb. 2. 14 taking part of the same
flesh and blood with us men. And yet this commenter tells us [ that Christ can
not be said to be Incarnate, 31. c. 2. v. 14.
though both of them are confessed to partake of flesh and blood] a bold
assertion, but false, and dull, untheological, unphilosophical; for here are
two Propositions, both false, and one of them blasphemous also.

I. The faithful are not Incarnate.]
Faithfulness, or unfaithfulnes do not hinder Incarnation, the question must be
whether a man may be said to be Incarnate, if every man prove Incarnate, then
must Christ also be so, for he is a perfect man, and more also, a very small
matter will give a denomination, a man that has but a gown on his back is
denominated T^gatus, and shall not he who has an immortal soul united with
his flesh be called incarnate? to be incarnate, is to be in Carne (i) in the
flesh I hope you will not deny that the soul of a man whilst it is in the
body, may be said to be Incarnate; the soul of a man can exist without the
body, and is seperable, and when it shall be parted from the body then it is
Discarnated, but when it is joined with the body who will doubt to say it is
incorporated, or incarnated? now from the Incarnation of this principal, and
essential part of man; the whole man is said to be Incarnate; S. Paul knew a
man -- whether in the body, or out the body he could not tell. 2 Cor. 12. 2.
surely a man in the body may be called Incorporate, and so, Incarnate, and Gal.
2. 20. the life which I now live in the flesh] S. Paul says he lived in the
flesh, in Corn therefore he thought himself incarnate, and again, Phil. 1. 22.
If I live in the flesh abide in the flesh is more needful for you,] S. Paul is
one of the faithful, and he confessed that he lived, and abode in the flesh,
therefore he was in Carne -- incarnate. I never read that a beast is called
incarnate, because the body, and soul of a beast cannot both exist, if
separated, as man's soul and body do, and therefore the fathers spoke of them
as of two distinct men, Care, and anima, duo homines, exterior, and interior
Amb. de Inst. veig. l. 2. n. 35. Naz. Epist. 94, n. 38. Ath. de Incar. n. 23.
Tert. de anim. c. 9. Men's cujusque, is est quisque Tul, in. Some. Scip. To. 7.
14. 1 Cor. 2. 14.
(i.) the soul and the body, two men, the outward, and the inward man. Apud
nos Philosophus, and Anima vocantur externus, and internus homo, (i.) The
Philosopher with his soul, are called by us, the outward and the inward man,
just so says Athanasius, and Tertullian, although he went too far in saying
the soul was corporeal. If any the soul a man be denominated Animatus, shall
he not as well from his flesh be called Carnatus. I am sure in Scripture a man
is called both. (...). Carnal, and (...); Animalis, because he has some of the
natural inclinations of soul and body in him, not wholly subdued by the Spirit.

If we will speak strictly, and properly, Incarnation must principally be
said of the Soul, because that part of us in its own nature is incorporeal,
but being joined with the flesh, becomes Incarnate, it seems by Moses
description of the Creation. Genesis 2. 7. that the body of man was framed before
the soul was insufflated, and both Or^gen, and diverse Philosophers before him
thought that the soul was more ancient then the body, and they called the
body the sepulcher and Theod. de div. decret. l. 5. n. 17. Ambr. Epist. l. 4.
n. 53. id. in Hex. l. 6. c. 6. Tert. de anim.
prison of the Soul, and the Christian writers said of it to the like purpose,
one calls it Tunicam Pelliceam Adami, and again. Caro est amictus animae and
another calls it Domum animae, and another vestimentum animae, and says that
the soul is but inquilinus corporis, (i.) the body is the coat of skin, the
apparel, the house of Chrysostom. ho. 5. Antioc.
the soul, and the soul is but a temporary inmate of the body, the departure
of the soul, is like the putting off the apparel of the body: the 2.
souldier-martyrs in id. Epist. ad Olymp. n. 39.
Chrysostom calls their bodies. Indusium ultimum, (i.) the innermost garment
of the soul, and of the holy woman Olympics he said That she was more ready to
put of her body for Christ then others were to put of their apparel; wherefore,
as when our naked bodies, are invested with garments, they are said to be
apparrelled, so our souls clothed with our flesh are said to be Incarnate: the
Apostle describes* the reuniting of our souls and bodies at the resurrection,
by this phrase of putting on immortality, then I think no Christian will
deny, that when our souls after a long discontinuance from our flesh, shall be
restored, and reunited with our bodies, they may be said to be Incarnate, or re
Incarnate, and the same kind of reasoning will much more prove the Incarnation
of our Lord Jesus against the Commenters second proposition. viz.

2. Christ the Captain of the faithful is not Incarnate.]
Because the Ingredients of which our Jesus the Emmanuel is Composed are two,
viz. the divine nature or Godhead, and the humane nature or manhood, and
because one of these ingredients, I mean the Godhead, had a real and separate
being by it self, without flesh, and without a body, from all Eternity before
the creation of the world, and because the same divine nature in the fulness of
time did assume an humane body, and so partake of our flesh and blood, I may
now well say that our God is Incarnate because he is in carne in the flesh, so
that his Godhead and manhood are as the principles and ingredients of one
Compound, for they are but one person, one Christ, one Emmanuel, because that
divine nature which before had bin entire and single by it self, is now joined
with another inferior nature, the Scripture expresses the mystery in this
phrase. Joh. 1. 14. The word was made flesh.] he says the word rather then the
Son, because the word signifies his pure Godhead but the Son may also signify
his humane nature, and that alone too* for if Christ were nothing but a mere
man yet he might be called the Son, but he could not be called the Word. This
is that which in Scripture is called. God manifest in the flesh. 1 Timothy 3. 16.
and Christ is so said to be in the body of his flesh. Col. 1. 22. And after his
incarnation the time is called the days of his flesh. Heb. 5 7. And he is said
to be sent in the likeness of sinful flesh. Romans 8. 3.] not that his flesh was
not real, or but a mere similitude or phantasme ( as the Manichees said,) but
it was real, and pure without sin, yet like unto our flesh which is sinful,
surely S. Peter^ thought Christ to be incarnate, when he said Christ has
suffered for us in the flesh. 1 Pet. 4. 1. I desire this Commenter who denies
this, to consider Soberlie what the divine Apostle S. John has said to this
point more then once 1 Ioh. 4. 3. Every Spirit that confesses not that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God; and this is that Spirit of
Antichrist whereof you have heard that it should come, and even now already it
is in the world.] Thus is this place now read and again he says 2 Ioh. 7.
Many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh* this is a deceiver, and an Antichrist. The fathers spoke in
the same manner of the Godhead to be Incarnate in the flesh of Christ, as they
spak of the incarnation of an humane soul in an humane body Corpus Domini est
vestis regia, Chrysostom. to. 5. ser. 65. Atha. Disp. in Nic. Council. n. 27. Aug. de
Civit. l. 18. c. 35. Eusebius. Emiss. n. 32.
(i.) the body of the Lord his garment royal, and Corpus Domini est amiculum
dei -- and Caro est amictus verbi, (i.) the flesh of the Lord is the garment of
God, and upon those words Mal. 3. 1. The Lord shall suddenly come to his^
Temple] S. Austin expounds thus, In Templum, id est in Carnem, (i.) by coming
into his temple is meant his coming in the flesh, and ^hristi vestimentum,
humanitas est qua divinitas induta videri non poterat, (i.) The garment of
Christ is his humane nature, which covered his divinity, as garments do our
bodies.

The reason why our Commenter denies the Incarnation of an humane soul is (as
I imagine) because he thinks the soul dies wiih the body. And shall rise
again at the resurrection of the body, and that it has no existence but only
in the body, and the reason why he denies the Incarnation of Christ is, because
he does not believe Christ to be God from Eternity, but that he has his
beginning from his humane birth, and that after his resurrection he was
Deified, for his forerunners the Arians said that Christ was but a God made,
that is, all one with Deified, that this Son of God was not equal to the
Father in Eternity, in his answer I trow he will resolve that question which
S. Austin asked the Arians. Quot annis precedit Deus Pater Aug. de 5. her. to.
6. n. 6.
filium suum? (i.) how many years was God the Father older then God the Son?
or how long was the Father, God, before the Son was God? in the mean time we
will rest satisfied in the sure word of God who says. Esa. 43. 10. Before me
there was no God formed neither shall there be after me: we read that by God
the Word all things were made. Joh. 1. 3. time is a creature, therefore it was
made by him, and he was before for if time, time were before the Son of God,
then could he not be called The first borne of every creature Coloss. 1. 15.

The reason why the Son of God did take upon him our nature, was because he
would in our stead, as a surety and undertaker both perform the whole Law,
and also sustain all the penalty of our transgressions, of which more
hereafter.

CHAP. VIII. More reasons, why the Son of God was Incarnate, how, and when he
became our suetrie, the Aeternal covenant explained; distinction of Persons in
the Godhead.
THe Supreme, and Eternal ^od* in the person of the son did for man's
redemption, ^^k^ man's nature upon him, not because God had no other way by
which he could have saved us, but because he would not save us any other way;
for we know that the same God who saves man by taking man's nature, did, and
still does preserve the blessed angels in their estate of glory, and from
falling, by his power, and gracious goodness, although he did not take upon him
the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham. Heb. 2. 16. The
Church never taught tha^ God could not have saved man without the Incarnation
of his Son, but the contrary. Athanasius says a Poterat Deus^sine adventu
Atha. cont. Aria. ser. 3. n. 7.
Christi peccatum solv^re verbulo suo, (i.) God could have remitted our sins
with the least word, though Christ had not come in the flesh; for if an earthly
King can save his subject; who has by the law forfeited his life, could not
the Omnipotent King have saved mankind by his power? for who can resist his
will? But then, why did God give his Son to take our nature on him? To this it
may be answered, that albeit the Son of of God was Originally a mere gift, and
from the free grace of God to mankind, yet accessarily, it became a debt, and
due to man, so that God was bound in Justice to give his Son, because God had
by his promise and Covenant engaged and bound himself so to do, for although
his mere mercy, and goodness moved him to make such a promise, yet when he had
once promised, his justice and truth required the performance of that promise
Deus dignatur promissionibus suis debtor Aug Confess. l. 5. c. 9
fieri (i.) God vouchsafed to make himself a debtor to, or by his own
promises, and having so made himself a debtor to man, how could he without
violating his word and promise, forbear the performance.

But where does this promise appear, and how shall we know that the Son of
God became an undertaker, and suert ^ for us men? and when was this Covenant
made for the mystery of man's redemption does depend upon the Covenant, and by
it the Son of God did engage and bind himself, out of his free and mere grace
to become a suertie for man, therefore before I proceed any further, this
Covenant must be inquired after, as the chief evidence of Christ's ingagment.

It was an old question moved either by some scoffers or curious persons, what
God did before he made heaven, and earth; unto which some made answer with a
jocular reproof G^hennas parabat alta Scrut^ntibus, (i.) he made hell for such
seekers: but S. Austin liked not Aug. Conf. l. 11. c. 12.
this answer, but said libentius respondeo, nescio, quod nescio. (i.) I would
rather, answer, that I know not. So in that book of Cic^ro, which was called
Hortensius, but is now lost, this objection was made against the unity of God.
Si Deus unus est, quae ^sse beata Solitud^ Lact de fall. rel. l. 1. c. 7.
qu^at? How can that one God be aeternally blessed and happy, If he be alone
and Solitary? Solitarines is rather an argument of sadness, then of joy; to
this, Lactanius answers tanquam no^ qui unum^sse dicimus, desertum Id. ibid.
1 Cor. 8. 4.
and solita^ium esse dicamus? (i.) although we say that God is one (for so the
Scriptures tell us 1 Cor. 8. 4. there is none other God but One) yet we do
not say that this God is so forlorn, and solitary as to have no society, for
he h^th Ministers whom we call his angels, thus he, but this answer does not
fully satisfy, for shall we say God was alone and Solitary before angels or
any other Creatures were made? The full answer therefore must be this, that
before any creation, and at the creation and after it; God was, and still is
but one, one I say in essence, and Godhead, but yet not only one, and alone in
person. Pater and filius duo sunt persona, unum Atha. Orat. Cont. Aria. n. 8.
di^^ate. (i.) the Father and the Son are two in persons, though but one in
Godhead, for when the Son of God says, The Father and jare one Joh. 10. 30.
Athanasius Atha. Dis. cont Arian. 27.
observes that he does not say. Vnum sumus, but unum sumus, (i.) it is not
said we am one, singularly, but plurally, we are one, one for essence, but
more for persons, and in another place the Substantive word Elohim signifying
God, is plural; and the verb is singular Genesis 1. 1. as is before noted; both
ways to signify an unity in Godhead but a plurality of persons; and the Son
of God says expressly. Joh. 8. 16. I am not alone, but I and the Father, and he
calls himself and the Father, two witnesses. Surely, If the Son be said not
to be alone, and to be another, neither can the Father be said to be alone,
although both are but One God, yet they are distinct persons, for did not God
manifest himself in three distinct persons, Severally, at one time. Math. 3.
16. The Father in a voice, the Son in the flesh, and the Spirit like a dove?
Nay did not the Spirit at one time manifest its self in many several cloven
fiery tongues. Act. 2. 3. And yet there is but One Spirit. S. Hilarie, to this
point very acutely says. Deus est non solus, sed tamen Hill. de Trin. lib. 7.
unus, Deus est unus, tamen non solus, essentia unus, pro personis non solus.
(i) God is but one and yet God is not alone, for he is indeed one in essence,
but he is not alone because in God there are more persons then one. Now
although we detest the blasphemy of. Marcion, Tert. Cont. Marc. l. 5. Aug. de
Morib. Eccles. l. 1. c. 10. Basil. Epist. 8. Naz. Orat. 37. page 7. c. 1. v. 6.
and the Manichees who said there were two Gods, and also the Calumny of the
Arians and the Macedonians, Who called the Orthodox* Church Tritheitas, (i) Men
that worshipped three Gods because they confessed three Persons in One God; yet
we reject the heresy of the Sabellians, who acknowledge but one Person in God
(as is showed before) just as our commenter does call the Godhead, the Person
of God, as if there were but one Person in God But because there is in him a
plurality of Persons, therefore we say that God neither is, nor ever was alone
or solitary, for the three Persons, for ever had Communion, Communication,
Society, and fellowship one with the Other, although they all are but one God,
as of one in the comedy it is said. Socia Ego Plaut. Amph. 2. 1. and Cap. 2.
1. and stich. 5. 4.
ille -- Sc^o me te esse, and te esse me -- -- Ego sum tu tu es ego. And in S.
Ambrose a young man says Amb de Paenit. l. 2 c. 10.
of him self. Sed ego non sum. (i) One speaks of himself as if he were
another, and speaks of another, as if he were himself. So Moses brings in
the self same one, and only God 'speaking to the same God, because God is
distinct in Persons, but the Persons are but one in Godhead -- let there be
light -- let us make m^n -- the Lord rained from the Lord, by which it
appears that there was a Communication between the Father and the Son before
the World was, for the Son is called the Counselor. Esa. 9. 6* and the
wisdom of the Father -- But who should God consult with, but only with God,
and who was his wise Counselor but himself. Nemo tibi suadere potest
Sapientius te ipso, -- Tul. Epist. l. 2. 17. Id lib. 10. Ep. 194
Ipse tibi sis Senatus. (i) It may more truly be said of God. None are Gods
Counselors but himself, he is his own Senate, God the Father and God the Son
Communicate in Counsil, as the Father made all things by the Son, So they
communicated not only in the creation, but also in the divine Counsil of the
great work of redemption, although the manner of this communication is to us
secret and in effable.

Now to the Question. What one thing do we find, that was Consulted on, or
agreed, and purposed between the Father and the Son, before the World? I answer
that the Eternal Covenant, was made between the Father and the Son, to man's
behoof, before the World, and in this everlasting Covenant of grace, was the
whole Mystical body of Christ included, and by virtue of that Covenant, and in
Christ, they were Predestined, decreed, purposed, and Elected to life, and by
that Covenant so transacted seccretly, the Son of God undertook for man, and
became a suertie for him to perform whatsoever was required, and by this first
Covenant, the Church was committed to the Son, he thus became her great
Shepherd, for we read. Joh. 10. 29. The sheep were given to him by the
Father; This Covenant is that great and hidden Mystery which so nearly
concerns both Jews and Gentiles, of which it is said. Romans 16. 25. To be
kept secret sine the world began, and again Ephesians. 3. 4. 5. 9. the Mystery of
Christ which n other ages was not made known unto the Sons of men as it is now
-- That the gentiles should be fellow heirs -- but it had bin bid in God, but
now is might be made known -- According to the Eternal purpose which he
purposed in Christ Jesus. And hence it is that Christ is called the Great
Shepherd through the blood of the everlasting, (or Eternal) Covenant. Heb.
13. 20. By this Eternal Covenant, or Eternal purpose, and undertaking, God the
Son became the Suertie, the Mediator, and Advocate for the Sons of men and by
reason of this undertaking it is said, that for the blessed, the Kingdom was
prepared from the foundation of the World. Mat. 25. 35. And it is further said
that the precious blood of Christ was fore -- ordained, before the foundation
of the World. 1 Pet. 1. 19. 20.] But I ask how could the blood of Christ with
righteousness and equity, be so ordained. If Christ had not freely, and
voluntarile thus engaged himself, who could compel him thereunto, or did not he
who is the wisdom of the Father fore see the bloody Passions which such an
undertaker must undergo? or what claim could the Sons of men have, to chaleng
any interest in his actions, or Passions, but only by this covenant and
engagement? and how could it be said Ephesians. 1. 4. God has Chosen us in him
before the foundation of the World? And how can in be said 2 Timothy 1. 9. God --
has saved us, and called us -- according to his purpose, and grace which was
given us in Christ Jesus before the world began.] Unles man be considered, and
looked upon in Christ, through this Covenant, because thereby the Son of God did
engage and oblige himself to the Father in man's behalf to perform the whole
will of God, which should be required of man; for therefore is the Son called
the Angel, or messenger of the covenant. Mal. 3. 1. Because he was the
Mediator, sent, interested, and employed both in the undertaking, and in the
performance of that secret Covenant, of whom it is also written. Psalm. 40. 7.
In the volume of thy book it is written of me that I should perform thy will,
or that I delight to do thy will. Thus because Christ had undertaken for us,
and therefore was by his promise to perform the will of God for us, hence it is
that all our salvation is in, and by and through him, and all the promises of
God to man are in him, and for this reason it is said. Tit. 1. 2. That God
promised Eternal life before the world began.] But to whom could it be promised
before any Creature was made, except only to the Son of God? and why to him,
but because he only had engaged himself in this Eternal Covenant; and because
our transgressions were fore seen, that they would deserve death, and that our
suertie in the payment of our debt must needs suffer death, therefore this our
suertie is called. Rev. 13. 8. The Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world. see John. 17. 5.

CHAP. IX. The Covenant between God and Man, the Legal and Evangelicall
Covenant are but one; the reasons why Christ was Circumcised, and Baptized.
BY what has bin said, it appears that the Son of God was indeed secretly
engaged to the Father for mankind before the world was made, and so secretly,
that it is said, Col. 1. 26. That it had bin h^d from ages and genera^ions: But
how shall it appear that this Son of God engaged himself to Man? Where shall
we find his word and promise to be an undertaker and surety for us, so that we
may faithfully and boldly lay hold on, and challenge his promise?

I answer, that after the Creation, God the Son entered into the same Covenant
wirh Man, that he had engaged himself in, to the Father before the Creation,
and by this, renewing the same Covenant, he bound Mankind to himself, as himself
had bin bound before to the Father, and that diverse and sundry times. For
first, the words of the Covenant between God and the Son, and Mankind before
the fall were these:

Genesis 2. 17. Of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of
it, for in the day thou eatest, thou shall surely die.] In this Covenant on
Gods part life is promised implicitly, and on man's part, obedience is
reftipulated or covenanted, for to this condition, Man had submitted, and given
consent as appears Genesis 3. 3. So that this was a perfect Covenant on both
sides, the Tree of Knowledge standing as a visible figne for man's obedience;
and the Tree of Life, as a Sacramental sign of Gods promise.

But after the fall of Man, the same God did again more evidently, and
particularly engage himself when he said of the seed of the woman, Genesis 3. 15.
It shall bruise the Serpents head.]. In this promise the Incarnation of God in
the seed of the woman was meant, and that therein he should take upon him the
curse, and death formetly denounced; by offering himself a sacrifice for sin,
the outward signs of this Covenant were the sacrifices, wherewith the Patriarks
did signify and nourish their faith in that promise.

3. After this the same Covenant was again renewed to Abraham more particularly,
Genesis 12. 3. In thee shall all Families of the earth be blessed, etc.] and then
came in the Sacrament of Circumcision.

4 After this again, the same Covenant was more largely given to, and published
by Moses, in the Law Moral containing Man's duty, and in the Law Ceremonial,
declaring Gods promise of Redemption, by the Figures, Types, signs and shadows
of Tabernacle, Priest, and sacrifices.

5 After this again, the same Covenant was more clearly delivered in the
Gospel, by the same Lord God, and most graciously explained, and the vail taken
off from it; for then it was showed, who was that seed of the woman, and that
seed of Abraham, and that sacrifice; and Lamb of God, which should take away
the sins of the world, and how man should be enabled to perform the Covenant
and Law of his God, namely, in that Christ his surety should perform all in
man's behalf, with this condition only required of man, to believe in this
Jesus his God and Savior; for so the Evangelicall Covenant declares, John 3.
16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believed in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.] And again, Mark
16. 16. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, but he that
believes not, shall be damned.] This is the one, and only, and everlasting
Covenant of Grace; there are not two Covenants, but only this one both before,
and since the world began.

Now if any man ask why there is mention of a new Covenant?

I answer, it is called a new Covenant; because the old Covenant is renewed;
just as we say there is a new Moon, when it is but the old Moon newly
enlightened, which is but Nova lunatio, (i.) a new illumination: Tert. cont.
Marc. l. 5. Id. cont. Marc. l. 4.
So the same Father said of Christ, O Christum, and in novis veterem, (i.)
Christ in the New Testament is the same with Messiah in the Old Testament. We
may as well say, that the Sunrising is a new Sun, which being but one, and
rising daily, and diversely Catul. car. 5. Virg. An. 1.
is called Soles, as if there were many Suns: Soles occidere and redire possunt.

Quid tantum Oceano properent se tingere Soles Hiberni -- For, the same
Covenant which before was clouded with obscurity, and with Types in the time of
the Law, shines brightly in the time of the Gospel. But why then do Divines
call this Law-Covenant, the Covenant of works, whereas the Gosple-Covenant is
called the Covenant of Grace?

I answer, that this one Covenant is both, for if the Law of God be not
actually and perfectly done and performed by man, viz either by us our selves,
or by Christ, or surety for us, we can have no benefit by the Covenant: so in
respect of Christ, it is a Covenant of works, but to us, it is a Covenant of
Grace.

But it may be said, that the Evangelicall Covenant is called a better
Covenant, Heb. 8. 6.

I answer, the same Covenant is called better, because it is bettered, and
better explained, and setforth with better evidence of graciousnesse in the
Gospel, then before, when in the time of the Law it was clouded, and clogged
with shadows, types, figures, and troublesome Ceremonies, but now it shines
clearly, and is also quitted of that heavy yoke, then it outwardly appeared;
but as (...), (i.) a pact or mutual Covenant, but in the Gospel it appears to
be (...), (i.) a Testament; and albeit the Law is also called a Testament, yet
it is but as the Will or Testament of a man, which is indeed written and
sealed, and testified, but not in force, because the Testater was not actually
dead.

But in the Gospel this Old Testament (being the same in substance) is newly
become to be in full force and virtue, because Jesus Christ the Testator died,
Heb. 9. 17. so it became in force; for Christ who was but promised in the time
of the Law, and died there but in types, was really exhibited, and really died
in the Gospel; and although the Evangelicall Testament is set forth with a
condition annexed, viz of believing; yet this condition is also in this New
Testament bequeathed; for Ephesians. 2. 8, Faith is the gift of God, and yet Faith is
that Law of which it is said, Jer. 31. 33. I will put my Law in their inward
pares, and write it in their hearts; and the same is repeated, Heb. 8. 10. So
the new Testament requires the condition of believing, and the Testator in his
Will, has given to man what he requires of man. The brief of all is, that the
same God who in Paradise engaged himself, that the seed of the woman, should
bruise the Serpents head, has himself taken upon him the seed of the woman,
and in that seed became our Jesus.

If after all this, the Christian shall yet desire further evidence, to inform
him more, and assure and confirm him in Christ's engagement and suretyship for
us men; as if his Word, Promise and Covenant, weee not sufficient to give rest
and contentment, to our wavering and timorous hearts: see how our most
compassionate and merciful Redeemer has yet further condescended, not only to
enter a covenant in our behalf, but also to seal the said Covenant, and thereby
openly declare himself to be a debtor with us, both for the principal; that
is, the fulfilling of the Law, and also for the penalty.

1 Upon our default and transgression, and this he did by the first seal of his
Circumcision, whereby he bound himself as a debtor to perform the whole Law;
and this in behalf of all the circumcised seed of Abraham: and this Mystery is
clearly set forth by the great Apostle, Gal. 5. 3. For I testify again to
every man that is circumcised, that he is a debtour to do the whole Law.]

Secondly, as by the seal of Circumcision, Christ underwent the burden of all
the legal precepts: So by the other Seal of his Baptism, he undertook the
performance of all the strict Evangelicall Precepts, in the behalf of all the
Baptized Christians; for so himself declared, though something covertly: for
when John Baptist refused to baptize him, Christ bade him, Matthew 3. 15.
adding this reason -- For thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness.]
Upon which words Saint Hierome observes that he did not say, Hier. in loc.
Justitiam Legis, (id est,) the righteousness of the Law only, but all, that
so we may understand that Christ undertook to fulfill both Legal and
Evangelicall righteousness, even in those strict Precepts of Love your
enemies, bless them that curse you, pray for them that persecute you, Deny
your selves, etc. These were the reasons for which our Savior submitted to the
Sacramental seals of Circumcision, and Baptism, thereby to be a surety bound
and engaged for us: And so the ancient Expositours understood it, Circumcisus
Anselm. in Gal. 5. 3.
est debtor faciendae universae Legis, sicut qui Baptismum percipit, and
debtor faciendi praecepti Evangelici; (id est,) As the Circumcised is a
debtour to do the whole Law; so the baptized is a debtour to perform the
Precepts of the Gospel: and this also was the judgment of Saint Basil, Sicut
Circumcisus Basil. de Bapt. l. 2. n. 18.
est debtor Legis servandae, sic Baptizatus, totius Evangelii, etc. And
although the Pelagians denied the necessity of Baptism, for taking away
Original sin; yet Coelestius could confess that Children were redeemed by
the Baptism of Christ; and this was only because by his Baptism he undertook
for us to perform the Evangelicall Covenant.

Finally, all that Christ did undertake to do for us men, that has he
punctually performed, partly by his Obedience active in fulfilling all
righteousness, and partly by passive Obedience, when he suffered the penalty
of our transgressions, pouring out his soul, and his most precious Blood upon
the Cross, there paying the utmost farthing of our debt, when our selves were
not able to pay one for a thousand.

This Doctrine understood rightly, will reconcile those two sayings of Saint
Hierome, Maledictus qui dicit Deum, impossibilia praecipisse. 2 Maledictus qui
dixerit legem esse possibilem, id est, Cursed is he that says, God commanded
things impossible, and cursed is he that says the Law of God is possible. The
meaning is, That Law which is impossible to be performed by us, or any mere
man, was performed for us by the Son of Man. For our sins were laid upon him,
and his righteousness is imputed to us, which Mel. Dav. in vita, Luth. p. 164.
Luther expresses in these pithie words: Domine Jesus -- tu^e Iustitia mea, Ego
sum peccatum tuum, (i.) man gave his sins to Christ, and Christ gave his
righteousness to Man.

CHAP. X. That Man could not be redeemed, nor saved, but by the Incarnation of
the Son of God, how the curse was executed on Man, and how the Law is
fulfilled by Man.
BUt could not our Lord Jesus having thusas a Surety and Mediator undertaken
for us, and for our salvation: I say, could he not have effected our immunitie
from punishment, and our blessedness by entreating as an Advocate for us, and
by that great power and favor which he has with the Father, obtain both
remission and pardon of our sins and salvation freely, without those bloody and
grievous passions, which he suffered on the Cross; and this only by speaking,
entreating, and pleading for us in Heaven, and there showing and offering
himself for us] As this P. 84. c. 5. v. 7. and page 160. c. 9. v. 7.
Commenter would have us believe? and if he could, what need was there that God
the Son should undergo such bitter and cruel torments, and death also?

To this I answer, (that as things then stood) God could not otherwise save us,
but by the Incarnation, yea, and the death of his Son, because (as is before
showed) God has limited, and bound, and confined himself by his own word, his
Law, his Decree, and Covenant; for by his sentence and determinate judgment he
had denounced death, and a curse to our first Parents, and in them to all their
Posterity. Genesis 2. 17. In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die:
and Ezech. 18. 4. The soul that sins, it shall die: and Romans 6. 23. The
wages of sin is death: and Deuteronomy. 27. 26. cursed be he that confirms not all
the words of this Law to do them, and Matt. 5. 19. Whosoever shall break one of
the least of these Commandments* -- shall be called the least in the kingdom of
God: and James 2. 10. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one
point, he is guilty of all. We see, that here is a curse, and death denounced
to all transgressors of the Law, and this curse and death must needs fall upon
Mankind, because God is true and just, and righteous.

But suppose the transgressors of the Law could escape the curse and death
denounced, yet how should they obtain life eternal, seeing that is not
obtained, but by the perfect and exact performance of the Law of God, which no
mere man of all the sons of Adam has, or can perform: For the Condition or
Covenant for life is, Levit. 18. 5. Keep my Statutes -- which if a man do, he
shall live in them: so Ezech. 20. 11. Romans 10. 5. Gal. 3. 12. and this is
confirmed by Christ. Matthew 19 17. If thou will enter into life keep the
Commandments.

These considerations being premised, let us now move the question, cannot God
assoil men, and give them eternal life, at the request only of Jesus Christ;
although Jesus had never suffered the pain and death of the Cross?

I answer, That God cannot absolve man from sin without satisfaction to his
Justice, his Truth, and Righteousness. I may say, God cannot do this as well as
the Scripture says, Tit. 1. 2. God cannot lie. And 1 Samuel 15. 19. The strength
of Israel will not lie: for as Saint Austin has truly said. Diabolus non fuit
superandus potentia Dei, Aug. de Trin. l. 13. c. 13.
sed justitia. i. (as things then stood) The devil was not to be conquered by
the power only, but by the Justice of God. And therefore before man can be
redeemed, and absolved, the curse and death denounced must fall upon man for
transgressing the Law (...) of his God, and before man can enter into (...)
Commandments of God must be perfectly (...) by man. Now if we can show, that
the just sentence of God in the curse, and death has bin fully executed on
man, and that the Justice of God has had its full course; and if we can show
that the whole Law of God has bin most exactly performed by man, and all this
by no other man, but only by the great Son of M^^ Jesus Christ being God
Incarnate; and for this reason incarnate, that he might as an undertaker and
surety for mankind, both take upon him the curse, and suffer death by
obedience passive, and also perform ever^ title of the Law by active obedience;
and this for us, and in our stead, and that our transgressions were imputed to
him and his righteousness in performing the Law is imputed to us, and that by
virtue of the Covenant most justly, and that man's redemption and salvation,
could not otherwise stand with the truth and righteous judgment of God. For as
Athanasius says, Verbum Atha. Ser. 3. cont. Arian. 6.
nunquam destinatum fuisset fieri homo, nisi hominum necessitas requisisset.
(i.) the Son of God had never been ordained to be made Man, if man's necessity
had not so required.

All this being undeniable, I trust the Christian Reader, does apprehend the
reason, why our true and only God, must needs have been incarnate, for the
working out of man's redemption, Justification, and salvation.

CHAP. XI. That Christ was a person able, and fit to perform the law, and to
suffer for manking, and that he did stand in the place and stead of all men.
We have seen what Christ has undertaken for us; But it must next be
inquired whether Christ were a person able, and fitly qualified to perform
what he undertook, viz. to take away the sins of the world; and indeed Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, perfect God and perfect man was a person able and every
wayfitly qualified, for performance of the truth of God both in suffering the
punishment, and in performing the whole law of God, in the behalf of man; for
as man is a Mi^rocosme, or an abridgment of the great world, as Austin says,
Omnis creatura in homine est. (i) in man Aug. l. 83. quaest. n. 87.
Every creature is comprised. So Christ is the Epitome of mankind, and to be
esteemed an Universal man, in as much as ^^rist the head, and all his mystical
members, ar^ one mystical body as has bin showed before. Christus universus,
est caput cum membris. (i) the whole Idem. ibidem. quaest. 69.
Christ is himself the head, and his Church the members, for if the first Adam
be esteemed as all mankind, why should not the second Adam be so much rather
accounted. S. Austin says of the first man Omnis homo Aug. Retract. l. 1. c.
15. Abm. de Obitu Satyri. n. 29. Pros. resp. ad Cap. Gall. c. 9.
^errenus, est Adam. (i) All men earthly are one Adam and of Christ S. Ambrose
says as much. in Christo, Summa universitatis est, and portio singulorum. (i)
Christ is the ^otal sum of all men, and a portion of every man, and Prosper
gives this true and excellent reason of it. Nullus est hominum, Cujus natura
non erat suscepta in Christo. (i) There is no man in the world, whose nature
Christ took not upon him, and therefore the Scripture calls Christ the last
Adam, as well as the first man is called the first Adam. 1 Cor. 15. 45. And yet
more expreslie it says. Gal. 3. 28. Ye are all One in Christ Jesus. And so
again. 1 Cor. 12. 12. And indeed we are rather nearer of kindred, and by a
better tie to the Second then we are to the first Adam; not because Christ and
we, are the Sons of men, which cannot be said of Adam, who was Terrae-Filius,
the Son of the earth, and not the Son of man; but Omnes nati ad primum, renati
ad secundum Pros. sent 299.
pertinent. We derive ourworse carnal Generation from Adam, but our better,
and spiritual regeneration is derived from Christ; and as there are no Sons of
Men, but such as are so from Adam, so there are no Sons of God, but those that
are so from Christ.

Now if it be demanded, how Christ and we can be accounted one, and what it is
which came from Christ, and is in man, that so he may be said to be in us, and
so, that what he did, or suffered, should be really, accounted as done or
suffered by us, for although we know why Adam's sin is imputed to us, viz.
because we are of the same Lump, propagated carnally from him but yet why
Christ's righteousness, o^ his sufferings should be imputed to us seeing we are
not propagated from Christ, nor ever were in his loins, as we were in Adams
is now the question; To which this is the arswer, that as Christ received* his
flesh and blood from man, so man has received the divine Spirit from Christ,
and as the natural body of Christ is made of the same lump of Adam, that our's
is; so man has in him the self same spirit that is in Christ, though he be in
heaven, and we on earth, by which spirit we are called the Sons of God, just
as Christ by taking our flesh is called the Son of Man. Nos homines vocamur
filii dei, quia filius dei Atha. in decret. Nic. Conc n. 13.
nostrum gestavit corpus, and quia Spiritus filii in nobis est. (i) Men are
called the Son of God, because the Sons of God took his body of man, and put
his own Spirit into man, and therefore Christ does fitly sustain an Universal
person of mankind.

That the Spirit of Christ is given, and put into man, the Scriptures do
manifestly declare* First it appears evidently in the regenerate? Man of
sueh S. Paul speaks. when he prays. Ephe. 3. 17. That Christ may dwell in
their hearts: And how Christ may be said to dwell in Man, Saint John shows, 1
John 4. 13. Hereby we know that we dwell ^in him, and ^e in us, because he has
given us of his Spirit; and hence it is that Saint Chrysostom says, Anima
sancta est Tabernaculum Chrysostom ho 2. Antioch.
Christi: (id est,) The soul of an holy Man is Christ's Tabernacle: For indeed,
though Christ had not at all assumed flesh from Man; yet because the same
Spirit which is in Christ, is also so put into, and communicated to man, it is
sufficient to make Christ the head of the Saints, his Members to be but one
mystical Body with him. And this is intimated by Saint Paul, when he says,
Ephesians 4. 4. There is one body, and one Spirit:] which is as much as if he
should say, though the Saints on earth are many, yet because all are endued
with one and the same Spirit of Christ; therefore all are but one body with
Christ, even as in man, there are many parts and members, yet because all parts
have the same soul in them, therefore all together are but one body.

Hence it is, that Origin says, Omnes salvandi sunt Orig. in Eze. ho. 9.
unum Corpus: (id est,) All those which shall be saved, are but one body: and
Saint ^asill gives this reason, of their unity.) Quia unus est Deus, si in
singulis Bas. Epist. 141.
sit, omnes coadunat: (id est,) Because, there is but one God, if this one God
be in all, he does thereby Tert. de Trin. n. 28 and Christus est ecclesia. De
Paenit. n. 16*
unite all; and this unity is also expressed by these odd words in Tertullian,
Spi itus nos Christo confibulat: (id est,) It is the Spirit that does button us
or join us to Christ.

For this reason the Scripture says, Romans, 12. 5. We being many, are one
body in Christ; And again, 1 Corinthians 6. 17. He that is joined to the Lord,
is one Spirit: And again, Galathians 3. 28. Ye are all one in Christ Jesus;
yea, such is our conjunction and union with Christ, and his with us, by reason
that his Spirit is in us, that Theodoret doubted not to say, Si pati possit
Theod. in D^alog impatib. n. 13.
divina natura, supervacanea fuisset corporis assumptio: (id est,) If the pure
Godhead were of a nature passible, so that it could have suffered for man, God
should not have needed to be Incarnate.

And Saint Augustine puts the case a little plainer, and nearer, thus; Si
Christus non assumpta carne a Virgin, sed vera tamen apparens, nos vera morte
redimeret, quis eum non potuisse, audet dicere? Suppose Christ had not taken
his flesh from the Virgin, (and so not from Adam) but yet had really taken a
body upon him some other way; and in that assumed body, had really died to
redeem man* who dares say, that he could not? and no doubt such a suffering had
been sufficient for our redemption, if (as I said before) God had not otherwise
determined and limited himself by his sentence of the curse, and death upon the
seed of Adam.

And thus we have seen how Christ and the Saints are united and become one body.

SECT. II. More of the same. That Jesus Christ was a Person every way fitly
qualified to be Man's Redeemer; both for that he was free from all sin,
Original and Actual; (although he took flesh from the loins of Adam:) and
also in regard of the infinite worth and excellency of his Person.
THe qualities required to a redeeming high Priest, are set down, Heb. 7. 26.
For such an high Priest became us who is holy, harmless, ((...)) undefiled,
separate from sinners. For if Christ were not absolutely without sin in his own
Person, he could not be a fit sacrifice for our sins: the Lamb of God must be
answerable to the paschall Lamb his Type, A Lamb without blemish and so the
Scripture describes Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 19. as a Lamb without blemish or spot;
and that he knew no sin, that he did no sin, and that in him 1 John 3. 5.
is no sin.

As for any actual sin, there will be no question among Christians; but the
difficulty is in showing Christ to be without Orig^^^l^ (...) because he was in
the loins of Adam when he fell, and is the Son of David, of Abraham, and of
Adam, and the Church has ever acknowledged that the whole lump of Adam is
Prosper. Resp. ad Genu.
Massa corruptionis, as Prosper says: and Aug. Epist. 105, and 157. De Civit.
l. 15. c. 1. and alibi.
Massa damnationis, -- V^nculnm damnationis, -- Apostatica rad^x, -- Massa
originaliter tota damnata as S. Austin often confesses, in all these words,
and many more; id est, a corrupt lump, -- a lump of damnation, -- an Apostate
root, totally condemned from the the very Original. The Apostle also seems
to lay this to the charge of Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 21. He has made him to be sin
for us, and Romans 5. 12. Death passed over all, for that all have sinned; And if
Levi be said to have paid Tithes to Melchisedech, because he was in the loins
of Abraham, how shall Christ be excused from falling, seeing he was in the
loins of Adam when he fell?

For the clearing of these difficulties, three questions are to be discussed.

1. What the Original sin of Adam was. 1. Question.

To this, the answer is, that the Original sin of Adam is twofold:

1 He eat the forbidden fruit against Gods command* This was the first sin of
Mankind, and is by Divines called, Originale Originans, i. The fountain of
other sins. This sin was also an actual sin in Adam, and cannot be said, to be
derived from him to his posterity; for his children cannot be said to have
eaten of the forbidden tree: But yet his posterity are subjected to the curse
denounced against Adam, and in him against his whole race, and that curse is
mortality: Genesis 2. 17.
In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die. Christ did not in Adam
eat of the forbidden tree, yet Christ being of Adams race, was thereby liable
to the curse: so the Apostle says, that Christ was made a curse for us. Gal.
3. 13.
He was made a curse, only by taking that flesh on him which was derived from
Adam, and in him was accursed; for in taking the flesh, he took also the curse
but not the sin of Adam, the curse passed without the Romans 5. 12.
sin. For whereas the Apostle says. Death passed on all, for that all have
sinned: The meaning is, that all men that have sinned and die, do therefore die
because they have sinned; But it will not follow, that whosoever dies has
sinned: And yet it is true, that the death of our righteous Savior was caused
by sin; Albeit not his own proper and personal sin. And this is the
determination of the Ancients. Christus mortalitatem traxit de substantia, and
mortalitate Maetris, sed non peccatum: Aug. cont. Julian. Pelag. l. 5.
( id est,) Christ derived his mortality, from the substance and mortality of
his mother, but without sin* therefore the Apostle says, Romans 8. 3. God sent
his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, which the same Father thus
expounds. In carne peccati mors est, and peccatum in similitudine, mors erat,
and peccatum non Aug. de verb. Apost. Ser. 6.
erat: (id est,) In sinful flesh there is both death and sin, but in the
likeness of sinful flesh, death there was, but sin there was not. The flesh of
Christ, was like other men's, flesh, sin only excepted; he had his flesh from
Adam, so had we, but his was derived without Adams sin, so was not ours.

2. The second sin of Adam, is called Originale Originatum; because it was the
effect produced by his first sin, in eating the forbidden fruit: Therefore it
is called Originatum.

And because it was the Original Fountain, from whence sin is conveyed to
his Posterity; therefore it is called Originale. For as we now use the word
Original sin, it is not meant of Adams first sin of eating but of that
which was occasioned, and produced by his first sin, and from him transmitted
to all his posterity, which (by way of natural generation) proceeded from his
loins.

So Bellarmine observes; If our Original sin had Bellarm. de ^ Amiss.
Gratiae l. 4. c. 3.
been from the eating of the forbidden Fruit, the Apostle must have said, by
One Woman sin entered, and not per unum hominem; For the woman did first eat:
Now, this Original sin, (besides the absence of Original Righteousness,
wherein Man was created:) is moreover an inherent pravity, and corruption of
our nature, and is called lust or concupiscence; and is therefore called
Original, because it is conveyed into us at our very conception, and so is
born with us: Now I proceed to the second question, and that is.

2. How Original sin is derived 2. Question.
from Adam, to all his Progeny.
The Answer is, That therefore the Original sin of Adam, is from him derived
into his Posterity, who have proceeded from his loins, by way of natural
Generation; because, such as Adam was, when he begot children; Such are his
Posterity so begotten; for Adam did not beget children, until he was the
servant of sin: a Therefore every man is the Pet. Diac. apud Fulgent.
servant of sin.

For this reason it is said, Genesis 5. 3. Adam begot a son in h^s own likeness,
after his Image; And in what sinful condition Adam was, before he knew Eve,
and begot Children, is evidently set forth* Gen* 3. 7. 10. The eyes of them
both were opened, and they knew they were naked, and they made them apro^s: And
after, I was afraid, because I was nak^d, and hid my self. But before the fall,
it is said, Genesis 2. 25. They were both naked, the Man and his Wife, and were
not ashamed.

From which passages we may observe, that whereas it is said, their eyes were
opened The meaning is, that they were opened so, as not only to see; (for so
they did before, unless we will say they were blind) but to discern and
perceive the difference between their Innocence before the fall, and their lust
after the fall: for before, they were not ashamed of their nakedness. Quia nil
praecessera^ quod Aug. De Nup^iis, and concup. l. 1. c. 5.
non li^eret, nil se^utum fuerat quod puderet: (id est,) No unlawful act had
preceeded, therefore no shame as yet insued.

Next* we observe, that they made them aprons. (P^rizomata) The Latins call
such covers, Campestria, which served to cover their secret parts only;
because when the Roman youths exercised themselves naked in the fields, they
covered their secret parts; so the covers were called Campestria. By this, it
appears that our first Parents perceived motions of lust in those parts, and
therefore were ashamed.

Adam, and Eva texerunt genitalia, erubuerunt de libidine, Aug. ib. l. 2. c. 5.
vide^t inobedientia membra: for if otherwise, why, did they not cover their
faces, breasts, and hands? But Quia senserunt pudendum, curaverunt Id. De Temp.
Sermon. 45.
tegendum. Since which time those parts are called Pudenda, which were not so
before the fall; and therefore the Apostle abstaineth from naming those parts
dir^ctly, but calls them uncome^y; and the Vulgar 1 Cor. 12. 23.
translation calls them inhonesta.

The Apostle durst not so have called those parts, which God had created pure,
if Man had not by sin dehonestated them. So that now we may not name them.

But, Per circuitum; and when necessity forces Martial. l. 11. Ep. 16.
us to speak of them; modesty requires that we speak by Circumlocution.

If the Apostle, had been to describe such a body as our first Parents had
before the fall, he would not have called any part thereof unhonest, or
uncomely.

So the result of all this, is, as Saint Augustine observes: Aug. De Genesi ad
lit. l. 11 c. 32.
Bestialem motum in membris, scilicet, appetitum concumbendi erubuit. And
again, Quendam pruritum turpem indicant folia; (id est,) The Figleaves show
that Adam was ashamed of his lust, appearing in those parts.

This is that Original sin in Adam, which by Generation is transmitted to
his Posterity, and which the written Law of God forbids. in these words,
Thou shall not lust or covet. So I proceed to the third question.

3. How Christ is freed, and separated from 3. Question.
Original sin.
To this question, the answer of Divines both Ancient and modern is. That
Original sin is not propagated to posterity, by taking our flesh from our
parents, but by lust; and that because Christ was conceived, and born of a
Virgin without Lustful copulation, therefore he is free from this Original
pollution. Nulla volup^ate carnalis concupiscentiae seminatus est Aug.
Ench^rid. Cap. 4^. and De Genesi ad lit. l. 10. c. 18.
Christus, id o nullum peccatum originaliter trahit. And again. Corpus Christi
non seminatum est per eam legem in membris, quae repugnat legi mentis, Ergo non
erat caro pecca^i. (i) The body of Christ was not generated in the pleasure of
lust, by the law in our members warring against the law of our mind, therefore
his flesh was not sinful. The same reason is rendered by Fulgentius, and also
by Isychius. Christi Christi humanitas munda erat, quia non Fulg. de Incarn. c.
4. Isych. in Levit. c. 14. Calv. instit. l. 2. c. 13. S. 4. Aug. cont. Pel. l.
2. c. 25.
geni^a erat ex viri immunditie (i.) The humane nature of Christ is clean,
because he was conceived without unclean copulation.

Indeed Calvin is of opinion, that it is not sufficient to acquit Christ from
this original pollution, in that he was born of a virgin, but because he was
also Sanctified by the holy Ghost, that his conception might be pure, before
him S. Austin had written something to that purpose. Christus carnem il^am, aut
suscipiendam munda^it, ^ut suscipiende mundavit. (i) That Christ, before ^e
took that flesh, or in taking of it did purify it. But the former opinion, and
this compared with the Scripturall words, will amount but to one, and the same,
for what can be meant by Calvin's Sanctified but that the flesh of Christ was
separated from the polluted way of other men's flesh? And what separation can be
meant, but only, that Christ was conceived in a way different, and Separate
from ordinary Conceptions? And that is, miraculously, by the operation of the
Holy ghost without man; and this I take to be the meaning of the Apostle before
alleged Heb. 7. 26: That our high-Preist must be separate from sinners. For to
Imagine that the Holy ghost did take away carnal pollution from that part of
the Virgin mother of which Christ was made flesh, and yet left the said
Original pollution remaining in the other parts of her, to me it seems both an
unprobable, and a needless refuge to this question. And whether God does any
time take away the pollution of Original sin from any person, in whom it once
was, during this mortal life, I have at large showed before, in my second book
and tenth Chapter, and that the taking See before. l. 2. c. 10. sect. 2. 2 Cor.
12. 8.
away of Original sin, was that very thing which S. Paul prayed for so
earnestly, and had only this answer. My grace is sufficient for thee.

Finally, because the first man was made of earth; and the first woman was made
of man, and both before lust was hatched, therefore both were at first free from
this Original pollution, upon which consideration Aquinas Aquin. l. 2. q. 81.
art. 4.
moves this pertinent question. If now a man should be miraculously made of
another man's flesh, whether he should contract Original sin? His answer is,
no. upon good reason, for such a creature is not procreated by way of carnal
copulation. I suppose no man will affirm, that worms which are bred in humane
bodies, do contract any sin from man, although they take flesh from man. The
same reason is appliable to Christ, and therfo^e, Origin upon S. Luke. and
Austin very often Orig in lu. ho. 14. Aug. in ps. 22. and De mirab. script. l.
3. c. 2.
apply that saying of the psalmist. Psalm. 22. 6. I am a w^^m and no man] as
being spoken of Christ, because as a worm, so Christ was bred in the virgin's
womb without any copulation, for therefore some birds, bees and worms are so
bred, that Christ might not be without example, who in the Psalm. is called a
worm. This I trust is enough to the three questions.

Now for answer to those Scriptural sayings, which seem to charg Christ with
sin. As; He has made him to 2 Cor. ^. 21. Aug. cont. Max. l. 2. c. 2.
be sin for us] which place was by Maximinus, the Arrian thus perverted.
Christus pro nobis peccatum fecit, as S. Austin notes. (i) Christ did sin for
us. If we should understand this of any personal sin in Christ, then should we
charg God with being the author of sin. But the meaning is only, that God made
Christ a Sacrifice for sin; for sacrifices are called sins. Hose. 4. 8. They
eat up the sin of my people. That is; the priests did eat the sin offerings.
That which we now read Levit. 3. 2. He shall lay his hand upon the head of the
Sacrifice. The Septuagint, read, He shall lay his hand upon the head of the
sin. So, from hence, no more can be inferred, but that Christ Aug. in Psalm. 68.
was* Peccatorum Susceptor, non commissor* as S. Austin expresses it. Christ
is thus factus peccatum, non natus, he is only made sin, as a sacrifice, but
all we are sinborn, to him sin is only imputed, but in us it is inherent.

To that of Romans 5. 12. Death passed on all, for that all have sinned. The
answer is, that all, who by way of natural generation proceeded from Adam, have
sinned, as is showed before, indeed, death is the wages of sin. Either of our
own proper, and personal sin; for which we are mortal, or else of Imputed
sin, by which Christ was subject to mortality.

To that of Levi. Heb. 7. 9. who is said to pay tithes to M^lchisedech because
he was in the loins of braham. And that therefore Christ being in the loins of
Adam when he fell, may seem liable to that transgression of Adam: we say if
this objection were formed in words which signified propagation of sin (which
is now our question,) the solution would appear more evidently: as thus. Levi
was in the loins of Abraham, when Jsaac was begotten; therefore Levi sinned in
Abraham's loins; this cannot be denied. So Christ was in the loins of Adam;
when Seth was begotten* (Seth was Christ's progenitor) Therefore Christ sinned in
Adam. This consequence is false, because Christ did not so proceed from Adam,
as Levi did from Abraham, that is, by way of carnal generation, and therefore
Christ did not attract sin from Adam, as Levi did from Abraham, so, as is said
before. But yet because Christ took flesh from Adam therefore all the pressures
included in the curse on Adam, were intayled on Christ (sin only excepted) as,
mortality, and the consequences thereof, sorrow^, labor, wearines, hunger,
abasement, and subjection.

T^^e it is that Abraham paying tithes^oo Melchisedech (which was in the nature
of an homage, or political submission, and acknowledgment as holding the Land
of promise to him and his seed by the donation of the Lord of Heaven who is the
Messiah) he did in this act include all the tribes which were to proceed from
him, to submit as homagers to the said Messiah represented in his type
Melchisedech, even as earthly Lords, and their successors do homage to their
superior princes for lands held of them. But what is this to intayling of sin?
Original sin is not derived to posterity by any such external acts. I doubt not
but Christ himself, as man, and as the seed of Abraham, was involved in this
homage, Mat. 17. 27. See beneath. l. 3. c. 17.
and therefore did actually pay tribute, and submit to the law as other
Israelites did. Of which tribute paying, and also of the difference between
Levies, and Christ's being in the loins of Abraham, I shall say more in the last
chapter at the close of this third book.

Now for conclusion, that it may appear, that our savior is a complete
high priest, every way accomplished with all abilities, and requisits needful
to the great work of man's redemption; of him it is spoken Psalm. 89. 19 I have
laid help upon One that us mighty, who Psalm. 89. 19. Psalm. 132. 2. 1 Pet. 1.
19. Act. 20. 28. 1 Cor. 15. 47. 1 Timothy 3. 16. Isa. 9. 6. Joh. 20. 28. 1 Cor. 2.
8. Heb. 7. 26.
is no less then the mighty God of Jacob. The blood which he shed for us, is
justly by S. Peter called Precious for it was the blood of God. This second
Adam, Incarnate for us, is no less then The Lord from Heaven, and God manifest
in the flesh, and The mighty God, the everlasting Father, the prince of peace;
he that was wounded for us, is called by the Apostle, my Lord, and my God, he
that was crucified for us, was no less then the Lo^d of glory, and in his very
humiliation of the humane nature, he was holy, harmless, undefiled, and
separate from sinners. To him be all honor and glory and thanksgiving for
ever.

CHAP. XII. That the unregenerate man is redeemed by Christ, and that the
Spirit of Christ is communicated to him.
BUt in the second place it would be inquired, what Interest the unregenerate
man has in Christ, and how he can lay any claim to Christ's sufferings, for
although it be true that Christ has taken the unregenerate man's nature on
him, yet, may we, or can we truly say that the unregenerate man has received
the Spirit of Christ into him? If this will not be granted, Christ cannot be a
person idoneous, or fitly qualified to be his redeemer, because as such a
redeemer must take something from man, so man must also receive something from
him, that by giving and taking the redeemer and redeemed may be united, and so
considered as one body, and that must be by receiving the Spirit from Christ,
as Christ received flesh from man, which is elegantlie expressed by Prosper in
his poem. Vt nos insercret Summis, se miscuit Imis. That man Prosp. de Ingrat.
n. 41.
might be joined unto God, God joined himself with man. Now it seems that the
Spirit of Christ is also communicated to the unregenerate man, because we find
in Scripture that he also has an interest in Christ, and a claim and title to
him; for the Scripture declares that the benefit of Christ's death, and by it
redemption is offered to all men of what condition soever, whether good, or
bad, regenerate, or unregenerate, believers, or unbeleevers; for the Gospel is
sent to all the world, and to every creature Mar. 16. 15. and One of the maine
points of the Gospel, is the offer of the benefit of redemption by the death of
Christ, of which the Scripture says 2 Cor. 5. 15. that he died for all, so,
Romans 8. 32. and 1 Timothy 2. 6. and again Heb. 2. 9. He tasted death for every
man; here is the benefit of Christ's death offered Omnibus, and singulis (i.) to
all, and every man: and more particularly, it is offered to the ungodly. Romans
5. 6. Christ died for the ungodly: and more plainly yet it is offered to them
that shall perish, and be destroyed, for S. Paul says 1 Cor. 8. 11. Through
thy knowledge shall thy weak brother perish, for whom Christ d^ed? and again he
says* Romans 14. 15* Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ died; And to
put it out of all doubt, that Christ did indeed offer the benefit of redemption
to them that not only may possibly perish, but even to such as actually shall
perish; S. Peter says 2 Pet. 2. 1. There shall be false teachers, which deny
the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction,] false
teachers are the most unlikely to have any benefit by Christ, for* * Rev. 20.
10. the devil, the beast, and the false Prophet are joined in the lake of fire
and brimston, and yet we see, the benefit of redemption was offered to false
Prophets. This is the Doctrine of the Church of England, and so it was of the
Church Primitive as appears by diverse testimonies; for S. Ambrose says.
Ethnicus, haereticus, peccator sanguine Amb. in symb. Apost c 25.
Christi, redempti sunt. (i) Not only the sinner, but the heathen, and the
heretic are redeemed by the blood of Christ, and Athanasius, delivers the
same doctrine not only as being his single opinion but as the judgment of the
Council of Sardice. Deus pro illis (Arr^anis) Ath. in Ep^st. synodi Sardic. ^
n. 15.
and pro nobis omnibus mortem subiit. (i) God who is the president of the
Church, did suffer death both for the Arrians, and for all us, and yet no
heresy is more opposite to redemption by Christ then the Arrian, and this is
also set forth by Nazianzen. Arriani, divinitatis acerbi Naz. Orat. 38
expensores, diaboli figmenta* -- pro quibus Christus mortuus -- ingratae
Creaturae. (i) the Arrian's are the most malicious examiners of Christ's
divinity -- and yet Christ died for these unthankful creatures, who are the
figment of the devil, but most home is the judgment of S. Chrysostom. Christus
mortuus est pro inimicis, pro tyrannis, Chrysostom. hom. 76. Constant. n 24.
pro maleficis ((...)) pro Osoribus, pro crucifigentibus, atque pro his ipsis,
quos tales fore, ante mundum conditum sci^ebat -- praescientiam vincente
bonitate. (i) Christ died for his enemies, for tyrant-persecutors, for witches
and conjurers for those that hated him, for those that crucified him, and for
those whom he foresaw, before the world, that they would be such, yet his
foreknowledge did not hinder his goodness toward them, but that he offered to
them the benefit of his death. Now if yet any man desire to know upon what
ground the unregenerate man can lay claim to any benefit by Christ. I answer,
that the reason and ground of this claim is because the unregenerate man's
nature is taken into Christ, as well as the regenerate man's, and I say
moreover, that the Spirit of Christ is communicated to the unregenerate man, as
truly as it is to the regenerate man, although with a great deal of diversity
in operation as shall be showed hereafter.

That the Spirit of God, (which is the spirit of Christ) is communicated to men
unregenerate, the Scripture evidently declares; for if the Spirit of God do
fill heaven and earth as the Prophet Jeremie says. Jer. 23. 24. Who can
imagine that the same Spirit is not in man, which is in Creatures inferior to
man? and the Gospel says Joh. 1. 9. He enlightneth every man that comes into
the world.] Therefore unregenerate men are not without the light of the Spirit
of Christ, and again Act. 17. 28. In him we live, and move, and have our
being] for infinitenes of Gods Spirit does include all ereatures. Deus est in
Creaturis intra and extra and supereminens, and Hill. de Trin. lib. 1.
circumsusus, and infusus. Says Hilarie (i.) God is within us, and on our
outside, and over us, and round about us, whersoever any life, or motion, or
but being is; there is God: for God is not only a being of himself, but he is
the Essentiator, that communicates being to all Creatures. Eusebius, gives
this excellent reason of it. Eus. de praep. l. 15. c. 11.
If there were not (says he) one lively power, which insinuates it self into
every creature in the world, this vast universe could not be so rightly, and
prudently ordered by such uniforme and mutual correspondence of one part with
another, when the whole consists of such contrariety of parts. S. Paul in
his sermon at Athens Act. 17. above mentioned, approves of the saying of an
heathen poet who said that men are the Offspring of God; he said so no doubt,
because even heathen's confessed that our very being is from him, and our
souls and motions are actuated by his Spirit. It is worth our observing, that
as the genealogy of S. Matthew deriveth Christ from Mat. 1. Luc. 3.
men descending, down from Abraham; so S. Lukes Genealogy deriveth men from
God, by ascending upward, and whereas S. Matthew uses the words [ begat and
the Son] S. Luke uses not these words in the Original, because men are not the
natural Sons of God, so as they are of their carnal parents, but yet they are
of God so as ^s said; in effect S. Mathews Genealogy deriveth the flesh of God
from man, and S. Luke deriveth the Spirit which is in man, from God, this was
the Doctrine of the ancient Fathers: S. Besil says. Omnia Basil. cont. Euno.
lib. 5.
creata participant de creatore nam m^s^ra essent si a creatore dirimerentur
(i.) all Creatures participate of the Creator, for most miserable would the
Creatures be if they were Dionis de diu. no. c. 3.
served, and disjoined from their Creator. Dionysius Areop. says, Deus est in
Omnibus rebus, sed and extra omnia. (i) God is within all Creatures, and yet he
is also on the Theod. de Prove. Ser 10. n. 27. Clem. Romans Recog l. 8.
outside of those Creatures. and Nulla mundi pars deo destituta est (i) no part
of the world is destitute of God, and again. Deus est intra nos, sed
infidelibus dormit, and absens dicitur, quia non creditur. (i) God is within us
men, and is even in infidels although he is said to sleep, or to absent
himself from them, because they Fulg. ad Thras l 2 n. 8.
do not with faith apprehend him: Fulgentius also says, Deus ades^ ub^que per
potentiam, sed non ubique per gratiam, substantialiter nullibi deest. (i) God
is every where by his power, his substance (or Godhead (...) no where absent,
though his grace (Sanctifying grace he id. ibid. n. 9.
means) be not every where, and (...)* Substantialiter ubique est (...). (i)
The (...) trinity is every where by their substances, and* Godhead* for when
it is said ^oh. 14. 23. We will come unto him, an^ mak^ our abede with him]
The meaning is, that the Father and the Son will manifest their gratiousnes,
and propitiousnes to be present, then when their Godhead is never absent, the
divine Spirit always filling all things, hence it is Atha. cont Apollinar n.
22.
that Athan^siu does call men (...), as he called Christ Deum Carnigerum (i.)
as God the Son bears man's flesh, so the Sons of men bear his Spirit in them.

From hence it is, that both Saint Cyprian, and Saint Cyp. ser. De Resur. Aug.
de Civit. l. 4. c. 12.
Austine say, from the Confession of Heathen Philosophers: Deus est anima
Mundi, Mundus est Corpus Dei: (i.) God is as the Soul of the World, and the
World is as the Body of God, and of the presence of God in Men. The same Father
says, Deus implet populum Aug. de. Civ. l. 17. c. 12.
suum, and p^pulus plenus est Deo suo: (i.) God does fill his people, and the
people are filled with their God. This truth was seen and confessed by the
wiser Heathens: Prope a te Deus est, tecum est, intus est: (i.) Seneca, ep. 41.
Ovid.
God is near thee, he is with thee, yea he is within thee: and Est Deus in
nobis agitante calescimus illo: (id est,) God is in us, and produces those
warm Spirits in us. And because there is but one God, and that one God is now
Incarnate, and bears the Name of Jesus: Therefore it must needs be the Spirit
of our Lord Jesus, which is thus said to be in Man, even in the unregenerate
sort of men, whereby all Mankind have at least a common interest in this Jesus.

This truth is of so great concernment and evidence, that it could not easily
be denied; and therefore both Heathens, and some Heretics, because they could
not gain say it, sought only to deprave it by an impious suggestion. For the
Stoic Philosophers, perceiving that there was something of Divinity in Man;
said, That the Soul of Man, was a part of God: and are therefore by Epiphanius
reckoned amongst the number of Epiph. haer. 5. and haer. 66. Theod. diu.
decret. l. 5.
Heretics; and so said also the Manichees; and before them, so did Marcion
teach us, as Theodoret notes: and the grand Heresy of Apollinarius, applied
this error to Christ himself, in saying, that Christ had no reasonable or
humane soul, as other men have; but, that his Divine Nature was in steed of an
humane soul* and supplied all the Offices thereof in the body of Epiph. haer.
77. Aug. n. 88. Soc. l. 2. c. 36.
Christ, as we read in Epiphanius, and in the Ecclesistick Histories, and in
S. Austine.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Original of Christ's humane soul, and whether it were
derived by Propagation from his Progenitors, as his body was.
THe mention of that Heresy* of Apollinarius, leads me to a new quaere, not
yet discoursed, but yet, (as I conceive) very useful and pertinent, to the
setting forth of this great Mystery of the Incarnation of God, and Man's
Redemption, if it could be clearly determined, and this it is.

That seeing the Christian World Catholic, has ever confessed that the Son of
God received his flesh and blood by propagation from the first Adam. It would
be now inquired, whence the same Son of God had his reasonable or humane Soul?

The reason which moved me to make this inquiry, is taken from the Arguments,
which diverse of the Fathers used against some Heretics, particularly against
Valentinus, and his Gnostick followers, and against the Manichees, and
Eutyches, for these taught, that Christ did not receive his Body by traduction
from the Virgin Mother, and so not from Adam, but that it was either from
heaven, or else that it was a mere apparition, and a fantastical body: which
Heresies are so well known to men learned, that I shall not need to send the
Reader by Quotations to Fathers to find them.

The Arguments which the Fathers used against those Heretics, were to this
purpose, that they might show a necessity, that the Redeemer must needs take
his flesh from Adam.

First, Saint Augustine says, Omnis massa Adami, Aug: De (...) cum Felic. l.
^^ c. 11.
maledicta est; Dominus carnem de illa suscepit, hinc maledictus dicitur. (i.)
Because the whole lump of Adam was accursed, therefore the Son of God (taking
the curse upon himself) must needs take flesh from Ad^m; for otherwise, how
could he take the cu^se upon himself* to cure mankind. And Theo^^^^ asks this
question, Theod. dial. 1. n. 12.
Why was not Ch^ists Body made of Earth as Adams was? And he returned this
answer. (...) Creature servaretur, quae perie^a: (i.) That Christ might save
the same creature which was lost, therefore he took the same creature upon
himself* and Athanasi^^s Atha. Epist. ad Epicter. n. 3.
strictly examining how man's curse could be fastened on our blessed Savior,
answers thus: Christus sic pro nobis execratio factus est -- sicu^ factus est
ca^o. (i.) He took our curse, as he took our flesh; and Saint Basil says
expressly, that the Heresy of Valentinus did nullify Man's redemption; for if
the flesh of Christ were not derived from Adam: Non occ^d^sset Basil. Epist.
65. n. 37.
peccatum in carn^; (i.) Christ had not destroyed sin in the flesh, and upon
this very g^ound, Dios^urus the Bishop of Alexandria, and Eu^yches the Monk
were condemned by the Council of Chalcedon, as Euagrius Euag. l 2. c. 18.
writes.

The self same kind of Argument does Naziarz^n use against Apollinarius, who
taught that Christ had no humane or reasonable soul, (as is said before) Naz.
ad Cledon. Orat. 51.
but that he took only flesh from Adam Deus assum^sit id quod salute
indigebat, etc. (i.) God took of Man all that which stood in need of salvation;
and therefore he took the humane soul also: For that fell, and needed help as
well as the Body. For if Christ had taken from Man only his flesh, and not his
Soul, he had done, as if a Man that has a fore foot, and a fore eye, should
apply a Medicine only to the foot, and neglect the eye -- besides Christ took
the whole and perfect Man upon him but the Godhead with a Body only is not
perfect Man, as neither could it be perfect man, if it were joined with an
humane Soul without a Body. -- But if you say, that God could have saved man,
though he had never taken an humane soul; so may you as well say, God could
have saved man, though he had not assumed a Body.] Thus far Nazia^zen.

From this discourse, I may upon the same grounds infer, That if Christ must
needs take his Body from man, because otherwise he could not destroy sin in the
flesh; It will follow by the like Argument, that Christ must needs take his
humane soul by traduction from man, for otherwise how could he destroy sin in
the soul? and then, though the body might be saved; yet the soul having no
medicine applied to it, must needs undergo the sentence; Ezech. 18. 4. The soul
that sinn^th, i^ shall di^: For the soul and body of man, are two distinct
natures, although joined in one person, just so as the Godhead and Manhood in
Christ are. Thus for ought I can yet see, the same reasons that induce us to
believe, that the flesh of Christ was propagated from the first man, may as
well prove that his soul must also be so transmitted throughout all Generations
to Christ.

Furthermore, because in Scripture phrase the natural soul of Man goes under
the notion of Carnal as well as his Natural body; for 1 Cor. 2. 14. (...),
signifies a carnal man, the very soul not regenerate is carnal, I do not
pe^ceive how the Incarnation of God, can be complete, but by his assuming both
soul and body from man; for otherwi^e, how can we say that he took the whole
man upon him, the denying whereof was by the Church judged an Heresy in the
Apollinarians. For they would not confess Christ to Naz. ad Cledon. orat. 5^.
be (...), id est, A perfect man having God in him, but they called Christ
(...), idest, God bearing flesh only, and this, because they believed not,
that Christ took our humane soul, but only that he took our flesh: and
therefore the Apolinarian is by Nazianzen called (...) id est, One that
worshipped a God, that had assumed nothing but flesh; And the Apollinarian in
derision said, that the Catholic was (...), (i.) one who worshipped a man.

Now although the Church of England does not expressly declare the propagation
of the Soul of Christ from the Virgin Mother, yet the second Article of
Religion, something implicit, seems rather to incline thereunto, for it
says,

First, The Word -- took Man's nature in the womb 1. Artic. 2.
of the blessed Virgin of her substance: so that two whole and perfect
Natures, (that is to say) The Godhead and Manhood were joined in one Person,
etc.] If the meaning be that Christ took perfect Manhood from his Mother, it
must needs follow, that he took both Body and soul of her; for neither of them
severally can be called perfect Man; and Master Rogers in his notes upon that
Article tells us, that it was one of the Arrian errors, who said, That Christ
took ^tha. de Incarn. n. 22.
only flesh of the Virgin, but not the Soul, and that some Arrians did indeed
so say, is affirmed by Athanasius.

Finally, if it can clearly appear that the Son of God did indeed take both
his flesh, and also his humain Soul by Propagation, from Man: it will be a
great consolation to Mankind, that the great God of Heaven and Earth, would
vouchsafe to be so completely near of kindred to us his poor creatures; and
hereby also a perfect and complete Incarnation of God will be proved against
this Commenter.

CHAP. XIV. The question of the Souls propagation left undetermined by Saint
Augustine, yet he thought it more probable that our souls are propagated from
our Parents.
I Will not presume (good Reader) to determine this great question because that
I find that the most profound Doctors of the Primitive Church; and after very
great and diligent discussion, yet left it dubitable, as may appear by the
Epistles which passed mutually between Saint Hierome, and Saint Augustine,
concerning this very question, which neither of them would absolutely determine
and conclude; either for the Soul of Christ, or the Souls of other men, for
that the Original of the Soul of Christ, was surely the same, with the
Original of other men's souls since our first Parents; and both alike obscure,
and hard to be understood: Only I will truly relate what has been thought
and said of it, especially out of Saint Augustine; who says, utrum origo
animarum Aug. n. 7. n. 18. n. 44.
sit ex uno illo (Adam) an semper fiant singulae si^gulis, adhuc nescio --
adhuc incertum, (i.) whether the souls of all men came from Adam, or whether
new souls for several men be daily created? as yet I know not -- and it is
uncertain.

And again, Nunquam ausus sum definitam proferre Id. Epist. 175. Id. Epist. 120.
sententiam: (i.) I never durst venture upon a definitive sentence thereof, and
concludes, Satius est ortum animae semper quaerere, quam invenisse praesumere:
(i.) It is safer to be always seeking, then to presume that we have found it.
And a great while after he said, Ego adhuc inter utrosque ambigo, vincant qui
poterant, (i.) Id. de Genesis ad lit. l. 10. c. 22.
I am still doubtful between those two opinions, prove either who can. And
although he confesses in the same book, that he would be more willing to
acknowledge, that Christ had not his soul from Adam, yet (says he) the other
opinion, that men receive their souls from their Parents, does preponderate and
turn the scale of my judgment. The same Father, for the probability of
propagation of souls from Adam, alleges many reasons.

For first, writing to Saint Hierome, Tell me (says Id Epist. 28.
he) if Souls are doyly created, and not transmitted from the Parents, wherein
have poor Infants sinned? and how are they involved in the sins of Adam, or
their Parents, so that they need the Sacrament of remission of sins?

But secondly, If it be said, that our souls are indeed derived from the soul
of Adam, then who can say, I have not sinned; seeing the Original soul of Adam
sinned?

Thirdly, It was the Argument which Pelagius used. If the soul be not
propagated as well as the body; then only the bodies (of Infants) are liable
to the punishment for Original sin; for it may seem very hard measure, that
so ancient a sin should be laid to the charge of a soul newly created, and
but one day old.

Fourthly, when the woman was made out of the body of Man, It is not said, that
God breathed into her nostrils the breath of life, as it was said of the man,
Genesis 2. 7. Perhaps to intimate that her soul was derived with het body from the
man.

Fifthly, Saint Augustine confessed, that to say that souls are daily created,
seeing God finished the Creation the sixth day, will seem a violent speech.

Sixthly, it is said, Romans 5. 18. By the offense of Aug. de Genesis ad lit. lib.
10. c. 11.
one judgment came upon all to condemnation ^ Now because only the soul
sins, (for the body is but the souls instrument) how can the soul that was
not created till so many generations from Adam are passed, be said to sin in
Adam, for what evil has the soul of a young dying infant committed, if his
soul were not derived from Adam?

Lastly, he grants, Non absurd ^reditur ^animas e Id. ibid.
traduce ^sse (^id est) It is no inconvenience to our Christian Faith, to say,
the souls of men are propagated from the first man. For it was indeed anciently
received by Christians, as a Truth long before Saint Augustines time, as we
find in Ter^ullian, who says Tert. de anima c. 27.
expressly, that Our souls came from Adam: and again, he says in the same Book,
Omnis anima censetur in Adamo, donec in Christo recens^atur: id est, Every Id.
ib. c. 40.
soul is first c^nsed or enrolled in Adam, until they be new enrolled, and
accounted in Christ.

And Saint Hierome, avoucheth this to be the opinion, Hier. Epist. ad Marcel.
apud Aug. Epist. 27
not only of Ter^ulli^n, but also that the greater part of the Western
Churches were of the same mind, that as our bodies are derived from the bodies
of our Parents, so our souls are propagated from their souls.

Even as millions of Ta^ers, may be tinded or lighted at one burning Taper, and
as all the Stars of Heaven, receive their light from the Sun, yet neither the
light of that one Taper, or of the Sun are any thing diminished.

So although the manner how our souls are propagated be inestable, yet De
facto, that they are propagated, is no way incredible, For why not the souls of
Men, as well as the souls of Beasts? and why may not the humane soul extend it
self into the child in the womb, as well as it does enlarge it self in a
greater distance into other parts of the body, as the body from its birth
waxes bigger from one cubite length of the Infant, to four Cubits at our
full growth; and this Doctrine of the Souls prop^gation, seems to stand with
a great deall of equity in our merciful and most just Redeemer, that as he
would redeem our bodies, by his own body taken from man, so to redeem our
souls by his soul so taken and propagated from man.

And this seems to be the Opinion of Athanasius, Atha. de incarnat* n. 23.
Corpus Chisti pro corpore nostro, and anima ^jus pro nostra, and integer homo
pro integro homine in Redemptione rependitur: (id est,) The Body of Christ was
given for our bodies, and his Soul for our Souls, and his whole Man, for our
whole Man in our Redemption.

Thus having said so much concerning this question; I submit the determination
thereof to the Judicious Reader only adding this, that if Christ did, indeed
take not only his Body, but the whole man by traduction from Adam; we may most
comfortably entertain a more evident and reasonable Argument of the Redemption
both of our bodies, and souls by him, because hereby we may conceive our
selves to be joined, and united unto Christ, in a more noble tie, then only in
our flesh, and that as he has communicated his Divine Spirit to Man (as is
showed before) so our humane Spirit is communicated to him.

CHAP. XV. That the Spirit of God is communicated to the unregenerate, and of
the diversity of the Measures, and the graces thereof.
IN the next place, I am to show how the Spirit of God is said to be
communicated to men unregenerate (as I promised before,) and this, because many
men are apt to believe, that to have the Spirit of God, is a grace proper, and
peculiar only to those that are the the Sanctified holy ones; but the contrary
will appear a none; for a man may have Gods Spirit in him, yea, and diverse
common gifs and graces of that Spirit, and yet remain unsanctified, and void
of virtue and holiness, Aug. de beat. vita n. 16.
S. Austin says. Omnis homo deum habet, nec t^m^n omnis beatus est, (i.) every
man has God in him, and yet every man is not in a state of blessedness; so
there is in every man a natural goodness (for every creature is good) and where
goodness is, there is God; though this natural bonitie may be mixed with a great
deal of moral pravitie, and the same Spirit of God works in all men, but yet
to several purposes, and with several Naz. Orat. 44.
operations, and in diverse degrees; Spiritas spirat quando vult, and super
quos vult, and quantum vult. (i) The Spirit blows when it will, and on whom
it will, and so much as it will, and though the Spirit of God be always in
man, yet men do not always perceive it, Aug. Confess. lib. 9. c. 4. Id. n. 88.
or consider it. S. Austin confessed. Christus miserat spiritum in me, and Ego
nesciebam. (i) Christ had sent his Spirit into me, and I knew it not, and
again he says ^git Spiritus Domini per bonos, and malos, per Scientes, and
nescientes, ut per Caipham. (i) The Spirit of the Lord works by good and bad,
by men that know it, and by men that know it not, as it did by Caiphas. Men may
have the Spirit of God, and Operations of that Spirit in them, and some graces
also of that Spirit, and yet those graces possibly, shall not be operative so
high as to Sanctification, neither are they such high graces, as divines call
Gratum facientes. But yet graces they are, for grace is but a free gift, and
therefore is it called grace because it is Gratis data. (i) freely given. There
may be grace in those persons who are not thereby rendered favorable, gracious,
or acceptable in Gods sight, for even our natural endowments, and temporal
blessings, and our very Creation rightly considered will appear to be an act
of Gods grace, and therefore men do usually give thanks to God for their very
Creation.

This doctrine of the great variety of graces, and workings of Gods Spirit is
most evidently set forth. 1 Cor. 12. There are diversities of gifts -- and
diversities of operations, but the same Spirit -- the same Lord -- the same
God. And you may find mention of many graces there which are not saving, or
sanctifying graces, but are Common even to reprobates, as knowledge -- healing
-- prophecy -- toungs. etc. Which we know may be, and are found in men not
Sanctified even the knowledge and skill of manual arts are the operations of
Gods Spirit in man, which no divine will say are saving, or sanctifying graces
as we read of B^zaleel, Ex. 35. 31. That he was filled with the Spirit of God
in wisdom and in all manner of workmanship. -- to devise Curious works, and
to work in Gold, Silv^^* and brass. Philosophers use to say, If heaven stood
still, man could not move so much as his little finger, but surely if God were
not Primus Motor in us, to be as the soul of our souls, we could not live, or
move, and though God be in man, and operateth in him, yet his operations are
diversified by diverse degrees, in some he works but weakly, and low: in
others higher, and stronger, even to produce holiness, and happiness; but though
the Spirit of God be in every man, yet this Spirit is not a Sanctifier in every
man, as he is not Paracletus. (i) a Comforter in every man; this doctrine has
bin taught of old by the ancients. Deus in est multiformiter Richard. de S.
Vict. de Trin. l. 2. c. 23.
secundum participationem Gratiae -- aliis per participationem potentiae, aliis
vita, aliis sapientiae, aliis bonitatis, aliis beatitudinis -- imanum suam
parcius, vel largius extendens. (i) God is in us by distributing his graces, in
great diversity -- some partake of power, some of life only, others have
wisdom, others goodness, others blessedness for so does he open his hand, more,
or less, as he pleases. The Spirit of God, in Scripture, is often resembled to
water, because, as the same water falling from heaven in rain upon several
Creatures, produces in them great diversity, and variety of effects. Aqua in
spi^is alba, in rosis rubra in Cyril. Hiero^. n. 18.
hyacinthis purpurea. (i) The same rain, in the thorn produces a white
flower, on the rose -- bush a red, and on the hyacinth a purple Color, So does
the Spirit produce diversity of effects in men, so again. Aqua in Aug. de
Mirab. script. l. 1. c. 18.
vite vinum ^it, in apibus mel, in Oliva ol^um. (i) Water in the vine is made
wine, in the Olive tree, Oil, in bees honey, in man, blood, tears etc. And the
like illustration is used by Epiphanius, and Chrysostom. To show Epiph. in Ane.
Chrysostom. ho. 4. Antioch.
that the same Spirit of the same God in some mea produces but life, or
understanding, in others it produces those effects, and more also, as wisdom,
judgment, counsel, in others, more also as faith, hope, charity, fortitude,
even to martyrdom, and to blessedness, the effect of Gods Spirit in Samson was
seen eminently in his great strength, in Solomon, it was great wisdom, in
Moses m^eknes, in the Prophets foresight, all these are gifts of one and the
same Spirit, though in such great variety, and when the Scripture mentions
diverse Spirits, as. Esa. 11. 2 Rev. 1 4 It means several gifts and graces of
one and the same Spirit; we may observe that Elisha, 2 Kings. 2. 9. did not
pray for two Spirits, but duplex Spiritus, that the same Spirit of Eliah might
be doubled on him, that is, increased, or heightened in him to greater power and
efficacy, and whereas David prayed Psalm. 51. 11. take not thy holy Spirit
from me] it will not follow that David feared, he should be left destitute
altogether of the Spirit of God, but that it might remain with him in some
degree at least, but he prayed for the Continuance, and Manifestation of Gods
help, and assistance by the Spirit in the same manner as before he had it,
because as Prosper observes. Cessatio auxilii pro absentia accipitur. (i) God
Pros. ad Them. n. 59.
is said to depart from man, when he withholdeth his help, albeit, God is
essentially always present, so when he withdraws one grace, yet he may
manifest his presence, by some other grace, for every man has not every grace
of the Spirit. S. Hierom in one of his exegetical Epistles upon these words. 1
Cor. 15. 28. That God may be all in all] says. Adhuc Deus est nisi pars Hier.
Epist. 147. n. 30.
in singulis, ut sapientia in Solomone, patientia in Job, post, erit omnia in
omnibus, cum Sancti omnes virtutes habuerint. (i) In this life God is but a
part in men, as wisdom in Solomon, patience in Job, but in the next life God
will be all in all, for then his Saints shall be induced with all virtues; And
whereas it is said Joh. 7. 39. The holy Ghost was not yet given] Yet we are
sure that it was given before both to the Prophets, and also to the Apostles,
but the meaning is as S. Austin expounds it. Non quia nulla datio antea, sed
quia non talis quae de Aug. de Trin. lib. 4. c. 17. n. 72
Linguis legitur. (i) Not as if there had bin no gift of the Spirit before, but
because the Spirit was not before given in that kind and manner, as it was at
the feast of Pente cost, and so does S. Cyril resolve the same doubt. Cyril
Hieros. Cat. 16.
Spiritus idem descendebat in Pentecoste, qui antea, sed tum Copiosius. (i) It
was the same Spirit that descended at the Pentecost, which came before, but now
it came more Copiouslie.

Thus are God and man united, he taking our flesh, and we receiving his Spirit,
upon this consideration S. Cyprian says. Cum Corpus ^ terra, and Spiritum
possideamus Cyp. de Orat. Dom. n. 82.
e caelo; Ipsi c^lum, and t^rra sumus. (i) Man is the union of heaven, and
earth, because our bodies are from the earth, but we possess a Spirit which
came from heaven.

CHAP. XVI. That the Spirit of God is given to men n^^ sanctified, how those
are said to be Gods anointed, who were not anointed with Oil, that our King is
Gods anointed, something concerning the Kings touching and Curing the diseased.
BUt why should we doubt to affirm that the Spirit of Jesus, our only Lord
God, is communicated even to men unregenerate, and that in such men this Spirit
does manifest it is presence in some lower degree, by some common graces, which
do not sanctify them, in whom they are; seeing that we find in Scripture,
that both heathen, and wicked Kings are called Gods anointed, for Esa. 45. 1.
Thus says the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus] yet this Cyrus, both lived, and
died an heathen. So King Saul, though an Israelite, yet a wicked man is called.
2 Samuel 1. 14. The Lords anointed, Now; we know, that Unction does not always
signify only an External, or Ceremonial anointing with Oil, but it signifies
also, the inward gift, and inhabitation of the Spirit of God, for we find that
those men are said to be Gods anointed, whom we cannot find, to have bin
externally anointed with Oil, for so Christ is said to be anointed. Psalm. 45.
7. Yet not with external Oil, so also Abraham, Jsaac, and Jacob Psalm. 105. 15.
are called Gods anointed, yet we find not that they were anointed with Oil,
but these holy ones are therefore said to be anointed, because the Spirit of
God was in them, which is the true, and real unction, whereas external ointment
is but the sign thereof, in like manner, because Cyrus an heathen is called
Gods anointed, and yet was never anointed with Oil, it must needs follow that
his unction was internal, and that he was therefore called Gods anointed,
because God had put his Spirit into him, I^say his Spirit although not working
so high as to Sanctification in Cyrus, but yet a Spirit of wisdom, and kingly
fortitude, and of skill and knowledge political and military, To enable him to
govern, which gifts are the effect of Gods Spirit. And this is the exposition
which the ancients give, concerning those forenamed unctions; first for Christ.
Eusebius us says. Non apparet Christum unctum fuisse communi oleo, sed divino
Eus. de Them. lib. 5. c. 2.
Spiritu. (i) It can not appear that Christ was anointed with common O^le
(Ceremonialie) but he was anointed with the divine Spirit, and so says
Athanasius Oleum Ath. Orat. 2. Cont. Arian. Opt. lib 4. Atha. Orat. Cont. Aria.
n 8.
Christi, est Spiritus sanctus. (i) The Oil of Christ, was the holy Spirit,
and just so says Optatus, and what this unction of Christ was, and wherein it
consisted is showed by the same Athanasius, upon those words God of God] unitio
verbi cum carne, vo catur unct^o. (i) The union of the Godhead, with the
manhood, was Christ's unction. Now for the anointing of mere men, and that
without any infusion of Oil Eusebius says. Dei Spiritus Eus. de Them. l. 4. c.
15.
est dei Oleum. (i) The Oil of God, is the Spirit of God, and he tells further
in the same place, that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are called Gods anointed.
Propter divinum Spiritum cujus participes erant. (i) By reason of Gods Spirit,
with which those holy patriarks were endued, and to the same purpose S. Basil
says, Spiritus Basil. hom. de Bapt. n. 14.
sanctus est unctio in nobis. (i) our unction is the holy Spirit which is in
us. For so it is said also of our Savior expressly Act. 10. 38. God anointed
Jesus of Nazareth, with the holy Ghost. The appellation of Christ, and of
Christian is from this unction, and we use to say of infants when they are
baptized, that they are made Christians, which signifies anointed, not because
of the old Ceremony of Crisme or ano^^ting with Oil (which with us has bin
long ago disused) but as Dionysius formerlie when it was in use, gave the
reason unction, and Christian signify deificam Spiritus communionem. Dionys.
Areop. eccle^. her. c. 2.
(i) The communication of the divine Spirit, because we believe, that God with
the external Sacrament, conferreth the inward grace; which belief the ancients
did represent by their anointing the baptized with Oil.

Now if it may app are that by virtue of such an internal Unction of which I
spoke in Cyrus, some unregenerate men, have actually exercised, and performed
externallie some one act, whereby that inward grace was showed, as namely by
that one gift of healing mentioned* 1 Co^* 12. 9. Of which I spoke in the
former chapter I trust it will not be denied to be as it is called v 7. A
manif^station of the Spirit. And for this I shall instance in another heathen
Prince who was of no better religion then Cyrus was, and that is Vesp^tian the
Roman, who in the reign of Nero, (and before he was Emperor) was employed in
the execution of divine vengeance on the rebellious vide Paulum Oros. lib. 7.
c. 1.
Iew^s and the city of Jerusalem; and for that service it may with great
pobabilitie be thought that God gave him the Roman Empi^e for his reward, as he
gave Nebuchaduezzar, the Kingdom of Egypt* for his service against Tyr^, as we
read Ez^ch. 29. 18. And that the Empi e was the gift of God to him, it seems
to me probable, because it was Prophetically foretold unto him by Josephus the
learned Jew, who was then a p^^i^t, unto whom God had revealed both Vespatian's
advancement, and also the destruction of the Jewish nation. God having appeared
to Joseph. de bell. jud. l. 2. and lib. 7.
him in his sleep as himself relates, and withal confessed that he feared,
God was offended with him for laboring to save his nation, when he knew God
had decreed their (...), for this reason I think I may call the said Ve^^^tian
Gods anointed, as being so clearly designed by God to that empire and also for
that, as an effect of his unction. Tac^us and Dion, and Suetonius do Tac.
hist. l. 4. c. 19. Suet. in vesp. c. 7. Dion. in vesp. c. 2. vide Plutarch. in
vita Pyrrhi, p. 384.
unanimously report that whilst this Emperor was in Egypt the gift of healing
was manifested in him for a blind man was restored to his sight, and a lame man
was cured by his touch, If this prove true in an unregenerate and heathen
Prince give me leave good reader, a little to discourse unto thee, the like
effect of divine unction, in a regenerate King, the most virtuous and most
Christian King this day (as I do firmly believe, and so do the greatest
number of his subjects) in the whole world I mean our own most gracious King
Charles.

For, that the King is Gods anoined, was never with us called in question
before this sceptick time, and God never showed a greater manifestation of any
Kings unction in this nation since the days of King Edward the Confessor, (who
was the first of our Kings that by his royal touch cured the disease called the
Kings Evil) then he has lately showed in the person of our most pious, and
most merciful King Charles, for never were so many, in so short a time
restored to their health and soundnes, as of late by him; many hundreds were
touched by his sacred hand, and as many returned home with health in their
bodies, and blessings in their souls to their royal physician, to the great
admiration of many witnesses where of my self am one, for to his majesty's
court at Newmarket Jnue 18. Anno 1647. did I ^end one of my Children a child of
11. years old, who immediately before had bin extremely afflicted, and indeed
tortured with that disease, but having bin there, and then touched, the next
day following he returned home perfectly cured and sound, and has so continued
ever since, for the space of more then 5 Months. Blessed be the Lord Jesus who
is the author of every good gift, and blessed be his anoinred servant, in whom
his goodness was so clearly manifested.

These things might stop the mouths of his Majesty's most implacable enemies,
who in print have endeavored to make the people believe that the King is not
Gods anointed, and might particularly shame them who most unchristianly have
called this Gift of healing, witchcraft, although there is an express warrant
1 Cor. 12. 9.
for it in the word of God, these men without doubt except they repent, shall
one day be accountable for the sin of blaspheming God, and the King; for
ascribing that work to witchcraft and so to Satan, which is done both by the
Kings hand, and with the finger of God assisting his anointed; just so did the
Pharisees blaspheme Christ when he cast out Satan by the finger of God, for
they said he cast him out by Beelzebub.

Neither will it be sufficient to say that the gift of healing was a tempor^rie
grace, and now quite expired, for it can not be so proved; Gods arm is not
shortened: for although the ordinary, and frequent use of such divine cures is
now abated, yet no man can for certain affirm that the gift is utteriie
ceased: and for our own particular case in this kingdom, why should we not
rather think, that our merciful God now in these needful times to stop the
mouths of all the enemies of his anointed, or at least to leave the obstinate
without excu^e, has so manifestly showed, and declared him to be indeed his
anointed and that these multitudes of Royal cures are as so many lamps
manifesting the divine Oil of his unction, for so the Royal P^almist brings
in God ^aying Psalm. 132. 17. I have ordained a Lamp so^ mine anointed -- his
enemies will I clothe with sh^^^, but upon himself shall his Crown flourish*
Even so Amen. Deus d^fendat Opt. lib. 2.
Oleum suum. Upon himself, and his royal posterity, Lord, let this Crown
flourish as long as the Sun, and moon endure.

CHAP. XVII. The Union of Christ, and his Church further showed, why Christ is
called by the names Adam, Jacob, David. Why all mankind was extracted out of
One man, why S. Austin denied the Antipodes, wherein this Union consists An
Explication of Heb. 7. 9. Which was slubbered over by the Commenter, touching
Melchisedech, and Levi.
BY what has bin said, the Christian reader I trust does by this time perceive
that our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, with great love, justice, and equity
did sustain our person, and in our steed, and to our behalf did both bear the
punishment of our transgressions, and also fulfilled the whole law of God for
us, as our surety, because he was as an Universal man, in whom all mankind
was united. The sower leaven of the first Adam had ^owred the whole lump of
mankind, but the divine Spirit of the second Adam sweetened his whole mystical
body for a Spirit us est genitoris Aug. de Trin. l. 6.
genitiqae Suavitas. (i) The Spirit is the sweetness of the Father and the Son:
and because our true, and only God has assumed both our flesh, and our soul
also on himself, and has put his Spirit into us, therefore he is become one
with us mystically, and we with him: hence it is that Prosper says. Tota
ecclesia cum Christo P^osp. in I sal. 102.
capite est unus homo. (i) The whole body of the Church with Christ the head is
one man, and again he says Tota civitas dei est unus homo in Capite, and
Corpore. (i) Id. in Psalm. 131.
The whole City of God is one man, in the head, and in the body, being as one
corporation. And concerning Christ's Prayers, and the Churches Prayers the same
Father says. Ad deum clama^ and Caput in Corpore and Id. in Psalm. 142.
Corpus in Capite. (i) Christ prays in his Church, and his Church prays in
him, for otherwise how could we say to God Abba* -- Father, and this neareness
and entire unity between God and man in Christ is principally from this
ground, that because there is but one God, and that one God is in all men,
therefore does he make al to be one; and also men with Christ are Commembers
Aug. cont. mendacium. c. 2. n 77. Chrysostom. in S. Theophaniam. to. 6. n. 59.
as S. Austin calls them) (i.) fellow members of his body, because we with him
were made of one blood, as we read Act. 17. 26. for as S. Chrysostom notes.
Deus ideo incarnatus ut ingeret opus cum opifice. (i) God was therefore
Incarnate that thereby he might unite the Creature with the Creator, all
communicating both in flesh and in Spirit, hence all Christians are called one
another brethren, and sisters, because all have the same Spirit of one
heavenly Father. Anima fratris est Hier. n. 41.
soror tua, S. Hierom says. (i) Thy brothers soul, is thine own sister, a --
sister, but it is only in Christ, because the same Spirit of Christ is in both;
upon the same grounds it is, that Christ becomes so near of kindred to us men,
that he takes upon himself the names of other Men, to implie an ^dentity with
Man, for 1 Cor. 15. 45. he is called Adam, and the Prophets call him David.
Jer. 30. 9. Ezech. 34 23. Ose. 3. 5. And this long after Adam, and David were
dead, and is therefore meant of Christ, for when David is called a Man after
Gods own heart. 1 Samuel 13. 14. Act. 13 22. (which is very hard to be said or
understood of any sinful man) but, de Aug de Dule: quaest, q 6. n. 89.
Christo intellige, and nullus nodus erit. (i) if you will understand it to be
spoken of Christ there will be no difficulty at all. So also I think that
saying. Number. 23. 21. He has not beheld iniquity in Jacob] is meant of Christ,
who is called Jacob with as great reason as the other posterity are called by
the name of their patriarch Israel, and Jacob very frequently in Scripture, and
namely. Psalm. 41. 7.

Because the Creator, at the first intended this union to be a ground and
preparative of man's redemption, therefore he extracted all mankind, even the
woman also out of one Man, that so all might come into the unity of Christ,
which is the reason that is alleged by Prosper, and that the^eby christ's
obedience active and Prosper. De Provid. n. 39.
passive, might be in stead of all Ad^m: and (...) (...) would not believe
there were any (...), although he knew the earth was scated in the midst of the
wo^^d, Aug. de Civ. l. 16 c 9. l a^^. de fall Rel. l. 3. c. 24.
but it was least he should grant that the e was any one man in the whole
world, which came not out of the loins of Adam.

Now as all Mankind has its interest in Christ so more especially has the
Church which is joined to her head in a more sweet and loving mat^imon^all
bond, Matthew. 22. 2. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Certain King, which
made a marriage for his son; and this is set forth more Emphatically, Ephesians. 5.
30. For w^ are member of his body, ^f his flesh* and of his ^ones, -- this is a
great Mystery, but I sp^ak con^^^ning Christ and his Church. For the union of
Christ and his Church, does not only consist in this, that Christ assumed the
flesh of his holy ones, for so he did of all, nor in that he communicates hi
Spirit to his Elect and holyen^s; for so also he does to all. But in that he
gives to his Church, his Divine Spirit with all the sweetness of his love and
goodness, and with such high graces as make her lovely, acceptable and
gracious in the eyes of her Lord and head.

This great mystery of Man's Redemption by the Incarnation of God was imitated
early at the Creation of the woman. It is observed by S. Ambrose, that at Ambr.
de Paradi^o, n* 9.
the Creation of the Man, it is not said, God saw that it was good, but when it
is said, Male and Female created he them, Genesis 1. 27. Immediately it follows,
God blessed them -- and verse 31. It was ver^ good, and this, because from the
Woman's fruitfulness, the Redeemer was to come; and this is the meaning of St.
Paul, 1 Timothy 2. 15. She shall be saved in child-bearing*] That is, by the Son
of God now born of a woman, if she continue in the Faith, and for the comfort
of all sorts of men, unto whom the benefit of the Gospel, and with it, the
inestimable benefit of Christ's death is offered, the Gospel has set forth our
Savior descending from the first man, and extracted through holy and unholy
Ancestors, through Jews and Gentiles, by noble and ignobl^ births, as appears
in the Genealog^^s of S Luke, and of ^. Matthew, where there is mention of
^amar, and of (...), a Moabi^^ and Gentile; to show that all sorts of men have
an interest in Christ, for all men in the world were united, with Christ
himself also in the loins of Adam.

Before I cl^se this Book, I think it very pertinent to the business in hand,
to explain that place, Heb. 7. 9. which our Commenter has most slightly passed
over; yet warily because if he had rightly expounded it, it had cl^a^ly made
against his blasphemy: the words are these, Levi -- (...) Tithes in Abraham,
For he was in (...) of his Fat^^r when Melchi^edech met him.] The collection
from these words is, that therefore Me^chis^aechs, and so Christ's Priesthood is
greater then Levi^^ P^i^st^ond.

But against this Argument it may be objected, that Christ was also in the
loins of Abraham at that time as well as Levi, for (th^n (...) was not begot)
and theref^re in this respect both Levi and Christ paid tithes in Abraham, and
neither are to be (for this cause) preferred before the other, except we can
show that Christ was not then in the loins of Abraham. (Secundum aliquem modum)
in some manner as Levi was.

For answer hereunto, S. Austine, thought it sufficient to say that the
difference between ^^vies and Christ's being in the loins of Abraham, was this:
Christus Aug. de Genesis ad lit. l. 10. c. 19
non (...) secundum animam, se^ Levi ficit: (i) That Christ's Soul was not
derived by propagation from Abr^ha^ as L^vi^s soul was.

But this answer will not satisfy, because it is uncertain to us, whence
either Levi or Ch^^st had their humane souls; and so it was to St. Austine
himself, as I have showed before.

The surer answer therefore, is this; that it being granted that the humane
nature of Christ was every way in the loins of Abraham as well as Levi was; yet
this grand difference is between them. That Christ's Divine nature, or eternal
Godhead was not derived from Abraham's loins: Although as Christ was in the form
of a servant, so he came from Abraham, and so he paid tithes in Abraham, to his
type M^lchisedech, just as he paid tribute to Caesar, or to the Temple, because
he was a man and a subject to Caesar, as S. Ambrose truly says; Christus est
servus quatenus incarnatus. (i.) Ambr. in Epist. con. Aquil. n. 49.
When Christ is called a Subject or Servant, it is understood of his
Incarnation. But as he was in the form of God, he neither came from Abraham,
nor was tithed in him, nor owed any tribute to Caesar, or the Temple. Of this
nature it is said, John 8. 58 Before Abraham was, I am: Yet in respect of his
humane nature, I may truly say that Christ before his birth, in the loins of
Abraham paid tithes to Melchisedech, which is all one as to say, Christ paid to
Christ. Christus homo, Christo Deo. (i.) The Man Christ, to Christ our God.
This Scripture thus expounded, does clearly set forth the Incarnation of God,
in the Person of Jesus Christ, who for his assumed flesh is called (...) Bas.
de Spir. sanct. c. 5.
by St. Basil (i.) flesh-bearing God, and in Greg. Nazian. and Athanasius,
(...), God Incarnate.

Thus was he every way (as has been showed,) a Person fitted to stand in steed
of mankind, as an undertaker and surety for performance of the Bond, Law, and
Covenant which was laid upon us.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his
people, and has raised up an horn of salvation for us, in the house of his
servant David. Laus Deo.
FINIS.
THE FOURTH BOOK Of the Unpardonable SIN: OR, The sin against the Holy
Ghost, wherein this question is discussed: Whether the sin against the Holy
Ghost be absolutely unpardonable.

Together with a plain Exposition of those places in Scripture, which concern
that sin, viz.

wherein the question of Anabaptisme is clearly discussed.
Matthew. 12. 31. Heb. 6. 4. Heb. 10. 26. Epist. 1 John 5. 16.
Qui legit haec ubi certus est, pariter pergat mecum; ubi haesitat, quaerat
mecum; ubi errorem suum cognoscit, redeat ad me. Aug. de Trinit. l. 1. c. 3.
LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1655.

THE PREFACE.
IN my second Book, I propounded two questions to be discussed.

First, what sin that 1.
is, which three of the Evangelists call the sin against the Holy Ghost; and
to me it appeared to be the blasphemous denying the Godhead of Jesus Christ.
For albeit some other sin may be so called, yet, that this also is that sin
there meant, I nothing doubt.

Secondly, Why the denying the Godhead 2.
of Christ is said especially to be unpardonable; and to me it seemed that the
reason is, because he that so sins, does thereby renounce the sole and only
means of redemption and pardon: for Jesus Christ, by virtue of his Godhead,
inseparably united with his Manhood, is the only All-sufficient Expiatory
Sacrifice for sin.

There is yet a third Question to be discoursed, 3.
which is very needful to be rightly understood, lest the former Doctrines
should lead such men into desperation, who have fallen into this sin and for
the comfort of those particularly, who have been misled into this most
dangerous blasphemy, by reading This new Commentary on the Hebrews; I do thus
state this third Question.

Of THE UNPARDONABLE SIN.
CHAP. I. Whether those who have once fallen into the blasphemy 3. Question.
of denying the Godhead of Jesus Christ, are absolutely unpardonable, and left
without all hope of assoilment, or remedy and forgiveness, so that they must
be certainly, and eternally damned?
THe reason which moved me to attempt this question, is, because I find in many
Writers, that the sin against the Holy Ghost is discoursed, as being absolutely
unpardonable, and their persuasion thereof is grounded on the words of Christ,
which seem to be so peremptory and absolute, as if they could not admit any
limitation or exception, or more favorable Exposition. For it is said, Matthew.
12. 31, 32. It shall not be forgiven unto m^n, -- neither in this (...), nor in
the world to come and Mar. 3. 29. He has never forgiveness, but is in danger
of eternal damnation. And in St. Luke, it is said. He that denies me before
men, shall be denied before the Angels of God -- unto him that blesphemeth
against the Holy Ghost it shall no be forgive. Of this sin, or blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost our later Expositors understand that saying, Heb ^. 4.
It is impossible for those who were once enlightened -- if they fall away to
renew them again unto (...). So do they expound that place also Heb 10. 26. If
we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the Truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain (...) looking for of
judgment. And that which to some men seems to prove the absolute
unpardonableness of this sin, and to put it out of all doubt is that saying, 1
John 5. 16. There is a sin unto death, I do not say ^^ (...) for it. For if he
that once sins this sin, be not all to be prayed for, it will be a great
inducement to persuade us, that it is altogether unpardonable.

There is yet another reason alleged by Expositors, why this sin is absolutely
unpardonable, and that is because (as they say) this blasphemy being one
committed it is ever after accompanied with final (...), according to that
saying before alleged out of Heb. 6. 6. If this prove true, then such
blasphemers must certainly perish; according to our Saviors words in another
case. Luke 13. 3. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish, and so this
sin may fitly be called a sin unto death.

But yet, to say any sin is so great, that in any case it cannot be pardoned
will be most harsh and derogatory to the infinite mercy of God in Christ; for
the sacrifice for sin, the Lamb of God is of infinite value, and an
allsufficient sacrifice; but no sins of the sons of men are infinite, either in
measure, or number, but only in respect of the Object: that is, God, a most
merciful God against whom they are committed. Pecca a numerari possunt, sed
misericordia D^^, nulla mensura comprehendi potest. (i.) Our sins are not
numberless, but the mercy Basil. in Ascet. Reg. n. 31.
of God is immense and infinite; and the Scripture tells us. Rom 5 20. (...)
grace did much more abound, and that God is rich in mercy, and the Father of
(...) and that his mercy is over all his works, and especially his mercy is
seen and excercised on mankind, even in such as have sinned with an high hand
against him* if they do penitentlie turn unto him, no Father or ^ender Mother
can so much pity their own children as our heavenly Father pittieth us. Non
sic ins^mus Chrysostom. 77. hom. Constant. n. 25.
(...) Deus paenitentem animam (i) no young man sick for love is more inamored
with his beloved than our loving God is with a penitent soul; Chrysostom. 31. hom.
Antioch. n. 12.
and again the same Father says Ego testifi^or, and fide (...), si quts
discedit a pecc^to, nihil aliud requirit Deus. (i) testify, and will be bound,
that if a sinner will forsake his sin, God requires no more of him. The gate
of Gods mercy is never shut against a penitent sinner S. Cypri^n says most
comfortably. Nulla paenitent Cyp. cont. Demet. n. 75. Id de Caena. n. 95.
a in mu^^o se^a ^st. And again Anim^m egredientem, and in lubi^ paenitentem
non aspernatur Clementissimus Dominus. (i) no repentance can be to late in this
life, -- when our Soul is pearched on our lips, ready to take her flight, even
in that moment our most merciful Lord will not reject her repentance, no,
though her sins have bin never so detestable. Prosper says. Nulla Pros. de
vocat. Gent. l. 1. c. 17.
sunt tam detestanda ^^elera, quae possun gratiae donum arc^re (i) No wickedness
is so detestable, which can utterly exclude the mercy of God. S. ^asil sets
this down as an infallible mark, whereby a man may be assured of remission of
sins Ce^t^^o rem ^ssi^nis est peccata abhorrere. Basil in Ascet. n. 31.
(i) if you would be assured that your sins are remitted, leave your sins. The
Psalmist says. Psalm. 33. 5. The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord;
Because in this life his mercy is more perceived then his justice, which he
does, for the most part defer til the judgment in the next life by his patience
and long -- suffering, yet even then his very judgments are not void of some
mercy. in Te^tull^an it is but Ironically said O deum, ad Tert. cont. Marc. l.
3 n. 44.
inferos usqu^ (...) (i) O the mercy of God which extend^th even to hell, but S.
Austin delivers the same seriously, and dogmatically. (i) Dei misericordia Aug
de Civit. l. 21. c. 24.
extenditur damnatis, mitius puniens illos quam mereantur. (i) The mercy of God
is in some measure showed to the damned, in that he punishes them less
rigorously then they deserved. Upon these reasons, grounded on the mercies of
a most merciful God, an Al sufficient Redeemer, I dare not pronounce this sin
against the Holy -- Ghost, to be absolutely unpardonable.

CHAP. II. That the sin against the Spirit, possibly may be pardoned, and that
by repentance; Gods threatenings are conditional, and not always executed, yet
the truth of God is not violated. Threatenings are but prov^cations to
repentance.
But dare any Man say, this sin is Pardonable, when Christ has said, it shall
never be forgiven? I answer, that neither I, nor any one that fears God,
would presume to affirm it pardonable, except we were assured that God
himself had so affirmed; for the same God who is the author both of the old,
and new Testament, has so declared in both, that all his threatenings, how
peremptorily, or absolutely soever they seem to be delivered, yet they are
ever to be understood with this limitation, or exception, except ye repent. For
although it be not openly expressed in every particular Commination, yet God
has more then once given us to understand, that whenever he threatens
destruction to a sinner, his threatening is always to be understood with this
limitation. Except that sinner repent. And this truth has bin long ago
discovered by our own divines, and long before them by the ancient Fathers:
That al threatenings of God are to be understood with the condition of
impenitencie, for example. God had by his prophet said. Forty days Jonah. 3.
4.
and Nineve shall be des^^oyed. Yet Nineve was not so destroyed, neither was
his word false, because Gods meaning was with this reservation. Except they
repented, and Gods threatening, and averting, or inflicting temporal plagues in
the time of the law, were signs what he would do in the like case, either
with, or without repentance in remitting, or inflicting eternal punishments
since the Gospel was published.

If you ask me how we shall know that, when God threatens destruction
without any mention of this exception of repentance that yet he so means. I
answer, that we know it, because God has so told us, once or twice that all
his threatenings must be so understood; and this we learn from two of his great
Prophets, both for general threatenings against a whole nation, and for
particular threatenings against any wicked person for Jer. 18. 7. As what
instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck
up, and to put down, and to destroy it, If that nation against whom I have
pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to
do unto them] So again Ezech. 33. 14. When I say to the wicked, thou shall
surely die, If he turn from his sin etc? he shall surely live, he shall not die]
these two are the general rules of all Gods threatenings in the whole Scripture,
so that if we lay these to any threatening, that was executed, or not executed,
yet we shall find that both the mercy and truth of God will be hereby cleared, as
in the differing cases of Sodom destroyed, and Nin^ve saved.

The same Rules are also to be observed in the threatenings mentioned in the New
Testament, even where the exception is not expressly mentioned yet it is
always to be understood, and there we find evident and personal presidents of
Gods mercy in sparing those whom he threatened, when the threatening seemed to be
absolute, without any limitation, for what threatening can be more peremptory
then that. Luc. 12. 9. He that denies me before men, shall be denied before
the Angels of God. But we know Peter denied him before men, yet Mat. 26. 74.
we doubt not of Peter's Conversion and Salvation. And we know that the Jews
unto whom the same Peter preached Act. 3. 14. had denied the Holy One, and the
Just. and moreover killed the Prince of life, Yet S^ Peter did not think them
absolutely unpardonable but exhorted them to repentanc^* and showed that thereby
their sin might be pardoned, for ^aith he v. 19 Repent yet therefore and be
convert^d, that you^ si^s may be blotted out.

What threatening seems more peremptory then that. 1 Cor. 6 9 Be not
deceived, neither fornicators nor idola^e^s nor adulte^^rs -- nor t^eves nor --
drunkards etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God; yet we believe that Noah,
Lo^, David, and the penitent theif who had offended in these sins shall
notwithstanding inherit the Kingdom of God and the Apostle, in the words
immediately following does clearly unfold the meaning, both of that, and of al
other Threatenings, when he says verse. 11. And such as these were some of you^,
but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of
the Lord Jesus so that, in all threatenings, we are ever to suppose, that there is
at least, this secret, and reserved condition; Except ye repent; according to
Gods declaration, which is thus expressed 1 John 1. 9. If we confess our sins, he
is faithful and just to forgive us our sins. And hence is the rule of divines.
Omnes comm^nationes dei sunt intelligendae sub condition impaenitentiae. (i)
The threatenings of God are ever to be understood, with the condition of
impenitencie

This is the judgment both of our modern divines, and Orig. in Number. 23. hom 6.
also of the Ancients Orig^n says. Ostenditur Deus quandoque dicere, and non
fac^re^ait ergo per Hie^miam, loquar super gentem, si convertetur gens illa,
(...) etc. (i) Because it appears that God says he will do that, which yet
he does not perform, therefore he has informed us by Jeremie what his meaning
is when he says* ^f I speak against a nation, if that nation be convered and
repent I also will repent, and again the same Father says* Deus -- cum
possi^^^cens punire, nunquam hoc facit, Orig. in Hier. 1. hom. 1.
sed etiamsi condemnav^r^t^, dicit tamen, quod sibi semper dicere proposi^um
est, ut liberentur a condemnatione per paenitentiam, qui condemnati suerant per
delictum* ut in Ninivitis. (i) God could punish without threatening, but does
not, and although he has condemned yet he says (as indeed he ever purposes,
that those against whom the sentence of condemnation is gone forth, yet may be
delivered by repentance. St. Chrysostom has the like observation upon those
words, Jona. 3. 4. Chrysostom hom. 5. Antioch.
Forty days and Ninevy shall be destroyed] This threatening did not fail (says
he) for God declares, Jer. 18, 7. That when he speaks against a Nation, his
meaning ever is, that if that nation repent, he also will repent of his
indignation; and yet the Truth of God is no way prejudiced although the
judgment threatened, be not so effected, because it is always meant
conditionally; yea it is ever more probable, that because God so openly
threatened, secretly he did really not intend at all to execute that judgment
which he so threatened: and more yet, That he therefore threatened, because
Chrysostom. hom. Antioch. 53,
he did not purpose it: Chrysostom says, Deus Gehennam mmatus est, quo
Gehennam non inducat (i) God therefore threatens hell, that thereby he may not
condemn Basil. in Esa. c. 13. Basil in Esa. c. 5.
to hell. And Saint Basil says, Deus interminatur -- ut sic exoretur, (i) God
therefore threatens that thereby he may provoke men to prayer, that by it he
may be pacified; and again, concerning the figtree, Luc. 13. 6. he says,
Exitat agricolam, ut diligentius excolat -- est comminatio quae efficiat ut a
peccato convertantur; (i.) Soz. l. 7 c. 1^
the intent of the threatening was to incite the husbandman to take greater care
of it -- so there is a threatening intended only to provoke men to conversion.
It is observed by Sozomen of the most gentle and godly Emperor, Theodosius
that his Edicts penal, did commonly threaten very severe, and direful
punishment, but that he did not execute them, even as our most merciful God,
when he seems most severe in his threatening; yet he secretly reserveth an
inlet of mercy to stay the execution, if the offenders will repent, and
therefore the prudent Jews would not condemn that man for a false prophet, who
had in the name of God threatened judgments, although the judgments threatened
were not so executed, because they knew that the executing, or suspending
thereof depended on the penitencie, or impenitencie of men.

Thus having in general showed, that Gods threatenings are to be understood
conditionally, let us now examine this particular threatening against such as
commit the sin against the holy Spirit of which it is said, It shall not be
forgiven:

CHAP. III. That the blasphemy against the holy Spirit is then only
unpardonable, when it is accompanied with final impenitencie.
IT is worthy of our observation, that Christ immediately Mat. 12. 31.
before he denounced, that the blasphemy of the spirit should not be forgiven,
he had said, Mat. 12. 31. All manner of sin, and blasphemy shall be forgiven
unto men] Certainly if all sin be forgiven, it must needs follow that the
blasphemy of the Spirit shall be forgiven unto some, and therefore it is not
absolutely unpardonable. All the difficulty will be to understand how all sins
shall be pardoned, and yet this sin shall not be pardoned. Both sayings must
needs be true, because Truth has spoken them. Surely the meaning is, That
there is no sin so great that it can bring damnation Aslemb c. 15. page 27.
upon those who truly repent.] All sins are pardonable to the penitent, and
therefore this blasphemy also is pardonable, if it be repented; but without
repentance it shall never be forgiven in this world, whilst men continue in
this sin, nor in the world to come if men dye in it. But yet it must needs be
confessed that there is a difference in the repentance which is required to the
pardon of this grand sin, and that repentance which is necessary to preceed the
pardon of other inferior Vide infra, Cap.
sins (for no actual sin is to be thought pardonable without repentance in
some measure) of which difference I shall speak hereafter in its due place. But
for the present it is expedient to enquire whether this blasphemy be in any
case pardonable.

I have showed before what the Scripture says of those that denied Christ as
Peter did and those Jews, Acts 3. 14. although denying Christ seems to be
that sin of which it is said, Luke 12. 9. 10. it shall not be forgiven.
Therefore the next thing to be enquired, is the judgment of the Church in the
exposition of those words, It shall never be forgiven] Athanasius in his Ath.
to 3. page 626.
book, de Communi ess^ntia Patris, F^lii, etc. First lays down this
conclusion, Nullum ^st peccatum ir^^^^ssibile apud D^um in illis, qui vere
(...) ^gunt; (i) No sin is unpardonable with God, in them which truly repent,
and he makes this observation on those words of Christ. That he did not say,
that he who s^ blasphemeth, and repents but only he that blasphemeth shall
not be forgiven, and that therefore the meaning is, that he that so
blasphemeth, and continues persevering impenit^ntly in that sin, shall never
be forgiven -- for if this sin cannot at all be remitted by repentance in this
life, why was the Church so offended with Novatus for not admitting penitents
to his Atha. ib. page 624.
Communion, who in time of persecution, for fear, had denied Christ? and yet if
there be a possibility of remission after this life, why is Origin so
condemned, for affirming that the punishment of the damned shall have an end,
Again he says, (...) those who were ignorant of the Godhead of Jesus, and so
did not believe or confess it, shall not be pardoned, what will become of his
own Disciples? Ausim dicere ne ipsos b^atos Discipulos Atha. ibid pa. 265.
perfectam sententiam de ejus Divinitate habiusse, antequam Spiritus sanctus in
die Penticostes eos visitasset: (i) I dare bouldly affirm, that the blessed
Disciples of Christ had not a perfect opinion of their Lords Godhead, until
the holy Spirit descended on them at the Feast of Penticost; for we read, Math.
28. 17. that after his resurrection, some worshipped him, but some doubted.
Heathens, Turks, Jews, and Arrians, do unto this day blaspheme the whole
Trinity, and therefore do certainly blaspheme the Holy Spirit: yet if any of
these should be converted to the true faith, and with a penitent confession,
and with tears should come to the Christian Church, renouncing their
blasphemies, and desire admission thereinto, and to be instructed, and then
baptized, what Christian would be so hard-hearted as to deny them? St. Austin
goes yet further; Aug. in Exposit. Epist ad Romans n. 96.
Si ex eo numero hominum, quibus Dominus crimen peccati in Spiritum Sanctum
(objecit) veniret (ad ecclesiam) ad fidem Christi, paenitens, salutem cum
lacrimes pos^ens; quaero utrum quisquam tanto errore esset ut neget ad
baptismum) admitti, aut frustra admissum esse contendat? (i) If any one of
those very Pharisees unto whom particularly Cbrist objected this sin against
the Holy Ghost, had been converted to the Christian faith, and with repentance
and tears had desired that saving doctrine; I demand whether any one would be
so ignorantly nice, as to deny him leave to be baptized, or to affirm that if
he were baptized, it would not profit him? Certainly, if Julian, or Arrius (who
by divines are said to have sinned this sin) had so offered themselves to the
primitive Church in their times, they had not been refused: for we know that
Novatus and his sect, were therefore condemned by the Orthodox, because they
refused to admit such as had denied Christ (as is said before.)

The conclusion, and resolution of this question, by Aug. Epist. 50. n. 31.
St. Austin is this, that this sin is unpardonable only in this case, viz. If
such a sinner continue: -- in duritia cordis usque ad finem vitae hujus, -- and
again, Aug. Enchirid cap. 83. n. 58.
Si in hac obstinatione mentis, diem extremum clandit; (i) If such a blasphemer
continue, and persevere in this hardness of heart and obstinacy all his life
time, and in it depart this life, then will there be no hope of forgivness.
And for this reason only, this grand sin, Vid. infra.
may be called in the Apostles words, 1. John 5. 16. A sin unto death] Not
because it does always necessarily bring to that sinner eternal death; but
because it Aug. Epist. 50. ^. 31.
will do so, if that sinner live and die in this sin obstinately and
impenitently (of which saying I shall more largly speak here after in its due
place) of this sin when it does necessarily bring the sinner to eternal
damnation, the same Saint Austin says very truly as I conceive, Non probatur
ab aliquo commissum, nisi cum de corpore exierit: (i) none can be properly said
to have committed the sin unto death, until the sinner be actually dead
because if he repent, before his death, then the sin cannot be said to be unto
death. Finally, neither this sin, or any other Apostasy ( except it be final)
is so absolutely unpardonable, but that forgivenes may be obtained through
Christ, if the sinner seek pardon, with true repentance. But whether any
repentance may be had by such, who have once fallen into this grand sin, is the
next thing to be enquired.

CHAP. IV. An exposition of Hebr. 6. 4. that the word Enlightened signifies
baptism, Anabaptisme is inhibited, as both unprofitable, and also sinful.
BEcause no sin, how great soever can be said to be absolutely unpardonable, if
the sinner will truly repent him of it, and that there is no case or condition
in this life, wherein sinful man should despair, and cast of all hope of
pardon, therefore diverse Calvin. l. 3. 3. 24. Instit. Polan. p. 339. Buc. p.
155.
divines tell us, that the reason why it is said of this sin, that it shall
never be forgiven] is, because when it is once committed, it is ever after
accompanied with final impenitentie, and that by the just judgment of God, such
apostates are punished with final, and Eternal blindness and that they cannot
possibly repent, and for this doctrine they allege the saying of S. Paul.
Heb. 6. 4. It is impossible for those who were once enlightened -- if they fall
away, to renew them to repentance.] Whether this be the true meaning of those
words, or not, it will better appear, if we diligently by way of exposition,
examine them, together with the context both before, and after. Which I will
not presume to undertake or perform by mine own single judgment but will call
in the assistance of former expositions by the ancient Fathers upon that
place, where we read as follows.

For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of
the heavenly gift etc. If they fall away, to Renew them again to repentance.
The Apostle having in the former verses told those Hebr^ws, that they should
not expect that he would new lay the foundations of Christian religion, which
had bin done to them before, whereof one was (...), and its Doctrine, for if
they must be always n^w rounded in Christian religion, as often as they fall
into ^in* then should they be as often baptized, that if they fell a second*
and third time they should as often be baptized, and thereby re^^ored to their
former estate by so many several baptismes. This is the e^position of
Theophilact. Si iterum e^^ in primordiis religionis insti^ueret; Theoph. in
locum.
ru^sus baptizaret: and po^iqu^m denuo ^apsi essent, baptizaret, a^que ^te^um
per ^ujusmodi^ iterationem essent multi baptismi; verum ho^ ^bsurdum, non
oportet iterari baptismum (i) If the Apostle must new lay the foundations of
religion in his disciples, as often as they fall into sin, then must he new
baptize them, and if they fall again he must baptize them again -- and
again, but ^f so, then there would be many Baptismes, which were absurd, for
Baptism may not be iterated. He mentions Baptismes in the plural, not as if
there were more baptismes then one to be applied to one Person, but because of
the multitudes of ^ersons Baptized. There is but One ^aptism. Ephesians. 4. 5. But
that one given to many is called Baptismes, yet but One, because it may not be
administered to one Person more then once; and this the Apostle teaches in
these words. It is impossible for those who were once enlightened -- if they
fall, to Renew them again (by Baptism) unto repentance.

For it is impossible] this Word for, shows that these following words, are a
reason rendered of the former words, and particularly of Baptismes, as if he
should say, I will not again lay the foundation of Baptism in them that were
baptized before, because a Second baptism is both impossible and unprofitable,
for as a man can not be twice borne naturally, so can he not be twice
regenerate, or new -- borne. And if a Man should be rebaptized, it would do
him no good, nay it would be an aggravation of his sin because it is a Contempt
of the cross and death of Christ, as will appear anon, Impossible.] He does not
say only It is unprofitable, or unseemly and unexpedient, but Impossible -- Ne
sperent se denuo posse Baptisma consequi Theoph. in loc.
(i.) That men might not imagine that they might be acquitted of their sins by
a new Baptism.

For those who where once inlightned] The Principal thing (as I conceive) which
has made this Scripture seem so obscure of late, which the ancient expositors
did most clearly expound ^s the ambiguitie of this word Enlightened, which
certainly does signify in this place. Baptized. and so S. Ambrose, Theodore^,
and Theophilact do all unanim^uslie expound it. And so did also, even the
Novatians, who yet from a true exposition of that word did suck this poison.
That such as lapsed into notorious sin after baptism, could not be admitted
into the Church any more by repentance. The Syria^^ translation also reads for
Enlightened, Baptized, as is acknowledged by Beza -- and non in^pte (i.) (as he
thinks) no^ unfi^ly; and nothing was more ordinary in the primitive Church,
then to call Baptism, Illumination, and the Baptized, Illuminatos. Which
appellation was (no doubt) taken from the words here used (...) (...), and
again Heb. 10. 32. (...), and that the ancient Christians by this word
Enlightened, understood Baptized which will evidently appear by what follows.

Inlightned] once Enlightened, signifies Once Baptized, amongst the Apostolical
Constitutions in Clemens, this is one. In Illuminatione semina^um, D^aconissa
abs^ergi^ Clem. Rom l. 3 Constable. cap. 15.
^as, ne mulieres aspiciantur a viris. (i) In the Illum nation of women, other
women ministered, because it was not comely for men to behold their nakedness,
here Illumination must needs signify Baptism, for in those times, and long
after both men and women were Baptized naked as also it may seem to be
intimated by the Scripture Phrases, of putting of the old man, and putting on
the new man, which was represented, by putting of their old apparel and by
putting on the white Baptismal garment, which is so frequently mentioned in the
Farhers; and that people were baptized naked, does appear in Dionisius,
Cyprian, Cyril Hierosol. Ambrose, Dion. Areo. n4 Cyp. 91. Cyr. 21. Aug. Epist.
118. c. 5. Arnb. n. 49. Cuspinian. in vita ejus Just. Apol. 2. n. 13. Chrysostom. n.
40. Cyril. Catech. Chrysostom hom. 60. Antio. Epiph. n. 33. Naz Orat. 39. Naz. Orat.
39. and 40.
and Austin. And particularly by the History of the Emperor Constantine the
fifth, who for a certain miscariage in his baptism was Nicknamed Copronimus,
(this by the way.) In Justin Martyr, baptism is called; (...). (i)
Illumination, and the baptismal Font is both by him and Chrysostom called.
(...). (i) an Illuminatorie, for as we call it the Font because of the water in
it, the ancients would as readily have called it the Phont, because of the
Sacramental Illumination; So both S. Cyril, and S. Chrysostom, call the
Catechizing of those who were already Baptized. Catechesis Illuminatorum. (i)
The Catechesis of the Baptized, and do expressly expound those words. Heb. 6.
and. Heb. 10. to signify the Baptized. just so does Epiphanius call the Font.
(...), and in Gre. Nazian, the festival of Christ's Baptism is called. (...).
(i) The day of Illumination: and he uses both words promiscuously. Christus
(...). (i) and Jesus (...). (i) Christ was illuminated; Jesus was Baptized and
that feast he calls both. (...). (i) Illumination, and also (...). (i) The
feast of Baptism. Neither was this appellation used, because of lights set up
in the church at the time of Baptism, when it was performed in the night as in
the Wakes or vigils of Easter, which was the custom in S. Chrysostoms time.
But the Chrysostom. n. 63.
Baptized were called Illuminates who had bin Baptized in the day time, and the
fonts were called Illuminatories at other times, when no Baptism was
administered as S. Chrysostom tells. That in an uprore in the Church, such
Chrysostom. Sermon post r^ditum. n 40.
great store of blood shead was made, that the (...). Or Font was fill^d with
blood (for then the Fonts, were little wels, or cistems, whose tops were no
higher then the Church -- pav^ment.) To this I ad that the ordinary gloss upon
those words says. Ne quis existimet Lyra. in loc.
secundum, vel tertium Baptisma, post peccata posse fieri. (i) the Apostle used
those words least any Man should imagine, that a second or third Baptism might
be used to release us of sins, so does Dionysius Cart: expound them of
Baptismal grace, and our vulgar Concordance in the title of Illuminati, adds
Per Baptismum.

Why Baptism is called Illumination, the words following declare, viz. because
with the Outward Sacrament of water, the inward grace of the Spirit is as by a
conduit convayed, whereby Original, and actual sins past, are remitted and the
strength of sin is abated by the same Spirit of regeneration, and a new life
kindled, and the peacable, and sweet tranquillity of Christ's Kingdom by the
comfortable promises of the Gospel, is tasted, which is an heaven upon earth,
for Grace is the Inchoation of glory. All these things are expressed by these
words following. Tasted the heavenly gift -- made partakers of the holy --
Ghost -- tasted of the good word of God -- and the powers of the world to come.
For a man that is endued with the regenerating and illuminating Spirit of God
may very well be said to be enlightened when as our mere natural soul and
understanding is called a light; of which, and the common and ordinary
concurrence of Gods Spirit it is said Joh. 1. 9. It Inlightneth every Man that
^ommeth into the world. Clemens Alex. and Naz. Observe that the very Clem.
Alex. Paed. l* 1. Naz. Orat. 40.
heathens called a man (...) (i) light, only because he was endued with the
light of a reasonable soul, much more may those be said to be Enlightened, who
are endued with the Spirit of Illumination from God. Ephe. 5. 8. Ye were
darkness but now are light in the, Lord and. 1 John 1. 5. God is light, for the
baptismal regenerating Spirit, is the Spirit of God. Eusebius notes, in the
life of Constantine the Great. Post baptismum sibi visus est luce Eusebius. de
vita Con. l. 4. n. 45.
plenus, and quasi numine siderari. (i) As Soon as he was Baptized, he seemed
to himself to be full of light, as if he had bin assisted by some heavenly
power, and people had such a conceit of Baptismal illumination, that Nazianzen
reports of his reverend Father, that as he Naz. Orat. 19.
came out of the Baptismal font, to them a visible light seemed to shine round
about him. But I proceed.

CHAP. V. That the word renewing, does in this place signify baptism, those
that fall after baptism, have yet left to them a second remedy, and that is
repentance.
WE have seen that those that fall into sin after baptism, must not expect a
release, or remedy for their sins by any second, or new baptism the words
which follow (as some do dangerously understand them) at the first veiw, seem
to exclude such sinners, from the second remedy of repentance; which is surely
an erroneous conceit as will appear presently.

If they fall away (it is impossible) to Renew them again unto repentance] the
plain meaning of these words is; That those which fall into their old
unregenerate, and carnal course of living, after they have once been renewed by
baptism, must not expect to be restored to their regenerate, and former
integrity, and innocence and cleanesse, and freedom from the guilt of their
sins, by another new baptism, for a second baptism cannot acquit them of
their sins, so as their first baptism did repentance, (which signifies
amendment of life,) is not obtained by a second* renovation by baptism, for
that cannot ^enue them so as to make them appear clean* and pu^ged from their
sins in the sight of God, water once washed in, is accounted foul afterward:
the Philosopher could say of a foul Bath, Qui hic lavant, ubi lavantur? St.
Ambrose said of Pilates washing, in vita Diog. apud Laert. Ambr. non diluit,
sed in quinavit, in psa. 61
they that wash in foul water, had need to wash again, a second baptism is so
foul, that it adds a new pollution, as will app^ar hereafter. Indeed, God by
one baptism, wherewith his Regenerating Spirit does concur, does renew men unto
repentance, or amendment and newness of life; but if afterward we fall away,
by polluting our selves with new sins, let us not so flatter our selves as to
imagine that we can be restored, and renewed by a second baptismal renovation,
for no such renewing is to be expected. There are two remedies prescribed by
God, for assoilment from our sins; the first is Baptism, Act. 22 16 Arise and
be baptized and wash away thy sins. The second remedy is Repentance, Act. 3.
19. Repent ye therefore and be converted that your sins may be blo^ted out.

To renew them to repentance] If the Apostle meant, that it were impossible for
those that fall after baptism to repent, it may be wondered why he did not say,
It is impossible to repent and why he should use two words, Ren^w, and
Repentance, for repentance it self is a renewing. Renewing is a general word,
and may be distributed into two sorts.

First, there is a renewing Sacramental, and baptismal, when a man is baptized,
or illuminated, and thereby initiated to a new state and way of living
according to new rules of life.

Secondly, there is a renewing Moral, when a man once illuminated or baptized,
having fallen into grievous sins, yet by grace given, changes his wicked course
of sinning to a careful and conscionable new way of living according to
direction of the Gospel. Hence I collect, that the meaning of these words is;
That he that has once been renewed by baptismall illumination, to repentance or
amendment of life, if such a man fall, he cannot the second time be renewed by a
second baptismal renewing, a second baptism will not acquit him of his sins;
but yet he is not excluded from a moral renewing, by leaving his sinning, which
is called repentance: briefly though he may be renewed, yet it may not be by a
new baptism, and though he may repent, yet his repentance is not to be wrought
by a second baptism.

For the right understanding of this exposition I here lay down to the Readers
view these few plain propositions.

First, a man that after baptism falls into sin though ever so great, yet by
the Grace of God, may repent and be recovered.

Secondly, a man baptized, that is fallen in his old carnal living may be
renewed, and possibly may become a new man and a new creature; for a sinner
after baptism may he renewed, because he may repent.

Thirdly, the reader may take notice, that in this place the words Illuminated,
and Renew are of the same signification. So that the meaning is that, he that
is once by baptism illuminated, cannot again by baptism be illuminated, and he
that is once by baptism Renewed, cannot again by baptism be renewed to repentance.

Fourthly, a man may once be enlightened and baptized, and thereby renewed to
amendment of life, and repentance, and freedom or acquitment from his sins
past, and this by the Spirit of God in the laver of regeneration, and by the
virtue of Christ's death* But after this one renewing by baptism, he cannot
again be renewed to resipiscence, newness of life, and acquitment from his sin
by a new baptism.

To renew them] Al though a sinner cannot be renewed more then once by the
Sacramental renovation of baptism, yet there is another way left open for
renewing, and that is penitential renovation, and acquiring new Spiritual
Graces, and this way is, and ought to be frequently iterated, as it is said, 2.
Cor. 4. 16. The inward man is renewed day by day, and to this we are exhorted,
Ephe. 4. 23. Be renewed in the spirit of your mind, that is, by excluding our
sins, and by acquiring new and higher graces. So that when our Apostle says:
It is impossible to renew them] he cannot possibly mean, that renewing is
absolutely impossible, but only that renewing by a new or second baptism is
indeed impossible.

When St. Peter desired, John 13. 9. That not only his feet, but his head also
might be washed, he had this answer: He that is washed, needs not save to
wash his Aug. de fide ad Pet. Diac. c. 36. n. 74.
feet; which place is by Saint Austin urged again rebaptization: Baptisma semel
dandum est, non iterandum, Baptism must be given but once and cannot be
repeated. Indeed daily sinning, has need of daily purging by humiliation,
confession, repentance, prayer and continual labor in quitting our selves
from the overruling of sin; there is that corruption in us that requires daily
spiritual physic to expel it, or rather a daily dying unto sin, more and
more, as we are exhorted, Ephesians. 4. 22. and Colos. 3. 5. To put off the old man,
and to mortify our earthly members. but yet not by a new baptism, for there is
but one baptism, and that cannot be iterated.

Because it is said that this one and only baptism is Prosp. Resp. ad Capit.
Gallo. n. 28 and 26. cap. 2.
for the taking away of sin, and that not only actual sin but Original also;
It would be inquired whether we may truly affirm that a man that has been
baptized, with all the efficacies of true Christian Baptism, is void of
original sin? Prospe^ says, very home, Baptismo delentu peccata originalia in
^is, qui non sunt pred^stinati ad vitam, (i) That by baptism the sins even of
such who are not predestined to life are blotted out, and yet we find St.
Paul complaining, Romans 7. 23. I see -- a Law in my members warring against the
law of my mind -- Captivating me to the law of sin, which surely he meant of
original Corruption. To this the answer is, that by baptism and baptismal grace
all sins past, whether original or actual are remitted so (as our Divines say,)
Quoad reatum, se^ imput^tionem, (i) we shall not be charged with them in
judgment, they shall not be imputed to us; they are forgiven, but yet they
still ramain in us they are not extinguished, or extirpated, our nature still
remains corrupt, and the sour leaven of sin yet works, the Serpent
continues in our bosom, though the sting be taken out, so that it shall not
sting us to death: and this truth does evidently appear by the effects of our
original corruption producing daily actual sins both in Parents and their
children, as the same father observes; Circumcisus gignit Prosp. Sentent* 298.
n. 37.
pr^putium -- sic baptizatus trajicit peccatum originale in prolem, (i) as he
that was circumcised begat an uncircumeised son; so he that is baptized
propagateth original sin to his child, which could not be if original sin did
not still remain in the baptized, but I return to my purpose.

I am next to show that the ancient Expositors delivered the same exposition
which I have done. St. Ambrose upon those words, To ^enue to repentance] says,
Quid ergo exclusa est paenitentia? absit; sed renovatio per Ambr. in loc.
sacri baptismatis lavacrum, secunda vice fieri non potest; (i) shall we say
that the Apostle here quite excludes repentance? No but he only denies it to
be possible by a second baptism. So does Theodoret expound the same words;
Apostolus non probibet me^icamentum paenitentiae, Theod. in. loc.
sed Divini baptismi definitionem doce^: (i) the Apostle does not deny the
second remedy of repentance only he s^eweth, that we are confined and limited
to one only baptism; and Theophilact upon the same place says, Non si segniter
vivamus, aut ex fide excidamus, Theoph. in loc.
rebaptizari nobis dabi^ur -- non o^or^et iterare baptismum, sed in priore
persever are, (i) If after baptism we live carelessely, or fall from the
faith, no second baptism can be given, but we must hold us to our first and
Anselm. in. loc.
to one baptism. St. Ansel^ upon this very place reads the words verse 2. not
as we now do conjunctively, Doctrine of baptismes, but severally, of baptismes,
of doctrines, (which Erasmus approves of) and he thus expounds it, N^c rursum
jacentes sundamentum baptismatum] ut quaeratis it^rum baptismali unda lavari,
(i) not laying again the foundation of bapt^smes, so as to defire a second
baptism. Lastly, Epiphanius describing the Nova^ian heresy, who urged this
place against receiving those into the Church upon repentance, who had fallen
after baptism, tells us that the meaning of the words, impossible to be renewed
to repentance] is Nemo 1. Epiph. haer. 59.
potest secundum lavacrum accipere, (i) No man may be twice baptized, which he
illustrateth by this example. As she that has once parted with here Virginity,
can never corporally recover it again; but yet she may attain unto the grace of
continency, so they that fall after baptism, can never be again baptized, but
yet they are not excluded from a second grace, even the medicine of repentance,
and this exposition is also asserted by Eusibius Emiss. occasionally touching
this Scripture, Post baptismum sola paenitentia sanat non iterum per baptisma
Eusebius, n. 24.
sanari possunt, (i) after baptism there is no salve for sin, but only
repentance, for men can not be healed by any new Baptism: now I proceed to the
next words whereby a reason is given why second, Baptismes cannot be admitted.

CHAP. VI. How a Second Baptism is said to be a new crucifying of Christ, that
it is ignominious to the all sufficient sacrifice of Christ, and that it not
only does no good to a sinner, but much harm by aggravating his sins, as rain
makes weeds to increase.
SEeing they crucify to themselves, tee Son of God afresh] 1. Reason
They that will be a second time Baptized in expectation of remissions of sins
committed after their former Baptism, do in a manner crucify Christ a second
time, not as if Christ could be actually, and reallie re -- Crucified, but yet
such re -- Baptized ones, do it to themselves, (that is) by their mean and
base estimation of that one allsufficient, and only sacrifice for sin.

For as Christ died but once for sin, because his once (...) dying is a
plentiful and sufficient expiation for all our sins through our whole life,
and ought to be accounted a continual sacrifice; and because we are but once to
be admitted to the benefit of his one death by one only Baptism answering to
his once dying, of which it is said. Romans 6. 3. So many of us as were Baptized
Pareus in loc.
into Christ, were Baptized into his death. That is, admitted to the benefit of
his death as is confessed by P^r^s, Therefore, whosoever shall be a second time
baptized, for remission, and expiation of his sins does thereby show, that in
his false apprehension, and misbelief, Christ's once dying, which was once
applied to him by one Baptism, is not by him accounted sufficient to satisfy
for his former sins committed before Baptism, and his later sins, after
Baptism; and therefore he will be again Baptized, and thereby a second time
admitted to the benefit of Christ's death, and thereby applying a second
crucifying of Christ to himself, as if that one former application, were
nullified, or insufficient, for as there is but one death of Christ, so there
is but one Baptism, by which that one death is applied to a Man; S. Basil
says. Baptismus est similitudo Basil. de Bapt. lib. 1. n. 18.
Crucis, mortis, sepulturae, r^surrectionis. (i) Baptism is the similitude, or
representarion of the Cross, death, burial, and resurrection of Christ. He
that will have two Baptismes does implie a similitude of two deaths. Christ
died but once* and we in our Baptism dyed with him. Christ dies no more, nor
we by Baptism can dye any more with him, Theophilact so expounds Theoph. in
loc.
these words. He that will be twide Baptized does thereby make a representation
of two Deaths, and two Crucifyings of Christ.

And put him to an open shame.] Because it is ignominious, and a great
undervaluing of that one most precious* and alsufficient Sacrifice of Christ,
to Imagine, that his once dying is not Satisfactorie to the Justice of God for
all our sins both before, and after Baptism: Therefore it must needs follow,
that it is also Ignominious to his said death, for any Man to represent or
apply two deaths of Christ to himself by two Baptismes; for as his once dying
is a sufficient redemption, so one application of it to our selves by one
Baptism, is a sufficient application. If therefore by sin we fall away from the
benefit of Christ's death by suffering sin to live and reign in us, having once
died unto sin Sacramentally by Baptism, we must return to the benefit thereof,
by repentance, and mortification of sin, and not by a new, or second Baptism.

For the earth, which drinks in the rain etc. verse. 7. 8.

Here is a second reason alleged against re -- Baptization, 2. Reason
taken from the similitude of the earth with Man, for the earth which has bin
watered by rain from Heaven, and dressed by the husbandman, if it bring forth
good fruit answerable to its watering and dressing, it is a sign that the
blessing from God still continues on it. Even that blessing wherewith it was at
the Creation blessed, when it was said Genesis 1. 11. Let the earth bring forth
grass, and the fruit tree; But if after this watering and dressing, it bears
only weeds, thorns, and briers, then a new watering will not help it, but make
it worse, by giving a new, and fresh aliment, whereby those Weeds and Thorns
will be increased, and grow stronger, -- watering is not a means to kill them,
or to extripate them.

So that Christian, whose soul has been watered with Baptismall Grace, and
dressed with holy doctrines of repentance, and faith toward God, and has been
instructed in the certainty of the resurrection, and of Judgment eternal: and
yet for all* this, brings no fruits of Righteousness and Holiness, but
contratily abounds luxuriantly in all manner of carnal v^ces, let him not
think that these weeds, and thorns of his soul can be mortified or killed by a
second baptismall watering. Which (if it should be applied) would rather
accumulate, higher and increase his sins, then diminish them, even as rain does
weeds* because such a second Baptism, will be accounted ^s a second crucifying
the Son of God, and shaming him, by undervaluing his own most precious death,
so as it is before said, and as the Earth being cursed, B^ing^th forth thorns
and thist^^s. G^n. 3. 18. So that baptized Ambro. in loc.
One, who brings forth no better fruit is nigh unto cursing and like unto
Thorns his end is, to be burnt. He says but nigh unto Cursing, not yet
altogether accu^sed, and whose end is to be burnt; yet not presently thrown
into the fire, for as St. Ambrose expounds it, Combustio non crit nisi quis in
fin^m permane^t in peccatis suis.

In this exposition of this Scripture all this while the reader does not find
any imposibility of repencance, of renewing, or of remission and pardon of the
grand blasphemy; the impossibility here mentioned ^s only an impossibility of
renovation and rep^ntance by a second baptism.

If this exposition be admitted, it will quit us of a great deal of trouble
which some Expositors have occasioned* and thereby much perplexed many men's
minds. How well, or ill other writers of late have expounded this place, I
take not upon me to censure, nor am I so wedded to this, as to propose it
Magisterially, but with submission to my Superiors, this may be true though
others are not false: for the Character which St. Austin sets on the
Mosaicall Scriptures, and Aug. confess. lib. 12. c. 31. 32.
their Expositors, may serve for all other Scriptures: Cum alius dix^rit, hoc
sensit Moses quod ego, et alius dicit, imo illud quod ego; cur non utrumque
dixero sensisse id ibid.
utrumque verum est -- and again he says, Moses, sensit quicquid very hic
potuimus invenire, et quicquid nondum possumus invenire: whatsoever truth may
probably be gathered out of a Scripture, agreeable with the faith, and
profitable, may with humility be submitted unto, as if it were the true meaning
of that most wise Spirit, by whom it was inspired, who has so composed the
Scriptures in such a temper as may be suitable to the various senses of men,
although some see more in them, then others have discerned, my humble prayer
shall be with him, Domine nec fallar in Scripturis; nec fallam ex eis, (i) Aug.
confess. l. 11. cap. 2.
The Lord grant that I may neither be deceived in the meaning of Scriptures,
nor by Scriptures deceive others.

CHAP. VII. A review of those words, Heb, 6. 4. and some doubts cleared
^concerning the former Exposition; what moved the Apostle to handle the
Doctrine of Baptism, and so strictly to forbid Anabaptisme in this Epistle to
the Hebrews.
THe sum of the former Exposition is; That if a man fall from baptismall
Grace, he must nor expect a restoring thereunto by a Second baptism, this
place being the chief in Scripture, by which Anabaptism, or Rebaptization is
expressly inhibited, though something obscurely.

It would now be inquired whether this Word Enlightened in this place may not
signify those that are instructed, or chatechised only, and not those that
are baptized; and this, because some think that instruction in the Christian
doctrine, is here principally meant, for that the custom of the Church was,
that in Adulto baptism, (which was the baptizing of people when they were in
years of discretion) catechizing ever went before baptism.

To this I answer, that in the Ancient Church language, it cannot appear to me
that any were called Illum^nati, (i) the Enlightened, before they were actually
baptized, although they were ever so exactly instructed, and known to be very
learned in Christian Doctrine* for we find that many were chosen, and compelled
to be Bishops before they were baptized; as Eus^bius Naz. orat. 19. and 20.
Soz. l. 7. c 8. Ruffin hist. l 2. c. 11. Soz lib. l^b. 6. c. (...)
Bishop of Caesaria in Ca^padocia, who was the Predecessor of St. Basil, and
after him Nectar^us was chosen Bishop of Constantinople by Theo^osius the
Emperor, immediately after the resignation of Nazianzen, and then Nectarius
was not baptized. So was St. Ambrose before he was baptized chosen, and
compelled to be the Bishop of Millaine; surely St. Ambrose, and the other also
were perfectly instructed in Christianity and known to be learned before they
were chosen to those high p^aces, especially, in such a learned age of the
Church; wherein they li^ed* and yet St. Ambrose after he was so chosen, is
styled but Catecumenus, and was never called Illumina^us, until he was
baptized And yet we find that those who were baptized in their infancy, were
then called Illuminat^, before they were Catechized. For St. Cyrils Catechismes
are therefore called, Catech^sis Illuminator^m, because they were employed for
the instruction of such as had been baptized in their minority and were
therefore called both catecumeni (because they were yet under the Catechiser)
and also illuminati, because they had been baptized. So that it is apparent
that some were called Illuminates, who were not sufficiently instructed, and
some were called Catecumeni, who never had been baptized, and therefore were
not called Illum^nati. St. Cyril says, Antebaptismum Catecmenus eras, nunc
fidelis vocaris; Cyril Hiero. n. 4.
(i) before baptism, they were called Catecumens, but after baptism (if they
were once admitted to the Eucharist) they were styled, Fideles (i) the
faithful; but in case they had been baptized, and not yet admited to the Lords
Supper, then their appellation was, Neophyti, (i) New plants: yet both the
Fideles, and the Neophyti Paulin in vita Amb^. n. 1.
were called Ill^minati, St. Ambrose would fain have declined the office of a
Bishop after he was chosen and alleged for himself, that the Scripture forbad
that such a man as he was, should be a Bishop, for he was not so high as a
Novice or Neophyte, 1. Tim. 3. 6. (...), for (said he) if a Neophite (who has
been baptized) may not be a Bishop, much less may I who am inferior to a
Neophite, but in the rank or form, of the Catecumen^* not baptized, and
therefore inferior to all that are baptized. In a word the appellation of
Illuminates was not given them because of their light of knowledge, but only
because they had received the light of Grace baptismal.

In the next place I am to show some reasons why our Apostle does thus forbid
second Baptismes, and what occasioned him to handle this doctrine in this
Epistle which is scarce found evidently any where else in Scripture especially
to be so offensive and sinful as is here set ^orth* to this query my answer is,
that the Apostle had great and weighty reasons so to do, partly because of the
Hebrews or Jews unto whom he wrote, and partly because of the Gentiles, unto
whom this doctrine would be needful, as well as to the Hebrews, as will appear
anon.

First, For the Hebrews, and particularly the Sect of the Pharisees in which
St. Paul had himself bin brought up, and accurately instructed. The Heb^ewes in
their legal religion used diverse and frequent washings, and Baptismes, whereby
they thought themselves to be acquitted of any former pollution; and indeed God
had commanded some washings, whereby, as by a tipe and figure of outward
washing, he signified what pureness of life he required of his servants, Exodus
19. 10. Sanctify the people, and let them wash their clothes, and of
sanctifying the Priests he says, Exodus 29. 4, Thou shall bring Aaron and his
sons to the door of the Tabernacle, and shall wash them with water, and Exodus
30. 15. Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands, and their f^et, at the
brazen laver when they go to Minister -- that they dye not, which washing was
actually performed, Exo^us 40. 31.

To these Scriptural washings the Scribes and Pharisees added more traditional
washings as we find in the New Testament, thereby imaging that any pollutions
attracted by touching any unclean thing, were done away Matthew. 15. 2. The
Scribes and Pharisees said, why do thy Disciples transgress the tradition of
the Elders? for they wash not their hands when they eat. And those traditional
washings are called Baptismes, Mar. 7. 3. The Pharisees, and all the Jews when
they come from the Mar^^t, except they wash their hands often, they eat no^. So
they washed cups, pots, brazen vessels, the original word is (...) (i) unless
they Baptiz^ -- and (...) Verse. 4. 1.
(i) baptismes of vessels, and so again, Luke 11. 38. the Pharisee marvelled
rhat Christ washed not ((...)) suitable hereunto St. Ambrose speaks, Judaei
baptizant Cali^es (i) the Jews baptize cups. Besides Amb. de Initiandis cap.
4. n, 30. Epiph. hae. ^7.
there was a special sect of Jews before the birth of Christ mentioned by
Epiphanius, and called Hemerobaptistae -- qui quotidie etiam hieme in aqua
mergerentur cred^ntes se sic ab omni culp^ ablui (i) the Hem^rohaptists were
every day dipped in water, even in winter also, bel^eving that thereby they
were purg^d from their sins. Now these traditional practices and erroneous
opinions of the Jews, occasioned the Apostle to write this passage, especially
in this Epistle directed to the converted Hebrews.

This reason is rendered by Theodoret upon that place Theod. in loc.
Docet judaeos qui crederent, ne existimarent sanctissimum baptismum ^sse
similem baptismis judaicis, illi enim non solvebant peccatum, sed corporis
sordes purgabant, hinc frequenter adhibebantur, Baptismus autem noster, unus
est. (i) he teaches the believing Jews, that they should not think our most
holy Baptism to be like to the Jewish-baptismes, for by their sins were not
remitted, but only the body was cleansed -- therefore their Baptismes were
often reiterated, but our Christian baptism is but one, the like reason is
given by Theophylact (i) fortasse Theoph. in loc.
ills Hebraei ut qui legi affixi erant, multos baptismos judai^^ more etiam in
Gratia predicabant (i) perhaps those converted Hebrews held this dangerous
opinion that although they fell into foul sins after Baptism, yet that a new
Baptism would acquit them from all their pollutions as they were once made
believe the Jewish Baptismes did. Therefore the Apostle gives the Hebrews this
seasonable and profitable monition, to prevent their unreasonable presumption
of sinning, upon a false conceit that their new sins might be remitted by a new
baptism, and this conceit was also amongst Christians who were Gentiles, as is
next to be showed.

Secondly, this doctrine against Re-baptization was useful to succeeding ages
of Christians among the Gentiles, by reason of abuses, which probably would
arise amongst them, and as may reasonably be thought) were foreseen by the
Apostolical Spirit. For who is now ignorant of the great troubles and
controversies that have bin in the Church about Clino-baptisme, adulto-baptisme
-- Rebaptization of Heretics and Schismatics -- paedobaptisme -- and (to this
day) about Anabaptisme. Such doubts in a matter of so great weight are worthy
of an apostolical determination, which is here set down with great gravity and
severity, when we are told that such as will be rebaptized, do to themselves
re-crucify Christ. Rebaptization is not so light a matter as some take it to
be, Sr. Austin said upon great Aug. epist. 163. and. utrum rebaptizari an non
baptizari perniciosius sit difficile est judicare Aug. cont* donatist. l. 2 n.
37 vide Epiph. n. 29. 1 Maccab. 1. 15 1 Cor. 7. 18. vide Joseph. Ant l. 12. c
d* and Martial. l. 7. 29. Aug. Epist. 203.
deliberation. Rebaptizator peior ^sse potest quam intersector, (i) he that
rebaptizeth may be far worse then he that murthereth. God so ordered the
Sacrament of Circumc^sion, that it could not twice be administered to the same
person; the two differing sects in Palestine, I mean the Jews and the
Samaritans, could nor recircumcise one another neither was it ever attempted
that I find upon the apostate and impure recu^i^e^ among them but only on
Symmachus as Epiphamus says, Christian Baptism is the Circumcision of the
heart, therefore he that will be twice baptized, must first get two hearts, as
St. Austin says, Wherefore I think it will not be overmuch impertinent to this
business in hand of expounding that place, Heb. 6. 4. to discourse a little
the question of Anabaptisme, or Re-baptization, upon what reasons and grounds
it was practiced by old Heretics and by that worthy man St. Cyprian, and in
some cases by the Church Catholic, but most especially because our Apostle
even St. Paul himself is alleged by some as a countenancer and practiser
thereof, by that story related, Act. 19.

CHAP. VIII. The distinction of Baptisms into true and false, the forms of
pseudobaptismes among Heretics, after their dippings a true baptism may be
administered, yet is not to be accounted Anabaptism. the Novatian baptism was a
true baptism. St. Cyprian in part is excused.
BEcause this impossibility of renewing appears to b^ m^ant only of renewing
by a new baptism, and that a new baptism, is not only useless, but sinful
also; I am now to discourse the reasons that have moved old and new
Anabaptists, to attempt second baptisms. Epiph. hae. 76.


The word Baptism is Vox dualis, an aequivocall word of a double signification.

First, it is taken improperly, and abusively, when 1.
that is called baptism which indeed is not so, but only has some outward
similitude thereof, yet wants the Essentials of true baptism.

Secondly it is taken properly, for that baptism which 2.
was prescr^bed by God: (for Sacramenta sunt de ^aelo, God must be the author
of Sacraments properly so called) and administered so, with the essential part
thereof, as by the author of it is prescribed.

For the first kind I have showed, that the traditional washings of the Jews
are called baptismes, but improperly* and so the very Heathens had their
baptisms, for they imitated the Christians in initiating their Novices by
washing as Tertullian often observes; Ecclesia Tert. de prescript. and Advers.
Quintil. n. 30. and 10.
diaboli^mitatur illam Christi in lavacro, etc. and again, Ethntci per aquas
imitantur sacris -- Ecclesia diaboli b^ptismum ex^r^et in suis: (i) The
worshipers of the devil imitate the Church of Christ in their laver: for
heathens are initiated in their rites by a baptism, and Just. apol. 2. n. 13.
the same relation was before delivered by Justin Martyr. Now such false and
nominall Baptisms as these, do not at all bar either Jewish, ot heathenish
converts from a true Christian baptism.

Besides these, there were other false and aequivocall baptismes, or
Pseudobaptismes among Heretics, who professed Christianity, which they called
Baptisms, although in truth they were not so, because they wanted the very
essentialls of true Christian baptism, of which we have very frequent mention
in the Church-writers, as namely of the Valentinians, who thus baptized, In
nomine ignoti pa^ris, in ve ita^e Matris, and in nomine Iren. lib. 1. c. 18. n.
107.
Jesus; as Irenaeus says, (i) in the name of the unknown Father, in the truth
of the Mother, and in the name of Jesus. So the baptism ministered by the
Marcionites, was vain and null, for this reason as St. Basil thought because
they thought God was the Author of evil, and Basil. Epist. 2. ad Amphi. n. 35.
therefore they would not baptize in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost; and for this reason the baptism of the Pepuzian
Montanists, was by the same father adjudged void, because they Bafil. Epist. 1.
ad Amphican. 1. n. 34.
baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of Montanus P^is^illa.
So also, the baptismes administered by Eunomius the heretic, were by the Church
adjudged void and null, because he baptized, in nomen Epiph haer. 76.
Dei incarnati Filii Creati, and Spiritus Sanotificativi, (i) in the name of
God uncreated, of the Son created, and the sanctifying Spirit. Such false
baptismes as these cannot disable any who have been dipped in this form, from
receiving the true baptism of the Church, upon their conversion, and desire of
the same; If our Commenter should dip one in the words of the same faith, which
himself has professed in his book, viz. In the name of the Supreme God and his
deified Son not Supreme God: being in this profession a manifest
Antitrinitarian, who can doubt, but that such a dipping will not be a baptism,
but the party is (for all this unbaptized, and by reason of the same Doctrine
which our Commenter has commented, the baptisines by Photinus the heretic
were adjudged void, because he Baptized Sozo. l. 4. c. 5.
not into the Eternal Son of God, for he thought him to have had his beginning
from Marie his Mother* Upon these reason's Origin expressly says. Baptismus
fit Otig. in Eze. hom. 7.
in nomine Patris, Fi^^i, and Spiritus Sancti -- si quis pauca commutans,
unxerit quemquam, is Oleum dei ponit ante ido^um. (i) Baptism is to be in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, If any shall but a
little alter this form, and so Baptize, he does thereby lay down the Baptismal
Oil of God before an idol.

Quod vult Deus in S. Austin, proposes a very pertinent Aug. to. 6 de haeres.
Epist. 1. n. 3.
question to this matter now in hand, in these words. Post quas haereses
ec^l^sia Baptizet and non rebaptizet? (i) He would know after what heretical
Baptism, the Church might Baptize such as had bin dipped before, and yet that
the Church shall not be charged with rebaptizing. To which question, S. Austin,
in Aug de eccles. dog. c. 52. n. 73.
another book, returned this good answer. Those that have bin Baptized by
h^re^icks without invocation of the ho^ie Trini^ie, and returning to the
Church, do receive baptism in the name of the Trini^ie, such we pronounce
Baptized, but not rebaptized; for we may not account such to be baptized, who
were not dipped in the name of the Father and of the Son, and of the Holy
ghost; and such were those, who were dipped, by the Photinians* Montanists,
Manichees, and by Ma^cion, Cerdon, thus he. And in this, S. Cyprian may so far,
be justly excused, in requiring that those who had bin so dipped by those
heretics should be again re -- dipped by the Church in lawful baptism for
(says he. Haeretici illi non possunt Cyp. de haer. Bapt. n. 85.
baptizare, qui negant dieta^em Pa^ris, aut Filii, aut Spiritus -- nam Marcion
non poterat qui negabat Trinitatem. (i) Those heretics can not minister true
baptism, who therein, deny the Godhead of the Father, or the Son, or the
Holy ghost, for therefore Marcions was no baptism because he denied the
Trinity. And therefore such pseudo-baptismes as were Ministered by such
heretics, so, as is showed before, Cyprian will not call Baptismes. Non est
Baptismus, sed tinctio. (i) It must not be called a baptism but a dipping. And
of those whom the Church baptized after they had bin formerlie dipped by those
heretics, he says. N^n est r^ -- Baptiza^io Cyp. ibid. ad Quint. n. 86.
^ae^eticorum, sed haptizatio. (i) We can not say, such heretics are
rebaptized; but that they are baptized.

If Cyprian had held himself to this Doctrine, and gone no further in his zeal,
against the heretics, and schismatics of his time, he had escaped much blame,
where with succeeding ages have charged him, and not without Cause as will
appear anon.

Upon Cyp^ians grounds, of Baptizing A^ti^rinitarians, who had bin so foully
dipped before the Canons of the first Nicene Council, (as they are recorded by
Ruffinus) direct; that when any heretic of the sect of Paulus Samosat^nus,
would forsake that heresy, and join with the true Church, that such an one,
should not be entertained, before he were new -- baptized, this is in the 21
Canon of Ruffi^us. But before, in the ninth Ruff. n. 16.
Canon it is ordered, that if any Catharist, or Novatian, leave that sect, to
join with the Church, he should be received, and for such there is no mention
or direction of a new baptism, because the baptism of the Novatians was a
true baptism, but the Samosa^eni^n dipping was but a Pseudobaptisme, because
Samosatenus denied the Godhead of Christ as is before declared.

Also, before the Nicene Council, and Cyprians time, amongst the Canons of the
Apostles, recorded by Clemens, one is, Ordinati, vel Paptizati ab hae^eticis,
reordinandi, and r^baptizandi sunt^ (i) Those that have bin ordained, and
baptized by heretics, must be re -- ordained, and re -- baptized this was not
intended, to countenance a Second Baptism, but because the tinctions, or
dippings of those who would not confess the Trinity were not to be esteemed
Baptismes. And therefore Athanasius also (after the Nicene Council had condemned
the Arrian heresy, for denying the Eternal Godhead of the Son) says plainly.
Ar^iani verum Baptismum Athan. cont. Arrian. sermon. 3. n. 6.
amittunt qui^ verum filium negant. (i) The Arrians in denying the Son of God
do thereby cease to administer true Baptism; for we find, that after that
Council the Arrians (denying the Trinity) would neither use the same form of
Doxologie which the Church Catholic used, nor the same form of invocation of
the Trinity in Baptism, but glorified, and baptized thus. Gloria Patri, cum
filio, in Spiritu, and In nomine Patris, Basil. de Spirit c. 25. n. 27.
per filium, in Spiritu. Because they would not acknowledge the Son, and the
Spirit, to be aequal to the Father.

CHAP. IX. That the disciples of Ephesus. Act. 19. who had bin Baptized by
John's disciples before, were rebaptized, because John's Baptism was then out
of date, and null.
THe principal president of a Second, and a true Baptism, after an imagina^ie,
and pseudobaptisme is clearly set fo^th by that passage of the great Apostle,
and recorded Act. 19. of the Eph^sian disciples* who had bin baptized unto
John's Baptism; but because that baptism was out of date, at the time when
they were first dipped, therefore when they heard S. Paul's words they were
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus For although John Baptisi's baptism,
was a true Baptism, whilst the time of his Baptismal office lasted, in so
much that our savior, never (that we find) caused any to be re -- baptized,
who had bin baptized by John; yet we know that John's Baptism was to have a
period, and not to last always. But how long it was to last, and to be in
force is the chief question material for the exposition of this passage.

To this question I will set down the answer given Optat. lib. 5.
by. Optatus, That John's baptism being to repentance, and belief in him that
was to come, even Christ, to be manifested, especially to his death, and
resurrection, this baptism, must last till then, and further also, until
Christ had ordained a new form, and law of baptism to be perpetual in his
Church. So that until Christ, after his resurrection had given a new rule, and
precept of baptism, the old baptism of John was accepted; but after Christ
had once said Go and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son etc. I say after this, John's baptism was expired, nor
could he, or his Disciples baptize any longer in that form of believing in him
that was to come, because now he was come, and manifested, and gone out of the
world Christ's new law, and precept of baptism* was the bounds, and limits of
Io^n's baptism, from that time all baptismes must be In the name of the
Father, and of the Son. etc?

Now these Disciples of Ephesus, were indeed Baptized with John's Baptism; but
they were so baptized, when it was to late, and when that form of baptism was
quite expired, and out of date; for their baptism was after Christ had settled
the new law of baptism In the name of the Father. etc? Without the observation
whereof, a thousand dippings, or duckings, will not make one baptism; so that
those Ephesians can not be properly said to have bin baptized, because the very
essence of that Sacrament was wanting: Optatus speaks Opt. lib. 5.
home to this purpose. Hiqui apud Ephesum post leg^m, Iohannis Baptisma^e
baptiza^i leguntur -- in Sacramento erraverunt, quia jamintroductum fuerat
baptisma Domini, and exclusum fuerat se^vi (i) Those Ephesians who are said to
have bin baptized with John's baptism, greatly erred in that Sacrament,
because then, the Baptism of the Lord Christ was brought in, and the baptism
of his servant John was shut out. Briefly that baptism which before Christ's
new precept was good; and useful; after the precept, became useless, and void.
So says the same Father of the same question. Post hodiernum non licebat, quod
heri licuit (i.) after Opt. ibid.
that day it became unlawful, which the day before was lawful.

But how shall it appear, that these Eph^sians were not baptized either by S.
John himself, or else by his Iohannists, till after the death of Christ, and
after he had prescribed this new form of baptism.

I answer, thus; probably, first they confess they were baptized to John's
Baptism, they say not by John.

Secondly. John never was at Ephesus for ought can appear.

Thirdly John had bin dead at least 14 years, before this time and passage,
(some say 19. years.) It was 12 years after Christ's resurrection and
ascension, before S. Paul took that journie to Ephesus.

Fourthly before Christ's resurrection and his Commission given to teach, and
baptize all nations, the Gospel might not be taught and preached to the
Gentiles, as Mat. 10. 5.
these Eph^sians were, for the Apostles were forbidden to go to the Gentiles,
or even to the Samaritans, who dwelt in that land, and were partly of the
I^wish religion, and the Seaventie went not out of the land, as appears. Luc.
10. 1. No more then Christ did, therefore in all likelihood these Eph^si^ns were
neither taught nor baptized, till after the new law of baptism.

Fifthly had they bin Jews of Ephesus, and had bin timely baptized with in the
Holy Land by John's baptism, S. Paul would not have caused them (more then
others) to be rebaptized, nor would God so have countenanced rebaptization, as
to give them the Holy ghost at imposition of hands.

Now whereas some late Expositors deny that those Eph^sian disciples were
again baptized by S. Paul's direction, and this they do because they are
unwilling to give such a countenance to Anabaptisme; the truth is, that they
were indeed then baptized, as that narration does clearly show, and yet, that
act does not at all warrant any re -- baptization properly so called. Origin
says. Refertur in actis quod baptizati a ^rig. in Romans ^^. 5. n. 50.
Johanne, rebaptizati sunt in nomine Jesus, quia Johannis baptisma, ^rat
baptisma, in lege non in Christo. (i) It is related in the Acts, that those
were rebaptized, who had formerlic bin baptized to John's baptism; because
John's baptism (then) was no better then the legal washing, and was not a
baptism in Christ. For it could not be accounted an Evangelical baptism
because it was not so performed as Christ had prescribed. S. Cyprian clearly
affirms. Baptizatos a Paulo eos, qui jam baptismo Joannes. Cyp. de haer.
Baptiz. prope fin. n. 85.
(i) the Ephesians were baptized by Paul, who had bin before baptized with
John's baptism; and yet that this act does not warrant two several Baptismes S.
Ambrose shows. Baptizati baptismo Joannis, Act. 19. Amb. de Spirit. l. 1. c.
3.
revera baptizati sunt postea -- nec itera^um est baptisma -- sed non erat
ptenum baptisma. (i) Those Ephesians were indeed baptized by Paul, and yet it
was no re -- baptization* because that baptism of John was an imperfect
baptism. Finally, the Jews in our time may as well justify their
Circumcision, which unto this day they use Sacramentallie, because they believe
that the promised seed of circumcised Abraham, is yet to come, yet we know
their circumcision is mortiferous and S. Paul has said. Gal. 5. 2. If ye be
^ircumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing (that is) if you be therefore
circumcised, as believing that Christ is yet to come in the flesh. Even so the
baptism of John Sacramentallie used, was an engagement to believe on Messiah
to come, which baptism if it be so used after Christ is come, and gone, how is
it any better then the now lewish circumcision? seeing both are upon the same
reasons quite expired, and out of date, and are moreover a denying, that Jesus
is the Christ.

All this while, I find no warrant, or lawful president of a Second baptism,
for when a true baptism succeeds a pseudobaptisme, it must not be called a
re -- baphization, but a baptism. Thus much of the lawfulnes of a ture
baptism after a pseudo baptism.

CHAP. X. Of true Christian baptism, that it may not be twice ministered. No
heretic maintained two baptismes, but only Marcion, what Marcion, was, and his
reasons for multiplying baptism, why the Novatians, Donatists and our new
Anabaptists do re -- baptize. Cyprian's error; and Athanasius his ludicrous
baptism.
IN the next place, we are to inquire, whether those who have bin truly
baptized according to that form, rule* law, and precept which our savior
prescribed for baptism, after his resurrection Math. 28. 19. May in any case
be rebaptized: for our Christian religion would be a very pleasant easy
religion, if those that fall into any grand, and enormous sins* after one
baptism, may be affoiled, and wholly acquitted, toties quotiet, as often as they
fall, by new baptismes. But surely, renewing by a new baptism is that renewing,
which our Apostle tells us is Impossible. One true Baptism is indeed a renewing
to repentance, and so S. Paul called John's baptism Act. 19. 4. John verily
baptized with the baptism of repentance and so is our Christian baptism, but
after this one renewing by baptism to repentance, it is impossible to be renewed
by a Second baptism to repentance.

Amongst all the old, and new Anabaptists, since the birth of Christ I find
none that ^ver asserted, and taught a second baptism to be lawful and
useful, after one baptism (which they thought and confessed to be a true and
lawful baptism) except only Marcion, But lately amongst us, some teach that
Baptism may be iterated, as well as the Lords Supper who was a most odious and
despicable Heretic; he indeed permitted three several su^cessive Baptismes,
and accounted them all lawful, (though in truth not one of them was so) the
reason which moved him hereunto is related by Epiphanius; Thus Ma^cion (says
he) was born in Pontus, Epiph. haer. 42.
and was the son of an Orthodoxe Bishop, and lived a c^asle single life a
good while; at length he deflowred a Virgin, and was therefore by his own
venerable Father ejected out of that Church; then he traveled to Rome, and
there petitioned to be vestored to the Church, but could not obtain it;
hereupon he began a new Sect, and among other impieties, he ordained that a man
might be thrice Baptized if he sell so often into sin, and this he did, because
himself so fell: And because he could not obtain* absolution from the Church by
penance, therefore he would have it by a new Baptism; -- Epiphanius adds
further, that this Narcion permitted women to baptize: (as he had good reason)
that so the same persons might release, with whom the sin was committed.

A second kind of Re-baptization, was practiced by the Catharists or Novatians,
and also after them by the Donatists, both of them African monsters: but theirs
was upon this reason. They had separated themselves from the Church Catholic
upon pretense, that it was not a true Church; and therefore they thought that
true baptism could not their be ministered; whereupon, such Seperatists as
departed from the Catholics, and joined with those Heretics, were entertained
by receiving a new baptism, which yet those Heretics would not confess to be
a second baptism, but a baptism, accounting the baptism formerly received in
the Church Catholic to be void and null

And in this very case it was, that the religious Bishop and holy Martyr Saint
Cyprian erred, and his African Council with him. For because the Novatians
rebaptized the Catholics, therefore Cyprian caused the Novatians, which
forsook the schism, and joined with the Church, to be received by a new
baptism, when they had been before baptized by the Novatians, (Excepting only
such who had formerly been baptized in the Church Catholic.) For he also
thought that the Novatians, being Heretics, and divided from the Church, had
not power to confer baptism, and that such baptismes as were by them conferred
were but pseudobapbaptismes, and therefore void and null; although they had
used the same form of Baptism, which Christ prescribed. And this was much
pressed by Cyprian, not only upon the reason before alleged, but also in a
prudentiall consideration, for (says he) If the Catholic Cyp. de haer. bapt.
n. 85
Church should admit of, and acknowledge the baptism administered by Heretics
to be a true baptism, then none of those Heretics would be persuaded to
return to the Church: But this Allegation has more of policy then of
Christianity.

And indeed, it appeared that the Novatians also, did therefore rebaptize the
Apostate Catholics, not because they did seriously think their former baptism
void, but craftily they so pretended, that thereby they might gain Proselytes,
and to magnify their own congregations. For we find that Novatus himself, or
Novatianus as Saint Cyprian calls him: Novatianus ipse, Cyp. de haer. bapt. p
323.
qui alios transfugas ab Ecclesia rebaptizabat tamen ipse non era^
rebaptizatus: (i.) Novatian, who rebaptized others, who had revolted from the
Church, yet himself (a revolter also) was not rebaptized. Eusebius relates
Eus. hist. l. 6. ^. 33.
the Story more largely thus: Novatus in his youth was possessed by an unclean
spirit, and so committed to the Exorcists, then falling into a dangerous
sickness when he dispaired of recovery, he was baptized in his sick bed, where
all the rites of baptism use not to be administered; -- yet after his recovery,
his baptism was never completed -- yet this hypocrite, whose own baptism was
hardly perfect, though he forsook the Church, and forced others to be
rebaptized, himself never was so rebaptized.

Upon the like reasons, the Anabaptists at this day, will not acknowledge
themselves to be Anabaptists, or rebaptized, or take upon them professedly to
administer a second Baptism. But they say, that Infants are not capable of
Baptism, and therefore such as were so sprinkled by the Church, before they
had the use of reason, their Baptismes are to be accounted void and null,
although those Infants were baptized, In the Name, of the Father, etc. as
Christ commanded. So in outward profession, neither the Novations, nor
Donatist, nor our Anabaptists do require, or maintain any second Baptism, but
they say, their own Baptism is the only Baptism.

The Ecclesiastical History reports the like case in a differing matter
which fell, in a passage of discourse between two Bishops, who were both at the
same time Bishops of Constantinople; the one was John Chrysostom, who was
Bishop of the Catholic Church; the other was Sisinnius, a very learned in
ingenicus Bishop of the Novatian Congregations, ( For in those days all
Catharists, whether Novatians or Donatists liked well of Bishops) these two
met, and Chrysostoms first said, It is against the Canon of the Church, that
one City should Ruff. in can 10 l. 1. c 6. Soc. l. 6. c. 20.
have two Bishops. Sisinnius answered that it was true, but withal, that he
knew but one Bishop in the City of Constantenople. His meaning was, that the
Catharists did not acknowledge Chrysostom to be a Bishop, nor did the
Catholics acknowledge Sisinnius to be one: so in effect neither party could
say, there were two Bishops.

In like manner, Saint Cyprian, and his party, accounted the Baptismes of
Heretics to be void; and the Heretics accounted theirs to be void, so neither
party would acknowledge more then one Baptism, and yet both sides erred: for
the Baptism administered by the Church was a true Baptism, and so was that
which the Novatians ministered, as was confessed by other Churchmen then
living; as namely by Corneleus the famous Bishop of Rome, a learned man, and a
glorious Martyr, who at that very time signified his dissent Eusebius. hist. l. 6.
c 36.
from Cyprian, in that opinion of rebaptizing the Novatians, as Eusebius
testifies.

The principal reasons (besides policy) which on both sides were pretended for
rebaptization, were these two.

First, they said, that baptism was void and null, which had been administered
by a person who was not fitly qualified, or that had no authority to baptize.
So Saint Cyprian alleges in defense of rebaptization. Nemo rite baptizatur
nisi ab ^o qui licentiam baptizand Cyp. lib. 1. ^pist, 6. n. 67.
habet: (i) None can be said to be rightly baptized, except they were baptized
by one, who had a license and faculty to Baptize. -- And adds further, that
Schismatics who have separated themselves from the communion of the Church,
can have no authority to administer that Sacrament which belongs to the
Church to confer, neither may the members of the Church receive baptism from
Heretics, with whom it was not lawful, so much as to eat and drink. Thus he
on the other side, the Seperatists confessed, that baptism might not be
renewed, if it had once been administered Been, well, but they would not grant
that the Catholics could administer it well.

The second Allegation was, that the Baptism which 2.
had been administered to a person, who was not qualified so as to be a subject
capable of Baptism, was to be accounted void. This is the reason which at this
day is urged by our Anabaptists against praedobaptisme, because Infants cannot
be taught, therefore they may not be baptized.

To these Allegations, the answers in brief are. First, 1. Resp.
the unworthiness or unfitness of the Baptizer, cannot nullify the baptism,
because (as Optatus answers Opt. lib. 5.
the Donatists, (i,) Caeleste munus credenti non ab homiste, sed a Trinitate
consertur; (i.) The Heavenly gift of baptismall grace is not conferred by the
person baptizing, but by the Trinity, and of the water of Opt. ib.
Baptism, he says, Aqu^ vera illa est, quae non de loco non de persona, sed
de Trinitate condita est: That is true baptizmall water, which is sanctified by
the Trinity, and not by any unworthiness, either of the place, or of the
person baptizing.

And whereas the Donatists confessed, that when baptism was administered well,
it could not be itterated, he answers, that when Christ said, John 13. 19. He
that is washed needs not, save to wash his feet.] He spoke of Baptism, -- of
the thing, not of the person, for then he would have said, He that is washed
well, etc. But in that he added not the word ( Well) it was to signify,
Quicquid in Trinitate factum suerit been est: (i.) Opt. ib.
That Baptism which is ministered in the Name of the Trinity, is well
ministered. Now because Baptizmal grace is conferred only by the Trinity;
therefore the Baptism is not nullified by the Baptizers unworthiness.

As when white wool is died into a royal purple, the Opt. ib.
color is not called principally by the touch or handling of the Dier, but by
the blood of the fish Purpura and Murex: So neither is it the Officiating of
the Minister, but the Operation of the Trinity through the blood of Christ*
that gives Baptismall grace, which grace cannot be impaired or nullified by
the unworthiness of the Minister. And therefore Saint Cyprian upon better
consideration, in one of his Sermons, said, Sive Judas, sive Paulus baptize^,
Chr^stus peccatum tollit: Cyp. sermon. de Bapt. Christi, n. 94.
(i.) Whether Indas, or Paul baptize, it is Christ, who nevertheless takes
away sin. And this was also the judgment of Saint Austine concerning
Baptism administered by the Donatists, who were both Separatists, and
Heretics* Donatistae non rebaptizandi sunt, quia in Aug. Epist. 48.
Nomine Christi baptizati sunt -- inter Baptismum Apostoli, and Ebriosi, nihil
interest, si ut^rque sit Baptismus Christi: (i.) The Donatists may not be
rebaptized, because they have been already baptized in the Name of Christ;
there is no difference (substantial) between that Baptism which is ministered
by an holy Apostle, and that which is ministered by a debashed fellow; If the
Baptism be in that form which Christ ordained; and what Christ's Baptism is:
Optatus tells us, Christ appointed in what the Nations should be Opt. lib. 5.
Baptized, viz In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, etc. But he did not
limmit by whom they should be Baptized; and therefore (says he) Quisquis in
Nomine Patris, Filii. and Spiritus baptizaverit, Apostolorum opus implevit:
(i.) Whosoever shall Baptize in the Name of the Father, and c. does perform
that Baptism which was given in charge to the Apostles: for when Christ said,
go-and Baptize all Nations, he did not say, do you Baptize, and none other:
Thus he.

Now albeit, all men have not a Commission, or calling to Baptize, yet if it be
so performed as is said, by persons that are not qualified thereunto, those
persons are indeed to be accounted presumptuous intruders; but yet the
Baptism, for substance is a true Baptism, and shall stand, neither may it be
iterated, although it was ministered with violation of good order.

When Athanasius was a Boy* playing with his fellow boys; in their game,
Athanasius acted a Bishop, and in their sport, he baptized another Boy, but
used the manner, and the form of words, which he had seen and heard used in the
Church: Hereupon, when the business was brought before the Church Bishop
Alexander adjudged, that ludicrous Baptism, to be a true Baptism, and would
not suffer the Boy that was so Baptized, to be rebaptized; although at that
time (for ought can appear,) Athanasius, who Baptized another, was himself
unbaptized: As see in Sozomen, In Soz. l. 2 c. 16. Ruffinus l. 1. c. 14.
Socrat. l. 1. a Ma haeus Epmus. Nor. An. Dom. 1637.
this Diocese in a Town called Acle* about ten years since, a woman Baptized
an ^nfant, in the form prescribed in the Gospel, whereof when notice was given;
the then most learned and vigilant a Bishop, would not appoint the child to be
rebaptized, but yet ordered that the woman for presuming to do that office
which did not belong to her, should be publicly reproved; so careful were the
Ancient and modern Churchmen to avoid Anabaptisme.

To the second Allegation of uncapablenesse of Baptism* 2. Respons.
particularly of ^nfants, their indoc^bility cannot be a sufficient reason to
nullify their Baptism, or to rebaptize them.

For first, we do nothing doubt, but that Infants born 1
of Baptized Parent^ are capable of Baptism, as well as the Jewish Infants
were of Circumcision, and we think the Evangelicall Proph^t, Esa. 49 22*
Prophesied of such presenting of Infants to the Church, which are to be brought
in their arms, and that ^nfants are capable of Sanctification, and that as they
have formerly, so they may still receive the holy Ghost; as it is said of
Jeremy, c 1. v. 5. and of John Baptist, Luke 1. 15. and that such are esteemed
by Christ, and called believers, Matthew. 18. 6. where the words (...) and (...),
are used. And (...), Luke 18. 15. Because the Spirit of God, is the seed of
Faith, and of all Christian virtues; and therefore it is called the seed, 1
John 3. 9. and 1 Pet. 1. 23. so that Infants having the Spirit, may thereby be
said to have Faith; -- In radice, semine, potentia, actu primo, and in
fundamento; because the Spirit is the root, the Seed the foundation, and first
act of Faith: Now as we read Act. 10. 47 Can any man forbid water that these
should not be baptized which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? Upon
these grounds* St. Cyprian with his Council (when the question was by the
Epistle of Fidus moved, whether Infants of two or three days old might be
Baptized) answered, Quid deest ei, qui in ut^ro, Dei manibus formatus Cypr.
lib. 3* Epist. 8, n. 71*
est -- unusquisque nostrum in Osculo Infant is, de^et recen^es Dei manus
c^gi^are, etc. (i*) No capacity of Baptism is wanting in the Infant -- he was
formed in the womb by God, when we consider that the youngest Infant is but
newly come out of his Creatours hands, why should we doubt to salute him with
an holy kiss? And St. Austin says, A parvulo recens na^o, usque ad decrepi^um
Aug. Enchir. cap. 43. n. 58.
senem, nullus prohibendus est a Baptismo; (id est) Baptism may not be
forbidden to any age, from the newborn Babe, to most extreem old age.

But secondly, suppose that Baptism administered to 2.
Infant, were not duly and rightly with good order, conferred on that age, the
fault must be imputed to the Minister, and not to the Baptism (being performed
in the form prescribed by Christ) nor to the Baptized Infant, and the same
reasons before alleged against rebaptizing of others, will serve as well
against rebaptizing of these. But so much has been by Divines unanswerably
written and said for paedobaptisme, that nothing of moment can be added by me.

CHAP. XI. That the ancient Church allowed but one Baptism, is showed by their
deferring it till ripe years, and to old age; that their delay was also for
carnal respects, the danger of delaylaying it, the Story of a Jew-Anabaptist,
and an example upon an Arian pseudobaptisme; the conclusion of this Exposition.
IF the Ancients accounted paedobaptisme, so good and lawful as is said, it
may further be demanded, why they did so frequently and almost generally defer
and put off their Baptism, either until ripe years, and even to very old age,
or their death bed; and yet we find by many pas^ages in the Church Records,
that men exceedingly fear to die unbaptized; and did exceedingly lament for
their friends that died without Baptism. Saint Aug. Epist. 180.
Austine reports, that in any time of danger or persecution, there used to be
great confluence of people to the Church requiring Baptism -- and this was
because they feared to die without it: And the sisters of the Emperor
Valeminia^ us the younger did greatly mourn not so much for the death of the
Emperor, Amb. de obit Valent. n. 46.
as for that he died without Baptism as Saint Ambrose declared.

That men did so defer their Baptism, it is most evident, and yet not only
ordinary, ignorant and common people, but also the most considerable, prudent,
honorable and learned men in their days; the godly Emperor Constantine the
first, who was the greatest advancer of Christian Religion, being also born of
Eusebius. de vita Constable. l. 1* n. 47.
Christian Parents, yet he would not be Baptized till his old age, when he was
65 years old and but a little before his death as Socra^es says so his son
Constantius Soc. l 1. c. 26* Eusebius. in vit. Constable. 4. Soz. l. 2. c. 32.
the Emperor and Valens, and Theodosius the elder a most Godly Prince, these
all deferred baptism until they thought that their death was near; and of
the clergy (besides those before mentioned, who were elected Bishops before
their baptism) Nazianzen was 30 years; and Austin was 34 years old before
they were baptized; to omit, others, Rhenanus observes Rhen. in Tert. de
coron. mil. annot. n. 12. Amb. de paenit. l. 2. c. 11. n. 34.
that in the primitive Church. Soli adulti sere baptizati, (i.) though some
infants were baptized yet mostlie they baptized at years of discretion, and S.
Ambros affirmed. Si paenitentia non esset, Omnes different ablu^ionis gratiam*
usque ad senectutem. (i) If it were not for the Second remedy, of Repentance,
no Man would be baptized until his old age, and death bed. Which
bed-riddenbaptized are therefore called Clinici, and Tertullian understands
Cyp. lib. 4. Ep. 7. Tert. de Resur. n. 20.
that passage 1 Cor. 15* 29. of. Vicarium Baptisma (i) That the living were
baptized in the stead of others that died unbaptized.

If we shall curiously examine, why the ancients deferred baptism so long, it
will appear, that their reasons mostlie were Carnal and voluptuous, for
because they believed, that baptism was the Sacrament of remitting sins past
both Original and actual; and also because at the time of baptism, the person
to be baptized, made a solemn profession of r^nouncing the world, the flesh,
and the devil, and that they thought themselves much more obliged to a pure,
and strickt Christian life, after this vow, then before, and because they were
very unwilling to part with their worldly pleasures, and lusts; therefore they
put off their baptismes, till the time of old age* when their lusts should
leave them. S. Austin confessed of himself, that when in his youth he Prayed
for the grace of Chastity, yet in his heart he did not desire it might be
presently given him. Aug. Conf. l. ^. c. 7.
Domine da mihi Chastitatem, sed noli modo -- timebam ne me ci^o audiret --
malebam expleri, quam extingui concupisc^utiam* (i) Lord give me Chastity, but
give it not yet, I was afraid God would grant it too soon, for I desired rather
to satisfy my lusts, then to have them extinguished.

Against such carnal delayers Nazianzen very gravely Naz. Orat. 40.
inveigheth. It is absurd (says he) to defer baptism for such voluptuous
causes; It is the Devil that suggesteth thus. Give me thy present time, and
youthful days; let God have thy weak old age -- Do not therefore accumulate
thy sins, that in baptism a greater number may be remitted -- On thy death
bed, the physician will be busy about thee, the cries of thy wise and children
will disturb thee; -- the priest laboring to prepare thee for heaven will be
quarrelled at, by thy kindred which gape for thy estate -- besides, even in thy
youth one c^^m of bread, may suddenly end thy life, and if thou should die
without the Sacramen^al mark of the great shepherd; Satan may surprise thy
Soul, as thieves do sheep not marked, this deferring baptism does moreover
give a great evidence, to the world, of thy lusts, and that thou desire still
to continue in them -- he added further. If thou have any infant-Children, let
them be presently dedicated to God by baptism, least they also be enticed to
sin, -- Samuel was promised to God, before he was borne, and -- Baptismus puero
magnum est ^muletum, and incantamentum. (i) Baptism is a preservative, and an
holy charm against sin, thus he and much more, and indeed, to defer baptism
only to prolong our time of loose -- living, what is it, but (against the
Apostles direction) therefore to sin that grace may abound.

S. Austin reports of himself. That in his youth, he Aug. Confess. l. 1. c. 11.
fell into a dangerous sickness, and therefore desired baptism, but before it
could be administered, he began to recover, so it was deferred, hereupon himself
confessed, Laxata sunt loca peccandi. (i) He was let loose to all manner of
sin, and when some reproved him, others would answer for him -- sine eum facere
quodvult, nondum enim Baptiza^us est -- tamen non dicitur, sine vulneretur
nondum enim sanatus est* (i) Let him alone, let him do what he will, for he is
not yet Baptized: they might as well have said, let him be wounded, for he is
not yet cured.

Others would delay baptism, under pretense of fear, least they should not be
able to satisfy and keep the vow, which is there to be made, when as it was in
truth therefore, because they were loath to leave their pleasures and lusts; for
when some had bin persuaded to come to the pabtismal font, who were known to
have put away their wives, and taken other women, and so lived in adultery,
when they were required to put away those women before they could be baptized;
they have chosen, rather to live without baptism, then to put away their
concubines and so have returned unbaptized as S. Austin reports. Aug. de
side, and Op. c. n. 78.


Others would say, they deferred baptism until the anniversarie baptismal
days Easter, or Pentecost came, and then they would pretend, that they would
stay longer, until their kindred came -- or that they were not provided of a
gift to Offer -- or that their white baptismal garment was not made, or that
they had not sufficient provision to entertain the baptizers, or that they
would stay till the Bishop, or the Metropolitan came, that he might baptize
them, these were but excuses, Naz. Orat. 40.
the true cause was, as is showed by Naz. They would not forsake their lusts.
They feared to engage them selves to live a strickt Christian life; which
reason, was Tert. deBaptism. c. 18.
long before intimated by Tertullian when he said. Qui intelligunt pondus
baptismi, magis timebunt consecutionem, quam dilation^m. (i) They that
understand the weight of baptism, will more fear to take it upon them, then
to delay it, for in those days conscionable men upon their baptism, resolved
to live a strickt, and austere life, being persuaded that sins after baptism,
were far more ponderous, and displeasing to God, then sins before baptism, and
that baptism was an easier remedy for former sins, then repentance, or
penance was for later sins, as Nazianzen also urges in his baptismal Naz.
Orat. 40.
Oration to deter those from sinning, who were then to be baptized. Post
baptismum peccare grave est -- co^rectio (per penitentiam) est baptismo
molestior; quantam vim lacrymarum impendemus, ut cum baptismo exaequari possit.
It is a heavy thing to sin after baptism -- renewing by repentance is a
greater molestation, then by baptism; O what an abundance of tears must fall
from us before our repentanced can aequalize the water of baptism. Now what
necessity was there, that men should so put off, and procrastinate their
baptismes until old age, and their death -- bed that then they might be
acquitted of all their sins, and go out of the world clean and pure; but that
the Church did by our Apostles words in this place, and others understand an
Impossibility of any new or Second baptism.

The Excl^siastical History, in detestation of Re -- baptization Socrat. l. 7.
c. 17.
reports a memorable story of a bergerlie vagaband Jew, a notorious
hypocrite, who went to several congregations, and sects of Christians,
counterfitted himself to be converted to Christianity, learned to answer
such Catechistical questions as were required of them that petitioned for
baptism, and had bin baptized in the Church of Catholics, at Constantinople,
and had got much money which charitable people had bestowed on him in pity of
his poverty, and congratulation at his baptism, after this, he went to
another congregation in the same city of the Novatiau sect, and there
presented himself with the like hypocrisy as one newly converted, and
petitioned the bishop that he might be baptized (concealing his former
baptism) Paulus the Bishop commanded, that preparation should be made for
baptizing this Jew, so the font was filled with water, and a white baptismal
garment was bought for him; and when Paulus had proceeded so far in the
baptismal office, that he was come to the time of dipping him; looking into the
font, he perceived, that there was no water in it, then he commanded the font
to be replenished, (supposing that the former water was sunck into the bottom
hole for want of care in stopping that sinck,) and caused the sinck, and all
cranies to be carefully stopp't, and so proceeded to dipping; but lo! the
Second time, the wather was vanished; whereupon Paulus was much amazed, and
looking upon the Jew with indignation, said. O homo, aut ve^e^ator es, aut
baptismum accepisti. Soc. l. 7. c. 17.
(i) O man either thou art a counterfit, or else thou have bin baptized before,
hereupon, One of the standers by, wistly viewing the Jewe, declared that he had
indeed bin before baptized by Bishop A^ticus, who was the successor of
Chrysostom, this business happened in the time of Theodosius the younger.

Not long after another strange paslage happened, in the same city of
Constantinople, which was taken as a Nic. l. 16. c. 35.
signification of the nullitie of such pseudo -- baptism as was ministered by
those heretics who denied the Godhead of Christ, For when one Barbas was to be
baptized by an Ar^an Bishop named Deuterius, this Arian changed the baptismal
words prescribed by Christ, and said Baptiza^ur Barbas in nomen Patris, per
filium, in Spi^itu. (i) Barbas is Baptized in the name of the Father, By the
Son, in the Spirit. At these words, the font-water presently vanished out of
sight, and Barbas was amazed, and fled unbaptized. This I trust is sufficient
for the clear exposition of that hard place, which principally was intended to
assert the unity of Christian baptism, and not the Impossibility of
repentance.

The sum of what has bin said in this exposition, is comprised in the 4
Conclusion following.

First that the Impossibility there mentioned, is not to be understood of an
Impossibility of repentance, nor of an Impossibility of renewing, but only of
an impossibility of being renewed, by a new, or Second baptism.

Secondly. That baptism having bin once administered, in that form which is
prescribed by Christ; no Second baptism may be ministered to the parties so
baptized, upon any pretense either of non age in the baptized, or unworthines,
and unfitnes in the baptizer.

Thirdly, that such baptismes, or rather dippings, which are ministered by those
heretics who deny the Trinity, and therefore do not d^p, in that baptismal
form which is prescribed by Christ, are utterlie void, and null.

Fourthly. That baptism rightly administered to those who have bin heretically
dipped before, is not to be called a re-baptization but a baptism.

By all that hitherto has bin objected, It cannot appear; That the blasphemy
against the Spirit (what soever is meant by that sin) is absolutely
unpardonable, but still there is one remedy left, whereby the sinner may find
help, and that is repentance.

CHAP. XII. An Exposition of Heb. 10. 26. The particular sin against the holy
Spirit is showed to be the denying Christ to be God, what is meant by
accounting his blood to be Common, or unholie. The unsufficiencie of legal
Sacrifices: and the sufficience of Christ's sacrifice.
THere is another place in this Epistle, much urged by some divines, by which
they would infer, that if a man once fall into this sin; there will be no means
or hope of pardon left, the words are thus read. Heb. 10. 26.

26. For if we sin wilfully after we have received the Knowledge of the truth;
there remains no more Sacrifice for sins. 27. But a certain fearful looking
for of judgment, and sierie indignation. etc? In this Chapter we have an
evident discovery of the grand capital sin which is commonly called. The sin
against the holi^ Spirit, or Holy Ghost, wherein, the obscurity of it (as it
is delivered in three of the Evangelists,) is cleared; and by examination of
the Apostles words in this chapter, it will appear, that the sin which in the
Gosple is called the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, is the blasphemous
undervaluing of the Person of the Son of God, whose Godhead is there called the
Holi^ Spirit, or Holy ghost, as has bin showed before in my Second book, and
this blasphemio consists in the denial of the Godhead of Jesus Christ, whereby
his allsufficient Sacrifice is undervalued, and the Son of God is trodden
underfoot, as being esteemed but a creature, and a mere man, and thereby
becomes contemptible, and his Blood, even the blood of the Covenant is
esteemed (...).] (i) But common ordinary, unholie blood no better then the
blood of another ordinary common man, and not Sanctified and ordains for
that great and high mystery to be offered as a full, and sufficient expiatorie
sacrifice for the sins of the world, according to the Covenant of God. For he
that denies the Godhead of Christ, must needs think, that his blood is but
common blood, as other men's blood is, and therefore, not of sufficient worth and
value to redeem the world, more then another man's blood is, and indeed if his
blood be no better then the blood of another man, and if it be not the royal
blood of God. Act. 20. 28. It has not, it can not redeem us.

Now whether the sin mentioned in this place, be absolutely unpardonable, and
altogether remediless, will better apeare, by a diligent exposition of that
text, as it stands in relation to the context both before, and after it.

For if we sin etc?] If every sin which is committed after we knew, and
professed the Christian religion, should be unpardonable, what man could be
saved? seeing the most righteous men fall, and therefore do daily pray forgive
us our trespasses; therefore this saying can not be understood of every sin, but
suerlie here is one special grand, and capital sin meant, and what that is the
words going before, and following, do declare.

For verse 5. it is said in the Person of the Son of. God Sacrifice, and
Offerings thou would not, but a Vide. Psalm. 40.
body have thou prepared for me.] That is, because the Legal sacrifices, or
the blood of bulls, and goats, could not redeem man, therefore an humane body
was prepared for the Son of God, that in that assumed humane nature, he might
in man's stead, bear the curse, and suffer death, which man had merited.

And because we, who are but mere men, weak and sinful, can not by our selves
perform the will, and law of God (without performance whereof, no man can be
saved) therefore, the Son of God came, in our stead to perform the whole law,
so as was required, and willed of God, as it is said verse. 9. Then said I lo I
come to do thy will o God] So that both the active obedience of Christ in
doing the law, and his passive obedience in suffering the punishment of our
transgressions, are here set forth in these words verse. 10. By the which will,
we are sanctified, through the Offering of the body of ^esu, Christ, once for
all] That is by Christ's performing the will, or commandments of God in our
stead; and through the Sacrifice of himself on the Altar of the Cross, for our
sins, his mystical body, or Church, is Sanctified, for it is said verse. 12.
This man (Christ) Offered one Sacrifice for sins for ever] and again verse. 14.
h^ one offering he has perfi^ted for ever, them that are Sanctified] and then
we are exhorted verse. 22. Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance
of faith] and verse. 23. Let us hold fast the Pro^ession of our faith without
wavering.]

If we sin -- there remains no more sacrifice etc] Having showed what the
foundation of our Christian religion is, namely Jesus the Son of God, God
Incarnate, and in his humane nature performing the covenant, law, and will of
God, both actively, and passively, for us, and in our stead; and requiring that
we should have a full assurance of faith, of the truth of that Doctrine,
without which faith, Christ will not profit us; he now shows the sad
consequences of rejecting this doctrine, by Apostacy, or, falling away from
our Christian religion, in these words, There remains no more sacrifice for
sins, but a certain fearful looking for, of judgement] So that the sin here
meant, is Apostasy that is, forsaking Christianity, as Julian did, esteeming
of Christ, but as of an ordinary Coman man, and therefore distrusting, the
sufficiency of his blood, and death, as not an equivalent price, and ransom
for man's redemption.

The truth of this Exposition will better appear by the words following,
wherein this particular sin is evidently expressed, and is called, verse 29.
Treading under foot the Son of God -- counting the blood of the Canant
unholy; or (as it is in the Original.) a common thing -- and doing despite
unto the Spirit of Grace.] Now to tread under foot, is to vilipend and
undervalue Christ, as esteeming him not sufficient to take away, or satisfy
for our sins: to count the blood of the Covenant unholy or Common, is to
esteem of the death and blood shedding of Christ to be of no more virtue and
power, then the death and blood of another Common man; and they that so basely
undervalue Christ, as to think and to account him but a mere man, do despite
unto the Spirit of Grace.]

What is the Spirit of Grace in the Son of God, but his Divine Spirit and
Godhead, even that Spirit from which all Graces flow, which are called the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. So they, who have no higher estimation of
Christ, then of a mere man, do despite unto his Divine Nature, his Godhead;
for what greater spite can be, then to un-God him? the word here used (...), to
despite, in effect is all one with the word (...). in Saint Matthew, and the
Spirit of Grace here is the same which is there called, the Holy Spirit which
does signify the Godhead of Christ as has been showed before.

For if he that despised Moses Law, died without mercy] verse 28. Yet Moses was
but a mere man, and so but a Theod. in loc.
fervant to this our God. Quan^o morte dignior est, qui Mosis Deum hab^t
despicatui: (i.) What shall become of him that despises the God of Moses, and
the saving Doctrine of Christ* who is the Only Eternal God. Moses propounded
life as a reward to them that should perform the Law.

Christ did perform that Law in man's stead, to man's behoof and benefit, and
offers to men, the benefit of that performance, and with it life eternal,
only with this condition of believing on him.

Therefore, that man which will not give credit to this joyfull-Evangelicall
offer, must expect to perish eternally: for if Christ be rejected absolutely,
and salvation through him despised, and not hoped for, or expected. There is no
other sacrifice for our sins possibly to be found, nor any other Name by which
we can be saved.

By what has been said, it appears that these words, ( If we sin) in this
place, signify the sinning of the grand sin of rejecting Christ, not trusting
or believing in him for redemption

So does this word sin signify the same, in that saying of our Savior, John
16. 9. The Comforter will reprove the world of sin, because they believe not
on me.] For as no sin shall be imputed to them that believe rightly in
Christ, with a true faith, working by love.

So, to them that will not believe in him, all their sins must needs be laid
to their own charge, without any help or ^emedy, because there is none other
sacrifice for sin, but only Christ, But I proceed.

CHAP. XIII. Of several degrees of denying, and rejecting Christ and salvation
by him; as First, some denied outwardly, only by compulsion, and the terror
of torments. Secondly, some wilfully uncompelled. Thirdly, others both
wilfully, and after knowledge; as Arius, Julian, and this Commenter:
Theophylact and Anselms Exposition of this place.
IF w^ sin wilfully] Many have sinned this sin of denying Christ, who yet did
not deny him with a settled and full resolution, and willingly in their heatt*
many denied him in the times of persecution, for fear of torments, who did
secretly in their Conscience retain the Christian Faith. So Pet^r denied him,
but was restored to his former state by repentance, and the Orthodox Church
never doubted of such deniers, but that they might have the remedy of
Repentance, and did condem the Novatians upon this very reason, for denying the
benefit of repentance, and refusing to admit those (who had so sinned by fear
and infirmity) to ecclesiastical penance.

Sain Cyprian most compassionately took upon him to excuse some, who had for a
while suffered for Christ, loss and torments, but at length yielded to deny,
by Cyp. ser. de lapsis. n. 80.
the infirmity of flesh and blood* Caro non animus deficiebat. (id est,) Their
defection was only of the flesh, but not of their mind, and so was not
wilful. And St. Ambrose makes a great difference between the^ that deny
Christ uncompelled, and wilfully, and those that are compelled thereunto Ambro.
de Paenit. l. 1. c. 3* n. 33.
by torments. Non est simile neg^re Deum sponte, and suppliciis victum. (i.) It
is not alike sin in them, when one denies Christ wilfully, and uncompelled,
and another in the agony of torment, and he puts up this supplication to God,
in the behalf both of persevering Martyrs, and of failing and fainting
Consellors. Domine Ambr. de Elia, and je. c. 21. n. 17
Jesus admi^te victores ad requiem; Victos ad compunctionem, (i.) Lord Jesus
give rest and peace to those that hold out in Martyrdom unto death, and to
them that faint, give the grace of repentance. But of the second sort and
degree of sinning this sin uncompelled, the Jews, Turks, and heathen infidels
are culpable, who do with a full resolution of will, purposely and wilfully
reject and refuse the benefits offered by Christ. But there is yet an
higher-degree of this sin expressed in the words following.

(If we sin wilfully) After we have received the knowledge of the truth.]
Everyone that denies Christ* does it not with a full consent of his will, and
in his conscience; nor does every one that denies him wilfully; so deny him
after he has received the gladsome knowledge of him by the Gospel. But to
deny him wilfully, and that after we have received the knowledge of his saving
health offered, is this grand capital sin, and is a total Apostasy and
renouncing of Christian Religion. This was the sin of Julian the Apostate, and
of Arius the Heretic, as Beza, and the Geneva gloss note. For Arius Beza. and
glossa Genev. in loc.
was a Priest, and a Preacher of Christian Religion by his profession; and
Julian was brought up therein, and very accurately instructed in the knowledge
thereof by the care of two Emperors his predecessors, as was confessed by this
Emperor Julian in a letter of his which is yet extant amongst the Epistles of
St. Basil, wherein he thus writes: (...). Apud Basil. Epist. 207.
(i.) I have read (the Gospels) and understood them, and do ^espise them. Of
this kind of falling away from Chri^^ian Faith, both taught, and once
professed, it is said, v. 38. The just shall live by his Faith, but if a man
draw back my Soul shall have no pleasure in him.

Finally, that it may clearly appear, that this sin is to be understood of
rejecting Christ and despising the offer of salvation by him, as if he were
unable to procure it for mankind; or as if men imagined that there is some
other way and means besides Christ, and without him, whereby salvation may be
obtained, the words following do show.

There remains no more sacrifice for sin but a certain fearful looking for
of judgment, etc.] There is none other name by which we can be saved, but
only Christ; his One sacrifice of himself on the Crols, was the only
sacrifice for sin, of which all legal sacrifices were but Types and Figures*
He who totally rejects salvation by Christ, shall never find any other means,
by which he possibly can be redeemed and saved. Julian rejected Christ, and
sought to heathen gods for salvation, but in vain. Turks expect salvation by
their false Prophet Mahomet rejecting Christ, esteeming him to be but a
creature, and a Prophet only: Arius undervalued Christ also, and accounted him
but a creature, not acknowledging him to be (as in truth he is) the only God,
even as our C^mmenter denies him to be the Supreme God. This is the treading
under foot, and undervaluing his most precious blood, and All-sufficient
sacrifice: For if Jesus Christ be not the only and the Supreme, and most high
God, his death could not have redeemed us; He that esteems Christ to be but a
Creature, and one but preferred, exal^ed, or deified by God* must also
consequently think, that Christ was insufficient to take away the sins of the
world; and he that thinks him thus insufficient does thereby most extremely,
and perniciously depreciate and villifie his precious blood: and this it is
which is here c^lled the treading under foot the Son of God, and accounting
the blood of the Covenant Common or vulgar blood, nothing better then the blood
of other men.

Those men that so think of it cannot possibly frame or excogitate to
themselves any other reasonable, or probable way of R^demption, and salvation,
but necessarily must with horror look only for judgment of condemnation, and
consequently fiery ind^gnation This surely is the right meaning of th^se words*
and thus have some ancient Exposito^s expounded them, mine Exposition is not
new.

Theophilact upon these words thus writes: This Theoph* in loc.
saying is against the Nestorian Heretics, who said, that Christ was a mere
Man, and that his blood was common blood, nothing differing in worth from other
men's blood

Thus he,

For indeed N^sto i^s divided Christ, denying the Personal Union of the two
Natures, (as I have showed before;) and therefore would not confess the blood
of Christ to be (as it is) the Blood of God; and upon this misconceit, he said,
at the Council of Eph^sus, that he could not call the Man Cbtist, God, for it
he should, it would follow, that he must call him Bim^strem and ^rim^strem
Deum; (id est) A god of two Soz l. y. c. 33.
or three mon^ths old; not considering that those sayings are not incongruous,
to be said of that Person who is Emmanu^l, God -- and Man.

Saint Anselme also writing upon those words. And has counted the blood of the
Covenant unholy;] Does thus expound them. Qui i^a vilipenderi^, ut eum ad
Ansel. in loc.
salutem sufficere non credat, nec Cenus humanum emundan^em; id est, to count
the blood of the Covenant unholy (or common) is to think so vi^^ly and meanly
of it, as if it were not of sufficient worth and value to redeem and save
Mankind.

CHAP. XIV. That the remedy of Repentance, is not absolutely taken away from
them that have sinned this grand sin, in denying and renouncing Christ, that
such possibly may repent, that this sin is then only unpardonable, when it is
accompanied with final impenitencie; the Conclusion of this Exposition.
IN all that our Apostle has said in this place, of sinning this grand sin by
treading under foot the Son of God, counting the blood of the Covenant common
and vile; casting away our confidence in Christ, drawing back from him, doing
despite unto his Spirit of grace, and all this wilfully, and after knowledge
received; and although he has affirmed, that (besides Christ's all sufficient
sacrifice once offered on the cross) there is none other sacrifice for sin,
either possible, or to be expected; yet after all this grand Impiety and
Apostasy, it is ^not said, nor intimated, that the sinner who so sins cannot
repent; repentance is not quite and absolutely taken away, nor is the sinner
wholly left to desperation without all remedy.

For albeit, he who does renounce the Profession of Christ plenarily and
totally, can find no other Savior, Redeemer, or Sacrifice for sin, and so long
as he continues in this total Apostasy, he can reasonably expect none other
issue but a fearful judgment of condemnation, and fiery ind^gnation: yet
nothing hinders, but that this Apostate may return to his former faith and
profession, and repent of his Apostasy, for although this rejecting, or
renouncing Christ may for a time be total, and plenary, yet it does not
follow, that it shall be final, seeing that those Jews who for a time did so
eagerly and spitefully renounce and deny Christ, that they also crucified him,
yet they were by St. Peter exhorted to repentance, Acts 2. 38. yea, and they
did actually repent and were baptized, -- and continued afterward steadfast in
the Apostles Doctrine.

Wherefore the sum of all this threatening is: That he who renounceth Christ,
can find no other Savior: (but if he will be saved) he must needs return to
that Christ by repentance whom he formerly rejected. Another Savior cannot be
found, but repentance may be found; for that is not absolutely taken away, and
by it reconciliation may be obtained.

The only thing which makes this grand sin to be absolutely unpardonable, is
impenitency, obstinacy, obdurateness, and perseverance therein, until death;
and in this case only, is that saying to be understood, It shall not be
forgiven, neither in this world, neither in the world to come*

In this Sense only did the anci^nt Expositors understand Aug. in expos.
Epist. ad Romans n. 96.
those words, St. Austine says, Quid restat nisi ut peccatum in Spiritum
Sanctum quod non remittitur, nullum intelligatur nisi perseveran^ia in nequitia
-- cum desperatione indulgen^iae* (i) No sin against the Holy Ghost is to be
conceived unpa^donable, but perseverance in that wickedness and desperation.
So Theophilact writing upon those words, If we sin wilfully, Theoph. in loc.
etc. Tells us they are to be understood* De permanen^ibus sine paeni^entia:
(i.) It is meant of such as continue obdurately without any repentance, -- he
adds. Si non p^rmaneamus -- veniae certe locus est, u^^ sunt igitur qui tolli
paenitentiam clamant: (i.) If we will leave and forsake that sin, certainly
there is pardon to be found -- away with them, who from these words Theod. in
loc.
gather, that such sinners cannot repent. Theodoret also gives the same
Exposition upon these words, There remains no more sacrifice.] N^quaqu^m
prohibuit paenitentiam, sed dixit non esse secundam crucem; (i.) The Apostle
does not deny repentance, or inhibit such sinners to be admitted amongst the
number of penitents; He only says, there is none other sacrifice or second
Cross. And before him S. Ambrose upon those words. Amb. in loc.
A fearful looking for of judgment] says. Aliud te expectat judicium nisi per
paenitentiam renovatus fueris -- In hoc, paenitentiam non excludit Apostolus --
nec prepititationem quaefit per paenitentiam, nec dejicit per desperat^onem non
ita est inimicus nostraesalutis -- uon enim dixit non est ultra paenitentia,
neque dixit, non est r^missio; sed Hostia, inquit, ultra non est, hoc est, non
crux ^ecund^ -- quicunque paenitentiae medicamentum neglexerit ignis aemulus
devorabit eum. (i.) Unless thou repent, judgment waits for thee, he does not
deny possibility of repentance, nor reconciliation by it, he does not cast
the sinner down to desperation, he is not such an enemy of our salvation, for
he does not say there remains no repentance nor there is no hope of pardon
only he says there remains no more sacrifice, that is, there is no other
Redeemer to be Crucified for thee, but only Christ; whosoever in this case
shall neglect the Medicine of repentance, fiery indignation will devour him.

As yet, we find not, that this grand blasphemy is absolutely unpardonable, or
that this blasphemer can not (by Gods mercy) repent. It does not appear that
such sinners are wholly left to final impenitencie and desperation, but we find
the contrary, that some have repented, and returned to the Lord their God.

CHAP. XV. Whether such Blasphemers as are before mentioned Question
(may upon their Repentance) find mercy? two sorts of Repentance: First,
Legal: Secondly, Evangelicall, of Judas and his Repentance: the difference
between penitencie, and resipiscencie: Objections out of the Old Testament
cleared: Why temporal pressures, are not always withdrawn upon true
Repentance.
IT being granted, that the greatest sinners, and most impious blasphemers
possibly may have the grace of repentance; it would be next inquired, whether
such sinners, upon their confession, repentance, and amendment may at all find,
and obtain mercy, and pardon, so that their repentance shall not be fruitless?

The ground, and reason of this inquiry, is taken from some passages, in
Scripture, where we find that some who are said to have repented, yet have not
bin releived, for of Judas it is said. Mat. 27. 3. When he saw that (Christ)
was condemned, herepented himself. To this, and the like sayings it may be
answered; That there are two degrees, or parts or ingredients of repentance.

The First is, the consideration of the terrors of divine vengeance, of the
threatenings in the law, which causes fear and horror of punishment only, and
looks no further; this, divines call repentance legal, because it is caused
by the preaching of the law only, as when a sinner considers the plagues
that hang over his head, it will make him sorrowful, this is called in
Scripture (...). (i) Carefulnes, dread, and anxi^^ie, for sins committed, in
respect only of the ensuing punishment, thus Caine, and Ahab repented, and of
Judas it is there said (...), (i*) he was greived.

The Second part or ingredient of repentance (which added to the former, makes
a complete repentance, and acceptable) is the consideration of Gods mercy,
grounded upon his promises in the Gospel, such as. Come unto me, all ye that
are weary and heavy laden etc. This is called repentance Evang^lical, and is
expressed by the word. (...). Act. 3. 19. and 2 Cor. 7. 10. which is rendered
fitly, by the word r^cipiscencie which signifies, a returning to ones self, a
recovering of our lost wit or former good estate, this ever is accompanied
with amendment of life, or at least a resolution thereto. (...)* Tertul. n. 41.
and 15. Naz. in Poem. n 44. Tert. de Paenit. n. 15.
est animi demutatio, est ^um quis corrigit vitam improbam. (i.) a Changing of
our evil thoughts, and correcting of our evil life, for repentance which is
only a sorrow for sin, is but fruitless, without amendment, of life. Vana est
paenitentia ubi nulla emendatio (i) Vain is thy penitencie, without amendment,
or resipiscency

Judas proceeded no further then the first degree, sorrow, in respect of his
sin, and accusing conscience, and ensuing punishment -- he said I have sinned,
but he sought not for pardon. Peter sinned -- then he wept bitterly -- but
afterward he repaired to his Lord, conversed with him -- professed his love --
and afterward died for his truth. The dove is a groaning -- bird, an emblem of
repentance -- it left the arc, bur it returned. The impure Crow, the emblem of
reprobates, it wears a mourning garment too, it went out of the a^ke, but
never returned* David sinned, often repented -- he Confessed peccavi* he smote
his breast (so far a reprobate Judas, might 2 Samuel 24. 10. Luc. 10. 13.
go) -- but David ceased not here, bur added Lord take away the iniquity of
thy servant, the Publican smote his breast -- but added, God be merciful to me
a sinner. The p^nitent Jews Act. 2. 32. first are pricked in heart -- but
added, Men and brethren what shall we do? Legal repentance only drives men
to sorrow, despair and destruction, but evangelical ^esipiscence leads men
to sorrow -- and further to hope, to amendment, to joy, to Salvation.

These 2 degrees or sorts of repentance were shadowed, and intimated in the
actions of Moses in the law, and Christ in the Gospel. One of the memorable
actions of Moses, was Ex. 7. 2* Turning waters into blood. Christ's first
miracle, was turning water into wine, to signify, The law-preaching alone to a
sinner, will turn his waters of repentance, into blood, death, destruction,
and despair, but the Gospel -- promises added, turn our waterie tears into
wine and gladness, and this conceit Durand stumbled on, and thus expressed it.
Aquam Dur. Rat. l. 6. c. 72*
in vinum mutare, est timorem de peccati^, converti in exultationem mentis.

From what has bin said; I think I may safely take up this conclusion that
when soever a sinner, though ever so great a blasphemer, shall confess, repent,
and amend his sin, and turn unto the Lord his God according to the rules of
evangelical resipiscence, that penitent sinner shall find merciful
entertainment. For when I see that there is no sin so great, but that the
Scriptural exhortations, and invitations to repentance, may, and verily d^^
extend to it, and to the greatest blasphemer. I can not imagine, that such a
repentance shall be fruitles and vain, unto which God himself does invite us,
neither would our merciful, and most wise God threaten destruction to an
impenitent sinner, if he purposed not to show mercy to a true penitent.
Tertullian says. Deus non comminaretur non paen^ten^i, si Tert. de Paenit. n.
15. Aug. de fide ad Pet. Diaco. n. 74.
non ignosceret paenit^nti, and to the like purpose S. Austin says. Deus
nunqu^m peccatori indixisset pae^itentiam, nisi paenit^nti, veni^ conced^nda
esset. (i) God would never have threatened the impenitent, if he intended not to
pardon a penitent neither would he have required repentance of a sinner, unless
he purposed to grant him pardon if he did repent.

But then what shall be answered, to those sayings in the old Testament, where
God professes the contrari^. Prove. 1. 28. They shall call upon me but I will
not answer they shall seek me carlie, but they shall not find me, no not when
fear, distress, anguish comes upon them* Isay. 1. 5. When ye spr^ad forth
you hands, when ye make many Prayers, I will not hear, I will hide mine Eyes;
and* Jer. 14. 12. When they fast I will not hear, their cry, and Ezech. 8.
18. Though they cry in mine Ear, with a loud vaice yet I will not hear them,
and* Zach. 7. 13. and Mich. 3. 4. The like sayings are now, calling, and
loudcrying, and spreading of hands, with many Prayers, seeking the Lord, and
that early, and in time of distress, and with fasting are outward expressions
of vehement repentance, yet God will not hear them.

For answer hereunto, let the reader look on the context of those places, and
he shall find, that those Cries plus tristitiae quam paenitentiae. Tacitus.
hist. lib. 1. p. 445. Pro. 1. 29. Isa. 1. 15. Ier. 14. 10. Eze 8 17. Mich. 3.
3* Zach. 7. 11.
were not the Cries of true penitents but of whiners, that continued
impenitently in their sins, they would not leave sinning, but yet called for
deliverance from some temporal plague, then hanging over their heads, for it is
at the same time said. They chose not the fear of the Lord, their hands are
full o^ blood. That they loved to wander (to idols) they have filled the Land
with violence they eat the flesh of my people; they stopped their ears that
they would not hear, hereupon God professes* that the Clamors of such
impenitent sinners, aad oppressors shall not divert his temporal plagues, this
is all that is there intended. But that the hearty groanings of a sinner truly
penitent, shall not avert Eternal plagues, does not by these words appear. And
in consideration of the most wise dispensatious of the Almighty, it is no
marvel, that he refuses to withhold, or withdraw temporal p^nishments from
impenitent sinners, seeing he does not always remit a temporal affliction unto
a sinner tru^ie penitent, no not when he forgiveth the sin, as appears in
David 2* Sam. 12. 13. I have sinned -- The Lord has put away thy sin --
howbeit, the Child shall die. Lueretia apud Livium. Des. 1. l. 1.
Ego me, Etsi peccato abs^lvo, supplicio non Lib^ro.

The reason why temporal afflictions are not always remitted, either to true,
or false penitents upon their C^yes, is given by S. Hierom. Magnae faelicitatis
^st interdum, Hier. in Ezech. 8. 18.
ad praesens, misericordiam non mereri -- ut malis coacti, intell^gant quid
fecerint. (i) It is in some cases, a sign of great happiness, not to obtain
mercy, and releasment, that men may learn by afflictions, how greatly, they
have sinned. So S. Ambrose says of Amb. Epist. l. 3. n. 52. Cyp. cont. Demet.
n. 75. Naz. Orat. 20. n. 19.
the same, people of whom the Prophets spoke those things. Judaeos in
potestat^m hostium dedit Deus, ut a Caelo remedium quaererent. (i.) God
delivered his people the Jews into the hands of their enemies to provoke them
to seek help from heaven Cyprian says. ^eus qui beneficiis non intelligitur,
plagis intelligitur. Nazianzen says. Plaga corda^is viris, doctrina est. (i.)
When men will not listen to God, for his benefits sake, he will open their
understandings with afflictions -- temporal plagues to wisemen, are active
sermons.

If we rightly consider, to what end, God sends, or permits temporal
afflictions to fall, both upon penitents, and impenitents; we shall find it
rather a token of his mercy, then a sign of his anger: we honor a Physician,
or a surgeon for curing us, though it was done by bitter potions, or painful
searings, and cuttings. Ama medicum percussorem, quia e^us plaga est Hier. n 38.
matter medicinae. (i.) Because the pain he puts us to, proves a medicine. God
is our physician, tribulations are his medicines, which he therefore applies,
only, that they may heal us, and howsoever the medicine be sharp, and seem
very evil, and penal, and for present displease us, yet. Quae hic pu^antur
mala, in Ambr. in symb. n. 20. and n. lact. n. 17.
Cael^ bona sunt. (i.) On earth that which is thought evil, in Heaven is known
to be good, for it is here taken to be a punishment, which indeed was but a
medicine.

V^ curat medicus vulnera vulneribus, as a Surgeon Pros. Epig. n. 33 Aug.
Epist. 48.
cures a wound, by lancing. Qui phrenetioum liga^, and lethargicum excitat,
ambobus molestus, ambos amat. (i.) He that binds a mad man, and with a blow
rowseth up one falling into a d^owsi^ lethargy, angreth both, and yet to both
does a freindly office.

And although these temporal judgments, are set forth unto us, as signs of
Gods anger, because they are such things as angry men wish, and bring upon
their enemies, yet they are indeed arguments of his care over us, and used as
preventions of worse evils. Divina bonitas, ideo irascitur in hoc seculo, ne
Ir^scatur Prosp. in sent. 5. n. 33.
in futuro (i.) God shows signs of his anger in this world, to prevent his
anger aeternal, in the world to come. Men are ready to say, or to imagine, that
God does not hear, or regard the Prayers of men in affliction, because he does
not send present deliverance, but this is an error in us, for God ever hears,
yea and grants the request's of truly penitent, and faithful souls, though
not to our fancy, and desire, yet substantially to our greater benefit. Bonus
Deus non Aug. Epist. 38.
tribuit saepe quod volumus, it quod maluimus trebuat. (i) though he grant not
that particular thing which we expected, yet he gives that which we would
rather chose, if both were propounded to us. And therefore some prudent
Christians have bin so far from murmuring at afflictions, that they have
earnestly desired Orig. in Psalm. 37. hom. 2. Aag. vita. l. 3. cap. 29.
them of God. Domine, oro, flagella me, and noli me res^rvare cum illis qui non
flagellantur -- and Domine hic seca, ure, ut in ae^ernum parcas. (i.) Lord I
pray thee chastise, lance, and sear me in this life, and reserve me not to
perish eternally with them that have their pleasures in this world. And for
this they have a parterne from a Prophet. Jer. 10. 24. O Lord correct me, but
with judgment, not in thine anger. This is enough to the question in hand viz.
that this Grand sin, is not always left to final impenitencie, nor is the
repentance (if it be true) of such sinners vain and fruitless, and
consequently, that this sin is not absolutely unpardonable.

CHAP. XVI. An Exposition of that place. 1 John. 5. 16. Of the distinction of
sins into venial, and mortal, what is meant by a sin not unto death, and a sin
unto death, that all sins are not Equal.
THere is yet another doubt to be cleared, which, seems to represent this
grand sin, as if it were altogether, and absolutely unpardonable, which is
occasioned by those words. 1 John. 5. 16.

If any man see his brother sin a sin, which is not unto death, he shall ask,
and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto
death, I d^e not say, that he shall pray for it.] By which words (at first
sight) it may seem, that 1.
some sins are deadly, or Mortal, and others sins not deadly, for from these
words, the Fathers often use to distinguish sins* into Venial, and Mortal,
whereas we are well assured, that every sin, even the very least p^ccadillo, is
in it self Mortal, and may bring damnation, and yet we doubt not, but the
greatest Capital sin may by Gods mercy become Vemal, and may be pardoned.

Secondly, it may seem by these words, that although 2.
some sinners may, and in Christian Charity ought to be prayed for; yet
others, without breach of Christian Charity, may be omitted, and not prayed
for; which yet seems very rough and harsh, seeing we are commanded Mat. 5. 44.
both to love our enemies, and to pray even for them that persecute us.
Wherefore, for the right understanding of these difficulties, it will not be
amiss to examine these words diligently, by way of an Exposition.

For surely, if any sinner in this life, sin so deadly, that we may not p^ay
for him, and if Prayer be absolutely forbidden by these words, who will doubt
but that such a sinner is absolutely unpardonable, and wholly left to
desperation; now to the words,

If any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death.] In these
words the prudent Reader may observe.

First, That the sin here meant, is such a sin as 1.
may be seen perceived and discerned.

Secondly, That it must be discernable, whether it 2.
be unto death, or not unto death.

Thirdly, That because no particular sin is named, 3.
therefore any sin which is perceived to be a sin not unto death, may be
prayed for, and so pardoned.

Fourthly, let it be observed, that the Apostle does 4.
in the next verse set down what he means in this place by sin; for verse 17.
All unrighteousness is sin: John 3. 4.
and he had said before, chap. 3. verse 4. Sin is the transgression of the
Law. From whence it may be reasonably collected, that any unrighteonsnesse or
transgression of the Law, or any sin, (if it be discerned to be not unto
death) may be prayed for, and possibly pardoned.

A sin not unto death.] How any sin can be said to Beza. in loc.
be a sin, and yet not unto death is hard to be understood, seeing we read,
Romans 6. 23. The wages of sin is death; for any sin ever so little rendereth
us liable to death, and is affirmed so by Beza: Omtria peccata per se lethali^:
(id est,) All sins in their own nature are deadly. Our very lapst nature in
Adams mass Original sin, and our minima peccata; there is no sin so small,
or unconsiderable, but draws after it the weight of eternal wrath, and a
thousand times meriteth eternal death. Thus he, and Calvin very truly says,
Omne peccatum per se mortale; Calv. instit. 2. 8. 59.
(id est,) Every sin in it self is deadly, but when the sins of holy men are
said to be not unto death, and venial; it is because by Gods mercy they obtain
pardon, and not because the sins are of themselves venial; for who doubts,
but that in the reprobate, all sins are sins unto death; but in the Elect,
no sin is unto death.

Saint Chrysostom observes upon those words, Matthew Chrysostom. de compunct. n.
18.
5. 22. Whosoever shall say to his brother, Thou fool, etc.] De levioribus dat
sententiam, ut de gravioribus non dubitare debeas: (id est,) Christ pronounced
sentence of Hell fire, against so small a sin, that no man should doubt what
greater sins deserve.

Again, there are very grand and capital sins, which yet in some persons,
are sins not unto death, as Galathians 5. 19. Adultery, Murder,
Drunkenness, Seditions, Heresies, Idolatry, etc. of which it is there said,
They that do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; and yet we
know, that some of the Patriarks, and many converted from Heathenisme has
committed these sins, but obtained pardon, and shall inherit the Kingdom of
Heaven. Noah's excess, David's adultery, the Corinthians incest, Peter's denial,
and the Jews denying and crucifying the holy One, and Paul's persecuting the
Church; all and every of these sins, in those penitent and Elect vessels,
were sins not unto death. This I think will not be denied.

Not unto death.] But why are some men's sins called not unto death, when the
very same special sins in other men are indeed sins unto death? The Poet
murmured at such a thing.

Committunt eadem, diverso Crimina fato; Juven. sat. 13.
Ille crucem, sceleris precium tulit, hic Diadema. For many sins, and very
capital ones, are common both to the Reprobates, and to the Elect, and yet in
the Elect, and the same sin is not unto death, which in the Reprobate is unto
death.

The answer is, that our Apostle calls that sin, a sin not unto death, which is
confessed, repented, forsaken and amended, before our death or departure out of
this life, when a man does not obdurately continue, and persevere in his sin
until his death, but forsakes it in his lifetime, so that the leaving of his
sin and amendment of life, may be seen by his brother; for how else shall a
brother see, that the sin is not unto death, but by the sinners leaving it,
desisting from, and amending it, as by ceasing from adultery, rebellion,
oppression, and the like, for so the Apostle tells the Corinthians, such as
these were some of ye; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, 1 Cor. 6.
11. So that sins not unto death, are not so called, from the nature or merit
of sin, but from the circumstance of the time or person sinning and desisting.
Fot (as is said) Every sin is mortal, deadly and unto death eternal, if we
look only on the merit of sin; but every sin, though the most grand and
capital sin, is not unto death if it be repeated of, and left, before the
departure of the soul from the body. So the gloss expounds this place. Non ad
mortem.] Id est, non usque ad mortem; (i.) A sin not unto death, is when the
sin is not continued in, until the time of death; and of David it says, David
sinned not unto death, for he repented, and obtained pardon; so that the same
sin in one man not repenting produces damnation, when in another it is
pardoned upon repentance.

Neither do we hereby assert any Stoicall Amb. n. 33.
Novatian, or Aug. n. to 6. habes Sardos venales alium alio nequiorem ^ul
Epist. 125
Iovinian equality of sins. For although no sin may well be called bettet
then another, because all are naught, yet one is worse then another. Of two ill
painted pieces* one asked, uter det^rior est? (i.) which is worst? and of two
evil, things, in the Comedy it is said, Plaut in Aulular. Act. 2. sce. ^.
Alia alia pejor est -- optima nulla est: (i.) one is worse then another,
neither can be called best (i.) Aug. cont. mendac. c. 8. n. 77.
Furum non est ide^ quisquam bonus* quia pejor est unus, (i) One thief is worse
then another, yet no thief is therefore good. Sin in general is Bafil. n. 5.
Proles Dia^osi, and Theod. n. 13.
matter mortis, and Chrysostom. n. 59.
grandis Damon peccatum; (i.) the bra^ of the Devil, the mother of death, and
it self is a Devil; and so is called in the Gospel, yet sins are of several
growths and degrees. For therefore are there several degrees of torments in
hell, apportioned to the degrees of sins. There is a sin as a mo^e, and as a
beam, and a Camel; so there are stripes, many stripes, weeping, wailing,
gnashing of teeth, worm, fire and brimstone; the damned shall be bound up in
bundles, according to the likeness and degrees of their sins, and every bundle
shall have its just portion, as we read of that particular portion, of
Hypocrites.

It is a memorable and a terrible observation, which Origin makes upon that
saying, Numb. 14. 34. where for one sin in one day, a whole year of punishment
is apportioned, If for every sin of ours, a whole year of Orig. in loc. hom.
8.
punishment shall be allotted, I fear that neither the duration of this world,
nor the eternity of the next world, will be long enough to end ou^ torments.
Let us not therefore flatter our selves* with the conceit of a little, or a
venial sin, as if such deserved not death, for the very least sin, is liable
to eternal death, except it be confessed, and in this life in some measure
repented. But I proceed.

CHAP. XVII. Whas is meant by a sin unto death, the judgment of the Fathers and
the Ancient expositdrs therein, and the discipline of the primitive Church
thereunto correspondent, that the greatest sins, both have bin actuallie, and so
may be pardoned, in what sense the Fathers called some sins venial, and some
Mortal.
THere is a sin unto death; I do not say he shall pray for it.]

If any words in the whole sacred Scripture will bear this exposition, and make
good this Doctrine; That there is any sin at all which once committed, cannot
possibly upon any terms or condition whatsoever be remitted, not upon
confession or repentance, and forsaking and renouncing it, and after it
adhering to Gods Truth and his Precepts, and that even to death and martyrdom,
nor upon all these together: This saying is most likely to bear it; A sin
unto death, and not to be prayed for: which words require a very diligent
Explication, being of so great weight and concernment. Lord Jesus send thy
Light and thy Truth.

A sin unto death.] This sin unto death, I conceive not to be intended of any
particular sin, whether it be absolute Atheism, or the blasphemy of Ar^us,
denying the Godhead of Christ, or of Eun^mius denying the Holy Ghost, or total
Apostacy from Christianity, or Adultery, Idolatry, witchcraft, murder,
sedition, or any of these grand sins mentioned, Gal. 5. 19. such as the Fathers
do usually (^in some sense) call sins Mortal, Mortiferous, and Capital. My
reason is, because it may be made apparent by Scriptures, and the Records of
the Church, that particular men, who have sinned these sins severally, have bin
by Gods mercy and his castigations reduced to renounce their errors, and to
forsake their sins.

For, many of those sins were seen in King Manasses, 2 Chronicles, 33. Who yet was
converted and humbled himself greatly, and God was entreated, and we know that
many Heathens, Atheists, Apostates, and ^rrians have Paulinus in vita. Ambrosii
n. 3. and Athan. to 2 page 448. n. 17.
bin reduced to Confession of their sins, and to repentance of their
Arrianism^, and those who have not bin actually reduced, yet during their
natural lives, were in a condition reducible, if grace sufficient and
prevalent had bin given; so that their conversion was not absolutely impossible.

Beza finding fault with distinction of sins into Beza in lo^.
ve^iall and mortal as the Schoolmen sometimes use it, ( for which he had good
reason) affirms, that it is absurd to say, that mortal sins are utterly left
without all hope of pardon, and yet he thinks the sinn^ unto death here
mentioned to be that sin against the holy Ghost, and that it is lethiferous,
and that the commitrers thereof cannot possibly repent: (which I dare not
assent unto) but yet he most truly affirms, that if those who have once
committed that sin against the Holy Ghost, would, and could repent -- Certe
veniam consequerentur; (i.) certainly they would and might obtain pardon: Thus
he.

Unto death] The old Exposition of the Fathers and ancient Expositors, surely
is the truest and plainest; and being received, will quit us of many
unnecessary doubts and anxi^tics, and is most agreeable with the Analogy of
Faith, particularly with the Article of forgiv^n^sse of sins, and
co^respondeth best with the justice and mercifulness of God; for thus they
write. A sin unto death, is any grand or capital sin, (such as is before
mentioned out of Gal. 5. 19.) in which a man lives, continues, and dies
impenitently. And that it is therefore only so called, a sin unto death:
because it is obdurately, and impenitently continued, and persevered in unto
the end of our life, and expiration of our souls.

So O^cum^nius says, Solum hoc peccatum ad mortem O^^um in loc.
est, quod ad pae^tentiam non respicit: (id est) Only that sin is a sin
unto death which never is repented. Beda ^n loc.
And Beda says, Pecca^um ad mor^em, peccatum usque ad tempora mortis
protractum diximus r^cte posse intelligi -- -- est de tali magno peccato, quale
David commisit si pro^ractum sit usque ad mortem: (id est) A sin unto death,
may truly be understood of a sin continued in, until the time of our death
-- such a great sin as David committed, if we persevere in it till death.

So does Saint Hierome understand it, Pecc^tum ad Hier. in Evag. objurg n. 41.
mo^tem est, cum tempus r^^^ssionis in vitio inueni^: (id est) A sin unto
death is when death comes, and finds us continuing in sin.

So does Saint Austine expound this very Text, Peccatum Aug. Retract. l. 1. c.
19.
ad mor^^m est, si in hac perversitate finierit ^anc ui^^m: (id est) The sin
unto death is when a man continues in sin obstinately, and therein ends
his life; and in another place, he just so expounds the sin against the holy
Ghost, which shall never be forgiven. Non absurd intelligunt, ^um peccare in
Spiritum and ^sse sine Aug. de fide and oper. c. 16. n. 79.
venia reum aeterni peccati qui usque ad finem vitae ^ oluerit credere in
Christum: (id est) It is no inconvenience ^o understand it thus that he sins
against the Holy Spirit, and shall not be forgiven for ever, who will not at
all believe in Christ as long as he lives.

Just so, Lyra, and both gloss^s expound it. Ad mortalem] (i.) usque ad mor^em
vitae -- quod in hac vit^ non corrigitur -- est final^s impaenitentia si quis
perseveret in eo usque ad finem vitae inclusive; (i.) unto death signifies to
the end of our life natural -- that sin which is not amended in this life -- it
is final impenitencie -- when a man persevereth in sin unto the end of his
life inclusively, not repenting at the time of his departure, but dies
impenitent.

By all which* it appears, that in the judgment of these Expositors, the sin
unto death, is some of those grand sins, in which a man lives and dies,
impenitently: and that it is not called the sin unto death in respect of the
sin it self, but for the sinne^s continuance therein unto his death: for the
same sin which in one man is a sin unto death, and shall never be forgiven: in
another man, proves, a sin not unto death, but is repented of, and so is
pardoned: that this is the judgment of St. Austin, I have diverse times showed
before; and especially in that place alleged by me before, page 201. cap. 14.
wh^reafter after a long discourse concerning the sin called the blasphemy
against the Holy Spirit, he concludes. That no sin against Vide supra ^* 14.
the Holy Ghost is unpardonable, but only in case a man does obstinately
persevere in it, without any hope or desire of pardon, or care of amendment.

To this doctrine of the pardonablenesse of any sin, though ever so great, upon
repentance; the Church discipline of old, was correspondent: for in the
Ecclesiastical Canons recorded, by St. Basil it is ordered. That whosoever had
denied Christ (in time of persecution) should be debarred from the Communion
all his life time, until his death bed, and remain only in the number and
rank of penitentiaries, but upon point of death, he should be restored, and
the Sacrament administered to him, and this -- propter fidem divinae Clementiae:
(i.) because the Church believed, that our merciful God did pardon those true
penitents who had fallen into that grand sin of denying Christ.

Upon the same doctrine did the fathers ground their dist^nction of sins,
calling some men's sins venial, and others mortal; just as St. John here does, a
sin unto death, and a sin not unto death. For so Origin mentions mortale
peccatum, and St. Amb^ose speaks of, crimen Orig* n. 41. Ambr. n. 9. 15 Aug*
n. 6773 77. Prosp. n. 34
mortale, and -- Erratum Noae erat veniale. So does St. Austine call sins --
V^nialia -- Morralia capitalia -- Damnabilia: and so does Prosper, and so does
the Church of Englands Liturgy mention a Deadly sin, and all these only in
this sense, as Saint Ambrose expresses himself; Venialis culpa est quam Amb.
de Paradiso, cap. 14.
s^qnitur confessio; (i.) that sin is called venial which is confessed, or
repented of. And so that sin is only a deadly sin, or a sin unto death, in
which men live, and die impenitently, and therefore unpardonably, as is showed
before.

CHAP. XVIII. The meaning of these words Idoe not say he shall pray for it,
that this praying, and not praying is to be understood of the living, and not
of the dead, the practice of the Church in praying for penitents, the manner
and form of Ecclesiastical or external penance, viewed in the Roman Lady
Fabiola, in what case God forbad praying for sinners in the Old Testament.
THere remains yet a greater difficulty in the words next following whereby
this sin unto death may seem to be such a sin, as the Apostle forbids men to
pray for, whereby he may also seem to set the brand and mark of absolute
unpardonablenes upon the sinner, as being quite forlorn, and bereft of all
remedy, and left utterly to desperation; for thus we read.

A sin unto death, I do not say he shall pray for it.] It being granted that
the sin unto death is one of those capital sins, before mentioned out of Math.
12. 31. and Gal. 5. 19. In which the sinner continues impenitently, al his
life time, and therein dies, we are next to inquire, whether the Apostle
means, that such a sinner so dying, is not to be prayed for after his death;
or whether he mean, that such a sinner is not to be prayed for during his life
-- time, whilst he continues in his sin without repentance.

For if we grant that, by these words, a man dying in that sin, is excepted
from being prayed for after death; then it will follow that the other sort of
sinners, which sin not impenitently unto their death, may be prayed for after
death, and so prayers for the dead must be allowed of, as if they were
warranted by Scripture, which the Church of England does neither practice, nor
allow of; although we can not deny, but that the ancient Church used them so
as I have showed above, in my first book.

To this inquiry, the answer is, that the praying or not praying here
mentioned, is to be understood of men living, and only during their life time,
for so the Apostle means, he that is seen, or known to consess his sin, to
repent, and amend it; may be prayed for by the Church, whilst he is living;
But he that is not perceived, or perceived not to Confess, repent, and amend
his foul visible, and noted sins, whilst he lives, the Church has no
direction to pray for such a sin, or for such a sinner in this sense, that the
sin may be forgiven which is never repented. Or that the sinner may be
pardoned, notwithstanding his obdurate persisting, and continuing in his sin,
no, not whilst he is living, and much less when he is dead. So, here is no
warrant for praying for the dead, whether they died penitently, or
impenitently, but in what sense, an impenitent sinner, during his impenitencie,
may, and ought to be prayed for in this life, will appear hereafter more
clearly, but first, I must show the Church practice in praying for sinners.

The reader may consider that this Epistle is Catholic, written to the whole
Church, and upon this direction, the Church Catholic, used to p^ay most
earnestly, yea, and with tears, and lamentations, for such sinners, who for
some grievous, and known Crime had bin excommunicated; and this the Church did,
at such times, as the sinners appeared to, and in the Church, or at the Church
doors, as penitents, confessing, and bewayling their own sins, in garments of
sackcloth, and their faces besmeared with ashes, b^gging on their knees, both
the prayers of the Church, and also reconciliation, and re -- admission to the
congregation, and communion.

The manner of penitents humiliation, and of the Churches commiseration and
compassion, we have very frequently described in the Church Histories, and the
Fathers, thus. In the wist^rne Church (says Sozomen) Soz l. 7. c. 1^. Ambr.
34. 37. Epiph. haer. 59. Origin. lam. n. 30.
there is a set place appointed, where the penitents stand, with a sad
coun^enance, mourning, and weeping, then they cast themselves down on the
pavement being clad in course sack -- cloth, and their beauti^ obscur^d, and
d^faced with ashes, and with long sorrow, and fasting, they beg the prayers of
the Church to God for them; Confessing their sins openly; If the Bishop be
present, he Compassionatly kneeles, and weeps, and prays with them, and for
them; and so does the whole congregation. S. Jerome relates the particular
Hier. Epist. 30. n. 8.
penance of the noble, and religious Lady Fabiola, as it was performed in his
own time. She had bin divorced; and after divorcement she was married to
another man, whilst her divorced husband was living. But she repented, and
confessed her offense, with great sorrow, in sack -- cloth and ashes,
publicly, in the sight of the whole city of Rome -- Episcopis, presby^eris,
and populo Collacrimantibus (i.) her self, and the Bishops present, and the
priests and the whole multitude altogether compassionatly weeping.

This was the use, and manner of the Churches praying for those Brethren, or
Sisters, which were thus seen to confefs, and express penitency for their sins,
and therefore not sinning unto death impenitently, and this they did upon this
direction. If any man see his brother sin a sin that is not unto death, let him
pray for him etc S. Ambr^se does exhort the sinner to confession, Ambr. de
paenit l. 2. c. 10. n. 34.
and penitencie by this motive. Fleat pro te matter ecclesia, that the Church
our Mother may pour out her tears for her Children, and it is required as a
Christian duty of the people to show compassion by prayers and tears, for
such penitents, and he himself used to weep, when he heard a penitents
confession; Amb. ibid. c. 8. and Pa^lin. in vita. Amb n. 2.
for says he. Surely I ought at least to pray, and weep for him; f^r whom my
Savior vouchsafed to die. Thus the reader may perceive, that the praying, and
not praying, here mentioned, is meant only of men living, and not of the dead;
for neither the sins, nor repentance of the dead, can be seen by the living.

The Apostle's discountenancing, prayer for the impenitent sinner, is no more
then what God himself had done before in the old Testament, in forbidding man's
intercession, for averting temporal judgments from rebellious sinners, as a
warning, and intimation, what he intended to do to obdurate and impenitent
sinners concerning eternal judgment. So he commanded Moses Exo. 32. 10. Let me
alone, and reproved Samuel. 1 Samuel 16. 1. for mourning for Saul, and Commanded
his Prophet Jer. 7. 16. Pray not thou for this people. Even as S. John will not
approve of our praying for sinners during their impenitencie, because he knew
that from such* God will not avert his eternal plagues. But whether any man can
be in such a forlorn and desperate condition in this life, as that he may not
at all be prayed for, is the next thing to be examined.

CHAP. XIX. That the greatest sinners, during their natural life may be prayed
for, in some sense, Certain propositions of divines examined, the practice of
the Synagogue, and Church in praying for all mankind for heathens, Jews,
infidels, heretics, persecutors, idolaters.
FOr the understanding of this needful question, I will first lay down to the
readers view, some propositions, which I find dogmatically asserted, by some
divines, both lately, and heretofore.

First, they say, There is no sin so great, that it can The Confess* the
assemb. c. 15. l. p. 27.
bring damnation upon those who truly repent.] This Proposition I do assent
unto as being very true, if it be understood of Evangelical repentance before
mentioned, and not of that repentance, wherewith Judas is said to have repented,
and that truly, in that kind of repentance.

Secondly they say. Prayer is not to be made for those ijdem. c. 21. P. 38.
of whom it may be known, that they have sinned the sin unto death.] This
proposition is very dubitable. For if this sin be particularly determined, to
be one certain sin, as the denying Christ to be God, or blaspheming the
Holie-Ghost, or apostasy, or any one, or all those sins mentioned Gal. 5. 19.
Yet while the sinner is living, his repentance is not absolutely to be
despaired of, and therefore he may be prayed for, so as will be showed anon. Bur
if by the sin unto death is meant, any of those sins, continued, and persevered
in obstinatly, without repentance, until the sinner be dead, then amongst us
there will be no question left, for no man will affirm that such sinners, are
to be prayed for, after they are dead.

Thirdly they say. That it can not be certainly known Beza in loc. p. 618.
by us; who do commit this sin unto death, until the sinner be dead, therefore,
that we may not (upon this pretense) forbear to pray for any sinner whilst he
lives, and so not for such sinners.] This I take to be very true, if it be
rightly understood in that sense which anon shall be discovered.

Fourthly, That no sinner, (during this life,) is absolutely to be despaired
of, for be possibly may repeat, and so be pardoned.] This Proposition is
affirmed, and asserted by S. Austin, and by Prosper. Quamdiu hic vivunt Aug.
Epi. st 50. n. 31. Pros. de vocat. Gent. l. 2. c. 37. Aug. Retract. l. 1. cap.
19.
non sunt desperandi -- Dum in corpore vivitu^, nullius est desperanda
reparatio, nullius est negligenda correctio -- De quocunque pessimo in hac
vita, non est desperandum, nec ^ro ill^ imprudenter oratus, de que non
desperatur. (i.) No man (though the greatest sinner,) is utterly to be
despaired of during his life time, therefore his amendment must not be
neglected; neither is it any vanity or fo^ly to pray for him, of whom we may
not despair. Now I proceed to the words.

I do not say he shall pray for it.] This Scripture seems more difficult
because other texts seem to speak the contrary, we may find in Scripture, both
precepts, and practice, for praying for all men, even the worst of all. 1 Timothy
2. 1. I exhort that requests, Supplications, Interc^ssions, and giving of
thanks be made for all men, for Kings etc. Here are as many, and as full words
as can be desired: prayer for Kings, even then when Nero reigned, and
persecuted the Church. Just so Christ commanded Mat. 5. 44. Pray for them that
persecu^e you, and so himself did for his Crucifiers. Luc. 23. 34. forgive them
Father. and Act. 7. 60. Lord lay not this sin to their cha^g.

In the old Testament, the Temple is re -- built upon this reason, that
Sacrifices, and Prayers might there be made for King Cyrus, and Darius, both
heathen Kings Ezra. 6. 10. So Josephus writes that in the Temple Josep. Anti q.
l. 11. c. 4. and lib. 13. and n. 21. Phil. de leg. ad Caium. n. 20.
of Jerusalem and in Egypt Sacrifices were daily offered, for Caesar, and the
people of Rome, for Cyrus, Darius, Xerxes, Ptolomie, and Cleopatra, who were
all heathens, and Philo reports, that particularly, every day, a Bullock, and
two Lambs were Sacrificed in that temple for Augustus Caesar; and further, that
therefore the four Colors in the Priests Ephod, represented all the Elements,
to signify,

Sacrificaturus totum mundum introducit -- ut totum Philo. de vita Mosis l. 3.
and de Monarch. l. 2. n. 11. 14.
mundum deprecatorem allegare possit; (i.) the Priest in his Sacrificing,
considered the whole world, and did represent the whole world as a suppliant,
and delinquent before the Lord; here is no particular sinner excepted, either
from the benefit of law sacrifices, or Gospel prayers.

But let us see what the practice of the Church Catholic has bin, in this
point of prayer; for if both, law, and Gospel, and the Church, have in all ages
prayed for all kinds, and degrees of sinners, Certainly S. John's meaning was
not to exclude any sinner whilst he lived, from being prayed for; I will
instance in the most unlikely sinners, and the most underserving our prayers,
as heathens, and infidels, who being no members of the Church yet were prayed
for. Cyprian Cyp cont. Them n 75. Fulg seu. p. Diac. n. 3. Aug. Epist. 107. and
haer 88. c. 6.
says. Orant Christiani pro salute ^^hnicorum. (i.) Christians pray for the
Salvation of heathens. Fulgentius says. Tota ecclesia precatur, ut infidelibus
donetur fides. (i.) The whole Church prays, that faith may be given to
Infidels, and S. Austin says. Sacerdos ad altar hortatur populum orare pro
incredulis. (i.) The Priest at the very altar ( in time of the ^olie Euch^rist)
exhorted the people to pray for unbeleevers, and from this practice of the
Church Catholic, he reproves the Pelagi^ns, who affirmed that men by their
own power, without assistant grace might perform the will of God. This
Doctrins (says he) frustrateth the devotion of the Church; for, why should she
pray for that, which is not by grace, or the gift of God. And just so Prosper
argues Prosp. Respon. act Genuens. n. 30.
against them. If faith be not the gift of God. Frustra orat Ecclesia pro non
creden ibn^ ut credun^. (i.) In vain does the Church pray for infidels, that
they may believe, if faith were not the gift of God.

Neither were these prayers put up for heathens, or wicked and profane men.
Only at such time, when they were about to be converted, or when they seemed to
incline to Christianity; but even then whilst they were at their worst.
Fulgentius prays thus. Domine, Fulg. vel Paul. Diac. de incar. n. 2. Opt.
lib. 3:
mal^s, bonos facito. (i.) Lord, make them good, who are now wicked; and
Optatus* expounding that place 1 Timothy 2. 2. says. Paulus orandum praecipit,
pro regibus gentiliter viventibus. (i.) Paul appointed heathen Kings to be
prayed for, even whilst they lived in their heathenisme. So the Church prayed
for heretics and persecutors, whilst they continued both heretics, and
persecutors. Athanasius says. Populus Alexandrinus Orat Atha. de populo Alex.
n. 19.
pro Constantio Artiano, and Persecutore. (i.) The people of Alexandria prayed
for the Emperor Constantius who was both an Arrian, and a persecutor. and
Epiphanius prayed for John an heretical Bishop of Jerusalem in these Epiph.
Epist, ad Ioannem. n. 31.
words. Domine praesta Joanni, ut recte credat. (i.) Lord grant unto John a
right belief, for surely there is very great cause to pray for the conversion
of such whose heresies, and persecutions do endanger the very being of the
Church; and Chrysostom presses this duty of praying for such, because says
he it is an act, and Chrysostom. sermon. d. Cruce and latr. n. 48. Machar. hom. 18.
sign of far greater Charity, to pray for our enemies, then for our friends,
finally the Holy man Macarius said. Sancti Orant prototo genere Adae (i.)
Holy men use to pray for the whole generation of Adam.

In those books de vocatione Gentium, which go under the name both of S.
Ambrose, and also of Prosper, the custom of the Church in praying for all
sorts of men is fully set forth. Supplicat ubique ecclesia deo, Amb. de voc.
Gent. l. 1. c. 4. Prosp. n. 53.
non solum pro Sanctis, and jam regeneratis, sed pro Omnibus infidelibus and
inimicis Crucis Christi, pro Omnibus idolorum cultoribus, pro omnibus qui
Christum in membris ipsius persequuntur, pro Iudaeis -- pro haereticis -- pro
schismaticis -- quid autem pro ipsis petit, nisi ut relictis erroribus,
convertantur ad fidem etc. (i.) The Church does now every where put up
supplications to God, not only for her own holy and regenerate members, but
for all infidels, and enemies of the Cross of Christ for idolaters,
persecutors, Jews -- heretics, schismatics; and thus she prays for them
that they may be converted from their errors to the true faith. The like is
found in the Epistle of Bishop Caelestinus written in the behalf of Prosper and
Hilarie, and is amongst the works both of Austin, and of Prosper, setting forth
not only Aug n. 72. Prosp* n, 62.
what kinds of men were prayed for, but also what prayers were used.
Obsecrationum sacerdotalium sacramenta, quae ab Apostolis tradita, in toto
mundo, at que in Omni Catholica ecclesia, uniformiter celebrantur -- praesules
humani generis agunt causam apud divinam clementiam, precantur ut infidelibus,
donetur fides, ut idolaatriae liben^tur ab erroribus, ut Iudaeis lux veritatis
appareat, ut haeretici resi piscant, ut scismatici Spiritum redivivae
Charitatis accipiant, ut lapsis, paenitextia remedia conferantur, etc. The
holy Rites of sacerdotal prayers descending down from the Apostles times, are
uniformly celebrated in every Catholic Church in the world, the prelates are
the Orators to God, in the behalf of all mankind, they pray for infidels, that
faith may be given to them: for Idolaters, that they may be delivered from
their errors: that the Jews may embrace the truth; that heretics may recant:
and scismaticks may recover the Spirit of Charity: that all lapsed sinners may
have the remedy of repentance. Lastly, upon all these precepts, and presidents
both of the Scriptures, and the Church primitive, the Church of England, with
great piety, and prudence prays also for all men, yea for her Enemies, In
the Letanie. and Collect on good friday.
persecutors, and slanderers, that they may find mercy and forgivenes, and for
the conversion of all Jews, Turks, in fidels, and heretics.

This I trust is sufficient (if not to much) to set forth; that any sin
though ever so great, during his life time, may be prayed for, at least so far
as that he may have the grace of convension from his sin. Orandum est pro been
and male viventibus* ut bonus perseveret, malus convertatur Aug. ad frat in
Erem. hom. 42.
And upon these grounds and reasons, I would make no scruple at all to pray for
the repentance of that party whom I know to have committed that sin of which
it is said, It shall never be forgiven, because I am fully persuaded that the
threatening there is conditional. viz. It shall never be forgiven without
conversion and repentance, as I have showed before, and therefore if I knew any
man who had committed tha^ sin in that high degree, as it is described by. Beza
viz. [ He who' is enlightened with the knowledge of Gods truth, so that he Beza.
in 1 John 5. 16.
can not be ignorant though he would: yet upon set purpose does maliciously
oppose and resist God purposely, and knowingly.] I see no cause why I should
doubt to pray for grace, and the conversion of such an heinous sinner, whilst
he is yet alive. No man living is debarred from the prayers of the Church as
you have heard, no not the lapsed, or excommunicated, nor those that are thereby
delivered to Satan, for even that most severe censure was intended for their
Conversion, and Salvation, only as S. Austin notes (u.) Ecclesia non Aug. de
Civit. lib. 21. c. 24.
Orat pro diabolo. (i) The Church prays not for the apostate Angels, and
withal he there professes, that if he did certainly know those men that were
predestined to hell fire (which no man can know without an especial
revelation) then indeed he would no more pray for them, then for the devil.

CHAP. XX. The meaning of those words* I do not say that he shall pray for it,
the difference between praying for the person, and praying for the sin, the
different prayers for a sinner penitent, and a sinner impenitent, the practice
of the Church in praying for her persecutors, and against them, the prayers of
Christ, and S. Stephen explained, the case of Alexander the Coppersmith.
HAving showed, that the Charity of Christian prayer is so largly extended
unto all sinners, of what height-soever* I am now to set down positively what
I conceive to be the meaning of the Apostle in these words. --

I do not say he shall pray for it.] Surely here is something forbidden to be
prayed for; or at least, something that we have no warrant to pray for.

For the understanding hereof I desire the reader to observe that S. John does
not forbid that the sinner unto death should be prayed for, but that the sin
must not be prayed for, and this observation may very easily be discerned in
the Original* (...) etc. where the word (...), answers to (...). And so our
English translation takes notice of this meaning, this* I do not say he shall
pray for it.] for it? that is, not for the sin; but S. John does not say he
shall not pray for him, (that is) for the person sinning, so for all that is
here said, the person may be prayed for, only the sin must not be prayed for.

According to this exposition, the reader may observe, that in the words going
before, the Apostle directs us to pray for the brother that sins not unto
death, but not for the sin (...), he shall give him ^^se: the word (...),
answers to the person either of him that prays* or of him that sins not
unto death, but it can not be meant of (...), the sin, for so he had written
incong^uously. All difficulty will be taken away if we do but distinguish the
act from the person, and the sin from the sinner, thus. The person may be
prayed for, but the sin may not be prayed for.

But then, If the person sinning unto death may be prayed for, as well as the
person sinning not unto death where is the difference, which the Apostle here
intends to show between, the prayer for a penitent, and the prayer for an
impenitent sinner? To this I answer, that the difference is very great, and
very evident; for we pray for the penitent, that he may be forgiven, and this
we pray absolutely, but for the impenitent sinner we do not pray that he, and
his sin may be forgiven absolutely^, but conditionally, that he may be
converted, and may have the grace of repentance, and amendment, and so may be
forgiven, and live, we pray for the persons conversion, and forgivenes, but we
pray not that his sin may be forgiven without conversion, and therefore the
Apostle directs, not to pray for it.

For if we should pray, that the sin may be remitted without any consideration
or pre -- supposition of repentance; then we should also with prayer for
remission, pray for the permission of sin, and thereby we should imply that we
would have God to give leave, and allowance, and liberty to sin, nay to give
tolleration, commission, countenance, and approbation to sin, as if we would
desire that God would grant to man a license to sin impune; the very
imagination whereof would be an high impiety and therefore the Church in her
prayers for sinners not yet penitent, prayed for them with mention of her
desire their conversion as has bin fully showed, and may to this day appear.

The Church of England upon this very reason, prays for Turks and infidels
that they may be saved, but for their salvation she does not pray immediately,
and unconditionally, as if she desired their salvation together with their
continuance, in living and dying in their infidelity, but thus she prays.
Take from them Collect. ut Super on Good Friday.
igno^ance, hardness of heart, contempt of the word, and fetch them home to thy
flock -- then after these conditions; comes in. That they may be saved. This is
to pray for the persons of sinners, but not for their sin, pray not for it.

The true Church never prays against the persons of the greatest sinner on
earth, or her greatest enemies. Only the prays against their sins, without
breach of charity toward their persons, S. Austin thus prays Aug. Epist.
16^. Idem. to. 6. n. 8.
against the Donatist's heresies* Deus errorem vestrum occidat in vobis, and of
the Manichees he says. Non vos, sed errores odimus, and S. Jerome said the
like of the Pelagians. Hier. proaem. in Jere. p. 270.
Non hominum, sed errorum ^imicus sum. (i.) That God would kill their errors --
that their persons are not hated, but their heresies only. Now to hate, and
detest and endeavor the extirpation of sin and to pray against it, without
hatred of the person, is just* bona persecutio, quae non hominem, sed peccatum
ejus Prosp. in Psalm* 100.
insectatur. (i.) It is a good persecution, when the sin only, and not the
person, is oppressed, just so did our Church pray against her enemies* Abate
their pride, assuage their malice and confound their devices. This may well
stand with Christian charity without any hinderance of our prayers, for the
amendment, conversion and salvation of their persons.

For it] we pray fot our enemies, but it is ut Convertantur, Aug. n. 28. idem.
n. 31.
for their conversion* and for infidels, but ut Credant. (i.) That they may
become believers, but we do not pray that they may be saved in their sins,
they living and dying in their infid^litie. S. Austin writing upon those words
Joh. 17. 9. I pray not for the world.] Aug. n. 102.
says. Pro non credentibus non postulatur, ut illis diffidentibus ignoscantur
peccata, sed ut bonitas, and pat^entia dei expectet si sort vellent corrigi --
ut dilationem long^m accipiant. (i.) We pray not for unbeleevers, that their
sins may be pardoned whilst they continue in their unbelief, but that the
goodness and patience of God would for bear them a long time, that so happily
they might amend. For to pray absolutely for the salvation of a grand
scandalous sinner, without respect had to his conversion, were to abuse the
truth and righteousness of our most righteous judge. Beza says. Profa^ sunt qui
Beza. in. 1. Joh. 5. 16.
hoc peccatum petunt remitti, non resipiscentibus. (i.) They are profane who
desire pardon to impenitents; I have heard of some hypocrites, who made their
silly proselites believe, that God was so far from being angry, that he took
pleasure in seeing such of Saints sinning, as Fathers smile, when they see
their young children playing, or else that God winketh, and can not see sin, in
such pretty black Saints.

Now, albeit, in the prayers of our Savior, and the Protomartyr S. Stephen the
words run. Forgive them Father Luc. 23. 34. Act. 7. 60.
-- and Lord ^ay not this sin to their Charg without any explicit and overt
mention of their Conversion, and repentance, yet we are not so to understand
them, that those grand sins should absolutely be pardoned, without any
conversion or repentance; but that the prayers for forgivenes, must presuppose
and implie an inclusive prayer for the means leading to forgiveness which are
faith, conversion repentance, and amendment, as if our Savior had said,
Father; Open their eyes that they may know, and confess me, and adhere to me,
and repent, and so that their sin may be forgiven, and never laid to their
charg. So S. Chrysostom understands Chry n. 48. Fulg. n. 14.
the words of Christ, for says he upon these words. hinc tria, and quinque
millia conversa, and so Fulgentius notes upon S. Stephens prayer Paulus
converticur per orationem Stephani. (i.) That these prayers did implie the
conversion of these sinners, for by virtue of them. 3. and 5. thowsands, yea
and S. Paul, was converted, and this is clearly expressed in S. Peter's sermon
Act. 3. 17. 19. as an exposition of our Saviors words, And now brethren I wot
that through ignorance ye did it, repent ye therefore, and be converted, that
your sins may be blotted out, to signify, that the blotting out of sins, ever
presupposes repentance.

Finally, whereas some object that we may nor pray for the Conversion of the
malicious enemies of the Church because (they say) S. Paul did not pray for
Alexander the Copper -- smith mentioned. 1 Timothy 4. 14. but said The Lord reward
him according to his work. To this we say.

First. It does non appear that S. Paul did not at all pray for his conversion.

Secondly. S. Paul did not hereby forbid prayer for him.

Thirdly. That as those words are no prayer for his conversion, so neither are
they accounted by the best expositors, any imprecation; but an Apostolical
commination, and a leaving of him to the judgment of Theoph. in Loc. Theod. in
Loc. Anselm in Loc.
God. Theophilact expounds it thus. Reddat pro reddet, verbum pronunciantis
est, non imprecantis, and so says Theodoret, and Anselm. (i.) He says the
Lord reward him, (for) the Lord shall, or will reward him, it is not the wish,
but the forewarning of the Apostle; and therefore S. Jerome to express rather
the meaning then the letter of those words, for reddat, reads, Reddet ei Deus.
(i.) God will reward him, which is no more then is said of other sinners Heb.
13. 4. Wh^remonge^s, and adulterers God will judge.

CHAP. XXI. A recapitulation of the former Expositions of the four places.
That final Impenitencie cannot properly be called the grand sin. The
difference of Repentance, required to the grand sin, and to other inferior,
and unknown sins. The danger of misunderstanding the solifidian doctrine. Of
the misbeliefe of the Incarnation of Christ, censured with Charity.
The Conclusion.
IT is now high time to ease the Reader, and to release him from my
tediousness, and to draw to a conclusion, by summing up what has been
delivered concerning this grand sin against the Holy Ghost in the Expositions
of all those difficult places of Scripture; the breviate whereof I do here
represent in a few conclusions.

First, To that saying, Matthew 12. 31. It shall not be 1.
forgiven.] The meaning is, that it shall not be forgiven to that man who lives
and dies in that blasphemy impenitently.

Secondly, to that saying, Heb. 6. 4 6. It is impossible 2.
-- to Repentance.] The meaning is, that they cannot be restored to newness of
life, and remission of sins after Baptism, by any new or second Baptism,
but yet Repentance is not impossible as a second remedy to them that have
fallen after Baptism, neither is it during life absolutely denied.

Thirdly, To that saying, Heb. 10. 26. If we sin wilfully, after we have
received the knowledge of the 3.
truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin.] The meaning is, he that
wilfully rejects Christ's only and all-sufficient sacrifice for sin, by
accounting his blood Common; that is, by esteeming it to be but the blood of a
mere man, a mere creature; and therefore to be no better, nor of more worth
then the blood of another man; and in this blasphemous conceit and infidelity,
lives, and dies; that man must look for nothing but judgment of
condemnation, and fiery indignation; because there is none other sacrifice for
sin possibly to be found, but Christ crucified, who then was, and is, and
ever will be, Emmanuel.

Fourthly, to that saying, 1 John 5. 16. There is a sin 4.
unto death, I do not say that he shall pray for it.] The meaning is, that
whosoever shall commit the grand sin, and in that sin shall persist,
continue and persevere obdurately, stubbornly, and impenitently, his whole life
time, and die therein without repentance, and without special revocation,
recantation, or retraction thereof that man must needs perish everlastingly. All
prayers for that man so living and dying, will be unprofitable for his souls
health. For though whilst he lives we may pray for his conversion, and
perhaps beheard (for ought we know) yet to pray for his pardon and salvation
immediately, without praying for, and desiring his conversion, as being
necessary in order to his pardon and salvation) is a foul abuse of Gods Truth
and righteousness.

Fifthly, That if all these Expositions prove true, and 5.
be so found and approved by the Christian Reader, then my former conclusion
will necessarily follow, that neither this sin which is called the sin
against the holy Spirit, nor any other sin how great soever, is absolutely
unpardonable, but upon special and particular repentance thereof, the sinner
may find mercy and forgiveness.

From this doctrine of the necessity of repentance, to go before forgivness;
some divines suspect, that the grand and only unpardonable sin, is final
impenitence, because it is true, that this grand in is pardonable if it be
timely repented, and as true; that when it is accompanied with final
impenitence, it shall never be forgiven, and indeed such a conceit did fall
from the pen of Saint Hierom; Impenitentiae crimen solum est, quod Hier. Epist.
4. 8. n. 9.
veniam consequi nou potest, (i.) impenitence is the only fault which cannot
obtain pardon.

To this conceit the answer is, that impenitencie cannot be called properly the
sin unpardonable, because of it self it is not always to be called a sin; for
impenitency is blamlesse, where no sin is; the holy and unspotted quire of
heavenly Angels, as they are impeccant, so are they not -- penitent, and yet
offend not thereby. But impenitency in grand and capital offenders, is a
weighty and an aggravating circumstance, then when it is the perpetual
concomitant of sin, and a consequent finally; it makes the sin far worse, and
as it is said, Romans 7. 13. By it sin becomes exceeding sinful. Chrysostom. de fato
lib. 3. n. 21.
Non ^am tetra res est peceare quam peccati non pudere: (i.) It is not so bad a
thing to sin, as not to be ashamed of sin. There is a received Maxim, Duo si
faciant idem, non est idem, (i.) Two men may commit the same sin, which yet may
be far worse in one then in the other; for surely if the circumstance of person
may vary the sin, much rather may a greater circumstance, as when a rich man,
and a poor man commit the like theft, who doubts but the theft is more sinful
in Aug. to 6. n. 10.
the one then in the other, two blasphemers do alike blaspheme the Son of God,
one repents the other persisteth, the penitent shall be pardoned. when the
other by reason of this circumstance of impenitency will be condemned.

If the Reader desire yet to be further satisfied, why I have said, that this
grand sin is not absolutely unpardonable but only in case it be accompanied
with final impenitencie; seeing that other sins also, which are not of so high
impiety, cannot be pardoned without repentance, according to our Saviors
words, Excep^ ye repent ye shall all lik w^se p^rish. To this my answer is
(with submission to better judgments).

First the grand blasphemy of denying the Godhead 1.
of Jesus Christ, does utterly root up the very foundation of Chri^tian
religion, it nullifieth the wonderful and gracious work of redemption, for if
the Lord Jesus be not the only Jehova, the Supreme and most high God, then he
has not, nor could redeem us; and if we do not firmly believe this, and adhere
to him, in this most necessary faith, we cannot receive the end and benefit of
his redemption. Without this confession all other doctrines of our Christian
faith,, will be unprofitable for our souls health; for this is the anchor of
our faith, he that once offends in Apostatizing from his confession of faith,
cannot be recovered, or restored to his benefit of Christianity but by a
particular and special revocation, and renouncing of that damning error and
blasphemy: whereas for the remission, and pardon of other si^s of inferior rank
I conceive a general confession and penitency will be accepted through Christ,
by our most merciful, and compassionate God.

For secondly, there are many sins, which although of 2.
themselves and in their own nature, and merit, as they are sins, are
sufficient to produce the fruit and wages of sin, which is death eternal, yet
they are unknown sins, sins of ignorance, and such as we do not account, or
think so, and such as we cannot possibly take particular notice of, and not
only passing the reach of our understanding, Eusebius. Em. 24.
but of our will also: Multi peecant qui peccare nolunt, (i) many sin, who
desire not to sin -- the evil that I would not that do I; the sin of non -- age
-- children, yea and of infants too, as Saint Aug. n. 8. 9. 67.
Austin accounts them a secret concupiscence, an angry wish or word to our
brother, an error in some point of christian doctrine not fundamental, in which
a man lives and dies in opinion of the truth of it, besides thousands of
unknown sins, and as many sins of Omission, called by Saint Austin, del^ct^,
and so called as being derelicta, (i) delinquencies, or desertion of that Aug.
quaest. in Levit. n. 8^.
which is good, and might have been performed. Now either such offenders must
perish for those unknown sins, or else it must follow that a general
confession, in the lump af all our sins, and a deprecation for Gods mercy in
Christ to forbear the punishment due to them with a purpose to decline all sin
to our power, and as much as we can by Grace assistant, will be by Gods Mercy
accepted through Christ, and therefore the holy Psalmist thus confesses, and
thus prays, Psalm 19 12. Who can tell how often he offends! O cleanse thou me
from my secret faults: we know how graciously our God did approve of the
Publicans general confession. God be merciful to me a sinner, Salvianus says,
Veniam peto etsi delictum nescio, (i) I pray Salv. Epist. ad Par. p. 322.
for pardon, though I know not my particular sin. For when there is an
impossibility of knowing all our several sins, how can there be a particular
confession or repentance; in this case the advice of Lactantius is good, Nihil
aliud precetur homo nisi peccata remitti, (i) Lact. l. 6. de ver^ cultu. c. 25.
n. 21.
Let a man pray that his sins may be forgiven though he pray for nothing else,
in this sense I understand those words of Saint Austin, Justam non impediunt a
vita Aug. de Spir. and lit. c. 28.
aeterna peccata quaedam venialia, sine quibus vix vivitur, (i) there are
certain pardonable sins without which a man can hardly live, which shall nor
hinder a godly righteous man from heaven, provided that the generally confess,
and deprecate them in the lump; and such an acknowledgment is most necessary.
But to such Pharisaical and presumptuous Solifidean hypocrites, who will not be
induced to a confession and penitence for their sins, presuming either on an
historical faith, or a bold ungrounded conceit that they are elected to
heaven, and shall be saved by this fancy, therein abusing the most comfortable
and wholesome doctrine of justification by faith alone acting and operating by
love, and therefore making no scruple in their conscience, of doing injuries,
and oppressing their despised brethren. Tertullian shall speak as sometimes he
did to such as themselves. Qui aiunt se salva fide peccare -- salva Tertul. de
paen. ^. 15.
venia in Gehennam detrud^ntur, (i) those that presume to act all manner of
unrighteousness, and yet tell us they shall certainly be saved, because they
hold fast, and reserve their Faith. Let them know that God also, will held
fast, and reserve his pardon from them, and then they will be condemned.

There remains yet one scruple more, to be examined concerning Erroneous
Opinions and misbelief of the Incarnation of God, which I thus state.

If the denial of the Godhead of Christ, persevered in impenitently* until
death, (For after death, none of the damned are Atheists, or Arians) will
certainly bring upon such a blasphemer, eternal perdition, because this
blasphemy utterly disclaimeth the grand and principal means of Redemption, and
so of salvation.

I ask, What shall be thought of them that believe not rightly in the
Incarnation of cur Lord Jesus Christ: For many which confessed Jesusto be God,
and also to be Incarnate, yet they would not believe that he took his flesh
from the Virgin Mary, as conceiving it to be too great an abasement of the
mighty God to pass through, and suffer the pollutions of the womb.

And also, because they read in Scripture, John 13. 13. and 1 Corinthians 14.
47. The second man is the Lord from Heaven.

Thus did some of the old Heretics believe, as the Basil n. 37.
Valentinians, and Naz. n. 34.
Apollinarius, Aug. to 6. n. 9
the Manichees, and Epiph, haer.
Apelles said that Christ made himself a body of the Elements, and did not
take it from Marie.

And this they professed in a pretended honor 44.
of Christ Aug. to. 6. n. 10.
Iusipienti honorificentia as Saint Augustine calls it; (id est) foolishly
thinking thereby to honor Christ; and this was also one of the Tenants of the
late Anabaptists, as we find in the sixteenth Centurie.

Now to affirm these things is to gainsay the Doctrine and promise of
Redemption, by the seed of the woman and the promised seed of Abraham and the
son of David, for Christ is not from their loins, if his body came from
Heaven; and although a simple well meaning soul, should live and die in this
error, who has always adhered to the main principal Doctrine, viz. God in
Christ, and God incaruate, believing Vide supra, lib. 3. cap. 10. and 11.
that Christ performed the Law actively for him, and also suffered death on the
Cross for him in a body* howbeit not in such a body as descended from Adam,
shall we affirm that such a misbeliever must necessarily perish?

I answer, that I dare not so pronounce, because this sinful and erroneous
conceit of the incarnation is at most but one of these sins which our Savior
called A word spoken against the Son of Man, Matthew 12. 32. For it is only
against this humane nature, and no blasphemy against his Holy and Divine
Spirit, or Godhead, and of such sins he says, It shall be forgiven him, viz.
If, such a sinner with an humble heart make an acknowledgement and general
confession of his secret and unknown sins, (wherein this will be included) so
as is before said, with a resolution to decline any thing that he knows to be
sinful, so much (as by assistance of Gods, Grace) he can still holding himself
close to the main foundation which the forenamed old Heretics did not, but
vented many blasphemies against the Divine Nature, and also polluted themselves
with many foul Moral vices.

I say, when Jesus Christ has said, It shall be forgiven, how dare any Man
presume to say, It shall never be forgiven.

For, although the Erroneous conceits of Christ's Body coming down from Heaven
do disturb the Order of Gods dispensation, and the congruitie of the work of
Redemption and correspondence thereof with the words of the Covenant, yet it
does not take away, and root up the foundation. This does not un-God our
Redeemer, nor deny utterly the gracious work of Man's Redemption, So as this
most blasphemous Commentary has none; which I now (together with my weak
endeavors in opening the dangerous Doctrines thereof) leave and submit to the
censure of the learned, and to the namelesse Anthor thereof: I say, of both our
Writings, as Saint Cyprian did Cyp. lib. 4. Epist. 9.
to Paptanus. In die judicii ante Tribunal Christi utrumque recitabitur.

To God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost, three Persons, one only
God, be ascribed all honor and glory for ever and ever Amen.
Qualiter haeretici pro falsae opinione, in die judicii puniendi sunt, nullus
potest scire nisi Judex -- patiens est Deus, quia affectis piae opinionis
errant. Salvian. degub. l. 5. p. 163.
FINIS.
THE TABLE Of the Contents of each several CHAPTER.
THE FIRST BOOK, Containing General Animadversions upon the Commentary and
Commenter, and the assertion of the Souls Immortality.
Chapter I. CErinthus, Artemon, Theodotus, and Page. 1.
Natalis, Authors and spreaders of the blasphemy of the denying Christ's
Godhead. The Divine warning of Natalis: That after these Paulus Samosatenus,
and Arius, were maintainers of the same Heresy. The spreading of it in
several parts of the known world, even in our Britain. That it was here
discovered in Queen Mary's days. And punished by fire in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, and of King James; That the same is now revived by this Commenter,
the quality of G. M. who negotiated in the Printing and publishing this
Commentary. Chapter II. That the Commenter, though he carefully concealed Page 4
his own name, yet caused this his Book to be presented to diverse persons of
quality. That this Commenter is the first that ever published this Heresy in
our English Print. Three reasons conceived why he concealeth his own name.
Chapter III. Of the licensing of this Comment; the Licensers Page 7
censure of it; and an Apology for him, in that he called this Commentary, a
Comment, and in his letter to an honorable Person declared it to be erroneous.
The copy of the Letter, a parallel passage of Libanius concerning Julian, and
the Manichees concerning their Founder Manes; the ancient practice of burning
such heretical books. Chapter IV. The Commenters compliance in unsainting the
Page 10
Apostles. The reason why the Title of Saint was of old withdrawn from Churches
by the decree of a Council. That the abuse of images occasioned it, and yet
that the Title of Saint was not denied to the persons of Holy men: Of his
condemning Tombs. Something concerning Hypocrisy in long hair and short. Of
the reason of the Nazarites long hair, and the hypocrisy of their imitators.
Chapter V. The Commenters compliance with the old Arians. Page 15
The judgment of the Ancients concerning the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews: A Vindication of Eusebius, concerning the words Homo ousion, and
Homoi ousion, and also of the Nicene Fathers falsely charged by the Commenter,
as if they favored his own Heresy. How the Father and the Son are said to
be Opposite, and yet both are but one God. The Commenters Error in the
Logical Doctrine of Relatives. Chapter VI. That this Commenters principal
design, was by Page 16
his pretended Commentary, to darken and extenuate, or confute the clear
Evidences of this Divine Epistle, only because therein are many great
Testimonies of Christ's Godhead: That herein he imitateth the practices of the
old Heretics, Marcion, Valentinus, and the Manichees. The Commenters
misexpounding Hebrews 1. 6. in allowing Divine Adoration to Christ, and yet
will not acknowledge him to be more then a creature; and in applying the
appellation Jehova, to one whom he denies to be the Supreme God, contrary to
Psalm 83. 18. what prostration signifies. Chapter VII. That this Commenter
mis-expoundeth Hebrews Page 21
2. 2, 3. That the Gospel is therefore preferred before the Law, in that the
Gospel was delivered by God himself immediately for it was delivered by Christ
himself who is the Supreme and only God, whereas the Law was delivered, indeed
by the same God; but mediately by the Ministry of Angels, or Creatures. A true
Exposition of Acts 7. 53. and of Gal. 3. 19. and Exodus 20. 21. Moses and Paul
reconciled. That Christ is the Author or Testator of the Evangelicall
Testament, and not only a Witness or Martyr, as the Commenter would have him.
Chapter VIII. The Immortality of the Souls of Men asserted against this
Commenter, from our Saviors Page 23
words, Matthew 22. 32. Luke 23. 43. That the Article of Resurrection is
therefore expressed to be said of the body only, because the Soul dies not,
which is showed in Saint Paul's Rapture, and Saint Stephens Prayer, from Church
Writers, Philosophers, and Physicians observations in Anatomy the Souls
mortality was the old Arabic Heresy. Of the immortality of Christ's humane
Soul, and consequently of ours. That the Doctrine of the Souls immortality is
now an Article of the Creed, and why this Article was then newly added to the
old Creed. Chapter IX. That the Article of Christ's descent was added to Page 26
the old Creed, principally to set forth the Immortality of the Soul of
Christ, and so of our souls: An examination of the tradition oral, and the
writing of Creeds: The sum of the ancient Doctrine of Faith, briefly
delivered by Irenaeus, and the most Ancient Creed thereunto agreeing, recorded
by Tertullian. Chapter X. That diverse additions were made to the old Creed Page
29
occasioned by diverse Heresies. What the Heresies were, and what Articles they
occasioned; and particularly, that the Arabic Heresy (denying the Souls
immortality) occasioned the Article of Descent, is probably showed for that it
was not any Creed generally received, before the death of Saint Austine, the
Nicene has it not yet, the Athanasian at first had it not, nor is it in the
symbolicall Hymn, called Te Deum; A modest censure of the Athanasian symbol
and an Observation concerning the multitude of Creeds. Chapter XI. Of the word
Hades, which is translated Hell, Page 32
that it proves the souls immortality in that it signifies a being,
subsistence or permanencie of the souls of dead men separated from their
bodies, and residing in a Mansion and Condition invisible to us Mortals. That
the place and state of souls separated, is kept secret from us, though the
knowledge thereof has been, and is much desired. Of Saint Hierom's and
Curina's visions, and the apparition of Irene deceased. Chapter XII. A censure
of those visions of Saint Hierome, and Page 35
Curina, by comparing them with the Ecstasies of Saint Peter, and Saint Paul,
mentioned, Acts 10. 10. and Acts 22. 17. What an Ecstacie, Trance, or Vision
is. In what manner God spoke to the Prophets in visions. Of Saint John's
Revelation. The difference between Divine Inspirations and profane
Enthusiasmes. That the one illuminates, the other obtenebrates men's
understanding, and how such raptures or exstacies do argue and prove the Souls
seperabilitie, and immortality. Chapter XIII. That the Apparitions of the dead
do not prove the Page 39
Souls immortality. For that they are not really the Souls of men deceased,
but possibly may be the delusions of Satan assuming the shapes of men. Why
Necromancy is forbidden, Deuteronomie 18. 11. Albeit the dead cannot appear to
the living at their desire. That the state of Souls separated is concealed.
Chapter XIV. That the Souls immortality is confessed by the Page 41
Church Catholic. That the Commemoration of the dead in the Church Litnrgies,
was principally to set forth the Churches belief of the immortality of their
Souls. For that the dead receive no benefit by the prayers of the living: The
Opinion of some Divines concerning Saint Paul's prayer for Onesiphorus, 2
Timothy 1. 18. and of that saying, 1 John 5. 16. of which see a full Exposition
in my fourth Book. Chapter XV. That the Father's did not believe (as the
Commenter Page 43
does) that Souls departed are insensible, as if they were dead, or asleep,
because the Saints departed do pray for the Church Militant, as the Fathers
thought. Chapter XVI. Of the departures of men's souls. That their conductors,
Page 48
and leaders to the other World are Angels good or bad. That souls separated
are settled in certain Mansions, is showed by Scriptures, and Fathers, whereby
the permanencie and immortality of the soul is clearby proved. That all those
several mansions go under the general appellations of Heaven and Hell.
Chapter XVII. A particular detection of the blasphemies contained Page 51
in the Commentary, which are reduced to these two heads The first, showing
the blasphemies against the Godhead of Jesus Christ. The second, showing the
blasphemies against the Incarnation of God and his gracious work of Redemption.
CHAP. XVIII. The dreadful consequences of the Commenters Page 51
blasphemies, in denying the Godhead of Christ, and his great works both of
Creation and Redemption. That it is much better, never to have been born, or by
death to be annihilated, or to perish as the beasts do, then to live and die
in these sins, and to rise to judgment.
The conclusion of the first Book.
The Table.
THE SECOND BOOK. Containing an assertion of the Godhead of Jesus Christ
against the Commentary.
Chapter I. AN introductorie discourse concerning Page 1
the sin against the Holy Spirit, as it is described, Matthew. 12. 31. Mark 3.
29. Luke 12. 10. Diverse doubts, difficulties, and opinions thereof. Chapter II.
What the word Blasphemy signifies; That this Page 4
sin was the blasphemous denying the Godhead of Christ, The spreading of that
Pharisaicall blasphemy amongst Jews and Heathens. Of Apollonius; of Tyana the
Magician compared by Heathens, with Christ for miracles. Certain considerations
premised for clearing doubts concerning this sin; and two conclusions
extracted from those consisiderations. Chapter III. That the Godhead of the
Son is called Spirit, 7
and Holy Spirit, that every Person in the Trinity is, and may be called the
Everlasting Father, in respect of Creatures, and yet how the appellation Father
is proper to the first Person. That every Person is holy, and an Holy Spirit,
and yet how the appellation Holy Spirit is proper to the third Person. That the
words Spirit and Ghost signify the same thing. Chapter IV. Diverse
Observations of the words of Christ, Matthew Page 20
12. The result is, that the Pharisee's blasphemy consisted in the denial of
Christ's Godhead. The difference between a sin against the Son of Man, and
against the Holy Spirit. The judgment of the Fathers herein. Chapter V. The
Opinion of later Divines concerning this Page 14
sin, that they affirm Arius and the Emperor Julian the Apostate to have
sinned this sin. An examination of the particular sin of the said Arius and
Julian, and a brief narration of their lives and deaths. Chapter VI. Why the
Blasphemy of denying Christ's Godhead Page 33
is called the unpardonable Sin, that the Commenters Doctrine in this grand
Heresy, is no better then Judaisme or Turcisme, that it is by the Fathers
esteemed, and called Antichristianisme. To deny Christ's Godhead is to renounce
redemption, and salvation by him, wherein the worth and preciousness of the
blood of Christ consists. Chapter VII. That the Commenter in Logic shows
himself Page 37
to be a Porphyrian in denying the Godhead of Christ, and follows the
Heresies of Cerinthus, the Maniches, and Arius, and acts for Antichrist, and
Turcisme. The Charactor of Socinus. Of the Grand Antichrist, and his numerous
Corporation, which is the Mystical body of iniquity, and of their preachers.
Chapter VIII. Of the Union of the Godhead and Manhood in Page 52
the Person of Christ, and that the two Natures once united continue for ever
inseparable. The difference between the Existence of the Godhead in Christ, and
its Existence in all creatures. Of the mutual communication of properties
between the Divine and Humane Natures in Christ. The Heresy of Nestorius, his
life, condemnation, banishment, and exemplarie death. How holy Men are said to
be Deified by partaking of Divine Graces, and conforming to Gods will. Chapter
IX. The Commenters blasphemous conceit of Christ's Page 33
Deification. In what sense Christ may be truly said to be Deified in time,
who was the only God from all Eternity. The true sense of diverse sayings in
Scripture concerning Christ's Exaltation. How the Son of God comes to be
called Christ. Chapter X. How those Scripturall sayings are to be understood
Page 37
which mention the abasing or minoration of Christ the Son of God. An
Exposition of 1 Cor. 15. 24. Concerning Christ's delivering up the Kingdom, and
reigning till judgment, and his subjection afterward. Of which see more in
the 2 Section of this Chapter. Chapter XI. Why the unpardonable Sin is
fastened rather Page 52
on the deniers of the Godhead of the Son, then on them that deny the Godhead
of the other Persons in the Scriptures Expression. Of the form of words used at
Baptism, diversely mentioned in Scripture, and the reason of that diversity.
That Christ mediateth for us in Heaven, not verbally (as the Commenter would
have it, but by a real presenting that Person, who in our stead, did perform
and suffer what was required of his mystical Body. Chapter XII. The Godhead
of Jesus Christ showed by Scriptures Page 55
Prophetical and Evangelicall by the Type of the Tabernacle, which was as a
visible habitation of God representing the Body of Christ. How the Heathens
immitated this, by setting up visible images, wherein they thought their God
was resident. Chapter XIII. Reasons why the Jewish worship was confined to Page
58
the Tabernacle and Temple, that these were Types of God to be Incarnate: Why
the People of God worshipped with their faces toward the Temple: That the
Church is more Ancient then the Temple: That (notwithstanding, the Commenters
cavil) the Patriarchs belived in the same Son of God that that we
Christians do, though the appellation Christ, could not then be used. Chapter
XIV. That the Christian when he prays, prays to Page 61
God whom he considers to be resident in Jesus Christ as in his Temple; As
the Israelites considered God resident in the Tabernacle and Temple, and so
prayed toward that place: That God so intabernacled in the Body of Christ, is
the final or ultimate Object of The Christians prayer and worship Chapter XV.
How the only and most high God became a Priest Page 65
and a Mediator: That Christ is prayed to, and yet is a Mediator: How Christ
is said to pray, and yet is the supreme God: That every Person in the Trinity
may be prayed to. Chapter XVI. The Godhead of Christ showed from the Adoration
Page 68
of his Person, that his Godhead is worshipped, and not his Body alone
considered without the Godhead. That the Godhead united with a creature (for so
is the Body of Christ) does not hinder us from worshipping our God: Of the
worship of Jesus performed, and yet without worshipping a creature. Chapter
XVII. That the custom of bowing, when the Name Page 71
Jesus is mentioned, was appointed principally to set forth his Godhead, and to
keep Christians in a continual Confession and memory thereof, being the main
foundation of our Religion. Chapter XVIII. That Jesus Christ is Jehova: Of the
Name Page 74
Jesus, that it is a proper Name of God: No Person in the Trinity has any
name proper, but only the Son: Of diverse appellative Names of God. Chapter
XIX. An inquiry, whether the pure Godhead (considered Page 77.
as not incarnate) has any proper Name: The distinction of Names Proper and
Appellative: The opinion of Philo the Jew therein, and of the Fathers, that
their judgment is, That there is no proper Name of God, but only the Name
Jesus: The Authors submission hereof to the learned Reader. Chapter XX. The
Godhead of Christ showed from his appellation Page 79
Jehova: That no mere creature can be called Jehova: The signification of that
word: The reverend esteem of it by the Ancients: That by the word
Tetragrammaton, Jehova is meant, both in Jewish and Christian Writers. Chapter
XXI. The Conclusion of this second Book, with the Page 82
Authors resolute Confession of Jesus Christ to be the most High, and the
Only Lord God.
The Table.
THE THIRD BOOK. Containing an Assertion of the Incarnation of the most High
and Only God, in the Person of Jesus Christ.
Chapter I. THe vindication of Eusebius against the Page 1
false aspersion of the Commenter. That Eusebius consented to the Eternal
Godhead of Christ, and to the Article Homo-ousion: His judgment con^erning
Gods visible appearance to the Patriarchs, in the Person of the Son: That
the supreme God appeared to Abraham in the Person of the Son: The Unity of
the Godhead in the Persons of the Father, and the Son. Chapter II. How in the
Scriptures, the most high God is said Page 6
to have been seen, and yet that no man has seen God, and both very truly.
Two questions propounded concerning the visibilitie, and invisibilitie of God.
Chapter III. The first question, How God is invisible: What Page 8
is meant by the Face of God; some places of Scripture which seem Opposite, are
reconciled. Chapter IV. More concerning the first question; How God Page 10
has been, and may be seen: What the word Angel signifies: Of the appearing
of God by assuming a corporeal shape: Of Gods walking in Paradise: That the
apparitions of God in corporeal shapes, were but Preambles, and Prefigurations
of his Incarnation. Chapter V. That the Incarnation of God was foreshewed in
Page 13
words, and by promises: The meaning of the Image of God wherein Man was made:
The meaning of the oath under Abraham's thigh: The mystery of Abraham's
entertaining God at meat, and of Jacobs wrestling with God, unfolded: What is
meant by the Back-parts of God: A rejection of the errors of the
Anthropomorphites, and an Explication of the first Article of Englands
Religion. Chapter VI. The second question, Why the Fathers said, Page 16
that only the Son was seen by the Patriarchs, and not the Father, seeing
both persons are but one God: An exception of the difference between seeing God
in this life, and in the other life: Whether God in the Person of the Father,
was ever seen in an assumed shape; the judgment of Saint Austine therein, and
the Authors submission thereof to the Reader: That because God was to be
Incarnate, only in the Person of the Son, and not in the Person of the
Father, therefore the ancient Fathers said, that God was seen in the Person of
the Son only, and not in the Person of the Father. Chapter VII. The
Incarnation of the Son of God is showed against Page 22
the Commenter; That a mere Man may be said to be Incarnate, and so may Christ
be truly said, and much rather, because the soul of Man may exist without a
body, and the Godhead of Christ really did exist from Eternity without a Body,
until his assumption of a temporary shape, and his Incarnation in an ever
durable Body. That the Scripture calls him that denies Christ's Incarnation,
a deceiver, and an Antichrist. Chapter VIII. That the Son of God was to be
Incarnate necessarily, Page 27
by virtue of the Covenant, although God could have saved Man by his Power,
without the Incarnation: Of that curious question, viz. What God did before the
Creation? That God was never solitary, though always but One. Of the
Everlasting, or Eternal Covenant between the Persons of the Father, and the
Son before the world. Chapter IX. Of the Covenant between God and Man, diverse
Page 33
times* renewed. The first words of the Covenant about the Tree of Knowledge
before the fall. The second words of bruising the Serpents head since the fall.
The same Covenant with Abraham, and afterward with Moses in more words. The
outward signs of the Covenant, viz. Sacrifices, circumcision, Tabernacle, and
Leviticall rites. That the Legal and Evangelicall Covenant are but one. The
words of the Evangelicall Covenant. Why it is called a new Covenant, -- the
Covenant of Grace, and of works, -- a better Covenant, -- and a Testament of
Christ's surety -- ship: The reason why Christ was circumcised and Baptized.
Chapter X. That ( as our state and condition now stands) Page 38
man cannot be redeemed and saved, but through the Incarnation, Obedience, and
death of the Son of God. That our salvation is not wrought by the request and
verbal entreaty of Christ, nor by the power only, of God without
satisfaction of his Justice. The distinction between Christ's satisfaction and
his merit. How Gods just Sentence was fully executed on man, and his Law
perfectly performed by man. Chapter XI. That Christ was a Person fitly
qualified to stand Page 41
in stead of all Mankind: The mutual unity of Christ and Mankind; in that
Christ t^oke his flesh from Man, and Man received the Spirit from Christ. That
from this mutual unity it is, that Christ's Obedience both Active Passive with
great justice, and equity, may be imputed to Mankind. Chapter XII. What
interest the unregenerate man has in Page 54
Christ. That the Divine Spirit of Christ is communicated to the unregenerate;
and therewith some common graces. That the Doctrine of the Church declares the
benefit of Christ's death to be offered to all men, good, and bad. That God is
essentially present in every creature, though not commugnicating his
sanctifying Grace to every one: The Stoics error concerning the souls of Men.
Apollinarius his Heresy concerning the soul of Christ. Chapter XIII. The
Heresy of Valentinus and others concerning Page 59
the Body of Christ compared with the Heresy of Apollinarius concerning
Christ's Soul. That the Arguments proving the derivation of the flesh of Christ
from man's body, do as well prove the traduction of his soul. That the soul of
man by nature is Carnal: The doctrine of the Church of England does not
clearly determine the original of Christ's soul: That if the traduction of
souls be granted, it will argue a greater nearness and conjunction of God and
Man. Chapter XIV. The question of the propagation of the soul of Page 63
Christ, and of other men's souls discoursed: the difficulty thereof showed out
of Saint Austine, and his inclination and reasons to believe traduction rather
then a daily new creation of souls: The judgment of the Western Church herein
alleged by Saint Hierome: That the opinion of Traduction is not inconsistent
with Christian Faith: But if it be granted, it argues a nearer relation between
Christ and us, then otherwise: the Author leaves it undetermined with
submission to the judicious Reader. Chapter XV. The Ubiquitie of the Spirit of
Christ: Of the Page 67
diversity of the Graces thereof: In what degree and measure the Spirit with
its common Graces is communicated to men unregenera^e: How the one Spirit of
God is in Scripture represented, as if there were more then one: how it is
said, to be withdrawn, or not yet given, when it is always present: That the
union of God and man is hence concluded. Chapter XVI. That the presence of the
Spirit does not always Page 71
sanctify, is proved from the unction of Heathen Kings: How such are called
Gods anointed: though they were not ceremonially anointed with oil: of
Christ's Unction, and the appellation of Christians: Vespatians touching and
curing the infirm thereby. The King of Englands cures and unction: Of the gift
of healing mentioned, 1 Cor. 12. 9. Whether it be utterly ceased. Chapter XVII.
The union of Christ, and his Church further Page 76
showed. Why Christ is called Adam: David and Jacob: Why all mankind was
extracted out of one man; Why Saint Austine denied that there were any
Antipodes: The difference between Christ's union with all mankind and his more
special union with his Church: An Exposition of Heb. 7. 9. Touching the
difference of Levi and Christ, who were both in the loins of Abraham, which
place is purposely obscured by the Commenter.
The Table.
THE FOURTH BOOK. Containing a discussion of this Question, Whether the
blasphemy of denying Christ's Godhead ( which is the sin against the holy
Spirit) be absolutely unpardonable; with full Expositions of certain Scriptures
in the Hebrews, and other places which concern that sin.
Chapter I. THe question stated: The judgment of Page 1
some late Divines therein, and their grounds: That to affirm it absolutely
unpardonable, seems derogatory to the infinite mercy of God in Christ, and
the grace of repentance. The efficacy of true repentance. Chapter II. That
this sin possibly may be pardoned, upon Page 5
the sinners repentance: That Gods threatenings are not to be understood as
absolute, but as conditional: That therefore his threatenings are not always
executed, and yet his Truth not violated. That threatenings are intended for
provocations to repentance; an observation upon Theodosius. The judgment of
the Fathers concerning those threatenings. Chapter III. That the blasphemy
against the Holy Spirit, or Page 8
Godhead of Christ, is then only unpardonable, when it is accompanied with
final impenitencie, a short Exposition of Matthew. 12 31. Chapter IV. Whether
the grace of repentance be absolutely denied Page 11
to those who have once sinned this sin. The judgment of some Divines herein.
A full Exposition begun of Heb. 6. 4. concerning final impenitencie. That the
word enlightened is there meant of Baptism. That the principal scope of that
place is against the presumption of Anabaptisme, or a second Baptism. Chapter
V. That the word Renew is to be understood only of Page 16
renovation by a new Baptism. That sinners after Baptism may have the remedy
of repentance, but not by a new Baptism. The distinction of renewing. 1
Baptismall. 2 Moral or penitential. Four Propositons, by which the meaning of
these words is collected. In what sense sins original, or actual are said
to be taken away in Baptism. Chapter VI. How a second Baptism, is said to be
a new crucifying Page 19
of Christ: That it is ignominious to the All-sufficient sacrifice of Christ:
That a second Baptism does no good but much harm, it aggravates sins, even as
rain makes weeds to grow, that these words do not prove an impossibility of
repentance; but only an impossiblitie of renewing by a new Baptism. Chapter
VII. A review of those words, Heb. 6. 4. and some Page 25
doubts cleared. That none were anciently called illuminate, but only the
Baptized; That Catechizing was not then called illumination. What moved the
Apostle to handle the Doctrine of Baptism, and so strictly to forbid
Anabaptisme in the Epistle to the Hebrews, rather then in other Epistles.
Chapter VIII. The distinction of Baptismes into true and false: Page 30
The forms of Pseudobaptismes among Heretics; That after their dipping, a
true Baptism may be administered, and yet cannot be accounted Anabaptisme: The
Novatian Baptism was a true Baptism; Saint Cyprian is in part excused.
Chapter IX. That the Disciples of Ephesus, Acts 19. who Page 34
said they had been baptized to John's Baptism, were (notwithstanding) then
Baptized by Saint Paul's appointment, yet that this example does not warrant
Anabaptisme, because John's Baptism was then out of date and Null: John's too
late Baptism compared with the now Jewish Circumcision, and both found
unlawful. Chapter X. Of true Christian Baptism; that it may not Page 38
be twice ministered. No Heretic maintained two Baptismes but only Marcion:
What Marcion was, and the reason why he multiplied Baptism: The reasons why,
Novatians, Donatists, and the late Anabaptists rebaptized; answers to their
reasons: Of baptizing Infants, of Saint Cyprians error, and Athanasius his
ludicrous Baptism. Chapter XI. That the ancient Church allowed but one
Baptism, Page 46
is showed by the then frequent deferring it till ripe years, or old age, That
their delaying was mostly for carnal respects: The danger of delaying
Baptism: The Story of a Jew Anabaptist: An example upon an Arian
Pseudobaptisme: The summarie meaning of that Scripture, and the Exposition
concluded. Chapter XII. A full Exposition of Heb. 10. 26. The particular Page 52
sin against the Holy Spirit, is showed to be the blasphemous denying Christ
to be God; What is meant by accounting his blood common or unholy: The
unsufficiencie of legal sacrifices, and the sufficiency of Christ's sacrifice.
Chapter XIII. Of several degrees of this sin of denying and rejecting Page 57
Christ and salvation by him. First, some deny him outwardly, only by
compulsion and terror of torments. Secondly, Others wilfully uncompelled.
Thirdly, Others, both wilfully, and also after-knowledge, as Arius Julian, and
this Commenter. The concurrence of Theophilact and Saint Anselm in the sense of
this place. Chapter XIV. That the remedy of repentance is not absolutely Page 61
taken away from them who have sinned the grand sin of denying and renouncing
Christ: That such possibly may repent: That this sin is then only
unpardonable, when it is accompanied with small impenitencie. The Conclusion of
this Exposition. Chapter XV. Whether such blasphemers, if they repent may Page
64
possibly find mercy: The difference of repentance Legal and Evangelicall. The
repentance of Judas: The difference of Repentance and Rescipiscence: The
Conclusion, that true repentance is never totally rejected: Objections out of
the Old Testament answered: Why temporal pressures are not always removed
upon true repentance. Chapter XVI. A full and large Exposition of 1 John 5. 16.
Page 70
That the Fathers called some sins Venial, and some Mortal, albeit every
sin in its own nature and merit is mortal or deadly. What is meant by a
sin unto death, and a sin not unto death: That sins are not equal. Chapter
XVII. The judgment of the Fathers and ancient Expositors Page 74
concerning sin unto death: The Discipline of the Primitive Church
correspondent to their judgment. That the greatest sins may be, and actually
have been pardoned: The true sense of the Fathers in calling some sins
venial, and some mortal. Chapter XVIII. The meaning of those words, [I do not
say he shall pray for it] That the praying or not Page 79
praying mentioned, is to be understood of the living, and not of the dead: The
practice of the Church in praying for penitents: The manner of Ecclesiastical
or outward penance showed in the penance of the Lady Fabiola. In what case
God forbad praying for sinners in the Old Testament. Chapter XIX. That no
condition of any grand sinner, is so desperate Page 83
during life, but that he may be prayed for in this sense, that he may have the
grace of conversion: Certain Propositions of Divines concerning the matter now
in hand, are examined: The practice of the Synagogue and Church in praying for
all Mankind, the concurrence of the Church of England therein; praying even for
Heathens, Idolaters, Persecutors and Heretics. Chapter XX. The meaning of
those words [I do not say he Page 89
shall pray for it] set down positively, and conclusively: The difference
between praying for the Person, and praying for the sin: The different prayers
for a sinner penitent, and a sinner not yet penitent. The practice of this
Church in praying for persecutors, and yet against them. The prayers of Christ
and Saint Stephen explained. The case of Alexander the Copper-smith. Chapter
XXI. A Recapitulation of the former Expositions of Page 94
those four places. That final impenitency cannot be called the Grand sin.
The difference of repentance required for the inferior and unknown sins. Of
the Solifidian doctrine. The particular sin of misbelieving the Incarnation of
God censured with Charity.
The conclusion of this fourth Book.
FINIS.
Errors of the Press.
In the Title page line 12 for 1647 read 1646. In the advertisement to the
reader, p. 3. l. the last, to Joh. Hen. Bisters^ldius add and published An.
1639. In the preface p. 12. l. 29 r. only. In the 1. Book, p. 18 l. 10 r your
word is* p. 28. l. 7. r. mortuos, p. 29 l. 18 r. one Lord, p. 30 l. 38 r.
Nicetas, p. 33 l. 41 r. a dead, p. 34 l. 32 r. Sentence, p. 47 l. 19 soul r.
joul, p. 51 l. 29 pro r. per in the margin. In the 2 Book. p. 3 l. 8 fur r for*
p. 6 l. 27 Lucan r. Bucan p 8 l. 33 Ehat r. That, p. 12 l. 16 aith r. says, l.
18 sod r. Son l 23 conjicietur r. conjicietur, p. 17 l. 19 r. how can, p 18 l.
37 Olympus r. Olympius, p. 22 l. 15 r. Grat^ justitia, p 26 l. 19 r. also, p.
28 l. 8 r. Son of David, l. 12 no r. nor* p. 32, ib. r. so in S. Chrysostom. is
called, p. 29. l. 28 r. (...), p 32 l. 22 r. Patellarii, l. 27 r. Goddified, l.
34 r. Deificatio est Dei imitatio, p. 34 l 11 r. became, p. 37 l. 14 r. As is,
p 39 l 2 r Saints, p. 42 l. 33 r. the, p. 43 l 6. r. contrectas. l. 8 r.
Christus, p 49 l 20 r. not at all, p. 54 l. 15 r. Vngentem, p 58 l. 9. r.
sacrifice, p. 59 r. Dei, p. 65 l. 27 r. orat, p. 73 l. 19 r. before* p. 83 l.
1. 38, r. 83 l. 3 r. Decep^i. In the 3. Book, p. 1 uli. r. of the h^resie of
Artemon, p. 2 l. 13 r. there, l. 39 r. de Demonstra^ion^, p. 3 l 34 idem, p. 4
l. 2 you mean, p 4. l. 5. r etc. l. 8 r. and, p. 5 l. 9 Tertullus, l. 11 r. as
in the l. 12 these r. the p. 7 l. 37 ^ that the, p. 8 l 33 r. Maj^stie, p. 9 l.
15 r. Nemo essentiam Dei vid^t, Deus essentia invisibilis, p. 11 l 34 r.
viderunt, l. ^9 r. with our first Parents, p. 12 l. 33. r. figura veritatem, p.
15 l. 15 r. Posterio* itatem l. 31 r. Audian errors, p. 7 l 18 r. we read, p.
18 l. 33 r. and the holy Ghost l. 38 p. 119 r. p. 11, p. 19 l. 22 leave out id
est, l 35 r. other fathers, p. 22 l. 12 r. Christ cannot be said to be
Incarnate, for neither can the faithful be said to be incarnate though, p. 23
l. 8 r. and to, p 25 l. 30 r. is, p. 26 20 r. were, p. 29 l. 3 r. sum* p. 31 l
26 r. it, p. 37 l. 21 r est, p. 42 l 33 r. 3 r. Son, p. 43 l. 8, r. is also
put, p. 51 l 17 ^. 1. 2 ae. p. 52 l. 4 r. to p. 56 l. 26 r. thep. 58 l. 30 r.
as, p. 62 l. 3 r. implicitly Lio 3 p. 78 l. 26 r*intimated. Lib. 4 p 6 l. 34 r.
converted, p. 9 l. 35 r. Arian, p. 20 l. 23 r. jacientes, ib l. 33. r. her, p.
21 l. 11 r. the Son, p. 22 l. 15 r. twice, p 23 l. 19 r. highn, p. 25 l 20 r.
Adulto-Baptism p. 28 l. 21 r. them, p. 30 l. 32 r mitiantur, p. 38 l. 31 r.
(but from but to supper)* p. ^9 l. 17 r. Marcion, ibid. l 27 r. there* p 41 l
32 r. Cornelius, p 43 l 10 r. caused, p 45 l 27 r infants, p 73 l 10 r ad
mortem, ib. l 30 p 201 r. p 62, 87 l 30 r. sinner, p 90* l 39 r. of, p 92 l 12
r. such Saints, p 94 l. 22 r. to renew them. p 99 l 25 r. John 3 John 6 38 that
he came down from heaven. p 101 l 6 r. Pupianus: Errors in the Margin, The
Preface, p 8 l 5 r. 1 Cor 12, 13: The 1 Book p 1 l 2 Eusebius. lib. 5 r. cap. 28 p
23 l 9 r. Tull. Epist. 69 lib. 5 p 33 l 3 r. Eusebius. de Demonst. p 46 l 8 r. n.
6: The 2 Book, p 9 l r. Pelagian. p 31 l 17 r. lib. 4, p 33 l 4, r. dofilii
Divinitate p 38 l 2 nu. r n. 27, p 44 l 11 r. de verb. Domini, l 16 and p 45 l
7 p 45 l 9 r. sermon. 48* p 80 l 10 r. 5 n, 13: The 3 Book* p 2 l 3 r. 23, p 5 l
7 r. Sue^. p 7 l 7 r. lib. 5 n: 17, p 12 l 4 r. c. 7, p 23 l 3 r. 64, p 24 l 3
add id: homil: 40 Antioch: p 41 l 7 r Ambrose, p. 44 l. 1 r Aug: in Ps: 21: The
4 Book, p 8 l 4 r. vide infra cap. 21, p 15 16 r n: 50 p 29 l 16 l 12 c: d: r:
lib. 12 c: 6, p 30 Ambr: de sacram lib: 4 c: 4 p 33 l 3 r: 1 c: 6, p 41 l 5
lib: 6 c: 36: r: lib: 7 c: 2, p 44 l r: Episcop: Nor: p 4 9 l 2 r: cap. 1 ^:
78, p 67 l 14 Des: 1 l 1 ^: Dec: 1 lib. 1, p 69 l 4 r: Augustini p. 72 l 4 ^:
18, r: n: 28 l p 73 l 2 to: 6 r: August n: 5 to: 6, p 85 l: 10 r. Haeres: 88
to: 6, ibid: l 12, r: ad Genuenses, p 86 l 9, r: de p 91 l: 2, r: supra.


