An Alarm of War, Given to the ARMY, And to their High Court of Justice (so
called) revealed by the will of God in a Vision to E. POOLE, (sometime a
messenger of the Lord to the General Council, concerning the Cure of the Land,
and the manner thereof.) Foretelling the judgments of God ready to fall upon
them for disobeying the word of the Lord, in taking away the life of the KING.
Also a letter to the Congregation, in fellowship with Mr. Kiffin, in
vindication of E. P. advising them to live less in the Letter of the
scripture, and more in the spirit.

ISAIAH 30.15, 16, 17, 18. 15. Thus says the Lord God of Israel, In rest and
quietness shall ye be saved: In quietness and confidence shall be your
strength, and ye would not.

16. For ye have said, No, but we will flee away upon horses; therefore shall
ye flee, we will ride upon the swiftest, therefore shall your pursuers be
swifter.

17. A thousand as one shall flee at the rebuke of one at the rebuke of five
shall ye flee, till ye be left as a Ship mast on a Mountain, as a Beacon on a
Hill.

18. Yet therefore will the Lord wait, that he may have mercy upon you, and
therefore will he be exalted, that he may have compassion upon you: for the
Lord is the God of Judgment, blessed are all they that wait for him.

PSALM. 68.12. Kings of Armies did flee apace: and she that tarried at home
divided the spoil. Wherefore separate the precious from the vile, and return
ye.

LONDON.

A Vision, wherein is manifested the disease and cure of the Kingdom.
Being the sum of what was lately delivered to the Council of War; By E.P.
touching the Death of the King, etc.
SIRS,
I Have been (by the pleasure of the most High) made sensible of the distresses
of this Land, and also a sympathizer with you in your labors: for having
sometimes read your Remonstrance. I was for many days made a sad mourner for
her; the pangs of a traveling woman was upon me, and the pangs of death
oft-times panging me, being a member in her body, of whose dying state I was
made purely sensible. And after many days mourning, a vision was set before
me, to show her cure, and the manner of it, by this similitude: A man who is a
member of the Army, having sometimes much bewailed her state, saying, He could
gladly be a sacrifice for her, and was set before me, presenting the body of
the Army; and on the other hand, a woman crooked, sick, weak and imperfect in
body, to present unto me, the weak and imperfect state of the Kingdom: I
having the gift of faith upon me for her cure, was thus to appeal to the person
on the other hand, That he should improve his faithfulnesie to the Kingdom, by
using diligence for the cure of this woman, as I by the gift of faith on me
should direct him. Nevertheless it is not the gift of faith in me, say I, nor
the act of diligence in you, but in dependence on the divine will, which calls
me to believe, and you to act. Wherefore I being called to believe, ought not
to stagger, neither you being called to act should be slack: for look how far
you come short of acting (as before the Lord for her cure) not according to the
former rule by men prescribed for cure, but according to the direction of the
gift of faith in me, so far shall you come short of her consolation; and look
how far you shall act as before the Lord, with diligence for her cure, you
shall be made partakers of her consolation.

I am therefore to signisie unto you, that there is but one step between you
and restoration, the which whosoever takes not warily shall stumble, and
fall, and be taken, and that is this; you are to stand as in the presence of
the Lord, to be dead unto all your own interests, lives liberties, freedoms, or
whatsoever you might call yours: yet pleading for them still with men, speaking
to every one in his own language, for they are your due with them; but except
you are as ready to resign them up to the will of the eternal pleasure, as to
plead them with men, you shall surely lose them; For he that will save his life
shall lose it, and he that will lose it shall save it.

The Lord has a controversy with the great and mighty men of the earth, with
the Captains, and Rulers, and Governors: You may be great and mighty upon the
earth, and maintain his controversy, but against the mighty men of the earth
is his controversy held: For as you are the potsherd of the earth, he will
surely break you to pieces, till there be not a sherd left to carry coals on.
The Kingly power is undoubtedly fallen into your hands; therefore my advice is,
that you take heed to improve it for the Lord. You have justly blamed those who
have gone before you, for betraying their trust therein. I speak not this as
you are soldiers, but as the spirit of Judgment and Justice is most lively
appearing in you, this is therefore the great work which lies upon you, to
become dead to every pleasant picture, which might present it self for your
delight, that you perfectly dying in the will of the Lord, you may find your
resurrection in him.

She being after demanded, Whether she had any direction to give the Council?
She answered, no: for the present, for she was in this case presented to her
self as the Church, which spirit is in you, an shall guide you.

She being afterward asked by some of the chief Officers, Whether she
conceived they were called to deliver up the trust to them committed either to
Parliament or People? She answered, No, for this reason, it being committed to
their care and trust, it should certainly be required at their hands, but take
them with you as younger brethren, who may be helpful to you: Nevertheless
know you are in the place of watchmen, wherefore slack not your watch over
them, for the account of the Stewardship shall be required at your hands.

It was further said unto her, How then shall we be free from the aspersions of
the people, who will be ready to judge that we improve this interest for our
own ends? She answered, Set your selves, as before the Lord, to discharge the
trust committed to you, and trust him with your reward: I speak not this that
you should be exalted above your brethren, but that you might stand in
faithfulness to discharge your duty; For he that will save his life shall lose
it, and he that will lose it, shall save it. You have been Noblemen, behaving
your selves with much valor and courage (as amongst men) now therefore lose
not your reward, for this will be the greatest piece of courage that ever you
were made the examples of; if you shall be as well content to lose house, land,
wife and children, or what ever you might call yours in divine will, as ever
you were to lay down your lives in the field.

SIRS,

I Have considered the agreement of the people that is before you, and I am
very jealous lest you should betray your trust in it (in as much as the Kingly
Power is fallen into your hands) in giving it up to the people; for thereby you
give up the trust committed to you, and in so doing you will prove your selves
more treacherous then they that went before you, they being no ways able to
improve it without you. You justly blame the King for betraying his trust, and
the Parliament for betraying theirs: This is the great thing I have to say to
you, Betray not you your trust.

I have yet another Message to show you, I know not what acceptance it may
find with you, yet I am content, here it is, let it find what acceptance it
may, I leave it with you.

The Message is as follows:
Dear Sirs,
HAving already found so free admission into your presences, it has given me
the greater encouragement (though more peculiarly, the truth persuading me
thereunto) to present you with my thoughts in these following lines. I am in
divine pleasure made sensible of the might of the affairs which lie upon you;
and the Spirit of sympathy abiding in me, constrains me to groan with you in
your pains; you may remember I told you, the Kingly power is undoubtedly fallen
into your hands, which power, is to punish evil doers, and to praise them that
do well: Now therefore my cumble advice to you is, that you stand as in the
awful presence of the most high Father, acting your parts before God and man,
you stand in the place of interpreters, for many hard sayings present
themselves to you, and will do, look for it: wherefore see,

That you give unto men the things that are theirs, and unto God the things
that are his, it is true indeed, as unto men (I know I appeal by the gift of
God upon me) the King is your Father and husband, which you were and are to
obey in the Lord, and no other way, for when he forgot his Subordination to
divine Father-hood and headship, thinking he had begotten you a generation to
his own pleasure, and taking you a wife for his own lusts, thereby is the yoke
taken from your necks (I mean the neck of the Spirit and Law, which is the bond
of your union, that the holy life in it might not be profaned, it being free
and can not be bound. For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has
freed us from the law of sin and of death, for the letter of the law, which
speaks to the flesh kills, therefore you must suffer of men in the flesh,
for the Lords sake, that so dying to your own bodies (that is to all self
interest in divine will) your might also receive your resurrection, for you
must dye before you can rise, you must loose your lives, Interests, Liberties,
and all (before you can save them) casting your Crown at the feet of the Lamb,
who only is worthy; yet still pleading for them with men, for they are your due
with them, a share they may not deny you; Blessed are the dead which die in the
Lord: for they rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.

From your own labors, I wish you rest in the Lord, that the fruit of your
labors, which is the life of your faith may follow you to prison, and to
death; know this, that true liberty either is not bound to any thing, nor from
any thing, for it is subject to this or that (neither this nor that in divine
will) nevertheless as from the Lord you have all that you have, and are so to
the Lord, you owe all that you have, and are for his own name sake. So from the
King in Subordination.

You have all that you have and are, and also in Subordination you owe him all
that you have and are, and although he would not be your father and husband,
Subordinate, but absolute, yet know that you are for the Lords sake to honor
his person. For he is the Father and Husband of your bodies, as unto men, and
therefore your right cannot be without him, as unto men, I know and am very
sensible, that no small straight lies upon you in respect of securing his
person (for the manifold conceived inconveniences following, and necessities of
evil event) in respect of raising more wars, and also other things well known
to you, which will present themselves unpossible for you to avoid,
nevertheless, this is my humble and hearty prayer to the everlasting Father
(which I present to you in words, that you may be edified thereby) Remember I
said, everlasting Father, for so we shall best know him for our consolation;
that it might please him of his infinite, eternal life and goodness to grant
you a sure and certain knowledge of this, that all things which are impossible
with men (at the utmost extent of impossibillity) are possible with him, who
only says it, and it comes to pass, the Lord of hoasts, the God of the
whole earth, who commands all hoasts of men, Angels and Devils, whose eyes
run to and fro throughout the face of the whole earth: To show himself strong
in the behalf of all those that trust in him: wherefore put your swords into
his hands for your defense, and fear not to act the part of Abigail, seeing
Nabal has refused it (by Appropriating his goods to himself) in relieving
David and his men in their distresle; it was to her praise, it shall be to
yours fear it not: Only consider, that as she lifted not her hand against her
husband to take his life, no more do ye against yours.

For as the Lord revenged his own cause on him, he shall do on yours; For
vengeance is mine, I will repay it, says the Lord; who made him the Savior of
your body, though he has profaned his Saviour-ship; Stretch not forth the
hand against him: For know this, the Conquest was not without divine pleasure,
whereby Kings came to reign, though through lust they tyrannized: which God
excuses not, but judges; and his judgments are fallen heavy, as you see,
upon Charles your Lord: Forget not your pity toward him, for you were given
him an helper in the body of the people: Which people are they that agreed with
him to subject unto the punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that
do well: which law is the spirit of your Union: And although this bond be
broken on his part; You never heard that a wife might put away her husband, as
he is the head of her body; but for the Lords sake suffers his terror to her
flesh, though she be free in the spirit to the Lord; and he being incapable to
act as her husband, she acts in his stead; and having the spirit of Union
abiding in her, she considers him in his temptations, as tempted with him:
And if he will usurp over her, she appealeth to the Fatherhood for her
offense, which is the spirit of Justice, and is in you; For I know no power in
England to whom it is committed, save your selves (and the present Parliament)
which are to act in the Church of Christ, as she by the gift of faith upon
her, shall be your guide for the cure of her body, that you might therefore
commit an unsound member to Satan (though the head) as it is flesh; that the
spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord (I believe) And accordingly you
may hold the hands of your husband, that he pierce not your bowels with a knife
or sword to take your life. Neither may you take his, I speak unto you as Men,
Fathers, and Brethren in the Lord. (who are to walk by this rule) Whatsoever
you would that men should do unto you, do ye the same unto them: I know it
would affright you to be cut off in your iniquity; but O, how fain would you
have your iniquity taken away! Consider also others in their amazement; I know
you have said it, and I believe, that if you could see suitable sorrow for so
great offense, you should embrace it: I beseech you in the bowels of love, for
there it is I plead with you, look upon the patience of God toward you, and
see if it will not constrain you to forbearance for his sake: I know the spirit
of sanctity is in you; and I know as well the spirit of bondage holds you
oft-times, that you cannot but groan for deliverance: Wherefore I beseech you
for the Lords sake, whose I am, and whom I serve in the spirit, that you let
not go the Vision which I showed you concerning the cure of England, as it was
presented to me: Wherein the party acting, being first required to stand, as
in the awful presence of God, and to act for her cure, according to the
direction which he should receive from the Church, by the gift of faith upon
her: (Act he must) but not after any former rule by men prescribed for cure,
(but after the rule of the gift of faith) which I humbly beseech the Almighty
Lord to establish in you. I rest,

Your servant in the Church and Kingdom of Christ. Elizabeth Poole.
After the delivery of this, she was asked, whether she spoke against the
bringing of him to trial, or against their taking of his life.

She answered, Bring him to his trial, that he may be convicted in his
conscience, but touch not his Person.



A Friend to truth and of the Authors to the Reader.
THe occasion of the next ensuing Letter (written by T. P. in vindication of
the Author) was this, the Author Mrs. E. Poole having delivered a Message of
the Lord to the General Counsel of the Army forewarning them against that
great sin, fore told of by the Apostle to be the sin of these latter days,
viz. Self-love, the forsaking of which, would be a great stop and let to the
Independent design, viz. the taking away the life of the King: there arose
diverse false witnesses, viz. W. K. Mr. P. and Mr. John Fountain, but none of
these stood to the public test but Mr. Fountain, who endeavoring to weaken
the Message by scandalizing and reproaching the Messenger, charging her with
some follies committed many years ago, and long since repented of, and with
other things she knew not: The old Serpentine trick new revived, but in a finer
dress: For it is not unknown to thee (good Reader) how the Lord Christ, when
in flesh, was called a glutton, a wine bibber, a friend of Publicans and
Harlots, and shall Christ in spirit, think you, fare any better? As also thou
art not ignorant of that place in Math. 13 25. where it says the Kingdom of
Heaven is likened unto a man which sowed good seed in his field, but while men
slept his Enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat and went his way: this man
is the Lord from Heaven, who sends his Servant to sow right good seed viz.
wheat, the word of God, the Child Jesus, in his field even your hearts, but
while you sleep the Enemy comes, (the Devil, the accuser of the brethren, who
always comes in a sleeping time, in the night, and dark understandings of men,
when they are commanded from him to watch) and stealingly sows tares among
the wheat, on purpose to choke the wheat, or at least to cause it to be
despised, upon the instant of time when Christ was borne in the flesh, King
Herod fearing his Kingdom and government should be taken from him, sent forth
Mat. 2.16.
and slew all the children that were in Bethlehem and in all the Coasts
thereof, this was a figure of that which was to come, to be done upon the first
appearings of Christ in spirit, for as the child of the bondwoman did
persecute the child of the freewoman, so they that are borne after the flesh,
do persecute them that are borne after the spirit, and the first borne of the
form will persecute them that come in the power of the most high, you know the
Story in the 12. of the Revelations Rev. 12.1, 2.3, 4, ^. 6. etc.
of the woman clothed with the Suane etc. being with child cried traveling in
birth, and pained (...) delivered; and a great (...) ^^^gon having 7. heads etc
before the woman, etc. to devour her child as soon as it was born; the issue
of it was, the great Dragon was cast out, the old Serpent called the Devil and
Satan the accuser of the Brethren: and I make no question, but the same effect
it shall have upon some; I pray let these things be considered by thee, ver.
9.10.
the Lord himself will make application of this in due time to the hearts of
these refined persecutors,

Farewell.
The Copy of a letter, as it was sent from T. P. a friend of Mrs. Elizabeth
Poole, To the Congregation of Saints, walking in fellowship with Mr. William
Kiffin.
DEar brethren in the bowels of love and meeknes, I kindly salute you, wishing
you an increase of all faithfulness and true knowledge in the mystery of Christ:
The cause of my present writing is to acquaint you, that providence has lately
brought a letter to my hand, directed to my husband, concerning one Mrs. Poole,
once a member with you; which woman say you, for scandalous evils was cast out:
Now it being some years since it was done, I humbly desire a little to reason
with you about the grounds, why this still remains upon your spirits, seeing
Christ says, forgive ye one another, as I forgive you; and God is said to
remember our sins no more; this therefore is a note of forgiveness not to
remember, and sure we should show our selves children of our heavenly father;
but further I desire before the Lord, that you examine your own hearts in this
thing, what your end is in it; if it be, you think, she is not worthy to have a
livelihood amongst men, then why do you not either by the Civil Law, if that
will take hold of the offense, or by some other way, if nothing will satisfy
you but her blood, take some present course that may put an end to this great
difference: but if you think this be too gross, or more then the offense
requires; then I beseech you, for the Lords sake, to consider your own actings
in this thing, whether you do not as much as in you lies, carry on the same
design, though more closly from the eyes of the world, but sure before the
Lord it can appear no other, but the hunting after her life; nay is it not more
then to take off one single life at once? or which is greater cruelty, for a
Tyrant to take a man life at once? or by degrees; and then your selves be
judges, whether your proceedings toward her be not a killing all the day long:
for you cannot be ignorant that she has no livelihood amongst men, but what
she earns by her hands: and your defaming her in this manner cannot in an
ordinary way but deprive her of that, and so at last bring her blood upon you:
if you say, you acquaint none but the Saints with it, that is evident to the
contrary, for your open publishing it in the Council of War, caused the world
to take notice of it, and yet your spirits rest not here; truly dear friends,
as the evil spirit wrought in her one way, when with you; so consider whether
the same spirit, do not highly work in you at this time another way; the Lord
give you understanding in all things: But if her life be not that which you aim
at, then is it these divine discoveries of life and light, which God makes out
to the world by her: if it be so, then you are to know, that he is too strong
you strive with; but about this I would a little quere: first, whether do you
think that because such evils were manifest in her, when with you; therefore it
is impossible now that any good should be brought forth by her: do you not hope
to grow better and better. But secondly, is it not Gods usual way to manifest
himself there highest, where in time past he was by the evil spirit kept
lowest; yea, does he not suffer himself for this very end many times, thus to
die in appearance, and to leave a soul to it self, that so it may see what it
is in it self, and so learn to die to it self, that so he may have the more
glorious resurrection in that soul. I beseech you for the Lord sake to consider
these things: as for her outward person, I conceive she cares as little for it
as you can, therefore you may take your fill of trampling on it; but I beseech
you be careful how you meddle with the spirit that breaths in her, for surely
brethren, I know not what spirit manifested it self in her while with you; I am
sure, and I speak nothing but the truth, that I have found a most divine spirit
in her, as far as I could discern, and that which comes to the spirit and life
of things, and in this methinks you should rejoice, for truly, I have heard
many professors and professions, but to my knowledge I never heard one come so
near the power, I do not speak this as being affected with any person, party,
or opinion; I bless my God, I am now in his strength; delivered from that,
though some have falsely affirmed my being deluded by her, but I am confident I
can say with Paul, and that not only repeating the letter, but in truth; that
those things which I have received, have not been from man, nor woman, nor any
other thing, but by the mere revelation of Jesus Christ in me, God manifesting
himself in my own flesh; and therefore they much wrong both her, and me, that
affirm it, but especially they wrong or speak a lie of that God that did it for
me: and because I hear it so reported amongst you, I thought good to write one
word to clear it, that so whether you will hear, or whether you will forbear
the word of truth might judge you; give not ear therefore to all you hear
though from brethren, least you be brought into a snare; for since the
defection of the Churches men, yea good men have been such lovers of themselves
and their own opinions, that they will speak largely, upon little ground, to
keep up their own glory; God having not yet undone them, for were they once
undone men, they would willingly be what God would have them, however the world
accounts of them; there is another thing which came to my ear, that it should
be given into the Council by your two witnesses, that the said Mrs. Poole
should say, that you cast her out for difference in judgment; and when Coll.
Reeth and Coll. Harison asked to whom she spoke it, they said to some of
Abington: now indeed my husband said to you, that he thought such a thing, but
when he came home and see so little ground for his thoughts, I think he had but
little comfort in telling you so; and then brethren if you upon such slender
grounds should act in this strange manner against her, affirming this thing so
publicly, I think you have cause to be humbled for it, and justly to repent of
your evil; I desire you to bear a little with me, for truly it appears to me,
rather to be your rage of spirit, then your true love, either to her, or truth,
for me thinks it would savor more of a true Christian spirit if you had first
spoken with her, and have seen what change the Lord has wrought in her, as
knowing that Mary out of whom seven Devils had been formerly cast, was made the
first messenger of Christ Resurrection; yea, and she must bring it to the
Apostles, and not the Apostles to her: You say in your letter that you left her
to the judgment of the great day, and I beseech you brethren, do you not again
take her into your own day, for truly I believe that day in a measure has
come upon her, and the Lord himself is at work with her, therefore do not fear
but the work will be well done, only we as well as she must have patience in
it, and surely this is the confidence that I have concerning her, that she has
seen evil in that estate she walked in with you, and certainly God is good to
her in this, showing her what an abominable spirit of wickedness may be hid
under the greatest practices and professions of externals, not that these are
the cause of it; no, the gold and the silver is mine, says the Lord; but we
bestowing it upon our lovers, and making our selves great with his ornaments,
he is fain, in love to us, to take us from them, or they from us, and so find
out a more special administration to perfect us in: Oh the infinite riches of
our God! where does his bounty end, sure his ways of love are unsearchable,
and his paths of mercy, in which he follows poor fallen man, and poor
backsliding souls, are past finding out, how narrow are our capacities, we
judge as men, we may think as some did of David, that there is no help for such
things in God, but all things in truth will be found possible with him, even
where they are altogether past our thoughts and conceptions, and become to us
impossible; I beseech you therefore be persuaded to bow down to him; I know you
are conscious, that all judgment is not committed unto you, and therefore it
is possible you may not judge right in this thing; for truly brethren we may
conceive many things even by the letter it self, and yet not living in that
spirit that writ the Letter, we may err, I pray do not mistake me as if I
would any way speak slightly of the letter, farther than it speaks of it self;
no, I bless the Father for it, and by sweet experience can say, that I was
never so confirmed in it, now the Lord has drawn me to him out of it, even in
that spirit that wrought it; I am for the conscionable use of it, but I would
not abuse it; I am sure, those men that would set it above the spirit, can
hardly free themselves from that thing, I hope therefore you will not count it
your excellency to walk in the letter, but rather desire the Lord to perfect
you in that spirit that writes the letter for then and never but then shall we
be able to walk by right, and speak of the letter truly: I have not yet
acquainted my husband with your letter. I shall wait upon God what answer to
receive from you: for truly dear brethren, upon serious deliberation, I know
not how to approve my self faithful in the eyes of God to my brethren here,
if I should deliver it; for God having put it into my hand, I must also see
clearnes from him before I part with it: for though blessed be the father, we
have a sweet hopeful people amongst us that wait upon God, and have fellowship
one with another; yet whether they may digest such things as you write of, I
really question; therefore it would be unfaithfulnes in me, if I apprehending
an evil to them, or any other, should not as much as in me lies prevent it; and
this I shall do, by detaining the Letter, till further manifestation from God
what to do with it do not judge me in this thing, I beseech you: I have one
Judge, even the Lord, and he that put it into my hand, will at length clear my
integrity in it, I have nothing to do for my self in it, the Lord knows; only,

How I may approve my self faithful to men in the Lord and for the Lords
sake; your desire I exceedingly like, that we may be kept from errors, and the
Lord keep us from all errors, but who must show us what error is, but the God
of truth himself, we have lived in error, and have sucked them in from our
cradles, and yet who will speak so much against error as we, stating our
selves still in the truth, my sweet friends, the day of truth is but now
dawning upon us, and how is it opposed, yea by those that are children of
truth, in their measure; yet we have all looked for it, and prayed together
for it a long time, but truly now we will not own our prayers, but turn away
our face from our Savior, because he comes not in such a garb as we imagined
he would, when we know its his prerogative to cloth himself with what flesh,
orgarment he pleases, brethren what would you have, do you not know that a
glorious day has been spoken of ever since the Prophets, and the Apostles:
Though the day was dawned upon them, yet they bid their hearts not to be
terrified, as if that day were near, for says he there must be a falling away
first, and that wicked one be revealed, notwithstanding Peter told them that
he was a partaker of that glory, that should be afterward revealed, however
says he, you have a sure word of Prophecy to which ye do well to take heed,
as if he had said, brethren, we have been with the Lord in the mount, and
have beheld that excellent glory, but yet to you that have not so seen Christ
there is a more sure word of Prophecy; for visions and revelations do most
especially confirm and strengthen those that have them, but here is a word
that is spoken to all, and is as a light shining in a dark place, therefore
you do well to take heed to it till the day dawne, and the day Star arise in
your own hearts, and you be swallowed up with that glory, that now you expect
and wait for, only know this, that no private spirit can understand these
Scriptures that speak of that day, it must be the spirit of God alone, let us
cease from our own Spirits therefore, for they are selfish and private, bound
up to this and that, and so it would confine God also, but his Spirit is as
large as himself, its without bonds, its neither here nor there distinct, but
it is individually every where. But that which I desire you to consider from
these Scriptures is, that this day of falling away has been; and all the
world has wandered after the beast, since the Apostles time; therefore how
near may we expect our glory: we should not be troubling our selves therefore
still with falling a way, but now look for a rising, for sure man has his
day, and now the Lord will have his day: now seeing this day of the Lord must
have a dawning, and some Disciples may be taken up into the Mount, before
other some, it should teach us not to judge our brethren, that speak of higher
enjoyments then we have, for we being behind should rather judge our selves,
seeing we are more in the day of man, and acknowledge our selves so to be,
still looking for, and hastening to the day of God, in which we may act self
nor selfishly, no longer, but our God may bring forth his own righteousness
in us: and truly brethren you may be satisfied in this, that we are verily
industrious to keep our selves from error, but we know that in his strength
we shall be perfected, and when himself comes and speaks, then shall we
know that it is he; and truly brethren, I would not have you infidels but
believing, this day has taken some unawares, and though many may have it in
notion yet I am sure that some have it in power, I have one thing more to you
concerning your Letter, and truly I cannot but wonder at it, that is, how you
durst so peremptorily to judge the woman that she brought a delusion for a
vision of God, I beseech you consider seriously before the Lord, whether you
are sure that it was so or no, before you make it so public, and send it forth
with the authority of a Church, surely friends, you will much abuse the
authority of your Church, in affirming mere supposition for truth, the Lord be
pleased to open your eyes in this thing, it may be your father in mercy desires,
a little to plead with you by a weak Instrument, and therefore put the letter
into my hand, that so he might put some stop to your furious driving, and truly
I can look upon it no other ways; therefore willingly meet your God in this
merciful act toward you, for if you do not, the dumb Ass next time may
reprove you, I confess, souls, I am the weakest of all, a poor undone soul
in my self, the Lord alone take all the glory, yet if I may be useful, as
being one of the body, in keeping you from doing greater evils, I shall be
willing and rejoice, though I go under never so great an odium my self, for
sure friends, account of me how you will, I am one of you, and tenderly affect
you, and in this thing would have God truly exalted: For this grace is given me
to love truth under any appearance, though indeed, that may sometimes appear
to men to be truth which I cannot close with; but I mean any appearance that
my God comes in, and I hope shall be more and more perfected in it; and indeed
it is sweet to me that he has given me, through mercy, to know his voice from
a stranger, it may be the world may judge me for it, because it comes not in
their form, but I shall rest in the Lord: well brethren, if you see mercy to you
in that which the Lord has spoken by me, receive it and rejoice in him, it may
be I may prove to you as Abigail did to David, keep you from shedding blood,
and from avenging your selves with your own hand, the Lord show us therefore
what that scripture means, I will have mercy and not sacrifices: there be
many things in the letter of the scripture, which we through weakness may think
to be sacrifices, as the Pharisees did, when God abhors it, and will have none
of it, in such a time as he calls for mercy; therefore he bids us learn what
that means: we may have it, and read it, and speak it, but to learn the
inside of it, learn what it means, will be our comfort, and our Crown; and
truly my dear friends, I am persuaded, that this is a time, in which, mercy is
required of us toward our Sister, and not such sacrifices: If you please to
send me a word of an answer, leave it with M. Calvert, at the Black spread Eagle
at the West end of Paul's; I do not think it fit as yet, that you acquaint my
husband with it, not for unlawfulness sake, but convenience; for surely
brethren, I am not willingly carried, to give you or him, or any one offense,
only as the Lord manifests it to be his will, and then I must leave Father,
and mother, and all, and cleave to him. Let me have your answer as soon as you
can: but I beseech you, do not answer me, but the Lord, and then see how you
can justify your selves; in him therefore shall I wait for it, and dear souls,
though I am nothing, and can do nothing in my self; yet I beseech you do not
reject any word of truth, love, and sincerity that God sends by my hand. Job
says He did not reject the cause of his Maid servant when it came before him,
though the word said, they contended with him: I can give you more satisfaction
if you please how I came by the letter, I am sure it was unexpected by me,
only the Lord would have it so; and therefore all your care must serve the
Lords designs, to bring it to my hand when my husband was not in town: do not
therefore look upon me, but look to the Lord, and use me as kindly as Job did
his servant, reject not my cause, for surely it is not mine; I leave you to the
Lord, in whom I desire rightly to guide you in this thing, and am

Your sincere loving Sister and servant, from the greatest to the meanest of
you, T. P.
Abington: ^6. March 1649.
Errata in Alarm.
Page 4. line 1. for have done, read have done to be righteous. page ^, li. 27.
for and your, r. but you your: p. 7. l. 5. for are r. were (...) l. 14. for as
appears for, r. as appears in that: l. 2. (...) r. call the: l. 22. for
call the, r. call it the: p. 9 l. ^2. (...) taken viz. l. 24. for say, r. said:
p. 11. l. 7. for e are, r. ye are (...) l. 15. for the sea, r. these.


