A Breviate of the New Allotment of Quarters in the Assotiation.
Yorkshire.
East Riding,
4. Troops of Col. Copleys Regiament, making (after the computation of three
Footmen to one Horseman) 933. Major Birkets Troop of Dragoones, 216. Col.
Fairfaxes Regiament, 870. Chirurgians Mates, Gunners, Marshall General, his
Lieutenant and men, Muster-Master, and Deputies, making 66. and of Colon.
Thorntons Regiament, 312. In all 2397.

West Riding.
Of Col. Brights Reg. 799. Four Troops of Col. Copleyes Reg. making 981.
Major Smithsons Reg. 744. Cap. Skippers Troop of Dragoones, 216. Pont.
Garrison, 499. Skipton 40, and Cawood 20. In all 3259.

North Riding,
Of Col. Brights Reg. 498. Col. Sir Robert Cellingwoods Reg. together with Cap.
Barwicks Company, 399. Of Col. Thorntons Reg. 990. Scarborow 258. Hemsley 66.
Bolton 78. Middleham 84. Scout Master and Chirurgions Mates 27. In all 2400.

In all these the Officers and Chirurgions Mates are included, and each
Horseman is computed after the proportion of three Footmen to one Horseman,
and each Officer is allowed in this computation according to his quality and
number of Horses allowed him in the Printed Orders (a Copy whereof is here
enclosed) viz. for each Horseman, three Footmens quarters, id est, six pence a
day. And on Tuesday next the Officers and High Constables to meet about an
equal disposition.

Northumberland.
Major Sandersons and Cap. Lilburnes Troops.

Cumberland.
Ma. Cholmleys Troop, being 104. Cap. Bayers Troop, being 65. and 69 of the
Bishopric Companies.

Westmerland.
Col. Fairfax his Company being 70. Cap. Johnsons Horse being 50. Cap.
Atkinsons Company being 100. Of the Bishoprike Companies 100. Appleby Castle
15. In all 335.

Bishopric of Durham.
900 Of the Garrison of Newcastle; And only to pay at four pence a day for
each Soldier, and have none Quartered upon them.

Lancashire.
Col. Bethels Regiament.

Darbeyshire.
Col. Thornhaghs Regiament.

Orders set down and agreed upon by Colonel John Lambert, Commander in chief
of all the Forces in the Northern Assotiation, and the Council of War held at
Wakefield, for the equal distribution of the said Army into quarters, and the
better regulation thereof.
I THat all Officers and Soldiers, be equally distributed and quartred upon
every Parish and Town, according to the chief Constables rates: and the
several Officers of the Troops and companies of Horse and Foot, (for the more
speedy and equal prosecution thereof) are to take the advice and direction of
the chief Constables in their respective wapontakes, or divisions,

II. That all soldiers be equally quartred upon every man according to his
estate, in the Town or Parish where it lies: And if in case any person having
lands or other profits liable to assessement (in the Town or Parish where he
has no house nor entertainment) for billeters, shall refuse to pay his
proportion assessed upon him for lands or other profits; then the Officers of
the Troop, or Company appointed to quarter there, shall upon complaint made to
him or them, appoint so many soldiers to quarter at his dwelling house, as
comes to his proportion, provided it be within the same Ryding of this County,
or the same County in other parts of the Association, and if not he is to
certify the Commander in chief thereof.

III. That all Officers and Soldiers so quartered shall content themselves
with such ordinary diet, as those with whom they quarter usually afford
themselves and their families: And if any shall otherwise enforce, or attempt
to enforce his Landlord to provide dainties, or extraordinary diet; upon
complaint to the next superior Officer in commission, such Officer shall
compose the business betwixt the quarterer and the Landlord, or in case he
cannot, to certify the business to the Commander in chief.

IV. If any Landlord shall refuse to admit or entertain such as are duly
quartered upon him, according to the rules aforesaid, then the Captain or chief
Officer present, with the Troop or Company, shall send some Commission Officer
with such assistance as shall be needful to cause the quarterer to be received
into and settled in his quarter with as much quietness as may be: And if any
Landlord shall be refractory or obstinate, in not entertaining or supplying
with necessary quarters, those that are duly quartered upon them: The chief
Officer present with the Troop or company (if he cannot otherwise compose the
difference between the Landlord and the quarterer) shall send such obstinate
refuser to the chief Officer present with the Regiament, who shall (if there be
cause) transmit him to the Commander in chief, either in safe custody or
otherwise (with respect to his quality) to answer his contempt.

V. Whereas great abuses are committed by some Soldiers in receiving money of
their Landlords, for discharge of quarters, which they do not pay; It is
Ordered, that if any Landlord having no accommodation for quarter shall desire
to table abroad, or for other causes, be minded to hire out their quarters,
that then their said Landlords shall not agree with their Soldiers, nor give
them money to quarter themselves elsewhere, but shall agree with some
inhabitants in the said Township or Parish, for convenient quarter, and fit
accommodation for them from week to week, as they shall think fit: and the
soldiers are hereby required to receive no money as aforesaid.

VI. Whereas diverse Officers and Soldiers, do many times upon their own
slight occasions or pleasures, absent themselves from their quarters, and
during the time of their said absence, do demand money in lieu of their
quarters: It is therefore ordered, that no Officer or Soldier shall demand or
receive any money from their Landlords for the same, except they be employed
upon the public service; or the private soldier have license from the
Captain of the Troop or Company to which he belongs, and a ticker expressing
the place he is to go to, and the time allowed for his stay, and the Officers
from the Commander in chief. And all Officers are hereby required not to give
leave to any Soldiers so to depart their quarters, except the Soldier shall
make it appear, that his occasions are real and urgent, and then they are to
receive of their respective Landlords money in lieu of quarters, according to
the time alloted in the said tickets, one moity whereof is to be paid upon the
departure of the Soldier, and the other moity at his return: Provided the money
so allotted do not extend above 15 d. per diem for every Trooper, and 6 d. per
diem for every foot soldier and for Officers as hereafter is set down.

VII. That each Trooper shall be content with one half peck of Provender (for
each day) viz three parts Oats, and one part Beans: And if in case the parts
of the Country cannot provide Beans, they are then to allow one quarter of a
peck of Oats more per diem.

That all Officers shallbe allowed for each horse, one peck of Provender for
each day, according to the number of horse allowed them, as follows, Every
Corporal of horse one horse. Every Quartermaster of a Troop, two horses. Every
Cornet two horses. Every Lieutenant of a Troop three Horses. Every Captain of a
Troop four horses, Every Major of horse, four horses, Every Col. of Horse,
four horses, Commissary of Musters two Horses. Scoutmaster General three
horses, Marshall General three horses, His Lieutenant two horses, Chirurgions
two horses, Quartermasters two horses, Ensign of Foot one horse, Lieutenant of
Foot one horse. Captain of Foot two horses, Each Major, Lieuten. Col. and Col.
of Foot, three horses.


And if in case any Officer or Soldier shall be absent from his Quarters upon
the public service, or by leave or Ticket, as is before expressed, then he
during the time of his absence to be allowed in lieu of his quarter, as
follows.

Each Trooper for himself and Horse, one shilling three pence a day, Each
Corporal of horse and Trumpet, 1 s. 6. d. a day. Each Quartermaster of Horse,
1. s. 10. d. a day, Each Cornet of Horse, 2 s. a day, Each Lieuten. for
himself, 2 s. 2 d. a day, For his man, 1 s. 3 d. Every Captain of a Troop, 2 s.
6 d. a day, For his man 1 s. 3 d. Every Major of horse, 3 s. a day, For two men
2 s. 6 d. Every Colonel 3 s. 6 d. a day, For two men 2 s. 6 d. Every
Foot-Souldier, 6 d. a day, Every Corporal 7 d. a day, Every Sergeant 9 d. a
day, Every Ensign 1 s. 10 d. a day, Every Lieuten. 2 s. a day, Every Capt. 2
s. 4 d. a day, And his man 1 s. 3. d. Every Major of Foot 3 s. a day And his
man 1. s. 3 d. Every Lieuten. Col. 3. s. And his man 1. s. 3. d. Every Colonel
3. s. 6. d. And his two men 2. s. 6. d.
Marshall and Q^artermasters of every Troop and Regiament equal with a
Lieutenant of Foot.

Marshall Generals Lieutenant, Chaplains, Chirurgions, equal with Lieutenants
of Horse.

Marshall General Scoutmaster General, Commissary of Musters, equal with
Captains of Horse.

The Deputy Commissaries equal with Lieutenants of Foot.

Provided, that in regard the intention of the abovementioned Order concerning
the numbers of Horses to be allowed to each Officer respectively, is only for
the present ease of the Country, not to the prejudice of pay; It is therefore
Declared, that in case there shall be a Muster during the time, the said Order
remains in force, and the Officers shall not be able to bring to the Muster so
many Horses as shall be allowed them in the establishment, that
(notwithstanding the aforesaid Order) each Officer shall receive pay upon that
Muster, and his Arrears be accounted to him as if he had mustered his full
numbers, according to the Establishment.

VIII. That if any Soldier or inferior Officer shall wilfully commit any
misdemeanors comprised within these Articles, or any the other known Articles
of War used in the Army, and complaint thereof be made to the Superior Officers
of the troop or company of the said Soldiers respectively, the said Officers
shall without delay examine and regulate the said Misdemeanors; or in case he
cannot, he is to certify the Judge-Advocate of the Army, and to give full
information to him thereof within ten days after, or else the said Officer
failing therein, shall be accounted guilty of the said crime and misdemeanour
committed by the Soldier.

IX. No member of this Army shall (by threats, or otherwise) deter any man
from complaining, or from prosecution of his complaints, nor shall offer any
violence, or put any burden, injury, or wilful prejudice upon any
complaining, upon pain of casheering.

X. That no Officer shall List or inroll any Soldier, more then what he has
at this present in his Troop or Company.

That the Colonells or chief Officers of the respective Regiaments, shall have
power to call a Council of War upon occasional complaints, except in such
cases where Life, or Limb is concerned, in which respect no proceedings are
permitted without the presence of, or some special injunction from the
Commander in chief.

And whereas many other particular cases may fall out which may not be included
within the Orders aforementioned, and wherein some persons may be agreeved and
burdened, which could not be well fore seen at the making thereof, in regard of
the unaccustomednesse of quartering in this manner; all such persons as shall
have any such case, or otherwise are agreeved, are to make their complaints to
the Commander in chief, or to the council of War, and they shall have
redress according to Justice.

Signed by Order of the Council of War. THO: MARGETTS, Advocate.
Vera Copia Examinat. Putney 23. 1647.
Signed by Order of the Council of War, THO. MARGETTS, Advocate.
Vera Copia Examinat. Putney 23. 1647.
FINIS.

