CHRIST EXALTED above all Creatures BY GOD His Father. OR A Sermon Preached
before the Right Honorable, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND. (At
their solemn Fast, observed the last day of the last Month called February
1649.)

By VAVASOR POVVELL.

Esa. 2.11.17. And the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day He has on his
vesture, and on his thigh, a name written, KING of KINGS, and LORD of LORDS,
Rev. 19.16.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Ibbitson for Livewell Chapman at the Crown in
Pope's Head Alley. MDCLI.

Christ exalted above all Creatures by GOD his FATHER.
Hebrews 2.7, 8. Thou made him a little lower then the Angels, thou
Crownedst him with glory and honor, and did set him over the works of thy
hands:

Thou have put all things in subjection under his feet. For in that he put all
in subjection under him, he left nothing that is not put under him. But now we
see not yet all things put under him.


BEfore I come to the words of my Text, I will endeavor to show you the main
aim and scope of the Apostle in this Epistle, which is to exhort and persuade
these Hebrews to stand fast, The Scope of the Apostle in this Epistle is two
fold.
and to persist in the faith, and to dehort and dissuade them from falling,
First to persuade them to perseverance.
and apostatizing from the faith.

First, to persuade them to perseverance, and to make both the exhortation and
dehortation more effectual, he urges several motives, and prescribes several
means. The motives that he uses to persuade them are 4.

1. The first Motive is from Christ. Chap. 4.11.
Seeing we have such an high priest (says he) that is passed in o the heavens,
Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession. The Apostle to make
this Argument more taking, he shows who and what Christ was, as that he was the
Chap. 1.2 5.8.
Son of God, Chap. 1.2
heir of all things C. 1.2.
Creator of the World, the v. 3.
brightness of Gods glory, the express image of his Person. The upholder of
every creature, the C. 2.3.
Prophet C. 2.8.
Sovereign, C: 2.10.
Captain, 3.11.
Sanctifier, v. 9.
Savior, v. 14.
Conqueror, C. 4.14.
Priest, C. 7.22.
surety, and C. 8.1.
substance of all, This is the first encouragement: And it is a very great one.

2. Another Motive and encouragement that the Apostle uses, is taken from the
Gospel and new Covenant. And this he presses by showing the Cha. 8.6.
Excellency of it above the Law, and how it is established upon better promises.

3. A third Motive is, the cloud of witnesses, or the many Saints that did hold
out, and go on in the faith, Chap. 11.
notwithstanding their great trials, temptations, and sufferings in the world.

4. The fourth and last Motive is, the wages that they should have, if they did
continue unto the end. And this is called a Chapter 4.9.15.
Rest, Chapter 10.35.
Recompense of reward, a Chapter 11.16
city, a Chapter 11.14
country, a Chapter 12.28.
Kingdom.

The means that he prescribes to further them to attain thereunto, are four,
I will but name them.

1. Faith, Chap. 4. 2. and 6. 12. and 11. 2. Diligence, chap. 6. 11. 3. A
Consider at on of Christ, Chap. 12. 2. especially of his sufferings and glory.
4. Keeping communion with his Church and people, chapter 3. 13. and 10. 25.
Secondly, The Apostles scope in the second place, is to dehort, and dissuade
them from falling: To dissuade them from apostasy.
And herein he shows a three fold falling.

First, a falling (or coming short) of grace; Take heed (says he) lest any
of you scem to come short of the i. e. of the promise of grace.
promise.

Secondly, a falling from the profession of faith, called a departing from God
Heb. 3.12.
. (Note there may be a See chap. 6. 6. Or from their own fled-fastnesse, as
Peter expresses it, 2 Pet. 3.17.
falling from the profession of grace, though not from the truth of grace; from
the form, though not from the power; and from the doctrine, though not from the
state of grace.)

Thirdly, a Chap. 4.11.
falling into sin: Take heed lest any man fall after the same example of
disobedience. And that he might affright and prevent them from falling he
puts three things before them.

1 The example of the Jews that were destroyed in the wilderness, Chap. 3.
17. 2 The greatness of their sin if they did fall, Chapter 6. 6. 3 The nearness
and soreness of their punishment and misery, Chapter 6. 8. and 10. 26, 27, 28, 29,
31.
Obj. But they might ask, how shall we prevent this?

Answ. He resolves them in that, by exhorting them to take heed of unbelief,
and the deceitfulness of sin, Cha. 3. 12, 13. So then the sum of the whole
Epistle is this;

That those that profess Christ, and christianity, must be careful, and
fearful lest they come short of grace and glory, and lest they return through
unbelief into impiety. But to come to the Text, which I have read unto you,
which presents it self in a threefold consideration.

1 To be divided. 2 Explained. 3 The main Positions or Doctrines therein to be
stated.
In the words you are to consider three things. The Text divided.


1 By whom they were spoken: And that is either by David, (who spoke them
before prophetically) or else by Paul the 2 Pet. 3.15.
Author of this Epistle, who cites these words out of the 8 Psalm.

2 Of whom they are spoken: The parties therein are either extraordinary, or
ordinary.

The extraordinary are God the Father, and Jesus Christ.

The ordinary are I call Angels ordinary, in comparison of God, and Christ.
God the father humbling Christ. God the father exalting Christ.
Angels and men.

3 What is the subject matter contained in the words. This is twofold,

1 The acts of the Father, both in abasing and exalting his Son. His act in
abasing him in these words Thou made him a little lower then the Angels. His
act in exalting him in these words; Thou crownedst him with glooy and honor,
and did set him over the works of thy hands: thou have put all things in
subjection under him.

2 The twofold state of Christ, either his state of humiliation, or his state
of exaltation.

In his state of Humiliation you are to consider three things.

1 The degree of his humiliatiation, a little lower then the Angels (viz.) in
nature, for he took (as I showed before) man's frail and fleshly nature upon
him.

2 The time of his humiliation, and in this sense also may those words, a
little lower then the Angels be understood, that is for a little time, or for a
short space lower then they.

3 The nature of his humiliation, which is called in the 9th verse. his
suffering.

In this Exaltation there be also three particulars.

1 His Coronation; Thou crownedst him with glory and honor. 2 His Institution:
Thou did set him over the works of thy hands. 3 His Dominion, which is
universal, Thou have put all things in subjection under his feet.
Note that Christ's humiliation is set down comparatively, but his exaltation is
set down superlatively.

Thus much for the division of the words; The Text explained.
now I come to the explanation of them, and therein consider the nature of
them, and the meaning of them.

1 In their nature they are an answer to the question in the sixth verse: What
is man that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man that thou visitest
him.

2 The meaning of the words is either literal or mystical: The literal
meaning is this, that God did at first make man (Adam) a little lower then the
Angels, The words in their literal sense applied to Adam.
in respect of nature and mortality; but he crowned him with glory, honor,
and dignity, and put all the Creatures under him, and made him as Sovereign and
Lord over them all, Genesis 1.27, 28.

The mystical and spiritual meaning of the words is this; The words in their
spiritual sense applied to Christ.
That Jesus Christ as man, or mediator was made a little lower in respect of
his humane nature, and his state on earth: and in a little while lower then the
Angels; But yet God the Father did exalt him above all creatures, and gave him
sovereignty and dominion over the works of his hands, and did put all things
under him, and under his feet.

Q. But what does that expression of putting all things under his feet signify?

A. 1 It signifies a low subjection, Luke 7.38.

2 It signifies a through and perfect subjection, as when people are overcome
and made slaves, 1 Samuel 12.31. 2 Kings 9.33

Q. Why are all things said to be put under Christ's feet, and yet we do not
see them put under his feet?

A. They are virtually and potentially put under his feet, but not actually
and apparently: that is, Christ is Lord and Sovereign over all persons and
things already by right, though yet many do oppose and withstand him, and do
not submit and subjugate themselves to him: As David was the true anointed King
of Israel, when yet he was persecuted, and forced to fly for his life.

Having thus opened the words, there arise these two main and special
Observations or Doctrines from them.

That Christ's way (as man) to exaltation, Doct. 1.
was by humiliation The Text holds forth this Doctrine clearly, that he was
first made lower then the Angels, then set over, or above them; so it is said
in the 110. Psalm, the 7. verse. That he did drink of the Brook in the way
(that is, he suffered death) before he lifted up the head, or was exalted.

Q. Wherein did the humiliation of Christ consist?

A. 1 In taking upon him the nature and form of his own Creature man: Heebeing
in the form of God (says the Apostle) thought it no robbery to be equal with
God: But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
servant, and was made in the likeness of men: Heb. 2.16.
And being found in the fashion of a man, he humbled himself.

It is further said, He took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on
him the seed of Abraham, or the nature of the seed of Abraham, which was great
humility, for the Son of God to become the son of man: and for the eternal
Majesty to be clothed with Christ's humane nature was subject to hunger,
thirst, weariednes, etc.
humane frailty and mortality.

2 Christ's humiliation did consist in his subjection to man's miserable
condition, as to 2 Cor. 5.21.
become sin, and a Gal. 3.13.
curse for mankind, to come under his own law, and to be judged by his own
justice, and liable to his own wrath. Oh what a low degree of humility was
this for Christ to yield to Act. 8.33
a death, much more to the Phil. 2.8.
death of the Cross, which was so shameful, miserable, and cursed.

3 Christ's humiliation did consist in his burial, and in Isa. 53.9.
making his grave with the wicked. For the Lord of Heaven to be covered with
his own earth, and the God of glory to be cooped up in a dark Cave, must needs
declare his great humility or humiliation.

Quest. What was the nature of Christ's humiliation, or what kind of
humiliation was it?

A. 1 It was a voluntary humiliation in respect of himself: For no man did
move or persuade Christ hereunto: neither did God his Father force him unto it;
But Christ testifies thus of himself, John 10.17, 18.
I lay down my life; No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self,
I have power to lay it down. And in another place he says to his Heb. 10.9
Father: I come to thy will O God.

2 Christ's humiliation was a necessary humiliation in respect of his Creatures
that were to be reconciled, and saved For if he had not undergone that state
of humiliation, the whole Creation had perished, and been lost for ever; For as
the Apostle Heb. 8.3.
said, It was of necessity that Christ should have somewhat to offer: So may
we say, that it was of necessity that this man (Christ) did offer himself, for
there was no other fit to do it.

3 It was a grievous humiliation, such a humiliation that there was never
known on earth the like either before or since. This did not only reach the
body, but the soul of Christ, for he cried out in his Mat. 26.38. Mar. 14.34.
Agony; My soul is exceeding sorrowful. There be 7 or 8 words in that 53. of
Isa. that sets out this humiliation of his, As that he was despised, rejected,
stricken, smitten, afflicted, oppressed, bruised, and tormented, all distinct
words, and aggravating his humiliation and sufferings.

4 Christ's humiliation was an efficatious humiliation, even upon the inanimate
creatures, for the Sun was veiled and ecclipsed, and covered, and hid his
face; the whole heavens mourned, and put on sackcloath ( So that there was Luke
23.44.
darkness over all the earth:) the earth did Mat. 28.51.
quake, and the rocks did rent: These senflesse things did express a kind of
sympathy with their Creator in his great sufferings.

5 Christ's humiliation was an advantageous humiliation, both to himself, and
to his Creatures. To himself, that he came to have a body and Generation, to
honor and obey him. To his Creatures, a hat all of them have a benefit
thereby; for his humiliation was their exaltation, his death their life, and
his condemnation, their preservation, and salvation.

Ob. But bad all the creatures some benefit by the humiliation and sufferings
of Christ?

Ans. Yes, doubtless all the Creatures in earth, and in heaven: For God is said
to Col. 1.20
reconcile all things unto himself by him (i. e. Christ) whether they be
things on earth, or things in Heaven. The Angels, they were stablished and
confirmed in their state, and stations: They that shall be saved, were
perfectly 2 Cor. 5.19. Romans 5.9.
justified and reconciled by his death.

Those that perish had their Joh. 1.9. Luke 9.56.
natural lives, and the enjoyment of the Creatures here on earth by virtue of
his death; also the Romans 8 1 19.20. 1 22.
whole creation (that now groaneth by reason of its bondage (caused by the
sin of man) shall be restored unto a glorious liberty, which would never have
been, had not Christ suffered. Having thus briefly opened the first Doctrine,
I will show you one Use only that you are to make of it, and so I will come to
the second Observation.

The Use is, to exhort you to make Christ your example and pattern. Was he
humbled before he was exalted? did he stoop to go through this low door to
his honor? then learn of him this Lesson of all other Lessons; for he would
have you learn it. Learn of me (says he) for I am meek and lowly, or meek
and humb e, as the Translated humble in Jam. 4.6.
Greek has it. If you would be high, then begin low, as a builder that intends
to build a great and stately Edifice, he does first dig the foundation low.
Solomon Prove. 15.33.
says, that before honor, is humility. And in another place, that Pro. 22.4.
honor is the reward of humlity. Those that would look after honor, let them
come by it as Mordecai came by his honor; he first puts on on sackcloth, and
fasted, and mourned, and then waited at Ahashuerus gate till he was called to
honor; he did not sue nor seek for it, but made it his business to honor
God, and to help the poor people of God: and so he was content to take his
turn, and to come to honor, after God was honored, and when his people were
advanced. There is an excellent Isa. 37.31.
promise made to the remnant of Judah (which I shall allude to) That they
should take root downward, and bring fruit upward: As those trees, whose
boughs and branches grow and spread most, do take deepest root, and spread in
the earth most: So those that are most exalted and advanced, they are first
humbled and afflicted; for where humility is not before honor, there will be
a humbling and abasing after honor. I beseech you (now you are come together
to humble your souls) labor to be humbled; for this is one maine end why we
now are met together, let us take heed then lest we depart with unhumbled
hearts. And that you may be humbled, look upon Jesus Christ, for there are 2.
special sights of Christ that do tend much to humble men.

The first is the sight of his misery, or the sight of him in his answerable,
low, and suffering condition. Rev. 1.7.
They shall see him whom they have pierced: And what follows? All the kindreds
of the earth shall wail because of him.

The 2d sight is the sight of his glory, (or of him in his glory.) When Isaiah
had seen this, he cries out Isa. 6.5.
Woe is me, for I have sten the King the Lord of hosts: And this sight was a
sight of him in his Verse. 3.
glory, as appears in the third verse. These two sights of Christ my Text
represents to you, viz. a sight of him in his humiliation, and a sight of his
exaltation. But I come to the 2d Doctrine.

Doct. 2. God the Father has exalted his Son Christ above all creatures, and
ha h put, and will put all persons and things under him. This Doctrine flows
naturally from the words, and this God foretold by his Prophet in the Old
Testament, saying; Behold my i.e. Christ see Isa. 42.1. and 53.11
servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted, and Isa. 52.13.
extolled, and be very high. This also the Apostle confirms, That Christ is
Col. 1.17, 18.
before all things, and that among all he has the pre-eminence. And in
another 1 Cor. 15 27.
place, that he ( i. e. God) has put all things under him.

But for the further proof of this, I will come to Particulars, and there be
three particulars in the Doctrine to be proved.

1 That God the Father has exalted his Son Christ above all creatures. 2
That he has put all persons and things already under him institutively and
virtually, etc. 3 That he will put all persons and things under him really and
actually.
For the first; that God the Father has exalted his Son Christ above all
creatures, appears, as by several Scriptures, so by two undeniable reasons.

1 In that he has put him to sit upon his own right hand, 2 Reason-To prove
that God has exalted Christ above all creatures.
which is the highest dignity, power, sovereignty, and glory that he could
give, and which he has not given to any creature besides: and this exaltation
Christ did not assume of himself; but the Father said unto him, Ps. 110.1.
Sit thou on my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool. Yea,
note this, that the Scriptures mention this his being on Gods right hand obove
Ps. 110.1 Mat. 22.44 and 26.64. Mar. 14.62 Lu. 16.19. and 20.42. and 22.69. Act
2.34. and 7.55, 56. Heb. 1.13. and 8.1. and 12 2. and 10.12. Romans 8 34. Col.
3.1.
twelve times, as sometimes on the right hand of his power, and sometimes on
the right hand of the throne of God. When Bathsheba, Solomon's mother came to
him, he had no way to show his respect more to her, then by 1 Kings 2.10.
causing a seat to be set for her, that she might sit on his right hand. And
amongst us, you know that to set one upon our right hand, is to prefer him, and
to have the right hand of fellowship, was an Gal. 1.9.
honor among the Apostles.

Obj. But are none copartners with Christ in this honor, and does he alone
sit on Gods right hand?

Ans. There is none but he that sits upon the right hand of the Father. It is
true in deed that the Queen, or the Church is said to Psalm. 45.9.
sit on the Kings (or on Christ's) right hand: also hereafter the Saints shall
be upon his right hand. But this prerogative is peculiar to Jesus Christ
alone, who is not only said to sit upon his Fathers right hand, but is also
Exodus 15.16.
called the right hand of God, and the Psalm. 80.17.
man of his right hand.

2 A second Reason to prove that God has exalted his Son Christ above all
Creatures, Reas. 2
is, Because he has appointed the chiefest Creatures to worship him and serve
him; as the Angels, God commanded them to worship him Heb. 1.6. Rev. 5.14. and
19.4.
; Let all the Angels of God worship him. And we find that these glorious (and
transcendently eminent) Creatures did worship, and do worship him, yea and
fall Rev. 11.7.
down on their faces (which is the lowest sign of humility) to worship him.

Secondly: The second thing to be proved is, That God the Father has put all
persons and things under Christ. This appears from Christ, being the head of
all persons and things: I would have you know (says the Apostle) that the 1
Cor. 11.3.
head of every man is Christ. And in another place, He ( i. e. God) has made
him to be the head over all things to his Ephesians. 1.22
Church: So Christ is often called the Mat. 21.42. Act. 4.11. 1 Pet. 2.7.
Head of the Corner. But further, that expression (which is more then once
mentioned) of putting all things under Christ's feet, carries much weight 1 Cor.
15 27. Psa. 8.6. Ephesians. 1.22. Heb. 2.8.
with it, and shows an absolute, low, and through objection.

Obj. But you may object (as it seems by my Text, that the Apostle met with
such an Objection) well, speak what you will of the putting of all persons and
things under him; yet we see no such thing, but rather contrary.

Answ. Though we do not yet see all things put under him, yet the word says
so, and it will certainly be so, which I prove two ways-

1 Because the Father has promised it See Psalm. 2.9. and 89.23. and 110.1.
Isa. 2.4. and 11.2. and 32.1. Luke 1.32, 33.
, and do you think that he will break his promise with him? Oh no, his
promises fail not, he keeps promise with all men, much more with his Son.
God gives all his children, yea the youngest their Legacies, and portions, and
will he detain from his Son and Heir what he has promised him, and
entailed upon him; especially seeing Christ performed so well with him.

2 Christ lives in expectation thereof; From (u) henceforth expecting till his
enemies be made his footstool. Heb. 10.13. i. e. From the time of his
ascension, Act. 2.35. Pro. 23.18
Sure Christ's expectation will not be frustrated: I may say as Solomon said,
Surely there is an end, and thine (Christ's) expectation shall not be cut off.
There is an until, or a time that God the Father has set to the reign of his
Enemies: and when that time is expired, he and his Kingdom must be exalted, as
afterward I shall show.

Thus having confirmed the particulars in the Doctrine, I come next to the
Reasons, why God did exalt Christ above all Creatures, I will name four, and no
more.

Because he had an hereditary right to it, Reas. 1.
as the Apostle says, He by inheritance obtained a Heb. 1.4.
more excellent name then they. He being Son and Heir, his Father could grant
him no less then a pre-emption and pre-eminence above his fellows. As under
the law the first born had greater privileges then any of the other children,
and shall not Christ then, who is the firstborn of every Creature, have their
privilege?

Because there was no fitter person to rule then he: Reas. 2.
As under the Law, Lev. 16.21 which typed out Christ.
the Lord would have the Scapegoat to be sent into the Wilderness by the hand
of a fit man: so God would have the fittest man to be above all his Creatures;
and as amongst men, the greatest, wisest, skilfullest, and ablest are chosen
and exalted over the people: so Christ being eminently qualified above all
others, his Father set him up above all his creatures, as David made his Son
Solomon King over Israel. 1 Chronicles. 23.1. Reas. 3.


Because Christ had exalted him on earth, Joh. 13.31.
Now (said Christ) is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him:
If God be glorified in him, God shall also glorify him in himself, and shall
strait way glorify him. And this was Christ's plea unto his Joh. 17.4.
Father: Father I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work which
thou gave me to do. And now O Father glorify thou me, etc. It was but just
that the Father should glorify and exalt him, he having first glorified and
exalted his Father: And he could do no less by way of retaliation, if his Son
had been but a mere stranger to him.

Because Christ by his sufferings and merits obtained it; Reas. 4.
For he that would drink of such a Brook in the way, deserv d to lift up his
head. David when he had slain the Philistine, and saved the Army of Israel,
did well deserve to command them: So this our Spiritual David, Jesus Christ,
having conquered all his enemies, and redeemed all his people by his death, he
might justly claim that privilege above, and over them all. Thus having
proved the Doctrine both integrally and particularly by Scriptures, and
Reasons; I now come to the explanation, thereof, and for that end shall
propound and resolve these three Questions:

First, Over what Creatures has God exalted and put up his Son?

Secondly, Wherein, or in what particulars is Jesus Christ exalted above those
creatures?

Thirdly, How, and by what means does God bring all Creatures under his Son?

To return to the first of these.

1 Quest. Over what Creatures has God exalted and put up his Son?

Answ. Over all Creatures in Heaven and Earth, and under the Earth, Philip.
2.10. Mat. 28.19. but particularly he has power, Over all Angels, Over all
Men, and Over all Over all things.


1 Over all Angels, as 1. The good Angels, they are called his Heb. 1.17.14.
ministering Spirits, for they Zev. 5, 8, 9.
always attend and wait upon him to do his service. 2. The evil Angels (or
the Devils) they are also in subjection to, and under the power of Christ; for
though Christ did once pray to his Father, to (e) deliver his darling from the
power of the Dog (or the Devel) yet we find that at other times Christ
rebuked these evil spirits, Psalm. 22.20
and they were afraid of him, least he should come to torment them before the
time; which expressed his Sovereignty over them.

2 He is over all men; high and low, good and bad, they are all his Servants,
as he testifies in the eight of the Proverbs, saying, By me Kings reign, and
Princes decree Justice; By me Princes and Nobles rule, yea also all the Judges
of the earth. He also is called, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and in
Daniel 10.21. Dan. 10.21
Michael the Prince of Israel; yea all the Patriarcks, Prophets, Kings,
Apostles, Evangelists, Magistrates, and Ministers, yea all people of all
Nations, Tongues, Kindreds, and degrees, in all Ages were under, and will be
under his power.

3 He is above all things, according to that expression in the first of the
Ephesians, Above all Laws and Ordinances, above all works and wonders, above
all powers, and privileges, above all gifts and graces, and above all earthly
and spiritual excellencies and glory.
22. verse. He (i. e. God) has put all things under his (i. e. Christ his)
feet. So in the 1 Cor. 15.28. you have the same words. Thus much in answer to
the first question.

2. Quest. Wherein is Christ exalted above all Creatures?

Answ. First, Doubtless in all things he has the pre-eminence, but more
particularly in regard of his Divine Nature; I may I hope safely thus express,
although it is true that the Divine Nature does not properly admit of degrees,
yet nevertheless the Divine Nature of Christ (to speak with reverence) was
much veiled, clouded, As a piece of Gold covered with earth or the Sun darkened
by a cloud, or a candle hid under a bushel,
and ecclipsed by his humain Nature, that few did account him God till after
his Resurrection, by which he was Romans 1.4.
declared to be the Son of God with power. And so much our Saviors own
words (in the seventeenth of John, verse. 5.) imply.

Obj. But you will say, The Divine Nature was never humbled, therefore it was
still exalted alike?

Answ. It is true, the Godhead of Christ did not, nor could not suffer, nor be
humbled, yet he that was God suffered, as those words in Acts 20.28. import.
But note this, when I say, Christ was exalted above all in respect of his
Divine Nature; I mean, that none had that fullness and measure of Divinity,
(or the Divine Nature) as Christ had.

Secondly, Jesus Christ was exalted in his humane Nature above all Creatures.

1 In that Christ's humane Nature was created, and begotten in a supernatural
way, even by the over-shadowing of the Holy Ghost, Luke 1.35. or as David
speaks in his person, Psalm. 139.140.
Wonderfully was I made.

2 He was exalted in his humane Nature above all others, in regard his humane
Nature was without sin; as the Apostle speaks 1 Pet. 2.22.
He did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth.

3 Jesus Christ his humane Nature (or his Body) saw no corruption, Act. 2.27.
Though he was in the Grave, yet the Grave could neither putrify him, nor
prevail to keep him within it.

4 The humane Nature of Christ is exalted above all in respect of place, to
wit, upon the right hand of God, as I have showed before.

Obj. Is Christ's humane nature (or the very body that he had on earth) now in
heaven?

Answ. Yes sure, he that Ephesians. 4.8,
descended is the same also that ascended up far above all heavens: and the
same Jesus which rose from the dead, and that appeared to his Disciples after
his Resurrection, was Act 1.8,9.
taken up before them into heaven, and that same Jesus will hereafter (in that
very person and nature) Jud. v. 14. Rev. 1.7.
come from heaven.

Fifthly, and lastly, Christ is exhalted in his humain nature above all, because
in that nature he will judge the world, according to the saying of the Apostle,
He will judge the world in righteousness by that man i.e. Christ) whom he has
ordained; this is the second way wherein Christ is exalted above all creatures.

Thirdly, Jesus Christ was exalted in his name above al creatures, as the
Apostle speaks, God his father has given him a name, Phil. 2.9.
above all other names, that at the name of Jesus Christ every knee should bow.
Now whether by name be understood the Power, Majesty, and Authority of Christ;
or those names by which he is called in the Scripture, as Jehovah and Immanuel,
yet this is most true that there is not attributed to any creature, what is
attributed to him, in respect of his name.

Object. But you will say, is not the Church called Jehovah, she shall be
called, Jehovah-tzidkenu, the Lord our Righteousness, Ier. 33.16.

Answ. Its true, that with relation to Christ she is called Jehovah as in Ezekiel.
48.35. Jehovah-shammah the Lord is there, Yet that Text in Jeremiah is not
rightly translated. For it is in the Hebrew, Jer. 33.16. (...)
He the Lord Jehovah, that is, our Righteous one, or Righteousness shall call
her, that is, the Church should be called by Christ her Righteousness, And
though many be called Gods in the Scripture (as the Apostle speaks) yet no
one is called Immanuel but Christ only. Esa. 7.14. Mat. 1.23.


Fourthly, Jesus Christ was exalted above all creatures, in his Office, as he
was Mediator; For there was (and is) but one Mediator between God, and Man, the
man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.6. It Is true, there were other typical Mediators,
as Moses, etc. but no true and real Mediator, save Jesus Christ. In Christ's
Mediatourship consider,

1 That none was fit to be a Mediator or Savior but he, for all creatures had
need of a Mediator and Savior, and therefore could not be their own
Mediators, and Saviors,

2 None could, or can, forgive sins but he, for he only is exalted to give
repentance and forgiveness of sins, Act. 5.31.

Object. But had not the Apostles of Christ, and have not the Ministers of the
Gospel power to forgive sins, For Christ says, whatsoever sins ye forgive,
shall be forgiven, etc. Joh. 20.23.

Answ. The Apostles and Ministers had and have power to forgive sins, but then
it is declaratively, upon their believing in Christ, and no other ways. For as
the Jews said who can forgive sins but God?

3 None can give Laws to the Church but Christ alone, and therefore he is
called the Esa. 33.22. Jam. 4.12.
Lawgiver, and Ephesians. 4.15. and 5.23. Col. 1.18
head of the Church. Note this, that no person or persons, Civil or
Ecclesiastical, were ever called Head, or Heads of the Church but Christ. It
is true, the Magistrates are sometimes called, the Heads of the People, but not
of the Church; but under the Law Ecclesiastical persons were not so much as
called Heads of the people, nay none of the Tribe of Levi were ever chosen, or
called Heads; how much then do men in our days imagine, and assume power to
themselves over Christ's Church (more then is given them by Christ) so that they
think they may enjoyne and impose what Laws they please upon Christ's Church
and people. But let such look to themselves.

4 None can discern and know the thoughts of the Children of men but Christ,
for he only is the Heb. 4.12.
(...) the Discerner, Tryer, and knower of the thoughts, and imaginations of
men, and he whose Rev. 1.14.
eyes are as a flame of fire, sees through and through the hearts, reins, and
inward parts of men.

5 None have power See Genesis 18.25 2 Timothy 4.8. Jam. 4.9.
to Judge men for ever but Christ, the Pope pretends he can send some to
Heaven, some to Hell, and some between both; yet a day will come when he poor
man (or rather beast) must, and shall have a sentence past upon his own soul,
and then where is he, and those he deceived? But so much for the exaltation of
Christ as Mediator.

Fifthly, Jesus Christ is exalted in his Generation above all others, for who
says the Prophet shall declare his Generation? That is, though Christ be
killed, yet who shall, or can be able to tell the number of his Progeny, and
Posterity, and the Branches that shall grow out of this Stem, and Root?

Note that there is a double Generation belonging to Christ, and a double book
wherein this twofold Geneneration is recorded.

1 His natural Generation, showing from whom he came according to the flesh;
This Matthew calls, Mat. 1.1.
The Book of the Generation of Jesus Christ, etc. According to his Fleshly
Generation he was of the Blood Royal, and next to the Crown (if he had
claimed it) as some conceive, and why should Herod command him whilst he was
but yet a Child to be killed? but that he feared he (that was next Heir)
would have put him besides the Crown?

2 His Spiritual Generation, or his Off-springe who are his blessed Seed,
called, 1 Per. 2.61 Rev, 13, 8. and 21.27.
A royal Generation, a Generation of Kings, Princes, and Priests, whose names
are written in the Lambs book of life.

Sixthly and lastly, Jesus Christ is exalted above all in Dominion and
Government, and of this his Dominion, Government, and Kingdom, the Scriptures
do amply testify, and clearly speak, Esa. 6.9. and 22.21. For as Joseph (who
was a Type of him) was Governor in all the Land of Egypt; so Christ governes
all the Nations of the earth, Psalm. 105.22.
Psalm. 67.4. and 22.28. And as God sent Joseph into Egypt to teach the Princes
of Egypt, so has God sent his Son Jesus into the world, to teach and rule
the Princes of the earth. Be wise therefore ye Princes, and obedient to him ye
Judges of the earth. You may more particularly consider this Kingdom of
Christ, as being divided into three parts:

A Celestial, A Spiritual, and A Terrestrial.
1 For the Celestial or heavenly part, I desire you to turn to two special
places which speak thereof, 2 Timothy 4.18. Luke 22.16
many more I might name, but I intend not to insist upon that part, yet be not
unmindfull that there is a Crown, and a Kingdom prepared for those that love
Christ, Jam. 1.12, and 2.5.
and that wait for his appearance.

2 For the Spiritual part of his Kingdom, which concerns us to know here,
observe these sour things.

1 The word of the Kingdom, which is sometimes called the Gospel, Mar. 4.23.
Mat. 13.11
and sometimes the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven; the Gospel is the Law
by which Christ does rule and govern the Subjects of his Kingdom.

2 There be the Keepers of the Kingdom, which is Skill, Mat. 16.19
and power to open the Gospel, and to open and shut the door of the Church of
Christ according to his will; the keys that were committed to Peter was
nothing else (I suppose) but a Call, and power as the first Minister, to preach
the Gospel unto the Gentiles.

3 There be the Subjects of this Kingdom, Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.7 Act, 11.26
and those are called in the New Testament Believers, Saints, Christians, the
redeemed and called of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. Romans 16.16.
or Churches of Saints, all which words imply that they must be in Christ, and
have grace, who are members and subjects of this Kingdom, and not all the
riffe-raffe (as we speak) of the world.

4 There be Officers belonging to this spiritual part of the Kingdom, which
the King of Glory has left, and appointed; as Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets,
Pastors, Teachers, and the like, Ephesians. 4.11.

5 And lastly, there is the seat of this spiritual Kingdom, the subjects of
this Kingdom are seated and placed in the heart of their Sovereign, and
Savior Jesus Christ, Cant. 8.6. As Paul said of the Philippians, Phil. 1.7.
that he had them in his heart, so may Christ say much more of his Members,
that he has them in his heart, and that he has borne them from Eternity. This
Kingdom (especially the Word of it) is also seated in the hearts of Believers,
as Christ said, The Kingdom of God is within you, Luke 17.21. So the Apostle
says, The Kingdom of God was in the Romans in righteousness, peace, Romans
14.17.
and joy of the Holy Ghost. Thus having ended the second part of Christ's
Kingdom, I now come to the last part, which is, Christ reigning on Earth, and
over the World; there are several things disputable herein; as,

1 Whether Christ shall come and reign in his own Person and humane Nature
upon the earth; and

2 If he does reign, who shall reign with him? whether all the Saints, or
whether those only that suffered under Antichrist? or whether the people of the
Jews only? But in regard these questions are controverted, we will come to those
things which are without controversy concerning this point, and they are four.

1 That Jesus Christ has a right to all the Kingdoms of the world, as it is
said in the 1 Cor. 10, chapter, The earth is the Lords, and the fullness
thereof; and in Psalm. 72.8. He shall have dominion from sea to sea, etc. One
special place besides that (I conceive) is applicable to Christ, it is in the
21. of Ezekiel 27. verse, I will overturne, overturne, overturne it, and it
shall be no more until he come, whose right it is, and I will give it him.
Here are three overturnings answerable to the three parts of the City in the
Revelation, and all these overturnings are to bring Christ the right Heir to
his possession.

2 The Lord has power to dispose of the Kingdoms of the earth to whomsoever
he pleases, as it is said in the 4th. of Daniel, the 17. verse. That the most
high is in the Kingdom of men, and he gives it to whomsoever he will. So in
the fifth of Daniel, 21. and in Psalm. 75.7. God is the Judge, he puts down
one, and sets up another; And who can (or dare) say to the Lord, What do
thou?

3 Jesus Christ accounts no men so worthy, and so fit to rule his Kingdom
(under him) as his Saints, therefore he makes promise thereof to them. And the
Kingdom, and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole
heaven, Dan. 7.27.
shall be given unto the Saints of the most high, etc. and know you not says
the Apostle Paul, that the Saints shall judge the world? And Christ said unto
his Apostles (though poor Fishermen) Ye shall sit upon twelve Thrones, Cor. 6.
i, 2
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. You know among men, if a man be exalted
to Honor, Office, or place, he will prefer his own friends and Servants,
especially if they be fit men, and can manage those places; even so does
Christ, who finds places for his people, and fits them for those places; and
indeed none are so fit to manage any work as the Saints, for they only do
their work in a right manner, and to a right end.

Fourthly and lastly, the Scriptures declare, that Christ shall reign in the
world, and in the Nations of the world. To instance in a few, in the second of
Daniel, the 44. verse, The God of heaven will set up a Kingdom which shall
never be destroyed, which shall stand for ever; And this Kingdom which is
called, the stone hewne out of the Mountain, shall destroy and break in pieces
all the remaining powers of the other four Monarchies. So in the 11. of the
Revelation, 15. verse. The Kingdoms of this world shall become the Kingdoms of
the Lord, and of his Christ. And elsewhere it is said, His Dominion shall be
from Sea to Sea, and that he should have the utmost parts of the earth for his
possession. And in Esaiah the second, and Micha the fourth, there are promises
that his Kingdom (called the Mountain of the Lord) should be set upon the top
of the Mountains. Surely these and many more Scriptures have somewhat of
special concernment in them, that relate to this Kingdom of Christ.

Obj. But you will say, Jesus Christ himself when he was on earth, denied and
resused an earthly Kingdom, Joh. 18.36. for he says, My Kingdom is not of
this world.

Answ. It Is true, that Christ did then deny and refuse an earthly Kingdom, for
then was his coming in his humiliation, rather then in his exaltation; and to
purchase a Kingdom, rather then to possess it. The time when Christ spoke
those words was at his departure out of the world, It is more then probable
that Christ will come in great power and glory, as (the Jews did expect him)
to call and redeem them, Mar. 24.30. Luke 21.2 Mark 13.26. Zach. 12.10. Rev.
1.7.
but he told the Jews elsewhere, and at another time; That they should see
him, and say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, Luke 13.35.
Let us take heed that we do not over-looke Christ's exalted state on earth, as
the Jews did formerly his state of Humiliation; but I do observe, that many
people in these days do stumble at three things.

1 That the Saints should rule and govern the world; but is there not all the
reason in the world they should, seeing that the world is upheld for their
sakes; also that they have been Sufferers in times past, and are Conquerers of
some parts of it at present, and does not Christ promise, that he that over
comes, and keeps his works unto the end, to him will be give power over the
Nations, Rev. 2.26.

Object. But some will say, The weapons of the Saints anciently were faith,
tears, prayers, and patience, and they did then rather choose afflictions, and
persecutions, then make resistance, and seek to reign over others.

Answ. Its true, that faith, tears, prayers, etc. are the best weapons, and
with these the Saints do chiefly war. But yet it is as true, that the Saints
may lawfully fight, for we read that they are to have a two edged sword in
their hands, Psa. 149.6
as well as the high praises of God in their mouths, and in another place we
read, that they that lead into captivity (meaning the Roman party) should be
led into captivity themselves. But you will say by whom? Rev. 13.10
Surely, by the Army of the Lamb, who are called, and chosen, Rev. 17.14
and faithful. There is a Generation of new, and upstart Courtiers that would
beg the Saints for fools, and deal with them as Ziba did with Mephibosheth;
and by false ways, get what appertains unto them out of their hands: Or as a
cunning fellow that would come to a rich man, and tell him it is hard for him
to go to heaven with all that riches, and this he does, that he may dispossess
him of his riches, that so he himself may have them: but I hope the Saints are
more wise then to be cheated out of their rights and privileges by a
generation of men, who would have Saints to be their slaves, who are themselves
slaves to Satan.

2 Some stumble at present proceedings, and at the dealings of God in these
days. Saying we have neither precept nor example for what we do. I will not
speak particularly and largely to this point, yet I would stir up and
provoke people to look upon the hand of God, which is so evidently and
eminently exalted and lifted up, though as the Prophet said of some, They will
not see, but yet they shalsee, and shall be ashamed. But let us peruse a few
Scriptures (instead of many that might be produced) that justify this to be no
other then the hand of God, in the 110 Psalm. 5. verse, The Lord at thy right
hand shall strike through Kings in the day of his wrath. So it is in the Hebrew
(...) in gentibus
So in the 149. Psalm. 7 and 8. verses, there judgment is said to be executed
in the Nation, and thein Kings to be bound with chains, and their Nobles with
fetters of iron, So in Rev. 19.18. The fowls of the air were called to eat
the flesh of Kings, of Captains, and of mighty men, etc. So in Isay it is
prophesied, That Kings should shut their mouths, and bow before Christ and his
Church. What, are all these Scriptures to be understood allegorically? No sure,
it is more then probable, that in the same manner as Christ's great and wicked
enemies opposed him and destroyed his people, they shall be opposed and
destroyed.

3 Many stumble at this, That mean men are exalted, and the great and noble
ones laid aside, and not made use of. But if the Scriptures be searched and
considered, this will not appear any new or strange thing. In the 21 of Ezekiel.
26. Thus says the Lord God, remove the diadem, and take off the Crown; this
shall not be the same, exalt him that is low: and abase him that is high. So in
Dan. 4.17. The most high (said Nebuckhadnezar) rules in the King dome of men,
and gives it to whomsoever he will, and sets up over it the basest of men.
Also in Psa. 113.7, 8. God is said to raise up the poor out of the dust, and
to lift the needy out of the dunghill, that he may set them up with Princes.
Is this so strange unto men? what have we not examples enough to wipe off this
aspersion? What were Moses, Josuah, Gideon, Jephtha, Saul, David, and many
others? were they not mean men, and not tramed up or educated either for Civil
or Military employment? who would have thought a Thresher as Gideon was, a
Keeper of his fathers Asses as Saul was, or a poor Shepherd as David was?
should be sit to lead and rule such a people and Nation as Israel was. Let us
not then look so much upon men, for the Lord sees not as man, 1 Samuel 1. 6, 7.
for man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart.
And the reason why God exalts them that are low, is, that he may glorify
himself the more. Therefore be not vexed at Gods dealings, for he says, he
will come upon Princes as upon mortar, and as the potter treads the clay,
Esa. 41.25.

I come to the last Question which is, How God does bring all creatures under
his Son?

1 By the rod of his mouth, or the Gospel, which is the power of God, Psa.
110.2. Romans 1.16 Rev. 1.16.
and the sword of God, by which the Lord does bring down many to the obedience
of Christ, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.

2 By the rod of his hand, Psa. 29.
or as the Prophet David calls it an iron rod, by which he will break, and dash
in pieces his Enemies, like a potters vessel. They that will not bow by the
sweet and gracious words of Christ, must be broken by the heavy blows, and
strokes of Christ, and where the kindness and goodness of Christ will not
take place, there his wrath and indignation must and will take place. Thus
having cleared the Doctrine, let me beg your patience a little to apply it.

1 Use. The first use then is, an use of Exhortation, and that is twofold; the
first exhortation is unto sinners, (and it is of great concernement to you) To
submit unto the Lord Jesus; First, by kissing Christ, is meant obeying him, so
the word is taken, 1 Samuel 10.1.
Kiss the Son least he be angry, and so ye perish from the right way, Psalm.
2.12. there are many of you here this day that stand in need of Christ, who
yet have not stooped, and bowed to him; I beseech you for to incite your hearts
to consider these motives.

1 Because Christ has conquered the whole World, and it can be no less then
Rebellion, and Treason in you to resist or disobey him.

2 He is your right and lawful King, and will you like the Jews refuse your
King?

3 Because Christ's yoke is very easy, as he says himself for encouragement
unto men; Mat. 11.29, 30.
Take my yoke for it is easy, and my burden, for it is light.

4 If you submit unto Christ, he will free you from all tyranny and slavery you
are now under; he will deliver you from Satan, and sin, who now rule over
you.

5 Because Christ will have no Successor to call you to an account for your
disobedience, and loyalty to him, for he shall abide a King for ever, and you
shall never change your Lord, for he is the last Monarch, and of his Kingdom
there shall be no end.

6 Because that all the love and mercy which the Lord has revealed to you, and
bestowed on you, they are to bring you to obedience unto him.

O consider! what mercies God has heaped upon you, he has given you Houses,
Lands, Children, Servants, Honors, pleasure, and dominion, and he has made
your enemies to stoop to you; O now what does the Lord expect from you? but
that you should submit unto his Son. The second exhortation is unto you all.

Secondly, If God has exalted Christ, then do you also exalt him. There is
not a more blessed work to be done, (now the work of Redemption is done) then
this. You should exalt Christ.

1 Because God the Father has exalted him; what, will you not be like unto
God? Est. 6.6.
What shall be done to the man whom the King delights to honor (said
Ahashuerus to Haman) If a man knew what such a one deserved, and though
Mordecay was his enemy, yet he must have a hand in advancing him. Oh! but then
what shall become of the man whom the King of Heaven delights to honor, and to
exalt?

2 It is the work of Angels day by day to exalt Christ; and if those Creatures
who are a thousand times more glorious, excellent, and perfect then we are, fall
down, and cast their Crowns before the Throne, Rev 5.12. and 7.12.
saying, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and
wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing; how much more
willing, and ready should we be, for Christ has done more for us men, then for
them.

3 You have been the cause of humbling Jesus Christ, for by, and for your
transgressions, he was brought from his Throne (and the glory which he enjoyed
with his Father) to suffer reproach, shame, sorrow, and the cursedst death that
was, and will you not be a means (what in you lies) to exalt, and honor him
whom you have so much abased.

4 You should exalt Christ because that is the way for you to be exalted; know
this assuredly, that that which humbled and abased your Savior, will never
exalt and honor you. Sin was that (though but yours, and imputed to him)
which abased him, and can you conceive that it will exalt you? Oh no!
Righteousness exalts a Nation (says Solomon) and God promised, That
whosoever would honor him, should be honored by him, 1 Samuel 2.30.

2 Use. The second use is, an use of examination, to try whether we honor
Christ, yea or no, and whether we exalt our selves or him? There be several
Scriptures that show how men exalted themselves, as in Dan. 11.14. The robbers
of Gods people are said to exalt themselves. So it is said of Adonijah, That he
exalted himself, saying, I will be King, 1 King. 1.5. Also Ephraim exalted
himself, Hos. 13.1. And God complained by Hosea, cha. 11. ver. 7. That none
would exalt him. Now that I may a little discover this SELFE-EXALTATION (and
the Lord discover it unto you, and the plagues of your own hearts, from the
highest to the lowest) This wicked Self comes to be Indicted and Arraigned
(before you this day) as an Enemy and Traitor to the Crown, and dignity of
Jesus Christ, as a destroyer of Nations, and as a Murderer of Souls and
Bodies; and as the universal Disease which has infected all sorts of men. For
to find out this Malefactor it is needful that we make strict enquiry, and
search, and for that end we will begin at home, or with the Ministers, who (I
fear) are not only possessed with this enemy, but out of them it goes forth into
all the Land, and from them it has its original and rise; therefore I think
in my conscience that we Ministers are to confess this sin, and to take
shame to our selves for it. And that we may do so, let us consider how we are
guilty hereof, I shall hint out some particulars.

1 We are guilty of Self, in our preaching, when we preach our selves, and
not Jesus Christ; contrary to the opinion and practice of the Apostle, who
says, We preach not our selves but Jesus Christ the Lord, 2 Cor. 4.5.

Obj. But you will say, how, and when is that?

Answ. When we preach humane Learning, or the wisdom of the world in the stead
and room of the pure Gospel and Word of Christ, or else when we mix and mingle
both together, contrary to the Scriptures, which say, 1 Cor. 2.4.
That our preaching should not be with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in
the demonstration of the Spirit, and power. Or further, when our maine work is
to prepare a fine piece (as they call it) or a handsome quaint Sermon, or
Oration, composed of Divinity, History, ancient sayings, and witty sentences;
and all these neatly compiled, and put together like a Posie, and then
delivered, and acted like a Play, then the blessed Word of God.

In the Primitive times, and for two or three hundred years after Christ (as a
learned and godly man observed) the Ministers of the Gospel spoke as the Holy
Ghost gave them utterance, but when Antichrist began to prevail, that blessed,
plain, and ancient way of preaching was lest and lost, and since even till now
men have made a mere trade of preaching, and its become the fruit of study,
and brain-knowledge, and the exercise of natural gifts and parts, rather then
the breathings and teachings of Gods Spirit.

2 Ministers declare that they have much of Self, when they appropriate and
assume to themselves a power over the Saints and Churches of Christ, so as to
give rules to them, and to impose Laws upon their Consciences; 2 Cor. 1.24.
but Paul having a more special Call, professed, That he had no dominion over
the faith of the Saints, but was a constant helper of their faith and joy, but
never exercised power but with the common consent of the Church where he was.

3 Self appears much in some Ministers by the contempt they show to their
brethren, who are younger then they, as esteeming them younglings, and terming
them upstart boys, that get up into Pulpits; But let these men consider how
unlike Moses they are, who wished that all the Lords people were Prophets.
Secondly, let this be considered by them, that God has not limited and
confined his discoveries to old men, but as Elihu said, Job 31.8, 9
There is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them
understanding. Great men are not always wise; neither do the aged understand
judgment.

Thirdly, such men were once young themselves, and Paul commands that no man
should despise Timothies youth. Lastly, young men have the promise of the
Spirit as well as old men, Act. 2.17.

Fourthly, Phil. 2, 21.
Ministers (for the most part) seek their own things, and not the things of
Jesus Christ, as the Apostle complains, and it may be said as the Prophet
said, Esa. 56.11.
That every man looks to his own way, and for gain from his own quarter.

Fifthly and lastly, There is another root of bitterneste, and appearance of
Self in the hearts of Ministers (the Lord root it out) that we love men more
because they are of our opinion, then because they are Saints, and friends of
Jesus Christ. Hereupon we make opinion, and not union with Jesus Christ (which
ought to be the ground) of communion, and fellowship one with another. Having
briefly showed wherein Self appears in Ministers, I now shall humbly take
leave to speak to you who are Magistrates, whom God has made honorable, and
employed in weighty and honorable undertakings. This Self, doubtless is
among you also; and if you would take the Candle of the Lord, and search
narrowly in your own hearts, you might find this enemy harboring, and hiding
himself in your breasts and bosoms. And for a help herein consider:

1 That Self appears in those who desire and endeavor to creep and get into
places of Authority for their own private interests, and gain. They desire
their places more then they deserve them, and they look more after their
places then their places want them. An example hereof you may find in Absolon,
and in his words: 2 Samuel 15.4.
O that I were (said he) made Judge in the Land, that any man which has any
suit or cause, might come unto me, and I would do him justice. Many are like
the bramble in Jothans Parable, Judge. 9.15.
that would rule over the Trees of the Wood, but poor is the service and
shelter of a Bramble, fit only to stop a hole in a Hedge; no better are some,
that seek (and serve in) places of trust. See whether any of you are guilty
herein, or any of your Servants, and underofficers; wherever this is found
it is abominable, and odious.

2 Magistrates seek themselves, when they make the utmost advantage of their
places, when they have got into them; 2 King. 5.21, 22. Elisha punished his
Servant with the same plague (or Leprofie) which Naaman had, ver. 27. a just
punishment.
as Gehazi the Servant of Elisha, took advantage of getting for himself from
Naa man, when his Master refused and denied it. So the case may be with you,
that though you your selves scorn, and despise bribes, and gifts, yet some of
your Officers and Servants may take them; but if you do either wink at,
approve of, or let such things go unpunished in them, God will impute the same
to you as well as unto them; Neh. 5.15. Who can say there is not a lie in his
right hand, Esa. 44.10.
take therefore that blessed Nehemiah for your example, who would not suffer
his Servants to bear rule over the people (as former Rulers did) because of
the fear of God.

3 This is a sign of much Self, when men will comply with Saints, and seem
to be religious out of policy to procure a good name, and esteem among men; as
it is said in the eleventh of Daniel, the 34. verse. That many should cleave to
the people of God by flatteries. A notable example hereof we find in Ezra,
(the fourth Chapter, and the second verse.) of some that came unto Zerubbabel,
and to the chief of the Fathers, and said unto them; Let us build with you,
for we seek your God, as ye do, etc. But mark the answer; But Zerubbabel
and Jeshua, and the rest of the chief of the Fathers of Israel said-unto them,
you have nothing to do with us, to build an house unto our God. As for such
politicians (that come in the evening of the day, and at the end of the work
for their own ends) God will discover, and confound them, with their baseness
and perfidiousnesse.

4 Examine whether you keep, and detain in your hands, that which is due unto
others. I do not speak this in way of reflection, or reprehension, but in way
of caution, and examination, therefore I beseech you look into your own hearts
and see whether it be so or no with you; for as you have many opportunities to
enrich your selves, in these days, so you will not want temptations to improve
them for your own advantage: but observe this that of all times, this is not a
time to be building our own nests, for either shortly we are like to have
enough, or none at all; and honest men shall either share all, or be no sharers
at all: but I do not fear the latter.

Fifthly and lastly, men do exalt themselves, when they do oppose the glory of
God, and the public good, for their own private, Act. 19.24, 25.
and personal interests; and of this sort there is not a few, who like
Demetrius and his fellow Tradesmen, cry out that their Trade and Profession is
gone, if such things shall be tolerated, and such and such Acts passed. But
woeful is that Profession, or occupation that is maintained by the corruptions
of the people.

Having put Magistrates, and Ministers upon selfe-examination, let us now come
to speak a word to the common sort of people. Nay, what I shall further speak
in this Use concerns all. Consider then,

1 Whether you do prefer your own righteousness before the righteousness of
Jesus Christ; for of all Selfs, this is the most dangerous, and that rock
which most men split, and undo their souls at. This was that which did undo
the people of Israel of old, To. 9.31, 32.
and this is that which is like to be the bane of many professors; Oh!
therefore I beseech you consider the impurity, imperfection, and insufficiency,
of your own righteousuesse to justify, or save you, and look upon that, free
and full righteousness of Jesus Christ, and exalt it by believing on it, And
submitting to it.

2 Examine your selves whether you do prefer Christ's will or your own wills.
Oh how eager are many in these days, for things that are not in the
Scriptures, and to set up Institutions which Christ has not appointed: Ask
what is the will of God, and then what reason you have to obey it? Gods will
carries reason with it, why it should be obeyed, for it is good, because God
commands it, Oh say then as Christ said, not my will but thine be done, and as
Paul, Lord what will thou have me to do? Thus much for the second Use. Use 3.


The third Use is an use of Encouragement to althose that endeavor to exalt
Jesus Christ: more particularly to you that are in Authority, who may say (as
Samuel) hitherto has the Lord helped us: 1 Samuel 7.12.
and with David, 2 Samuel 7.18
Oh Lord God what is my house that thou have brought me hitherto? You may call
England Jehovah shammah (as the Church in Ezekiel the last verse) the Lord is
there. He that will rightly and impartially look, may see that the Lord is
not yet departed, and so long as he abides among a people there is no fear, but
great hopes (notwithstanding the greatnesle of their sins) that he will
prosper and carry on his own work in their hands.

Object: But you will say, How shall we know that the Lord is yet with us, and
not departed from us.

Answ. Among many other signs of the Lords presence, with you, Consider these
few.

1 That you yet do those things which are for his glory, your late actions,
and your very late Acts testify this, however prejudiced and discontented men,
would make those things your sins, which God (I believe) accounts and approves
of, as acceptable services done for his glory.

2 Surely God is with you, for his people are with you; You have all or most of
the Congregations of Saints in the Nation with you, and for you. And note this
that whenever God does depart from any Authority, Power, or People, God does
first take away the hearts of his people from them, that they neither approve
of them, join with them, nor pray for them: This we find in Samuel, who left
Saul. and came no more to see him, 1 Samuel 14.35.
and what followed? within a very little time after, 1 Samuel 28.16.
the Lord also departed from Saul and became his enemy. I hope I may say of
you, as it was said of Judah, Hos. 11.12
That you yet rule with God, and are faithful to the Saints.

3 This is a sign that God is with you, that the Lord puts a spirit of zeal in
some of you for a perfect Reformation; and also a spirit of assurance, that God
will carry on the Work of your hands.

4 The concurrence of Gods Providence in effecting those great things which you
have undertaken, both in this land and in Ireland, does bespeake the Lord to be
with you. The heavens smile, and the earth laughs and rejoices at the execution
of Justice, yea, some do observe that the Lord has showed himself more
gracious to this land in externals, since you have appeared and acted for him
of late so impartiallie and courageously: however some (as the Prophet speaks)
will not see the hand of the Lord that is so evidently lifted up. Esa. 62.11


5 And lastly, This is a sure sign that the Lord is yet with you, because you
have decreeed and don nothing against the Saints of God, nor imposed any thing
upon their consciences, though you have been frequentlie moved thereto.
Remember still those many Sermons that you have had to stir you up to be kind to
the Lords little ones; they are (as you once excellently heard, the interest of
Nations) and God will deal well or ill with you, as you favor them, or frown
upon them, therefore look upon the Saints next Christ, as your safest and
strongest sanctuary. Give me leave I beseech you, to put you in mind to be
tender also to some tender consciences, who peradventure cannot subscribe and
submit to your power and authority, favor them, and be not provoked against
them, though some would stir you up thereto, who peradventure have no other
ends but to weaken your hands, and to make you more odious to the people.

Object. But some will say, though God has been hitherto with us, and yet
abides amongst us, yet we have many grounds to fear that the Lord may leave us,
and that there will be a stop in the work now in our hands.

Ans. Sure the Lord has not put you upon a work that he means to lay aside,
for it is temple-worke, and such a Temple-work as has not bin undertaken by
any before. The work you are upon tends to set up Jesus Christ, and to pull down
Antichrist, fear not therefore, but go on for the Lord will prosper you.

Obj. But peradventure some others will say, sin remains still among us, and God
is provoked now as much as ever, how then can the work go on?

Ans. God sometimes takes occasions from the sins of men to show mercy to
them, and to spare them. I have time only to name you a few places, Genesis 8.21.
Esa. 57.17. Hos. 2.13, 14. Joh. 20.25.

Obj. But that which does most trouble us herein is, to know whether the
witnesses be slain yea, or no?

Ans. 1. Suppose the witnesses were not slain, yet it is an honor to be a
witness to Christ, and to suffer Martyrdom for his sake, and in his cause.

2 If they be not slain, yet the time of their slaying and being dead is but
short; but,

3 It is more then probable, (yea I am very confident) that they are slain,
and have been a slaying all the time and reign of Antichrist; now Christ
begins to take his great power, and to reign, and now the Judgment is set,
and power put into the hands of the Saints, and one of the ten Horns is cut
off, and never to be put on again; yea this year, 1650. that is coming,
(according to the interpretation of many, yea most godly Writers upon Daniel,
and the Revelation) is to be the Saints year of Jubilee; and though it be also
at Rome a Jubilee this year, (when they are at the height of their pleasure
and pride) yet ere long God will visit them to some purpose; therefore up in
believing, and be doing, for your Lord is with you. I have three things to
exhort you to in three words, and the rather let me mind you herein, because
God has so prospered and blessed you in your Counsels and Armies, and set you
up over your enemies:

1 Decree nothing that is unjust; Esa. 10.1.
There is a woe pronounced against those that decree unrighteous decrees, and
that write grievousnesse, which they have prescribed. The Lord keep us from
sinning by a Law, though we through weakness do daily sin against a Law.

2 The second thing I would mind you of, and stir you up to, is the removing
of all such things as are yet offensive to religious people, particularly such
Laws as continue in force against them, and all superstitious Relics, which
keep the people still in blindness.

3 Do what you can to satisfy the desires of those that are distressed; as
(1) Those that suffered for, and in the Lords Cause, to whom you have given
promises, engagements, and encouragements of relief, and redress. (2) Think
upon poor Prisoners, whom you have partly releeved already, but they complain
that the remedy is yet too short and insufficient to heal the disease, (as
this day I have been desired by Letters from several of them) to move you in.
(3) The poor of the Nation (called Beggars) are to be thought of, and not to
be suffered (to the dishonor of God, and the shame of the Nation) to be out of
a calling, and employment, and many to starve and perish; remove also what
oppressions and burdens you can from the necks of the people of the Land,
remembering and considering that text in the third of Esaiah the fifteenth verse.

I crave leave for one word more, Last use.
and it is to stir you up to thankfulness. This day might have been a day
of praise as well as of prayer, for God has given all of us cause of
rejoicing, and thankfulness; you that are in Authority bless the name of the
Lord, that he has not suffered you to be broken in pieces, praise him; O
praise him that he has honored, preserved, and prospered you so much. Also
let the Ministers bless the Lord, that there is liberty, and a door open for
them to preach the Gospel, yea let all people bless the Lord, that they have a
breathing and refreshing time; a time of peace, a time of plenty, a time of
Christian Liberty to profess Christ, and to worship him according to rule and
Conscience; above all let us praise God that Christ is exalted: Also let us
bless God for Ireland (yea poor Wales) that those people that were so
contemptible, are like to have the greatest presence of God amongst them. I
have done, only I shall pray that the Lord would make you as Ezra, a helper; as
Nehemiah, the consolation of God; as Zerubbabel, an opposer of Babylon; and as
Eliakim, fathers to the people of this Nation; I doubt not but this Generation,
and the Ages and Generations to come, will (as they have cause) bless God for
you, and the things done by you in these days.

FINIS.

