A TRUE RELATION Of Prince RVPERTS Barbarous Cruelty against the Town of
Brumingham, To which place on Monday Apr. 3. 1643. he marched with 2000 horse
and foot, 4 Drakes, and 2 Sakers; where after two hours fight (being twice
beaten off by the Townsmen, in all but 140 Musketeers) he entered, put diverse
to the Sword, and burnt about 80 Houses to ashes, suffering no man to carry
away his goods, or quench the fire, and making no difference between friend or
foe; yet by Gods providence the greatest loss fell on the Malignants of the
Town.

And of the Cavaliers were slain diverse chief Commanders, and men of great
quality, amongst whom was the Earl of Denbigh, the Lord John Stewart: and as
themselves report the Lord Digby.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright in the Old Bailey, April 12. 1643.

SIR,
THough I can write you but the same lamentation which I believe you have
already heard; yet I cannot be silent to acquaint you of the truth as near as
I can: If Coventrey how sent us what help it might, I believe the Enemy durst
not have assaulted us, but in regard they had been in danger of cutting off by
the way, in case they had been sent, I must excuse them, though it be to our
own suffering. We with the Captains were sensible, that if the Cavaliers
came, we were not likely to withstand them, they being near 1500. and we not
above 150. Musketeers, with a Troop of Horse of Captain Greaves, which did no
good, but in their flight, as hereafter you will hear; but in regard the
general desire of the Town, especially of those that bore Arms, would have
them stand it out, and not march away with their Arms, as we might in time,
and that both they, and the malignant would have reviled, and cursed the
Captains and Majestrates of the Town if, they had left them, made the
Captains and better sort content to stay and try the issue, rather then be so
perpetually reproacht: And though the same fall hard on one side in loosing the
Town and some Arms, and about 80. Houses burnt to ashes, with all that
therein was, and some fifteen men, and two women lost their lives; yet their
gain was nothing at all, yea, they count it great loss, and curse the tune
that ever they meddled with us, for I believe they lost as many ordinary men as
we, besides three men of great quality, which they much lament, whereof two of
them were Lords, as we have great cause to think, the one the Earl of Denby
that's sure, the other Lord we something doubt of his name, but we hear by
diverse of the Cavaliers it is Digby, sure we are he is wounded; and it is as
sure that some of their Colonels say it was a man of greater rank, and more
considerable then Denby; the other a chief Commander: Denby pursued Captain
Greaves Troop some two miles out of Town being at their heels, before our
Troop departed, among whom I went away, and Captain Greaves observing his
tune betwixt two woods faced about, and charged the pursuers most valiantly, as
they themselves confess, and drove them back again: in which charge Denby
was slain immediately, and the rest fled, and so we escaped with safety, only
Captain Greaves twelved one shot in the face, and a cut in the Arm, but not
mortal; in the pursuit of that Troop God made away for all our Soldiers,
saving some two or three, to escape most with their Arms, which they threw
away and hid in Pits and Ditches as they could, whereof the most, I think, the
Cavaleeres found not, and not one Captain or Officer was hurt or taken
prisoner, nor any considerable man, but most poor fellows, and Malignants,
because they could mere with no better, and all are released saving two of the
best, though of no great quality, some redeemed themselves for 2d. 12d. and 8d,
apiece, and some one or two for 20s. Prince Rubert being enraged that he should
take never a prisoner of so great a company, and of those not to raise 20^.
when he himself had undergon so great a loss, and of those that were slain
of our side were most poor malignants, some three young men of ordinary
quality that bare Arms, and John Carier, and that in their flight; for but one
was slain, and one lightly shot in the flesh; in the entrance for pillage
they spared none, friend or for they lighted of, yet for the most part those
that did most against them escaped best, the same I may say of the fire, though
they intended to burn the Town utterly, as may be known by their laying
lighted Match, with Powder, and other combustible matter at the other end,
which fired in diverse places, and diverse was found out and prevented, so that
we may truly say, that the flames, sword, vi^ledgers, but especially the
prison, made a difference betwixt those that feared God, and those that fear
him not. But this is remarkable in their vileness, that all these Houses
saving two were fired in their cold blood, at their departure, wherein they
endeavored to fire all, and in the flames they would not suffer the people to
carry out their good, or to quench it, triumphingly with reproaches rejoyeth
that the Wind flood right to consume the Town, at which present the Lord
caused the Winds to turn, which was a token of his notice of their insultation.
For pillage I hear but of little I lost, having obscured the things I had of
any value; and for fire, God did marveliously prevent, both to me and many
others, whereat the malignants are so enraged that they have since pulled down
my Mill, and pretend that Prince Rupert so commanded, and threaten to pull
down my House and diverse others, which I think they dare not, left they build
it up again, the County having sent them admonition of their insolency. Prince
Rupert with Hasting, kept their Readervow this day, within two miles of
Lichfield, as we credibly hear; what their design is we know not, I believe
they can do no good at Lichfield: I hope their cruelty in our sufferings will
provoke this unwilling kingdom to jealously for the Parliament. I pray you
wheen you have read this, show it to Mr. B. and Mr. E. not only to acquaint
them with the news, but of my being in health, with all my Company, where in I
have great cause to rejoice in the Lord, and so I rest,

Your loving Friend, R. P.
Coventry, April 8. 1643.
SIR,
BEing by my promise engaged unto you, I am now to make relation of a most
barbarous massacree of our townes-men of Bermingham, and of the enraged cruelty
of Prince Rupert and his inhumane Cavaliers: Sir, thus it was, about three of
the clock one monday in the afternoon, he had with near two thousand horse
and foot, four Drakes and two Sakers, set against the town, playing with his
Ordnance, and endeavoring to force his way, with foot and horse, were twice
beaten off with our Musketeers at the entrance of Derrington at which many of
their men fell, the towns men held them in play above an hour, we had not
above one hundred and forty muskets and having many entrances into the town
they were many to few, Coventry men had with drawn their forces three days
before, all but Captain Castledownes Dragooneers, a Troop of horse of Master
Perkes commanded by Captain Greaves being in the town, not fit for that
service, made escape when the adversaries began to incompasse the town, and
force the ways over the meadows, and fired the Town in two places, and so by
incompassing them that did defend the out-worke, caused them to draw inward, to
other works, there in Digboth, which work they defended to the adversaries
loss, but being the enemy brake in at the Millone they were forced to leave
that work also, and so put to shift for themselves, with breaking thorough
houses, over garden ways, escaped, over hedges and boggy meadows, and hiding
their arms, saved most of them, the enemy killed none as I here in fight
unless some three or four, Mr. Carter, and Samuel Elsmore. being of them
some with their arms defended themselves stoutly till death, they persued the
rest in fields and lanes, cutting and most barbarously mangling naked men to
the number of fifteen men one woman, another being shot, and many hurt, many
men sore wounded, and Mr. Tillam the Surgeon standing in his door to entertain
them, was most cruelly shot, having his leg and thighbones broken, they
pillaged the Town generally, there own friends sped worst, and one tuesday
morning set fire in diverse places of the Town, and have burnt near a hundred
dwellings the Welsh end, Dale end, and More street end, Humphrey Rans, the
Bell, and diverse houses thereabout, many other fires they kindled, but they
did not burn, they left kindled matches with gunpowder also in other places
intending nothing less then utterly to destroy the Town, but by Gods
providence, they whose hurt they chiefly intended by Gods hand is much
prevented, the Cavaliers lie about Clanke beyond Wosall, are joined with
Hastings forces, and intend to set on the Close at Lichfield, where I fear not
but they will have enough; your Fathers house stands, but has lost much, Mr.
Roberts, Mr. Porters, and mine be safe, but are threatened to be pulled down,
and they pretend Prince Ruperts warrant, but however its their envy that Gods
overruling providence has turned the mischief so much on the heads of those
that might with their timely help have preventid this mischief; I am much
grieved at the loss of your brother, and many other friends, three being my
honest worke-men, whose lives I would I had redeemed with mine estate, The
Cavaliers have lost thirty men at least, of which there be three or four
chief men Earls and Lords, I believe you have heard them named the Earl of
Denby, the Lord John Stewart, some say the Lord Digby, thirty are said to be
buried and many carried away wounded, this did so much enrage them, that they
appeared more like Devils then men, lamenting more their loss, then boasting
of their gain, which was much in goods and in money, its thought above two
thousand pound, thirteen hundred being taken from Mr. Peake, Mr. Iennens, lost
much, the which men if they had parted with little before, our fortification
had been such as they could not have entered, which went on well for the time.
So wishing you to have comfort in our God, who is able to turn the rage of men
to his praise, and sweeten this bitter cup by some other comfort, I conclude
and rest.

Yours to Command, R. G.
I could wish I might hear how the City stands affected with our loss, for a
little relief from them, might much comfort many poor people, which have lost
all and are left well ^^^e naked and harbourlesse: it would much encourage all
to stand out in the cause, that are but indifferent, a help to ease the better
party of the burden of the which will be otherways too great for us; I would
move some friends if you think fit, I have already put on the work of
contribution in this City.



FINIS.

