THE PORTRAITVRE OF Mr. George Keith THE QUAKER, In Opposition to Mr. George
Keith THE PARSON.

Presented to the Hearers of his late Sermons.

By a Protestant Dissenter.

G. K 's Serious Appeal, p. 21. Let but the Reader see my own Words, in my
printed Books, and well consider them; and if he have but a little Sound
Judgment, he will easily find, I have not contradicted my Self in any thing.

LONDON Printed, and Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster. 1700.

THE PORTRAITURE OF Mr. George Keith, etc.

THe Exposing this Person, I am now concerned with, in his proper Colors (who
yet told the World in his first Narrative, p. 15. I know not any Fundamental
Principle, nor indeed any One Principle of the Christian Faith, that I have
varied from to this day) has lain hitherto mostly upon the Quakers, and a
Moderate Churchman; and it has driven him (or Money has tempted him) after
having made a ricketty Retractation, imperfect in almost all the parts of it,
to give them the greatest Contradiction, that a Protestant was capable of
doing; so obvious is the Disparity between a Teacher among the Quakers, and a
Minister of the Church of England. Nor has he (I Appeal to you, Gentlemen,
whose Curiosity has led you to be his Hearers of late) gone off quiet, with
the rest of his Dissenting Protestant Brethren, nay not his particular Friends,
but as a Man Fighting pro aris and focis, and who would Monopolize the
Character of Ishmael to himself, viz: His Hand against every Man, and every
Man's Hand against him; he spares none, but proclaims War against them all; and
I fear not so much to ingratiate himself with his new Masters, or to Reform us,
as to blow up the Coals of Persecution against us all, Preached at St. George's
Buttolph's, in the Afternoon, the last Leaf but one.
not obliquely hinted at in one * of his late printed Sermons. This rendering
him a common Enemy and Makebate, (for if his Malice prevail, we are like to be
Sufferers in common) wonder not, gentle Reader, if by our joint Endeavors,
after Examination, and finding him a fickle Proteus, we submit our gleanings to
his Auditors, that they may see him as he is, and beware of him. Could he give
proof he were a Sincere Convert, like St Paul, who once had Zeal without
Knowledge, not Knowledge without Zeal; God forbid, we should do other than pity
him, and inform him better, wherein we differ from him, and apprehend him
misled: But if upon the reading of these, the contrary appear, my endeavors in
detecting him, I hope, will not be unacceptable to any good Man.

What I have collected of this kind, is much of it New, not offered before
(that I have observed) and the method somewhat different. The Reader is left to
compare what is here cited, with what he well knows to be the Doctrine of that
Church, G. K. is now a Member of, or has heard or read from his late Sermons,
too well known to contradict his Sentiments here given, to need either Comment
or Transcribing. And whether the Arguments formerly delivered, when he went
against both Wind and Tide, have been (even faintly) attacked, since both have
been for him; much more whether invalidated or sufficient to set him strait in
the Opinion of the Judicious and Conscientious, is submitted to such. And thus
I enter upon my Citations.

I. Out of G. K's Book, entitled, Help in time of need, etc. printed Anno 1665.
1. His Charge against the Presbyterians of Scotland, turned upon himself.
The Title Page begins thus, Help in time of need, from the God of Help, to the
People of the (so called) Church of Scotland, especially the once more Zealous
and Professing, who have so shamefully degenerated and declined from that which
their Fathers, the Primitive Protestants, attained unto; yea, and from what
they have but of late themselves, so zealously asserted and maintained to be
the Cause and Work of God, which now they have generally shrunk from -- like
the Dog returning to the Vomit, and the Sow to the Puddle, after the being once
Washed. --

Were not set Forms of Prayer cried down also in Scotland, as lifeless, barren
things (and the Service Book denied? P. 24, 25.
) And now have ye not again licked up the Vomit? -- And have not your Brethren
in England taken it up again? And when it is offered to you to read, will you
not also do the like? There is no question of it, but most of you will, and
worse also, when ye are put to the trial.

Now, have ye not Apostatized herein also, P. 26.
and mixed your selves with the profane Rabble of the World, as bad and worse
than Papists, Turks, Pagans, which has provoked the Lord to withdraw from
among you, and ye can Pray, and Sing, and Communicate with such? Is not this
Babylon indeed? Which is to say, Confusion.

And by the by, I would ask you one Question, P. 28, 29.
If the Popish Church be a true Church (though Corrupt) why have ye separated
from it? And how can ye justify your Separation therefrom? See his Sermon
Preached at St. George's Buttolph's, before noted.
For its another Principle of yours, That a Church holding the Fundamentals (
which make, say ye, a true Church) though there be many Corruptions therein, is
not to be separated from. And this Principle ye have taken up to justify your
Compliance with Prelacy, and this late Church Model and Frame, which ye
formerly vomited up, and not only quit it, but vowed to God against the same:
And now it stood somewhat against your Stomachs to receive it among you again
-- till ye fell upon this Pill, whereby ye got it digested, viz. The Episcopal
Party is a true Church, and therefore we ought not to separate from them,
because of their Corruptions; and shunning one inconveniency, Have ye not
fallen upon another far greater, and quite given away your Cause into the hands
of the Papists.

Now Judas fell from his Ministry in Selling his Master Christ, ibid.
which generally your Ministers have done, and have they not thereby fallen
from their Ministry?

I know well, P. 37.
generally they have kept to their God all along very constantly, amongst all
their Changes, being such (the Apostle mentions) generally, whose God is their
Belly, and this Master they have served, and do serve very Faithfully, making
every Change answer its design.

It was discovered unto them by the Light, ibid.
and they discerned Prelacy to be a limb of Antichrist, and so called it, and
but of late days it was Covenanted to God against, again and again; and did not
ye your selves Vow to God against the same? So that herein ye have not only
Apostatized from your Fathers, but from what ye were of late your selves.

I know not amongst the Thousands of you (Ministers or People) that vowed to
God against that filthy thing set up in the Land, P. 38, 39.
any of you all bear a suitable Testimony by Sufferings -- The cause I say is
common to you with us, viz. our Testimony against that which is now set up in
the Land; and both Ye, and many of Us also, vowed to the most high God, while
we were among you, we would never own such a thing, and we have kept to our
Vow, and ye have shrunk therefrom. [How does this hold now?]

The whole Protestant Church in Europe has much degenerated from the Primitive
Christians and Protestants, P. 45.
both in Principles and Practices, and is become quite another thing; retaining
the Name, like an old rotten Ship, that has been so often Clamped and Clouted,
that all the former Timbers are worn out, and others put in their place, yet
keeping the Name, and somewhat of the Form and Shape; and ye have sailed long
up and down in this old rotten Ship, which is just upon the Splitting, and
suffering Shipwreck.

For that ye kept not chaste to his Light in your Consciences, P. 50.
nor to the leadings of his Spirit, this was it which discovered to you the
Popish and Prelatical Abominations -- Oh ye did run well, who did hinder you?
But ye are become so foolish, who began in the Spirit, to end in the Flesh; and
now when ye had got upon the Walls and Bulwarks of your Enemies Building, and
levelled it to the Ground; when ye had rooted out Prelacy, and the many
Corruptions and Superstitions accompanying the same, and dug down a good
part of Babylon's up-setting, then ye betook your selves to Build --.

Ye were angry at their Revenues being so great, P. 53.
and yet ye stepped in also to many of them, and into their Pride, Covetousness,
Lightness, Vanity, Ambition, Carelessness concerning the Work of Jesus Christ,
and the Salvation of poor People, whereof ye took up the Charge; and many other
Iniquities, they were found in, for which the Lord was provoked against them,
ye have taken as it were a Succession of, and ye thought the Lord would have
winked at you --.

[He closes thus] The word of Commandment from the Lord (which filled me with
heavenly Joy and Comfort) came unto me the 30th Day of the 10th Month (called
December) saying, P. 54.
Show unto the People of Scotland my true and righteous Judgment, concerning
the Particulars abovementioned.

2. Of the Ordinances.
Put not the name of the Ordinances of Jesus Christ upon Babylon's Brats, P. 73.
which whosoever takes and dasheth them to pieces against the Stones, Blessed
shall they be.

3. His Character of Episcopacy.
Ye [the Presbyterians of Scotland] did well in departing from such Men, P. 47,
48.
who gave themselves forth to be the Lord's Ministers and Servants, but they
ran and he sent them not; and their Covetousness and Ambition, and seeking how
to please Men for their own Ends, and not his Honor, not any true Zeal for
him, set them on such a work, to Lord it over the People, which he had
forbidden, and it is Abomination to him; together with the many things
accompanying them, which they gave forth for his Ordinances, good Order,
Decency and Comeliness in the Church; but were the mere Inventions of Men, and
Babylon's Golden Cup of Fornications --.

-- Because of the Iniquity of such Men, their Pride, Pomp, ibid.
Covetousness, Tyranny and Ambition, his Wrath kindled against them, and he
poured Contempt and Desolation upon them, for the cry of their Wickedness.

4. His Character of the Quakers.
And now, whether ye will hear or forbear, P. 78, 79.
this I do declare unto you, in the Name, and Power, and Authority of the
living God, The day of the Lord is of a truth broke up amongst us, and ye shall
look till your Eyes fail you, and rot within your holes, ere ever ye see
another Day, or Appearance of Jesus Christ, to your Comfort, than what we, the
People of the Lord, called Quakers, do witness come, and yet more abundantly
coming --.

5. Of Universities and Humane Learning.
Away with the Education of Youth at Universities and Colleges, of Philosophy,
P, 75, 76*
so called; I may say of them, which Luther stuck not to call them in his day,
that they are the Stews of Antichrist; for out of them comes this ignorant,
profane, scandalous Ministry, wherein they learn to talk of things they
Understand not, and to prate in Man's Wisdom, which is Carnal, Earthly and
Devilish.

I certainly know the Humane Wisdom or Learning is one of the main Bulwarks of
Antichrist against the Revelation and setting up the Kingdom of Christ in the
Earth; ibid.
and because this is arising, and shall rise, down must the other go, and all
who seek to uphold it shall fall therewith.

II. Out of G. K 's Book, entitled, The Woman-Preacher of Samaria a better
Preacher, and more sufficiently qualified to Preach than any of the
Men-Preachers of the Man-made-Ministry, in these three Nations. Printed Anno
1674.
6. Of the National Ministry.
-- I my self have had sundry Debates, with both Conformists and
Non-conformists, P. 3, 4.
so called, touching this same thing, both affirming that true Faith and Piety
was not needful to a Man's being a Preacher, but that Letter-Learning was
needful; so that he could not be a Preacher without Letters, but he could be a
Preacher without Faith and Piety. O abominable Doctrine* And this same rule
both follow, in their trying Men's Qualifications unto the Ministry; they try
what knowledge they have in Strange Languages, and Arts, and Sciences, Natural,
and what they can say upon places of Scripture, but never one Word they
question them, concerning the Work of God in their Hearts; or concerning their
Faith and Piety. But alas! How can they try them concerning the work of Grace
in their Hearts, seeing they acknowledge they have not a discerning themselves,
whereby to know them surely and infallibly? Yea, they affirm, There is no such
discerning in these days, as whereby Men can be known to be truly Gracious. And
does not sad Experience show it, that the Generality of those Preachers have
not true Faith and Piety, their Lives and Conversations are so Gross and
Carnal? Yea, do not many of themselves see it, and have they not complained of
it? And yet does not this Principle of theirs, That wicked Men may be
Preachers, and ought to be received, lay a Foundation for a wicked Ministry?
And this Foundation being laid with their own Hands, will not wicked Men come
in Thick and Throng? And will not these wicked Men love to have all like
themselves? If they can have a wicked Man, will not the wicked prefer him to
another, that but seems to be a Godly, and may, or may not be? And thus in
process of time, the whole Ministry will consist of ungodly Men, the wicked
being still preferred by the wicked, and carrying it by most Votes, as among
them called Presbyterians; or by the Authority of the Bishop, as among the
Episcopal. Oh! for shame never say, that you are for a godly Ministry, while
you both lay such a Foundation for the ungodly.

Now which of the two ways of Preaching are the best; P. 6.
to Preach only from a Hearsay, by others, or from a Sight and Hearing of
Christ himself? Surely this was the best, and therefore this Woman is a better
Preacher than all your University-Men, and Doctors, and Batchelors. She learned
more of Christ, from himself in that small time (perhaps not one hour's length)
than your Doctors and University-Men have yet learned, for all their many Years
Studying, Laboring, Reading and Hearing. As Christ upbraided the Jews, that
they had neither heard his Father's Voice, nor seen his Shape; so it may be
said of them, yea they say it themselves, they have neither heard him, nor seen
him. Alas for such Teachers! What should Men hear them for? They can tell us no
more of him, but as they have heard it from Men, or read it in the Scripture;
and all their Knowledge is from the Scripture, and all have the Scripture as
well as they, and so without them, by the Scripture, may know as much of Christ
as they, and save both their pains and their Money.

7. Of their Maintenance.
A Father has three Sons, P. 8, 9.
one of them he thinks may be fit to be made a Lawyer, another to be a Doctor
of Physic, a third (and that commonly the greatest Dunce or Dolt of the three,
finding him not so fit for other things) he resolves he will have him a
Minister, or Preacher, that it may be a living to him; and so away he sends
them all to the Grammar School, and from that to the University; and thus one
becomes a Preacher, only by that which is Natural and Artificial, as the other
two become the Lawyer and Physician; here is nothing of God or Christ seen more
in the one than in the other: Is it not so generally among them? They are
become Preachers by a Design or Contrivance of their Parents, or themselves. As
soon as they become so old, as to have so much natural Wit as to see they must
make some shift how to live, and looking about the many Trades, they readily
see it is the far easiest of many, or most Trades, to be a Preacher, to get
Money; for it is little Labor, in Respect of many other Labors, and much
Gain, and also brings Honor; for if he had been of never so mean a Degree, and
of the most abject and mean Parents in all the Country, yet to become a
Preacher, makes him to be esteemed a Gentleman, and be called Sir, and perhaps
to be advanced to be a Bishop, and then he will be called, My Lord. But how
many either of one sort or another of them, whether Episcopal or Presbyterian,
are to be found, who have been called from some other Calling or Occupation
they were in before, to leave it, and go to Preach Christ, as this Woman was
called from her Water Pot, immediately to Preach him, in a City of Samaria,
called Sychar? And yet thus were the true Servants of the Lord called, who were
Mechanick-men and Tradesmen, etc.

She preached Christ freely -- She said not unto them, P. 10.
What Money or Hire will you give me, and I will Preach Christ unto you? Nay,
nay, she was not of such a Mercinary Spirit, she was more noble; far unlike the
Preachers of the Man-made-Ministry, in these Days, whether Episcopal, or
Presbyterian, as well as Popish, where all is done for Money; No Money, no
Preaching; as the old Proverb is, No Penny, no Pater noster. [G. K. may speak
this now feelingly.]

8. Of their Doctrine.
-- But so do not these Men of the Man-made-Ministry Preach him; Nay, but the
contrary: For, say they, P. 13.
That is not Christ which convinces every Man of his Sins, and tells him all
that ever he did, it is but a Humane Principle, not Divine; it it is but
Natural, not Spiritual; a Natural Light, etc. -- and so deny his Divinity, and
Divine Power and Godhead. [Is not this an Error in Fundamentals, to deny the
Divinity of Christ? For so he charged them then.]

I will rather hear this Woman of Samaria, than hear them; P. 14.
She bids, Come and see Christ himself; they say there is no seeing of him, nor
hearing of himself, so long as we live upon Earth. Oh blind and deaf Men! who,
because they have neither heard him, nor seen him, therefore deny this blessed
Privilege! Oh that People should follow after them, and not see these blind
Men!

Whom have these of the Man-made-Ministry brought this length, that they are
come unto Christ himself, and heard him, and seen him? Nay, both Teachers and
People cry out generally, This is not to be expected in this Life --

[ Query, Are these Teachers and People now Reformed, or G. K. Deformed? The
Principles unsound, or Turn-coat George become so?]

III. Out of his Book, entitled, The Fundamental Truths of Christianity
briefly hinted at by way of Question and Answer: To which is added, a Treatise
of Prayer in the same Method. Printed Anno 1688.
Before I proceed, excuse me, good Reader, if I make two Remarks by the way:
The one is, that here we have not a Syllable from him of our blessed Savior
Christ, his Birth, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, Ascension and Mediation,
notwithstanding he pretends to give the Fundamental Truths of Christianity.
What, have these no share in his Fundamental Truths? Or were they too trivial
be noticed? An unpardonable Omission, believe me, in any but himself; enough to
have given him a fresh occasion to have ascended his Stage at Turner's-Hall
once more, were he not now better provided for; and I think he ought not to
come off cheaper, than (more patrio) standing in a White-Sheet for it. The next
is, That Prayer, right Prayer, Praying so as to be acceptable with God, is a
Fundamental Principle of Christianity. If he call that good Prayer now, which
he once asserted to be otherwise, two things lie upon him (telling us he is
otherwise minded now, and that he gets his living by being so, will not serve)
viz. First, to enervate the Force of those Arguments then delivered, which lose
not their Validity by his being a Weathercock: And 2dly, To manifest himself
not to have erred in Fundamentals, a Brag his late Prints have abounded with.

9. Of set Forms of Prayer, and Singing of Psalms.
[In his Preface to the Treatise of Prayer, he saith] Wherefore the Apostle
prayed to the Lord, that God would establish the true Believers in him, in
every good word and work, 2 Thessalonians. 2.17. whence I conclude that good words are
as real a Fruit of the Spirit, as good works or desires; and these good words
must not be borrowed words from the Mouths or Lines of others, made ready to
our hands, but must spring from the inward fruitfulness of our Understandings,
as the Spirit of the Lord does water them, and make them fruitful after an
heavenly sort.

To read set Forms of Prayer but of a Book, whether in private or public, P.
43.
and call that reading Prayer, is not nay part of Gospel Worship, or true and
real Prayer, but rather one of the many Inventions and Traditions of Men since
the Apostasy -- If it had been the Will of God that such a way of Worship
should have been used in the true Church, as a common Liturgy, or set Form of
Prayers, it would have been used in the Apostles days -- But neither the
Apostles, nor their immediate Successors, either made or used any such set
Forms of read Prayers. Nothing of this kind was known in the Church, either in
Justin Martyr or Tertullian his time, who lived above 200 Years after Christ.

So that it is as clear as the noonday, that when these divine Gists of
Praying and Singing by the Spirit were lost, P. 54, 45.
and the holy Spirit himself was in great measure departed from, the Invention
of reading set Forms of Prayer took place. The first Instance that I find of
Peoples being put to use a composed or set Form of Prayer, made by another, was
that Form of Prayer which Constantine the Great composed, and gave his
Soldiers, not to read, but get by Heart. -- He at this time was but a young
Christian, and the Purity of spiritual Worship began to decline a-pace, even in
his days -- But neither in Constantine's time, nor a considerable space
thereafter, do I find, that any made or composed Prayers beforehand were used
in the Church.

This way of Praying [ to wit, in words, by the Spirit, P. 56.
as he is pleased to give assistance] does alone and only answer to the Liberty
of the Spirit, which is free, even the holy Spirit of Truth, and neither will
nor can be limited; and who seek to limit him, he departs from them in so far,
and remains still in his own freedom, although such who seek to limit the
Spirit by using set Forms, may and do quench the Spirit, as unto themselves.

The words of these set Forms, Whence came they? P. 59.
Had the Spirit no influence upon the understanding of those Men, who conceived
them, to help and assist them in those Conceptions? If they say, Nay, they will
render the set forms of Prayer of small value with the People, in that respect.
But if they say, The Spirit did help them to form these Conceptions, -- it may
as well be in Men now to conceive other words of Prayer.

Praying by a set Form, not only tends to limit and stint the Spirit, and
quench it, in regard of its Operations, P. 60.
but also it tends to make the Understanding, etc. altogether barren and
unfruitful, in respect of Prayer, which yet ought to exercise the
Understanding, as much as any other thing, as Paul said, I will Pray with the
Spirit, I will Pray with Understanding also. For if the Understanding be
limited to a set Form of Words, then there is no room, nor place, nor liberty
left for it, to bring forth Prayer in any other Forms, the which seems verily
as absurd to me.

Indeed a word spoken in season, P. 71, 72.
whether it be in Preaching or Praying, how sweet and comfortable it is? Now
these set Forms of Prayer being to be used according to the Calendar, such
Prayers on such a day, and others on other days, as the Calendar, or order of
the Service requires; Can these Forms be always, or for most part, seasonable
to Peoples States and Conditions, unless it could be supposed, that the inward
States and Conditions of Men's Souls and Spirits should regularly vary,
according to the seasons and days of the Year; which were most absurd to think
or imagine? Or how do these set Forms of Prayer, which tell us daily what to
pray for, agree with Paul's words, Romans 8.26. The Spirit also helps our
Infirmities, for we know not what we should Pray for as we ought.

From their using set Forms of Prayer and Blessing under the Law, P. 77.
to argue for the use of them under the Gospel, will not hold good; for not
only Sacrifices, and Offerings of Beasts, but many other things, were both
commanded and allowed under the Law, which are not under the Gospel.

But we do not find, that even under the Law, or at any time before, P. 79.
the Lord did limit or confine his People or Servants to such a precise number
of set Forms of Prayer -- But on the contrary, we find that many prayed ex
tempore by the Inspiration of the Spirit, what the Lord did give them, or put
into their Mouths of words, both in private and public, as Solomon's Prayer at
the Dedication of the Temple; also Esdras's Prayer, chap. 9. and the Levites
Prayer, Neh. 9. and Daniel's Prayer, Dan. 9. etc.

[To an Objection, That Christ taught his Disciples to Pray in a set Form of
words, P. 81, 82.
he answers] Though they were endued at that time with a measure of the Spirit,
yet it was but small, in respect of what was to follow: And we must remember,
that as yet the Dispensation of the Law remained in force. -- 2. Christ did not
limit them only to this Form of Prayer, nor did he give them a Book of Forms of
Prayer, P. 83.
or any other Forms that we read of, but this only, which therefore was rather
to be a Pattern and Example unto them, according to which they were to Pray,
than to tie or confine them to the precise number of the words of it.

All true Prayer is a living thing, P. 89.
and must have a living Form of its own, and cannot borrow the Form of another;
even as a Rose, or Tulip, or Lilly, or any other Flower, or Vegetable, or Fruit
of the Earth, as it springs up out of the Ground, must have its own proper
living Form and Figure.

Either these set Forms of Prayer are few or many; if few, they cannot give a
large understanding to the People; P. 115, See his Sermon Preached at St.
George's Buttolph's before noted.
if many, they cannot well be remembered by them: And if they were as many as
would fill many Volumes, they cannot give so great occasion to edify and
inform the Understanding, as these Prayers which proceed ex tempore, by the
Inspiration of the holy Spirit in holy Men, which must needs be many more, and
containing much more matter, than the greatest Book of ever so many set Forms
of Prayer can.

What is here said, P. 127.
all along in this Treatise of Praying by the Spirit, helping to conceive the
words of Prayer, is also to be understood of Singing and Praising God with a
Psalm; and the Reasons and Arguments drawn from Scripture for the one, serve
equally for the other; for all Singing and Praising with a Psalm, or Psalms, in
Gospel Times, was a spiritual Gift, as is clear in the Church of Corinth, when
some had a Psalm to utter or express in words, as some had a Doctrine, and some
a Revelation, some an Interpretation, 1 Cor. 14.26.

10. His Deism.
My Charity is so large and free in that respect, P. 103.
that I believe among all People, Jews and Turks, as well as Christians, and
many of those called Heathens, if they do believe in one only God, and are
Faithful to what they know; they are at times visited with gentle Breathings of
the Spirit of God, which helps them truly to Pray unto him, with Desires, and
Affections, and true Breathings of the Soul after him.

Having thus gone through Ten Heads of his Belief formerly, and scarce wedged
in an Animadversion, I leave, my Reader, to compare it with what must be his
Sentiments now, (if he really believe, as that Church does, of which he is
admitted a Member) and with his weekly Sermons, I only add, his fruere mecum
and vale.

FINIS.

