HONI: SOIT: QVI: MAL: Y: PENSE. G: Faithorne (...)


THE PORTRAIT OF HIS MAJESTY Charles the Second.

Faithfully taken to the LIFE.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Creake. 1660.

The Portrait of His MAjESTY, CHARLES the II.
KIngs like the Sun, in their full Majesty's,
Are too Resplendent bright for subjects eyes;
Nor without dazzling can their weaker sight,
Sustain the force of so much glorious light.
But when Ecclipst, then every one can see
(Without that splendour,) what their persons be.
In which Conjuncture who so ever has seen
This Sun of ours, may well affirm of him,
His Person's such, as he for that alone
(His Birth away) deserves the Royal Throne;
Such Majesty appears in 't, and such Grace
(Both awing and delighting) in his Face,
Without those Kingly Robes Adorn the Throne,
H'apear more King, then those who have them on.
His Statur's Tall, and of the comlyest make,
His Visage ovall, his Heyr thick and Black,
In ample Curles, on's Shoulders falling down,
Adorning more his Head, then any Crown.
His Eyes are Lively, full of Flame and Sprit,
And of that color, most delights the sight:
Royal, and largly featured all the rest,
Declaring largnesse of his Royal Breast;
And of so healthful Constitution,
As he had Articled with Sickness, none
Should e're molest and grieve him, nor he e're
By'excesse provoke them. to which much confer,
His wonted Exercises, who in all
The Noblest, Gallants, and most Martial,
Who er's most Excellent, so far Excels,
He Is King in them, as he is in all things else:
(And who'd be absolute in every thing
As well as Birth and Power, should be a King)
Nor shall you er'e in any person find
A greater strength of body and of mind;
Which with long Travail, h'as improved so,
He knows what er'e befits a Prince to know;
Not learnt from the dead, but from the World and Men
Those Living Authors, and h'as studied them,
So as each Nations wisdom he dos know,
And each on's Language to express it too.
Whence he compared to other Princes, sit
Dully at home, and nothing know but it,
Seems just like some huge Gallyon dos come
From farthest Indiis, richly laden home,
Compared to some poor Hoy, or Bylander
Then their own shores, and coasts, never further wear,
And never none to Fortune more did owe,
Then to misfortune he, for being so.
For moral virtues then, has every one
In their full splendors and perfection,
Justice, not Clouded with severity,
Nor Temperanee, with sour austerity;
And never in none more Courage was, nor more
Wisdom and Prudence, with less vanety, nor
With lesser Artifice. And or's passions he
Commands so sovereignly and absolutely,
It shows him King over himself, as well
As over others. nor dos he less excel
In civil virtues, which adorn no less
The Royal Throne, as mildness, gentelness,
Ravishing swetnesse, debonarity,
Obligingness, and affability,
That more dos conquer with a gentle word,
Then ever any Conquered by the Sword,
Acquiring by (...) absolute Dominion
And Sovereign sway o'r hearts of every one.
Mean time he is so cheerful and so gay
None from his presence er'e went sad away,
Nor yet could all his troubles nor his cares
Render him less Gay and cheerful, which declares
His mind's above them all, and h'as within
Him, somewhat higher then the being KING,
Just like the highest Region of the Air
'Bove Storms and Tempests, nor could Fortune er'e,
Eclipse his mind. For Courtly virtues then
In which Kings too, should excel other Men,
As far as Courts, do other Houses, he
Appears in every one, to Excellency,
Daunces so admirably as your Eye
As well as Ear's all charmed with Harmony,
Understands Music, Poetry and Wit,
And none knows better how to judge of it:
In fine, in every thing that curious is
No'ns taste was ever more delicate then his,
And as he is a King amongst Courtiers, so
Amongst Ladies, he is both King and Courtier too.
How happy are his subjects then, to have one
For King, Heaven seems to have chosen King, alone
To make them happy? one, they need but pray
That as has born Adversity, he may
But bear prosperity as well, and then
As still has been, he'ill be the best of Men.
One, finally in whom ye united find
(Besides his Birth, his person, and his mind)
All that, which found in others one by one
Raise them to height of Admiration,
The Wise, the Valliant, the Majestical,
The Mild, the Gallant, and the King all.
More Glorious are his sufferings then, and more
Injurious Fortune, persecutes him for
His Royal Birth alone, who had he been
Born private Man, deserv d to be a King.
Such is her ignorant blindness, dos not know
His eminent worth whom she disfavours so,
Would find, wear she unveyld and could but see,
None ever deserved her favors more then he.
Tudor rose Scottish thistle French fleur-de-lis depiction of Irish harp

