Country Astrology IN THREE BOOKS. BEING The many years Astrological
Experiments and Painful Collections of JOHN POOL of the County of GLOUCESTER,
Student in Astrology and Physic. A Work very useful for all such as are Lovers
of Astrology, and do delight in the serious Study of calculating NATIVITIES.

Non me sed opera.

LONDON, Printed for LAVVRENCE CHAPMAN, next door to the Fountain-Tavern in the
Strand. 1650.

TO THE READER.
HAd Providence assigned unto me in mine infancy such Education as my Genius
thirsted after, thou had received the following Treatise better garnished
with words then now it is: but such is my now natural rudeness, and such is the
rustical homeliness of those people with whom I daily converse, my practice
being wholly with rural persons, that thou may not expect the work it self to
be better, or any other, then a plain piece of Country Astrology, rude
Collections, or indigested and wholly unpolished Experiments: yet I promise thee
thou shall find truth all along in every book attending thy reading hereof: I
have been a long time in gathering my Observations together, the work it self
is the Production of time and years, and the fruits of many nocturnal
watchings; it had come out sooner, and appeared more glorious, had not some
snarling Presbyterian Priests both in public and private, impedited my
Studies, and endeavored to blast my reputation (such as it is) by babbling in
their Pulpits such things against Astrology, as God knows they understand not:
maliciously they thunder out their Censures against me, poor man, and I as
patiently undergo them, knowing very well, that their Kingdom is declining, it
being no other then earthly, and they themselves of all sorts of Priests the
most raging and malicious that ever the world produced unto the day hereof, and
this is April 25. 1650.

But to the matter it self of the ensuing Discourse, I have divided the work
into three Parts or Books.

The first Book contains 54. Pages, and does instruct the Learner how to
verify a Nativity, then how to judge exactly of every one of the 12. Houses of
Heaven, wherein I am very copious; as also in instructing how to take the
several Parts in every Nativity, a thing which I perceive was omitted by Mr
Lilly in his Introduction, and also by some other or all of our late Authors,
and which I could willingly my self have omitted, but that some young Students
desired me to insert them; and truly, though I do not very much attribute unto
these Parts, in regard I am not well satisfied of the Reason why the ancient
Arabians so collected them; yet have I found in many Experiments of mine own,
that they have given singular light unto me for all those purposes for which
they were framed, and by me collected: I am also in the Judgment of every House
more copious then Mr Lilly, by means whereof, the young Student carefully
observing my precepts, will much enlarge his conceptions, when he judges the
general felicity or infelicity depending on every House of the Zodiacks.

The second book most delightfully handles that Subject which was yet never in
the English Tongue, viz. what every Planet signifies in each others House,
what occupation or profession every Planet, either by himself, or as joined
with another by any aspect, does declare; as also the diseases subject to such
Configurations: It also acquaints you what occupation or magistery does
properly belong to every sign of the Zodiacks, that so the provident Artist, by
mixing the signification of the Planet together with that of the sign, he may
give a very sober and solid Judgment what profession the Native will naturally
most incline unto; and this is of excellent use for parents, whereby they may
most properly fit their children with such a profession as they naturally love:
Besides, I there deliver the natural as well as accidental signification of
every Planet; as also what naturally every Planet is the significator of, as
posited in any House of the Radical Scheam of the birth.

The third and last Book contains eleven Chapters, full of many Curiosities,
and such as you shall not find extant in any English Author: And although many
things herein, in this third Book, does smell more of the vulgar Arabian
learning, then Grecian; yet what I have experimented by the space of near these
twenty years, I could do no less then publish for thy benefit, and wish thy
favorable acceptance hereof, until I be more able to furnish thee with other
Curiosities, now lying by me, not in this our English language, which excellent
Pieces were communicated unto me by a person of quality and learning.

Unto the Noble Professors of this Art I have a few lines to write, and I do
most heartily implore those which generally practice in the City of London,
that with much wariness they handle or undertake Questions concerning Theft,
for it is a most difficult and laborious task, as I my self by my great
experience have found; for though we describe the party or Thief never so
exactly, yet if the Goods be not presently retaken with the Thief, or if the
party so accused or described by us do complain to an ignorant Justice of the
Peace, (as now there are many, as well as in former time,) and pretend
themselves injured, either the simplicity of the Master, or covetousness of the
Clerk, will causlesly bind over the Artist to answer the fact at the next
Sessions, though there do no party appear to make complaint against the
Astrologer; which silly act of some Justices is no other then an encouragement
unto Thieves, and a disheartening to every honest Artist for endeavoring the
discovery of Knaves, and be so scurvily rewarded: I would willingly know,
whether a Justice of Peace his Clerk does not more offend in taking 2. s. 4. d.
to bind a man over to the Sessions, then the poor Artist, who had perhaps
little or nothing for his pains, for his endeavoring by lawful Art to discover
the Thief: Of this manner of dealing in London, I hear, there are frequent
examples, and one also I have known in Northamptonshire of late committed by
S. J: D: Knight, until the Assizes; but the Artist at the Assizes was as freely
discharged by an honorable Judge of this Kingdom, as he was maliciously bound
over by the aforesaid simple Justice; the truth is, the Justice was a
Presbyterian, and the Astrologer a great Parliamenteer, and Lover of the Army,
etc. But I hasten.

I would wish the Divines of this Nation, or whoever are offended with this
Study, to argue it fairly with us, or with Love and Charity, and to read over
Mr Lilly's Works, and not condemn them, him, or us all, or Astrology it self,
unheard, or not at all understood: What a Barbarism is this in those who
pretend themselves the Ministers of Jesus Christ to be thus uncharitable? But
such were the Priests in the old Law, such the Pharisees in Christ's time, such
at present the Presbyterian violent Priests.

But seeing the God of Heaven discovers more Truths unto us now living every
day, then our forefathers were sensible of, shall we like beasts be mute, and
not magnify his holy Name therefore? Or shall we refuse to study Astrology,
Divine Astrology, Celestial Astrology because it has been very little
understood formerly, or abused by some former Artists? God forbid that the
abuse should take away the pious use of any creature; No: Let us magnify the
Lord God of Heaven, and admire his wonderful Works in the Heavens; let us fear
to offend his holy Name: Let us love and obey this Parliament, this Council of
State, and this Army, this Power which now governs; and let us say, A Fig for
all their Enemies: So says,

Thine, JOHN POOL.

The Contents of the first Book.
HOw to erect a figure of Heaven. Page 1. How to verify the Nativity by
Accidents, or Animodar, or Trutine of Hermes. 3. Of the several Parts in a
Nativity, and by what means to find them out, and their use. 6. Of the Planets
Latitude. 10. Of the Fortitudes and Debilities of the Planets. 11. If the child
born shall live long, or not. 15. Of Hyleg, and its signification. 16. Of
Alcocodon, the meaning of the word. 18. Of the Planets who give or diminish the
number of years. 21. The Almuten, or Lord of the Nativity, who he is. 22. Of
the wit, manners, and natural inclination of the child. 24. Of his estate and
fortune. 28. By what means attain it. 30. The time thereof. 32. Of Brethren and
Kinsfolks. 34. Of Father and Mother, Lands, Tenements. 35. Of Inheritances. 36.
Of Children. 37. Of Servants, and small Cattle. 37. Natural inclinations of
every Planet. 38. Of Sicknesses. 39. Of Marriage. 41. The estate of Wife or
Husband. 43. Of the death of the Native, and who is Significator. 43. Of
Journeys by Land or Sea. 47. Of Religion. 48. Of the Trade or Profession of the
Native. 48. Of Honor and Preferment. 50. Of Friends and Friendship. 51.
Lawsuits, open and private Enemies. 52. Restraint of Liberty, or Imprisonment.
Page 53. Of Horses, Oxen, and small Cattle. 54.
Contents of the second Book.
The several natures and significations of the seven Planets. 55. The twelve
Signs, and their proper signification. 60. Signification of the Planets in
their own Houses, and the Houses of others. 65. Signification of their several
aspects each to other. 68. Several significations of every one of the twelve
Houses. 76 Of the several Trygons or Triplicities of the Planets. 78. The
signification of every Planet in any of the twelve Houses. 79. The length or
shortness of life by the Position of the Planets in Houses. 91.
Contents of the third Book.
Of Directions, what they signify. 99. Of the signification of the word
Algebuthar. 101. Of the several Lords of the Triplicities. 102. Of Revolutions,
or the Return of the to his proper place in the Radix. 102. How to judge a
Revolution. 102. Of the Fridaries, or Government of the Planets by years. 104.
Of Profections. 107. Of Eclipses, and great Conjunctions, and how to make use
of them in any Nativity. 109. Of the Transit of the Planets. 110.
OF THE IVDGEMENTS ASTRONOMICALL UPON NATIVITIES.
The first Book.
Chap. I. Of the Celestial figure of a Nativity.
FOr to judge of Ascendants, and Nativities, after the Traditions of the
Ancient and learned Astrologians, it is convenient first to explain the
Celestial figure, and in the same, to apply the seven Planets, with the head
and tail of the Dragon Lunaire together with the part of Fortune, and the part
of the spirit, and others, more appertaining to the high, and notable
significations of the Stars: then to set down plainly the Celestial figure,
you must in the first place, note the year, the day and the hour, with the
most nearest minute of time of the Nativitie that you have undertaken. The
number of the hours, and minutes, you must set them down after the manner of
the numbering of the Astrologians, within their Tables: always set down the
hours afternoon, as well by day as by night, and never say, one hour, two
hours, three hours after midnight, but number 13. hours, 14. hours, 15.
after noone. This done, search in the Ephemerides, in the Table of the year of
your nativity, in the right month and day proposed, the degree of the sign
wherein the Sun is: look afterward in the Table of houses, which serve for the
latitude of your Country, and search there the said degree of the Sun under the
line of the tenth house. And having found in the same place, the same degree of
the Sun, you shall find directly upon the left hand of the same Table a number
of hours and minutes, the which write apart. To which number you must add the
hours and minutes that have been given you of the same nativity, and that
which rests by your addition, you must seek in the table of houses; and
there where you find the same number of hours, and minutes, coming of the
same addition, you must take to a right line the points and beginnings of the
six houses which you shall find marked: the which you shall direct upon your
figure, beginning at the point of the tenth, and continuing toward the left
hand.

The beginning of the other six houses, you must take the opposite signs; and
if it happen that the number of houses and minutes, come to more than twenty
four hours, it is then convenient to substract twenty four hours of the
same time, and the residue seek out, as we have aforesaid. If the (...) of
the (...) nativitie be upon the point of twelve hours of noone, you must take
the houses in a right line of the degree of the Sun, in the Table of your
Latitude, without making any other addition, or substraction, and that when in
the figure estimative: within the which, it is needful by all means to apply
the moving of the Moon exactly calculated, according to the vulgar Canons of
the Ephemerides, for to verify afterward your nativity by the hour of the
conception; as follows.

Chap. II. Of the verification of the hour of the Nativitie.
LEaving the Animodar of Ptolomie, and the meetings of Schoner, and all other
uncertain ways (although they have their Authors) to verify the hours of
Nativities, I will presently follow the method of Hermes, approved by long
experience, and confirmed by Ptolomie in his Centiloque, and by Abraham
Avenesrus, by Alphonse, Leopold, Holy, and other most expert Astrologians.
Hermes says, that the ascendant of a nativitie has been the place of the
Moon at the time of the conception; and that the ascendant of the conception
is the place of the Moon at the hour of the Nativity. Who would be more near
certified of the hour and minute of a nativity, and of the true ascendant, it
is convenient that you follow the doctrine of Hermes, by the method following.
First of all that you look into the figure estimative, whether the Moon be
above the Horizon or beneath. If she be above the Horizon, count the distance
that is between the point of the seventh house, and the Moon: if she be
beneath the Horizon, count the distance which is from the first house unto the
Moon, which distance of signs and degrees, you must search in the Table that
follows, under the title of the Moon, above the Horizon or beneath, as
truly you have found in the said figure. In a right line of the said distance,
you shall find the time that the infant has remained within the womb of his
mother, in a certain number of days, the which you must reckon from the day
of your nativity backward, and there where the number ends, you must mark
the day of the conception, if the Moon be found in the sign of the ascendant
estimative. If you find her not in the same place, go backward or forward
certain days of your account, until you have found the Moon within the said
sign, not far from the degree ascendant in the said figure. The day
considered, and in what hour, go forward to the East point, the place where
you have found the Moon in the figure estimative, and at that hour you must
calculate the moving of the Moon. For this degree and minute in the which you
found her, you must place it in the ascendant of your Nativitie.

And to know the hour in the which the place of the Moon of the nativity rose
to the East point at the time of the conception, take first the overthwart
ascension of the said place of the Moon, within the table of the directions of
your country, in the book of John de Regio monte, of the same ascension take
away 90. degrees (and add to the whole circle, which is of 360. degrees, when
the substraction cannot be otherwise made) the residue shall be the right
ascension of the height of the point of the Meridian circle, take afterward the
right ascension of the Sun, and take out by the substraction of the right
ascension of the said point of the Meridian, and add 360. degrees if it be
necessary, and turn that which is left into hours, and minutes, in giving to
30. degrees two hours, to fifteen degrees one hour, to one degree 4. minutes
of an hour, to fifteen minutes one minute of an hour: by this means you
shall exactly come to the hour of the conception, to the which you must
calculate the place of the Moon, and the same well calculated, put it to the
point of the first house, in the figure of the Nativitie.

Diverse for this verification do dress and garnish the motions of the Planets
four figures. One of that hour estimative of the nativitie, the other of the
precedent conjunction or opposition of the brightness: the third, of the
verification by the Animodar: the fourth of the conception. The which besides
the unprofitable and superfluous labor, err greatly, thinking to find out the
time of the conception by the Animodar of Ptolomy, the which experience from
day to day shows to be false, and that it has no ancient Author to maintain
it, or has made mention of this new doctrine being full of contention and
disproved verity.

The Table of the time that the Child does remain within the womb of his
Mother.
The Moon being under the Horizon, reckon from the Ascendant. The Moon being
above the Horizon, reckon from the seventh. fig. degr. days. 0 0 273
Indifferent abiding. 258 Little abiding. 0 12 274 259 0 24 275 260 1 6 276 261
1 18 277 262 2 0 278 263 2 12 279 264 2 24 280 265 3 6 281 266 3 18 282 267 4 0
283 268 4 12 284 269 4 24 285 270 5 6 286 271 5 18 287 272 5 29 288 Long
abiding. 273

Chap. III. The manner to set down perfectly the said figure verified.
HAving put to the point of the first House, the degree and minutes of the
Moon of the time of the conception, take the overthwart Ascensions of the said
degrees and minutes: take out afterward 90. degrees of the said Ascensions, and
add thereto 360. degrees, if otherwise the substraction cannot be made: that
which remains shall be the right Ascensions of the highest point of the
circle Meridian, the which search in the table of the right Ascensions, in the
book of Alphonce, or of John de Regiomonte, etc. and put to the point of the
(...) house, the degrees and minutes of the sign you find, answering to the
right number of the said right ascensions. The point of the fourth is always
against the sign and degree of the tenth: likewise the point of the seventh,
to the point of the first. The other houses sufficed, take the Ephemerides,
because they do not desire exact calculation, seeing that the most part of the
Astrologians, desire more to take of the equal portion of the eclipse, than of
the horizontall sect.

For to know the exact hour of the said figure, verify first the said right
ascensions of the Meridian, and take from them the right ascensions of the
Sun; that which remains turn into hours and minutes, giving to 15.
degrees one hour, to every degree four minutes of an hour, etc. as we have
said before. At this hour you must newly count the moving of the Moon, and of
the Sun, and of the other Planets: and upon this figure you must ground the
parts and judgments Astronomicall.

Chap. IV. Of the parts of Nativities.
AFter you have well sought the Planets in the said figure verified, you must
consider their above certain proportions of the Planets, and parts of the
heaven, taken of their distances, as follows.

The parts concerning the significations of the first House.
The part of the quality of the life, is taken by the distance of Jupiter from
Saturn, counting as much (...) from the ascendant, as when the Nativitie is by
day: for when it is by night, they take it to the contrary, the distance of
Saturn unto Jupiter, following the natural order of the signs, counting
likewise as much space since the ascendant.

The part of life by day and by night, is taken of the degree of the precedent
conjunction, or opposition of the (...) unto the (...) counting from the
ascendant.

The part of the Spirit (many do call the part of earthly things and secrets,
the other, the part of things to come, the others, the part of the Sun) in the
day, from the Moon unto the Sun; from the ascendant, in the night to the
contrary.

The part of the understanding, by the day, is from Mercury unto Mars, from the
ascendant, at night to the contrary.

Of the second House.
The part of Fortune by the day, is from the Sun unto the Moon, from the
ascendant, at night to the contrary. Ptolomy does take it as much by day as by
night, from the Sun unto the Moon.

The part of the goods as well by day as by night, is from the Lord of the
second house, unto the said second house, taken upon the quality of the
Eclipse, from the ascendant.

Of the third.
The part of brothers by the day, is from Saturn unto Jupiter, from the
ascendant, at night to the contrary.

The part of the love of brethren, by the day, is from the Sun unto Saturn,
from the ascendant, at night to the contrary. If Saturn be under the beams of
the Sun, take Jupiter in his place.

Of the fourth.
The part of father, by the day, is from the Sun unto Saturn, from the
ascendant, at night to the contrary. This same is like the love of brethren:
then if Saturn be underneath the beams of the Sun, in his place take Jupiter.

The part of inheritances and possessions, by day and by night, is from Saturn
to the Moon, from the ascendant.

The part of fortune in tillage and sowing, by day, and by night is from Venus
unto Saturn, from the ascendant.

Of the fifth.
The part of Infants, is as the part of the quality of the life.

The part of male children by day and by nighe is from the Moon unto Jupiter,
and is numbered from the ascendant.

The part of daughters, by day and by night, is from the Moon unto Venus, and
is taken from the ascendant.

Of the sixth.
The part of diseases inseparable, in the day, is the distance of Saturn unto
Mars, and it is cast from the degree ascendant, and in the night from Mars,
which is contrary.

The part of servants, by day and by night, from Mercury unto the Moon is from
the ascendant.

The part of prison and captivity, by day, from the Lord of the place of the
Sun, unto the Sun, and is reckoned from the ascendant. By night, from the
Lord of the place of the Moon, unto the Moon.

If the Sun by day, or the Moon by night, be in their proper houses or
exaltations, they shall be signifiers of this part.

Of the seventh.
The part of the marriage of men, by day, and by night, from the Sun unto
Venus, is from the ascendant.

The part of the marriage of women, by day and by night, from Venus to Saturn,
is from the ascendant.

The part of marriage common to men, and to women, by day, and by night, is
from Venus unto the point of the seventh house, accounting from the ascendant.

The part of kindred, by day and by night, from Saturn unto Venus, is from the
ascendant.

The part of discord and agreement, by day, is from Mars to Jupiter from the
ascendant: by night to the contrary.

Of the eighth.
The part of death, by day and by night, from the Moon unto the degree of the
eight house, taken upon the equality of the Eclipse, accounting from the place
of Saturn.

The part of the mortal Planet by day, is from the Lord of the ascendant, unto
the Moon, from the ascendant, by night to the contrary.

The part of the perilous year of death, or poverty, or of any other
misfortune by day, and by night, is from Saturn unto the Lord of the foresaid
conjunction, or opposition of the light, from the ascendant.

The part of all envies, by day, is from Saturn unto Mars, by night to the
contrary, accounting from the place of Mercury.

Of the ninth.
The part of faith, and of religion by day, is from the Moon unto Mercury,
from the ascendant by night to the contrary.

The part of ways by land, by day, and by night, is from the Lord of the ninth
unto the ninth, taken upon the equality of the Eclipse, from the ascendant.

The part of travel by water by day, is from Saturn unto the fifteenth degree
of Cancer, from the ascendant, at night to the contrary.

If Saturn do meet in the said fifteenth degree of Cancer, he shall be
signifier of this part, with the ascendant.

Of the tenth.
The part of Nobility by day, is from the Sun unto the nineteenth degree of
Aries, accounting from the Ascendant, by night, from the Moon unto the third
degree of Taurus. If the Moon by night be in the said degree of Taurus, or the
Sun by day, in the said degree of Aries, they shall be signifiers of the said
part.

The part of government by day, is from Mars unto the Moon from the ascendant,
by night to the contrary.

The part of Magistrates, as the part of the understanding, written upon the
first house.

The part of conquest and victory, as the part of father.

The part of sudden advancement, by day, is from Saturn unto the part of
fortune, from the ascendant, by night to the contrary; If Saturn be burned,
take in his place Jupiter.

The part of estimation, by day, and by night, is from Mercury unto the Sun,
accounting from the ascendant.

The part of governments, and feats of war, by day, is from Mars unto
Saturn, from the ascendant, by night to the contrary.

The part of the profession and action, by day and by night, is from Saturn
unto the Moon, from the ascendant.

The part of honor proceeding of the profession, by day and by night, is from
the degree of the Sun, unto the degree of the tenth house, from the ascendant.

The part of the industry of the hands, by day, is from Mercury to Venus, from
the ascendant, by night to the contrary.

The part of the feat of Merchandise, by day, is from the part of the spirit,
unto the part of fortune, from the ascendant, by night to the contrary.

The part of felicity and profit, by day, is from the part of fortune unto
Jupiter, from the ascendant, by night, to the contrary.

The part of the mother, by day, is from Venus unto the Moon, from the
ascendant, by night to the contrary.

Of the eleventh.
The part of friends, by day and by night, is from Mercury to the Moon, from
the ascendant.

The part of praise, by day, is from Jupiter unto Venus, from the ascendant, by
night to the contrary.

The part of honorable companies, by day, is from the part of fortune unto the
Sun, from the ascendant, by night to the contrary.

Of the twelfth.
The part of enemies by day, and by night, is from the Lord of the 12. house,
unto the said 12. taken upon the equality of the Eclipse, from the ascendant.

The second part of enemies, as the part of diseases inseparable, written in
the sixth house.

The part of pain, travel, and affliction, by day and by night, is from the
part of the spirit, unto the part of fortune.

Chap. V. Of the latitudes and aspects of the Planets.
HAving applied the planets in the said figure, and ordained as we have said
in the former Chapter, the parts proceeding of the proportions of the said
Planets, you must consequently draw out of the Ephemerides their latitudes, and
put apart all the aspects which is among them, and toward the said parts and
12. houses; also the radiations, after the last proposition of the book of
Directions of John de Regiomonte: upon the which note, that the aspects
opposites have always diverse latitudes to them of their Planets, although they
keep the same number. As if Saturn had two degrees of latitude
septentrionall, his opposition has two degrees of latitudes meridionall. The
quadrant aspect has no latitude, for it falls always upon the Eclipse.

The Trine aspect retains the half of the number of the latitude, in
contrary part: for if a Planet have one degree of latitude Meridionall, his
trine shall have thirty minutes of latitude septentrionall. The Sextile
retains the same side, with the half of the number. You must also note, that
these aspects of Saturn, and of Jupiter, do not extend but unto nine degrees,
or for the most longest unto twelve: those of Mars unto eight, or for the most
part to ten. The Sun extends his beams to 15. degrees; Venus and Mercury
almost to eight. The Moon unto twelve, the head and tail of the Dragon,
likewise extend their forces unto twelve degrees.

Moreover it is to be noted, that the opposition is a plain aspect, and
perfect enmity: the quadrate of less enmity: the trine of perfect love: the
Sextile of imperfect love. That which always receives exception in Jupiter
and Venus, (of the which opposites, and quadrate aspects) profit the Sun and
the Moon with reception, or without reception, and to others also with
reception.

Chap. VI. Of the fortunes and infortunes of the Planets, and parts of Heaven.
AFter this you must consider the forces and weakness of the Planets, parts
and houses, and conferring the ones significations with the other, you must
collect the fortunes and infortunes of every place, as follows.

Here follows the infortunes.
The planets and other places of the Heaven, be called unfortunate, when they
be burned under the beams of the Sun. Burnings are called Saturn and
Jupiter, when between them and the Sun, they have less than twelve degrees.
Mars when he is burned of the Sun, has at the least 11. degrees and a half.
Venus and Mercury, when they be near the Sun 11. degrees. The Moon when she
is not burned, by 13. And yet you find other terms, when you will take a
Planet for to give the years. Then the three superiors are esteemed burnt,
because they are near the Sun by 15* degrees, and if they be occidentall.
For when they be oriental unto ten degrees, they are burnt from the 10. unto
15 under the beams. Venus and Mercury occidentall, near to the Sun by
seven degrees, or oriental by five, be burned, from thence unto twelve under
the beams. The Moon near by twelve degrees is burnt, from thence unto 15.
under the beams. And you must note, that the said accidents are not hurtful
when they fall in the signs of Aries, and of the Lion.

Unfortunate also are the Planets, when they go backward, and when they be
joined with Saturn, or with Mars: or when they receive evil aspects of them.

When they are joined with any fixed Star of violent nature.

When they are in their detriments or fallings (that is to say) in places
opposite to their houses or exaltations.

When they are in their declining houses.

When they are first standers, (that is to say) when they be in the degree and
Minute, wherein incontinently they begin to go backward.

When they are in the way of burning, which begin at the 19. degree of Libra,
and end in the third degree of Scorpio.

When they be with the tail of the Dragon.

When they are joined with a backward Planet, or otherwise unfortunate.

When they are Peregrines, without being received. They are called Perigrines,
when they have no dignity or place where they be. Of the reception we will
speak afterward.

When they be Meridionall discendants.

When any of the three superiors are occidentall, or Venus and Mercury
oriental, when they be in evil aspects of the Sun.

When they do not regard any other Planet.

When they be opposites to the Lord of the sign where they be.

When they be set, (that is to say) between two evil Planets, although they
have 30. degrees of distance.

When they be in evil houses or terms.

When they be in the twelfth sign of their principal houses.

When they be under the Horizon in the day, or above the Horizon in the night:
if they be Diurnes, as Saturn, Jupiter, and the Sun.

When they be above the Horizon, in the day, and beneath at night. If they be
Nocturnes, as Mars, Venus, Mercury, and the Moon.

When they be in signs and degrees feminine, they be masculines, or in signs
and degrees masculine, they be feminines. Feminines are Venus and the Moon,
Mercury and Androgine, the other are masculines.

When they be in degrees which are called Azemenae, or in degrees stinking,
dark, or smoakie. That which is marked in the Ephemerides, in the Table of the
dignities of the Planets.

Infortunes particular to the Moon.
When she decreaseth.

When she is within the eight house, out of her principal dignities.

When she is within the seventh, and that as to the life. And as for any
other significations, she is not unfortunate in the seventh.

When she is in the 19. degree of a sign.

When she is slack in her course, (that is to understand) when she goes in
twenty four hours, less than thirteen degrees and 11. minutes.

The fortunes of the Planets.
Fortunate be the Planets, and other places of Heaven, when they be in angles,
or at the lest in houses succeeding.

When they be in a good aspect of Jupiter, or of Venus, or at the least in
evil, with reception.

When they be joined to the Sun within sixteen minutes.

When they be in a good aspect of the Sun, of the Moon, or of Mercury
fortunate.

When they be joined with any fixed star, of a loving nature.

When they be directs, or at the least in the second station, (that is to
understand) when they be in degree and minute, in the which begins
incontinently the direction.

When they be within their proper houses or exaltations.

When they be in their triplicities and terms together, or triplicity and face
together.

When they be in houses, wherein they naturally take pleasure, as Mercury in
the ascendant, the Moon in the third, Venus in the fifth, Mars in the sixth, the
Sun in the ninth, Jupiter in the eleventh, and Saturn in the twelfth.

When they be in any of their dignities, or if they be peregrines, when they be
received. Received, that is, the Planets, which receive aspect of him, which in
their place has at the least four dignities, the which reception is
fortunate, when she is made of a good aspect.

At all times the receptions of Jupiter and Venus be always favorable,
although they be not made of good aspects.

When they mount to the highest part of their Circles.

When they be Septentrionals, principally ascendants.

When any of the three Superiors is oriental, or Venus and Mercury
occidentall.

When they begin to go from the beams of the Sun.

When they be in houses or terms of favorable planets.

When they be above the Horizon in the day, or under the Horizon in the night,
if they be Diurnes.

When they be under the Horizon in the day, or above the Horizon in the night,
if they be nocturnes.

When they are in signs and degrees masculine, they be masculine, or in signs
and degrees feminines, they be feminines.

When they be in degrees fortunate and clear degrees, which are called Lucides.

Particular fortunes of the Moon.
When she increases.

When she is within the house or exaltation of the Sun.

When she is very swift in her course, (that is to understand) when she goes
more than 13. degrees, and 11. minutes in 24. hours

Chap. VII. If the Child shall live or no.
ALl this above considered, you must first look, whether he that is borne, is
for life in this world or no. That which principally will show us the light of
the time, (that is to say, the Sun by day, and the Moon by night) are the
Lords of the triplicitie of him, and the ascendant with his Dominator.

When the Dominator of the ascendant shall be unfortunate, by the Lord of the
eight house, the child cannot live: and less, if the Lords of the triplicitie
of the temporal light be unfortunate.

When within the first house shall be any fixed star of violent nature, or
any ill fortune (that is to say, Saturn or Mars) without having at the least
four dignities, and the temporal light shall be unfortunate, the child shall
die quickly; if you find not any fixed star of amiable nature, or if Jupiter
and Venus, or the Sun, or the Moon do not communicate unto him their beams.
For if the aspects be of love, or of enmity with reception, the child shall
live.

If the Dominator of the ascendant be burnt, the child shall die before 9.
days be accomplished, and more sooner if he be burned within the eight house,
or in this estate, if he be joined with the Lord of the eighth. Except when he
is burned in his own house or exaltation, or within the house or exaltation of
the Sun.

When the Moon, being the temporal light, shall be unfortunate within the
first house, without any aspect of the fortunes, and without the conjunction of
any fixed stars of amiable nature, the hope of life shall not be great.

When the Moon shall be unfortunate within the fourth house, and he that has
the misfortune, shall be also unfortunate, and out of his principal dignities,
the infant cannot live, and the mother shall be in great danger of death at her
deliverance, and principally if the ascendant be the house or exaltation of the
Moon.

When the infortunes are conjoined within the eighth house, it signifies very
short life: except when Mars and Saturn be in Capricorn.

Many joint Planets within the first house, bring not good testimony of life,
although they be all fortunate.

When the Dominator of the ascendant, and the temporal light, and the Lords of
their triplicities be not altogether unfortunate, the child may easily live.

Chap. VIII. Of the giver of life, called of the Arabians Hyleg.
THe giver of life is taken out of the principal places of the Figure (that is
to say) of the Sun, of the Moon, and of the Ascendant, of the part of
fortune, and of the degree of the last conjunction, or opposition of lights;
the which having well noted, we consider first, if the nativity be diurnall or
nocturnall. For if she be diurne, we begin at the Sun, the which within the
first, tenth, or eleventh house, in a masculine or feminine sign, shall be fit
to give life, if it have any giver of time that does regard it: if it be in the
ninth, eighth, or seventh house, it may also be the giver of life, if it be in
a Masculine sign, and not in a feminine; in other places it cannot be the
giver of life, but by constraint. It is always necessary for such an act, that
the giver of time regard the giver of life, otherwise, the said giver of life
shall be as a person that has good will to do his friend good, and has not
wherewithal; and so when the Sun shall be without aspect of any giver of
time, you must leave it there, and go to the Moon, which may give the life
within the first house, in the sign Masculine or Feminine, and within the
tenth, eleventh, seventh, fourth, fifth, second, and third house, in signs
Feminines and not Masculines, receiving aspect of any giver of time. If the
Moon have not all the said conditions, you must come to the degree ascendant,
if the nativitie be conjunctionall, (Conjunctionall is said the nativity,
before the which lastly the lights have been conjoined) and if the said degree
receive aspect of the giver of time, he shall be giver of life: otherwise not.
Wherefore you must examine the part of Fortune, the which shall give life in
the Angles and houses succeeding, with the aspect of the giver of time,
otherwise you must come to the degree, to the which lastly the lights have
been conjoined: the which within the Angles or houses succeeding shall be
giver of life, if he receive aspect of his giver of time.

It is here necessary that the giver of time have dignity of house, or of
exaltation in places of the part of Fortune, and of the said degree
conjunctionall. By this order you must seek the giver of life, when the
nativitie is conjunctionall. When she is preventionall, (Preventionall is said,
before the which lastly the lights have been opposites) after you have
considered the Sun, and the Moon, you must consequently contemplate the
place of Fortune, more than the degree ascendant, and lastly the degree of the
oppositions of the lights, and see that it have two degrees in the opposition,
one of them of the Sun, and the other of the Moon. The Astrologians command to
consider it, that at the time of the opposition it has been in the first
house, or elsewhere above the Horizon.

When the Nativity is nocturnall, we follow the same order, (except that first
we consider the Moon, secondly the Sun, etc.) this giver of life, when
either by direction, or by profection, or by other way, meet any evil aspect
of the infortunes, or of the stars fixed of violent nature, or any of the
notable conjunctions, or Eclipses of the lights, it causes then some
sickness, and very suddenly brings death, when the fortunes do not
intermingle the favorable beams.

Chap. IX. Of the giver of years, called of the Arabians Alcocoden.
THe giver of time, or giver of years, is the same that has dignity of
house, exaltation, triplicity or term in the place where is the giver of life.
As if the Sun were in the 11. in the sign of Sagittarius (there where he may
be a giver of life) and Jupiter were in the sign of Aquarius, he shall regard
the Sun of the Sextile aspect, and look that he have dignity of the house in
the sign of the Sun, he shall be giver of years. It is then necessary,
that these two things concur together, to the end that one Planet be giver of
years, that is to say, that he has dignities nevertheless of term (for the
dignity of face is not sufficient enough for one so great effect) in sign and
degree, in the which shall be the giver of life, and that he regard the said
giver of life, of one aspect or other.

This giver of time, well lodged upon the point of Angles, gives him old
years, in point of the houses succeeding: is means, is Cadents, is smalnesse,
and for as much as he shall be long from the beginnings of the said houses, so
much the more or less he must diminish the number of his old years, means,
and smalnesse, after the difference taken of the next houses with the
difference of years. And first of all if it be within any angle of heaven, not
always to the first point, you must proceed also, and take in the first place
the distance of the said angle, and of the next house succeeding. Note
afterward, how many degrees the said giver of years is from the point of the
angle. Then take the difference of his old years, and means, multiply this
difference by the number of the said elongment, and part it by the distance of
the said angle, and of the house succeeding; that which rests take for the
exact number of the years of life, promised by the said giver of years. If he
be within any house, succeeding out of the points and beginnings of the same,
you must first take the distance of the house succeeding, and of the next
cadant: then note how many degrees the said giver of years shall beelonged
from the point of the said house succeeding; afterward take the difference of
years, means, and smalnesse, the which multiply by the second number, and
part it by the first: the residue shall be the time of life which was promised
by the said giver of years. If it be in Cadant houses it shall be upon the
points of them, or after, he gives but only small years: Except when he is
within 5. degrees near to the point of the said angles, and then you must
reckon as it follows. Take the difference of the old years, and smalnesse of
the Planets that gives the years, and divide them into 5. parts; afterward
look in which of the said 5. degrees shall be the said Planet. For if it be in
the first and most near the point of the angle, (that is to say) if he be
elonged from the said angle one degree only, then is it convenient to take out
of his old years, one of the said 5. parts: if he be elonged by 2. degrees,
you must take out 2. parts: if he be elonged 3. degrees, you must substract 3.
parts, etc. You must note that the Moon in the 8. gives but small years. And
that the Sun within the 9 and Jupiter in the 11. and Venus in the 5. and
Mercury by the whole ascendant, and the Moon in the 3. give their old years
as perfectly, as if they were upon the points of the angles: For they be places
wherein principally they do rejoice. Jupiter, Venus, and Mercury within the 9.
give their years indifferent: and the Moon in the 11. gives them old. Mars in
the 6. and Saturn in the 12. they are indifferent, because in the said places
they greatly deight themselves: wherefore if they were not evil, they would
there give old years.

Upon this purpose it is also convenient to note, that one burnt Planet cannot
be a giver of years: and the Moon in the prime of the beams of the Sun,
cannot give life nor time. If a Planet, which otherwise may be a giver of
years, be burnt in his proper house or exaltation, receiving there the Sun
causes the Sun to take the charge to be the giver of years. If it come to
pass that the Sun or the Moon be in their proper houses or exaltations,
they may be givers of life and time together, without need to desire aspect of
any other Planet. If one place being significator of life, have many givers of
years, we will take him that has most dignities in the same place, and if
they be equal in dignities, we will take him that has his aspect most whole,
and his beams most nearest the said giver of life. If they find two or three,
or many givers of life, that have their givers of years, they must always
consider and direct, as the first and principal, following the years of the
Planets.

Old years. Mean years. Small years. Of 57 43 30 Saturn. 79 45 12 Jupiter.
66 40 15 Mars. 120 69 19 Sol. 82 45 8 Venus. 76 48 20 Mercury. 108 66 25 Luna.

Chap. X. Of them that augment and diminish the number of the said years.
THey which augment the number of the said years, are Jupiter, Venus, the
Sun, the Moon, and Mercury fortified; the which fortunately regarding the
giver of years, with an amiable aspect adding to their small years, (that is
to understand) the Sun 10. and 9. Venus 8. the Moon 25. etc. Likewise, if
the giver of time be conjoined with any fixed star of amiable nature, it
takes of the said star the number of the small years of the Planet, of the
which the said star holds his nature. If the said planets regard the giver
of time with an evil aspect with reception, they add as before, which they do
not when they have no reception. Except Jupiter and Venus, that in every sort
of aspects, with reception or without reception, always adding to their small
years, for to see that the giver of time be not Saturn or Mars, toward the
which the reception is necessary, if the aspect be of enmity.

The said planets evil placed and unfortunate, in the place of the whole small
years, in adding the half, or the third, or fourth part, or certain number of
months, of weeks, or of days, according to the greatness or smalnesse of
their infelicity. The amiable aspects of ill fortune, with reception, give
their years small: without reception, they do neither good nor evil. If the
giver of years be retrograde or meridionall descending, or in his fall or
detriment, or in the way burned, that takes from it the fifth part of that
which he had given being otherwise disposed. That which happened also to the
3. superior Planets, when they be occidentall, and to the Moon when she
decreaseth, and when she is in the 20. and 9. degree of a sign, and when she
is slack in her course. The Sun rgarding the Moon with the aspects of
enmity without reception diminished. Saturn, Mars, or Mercury deprived,
looking to the evil aspect of the giver of light, they take away the number of
their small years: except they recover; for then by opposition they do but
half the evil: by quadrate aspect they diminish but the fourth part. The
tail of the Dragon taken from the Moon 12. years. I have found it often by
experience, that the fortunes (that is to understand, Jupiter and Venus) or the
Sun and the Moon, and Mercury fortunate in the first house, or near to the
giver of life, adding to their small years, although they do not regard the
giver of time: and to the contrary, that the infortunes in the said places,
take away the small years, without regarding the said giver of time. Except
when they were well honored in the said places, or when they were Lords of th
Nativities.

Chap. XI. Of the Lords of the Nativitie.
YOu must take the Lord of the Nativity out of the places of the which we have
taken the giver of life, (that is to understand) of the place of the Sun, and
of the Moon, of the degree ascendant of the part of Fortune, and of the
degrees of the precedent conjunction or opposition of lights. Of all these
places likewise it is to be considered what Planet has most dignities, for he
shall be Lord of the Nativity, that which the giver of years shall signify
the time of our life, according to the situation and felicity or infelicity,
as we have before said of the giver of years. And if the one give more than
the other, you must take the difference of both, and the half add or
diminish: according as shall be necessary.

6 The Signs. 5 The house of the Planets. 4 Exaltation. 3 The triplicitie of
the Planets. 2 The terms of the Planets. 1 The faces of the Planets. Perigren.
The hurts. The falls. D N P G G G G G G G G When the Planets have no dignities.
D 6 12 20 25 30 10 20 30 N 8 14 22 27 30 10 20 30 D 6 12 17 24 30 10 20 30 DN 7
13 19 26 30 10 20 30 DN 6 11 18 24 30 10 20 30 N 7 17 21 28 30 10 20 30 D 6 14
21 28 30 10 20 30 N 7 11 19 24 30 10 20 30 D 12 17 21 26 30 10 20 30 N 7 14 22
26 30 10 20 30 D 7 13 20 25 30 10 20 30 N 12 16 19 28 30 10 20 30

Chap. XII. Of the understanding and manners of a man.
HOw to know the felicity or infelicity of the spirit, and the nature of the
same, you must look in the place of Mercury and of the Moon, the Planet that
in these two places has most dignities, shall be signifier of the spirit. The
which if it be Saturn well disposed, shall signify the man of a great and
profound knowledge, of good counsel, and of good gravity, or a strong opinion:
close, secret, solitary, dissembling his good and evil, a lover of just men,
and of good age: rejoicing upon the treasures, heritages and labourings;
holding discourse of antiquities, and of great affairs, admirator of
buildings. Sometimes a little merry, incontinent, sad, sometimes laughing or
murmuring by himself alone, a little sloathfull, a little envious, and not
always keeping his promise. If he be unfortunate, he shall be noted envious,
sad, solitary, fearful, melancholy, faint-hearted, a railer, jealous, a
malefactor, evil, a blasphewer, a liar and deceiver, an-usurer, and holder of
opinions: rejecting the counsel of others: fearing that all the world does
deceive him: uncivil, a villain, a slovin, dishonest, flying the company of
men, unless it be to deceive them, and to draw any profit, having no other
friend but his villainous gain, using sometimes sorcery.

Jupiter signifier of the spirit, well disposed, shows the man sweet,
courteous, honest, gracious, amiable, faithful, pitiful, liberal, of good
behavior, of good heart and good love: following nobleness and all honesty:
loving God abounding in friends, dreaming always upon some virtuous thing, and
withdraws himself, sometimes solitary, to think upon some goodness: using in
all and by all his affairs, a great equity, prudence, and modesty, having
great courage to accomplish. If he be unfortunate of himself, and not to meet
with other stars in the place of good love, he will give sometimes
foolishness in the place of honesty, pride in the place of liberality,
prodigality in the place of loving good will, does yield him an hypocrite,
seeming to follow nobleness, when indeed he will dispraise all the world: in
the place of honesty, it will make him dream of tyranny.

If the said Jupiter be unfortunate of other Planets, and not of himself, he
takes all their vices, and covers them with his said virtues in manner of an
evil hypocrite. If Mars well fortunate be the said significator, he shall
cause the man to be of a high courage, hardy, irefull, furious, a hazarder,
conductor of wars, and the first in business, and only in deeds, and
cogitations given to arms: strong, stubborn and mighty, trusting too much to
his own puissance, not fearing any peril, and blessed in all his deeds. If he
be unfortunate, it makes the man timorous, a thief, a liar, blasphemer,
mutinous, cruel, a murderer, hardy, proud, arrogant, not to be borne withal,
despising his own proper goods, and the goods of other, using force and
violence against his Parents, and against all the world; a devilish man,
without shame, without counsel, without virtue, without love, without any
fear or reverence of God, furious, seditious, given and prompt to all
mischief.

If the Sun be significator in his good disposition, it makes the man
mannerly, wise, prudent, of good counsel, a lover of nobleness, following
glory, and honor, given to justice and governments of Towns and Cities,
loving hunting, worthy, and of great estimation. If it be unfortunate, it
shows great pride, excessive ambition, and tyranny, and does nourish the
thought.

If Venus signify the quality of the spirit, and good disposition, it makes
the man pleasant, merry, dancing, laughing content, amiable, gracious, of good
conversation, and a little jealous. If unfortunate, it makes the man frowning,
and too merry, of evil maintenance, using dishonest words, given to
voluptuousness, and jealous of that which belongs not unto him.

If Mercury be fortunate, it gives good understanding, good memory, great
perseverance, great subtlety of spirit, good discourse of reason, full of wit,
very apt to know the Mathematicals, and the secrets of nature; it makes the man
a Poet, an Orator, well spoken, writing well, and a great trader. If it be
evil disposed, it makes him presumptuous, of little knowledge, with great
estimation of his person, inconstant, a liar, a mocker, a deceiver ordinarily,
fine, fantastical, and vicious.

If it be the Moon that is fortunate, she makes him that is borne, pacified,
modest, of good heart, or good will, and easy to endure any thing that one
will do. unfortunate does show inconstancy, lightness of spirit, fainthearted,
prodigal, faithless. If the said fignifiers, are not greatly fortunate or
unfortunate, it is convenient to rebate the said significations good and
vicious, after the quality of their good and evil dispositions.

If any Planet be participant in the signification of the manners, or if it
have great communication of aspect with the principal significator, then
considering the vices and virtues of him, that (according to his good or evil
disposition) we do join them to him which gives the principal, as if Saturn
well disposed, be principal significator, and Mars unfortunate be participant,
or regard Saturn of one whole aspect with reception, then it is convenient to
mingle some little of the nature of Mars unfortunate, with the significations
of Saturn fortunate.

The Astrologians do advertise us, that if the Lord of the ascendant be well
placed, and the said significator of manners evil disposed, you must more
consider upon that which the Lord of the ascendant signifies, than upon that
which the said significator does promise. Moreover, they consider more
particularly, the place of Mercury, and of the Moon, and the aspect which they
receive. If Mercury be in the ascendant, it makes the man ingenious, and of
great and profound knowledge, a great Philosopher, a Mathematician, an Orator,
a Poet, a Divine; principally when he is in the place in the which Saturn has
at the least 4. dignities, or when he receives aspect of Saturn.

Mercury in the twelfth, receiving aspect of the Moon has very near as great
force for to give wit, and knowledge, as if he were in the first. And where
that Mercury is, if he regard the Moon, and both two, or the one, or the
other, regard the ascendant, or the Lord of the ascendant, this is sign of a
good and subtle spirit. And if Saturn, Jupiter and Mars, or other Planets, do
communicate to him their favorable beams, if they mingle their good virtues,
if they regard the evil aspect, they intermingle their vices: except Jupiter
and Venus, which of evil aspect do never anoy them, and less when he has
reception.

If the Sun be temporal light, it may signify the quality of the spirit
with the Moon, and Mercury in the form abovesaid. If Mercury be occidentall
within the house or exaltation of the Sun, having aspect of the Moon or of
the ascendant, or of his Lord, it is the sovereign sign of good and high
spirits, of men of all knowledge, given to great enterprises and virtues, as
Poets, Orators, Mathematicians, Counselors, Administrators of Commonweals,
and Governors of Realms: principally when he is fortunate in every angle of
Heaven.

Mercury within the seventh house fortunate, gives good understanding, and
ripe judgment: it makes the man subtle, watchful, and of Good counsel,
with great craft to govern his affairs. Mercury in the ninth or third house,
gives knowledge and contemplation. The part of the understanding of the spirit
with their Lords fortunate, signifies good spirits and good manners.

Mercury in the sign of Pisces, does not any way love learning: the contrary
happens, when he is in the figne of Virgo, and of Gemini, by all the places
of the sigure of Heaven. Saturn within the houses of Mercury, is always
contemplative: Mars, a little deceiver. Mercury within the houses of Saturn
fortunate, is always studious, within those of Mars, he is full of evil
words, and often false.

When the lights and significators of manners shall be oppressed with ill
fortunate, the child shall be of a very strange and perverse nature. The Moon
opposite to the Sun, makes him hate all men. If the Sun and the Moon with
the ascendant and his Lord, be all in feminine signs, the manners of him shall
be feminine, and he shall be a man of little heart. If they be in signs
masculine at the nativity of a woman, her deeds shall be manly, and she shall
be a woman of great enterprise.

If Venus be in the sign of the Lion, or under the beams of the Sun, or in
conjunction or other aspect of Mars, she makes that the man shall be suddenly
stricken in love. And if in that estate she be within the first or tenth house,
without any aspect of Jupiter, he shall be voluptuous without having shame; and
when she shall be in the sign of Scorpio, the aspect of Jupiter toward Venus,
gives always chastity and love of virtue.

Chap. XIII. Of riches and poverty.
FOr the riches and poverty, it is convenient first that you look to the
second house, for if she and her Lord be fortunate, we say that child shall be
rich, and if they be unfortunate, he shall be poor on that side. Then
afterward you must consider the part of Fortune, the which with his Lord well
disposed, promises great store of goods, without other witness. If they be
evil disposed, you must come to the part of goods the which with his Lord
fortunate enricheth, unfortunate gives nothing. Likewise you must judge of the
part of felicity and of his Lord. And that things which the other places
signify, you must always have recourse to the natural significator of
riches, which is Jupiter, the which well placed, and fortunate, gives goods in
abundance: principally if he be Lord of the Nativity, or Lord of the hour, or
of the ascendant, or of the second house, or of the part of fortune, or of the
part of goods, or of the part of felicity, or of temporal light, or of the
tenth house, otherwise he gives nothing.

When the abovesaid Significators shall be unfortunate, the child cannot be
rich, if the tenth house (of the which we will speak hereafter) do not promise
him some good luck. Men find also often by experience, that when a planet is
within his own house or exaltatio^, or in his joy, (without being unfortunate,
or else where environed with the fortunes or their beams) that he gives
goods, although he be not Significator of riches. If in the fourth house be his
Lord, or other fortunate Planet, he promises inheritances. If any fixed star
of the first or second greatness be joined to the temporal light, or to the
degree ascendant, or to the points of the other angles, or to other Planets in
the said places placed, she does raise the man of base estate, to great
authority, and honor: and if he be of the race of Princes, it will make him a
puissant Lord and King.

When a like planet shall be Lord of the ascendant, and of the second house,
the child shall be covetous of money and gain, as that which happens when
Capricorn is ascendant. When the Lord of the second house shall be within the
first, the goods come without labor. Likewise when the Lord of the second
house gives strength to the Lord of the ascendant. When the Lord of the
ascendant shall be in the second, the goods shall not come without travel; nor
when the Lord of the ascendant shall give strength to the Lord of the second.
Saturn, Mars, Mercury depraved, the Sun and the tail of the Dragon Lunary,
within the second, destroy the man, and disperse his goods: except when they
have at the least four dignities, or when they be received. When the Lord of
the ascendant shall regard with evil aspect the second house, or the part of
goods and of fortune, or their Lords, the child of his own proper will shall
disperse his goods. If the Lord of the ascendant be unfortunate in the second
house, the child shall be too large a giver, and prodigal. If any misfortune
have domination upon the ascendant, and in the second, the child shall be
destroyed by others, which shall destroy his goods, and rob him. When the said
significators of goods shall be unfortunate, the child shall be all his life in
pain and travel, without any advancement or profit.

Abraham Avenesre says, that if the Lord of the second be burnt, and Jupiter
evil disposed, that the child shall be always poor. And Hermes says, when
the Lord of the profession (of the which we shall speak in the 27. chap.)
shall be burnt, or retrograde, or in the 6. or 12. house, and not any planet
regarding the Moon, the child shall seek his living from door to door like
a beggar. Jupiter, Venus, and the head of the Dragon in the second, always
enrich. Venus in the fifth promises some good. The Sun in the ninth
fortunate, gives benefices, or other goods of the side of the men of the
Church. Mars in the sixth well disposed, gives good or nourishment to Beasts,
and exercise of Physic. The Sun in the sign of Leo, will never suffer the
child to be poor.

Chap. XIV. By what means riches and poverty come.
HAving well noted the places which promise, and bring riches, in regarding the
situation of the said significators, we will know by what means ought to come
the good and the evil. For if the significator be in the first house received
and fortunate, it easily inricheth the person by his industry and proper
labor: and if he be in the said place unfortunate, it is that his industry,
and labor does profit him nothing; and the sooner from thence to loss and
damage.

If he be in the second house well disposed, it profits to talk with
Merchants, and lend merchandise and money, and of them make gain. And if he be
there evil disposed, the said business brings great damages. If he be
within the third house fortunate, it brings the goods from the side of
brothers and sisters, and cousins, and allies, or from the side of the men of
the Church in taking charg of their affairs: or to traffic here and there
about his Country. If he be in the 4. well placed, he is enriched of
inheritances, and goods of our fathers and predecessors, of laboring and
tilling of ground, of houses, and oftentimes does meet with treasure. If it be
within the fifth, it profits to be a good dancer, a good Player, to be brave,
gracious, pleasant and delightful, and sometimes to be voluptuous: always
well, because of Godfathers, and Godmothers, and of their proper children; or
because of gifts, or to make some voyage, and do some embassage. Those things
that come appertaining to bravery and voluptuousness, and making ready
delicates, odours and perfumes, of this house they very suddenly draw their
profit. If the said significator be in the sixth well placed, he shall make his
profit in nourishing, and buying and selling of sheep, muttons, and other
small beasts, or shall become rich by the diligence and faithfulness of his
servants, or shall gain by the exercise of Physic. The Gaolors, and others,
which have the charge of prisons, draw oftentimes their profit from this house.

If the significator be in the seventh fortunate, it promises great good of
the side of women, by marriages, or like agreements; and oftentimes to have
pleaded, and gained his suite in the law, or having been in the wars, and
pilled the enemies. If it be in the eight well disposed, it gives great dowry
and great good, because of women, and sometimes heritages, of the which he
shall not greatly think of. If it be in the ninth fortunate, he shall be
enriched of the goods of the Church, or by traffic and traveling in strange
Countries.

If it be well in the tenth, he shall have his profit of the side of Kings,
Princes and Lords, and be made of them governors of Towns, and honorable
Officers; or be enriched by their own vocation and profession.

If it be within the eleventh, in good disposition, he profits by reason of
friends, and by favor of men in authority.

If it be in the twelfth fortunate, it gives gain by nourishing, and selling
of horses, mares, oxen, kyne, cammels, and other great beasts: or to have
charge of prisoners: or of the persecution of enemies, with profitable victory
in the end; As oftentimes it happens to some, which accusing others, and
cannot prove the crimes intended, be condemned to make a good amends to the
party: after all which persecution, the party does find himself content.

Saturn by himself, enricheth by heritages and labors, nourishing of all
cattle, and with trading with ancient men, or with countrymen, mariners, and
other vild men: in corn, wines, oils, fish, oade, rosen, alum, leather,
tyles, stones, plaster, chalk, lyme, and such merchandise.

Jupiter, by offices, benefices, and business of men of the Church, and all
gains that are made without deceit. Except when he is unfortunate, for then
under the shadow of virtue, he does his affairs craftily.

Mars, by wars, suites, or thefts, or by slaughter, and selling of cattle:
or if it be in aspect of Venus, by physic.

The Sun by honorable offices, dignities and Lordships, by great credit, by
charges to keep and gather the money of Princes and Commonweals.

Venus by music, pleasure, grace and virtue, by bravery, by play, and
sometimes by voluptuousness, and sometime to serve some great Lady.

Mercury, to speak well and write well, and to be very skillful, to be a
Secretary, a Register, a Poet, an Orator, and a good advocate, to be a
Geometrician, Arithmetician, Astrologian, and a good trader. The Moon for
voyages, navigation, wandering, and trading in far Countries, to have the charge
of small affairs of the commonwealth.

If the said Significator be unfortunate in the same places, they bring damage
and interests, and if they be within the houses of Saturn, Jupiter or other
Planets, we judge the profit and interest after the nature of Saturn, Jupiter,
and other planets which shall be Lords of the same places.

Chap. XV. Of the time when the riches and damages shall come.
THe said riches shall come, when the Significators of good shall meet by
direction, in body, or in aspects of amity. As if Venus in some nativity
promise goods, they shall come when Venus by direction shall touch the place of
Jupiter, or the degree of the second house, or the part of fortune, or their
good aspects: Likewise you must judge of damages in goods. For when a
significator of damages, and interests does meet by direction a significator of
goods, or his aspects of enmity, then certainly comes the loss, and damage. As
when Saturn or Mars meet Jupiter in the part of fortune, the part of goods,
and other places which signify riches, the which also you must direct to the
said ill fortunes, or to their evil aspect signifying always some loss.

By the revolutions also you may know the time of good and evil fortune. For
when Jupiter in the nativity shall be in the sign Libra well disposed, always
and as many times, as you shall find him in the revolution in the sign, in the
same fortune, certainly he shall then bring the goods that he promised, at the
hour of the Nativity.

To the contrary, if he be unfortunate by Saturn or Mars in the Nativitie,
always, and as many times as he shall be in the revolution over against the
said unfortunators, then the said damage shall come in the sort, and manner as
was signified in the Nativitie.

If the significator of goods be Oriental, the goods come in youth, if it be
Occidentall, in age. If it be in the first house, he shall be rich in his first
age, if it be between the first and the tenth, upon the time of twenty, and
seven years. If it be in the tenth, between thirty, and five and thirty. If
it be between the tenth, and seventh, about forty and forty eight. If it be
in the seventh, he shall be rich in his old age. You must also look to the
three Lords of the triplicity, and to every significator of Goods. For the
first Lord signifies the first age, the second of the time of thirty of forty
years, the third the last age. Wherefore if the first Lord of the triplicitie
of one significator of riches be fortunate, the said goods signified shall come
at the first time: or if he be unfortunate, the damage then shall stick, by
this means you may apply the other Lords, to the ages following, and according
to the good or evil disposition you must judge of the fortune of every one.

Chap. XVI. Of Brethren.
MArs and Saturn within the third house out of their principal dignities and
not received, signifies that the child shall have no brother norsister. And if
they be in their principal dignities, or if they be fortunately received, they
may then give some brethren, but by reason of the which he shall always be in
sorrow, strife, and contentions. The tail of the Dragon or Lunaris, makes him
see the death of his brethren, when she is in the third house. That does the
Lord of the said house also, when he is in the tenth or eighth, and when he is
burned, or otherwise evilly disposed.

If in the ninth be any Planet well dignified; and the Lord of the third house
be unfortunate, his brethren shall dye before him, if he do not find in the
same house some favorable planet, or if the Lord of the said house be not
amiably regarded of fortunes.

Jupiter, the Sun, Venus, the head of the Dragon, the Moon, and Mercury,
fortunate in the third house, do give many brethren, happy, pacified and
fortunate. Mars regarding the said house, or his Lord of evil aspect,
signifies strife and debate among the brethren. That which signifies also the
Lord of the said house, in the 7. and 12. And Mars opposite to the ascendant,
or to the Lord of the ascendant, and to the temporal light, and when a like
planet is Lord of the 3. and 7. or 12. house. The part of the amity of
brethren with his Lord fortunate, signifies concord: unfortunate, discord
among brethren. The part of brethren, and the third house, with their Lords in
watery signs, denotes many brethren and sisters: and if they be fortunate,
they signify concord and good love together* unfortunate denotes the contrary.

Chap. XVII. Of the Father and Mother.
THe Lords of the fourth, and of the part of the Father, burnt out of their
proper houses and exaltations, signify that the Father cannot long live. The
ill fortunes within the 4. signify that the father shall die presently after,
if within the said house they be not dignified, or if the fortunes do not
enterlace their favorable beams: Likewise you must judge of the mother, when
the said Constellations shall be in the 10. The fortunes in the 4. signify
long life to the Father, and happy fortune: and likewise of the mother, when
they be within the 10. The Sun unfortunate within the 4. or 8. house,
testifies that the Father shall not live long: likewise you must judge of the
mother when the Moon shall be so disposed. If the Lord of the 4. be in the 11.
the child shall see the death of his Father. If the Lord of the 10. be in the
5. he shall see the death of his Mother. Venus or the Moon in the 4.
unfortunate, gives peril to the mother at her deliverance. The Lord of the 4.
in the 7. or 12. house, or in evil aspects of ill fortunes, signifies strife
and quarrels between the Father and the Son. Likewise you must judge of the
mother, when the Lord of the 10. shall be in the same disposition. The part of
the Father fortunate, denotes long and happy life to the Father: unfortunate,
he shall dye very quickly. The part of the mother signifies as much of the
mother, after her good or evil disposition.

Commonly the Astrologians have regard to the Sun and to Saturn for the
Father, and to Venus and the Moon for the mother; if the Nativity be by day,
they take the Sun for significator of the Father: if it be by night they take
Saturn, if the Sun be not in any angle of heaven: for if it be in the 1. or 4.
they prefer him always to Saturn. If the Sun be in the 1. in the nativitie
of the 1 child, the figure of the nativity of the Father and of the Sun shall
be both one. The significator of the Father, joined to the Fortunea, or
receiving their amiable aspects, denote good fortune and long life to the
Father: the contrary you must understand when they be unfortunate.

If the Lord of the ascendant, and the Lord of the 4. do look with an evil
aspect, the Son and the Father shall be in discord, principally if Mars
intermedle with his pernicious beams. For the mother you must look
principally to Venus, if the Nativity be by day: or to the Moon, if it be by
night. And after their good and evil dispositions, you must judge the good, or
contrary fortune of the mother.

Chap. XVIII. Of heritages and goods of the earth.
THe Fortunes, or other Planets fortunate, within the fourth or eighth house,
denotes inheritances, and possessions: the ill fortunes do deny or despise
them. Saturn, natural significator of heritages, lands, and possessions, well
disposed, does give great goods and lands, and makes the man happy in
laboring and tillage; That also signifies the significators of riches, when
they be well disposed within the houses of Saturn. And the part of heritages,
and the part of fortune in sowers and tillers when they be fortunate, with
their Lords. If the said significator be unfortunate, you must judge the
contrary.

When one self Planet is Lord of the first and fourth house, the child shall
have inheritances which shall enrich him, if the said Lord be fortunate: and if
he sell and disperse them, he is unfortunate. The Lord of the ascendant, or the
Moon within the fourth fortunate, and amiable by Jupiter or Venus regarded,
denote that he shall find some great sum of money under the earth,
principally, if Saturn cast his Trines or Sextile beams: or that of Mines of
gold and silver he shall be made rich.

The tail of the Dragon in the fourth, makes him to sell and disperse his
goods. That does also the head of the Dragon, when she is in a sign earthly or
watrish: in ^erie signs, or fiery, she gives great goods, and lands.

Chap. XIX. Of Children.
THe fortunes in the fist, give the children: the unfortunes deny them. Except
when they be in their proper house or exaltations, for then they give evil
children; that which they do also, when regarding the said house, or the Lord
of the same, with evil aspects. If the Lord of the first be burned, he gives
the children abortives, or which presently after their birth die. If the said
Lord be in the 12. he shall see the death of his children. If he be in the 7.
or 12. or if a like Planet be Lord of the 5. 7. or 12. he shall have suits and
questions with his children. The Lord of the ascendant, in evil aspect of the
Lord of the 5. denotes as much. Before you give judgment of the children, you
must consider the 10. and the 7. house, and the parts of children with their
Lords. The significators of the children in Masculine signs, signify Male
children; in feminines, denote daughters: Likewise you must judge when they be
coupled with planets, masculines, or feminines.

Chap. XX. Of Servants.
THe significations of servants must be taken of the place of Mars and Mercury,
of the sixth house of the part of servants, and of their Lords. The which
fortunate give faithful servants, unfortunate give them evil. When the Lord
of the ascendant, and the Lord of the sixth shall be in good aspect together to
the significators of riches, the child shall become rich by the industry, and
faithfulness of his servants. Likewise when the fortunes be within the sixth
house: to the contrary, when the significator of riches shall be unfortunate in
the sixth house, he shall be undone by his servants. Likewise when the ill
fortunes shall be in the said house. If the Lord of the 6. be in the 10. he
shall yield his servants more greater masters than himself. If the Lord of
the 6. house be in the sign of a humane figure, his servants shall bear him
reverence, and be at his commandment.

What kind of conditions every Planet does yield.
Fortunate.
Sad, and of a deep cogitation, secret, solitary, laboursome, painful; a
heaper of goods, patient, sparing, careful of his own preferment.

Unfortunate.
An abject. A fugitive. Base minded. A vile man. Negligent. Fearful. Sad or
pensive. Covetous. Envious. A Witch. Stubborn. A rogue. Suspicious.
Superstitious. A deceiver.

Fortunate.
A lover of God. Religious. Honest, and virtuous. Stout. Courageous. Just.
Upright. Authority. Modesty. Bountiful.

Unfortunate.
A lover of himself. High minded. Proud. Superstitious. Fearful.
Faint-hearted. Careless or negligent. Prodigal. Nothing so good as when he is
fortunate.

Fortunate.
Gentle. Manly-minded. Full of courage. Stout. Irefull. Earnest. Fearing no
danger. Patient. Delighting in wars and manly exercises.

Unfortunate.
Quarrelsome. Cruel. Angry. Tyrunnicall. Unjust. Unfaithful. A blood-shedder.
Theevish. A makebate. Hasty. or rash. A boaster. Very proud.

Fortunate.
Pleasant. Merry. Fair. Gentle of speech. Of comely jesture. Good. Merciful.
Given to pleasure both of body and mind. A lover of dainty and delicate things.

Unfortunate.
Womanish. Fearful. Weak of nature. Slothful. Lecherous. A slanderer. Not
caring for his good name. Given to filthy lust. Sodomiticall.

Fortunate.
Of an excellent wit. Studious. Of a quick capacity. Of a good and sound
judgment in every thing. Poetical. Grammatical. Mathematical. Finding out
many things untaught.

Unfortunate.
Unstable. Malicious. A liar, chiefly if he be with the Dragons tail. Privily
sowing deceit. A slaunderer. Forgetful. Foolish. Full of wicked counsel and
malice.

Thus may you gather the natural disposition of any man, either present or
absent: according to the nature of the Planets, as is above specified. As for
the lights, the from her to her does make their manners most apparent, from her
to her more obscure.

Chap. XXI. Of Diseases.
YOu must first of all consider the places of Saturn and of Mars, and of the
Lord of the sixth house. And according to the sign in the which they be, you
must judge the sickness to be in the place marked by the said sign. As if
Saturn were in the sign of Libra, it denotes that the sickness is in the
reins of the nature of Saturn; because that Libra is the sign that has
government over the reins, as shall be declared in the second Book. Likewise
you must judge of other significators, after the government of the sign in the
which they be.

The sickness and accidents coming by Saturn, Mars and other Planets, shall
be explained in the second book. Mars in the ascendant, gives always some
notable hurt upon the face, or upon the head, and often near the eyes, when he
is near the lights. Saturn in the first house, yields the man to be very
sad, and melancholy, and vexes the mind, causing horrible ill, and fearful
imaginations. The tail of the Dragon in the first, darkneth much the sight,
and often yields the men blind, when the Luminaries or the fortunes do not
intermingle their favorable beams. Saturn and Mars in the tenth, signify
sickness in the neck, in the seventh, in the buttockes: as Fistulaes, Emrods,
Ulcers, and hurts, etc. In the sixth, diseases in the feet: in the twelfth,
hurts, and griefs in the legs, as I have often tried. Saturn unfortunate,
signifies diseases in the parts appertaining to Saturn. Jupiter and the
other, signify as much, when they be evil disposed. Of the parts which belong
to the Planets we will speak of in the second Book.

They which have the Luminaries, or any of the principal places in the figure
unfortunate in the sign of Scorpio, are subject to the French Pox. The ill
fortunes in the sign of Gemini, give always some great and violent blows
upon the shoulders, legs and arms. The Moon unfortunate in the sign of
Aries signifies great pain in the head. Saturn and Mars joined to the
Luminaries, or to the Lord of the ascendant, trouble the sight, and spoil the
eyes with some blow. The Sun in the Nativities Diurnes, signifies the right
eye, the Moon the left: in the Nocturnes, to the contrary. If the degrees of
the first house, or the Luminaries be joined with any troublesome star, the
eyes shall be dark, and the sight troubled; likewise if they be in the signs
which the Astrologers call Azemenae, and filthy dregs, etc.

Saturn in the sixth house burned in a watery sign, denotes some form of
leprosy. Saturn in the ascendant, makes some notable deformity in the face,
when he is near the Moon. The ill fortunes and the Moon, and Venus in watery
signs, signify leprosy, ulcers, and cankers on the body, and villainous
spots in the face. Saturn in the ninth, and the Moon in the eight
unfortunate, denote trouble of mind and folly. Venus joined to Mercury
unfortunate by Saturn or Mars, without aspect of Jupiter, or of the Sun,
signify notable grief in the parts of generation. If Venus and Mercury be
under the beams of the Sun, they signify as much. Saturn with the Moon
burned, causes palsies and impostumes. Mercury unfortunate, gives always
some impediment in the tongue, and so does Saturn also, when he is unfortunate
in the temporal lights. The Sun unfortunate, denotes weakness of the
heart: principally when he is Lord of the 6. house, or Lord of the part of
sickness. The ill fortunes with the tail of the Dragon, cause loosnesse, and
the flixe of the belly. They that have the Sun, or Mars in the signs of
Aries or Gemini, be subject to the Stone. The retrogradation, and burning of
Saturn, and Jupiter, spoil the hearing and the teeth.

When the Moon, and Mercury do not look between them, and do not regard the
ascendant, nor the Lord of the ascendant, the child shall be troubled in his
understanding. The retrogradation of all the five planets, signifies the
falling sickness. The ill fortunes joined in the ascendant in evil aspects of
the Moon, or the Lord of the ascendant, denote entire folly. The part of
sicknesses with his Lord fortunate, preserves from sickness, unfortunate,
give many evils.

Chap. XXII. Of Marriage.
FOr the marriage you must look the seventh house and his Lord, the places of
Venus and the Moon in the Nativities of men, and in the places of the Sun
and of Mars in Nativities of women: and the parts of marriage, and the place of
Jupiter. If the said significators be fortunate, the marriage shall be happy,
if they be unfortunate, it shall be full of envies, reproaches and evils. If
some be fortunate, and some unfortunate by certain times, now happy, and then
unhappy, it shall be manifest. Many planets in the seventh house, give many
women: likewise when many planets regard the said house or his Lord. If Venus,
and the Lord of the seventh house be burned, or otherwise of Saturn
oppressed, the child shall never marry. Jupiter and Venus within the 6. or 8.
signifies that he shall marry a widow. Jupiter burned signifies as much.
Otherwise if Jupiter behold Venus, and the other significators of marriage, it
promises maids and virgins. If Venus or Jupiter, or the Lord of the seventh
house be joined to Saturn, or if Saturn be within the seventh house, the
woman shall have some note of infamy, (that is to understand) she shall be of a
strange religion, or shall be a bastard, or shall be of the race of Lepors, or
of some other, by whom the Parents have received some shame, or she shall be
deformed, and her Parents shall be of a very weak condition. Mars in the said
house, or beholding with evil aspect the Significators of marriage,
intermingle strife and contentions between the man and the wife: the same does
also Venus in the seventh or twelfth house.

Mars in the ninth, as much in the nativities of women as of men, denotes some
manner of separation of marriage. And Venus in the ninth, signifies that the
man shall hate his wife, not so much for the vice which he shall find in her,
but of a desire to be solitary. The Significators of marriage unfortunate, or
within the the houses Cadents, signifies the woman to be of a sinple race, or
the husband in the Nativitie of women.

If Venus and the Lord of the seventh house, join with the significators of
riches, beholding the Lord of the ascendant with an amiable aspect, she gives
much goods by reason of women. The significators of marriage within the third
or ninth, or else where Peregrines, signify that he shall marry out of his
Country. The fortunes within the seventh house, denote happy marriage, the ill
fortunes unhappy. The Lord of the seventh within the second, denotes that he
shall see the death of his wife. The significators of marriage occidentall,
witness that he shall marry late, or in his youth take a wife older than
himself. Oriental, denotes that he shall marry in his youth, or in his age
marry a young wife. Likewise you must judge of husbands in the nativity of
women.

Chap. XXIII. Of Dowry, and other Goods by the means of marriage.
BEcause the 8. house is succeeding to the 7. by good reason it signifies the
profit of the significations of the 7. (that is to say) of marriage. If then in
the eight there be any fortunate Planet, or any part fortunate, the child shall
have great dowry by his wife, and of that side shall meet with great
inheritances, and great goods. To the contrary, if Saturn and Mars be
unfortunate in the said house, he shall have small dowry, and the same shall
never be fully paid.

When the fortunes be in the said house unfortunate, he has hope of great
goods the which in the end he shall not enjoy. The Lord of the said place
unfortunate denotes as much; and if he be fortunate and coupled with the
significators of riches, it denotes great goods, and great profit on that
side. It happens well sometimes when the seventh house is fortunate, and the
eighth unfortunate. As that which signifies a little dowry, and desperation
of other goods toward his wife, and that always he shall be enriched by the
diligence, industry, and faithfulness of his wife.

Chap. XXIV. Of the death.
YOu must first consider if there be any Planet in the eight house, for it is
convenient to take it for Significator of the death. If within the said house
there be never a planet, take them for Significators that be in the seventh,
preferring him always that is best dignified. If within the seventh you find
none, draw the Significator of the death from these places which follow.

Of the ascendant, and of his Lord.

Of the eight house, and of his Lord.

Of the part of death, and of his Lord.

Of the eight sign, from the place of the Sun, and of his Lord.

Of the eight sign, from the Moon, and of his Lord.

Of the place of the first Lord of the triplicitie of the fourth angle.

Of the place of the Planet which has dignity of term, to the degree of the
seventh house.

The Planet which in all these places shall be most dignified, shall be
principal Significator of death.

If Saturn being in the eight or seventh house, or otherwise more dignified
in the abovesaid points of the figure, he is principal significator of the
death. If he be well disposed, it witnesses that the same party shall die of
the Dropsy, of some great stopping of the liver, and of the Spleen, or of a
quartane Fever, of the flixe of the belly, of Pthisicke, or of some burning
Fever, and of Impostumations of the ears, etc. If it be greatly unfortunate,
and together with the Lord of the ascendant, and the Luminaries temporally be
evil disposed, it denotes violent death by impostumes, Palsies, falling down
of humors, suffocations, over-flowne with water. When it is in watery Signs, by
some fall or ruin: when it is in earthly Signs, by great blows: for to be
hanged, when it is in ayerie signs.

If Jupiter be significator of the death, it denotes that he shall die of a
Plurisie, of a Squinance, or of some hot apostumations of the liver, or of the
lungs, or of other sicknesses coming of wind or of blood; and that if he be
fortunate. For when he is evil disposed and unfortunate, it makes him die by
the hand of justice, by the commandment of the Prince, by sentence of the
Judge, or of the Marshall, by overflowing in waters, to be whipped, and
scourged, by long imprisonment.

If it be Mars well disposed, by continual tertian Fevers, by flixe of blood,
by Carbuncles and pestilences, by impustumes coming of choleric matters,
burnings by too much using of women. If he be very evil disposed, it makes
him to be hanged and strangled, or smothered, or otherwise killed in his
be^^de, or on his horse. When he is an aierie sign or partaker within the
water, when he is a watery sign or fallen from on high, or of some ruinous
murderer. When he is a terrestrial, or burned: when he is a fiery sign:
principally if the Lord of the ascendant, and the luminaries temporally be
unfortunate by Mars. If it be the Sun well disposed, he shall die of some hot
disease. If it be unfortunate, by the commandment of the Prince, or by
sentence of the Judge, or he shall die among a great company of men, subject to
death, or in prison, or in a Dungeon, or in some other stinking and filthy
place. If it be Venus well disposed, he shall die of too much eating fruits, or
with too much continuing his voluptuousness, or of some Fistula, or Impostume.
If she be unfortunate, it denotes death by venom, principally when she is
burned, or joined to Saeurne, or of too much burning affection of love, or of
great griefs of the French pox. If it be Mercury fortunate, it makes him die
by sadness, by great apprehensions, by the yellow jaunders, by pthisicks, by
the burning Fever, or by too much watching. If he be greatly unfortunate, it
signifies that he shall die by madness, the falling sickness, by violent
coughs, with breaking in sunder the veins, by foolish melancholy, by
jealousy.

If it be the Moon well disposed, with too much eating moist meats, by
drinking water, by too much continuing his pleasure; If she be unfortunate, you
must consider the nature of him which is unfortunate. For if it be Mars he
shall die by fire, or by hurt: or by abortisement, if it be a woman. If it be
Saturn, by ruins, falls, pestilences, and like accidents.

Before concluding of what death the party shall die, you must consider the
disposition of the Lord of the ascendant, and of the Luminarie^ temporal: For
if they be well disposed, the death shall not be violent, although the
principal significator be greatly unfortunate. If the said Significator be
unfortunat^ tog^^her with the ^^^^^^ries temporal, or the Lord of the
ascendant evil disposed we esteem certainly that the death shall be violent,
if Jupiter or Venus do not intermingle their favorable beams, and then the
said person shall fall in great danger of the said violent death, and from the
which he shall always escape miraculously.

If one of the ill fortunes be in the sign of Cancer, and the other in the
sign of the Lion, the death shall be violent; Likewise if any of the said ill
fortunes be in the sign of the Lion, and the luminaries temporal, or the Lord
of the ascendant be unfortunate, and one of the ill fortunes be in the first
house, and the other in the seventh, or fourth, or one of them in the tenth,
and the other in the fourth.

The Sun or the Moon, or the Lord of the ascendant, joined with Mars, have
right in one fixed star, which the Astrologers call the head of Meduse, or
otherwise the head of the devil, makes him by the hand of the Executioner to
lose his head.

When the Sun, and the Moon, and Saturn, and Mars, occupy the 4. angles of
heaven, or at the least 3. the person shall die a horrible death: for he shall
lose his head, or be cut in 4. quarters, or be drawn with four horses:
principally, if in the said angles be the signs of Gemini, Pisces and
Aquarius. Mars in the ninth or eighth in the sign of Aquarius, or of Gemini,
opposite to the Moon, or the Lord of the ascendant, without good aspect of
fortunes, makes him perish by Sulpher or fire from heaven. Saturn in the the
twelfth, sixth, eight, or fourth house unfortunate, the Lord of the said houses
makes him die in prison, or else where in great pain and travel: principally
when the luminaries temporal, or the Lord of the ascendant be unfortunate in
any of the said houses.

The tail of the Dragon, being joined to the Significators of death, denote
poisons, venomes, and violent medicines, or ill applied, and flixe of the
belly. Mars within the fourth, eight, twelfth, or sixth unfortunate, their Lords
and the luminaries temporal, or the Lord of the ascendant, witness violent
death, by the shedding of blood or otherwise.

The Significators of death within the ninth or third house, signify that the
person shall die by the way, or in a strange Country: except they be in their
own proper houses or exaltations, for then he shall die in his house, and
bring his evil from the high ways. The said significators in their proper
houses or exaltations, make him die in his house, if they be Peregrines, they
make him die out of his house.

The Moon joined to a fixed star, named the Claire of the balance
meridionall, denotes violent death. That does she also when she is joined with
other stars that have the nature of the luminaries. Mars in the 8. house with
the head of the Dragon, makes him to be hanged and strangled. Many Planets
within the seventh house, make him die of some strange and terrible kind of
death. Saturn, Mars, and the head of the Dragon in the first, Venus and
Mercury with the tail in the seventh, make the body in a thousand pieces.

If the principal Significator be burned in his own proper house or
exaltation, without being otherwise unfortunate, it makes him die suddenly, of
some feeblenes, or other sudden and secret accident, without other violence.
The fortunes well disposed in the eight house, preserve him always from
violent death.

Chap. XXV. Of voyages by Land and by Sea.
Jupiter, Venus, the Sun and Mercury fortunate in the ninth house, denote
that he shall be happy in viages by Land and by Sea. Saturn and Mars signify
to the contrary; and principally Saturn does hinder the viages by water, and
Mars the ways by land. If within the ninth house there be never a planet, you
must consider the Moon, and the Lord of the ninth, and the parts of the ways
and viages by land and by water, with their Lords, the which fortunate, give
profitable navigations: unfortunate, denote the contrary. Likewise you must
judge of the third house and of his Lord when they be well or evil disposed.
The head of the Dragon in the ninth, favoreth greatly to the fortune of viages,
and the tail to the contrary.

Chap. XXVI. Of the constancy in his religion.
ALso as the head of the Dragon, the luminaries, and Mercury in the ninth house
well disposed, denote entire faith, and Constancy in his Religion, Saturn,
Mars, and the tail of the Dragon do hinder it. Saturn of his nature is most
inclined to the Law of the Jews: and Mars to the Law of the Turks and
Mahometists; the tail of the Dragon, causes him always to err from the
truth of the Law. The Lord of the ninth, and the part of the faith, with his
Dominator fortunate, yields a man constant in his faith: unfortunate makes
him variable.

If the part of the spirit be in the sign of the Lion at the birth of a
Christian, he shall be very constant in his religion, if the Sun be
fortunate: if he be unfortunate by Saturn, to go from his faith, and to
address it to that of the Jews. If he be unfortunate by Mars, it makes him
more to incline to the law of the Turks, and Mahometists. If the said part be
in the houses of Saturn at the nativity of a Jew, or in the houses of Mars at
the nativity of a Turk, they shall deny their Law: if the said Lords of the
said part be retrogrades, or otherwise ill disposed. Saturn in the ninth at
the nativity of a Jewe, does nothing diminish his faith. Saturn in the said
house when he is fortunate, signifies dreams to be true. Mars, and the tail
of the Dragon signify them vain and false. The other significators do assure
them to be true.

Chap. XXVII. Of the Action and Profession.
HOw to know of what profession the Child shall be, you must chiefly consider
if any Planet be in the tenth house, for he shall be Significator of the
profession: otherwise you must come to the part of Fortune, and to his Lord, to
the part of the profession, and to his Lord, to the tenth house, and to his
Lord, and to the places of Mars, Mercury, and Venus.

The Planet that upon these places shall have the most dignities, shall be
significator of the profession. The which if it be Saturn it shall signify a
Husbandman, a good housekeeper, a receiver of rents, and many times a
Governor of Towns, when he is in angles fortunate. Jupiter denotes the
Officers, Judges, Benefices, Prelates, Bishops, Governors of the goods of the
Church. Mars signifies Captains, Men of War, Coyners, Forgeours, and others
that use to work with fire and Iron: and Physicians when he is in the aspect of
Venus.

Sol represents Princes, Lords, Magistrates, Hunters, Treasurers, and
Archers. Venus Players, Dauncers, Perfumers, Apothecaries, and in aspect of
Mars Physicians. Mercury, Advocates, Notaries, Registers, Poets, Rymers,
Philosophers, Mathematicians, Diviners, Writers, Messengers and Traders.

The Moon, Ambassadors, Counselors, Consuls, Rulers of Commonwealth,
Travelers, Hunters. If there be Many Significators, or if the principal be
coupled with many Planets, you must mingle the significations of the one and of
the other, and of the said mixture, gather together the profession coming of
the concurrence of the stars. You must also consider in what house the said
Significators be, if they be within the second, the profession shall be of
feats of merchandise and traffiques: if within the third or ninth, of feats of
religion, or gathering the goods of the Church. If in angles, of Dominations,
and governments. If in the fifth of Embassages, legations, and other things of
pleasure. If in the sixth, of feats of diseases, of servants and of Cattle,
etc. If the part of the honor coming of the profession, be with his Lord
fortunate, the infant shall obtain great credit and honor because of his
profession. If they be unfortunate, if he do never so well, he shall never
gain to himself honor in the feats of his profession.

XXVIII. Of Dignities, Offices, and Honors.
FOr the dignities, offices, charges, and honors, you must have respect to the
tenth house, to the luminaries temporal, to the part of nobleness, to the
part of government, to the part of Magistrates, and others, appertaining to the
tenth house, with their Lords. The Planet that in the said places shall have
most dignities, shall be Significator of the said considerations in good or
evil, according to his good or evil disposition: particularly also you must
follow the said places one after another, to know of what side principally the
said dignities, offices and honors ought to come.

Saturn in the tenth house, or in the ascendant in nativities by day,
signifies great advancement and honor after thirty years, when he is not
evil disposed: in nativities by night, it denotes continual fear, to
receive damage of Princes and Kings. Mars in the said places in nativities by
night, signifies also great advancement, and by day more than Saturn.

The part of government, and his Lord within any of the angles, witness great
favor of Kings. Likewise you must judge of the other part that we have
deducted upon the tenth house. Mercury in the tenth well disposed and
fortunate, promises dignities, offices, and honors, by reason of knowledge.
Venus and the Moon because of women. Jupiter for his virtue. The Sun and the
head of the Dragon in the same house, denotes as much. The two Luminaries in
their houses or exaltations placed in the figure of heaven, do denote great
advancement and honor.

That which Jupiter does also when he receives the virtue of all the other
Planets, and communicates his own to Saturn and the Sun; and the fortunes,
and the luminaries, when they be in the angles of heaven. Many Planets in the
fourth house, denote great honor after death. If in the points of the angles
by any fixed star of the first or second greatness, or other having the nature
of luminaries, it is a sign of incredible advancement. That which happens
also when the said stars be joined to the luminaries temporal, or to the
part of Fortune, or to his Lord, or to the Planets and parts that be in the
angles.

They which have Saturn in the tenth burnt, or the Lord of the tenth burnt, or
be by Saturn oppressed, or that have the tail of the Dragon in the tenth,
receive commonly some form of dishonor, and often be deprived of their
estate, when the fortunes do not intermingle their favorable beams: except
when they be also unfortunate in their proper houses or exaltations, or in the
signs of Aries and the Lion.

You must note that Saturn and Mars hinder greatly the good fortunes, until
that the man has passed the number of years correspondent to the number of
the small years of the said Planets: and if they hinder any more time, it shall
be until that the man shall accomplish the number of years answering to the
number of degrees, of the overthwart ascensions of the sign, in the which they
shall be at the nativity.

Chap. XXIX. Of Companions and Friends.
YOu must for the Companions and Friends, have respect to Jupiter, the eleventh
house, the part of friends, the part of honorable companions. The Planet
having most dignities in the said places, shall be principal Significator of
friends: the which after his good or evil disposition shall denote honorable,
faithful, and profitable friends: or unprofitable, disloyal, and of base
condition. Jupiter and the Sun in the said house, signify honorable companies
and profitable: so does Venus, the Moon and Mercury also in the said place.
Saturn in the eleventh fortunate, witnesses grave friends, ancient, and
honorable. Mars, Men of war, Captains, and Lords.

Saturn or Mars in theeleventh out of their principal dignities, deprived of
the beams of the favorable Planets, signify some great suit against his
friends, or some great evil by reason of them: as it happens commonly to the
Answerers and Suerties. The parts of honorable companions and of praise, with
their Lords fortunate, signifies profit, and honor on the side of friends:
unfortunate denotes the contrary. The part of friends denotes as much.

The head of the Dragon in the eleventh house gives favor of friends: the
tail denotes a thousand mischiefs by reason of them.

XXX. Of Suites, and enemies.
THe fortunes in the seventh and twelfth house, give victories against
enemies, when they be in good aspect to the Lord of the ascendant. And commonly
those which have these 2. houses with their Lords fortunate, be happy in their
suites: the contrary you must judge, when they with their Lords be unfortunate.
The ill fortunes in the said places, signify much strifes and enemies. That
does also the parts of enemies, and of discord, and accord, whey they and their
Lords be evil disposed.

The Lord of the twelfth house fortunate, it denotes little puissance of
enemies: unfortunate denotes the contrary. If one of the two ill fortunes be
in the twelfth, and the other in the sixth, in evil aspect of the luminaries
temporal, or of the Lord of the ascendant, the child shall be killed by his
enemies. They which have Saturn, or Mars or the Moon opposite to the Sun in
the Sign of Cancer, be commonly contrary to all the world. Mars in any of the
four angles, ingendereth naturally strife, suites, debates and enmities
against all the world: except when he is in a good aspect of Jupiter and Venus.
For then he does expel his ire and anger against the vices, and of great
zeal maintains the right of every one.

The Lord of the ascendant, or the Moon, or the Sun unfortunate in the twelfth
house, denotes great persecutions and calamities of the enemies. The Lord of
the ascendant by the Lord of the twelfth oppressed, testifies that he shall
die by the hand of his enemies.

The Lord of the twelfth, and the Planets that be in the seventh and twelfth
house, signify the quality of enemies (that is to understand) the Sun
signifies the Princes, and great Lords, the Moon all the world, and Mars the
men of war, etc.

Chap. XXXI. Of Imprisonments, and Captivities.
THe Lord of the ascendant, or the Moon or the Sun greatly unfortunate in the
12. 6. 8. and 4. house, do signify imprisonments, and death within the
prisons, or in captivity: principally when they be burned out of their
principal dignities, and out of the signs of Aries, and the Lion, and when
they be oppressed by Saturn Lord of one of the said houses. Saturn and Mars
in the angles of Heaven, signify always some imprisonment: and principally
Saturn. Mercury in the angles under the beams of the Sun, receiving an
evil aspect of ill fortunes, signifies as much. If Mercury or the Lord of the
ascendant give his virtue to Saturn being in the 8 house, it signifies that
the child shall dwell long in prison and captivity.

If the Lord of the ascendant be in the 12. in a sign of a humane figure,
without aspects of fortunes or of luminaries, he shall be captive and a slave
in his youth. If the Lord of the 9. be burned in any of the angles of Heaven,
he shall be taken by the highways, and put in prison.

The parts of prison, and of pain, travel, and affliction with their Lords
burnt, or otherwise unfortunate, signifies imprisonment, and captivity. That
does also the unfortunes when they be well dignified in the said places.

The parts of all envies, and of the perilous year does signify as much, when
they with their Lords be greatly unfortunate.

The said parts with their Lords fortunate, preserves from prison, and from
captivity.

Chap. XXXII. Of Horses, Muttons, and other Beasts.
THe Fortunes, and Planets fortunate within the 6. and 12. house, yield the men
happy in horses, and nourishing of beasts. The Lords of the said houses
fortunate, and coupled with the significators of riches, signify as much.
Naturally the 6. house denotes Sheep, and Goats, and other small beasts, the
12. Horses, Oxen, Kine, Camels, and other great beasts. The ill fortunes within
the said houses, or the Lords of the said houses unfortutunate, signify loss
and damage of the said beasts.

Saturn and Mars in the 12. make the horses to fall with notable loss. The
which they do also when they be elsewhere in the sign of Sagittarius. The Lord
of the nativity in the 12. house in evil aspect of the Lord of the 12. makes
him fall from his horse in great peril of death, when the fortunes and
luminaries do not yield their amiable aspects.

If the 12. be of Sagittarius or the Lion, and the Lord of the ascendant, or
the Sun, or the Moon be unfortunate, he shall fall from his horse and die, if
the fortunes within the eight house do not hinder the evil.

The end of the first Book.
OF THE ASTRONOMICALL judgments upon the Nativities, containing particular
considerations.
The second Book.
Chap. I. Of the significations of the Planets.
Saturn having regard over the right part of Septentrion, over the earth, and
the water, over the melancholy, and sometimes over the phlegm, gross humors,
over the ears, the spleen, the bladder, the mawe, the sinews, and the bones.
And signifies pale men, or black, lean, pensive, solitary, fearful, raylers,
grave, contemplators, laborers, Masons, buyers of rents, Usurers, Carpenters,
Fishers, Merchants of oils, Leather, Fish, Tyles, stone, Allome, etc. Of
diseases it signifies leprousnesse, cankers, rottennes, quartane-fevers,
oppilations, dropsies, flixe of the belly, colic, burstnesse in the coddes,
misconception of women, the gout in the legs, gout in the wrists, Sciatica,
Deafness, the falling sickness, foolish melancholy, very difficult in
fetching breath, and others, ingendered of gross humors, or of wind, which
endure long. Of ages, oldnesse: of parts of the year, Autumn: of colors, the
black, clear, tawny, dark: of favors, the sharp and abstringent, pricking
with sharpnes: of days, the Saturday: of Regions, Bavieres, Saxony, Romanie,
Constance, and the first Clymate. Of particular places, caves, lakes, ponds,
close places, old and ruinous houses, solitary places, obscure deserts, and
stinking places.

Jupiter regarding the occident, the air, the blood with the vital spirits,
the lungs, the sides, the liver and the veins: and signifies men of good
stature, and full faced, bald, curled, white with a pleasant redness
intermingled, having the eyes indifferent great, the nostrils reasonable short,
the fore-teeth reasonable great, honest men, gracious, blessed, religious,
Abbots, Bishops, Prelates, officers, Judges, Magistrates. With copulations of
Saturn it signifies Negromancers; Enchaunters, Sorcerers. With Mars,
Physicians. With the Sun, appeasers of quarrels, cotroversies, and
disputations. With Venus, Musicians. With Mercury Mathematicians. With the
Moon, Geometricians, Geographers, and Hidrographers. Of Diseases, it
signifies burning Fevers, Quincies, Plurifies, Swellingr, Impustumes,
Phlegmes, and other coming of blood. Of ages, between age and youth. Of the
parts of the year, the Spring time. Of colors, as clear as a Sapphire, as
yellow as a Cittern, green, and a little drawing upon the red. O ffavours sweet
and amiable. Of days, the Thursday. Of Countries, Babylon, Persia, Hungary,
Spain, and the second Clymate. Of particular places, Churches, Palaces,
privileged places, clean, honest, and religious.

Mars looking toward the South, the fire, choleric humors, the rey nes, the
pain in the nostrils, the gaul, the genitories. He denotes men with red
faces, and the skin red, the face round, the eyes yellow, horrible to behold,
furiousmen, cruel, desperate, proud, seditious, soldiers, Captains, Smiths,
Colliers, Bakers, Alcumists, Armourers, Furnishers, Butchers, Chirurgions,
Barbars, Sargeants, and hangmen, according as they shall be well or evil
disposed.

With Saturn it commonly signifies Chirurgians. With Jupiter, Natural
Philosophers, and Physicians. With the Sun, healers of eyes. With Venus,
Barbars, and Sheremen. With Mercury, men of skill to let blood. With the Moon,
Tooth-drawers, and clensers of the ears. Of diseases, it denotes tertian
Fevers, and continual impediments, pestilences, megrams of the head,
carbunckles, ring-wormes, blisters, cholericks, and burnings, madness,
phrensies, issues of blood, vomiting of blood, choleric passions, the yellow
Jaunders, the bloody flixe, and others, coming of choleric humors and
burnings. Of ages, the flower of youth. Of the parts of the year, the Summer.

Of colors, red, flame-colour, sanguine, and drawing to an iron color. Of
savours, the bitter and sharp. Of the days, Tuesday. Of Regions, Getuly,
Lombardie, and the third Clymate. Of places particular, houses of Smiths,
Coyners of money, slaughters, furnices, all places dedicacated to fire, iron
and blood.

The Sun having domination over the East and South, over the fire, over the
pure blood, and over the vital spirits, over the eyes, over the brain, over
the heart. And it signifies wise men, prudent, discreet, covetous of glory,
and of honor: of an indifferent stature, brown of color, great bearded,
yellow eyed, the face marked, a great voice and very ill favored. Honorable
men, Officers, Magistrates, Lords, Princes, Kings, and governors of Countries,
and great hunters. And with Saturn, denotes principal Meaters, Renters, and
laborers honorable. With Jupiter, Beneficed men, Priors, Abbots, and
Prelates, or Judges and Officers of Justice. With Mars, Captains, and
Conductors of wars. With Venus, governors of the goods of Princes, and
Officers of the same. With Mercury, Counselors, Secretaries, Chauncellors.
With the Moon, Legates, Ambassadors, and honorable messengers.

Of diseases, hot rheumes upon the face, and upon the eyes, redness of the
face, tympanies, palpitation of the heart, dolor of the head coming of too
much blood, or with carrying long in the beams of the Sun. Of ages, youth.
The parts of the year, the beginning of Summer. Of colors, the yellow, the
clear red, color of Gold.

Of savors, sowrenes, and sweetness agreeably intermingled. Of days, Sunday. Of
Countries, Italy, Sicilia, Bohemia, and the 4. Clymate. Of particular places,
houses of Princes, Palaces, Theaters, and other large places excellent and
clear.

Venus Dominatrix over the right part of the East, upon the air and water,
upon the mixtion of phlegm, blood and spirits, and seed of generation. Upon
the reins, belly, navill, liver, back, and other parts dedicated to
generation. And signifies white men or brown, with some redness
intermingled: fair faced, pleasant looks, hawke nosed, full of hair joyful,
laughter, liberal, pleasers, dauncers, entertainers of women, players,
perfumers, Musicians, messengers of love. With Saturn, it signifies Preachers,
and others that sing, and joyfully assist at deceases and burialls. With
Jupiter, musicians, and others, which sing the praise of God in solemn hymns.
With Mars, trumpetters and drumslades in War. With Mercury, fingers of rymes
and Poetry. With the Moon, fingers of common songs. Of diseases, impostumes,
and of moist matters, fystulaes, imbecility of the stomach, of the reins, and
of the part of generation, folly coming by too much love, the French pox,
with the supporters, and other, coming of cold and moist matter, and of
venomes.

Of ages, young years: of parts of the year, the beginning of the
Springtime: of colors, the white, green, red, and a little yellow: of
savours, the sweet, delectable, and savourliest. Of days friday: of Regions,
Arabia, Austria, Sweecharlard, and the fifth Clymate. Of particular places,
near gardens, fountains, chambers well decked, halls hanged with Tapestry,
beds well adorned, and others, dedicated to plays, daunces, songs, and all
voluptuousness.

Mercury being chief over the Septentrion, over the water and earth, and of
the spirits of beasts, and over the confusion of humors. Over the hands, feet,
arms, shoulders, tongue, mouth, and teeth. And signifies men neither white
nor black: lean: of small stature: long fingered, long faced: high forheaded:
the nose straight and long: little beard: full of hair: the eyes little and
quick: subtle men: ingenious: unconstant: Rymers: Poets: Advocates: Orators:
Philosophers: South-sayers: Arithmeticians: Merchants: and busy fellows.

With Saturn Geometricians: Architects. With Jupiter, Lawyers: Canons: and
those that keep the Registers of the benefits of Churches and suits. With
Mars, Sargeants of the band, Archers of the Guard, etc. With the Sun, Masters
of the houses of Princes and great Lords: and their Secretaries and Stewards.
With Venus, Musicians: Apothecaries, and Perfumers. The Moon, travelers,
messengers, and traffiquers. Of diseases, vertigo, or turning of the head:
lightness of the brain: like to folly: foolish imaginations: lets of the
tongue: pthisickes: issues in the legs, feet and hands: and other, that have
causes hidden, and that come by certain times. Of ages, the time between seven
and fourteen years. Of the parts of the year, Autumn. Of colors, the
strangest, diverst, and mixtuous. Of savours, the strangest, and of new taste.
Of days, Wednesday. Of Countries, Egypt, Greece, England, Flaunders, Paris,
and the 6. Clymate. Of particular places, shops: fayres: common-markets:
schools: hals of Lawyers.

The Moon does govern over the right part of the West: over the water: over
the phlegm: sweatings: monthly flowers: and like superfluities. Over the
stomach: the belly: the brain: the lungs: the breast and the eyes. And
signifies men of fair stature, white, and the face round and spotted: the
eyes a little black, and a little lowering: long bearded: his eyebrows knit
together: amiable men, peaceable: Travelers: Pilgrims: Hunters: Ambassadors:
Legates: Consuls: Atturneyes: Benchers: Governors of Towns* principal in
deeds of policy.

With Saturn, it signifies Carters and vile Workers. With Jupiter,
Geometricians, and Geographers. With Mars, Drawers of teeth: Alchumists and
Blowers. With the Sun, honorable messengers. With Venus, Carriers of packs.
With Mercury, Poets, Rymers, Messengers, Travelers, and traffiquers. Of
diseases, gowts of the feet, and wrists: sciatica: dropsies: lethargy:
palsies: rheumes: shaking of the members: drowsy sicknesses: flixe of the
belly, vomitings: fistulaes: worms: and other causes of cold and moystnesse.
Of ages, the infancy: of the parts of the year, Winter: of colors, white:
yellow: green: of savours, the saltish: fresh: or without savor: of days,
Monday. Of Countries, Flaunders: Affricke: and the seventh Clymate. Of
particular places, fields: fountains: mountains: havens of the Sea: woods:
highways and desert places.

Chap. II. Of the significations of the twelve Signs.
ARies does govern over the heart of the Orient, over the fire, over the
choleric humors, and hot: over the beginning of the Spring: over the head,
the nose the face, the ears and the eyes. And signifies lean men, red
colored, flat nosed, choleric, strong, and right men of War, Captains,
Soldiers, Alchumists, and other martialists. Of diseases, it denotes
lithargie: madness: issues of blood: redness of the face: fill thinesse:
falls: hurts: and all sicknesses violent and continual.

Of colors, red, yellow, and sanguine color: Of savours, the sweet. Of
Countries, Britany: Almany: Inde: Juda: England: Naples: Florence: Favence:
Imole: Capne: Ferrara: Venice: Verone: Pavie: Cracony: Marsell: Saragosse; and
the third Clymate.

Of particular places, fields, pastures, houses of Forgers of money, and places
of blood, and justice.

Taurus governs over the left part of the meridies, over the earth, over the
melancholy humors, over the middle of the spring, over the neck, and throat.
And signifies little men, well fleshed, with great shoulders, great eyes,
large bellied, painful men, liberal, trusty, voluptuous, messengers of love,
dancers, players. Of sicknesses, the Kings evil, Caterches, Squinances, and
other sicknesses of the neck. Of Color, the green, and white. Of savors, the
sweet, with adstriction. Of Countries, the sea coasts of Asia the lesser,
Cyprus, Media, Campania, Rhetia, Sweathland, Lorrain, Bologne, Seen, Montory,
Tarrante, Parm, Panorm, Capne, Salerne, Verone, and the 6. Clymate. Of
particular places, Fields, Tillages, Vines, very near green, Gardens, and
other pleasant and odoriferous places.

Gemini governs over the right part of the Occident, over the air, over the
blood, and other end of the spring time; over the shoulders, arms, and hands.
And signifies men of middle stature, fair faced, and bodied, store of hair,
little eyes, laboring men, subtle, ingenious, prudent teachers, fraudulent,
Arithmeticians, Geometricians, Astrologians, Orators, Poets, Advocates,
Witches, Soothsayers, Busy fellows, Weavers. Of sicknesses, Phlegmes,
Foroncles, and others coming of blood in the said part. Of Colors, the
mixtures. Of Savor, the sweet. Of Countries, Hircany, Armeny, Montiane,
Syrenianque, Marmarique, Low Egypt, England, Sordign, Brabant, Flaunders,
Lombardie, Viterbie, Vercell, Norrenberge, Lovaine, Magonce, Brudges, London,
Paris, Cordube. Of particular places, Faires, Schools, Shops, places of high
mountains, places of hunting of birds, places garnished within with instruments
of Music.

Cancer governs the heart of the Septentrion, over the water, over the hollow
humors, and Phlegmatiques, over the breast, sides, and lungs, and over the
dugges, and stomach. And signifies amiable men, peaceable, modest, white, full
faced, the nose indifferent long, large shoulders, little bearded, slowthfull,
unconstant, and effeminate. Navigators, Strangers, Consuls, Atturnies, etc. Of
diseases, Lethurgie, Leprosy, darkness of the sight, galling of the skin, and
evil sicknesses, of the face and body. Of Colors, the white and yellow. Of
savours, the salt, and his contrary freshness. Of Countries, Bythinie,
Phrygia, Africa, Carthage, Scotland, the Kingdom of Grenade, the County of
Burgony, Prusie, Holland, Zeland, Constantinople, Thunis, Venice, Millain,
Genes, Luques, Pise, Treves, Madebourge, Berne. Of particular places, ponds,
lakes, rivers, the sea, and ports of the sea.

Leo governs the left part of the Orient, over the fire, over the choler,
over the heart, stomach, liver and back. And signifies fair men, straight,
the nose broad and little, great ears, with a little strong look, the face
brown, the body reddish, hairie, courageous and of great heart, Princes,
Officers, Magistrates, Governors, Kings. Of diseases, shaking of the heart,
swoundings. Of Colors, the yellow and red as gold. Of savors, the bitter, and
the strong. Of Countries, Italy, France, Apulie, Sicilia, Chaldea, Bohemia,
Rome, Ravenna, Prague, Ulme, Mantove, Cremone, Syracusa. Of particular places,
noble lands, Lordships, Castles, Towns, Palaces, and royal buildings.

Virgo governs over the right part of the Meridies, over the earth, over the
melancholy, over the guts, belly and diaphragme: And signifies men of
indifferent greatness, the body straight, the face fair, good voice, shining
hair, little eyes, prudent, learned, ingenious, covetous of glory and honor,
Scriveners, Arithmeticians, Geometricians, Boat-men. Of diseases, the collique,
(the disease which causes the patient to vomit his excrements at his mouth
called Iliaque) etc. Of Color the white, and purple: of savors the astringnt:
of countries, Greece, Achaia, Crete, Mesopotamia, Assyria, Cicilia, Athens,
Rodes, Alexandria, Jerusalem, Corinth, Tarrant, Benevent, Farrare, Pavia,
Basle, Paris, Lions, Tholose. Of particular places, faires, shops, schools,
and arable grounds.

Libra governs over the heart of the Occident, over the air, over the blood,
over the beginning of Autumn, and over the reins: and denotes simple men,
honorable, fair faced with whiteness over all the body, the eyes a little
troubled or spoiled, players, dancers, musicians, hunters, Judges. Of diseases,
suppression of the urine, issue of blood in the lower parts, stones in the
reins, and darkness of the eyes. Of colors, the green: of savours, sweet:
of Regions, Bactriane, Caspie, Thebes, Trogloditique, Ethiopia, Tuscia,
Austria, Savoy, Danphina. Gaiete, Plaisance, Argenton, Vienna in Austria,
Franckford, Spire, August, Arles, Lisbone. Of particular places, where suites
be judged upon, all high places and mountains bearing corn, grapes, or other
fruits.

Scorpio governs over the left part of the Septentrion: over the water: over
the phlegmatique humors, and aquosites, over the parts dedicated to generation.
And signifies men very deformed: broad breasted: the head deformed: great
speakers: bablers: mockers: liars: gluttons: voluptuous: traitors: spies:
poysonners. Of diseases, darkness of the eyes, scabs, scurses, cankers,
leprousnesse, falling of the hair, and deformed diseases in the face: and all
the body impoysoned by violence of medicines, etc. Of colors, the red, and
tawny. Of savours, salt and fresh. Of Regions, Syria, Cappadocia, the land of
the Moors, Catalogne, Bavaires, Trapezonce, Saxony, Padua, Urbin, Brixie,
Valence in Spain, Vienna in Danphinna. Of particular places, vineyards, and
gardens evil trimmed, desert places, stinking, infected, abounding in worms,
snakes, and scorpions, etc.

Sagittarius governs over the right part of the Orient, over the fire, over
choler, over the end of Autumn, over the thighs: and all superfluous parts; as
a sixth part of the finger, etc. And represents men of right and high
stature, the face yellow or reddish, the breast large, Cattes eyes, just men
and pitiful, and ceremonious, Judges, Magistrates, Prelates, beneficed men,
Merchants, Hunters. Of diseases, darkness of the eyes, falls from high places,
hurts by horses, agues and wounds. Of colors, clear, yellow. Of savours,
strong and sharp, with some sweetness intermingled. Of Countries, Tuscan,
Spain, Arabia the happy, Portugal, Hungary, Slavonia, Volterre, Mutine, Bude,
Casconia, Narbona, Avignon, Tolete. Of particular places, Gardens, Ways,
Mountains, or where men keep horses.

Capricorn governs over the heart of the meridies, over the earth,
melancholy, the knees, over the beginning of the Winter. And signifies little
stature, a little round head, the face brown, fair nose, fair eyes,
choleric, and sad, subtle, secret, prudent, painful, shepherds, fishers,
mariners, carpenters, buyers of Rents. Of diseases, scabs, gauls, infirmities
of the skin, hindrances of the hearing, of the voice, of the eyes, issues of
blood in the lower parts. Of colors black, and earthly. Of savours, the
bitter, and astringent. Of Regions, Macedonia, Thracia, India, Brandebourge,
Anchone, Favence, Torton, Ausburge, Constans, Gand, Malnies. Of particular
places, Gardens, Fountains, Rivers, Fields tilled, Land plowed, Prisoners,
Caves, Obscure places, deeps, and full of fumes and vapors.

Aquarius governs over the left part of the Occident, over the air, over the
blood, over the legs, over the middle of Winter. And signifies fair men,
fair, and somewhat long faced, and the face somewhat red, the breast or the
elbows marked, and men courteous, sociable, covetous, prudent, given to the
acts of Saturnines. Of diseases, quartane fevers, the black jaunders, etc. Of
colors, the green and dark yellow. Savours, sweet. Of Countries, Arabia,
Ethiopia, Sarmacia, Oxione, Tartaria, Denmark, Piamount, Mountferrat, Pisaure.
Of particular places, Lakes, Ponds, Close places, Caves, Sepulchers, and
infamous houses.

Pisces governs over the right part of the Septentrion, over the water,
phlegm, aquintes, and over the feet, and over the end of winter. And
signifies men of whitish color, delicate, fair foreheaded, fair breasted,
fair bearded, the eyes open and indifferent great, and indifferent sickly;
Fishers, and Navigators. Of diseases, gauls upon the skin, ulcers, and
deformed spots upon the skin, pain in the feet. Of colors, the green, white
and mixtures. Of savours, salt and fresh. Of Regions, Lydia, Lycia, Sicilia,
Pamphilia, Calabria, Normandy, Ratisbone, Roane, Compostella. Of particular
places, ports of the sea, heads of rivers, Ponds and watrish places.

Chap. III. Of that which the Planets signify in the said Signs.
Saturn in his signs of Capricorn, and Aquarius in Nativities by day gives
knowledge, and love of Noble men: and of credit and great riches, principally
in the Ascendant with the part of Fortune, and makes the man grave, prudent,
proud, and melancholy, and first of all his brethren, or most advanced. In
Nativities by night gives great pain and travel and many diseases. Jupiter
in the said sign, makes the man of little courage, unfortunate in the goods
of the Church, otherwise of small riches, or always poor.

Mars makes him bold, a great enterpriser of matters, and not in vain, and
makes him see the death of his brethren.

The Sun in the Nativity by day signifies that he shall be perfect and happy
in all his enterprises. In nativities by night, that he shall have unconstant
fortune.

Venus makes him an adulterer and effeminate, and denotes that his wives
shall not live long.

Mercury causes him to have impeachment in his tongue, and makes the man ill
spoken otherwise, and which haunteth the company of men of knowledge, and of
Religion.

The Moon makes the man too slothful, and one of evil estimation: and his
mother also, and signifies imbicillity of the eyes, and great coughs.

In the houses of Jupiter.
Saturn in the houses of Jupiter, which be Sagittarius and Pisces, makes the
man fair, rich, mighty and faithful in nativities by day: in nativities by
night, strife against men of authority, and near the death of his father.

Jupiter signifies riches, honor, great credit and offices.

Mars yields the men noble, governors in wars, and friends of Princes.

The Sun makes them beneficed men, Prelates, officers, and more advanced
than any of their family, they shall be always greatly covetous.

Venus gives them goods of the Church, or of the side of women, and makes
them discreet, honest, among the which they shall have great strife against
their parents, families and friends.

Mercury makes them just men, of good estimation, which by their proper virtue
shall come to the knowledge, and love of great Lords and Kings.

The Moon yields them chief and most honored among their friends: makes
them also covetous, sound, and of long life.

In the houses of Mars.
Saturn gives great anger, and cruel malice.

Jupiter makes the man happy, and a friend of great Lords, and a Conductor of
wars, principally in the sign of Aries.

Mars within his houses signifies Captains, Governors in war, and great
Lords.

The Sun, hot diseases, in the sign of Scorpio, in the sign of Aries great
advancement.

Venus denotes luxury, and all voluptuous villainy, but against nature, and
evil dealing to women. Always in the Sign of Aries she makes him hate
women, principally if the Moon be in the same sign, and if the Sun be in a
masculine sign.

Mercury makes the man a liar, an evil person, a deceiver, a babbler, and a
demander of unjust things: otherwise eloquent, subtle in his affairs,
diligent, suspicious, a negromancer, a little false, or a thief.

The Moon denotes evil companions, in peril of being drowned, and short end
by the sea.

In the house of the Sun.
Saturn in the sign of Leo, being a house of the Sun* signifies good
fortune, and long life to the father.

Jupiter makes the man wise: of good spirit: of good nature, amiable, which by
virtue shall come to the knowledge and love of great Kings and Princes.

Mars denotes violent death, great sicknesses, loss of goods, infirmities of
the eyes, and of the Stomach.

The Sun in his said house signifies great and incredible advancement, in
Angles or Houses succedent, when the Nativity is by day. When it is by night,
signifies sadness, envies, and a short end of the father.

Venus, great love, great covetousness, and impudent life, when Jupiter does
not regard her.

Mercury, good writers, men of knowledge, good memory, and of great counsel.

The Moon, honorable companions, and vivacitie of the spirit.

In the houses of Venus.
Saturn denotes impudent life, love of maids, and women of small discretion,
diseases by reason of lechery.

Jupiter, honorable companions, love of great Lords, profit by the side of
women, or Ecclesiastical goods, or coming by the men of the Church.

Mars, furious men, ravishers of women, shameless in their lechery, unto the
constrainings of their parents and friends.

In the sign of Taurus, makes the man, false and traiterous.

In the sign of Libra denotes some hurt by iron, or fire.

The Sun makes him eontemplati^e, just, interpreter of dreams, curious in the
secrets of nature, and a lover of pilgrimages.

Venus signifies joyfulnesse, great prosperity, happy in effecting his
enterprises, but he shall love women reprehended. Mercury gives many good, and
profitable friends: and yields the man pleasant, joyful, and a musician.

The Moon gives profit by women.

In the houses of Mercury.
Saturn makes the man very skillful, wise, and of great judgment, which has
envious men, pursuing him, an impediment in his speech, his anger violent.

Jupiter makes him also skillful, or a merchant, a man of good faith, and more
rich than his parents.

Mars, slowthfull, prudent, subtle, men of war.

Sagittarius, busy fellows, counterfeiters of letters, and forgers.

The Sun gives abundance of knowledge, as well in matters of judgments, as
in mathematickes.

Venus companies and love of men of the Church, otherwise she does yield them
very lecherous.

Mercury in his proper houses signifies men of all knowledge, Philosophers,
Mathematicians, Orators, Advocates, Poets, Rimers, Southsayers, and skillful in
knavery.

The Moon, good life and long, great understanding in affairs which he ^aketh
in hand, good fortune in merchandises, and in love of young maidens.

In the house of the Moon.
Saturn, great sickness, loss of goods, hurt in the eyes, voyages from the
which he shall never return, or very late with great pain.

Jupiter, love of honorable men, good renown and good fortune.

Mars, swiftness of spirit, rash, bold enterprisers, blindness of the eyes,
loss of goods by his mother.

The Sun, good renown, and if he be joined to the tail of the Dragon, or to
Saturn, or Mars, blindness of eyes, peril of drowning, frequenting voyages.

Venus signifies inconstancy, and shameless lechery.

Mercury, good will, chastity, fidelity, and happy fortune in deeds of
merchandise.

The Moon, holly, and profitable in voyages, Traffiques and merchandise when
she is fortunate, or when she is unfortunate, continual sicknesses, hurts in
the eyes, peril of death by land and water.

Chap. IV. Of the Aspects of the planets between them.
THe Conjunction of Saturn, and Jupiter gives fair possessions, farms,
rents, houses, and charges of the affairs of the King, profitable if Mars do
not behold them.

The conjunction of Saturn and Mars, signifies that the child shall be
trusted: but he shall not accomplish his enterprises without great difficulty,
and shall die sooner than his father and mother, and yet his brethren shall die
before him.

The conjunction of Saturn, and of the Sun, loss of patrimony, great
travel to get goods, and most in the nativities by night.

The conjunction of Saturn and Venus, denote that the man shall have no male
children, that he shall espouse some old woman, or some widow, or some of evil
condition, or a bastard: or other stain of his honor, or by the which his
parents have had some discredit.

The conjunction of Saturn and Mercury, does yield him a poor vagabond,
needy, of no mystery, the which has an impediment in his speech.

The conjunctions of Saturn and Luna, weakness of body, loss by the side of
his Parents.

The conjunction of Jupiter and Mars, signifies riches, rule, and government
of wars, and of good renown.

The conjunction of Jupiter and the Sun, poverty, and need if it be not
Oriental, for then it promises good fortune to the father, to him, and to his
children.

The conjunction of Jupiter and Venus, good institution, amity of honorable
men, and profit of them, and of the wife and children.

The conjunction of Jupiter and Mercury, signifies Lawyers, Secretaries, and
Chancellers.

The conjunction of Jupiter and the Moon great riches.

The conjunction of Mars and the Sun, loss of patrimony, damage of goods,
and short life to the father, and great peril of the child to be burnt.

The conjunction of Mars and Venus, suits, strifes, debates by reason of women,
adulterers with women of infamous condition.

The conjunction of Mars and Mercury, liars, deceivers, eloquent, diligent, and
bablers.

The conjunction of Mars and the Moon, short life, wounds, blows, danger of
violent death by iron or by fire, or by falls and ruins.

The conjunction of Sol and Venus, praise, good renown, favor of the common
people, especially of women.

The conjunction of Sol and Mercury, wisdom, science, great advancement, and
estimation to be very skillful.

The conjunction of the Sun, and of the Moon, short life, government, and
honorable company.

The conjunction of Venus and Mercury makes the man pleasant, joyful, a
player, a dancer, musician, well furnished, and brings him damage by the side
of women. If they be conjoined under the beams of the Sun, they make great
hinderance in the parts of generation.

The conjunction of Venus and the Moon, makes the man fair, pleasant, proud,
an adulterer: and of whom his wife is an adulteress, if Mars do cast his
beams without aspect of Jupiter.

The conjunction of Mercury and Luna, denotes good renown, science, and
unconstancie of manners and of fortune.


The trine aspect of Saturn and Jupiter, signifies inheritances, possessions,
fair houses, riches, meetings with treasures, great gains, when they be in
fortunate places of the figure.

The trine of Saturn and Mars, great advancement, dignities, great credit rule
and government of towns, and Countries, and death of brethren.

The trine of Saturn and the Sun, rule, offices, dignities, great renown,
in nativities by day: in the night it makes the dispersing of patrimony goods,
and afterward by his deeds and virtue shall recover and obtain more greater.

The trine of Saturn and Venus makes the man trusty, mild, honest,
shamefaced, of good conversation, of good renown, the which by men of base
condition shall be pursued with envy, and shall marry late.

The trine of Saturn and Mercury, makes the man prudent, subtle in all his
affairs, a man of good and great knowledge, ingenious, industrious, an
Arithmetician, Geometrician, Astrologian, and a Geographer, President in
matters of accounts and calculations: Chauncellors, Secretaries and Registers.

The trine of Saturn, and of the Moon, favor of great Lords and Kings,
glory, honor and government.

The trine of Jupiter and Mars, signifies audacity, honor, victory, favor of
Kings, government of towns, and great credit.

The trine of Jupiter and Sol being greatly favorable, to glory, honor,
government, credit, and gives great riches, fair possessions, and fair
children.

The trine of Jupiter and Venus, denotes beauty, grace, faithfulness,
honesty, and profit of wives and friends, dignities and inheritances by their
means.

The trine of Jupiter and Mercury, makes the man ingenious, subtle, forward,
of good judgment and advise, happy in his enterprises, a Judge, Officer, great
Lord, Secretary, well understanding the secrets of nature, and Astrology.

The trine of Jupiter with the Moon, signifies nobleness, honor, glory, good
renown, love of virtue, fidelity, principality and government.

The trine of Mars with the Sun, great advancement, great credit, dignities,
governments, administrations of Commonwealths, and conductors of wars.

The trine of Mars with Venus, gain, riches, goods of women, proud, arrogant,
brave and lecherous.

The trine of Mars and Mercury, prudent, crafty, subtle of spirit, and makes
the man to study secretly: a good Advocate, President in matters of account,
and rich.

The trine of Mars with Luna, makes him happy in all his affairs: President
in matters of account, an honorable Officer, and a great Lord, with great
renown.

The trine of the Sun with Venus, signifies the same that the trine of Mars
and Venus signifies, with great honor of the said significations.

The trine of the Sun with Mercury, and Luna, likewise as of Mars, with great
honor and profit.

The trine of Venus with Mercury, brave, pleasant, grave, beauty, and happy
enterprises with profit.

The trine of Venus and the Moon, beauty, grace, bravery, pride, and adultery.

The trine of Mercury with the Moon, makes the man greatly esteemed in his
profession: be it in music, painting, or other pleasant industry; or in all
knowledge, or in merchandise or office.


The Sextile aspects make the same effects which the trines make; except that
the Sextiles be not of so perfect virtue.


The Quadrate aspect of Saturn and Jupiter signifies loss of patrimoniall
goods, great adversities, hindrances in all enterprises, vain cogitations,
principally when Saturn is elevated over Jupiter, without receiving him.

The quadrate of Saturn and Mars signifies as much, and further makes known
the death of brethren.

The quadrate of Saturn and the Sun out of the said significations, brings
great damage to the honor, and spoyleth the body with cold diseases, and
contractions of the sinews; and makes the father die before the mother, and
yields the child not agreeable to his father.

The quadrate of Saturn with Venus, denotes loss of goods, poverty,
miserable fortune to women, uncivility, when Saturn holds the right part of
the aspect. For when Venus holds it, the child shall be shamefaced and of
good manners, and his wives shall love him effectually, although they dissemble
their love and will govern in the house.

The quadrate of Saturn and Mercury, makes the man laborious, a servant, of
poor counsel, deaf, or of ill hearing, stutting or evil spoken, pursued of
envy.

The quadrate of Saturn and of the Moon, makes the man slothful, sickly,
evil graced, full of care, without friends, a disperser of the goods of his
mother, and of his wives.

The quadrate of Jupiter and Mars, if Jupiter be mightiest, it signifies that
the child shall be esteemed, praised and honored of Princes, and Kings, and
that he shall have perseverance in all his enterprises with profit: always he
shall lose and disperse his inheritances and possessions, and shall see the
death, or destruction of his children. If Mars be most elevate, he signifies
suits, de^^^^^, and losses by means of great Lords, and a troublesome life.

The quadrate of Jupiter with the Sun, if Jupiter be the superior, honor,
profit, and good fortune to the Father. If the Sun be superior, the child
shall disperse his goods, and shall not be beloved of his neighbors; and shall
go out of his Country.

The quadrate of Jupiter and Venus, profit by women, faithfulness, honesty,
civility, when Jupiter is most highest. When he is inferior, lust, deceit by
women, inconstancy, joy incontinently turned into sadness, when Venus is not
received by Jupiter.

The quadrate of Jupiter and Mercury, signifies the man skillful, a
Mathematician, a Sorcerer, Sooth sayer, abounding in servants, very faithful
and very rich, principally when Mercury is received by Jupiter.

The quadrate of Jupiter and the Moon, of good renown, great honors, in
knowledge and love of great Lords, with a little unconstant of Fortune, and of
manners.

The quadrate of Mars with the Sun, signifies many evils, loss of goods,
darkness of the eyes, and in great danger of violent death, or public.

The quadrate of Mars with Venus, great troubles and tribulations by reason of
women of base condition, or impudent, and some ways defamed, when Mars is in a
moveable sign.

The quadrate of Mars with Mercury, weakness of all the body, prisons,
pursuits, accusations, false nature of the child, with malice and iniquity.

The quadrate of Mars with the Moon, signifies the Mother to be weak, and of
a very short life, and the child an evil boy, prodigal, unconstant, poor,
and which shall die miserably; and of the which, the wives shall be proud,
arrogant, and terrible.

The quadrate of the Sun and Venus, signifies that which the quadrate of
Jupiter and Venus signifies.

The quadrate of Sol and Mercury, signifies that which the quadrate of Jupiter
and Mercury signifies.

The quadrate of the Sun with the Moon, augmenteth the dignities and the
honors, and gives enviousnes.

The quadrate of Venus and Mercury, makes the man diligent, and industrious in
his office, and well renowned, but he shall receive some infamy by reason of
women.

The quadrate of Venus and Luna makes him very rich, and happy in his
profession, eloquent, gracious, very happy in wives and children: but he shall
have some loss of goods and honor by reason of women.

The quadrate of Mercury with Luna, makes him skillful, ingenious, unconstant
of manners, and of fortunes, which in a common sedition shall betaken, or shall
be accused by many of his conspirators.

The Opposition of Saturn and Jupiter, signifies great troubles, a thousand
mischiefs and tribulations, deprived of children. If Saturn be in the
ascendant, and Jupiter in the seventh house, the beginning of his life shall be
with pains, tribulations and torments, and the end with repose, profit, and
honor.

The opposition of Saturn and Mars without aspect of Jupiter and Venus, denote
great troubles, common seditions and conspirations against the said man: many
diseases intolerable, ruins, falls, perils by water, violent death, or
pestilence, and a miserable father.

The opposition of Saturn and Sol without aspect of Jupiter, makes the man
sickly, sad, full of thoughts, full of tribulations, with great loss of goods,
and danger of violent death.

The opposition of Saturn and Venus, makes him evil disposed, deprived of
beauty and of virtue, lecherous, infamous by reason of women.

The opposition of Saturn and Mercury, an imperfect speech, separation of
brethren, knowledge and science.

The opposition of Saturn and Luna, dispersion of his mothers goods, griefs
happening to the mother, troubles, and tribulations, with great danger of
violent death, according to the nature of the sign wherein Luna is.

The opposition of Jupiter and Mars, rashness, dispersion of goods, enemy to
them which have been friends, unconstant fortune.

The opposition of Jupiter and Sol, makes him disperse his Fathers goods, and
sell his offices and his honor.

The opposition of Jupiter and Venus, signifies unconstant friends,
ungratitude of them where he has done good; otherwise sufficient fortune.

The opposition of Jupiter and Mercury, common seditions, envies,
conspirations, strifes, suits, enmities of brethren, of the which he shall see
the death.

The opposition of Jupiter with Luna, sufficient fortune after long travel.

The opposition of Mars and of the Sun, spoil of the eyes, makes him to be
killed, or fall from on high, makes him disperse his patrimony, and his father
die quickly.

The opposition of Mars and Venus, yields the man voluptuous, and a little
vicious, weak, unconstant, and makes his wife and children to die in signs
tropiques, makes him marry wives of base condition, or otherwise defamed.

The opposition of Mars and Mercury, without aspect of Jupiter, makes the man
a falsifier, of evil conscience, accompanied with evil children, accused of
many crimes, for the which he shall be a fugitive or banished: principally if
Mercury be in the houses of Saturn.

The opposition of Mars and the Moon, signifies spoil of the eyes and the
body, by blows and hurts, and other sicknesses, and gives great adversities,
makes him hate marriage, and causes violent death, and often Canon:
principally when the Moon increases in the angles, with sufficient aspect of
fortunes.

The opposition of the Sun, of Venus and of Mercury, signify that which we
have said of Jupiter.

The opposition of the Sun, and of the Moon, changes the fortunes of goods
and honor, poverty after riches, dishonor after honor, weakness of body
after health, mutation of good to evil, and great unconstan^ie of manners.

The opposition of Venus and Mercury, envies, quarrels, enmities by reason of
women; otherwise grave eloquence, beauty and bravery.

The opposition of Venus with the Moon, unfortunate marriage, injuries by
women, deprivation of children.

The opposition of Mercury and of the Moon, conspirations against him, envies,
treasons, fear and lecherous.

Likewise you must regard the part of Fortune, the part of the Spirit, and of
their Aspects with the said Planets; you must judge as of the Aspects of the
Planets, with the Sun and the Moon. For if the part of fortune be part of the
Moon, and part of the Spirit, and part of the Sun, which would consider the
Aspects toward the other parts, and houses of heaven, he may judge as of the
Planets of the which the projections of the said parts shall be made, etc.

Chap. V. Of the significations of the twelve Houses.
THe first house signifies the life, nourishment, and disposition of the body,
of the spirit, and complexion, and represents the head, face, brain, ears,
and nose, and ^s called Horyscope angle, adorning and ascending.

The second house signifies goods, traffic, riches, gain, companies to get
profit and gain, men that help to gain. It signifies also gold and silver,
and all moveable goods, and is called, The house succedant to the Ascendant,
and beneath the earth, and reigns over the neck.

The third house denotes the brethren, sisters, cosins, and allies, and little
voyages, and the liver, and divinations of dreams, and is called, The house
cadant of the ascendant, otherwise goodnesse^ and has government over the
shoulders, legs, and arms.

The fourth house signifies the Fathers, and Parents possessions,
inheritances, houses, fields, orchards, vineyards, laboring, wood, and other
goods, and movables: treasures, and goods hidden, and mynerall matters,
prisons, and obscure places, and in the end all things; and that which comes
after death, as the grave and good report, etc. and is called, The angle of the
earth, and the depth thereof: and reigns over the breast and lungs.

The fifth house signifies infancy and daughters, nephews, gifts, presents,
pleasures, voluptuousness, ornaments, bravery, dancing, plays, banqueting,
messages, gold and silver, and the riches of the Father, the profit of
inheritances, possessions, tillage, and is called, The house succedant to the
fourth, and otherwise good fortune: and reigns over the heart and stomach.

The sixth house denotes servants, sickness, wild beasts, ryding, hunting of
and by dogs, sheep and muttons, goats and pulleine, and has some
signification over prisons, unjustice, and false accusations, and is called,
The house cadant of the fourth, and otherwise ill fortune, and has government
over the belly and bowels.

The seventh house denotes marriage, wives, suits, quarrels, strife, debate,
known enmity, and men appertaining to gain and profit, and signifies
agednesse, and strange places, and is called, The angle of the occident, and
reigns oves the reins.

The eighth house signifies sadness, envy, long torments, the quality of
death: dowry with wives, inheritance, and other benefits provided by parents,
and those that belong to gain, riches, of the which one has not greatly
thought, and is called, The house succedent to the angle occidentall, and
otherwise is entered on high, and governs the parts of generation.

The ninth, long viages, long pilgrimages and navigations, faith, religion,
sacrifices, ceremonies, science, wisdom, divination of dreams, prodigious
interpretations, new sects, paradoxes, signs of heaven, divine punishment, and
is called, The house Cadant of the angle occidentall, and otherwise, the house
of God, and governs the buttocks.

The tenth signifies honor, dignities, offices, magistrates, administratious,
government, rulers, conductors, good renown, estimation, profession, action,
and the mother: and is called, The middle and heart of heaven: the Meridian
point and angle Meridian. It gardeth and governs the knees.

The eleventh house signifies friends, companions, hope, confidence, favor,
help, succor, praise, estimation, and renown, counsel of friends: and is
called, The house succedent to the angle Meridionall, and otherwise called the
good angle, and governs the legs.

The twelfth house signifies hidden enemies, prison, captivity, bondage,
sadness, torment, complaint, lamentation, tears and hate, treasons,
villainies, horses, and great beasts of like and just proportion: and is called,
The house cadent of the angle Meridionall, and otherwise an evil spirit, and
governs the feet.

Chap. VI. Of the Lords of the Triplicities of the said houses.
THe first Lord of the Triplicitie of the first angle, denotes the nature and
life of the child, and his cogitations and will: that which he loves and
hates, and that which is to come, health or sickness: good or evil
entertainment, peril of his life in the first age. The second Lord of the
triplicity of the said angle, signifies force and strength of the body, and
the midst of the life. The third, the end of the life.

The first Lord of the triplicity of the second house, betokens riches; the
second, the manner of the same riches; the third, the intent and confidence in
getting.

The first Lord of the triplicity of the third house, denotes the most ancient
and first brethren, the second the middle, the third the least.

The first Lord of the fourth, denotes the Parents: the second, lands,
possessions, and houses: the third, imprisonment and end of things.

The first Lord of the fifth, denotes children: the second, love, pleasure,
grace, bravery: the third, messages, and embassages.

The first Lord of the sixth house denotes sickness, trouble: the second,
servants: the third, cattle, prison, and the profit of the significations of
the said house.

The first of the seventh house, women: the second, strife and suit: the third,
division.

The first Lord of the eight house, death: the second, antiquity: the third,
inheritance.

The first Lord of the ninth house, denotes pilgrimages, long viages,
navigations: the second, faith, religion, and devotion: the third, science,
divination, dreams, prophecies, sorts of cross, and prodigal sects.

The first of the tenth denotes profession, honor, dignity, and
advancements: the second, audacitie, and the means to work in his profession:
and the third, preservation in such fortune.

The first of the eleventh house, denotes constancy, hope: the second,
friends: the third, the profit of the eleventh house.

The first of the twelfth house, denotes enemies: the second, pain and
travel: the third, beasts of like proportion, and other that be appointed to
charge and labor.

Chap. VII. What the Planets signify in the twelve houses.
IN the first house, Saturn out of his principal dignities, signifies that
the child shall have short life, unfortunate, deformed, evil favored: and
shall die because of other lands and possessions: nevertheless he shall be
first of his brethren.

Jupiter in the said house signifies long life, good fortune, beauty, honesty,
love of virtue, fear of God, honor, and favor, and makes him the first of
his brethren.

Mars in the said place signifies hurt always in the head or face, and makes
him dispend a part of his goods, and makes him intermedle in many discords,
and contentions: if he be in his house or exaltation, it makes him a mighty,
and valiant man, hardy, fortunate in arms, out of his principal dignities, it
does yield him evil, mischievous, furious, seditious, mutinous, and
quarrelsome: principally when the fortunes do not intermingle their beams.

The Sun gives honor, and praise, and estimation, credit and great
advancement: fovour of great Lords, riches by the means of Princes, and makes
the child first borne, or most advanced of all his brethren.

Venus gives him grace, beauty, bravery, civility, love of women, healthful,
and prospercus: and yields the man lecherous, joyous, loving music,
dancing, and something unconstant.

Mercury makes him ingenious, skillful, diligent, apprentice, of good
judgment, of good memory, a good Reader, a good Writer, a great Mathematician,
and apt to all knowledge.

The Moon yields him unconstant, vagabond, which takes diverse affairs, and
given to many viages, a man healthful, fortunate, fair, and something spotted
in the face, and shall be numbered among great Lords.

The head of the Dragon lunarie, honor, dignity, and favor of great Lords
and Prelates. The tail of the Dragon, loss of goods and honor, deformity,
obscurenesse of eyes, and great danger of the loss of life.

In the second house, Saturn out of his principal dignities, destroys the
man, and makes him spend, and scatter his goods, and yields him poor and
unprovided of succor. And in his house or exaltation makes him rich, proud,
and with all his goods miserable.

Jupiter gives great riches by honest means.

Mars makes him spend his goods, and in the end does yield him poor many
ways.

Sol makes him honorable, a great man, liberal, brave, which in his
magnificence shall spend his goods.

Venus gives aid and succor, and greatly enricheth by women, and men of the
Church.

Mercury, profit in merchandise, and in Scripture, and very industrious in the
Mathematiques, and a thousand means to become rich.

Luna, riches, advancement by embassages, messages, and employments when she is
fortunate; unfortunate, signifies pains, and travels for the goods of the
world, without going forward, and hinderance in whatsoever he does.

The head of the Dragon, riches, great gains, profit, inheritance, or goods of
the Church.

The tail of the Dragon, destruction, prodigality, folly, dispense in
playing, and falling from on high without expectation.

In the third house, Saturn destroys brethren, and makes them see their
death, and intermedleth strifes, and suites among brethren. Yields a man
unfortunate in small viages, an hypocrite, superstitious, rash, fearful,
astonished at prodigious dreams.

Jupiter signifies peace and concord amongst brethren, not without profit,
makes a man prudent, happy in viages near hand, and that his dreams shall be
true.

Mars signifies great injuries, strifes, and suites among brethren, and
causes the brethren to die quickly: and yields the man a terrible
blasphemer, forsworn, a deceiver, not fearing God, which shall be unfortunate
in all his ways, and after in danger of thieves and robbers, and shall be
tormented in many terrible and vain dreams.

Sol, honor, dignities, offices, out of his Country, long pilgrimages,
honorable brethren, and true dreams.

Venus, love among brethren, happy viages, fear of God, and true dreams.

Mercury, profit in traffic, and viages, in fair markets, and gives good
fortune at all times and places, concerning the good of the Church.

In the sign of Gemini or Libra, it makes the man a good Musician, and a
sounder of musical instruments, principally in conjunction, or good aspect of
Venus.

The Moon makes him given to go here and there on pilgrimages, so that he
rests not long in a place: nevertheless in his deeds he shall be honored
and praised, and meet with good fortune, and friends, and great Lords, that
shall employ him in Embassages, in messages and other voyages: and he shall be
loved and praised of his brethren.

The head of the Dragon signifies, that his brethren shall be of greater
estate and authority than he: nevertheless, it denotes some Ecclesiastical
goods.

The tail of the Dragon destroys the brethren, and makes them die quickly.

In the fourth house, Saturn out of his principal dignities, makes him
scatter his patrimony, and yields the man poor and unfortunate in unmovable
goods, as in houses, lands and possessions, plowing, and sowing: and signifies
that the mother shall be of an infamous condition, and shall not live long.

If he be within his house or exaltation, he gives inheritance, houses,
lands, possessions, and signifies the mother honorable and of long life.

Jupiter yields him happy in unmovable goods, and gives him great store of
inheritance, and sometime causes him meet with treasure and goods, of the
which he never greatly thought. And signifies the Father of long life and
happy: and signifies his child shall be esteemed after his death: and he
shall be honorably laid in his grave.

Mars, loss of goods by fire and wind, and houses, lands, and possessions,
destruction of trees, dispending of his goods, evil end by wounds, effusion of
blood, evil renown after death, and short life of the father.

The Sun denotes fair possessions, Lordships, government, inheritance and
fair houses, praise, honor, and good fortune in his old years, and good
renown after death, an honorable sepulcher, and makes him given to
divination, and prevent things to come.

Venus denotes the same that Jupiter does.

Mercury fortunate, yields the man industrious, providing, and foreseeing
things to come: a buyer of rents, houses, and possessions: a planter of trees,
and curious in husbandry affairs: inclined to gather gold and silver.

If it be unfortunate, it yields him quarrelsome, striving, and hated of his
neighbors, always angry and full of dispites, and little esteemed.

Luna signifies that which is said of Mercury, except that she is given to
mills, ponds, and watery places, and yields the man in the beginning
unfortunate, and in the end happy, principally when the nativity is by day.

And when the head of the Dragon is in airie and fiery Signs, it signifies
that which Jupiter does, and in earthly, and watery, that which the tail of the
Dragon does.

The tail of the dragon makes the father die quickly, and scatter his goods
unmovable.

In the fifth house, Saturn signifies sadness, necessity, rudeness,
uncivil, evill-faced, evil entertainment, deprivation of death of children
unnaturally, going in evil and filthy clothing.

Jupiter gives grace, honesty, prudence, civility, bravery, riches, profit in
messages and embassages, abundance of fair children, well nurtured, and well
instructed, and beloved, good fortune by Churchmen, gifts, and a dealer for
gold, jewels, precious stones, sweet and precious savours.

Mars destroys, and makes the children die, or wholly depriveth them of
children: makes a man happy in all significations of the fifth house, when he
is out of his principal dignities; Within his house or exaltation, he yields
him very lecherous and impudent, timorous, a scoffer, abounding in bastards,
and evil children.

The Sun denotes fair children, honorable companies, good renown,
messages, gifts of great Lords, and a dealer with Jewels, and precious stones,
and sweet perfumes and savours.

Venus makes a man pleasant, delectable, joyful, dancing, vaunting, playing,
and laughing, Gentleman-like, a Musician, happy in children, lecherous, and
jealous.

Mercury makes him a merry jester, a mocker, brave, to write well, a good
painter, industrious with his hands, ^ngenious, a musician, voluptuous, not
caring greatly for his affairs, or tribulations, indifferent happy in
children, and given to embassages and messages, and to go on viages.

Luna makes him an Attorney, and of counsel, a Bencher, a Legate, an
Ambassador by election of the people, and had in great account with the people,
abounding in banqueting, and happy in children,

The head of the Dragon signifies as Jupiter does.

The tail signifies what Mars and Saturn signify, for children.

In the sixth house, Saturn signifies pain of the belly, and teeth, much
sickness, an ill servant, unluckie to sheep and like beasts.

Jupiter, good servants, health of the body, good fortune in bringing up beasts.

Mars within his house or exaltation, good servitours in wars, profession of
physic. Out of the same places, hot sicknesses, pestilence, evil
impediments, and evil servants to be rebels, and thieves.

Sol, sickness of the heart imbecility of the body, hurts by his servants.

Venus, imbecility of the reins, and parts of generation, otherwise
soundness of body, good and faithful servants, good fortune in nourishing
beasts, and commonly impudent love of Maids, and in nativities of women makes
him love servants, and signifies peril of death in childbearing.

Mercury signifies him to be a deceiver of women, and to be deceived by them
and his servants, and yields him a deceiver, a dissembler, a detester, of
evil memory. If he be with Saturn or Mars, he threatens death by prison, a
conspiracy of servants or in prison.

Luna denotes weakness in the eyes and brain, great and fervent sickness,
strife against parents, enmity of women, a company of men ill conditioned, when
she is unfortunate. When she is fortunate, gives health and profit in
nourishing young beasts and good servants.

The head of the Dragon preserves from sickness, gives good servants, and
good luck in keeping beasts.

The tail, unfaithful servants, loss of cattle.

The seventh, Saturn out of his principal dignities signifies marriage of an
evil wife, blotted with some infamy, proper to himself or parents, ruin of
enemies, and peril of evil death. In watery signs it denotes Emrods,
Fistulaes, Constitution of the sinews, and diseases of the back.

In his house or exaltation, he signifies the woman to be rich, and enemies
mighty.

Jupiter, happy marriage, the woman honest, shamefaced, virtuous, fair, rich,
victory against enemies, and fortunate in age.

Mars in his house or exaltation, or out of his dignities, always signifies
mighty and terrible adversaries, brute of women, or husbands in Nativities of
women, impudency of the man, timorous, lecherous, in danger to be killed, to
have blows on the feet and hands.

Sol, mighty enemy, rich, wise, well brought up, and honorable age.

Mercury, lecherous, strife and debate between man and wife, evil by reason of
impudent desire, crafty knowledge in numbering, love of virtue. If he be with
Saturn or Mars he shall kill his wife, and shall be killed or put in prison,
and put in exile, or condemned to die by sentence of a Judge.

Luna, profit of wives, thousand strifes and suits, desire of change of
countries. If she be fortunate, she signifies all well in all significations
of the said house; and unfortunate the contrary.

The head of the Dragonsignifieth as Jupiter.

The tail makes the woman die quickly, and destroys the enemies.

In the eight, Saturn out of his principal dignities, signifies strange
death, sorrows, complaints, lamentations, long torments, sadness, anguish, and
Poverty, in his house or exaltation, inheritance and goods unlooked for, death
by flixe or plague, or of some cold or long sickness.

Jupiter, long life to 72. years, inheritance, goods by women, happy death.

Mars, out of his principal dignity, signifies hasty death, pestilence,
impediment, slaughter, and other sorts of violent death.

If he be with the head of the Dragon, he shall be hanged, if in his house or
exaltation, he gives goods, not without great strifes and suits.

Sol causes death presently after honor, short life to the father,
inheritance to the child, loss of goods by violence of great men, except when
he is oppressed with evil fortune, for then in any airie sign it signifeth
strangling by force, burning in fire, and killed, and buried in the earth, death
by a fall, ruin, drowning in water. Except in Scorpio, where it often causes
death by poison, mad dogs, or of venomous beasts.

Venus, good death, inheritance, riches, long life, short life of mother and
Nurse, and his wife more ancient than himself.

Mercury, enmity of neighbors, vaime hope of inheritance, death by over study
of his affairs and business.

Luna, inheritance, riches by women, long life of she be fortunate, short life,
imprisonment, slander by false witness, strife, suites, quarrel, and
vexation of spirit, as mad or distract of wits.

The head of the Dragon, inheritance, riches, honor, liberality, prodigality,
and good death.

The tail, horrible death, small endeavor, no goodness in the signification
of his house.

In the ninth, Saturn betokens horrible dreams, terrible visions, hypocrisy
and superstition, ceremonies, preachers, Friars, men of Religion, and a
thousand troubles, by the way and perturbation of spirit.

Jupiter gives faith, constancy in his religion, profitable journies, fear
and love of God, and knowledge of divine mysteries, interpretations of dreams,
revelation and profit in the state Ecclesiastical.

Mars, out of his principal dignity, danger by the way, unfaithfulness,
shaking of the faith, and terrible opinions, and more than an heretic,
timorous, violent, impudent, horrible dreams, and false dexterity in arms,
and valiantness, when he is otherwise fortunate in his house or exaltation, it
makes the man very terrible, a negromancer, happy in his journey or
pilgrimages, hardy ventrous, and of great courage.

Sol, Benefices, Abbeys, Bishoprics, Ecclesiastical dignities, Cardinals,
Popes, Legates, principally in a masculine sign, good faith, constant,
religious, a reverencer of holy things, a lover of God and virtue, true
dreams, profitable journeyes, and honor in his profession.

Venus, true dreams, except in the imagination of women, Ecclesiastical
dignities, constant Religion, love and reverence of God, long pilgrimage by the
World, profitable journies, honor in profession, which takes away the desire
of marriage.

Mercury, goods Ecclesiastical, high knowledge, divine mysteries, admiration
of justice, and providence of God, cogitation of God and Angels, and of
spirits, profitable journeyes, great knowledge in Divinity, Astrology, and and
in all other Philosophy, interpretation of dreams, oracles, and strange
things, profit in traffic, infarre Countries good renown.

Luna, long pilgrimage, perverse cogitations, unconstant in manners, and
fortune, true dreams, knowledge of stars: When the 9: house is the house of
Mercury, or of other things answerable to the nature of the Lord of the 9.
house.

The head of the Dragon, variable dreams, honor, and profit in travel,
Ecclesiastical goods.

The tail, lack of faith, terrible dreams, perilous journies, and full af
envy, and little honor in his profession.

In the tenth house, Saturn out of his principal dignities signifies short
life of the mother, many ill fortunes, sighs, plaints, and imprisonments. If
the the tenth house be in the sign of Leo, and any of the Luminaries be with
Saturn, he shall die in prison. If Saturn be with Jupiter, in the houses of
Jupiter, he shall be condemned of wrong: if he be with Mars in the houses of
Mars, he shall be condemned according to his crime. If he be with Mercury, he
shall die a very shameful death by false witnesses: If with Venus and Mars, he
shall be whipped, and racked, and condemned to die. Saturn in his house, or
exaltation in the tenth house, does license dignities, pre-eminence, and
government.

Jupiter great honor in profession, Ecclesiastical dignities, and great
renown.

Mars out of his principal dignities, makes a man terrible, cruel,
seditious, quarrelsome, arrogant, a despiser of his goods, usurper of the goods
of other, hated of father, mother, brethren, and others, and many times to be
imprisoned and punished by justice. In his house or exaltation, it makes him
valiant, hardy, courageous in feats of arms. In the houses of Jupiter well
disposed, and regard of furtunes, makes him a President, Counselor, or
sovereign Judge.

Sol gives honor, offices, dignities, preheminencies, rules, governments,
great credit and favor of many great Lords, in estimation of the common
people, honor in profession, with riches and great goods, principally if he be
in fiery signs, and if the child be poor, and of base condition, he lifts
him up to honor and great dignities.

Venus, honor in his profession, goods of Princes, and great Lords, great
credit, and long life of the mother, with prosperity and honor.

Mercury makes him a Chancellor, Secretary, Counselor, President put in great
dignities, skillful in Arithmeticke, Geometry, and Astrology, well renowned,
rich and abounding in goods. If he be unfortunate by Mars, he shall come to an
evil end, for having taken too much upon him, or for taking quarrels against
his betters.

Luna signifies praise and honor of great Lords, and shall be happy in all
enterprises, and esteemed in all the world.

The head of the Dragon signifies as Jupiter.

The tail makes him receive dishonor, and loss of his calling, and falling
from an high, and denotes the short life of the mother.

In the eleventh house, Saturn out of his principal dignities betokens
acquaintance, and to be a companion with men defamed, and of base condition,
mischievous: sadness of friends, vain hope to come to things undertaken:
difficulty in affairs: loss of friends, if he be in his house or exaltation,
he gives love of Saturnities, as by great and ancient Lords.

Jupiter makes him happy in all his devoyers: gives favor of great Lords,
great credit, abundance of friends: advancement by friends: riches, and fair
children; of the which the first shall be a Major.

Mars in his house or exaltation, love by men of war and fortunate in feats
of arms, and out of those places signifies despair, unhappy enterprises,
loss of friends, and enmity with his friends, he shall not be loyal to his
Lords and friends, by which shall ensue great damage.

Sol, happy enterprises, goods, honor, dignities by means of friends, which
shall be men of authority, and great Lords.

Venus gives good friends, which shall be honorable men: and of good
authority: and of good will, signifying good fortune, happy enterprises, and
many children.

Mercury knowledge and company: and love of men of knowledge and virtue, and
good renown among friends, happy enterprises.

Luna gives good riches, honor, good renown, good friends, which shall be
great Lords, and happy enterprises.

The head of the Dragon, that which Jupiter signifies.

The tail, that which Saturn and Mars signifies.

In the twelfth, Saturn out of his principal dignities makes unhappy in
horses and other great beasts, from the which he shall fall and receive hurt,
and signifies fear of Justice, imprisonment or exile. In his house or
exaltation, victory against his enemies, good fortune in horses, and other
beasts, fit for burden, and labor.

Jupiter out of his principal dignities, mighty enemies and adversaries of men
in authority, imprisonment, exile, condemnation, poverty, well dignified he
signifies the contrary.

Mars the fall from horses, hurt or other damage by beasts, abundance of
enemies, imprisonment, slanders, and a thousand persecutions, great evil in
legs and feet.

Sol, good fortune in horses, and other great beasts, great persecution by
enemies, great Lords, and mighty confiscation and loss of goods, imprisonment,
exile, slander, false witness, evil report, condemned to a great fine,
deprivation of his estate, by perverted traitorous, and household servants.

Venus gives good fortune to horse, strife and enmity to woman, disprayse in
marriage, mischievous and evil renown because of women: principally if they
be evil conditioned and defamed: an impudent lover of women defamed, for the
which he shall be imprisoned, and suffer great dishonor. If she be in the
sign of Virgo o^ Capricorn, or of Aquarius, joined with the Sun and Saturn,
or to Mars signifies great peril of death by love.

Mercury gives great knowledge, principally in sciences that shall bring small
profit, makes a man a Philosopher, Mathematician, and ready in all knowledge,
a little foolish by reason of the lightness of the spirit, having many
enemies, given to voluptuousness, evil fortune, hated by men of knowledge,
likely to be slandered and imprisoned. If Saturn be well disposed he gives
good fortune in horses and other beasts.

Luna gives many enemies which daily shall grow, and increase, if she be
unfortunate, signifies imprisonment, and exile, if she be burnt and joined
with Saturn or Mars, the child shall be ever miserable, and of a short life,
which shall receive hurt by beasts of like proportion: and dies by plague, to
be killed or drowned: If she be fortunate it betokens escape from all these
evils.

The head of the Dragon betokens that which Jupiter.

The tail, damage by beasts of like proportion and ruin by enemies.

And generally when a Planet is well dignified or otherwise well disposed, and
regarded of fortunes within the said houses, it signifies good luck in all
significations of the said houses, but when it is unfortunate, it yields
mischief in all the said significations.

Chap. VIII. The significations of the Lords of the Houses, by the places of
the figure.
THe Lord of the first house within the first fortune, betokens long life,
health of body, goods, and riches by his own proper means, honor of his
parents. In the second, riches: In the third often voyages, agreement, and
concord with his brethren. In the 4. inheritances, houses and goods unmovable.
And it notes that he shall be a great builder, a planter of vines and trees, a
medler with mines of gold and silver, and other things, according to the nature
of the said Planet: in the 5. betokens many children which he shall love
greatly, to be given to banquets, plays, dancing, bravery and to all
voluptuousness and pleasure, and shall have many friends to enrich him. In the
6. a buyer of small cattle, abounding in servants, the which he shall teach,
and make diligent, he shall be sickly. In the seventh, quarrelsome, given to
strife, and suits in matters of marriage, unfortunate in all his acts. In the
8. sad, fearful, and of short life. In the 9. an interpreter of dreams, of
Oracles, secret things and visions, given to know divine mysteries, to travel,
and to abide in strange Countries. In the 10. goods, riches, dignities, and
honor by the means of Princes and great Lords, good fortune in his
profession. In the 11. happy enterprises, good friends, honorable companies,
prosperity, few children. In the 12. evil manners, perverse nature, great
enmity, good fortune in cattle. If he be unfortunate in the first, the child
shall not live long, if in the second, he shall be destroyed and poor. If in
the third, he shall receive great evil by his brethren. If in the fourth, he
shall be unhappie in lands, inheritances, labor, and possessions, and die in
prison. In the fifth, it denotes sadness, and tribulation, because of
children, and of messages and gifts, and shall many times die by too much
drink, or by too much pleasure. In the sixth, signifies great sicknesses and
piteous death. In the seventh, by means of the wife by poison, if he be in the
sign of Capricorn, by (...), if he be in a fiery sign, by fall from on high,
if in an earthly. In the eight, short life, danger of death in travel. In the
ninth, in peril to be slain by thieves. In the tenth, imprisonment, wrack,
condemnation, and death by means of Princes. In the eleventh, a thousand
evils, and mischiefs for friends. In the twelfth, death in prison. The Lord
of the second, in the first house signifies much gain and to be rich: In the
second, that he shall have much goods and be very rich and avaricious. In the
third, loss by brethren, and profit in small voyages. In the fourth,
innumerable inheritances, augmentation of patrimony. In the fifth, profit in
all things of pleasure and magnificence, children to come to honor, and shall
be rich givers. In the sixth, profit by means of servants, and of keeping
beasts. In the seventh, goods of women; and by suits. In the eighth great
dowries: some inheritances, otherwise scattering of goods. In the ninth, goods
of the Church, fortunate in long pilgrimage. In the tenth profit, profit in his
profession, goods by great Lords, and offices, and dignities. In the eleventh,
goods, riches and honor by friends. In the twelfth, profit in horses and
beasts, otherwise loss and injustice, by the means of gaining. The Lord of
the third house in the first signifies greater riches, and praise than his
brethren, that he shall make many voyages. In the second, he shall have suit
with his brethren for goods. In the third, he shall often go abroad for
pleasure, and his brethren, and friends accompany him. In the 4. he shall go
often to visit his lands and possessions, and his brethren shall leave him, and
withold part of his right. In the 5. his brethren shall be brave, pleasant,
and gracious, and given to voluptuousness, and make agreement with his
children. In the 6. that he shall hold question of injuries with his brethren,
and that they shall not answer him. In the 7. suit against brethren and
friends, a voyage to be married. In the 8. short life to brethren flying for
fear of plague or murder. In the 9. pilgrimage of friends, and voyages to
obtain pardons. In the 10. voyages by reason of profession, and for dignities
and death of brethren and friends. In the 11. good friendship among brethren,
voyages to meet with good fortune. In the 12. enmities of brethren, and
voyages because of enemies.

The Lord of the fourth in the first house, signifies good disposition and
honor, richer than other of his kindred, a great man in building and
possessions, and shall build houses, plant vines, trees, and a diligent husband
in his grounds. In the second, a good traffiquer in corn, oil, wine, and
fruits, a dear seller, and a good cheap buyer, and a buyer and seller of
lands and houses. In the third, he shall have the goods and inheritance of his
brethren. In the fourth, he shall have great fortune in goods, lands, Houses
and labors, and happen upon treasure. In the fifth, the riches of the father,
children happy in their inheritance. In the sixth, signifies no great
estimation of the Father, but physic, surgery and government of sick folks,
and a nourisher of beasts: in the seventh, inheritance by women, enmity
between the father and children, a good huswife of his wife: in the eight, the
father of short life, inheritance, death out of his country: in the ninth,
lands. and possessions joined to the Church or in subjection to the Churchmen,
and the father a stranger: in the tenth, the father to be known of great
Lords, by the which shall come great profit to the child, and shall have
Lordships, lands, and possessions by means of great Lords. In the eleventh,
short life to the father, inheritance by friends: in the 12. the father a
stranger, and of base condition, and shall hate his son, and shall have some
moveable goods of his enomies, not without long suit and great difficulty.

The Lord of the fifth, in the first house signifies feasting, banqueting,
dancing, voluptuousness, and fair children. In the second, rich children, and
joy of their gaining. In the third voyages for pleasure: In the 4. goods of
parents and allies. In the 5. feasts, banquets, plays, bravery, dances,
pleasure, and fair children. In the 6. witness that he shall be a peace
maker, and not greatly given to pleasure: but in servants, and keeping cattle.
In the 7. the children shall hate the father, and shall have suits one against
the other* yet always contentment by his wife and rejoice in her. In the 8.
joyful, because of unlooked for inheritance, and short life to children. In
the 9. joy in pilgrimages, vows, holy religion, good children that fear and
love God. In the 10. pleasure in honor. In the 11. pleasure in friends: and
many children. In the 12. short life of children, enmity between the father
and the children, pleasure in horses.

The Lord of the sixth in the first signifies many sicknesses of the said
Lord, and that his servants and beasts shall die quickly. In the second that he
shall be rich by keeping of cattle. In the third, sickness, and going here
and there from home, a poor kindred. In the 4. that his father shall be of
very base condition. In the 5. sickness by overmuch pleasure, children of more
base condition than their father. In the 6. health, if the Lord of the
ascendant do not regard him, otherwise sickness by over labor. In the 7.
sickness by women, of strifes, and suites and strife between his servants and
him. In the 8. death by reason of servants. In the 9. sickness out of his
Country by travel. In the 10. sickness by over-travell in his profession, or
by over-labouring for honor. In the 11. acquaintance of men unknown, and
sickness by means of friends. In the 12. sickness by means of enemies and of
imprisonment, and enemies of his own servants.

The Lord of the 7. in the 1. signifies gain by traffic, peace and
agreement, by exercise of physic, and Astrology, and that he shall be well
loved of his wife, and have goods with her: but he shall be quarrelsome, and
have suits. In the 2. short life of his wife, suites for her goods and riches.
In the 3. strife and suits against friends, kinsfolks, and they shall love his
wife impudently. In the 4. inheritance by women, suites against parents. In the
5. a young wife, honest, and virtuous, beloved of her husband, and suit against
his children. In the 6. strife for cattle and servants, marriage with some
woman of base condition, or noted of some infamy proper to himself and
parents. In the 7. suits for women, houshold-strife, profit, and to agree and
communicate his goods. In the 8. strife for inheritance, great goods by women.
In the 9. strife and accusations for matters of faith, marriage with strange
woman. In the 10. trouble for offices and honor, an honorable wife, and
dignity by the wives friends. In the 11. suits against friends, or by their
means, and shall be married by his friends. In the 12. controversy against
enemies, marriage with women of base condition, and not long love together.

The Lord of the 8. in the first signifies i^e, sadness, angry for that he
cannot bring to pass, and shall not be of long life. In the 2. inheritance. In
the 3. death of brethren. In the 4. death in his house, and shall see the death
of his parents, and shall have inheritances. In the 5. death of children. In
the 6. death of his family before him, and shall be unfortunate in cattle. In
the 7. death of wife by whom he shall have inheritance, and thereby become
rich. In the 8. that he shall think suddenly to die, and yet sound of body,
trouble in spirit, and shall have dowry by his wife, and inheritance and other
goods. In the 9. that he shall have evil courage, and shall die out of his
Country. In the 10. honorable death, or otherwise by the means of great
Lords, and of Judges, or because of his honor. In the 11. death amongst his
friends. In the 12. death amongst his enemies, or by reason of themselves.

The Lord of the ninth in the first signifies prudence, religious, virtuous,
divine, a lover of Churchmen, and shall make many voyages. In the 2. that he
shall make many voyages, by the which he shall become rich. In the 3. marriage
out of his Country, or take a stranger, and shall make journeyes because of
his brethren. In the 4. death from home, pilgrimage by persuasion of parents.
In the 5. have children from home out of his Country, and shall make journeyes
for them. In the 6. marriage of a maid or woman of base condition, sickness
from home, and shall travel for his servants and cattle. In the 7 voyages,
and suites by reason of women and their goods, and signifies the woman to be
devout, moderate and well mannered. In the 8. desire of riches, travel for his
wives goods. In the 9. good understanding, a lover of virtue, fearing God,
knowledge in divine mysteries, oracles, secret things, and true dreams,
travel for devotion. In the 10. travel for profession and honor. In the 11.
good friends from home. In the 12. evil courage, and enemies out of his
Country, travel by reason of enemies.

The Lord of the tenth in the first signifies that by his industry he shall
come to great honor, and shall have dignity, offices, and governments. In the
2. honor for his wealth. In the 3. honor by his brethren, or by travel. In
the 4. unmovable goods, sumptuous houses. In the 5. honor by his children. In
the 6. little honor, except of his household and servants, or in governing of
the sick. In the 7. honorable marriage. In the 8. goods by marriage,
inheritance, and peril of death to the mother at the time of her travel and
delivery. In the 9. Ecclesiastical dignity, honor in strange countries, and
estimation by his travel. In the 10. dignities, offices, and great honor by
his own means, and favor of Princes. In the 11. prosperity, honor, and
favor of friends. In the 12. honor by his enemies, honor and estimation of
men of evil condition.

The Lord of the eleventh, in the first signifies good fortune, happy
enterprises, good friends, and many children. In the 2. goods and riches by
friends. In the 3. amity of brethren, journies, and travels for friends. In
the 4. good fortune in unmovable goods. In the 5. abundance of children,
banquets joy, and good fortune. In the 6. fortune in good husbandry. In the 7.
rich and fortunate marriage, and good friends, strife and debates against
friends, and that he shall be poor in his youth, and rich in his age. In the
8. inheritance, death of friends. In the 9. profitable journies, friends out of
his Country, and good fortune in strange places. In the 10. goods and honor by
means of men of authority, and dignity in youth. In the eleaventh, abundance
of friends, and children, great goods, and honor, and favor of men in
authority, good renown and prosperity. In the 12. small friends, few goods, and
debate with his friends.

The Lord of the twelfth, in the first signifies poverty in youth, sadness,
long travel enmity and conspiration against him. In the second evil manners,
quarrels for goods. In the third, quarrels with friends and kindred. In the
fourth, strife and suits for inheritance and moveable goods, and discord with
the father. In the fifth, rebellious children to the father, and strife among
themselves. In the sixth, strife and anger among the family. In the seventh,
that he shall take wives of base condition, and not love them long, and by
their means shall have great pain and travel, and shall be in grief for
them, and his friends shall conspire against him, and his enemies shall take
away part of his goods, and in the end of his days be poor and miserable. In
the eight, hatred and treason for livelihood and goods of women, death of
enemies. In the ninth, quarrel with Churchmen, and mischiefs by the way: In
the tenth, quarrel with great Lords, persecution by reason of his profession,
of his offices and honor. The eleventh, signifies that his friends shall be
his enemies, and shall have great mischief for his friends. In the twelfth,
many envies and enemies that shall imagine many mischiefs against him.

Likewise, you must judge of all the parts of the 12. houses, as the part of
fortune in the first signifies: that he shall be rich and fortunate by his
industry. In the second, that he shall become rich in all that is signified by
the second house, etc.

All these be the foundations and roots of the judgments Astronomicall, from
the which you may not swarve or depart: except in as much as be mitigated,
prohibited, or augmented by the concurrences, and aspects of the planets, and
conjunction of the fixed stars.

The end of the second Book.
OF IVDGEMENTS ASTRONOmicall upon Nativities, containing the directions and
revolutions.
The third Book.
Chap. I. Of Directions.
THe art of Directions so diligently entreated upon by John de Regiomount, that
there is no more place fitly to speak of the same. Except, that with the aid
of God, we have purposed to translate into French, his problemes and documents
appertaining to the said matter. Nevertheless we will here touch the
principal point. To direct (which term I use, being most commonly used, and
of long time received, although it be not proper) it is no other thing than to
stay the meeting of one place of the heavens with another consequently
following, according to the natural order of the signs, and that the moving
of the first mobile. The first place is named the significator, the second the
promittor: as if the ascendant were in the 20. degree of Sagittarius, and
Saturn in the 10. of Capricorn, one might direct the ascendant to Saturn,
and the ascendant shall be significator of life, and Saturn promittor of death
or sickness, and then the judgment shall be danger of death, there is another
form of direction attributed to the parts and planets, retrogrades, which do
make following the natural course of the first mobile, to the contrary of the
consequence of the signs, of the which the craft is like to the first, and
there is no difference but that we have called Significator, which is here
promittor, and the Promittor is here significator.

The point meridionall of the tenth house, you must direct by the right
ascensions. The point of the ascendant, by the ascensions obliques, found in
the Table of the latitude of your Region. The points and stars that shall be
between the Meridian and the Horizon, by the oblique ascentio^s under the
circle in the which they be, the which you call, The circle of Position, the
which for to find, and likewise to have the ascensions of every place, having
latitude or no, you must follow the method following.

First, you must take the longitudes of Planets, fixed stars, and other places
that you would direct, (that is to say) the sign, degree, and minute that they
hold in the Zodiac, and in the Ephemerides, or other tables Astronomicall, etc.

Secondly, you must calculate their latitudes, in degrees and minutes placed in
the Ephemerides.

Thirdly, their declination by the f^rst problem of the book of directions of
Regiomont.

Then, their right ascensions by the third problem of the said house.

Then again, the distances of the circle Meridionall by the 19. problem.

Incontinent, the circles of their positions, by the 20. problem, consequently
the differences ascentionall by the Table expressed.

And finally, the oblique ascensions by the tenth Canon, if the said stars be
between the point meridionall of the tenth house, and the point of the fourth,
or the discentions of obliques by the eleventh problem, if they be between
the point of the fourth and the tenth.

This done, take out the number of the oblique ascensions of the Significator,
of the number of the oblique ascensions of the Promittor, take to the Table of
the position of the Significator, or the contrary, if you direct the parts and
Planets, retrogrades; that which rests of degrees and minutes, turn into
years, months; and days: and by this means, you shall have exactly the time
of good or evil that shall happen unto you by direction, intending that one
degree is here signified a year, five minutes a month, one minute, 6. days,
and some odd hours, he that would help the seconds he shall touch the end
more perfectly.

For to know the sicknesses and danger of death, you must direct the five
vital places that we have considered, searching the giver of life, in sixed
stars of violent nature in the point of the fourth, sixth, seventh, and
eighth, and the tail of the Dragon, to the ill fortunes, and their evil
aspects in the parts of death, and by and by to the Sun, and to the head of
the Dragon. Likewise for the same consideration, you must direct the said
pernicious places to the five vital places. And they meeting, they judge that
the man is in great danger of death, when the fortunes do not show forth their
favorable beams.

For the goods, honor, dignities, friendships, and other considerations, you
must direct the one significator of goods with the other, and the one
significator of honor with the other, of the which we have made mention in the
first Book, following the particular judgments of the Nativities.

Chap. II. Of the Separator or Burner, called of the Arabians Algebuthar.
THe Separator or Burner is the Planet which has dignity of term and degree,
to the which the year is answerable, multiplied with the ascensions of one
significator.

For to find the Separator of the like, you must take the oblique ascensions of
the ascendant, and add unto the same the years of your age, and search it all
in the Table of the latitude of your Region, to look to which sign and degree
the said number answers, for unto that point shall come the perfection of
your life. Look afterward which is the Planet which has dignity of term in
the said degree, for of the self same shall be the Separator of the life.

By the same means you may seek the Separators of the honor, goods, gains,
friends, and of other-like, upon the circles of their positions. The which is
convenient to seek, following the aforesaid method of directions.

Chap. III. Of the Lords of the Triplicities.
YOu must also note all the Lords of the Triplicities, in places which signify
good and evil, as well in significations of life, as of goods, friends,
honor, marriages, pilgrimages, etc. If they be well disposed in the
revolution, they shall signify well, touching the signification of the place
of the which they be Lords. If they be unfortunate, they signify evil. That
is to understand, the Lords of the Triplicities of vital places, will signify
of the life: of the places of fortune, riches and profit: of places of honor
of the honor: good or evil, according as they be fortunate or unfortunate at
the hour of the revolution.

Chap. IV. Of Revolutions.
THe Sun returning to the same point in the which he was at the hour of the
Nativity, makes the revolution every year. He therefore that would know the
hour and minute of the revolution, he must look in the Ephemerides, at what
hour and minute the Sun began to enter into the degree, minute, and second,
in which he was at the hour of the Nativity.

If the Ephemerides do not suffice you for this matter, go to a Table made for
the same purpose, by Peter Pitat, in the beginning of the same Ephemerides, by
him corrected and augmented. Jerome Cardin uses another, which I find very
exact: the which he has written in his book, Of the restitution of times, and
celestial motions, in the 5. Chapter.

Chap. V. Of the judgments upon the revolutions.
FIrst, look how the Separator of life is disposed in the figure of the
revolution, for if he be unfortunate, he denotes sickness, and other dangerous
accidents: If he be fortunate he holds him healthful and glad all the year.
So likewise you must judge of the Separator of goods, friends, dignities, and
other effects. It is to understand, that they give good fortune in the said
significations, if they be well disposed: or else loss and evil fortune if
they be unfortunate.

In the second place, look if the Lords of the Triplicities of the vital
places be well disposed, and of places which signify riches, honor, travels,
brethren, Parents, wives, and children, do so much. For in the same
significations the man shall be happy or unhappy, according as the said Lords
shall be well or evil disposed. And principally you must consider the Lord
that shall reign over your age; for the 1. Lord of one triplicitie governs
the first age; the 2. the midst of the life; the 3. the latter year.

Thirdly, you must consider which is the Planet which governs over the year
of your age, that which the Arabians call Fridaie.

Fourthly, the Lord of the sign, in which shall come the same year of
perfection.

In the fifth place, the Lord of the circulation, accounting by the Lord of the
hour of the Nativity.

Then the Lord of the circulation, accounting by the Lord of the ascendant of
the nativity.

And if in the ascendant of the nativity there be any Planet, you must likewise
make circulation.

Furthermore, you must look if any Planet return to the same sign and house
in the which it was at the nativity; for then it intends the same effect
which it has signified in the nativity, principally-when it returns to the
same sign. You must also have regard to the aspects which are made in the
revolution, if they be like to them of the nativity; for that shall be a
renewing of the effects of the said aspects. And you must not forget the
changing of the places. For if a happy planet be in the revolution in the place
where an evil Planet was in the nativity, the evil signified by the said
evil Planet in the nativity, shall be deferred that year by the presence of
the happy Planet. To the contrary, if a Planet promise any good fortune in the
nativity, and in his place in the revolution be any unfortunate Planet, the
same good signified in the nativity, shall be diminished in th revolution, or
lost by reason of the said ill fortune. The misfortune in the places of
misfortune augmenteth the evil: the good fortunes in the places of good
fortune, augmenteth the good fortune.

For to judge of the said considerations, you must have recourse to that which
we have said in the two former Books of general and particular significations
of the Houses, Signs, Planets, Aspects, and particular situations of the
Planets in Signs and houses: having always before your eyes, the disposition
of stars in the figure of the Nativity. For if a Planet be in the Nativity
greatly unfortunate, and in the revolution well disposed, it cannot much profit
because of the first infelicity.

Likewise, you must judge of those which be fortunate in Nativities, which
being unfortunate in revolutions, do no great damage. There be some that
contemplate hereupon, many other things, the which by experience I have often
found unprofitable, false and superfluous.

Chap. VI. Of the years governed by the Planets, called of the Arabians
Fridarie.
IF the Nativity be by day, then the Sun governs the first 10. years, Venus
8. years following, Mercury 13. years after that: then the Moon the 9.
following, Saturn 11. years, Jupiter 12. Mars 7. the head of the Dragon 3.
the tail of the Dragon 2. When it is by night, you must begin at the Moon, the
which governs the first 9. years. then Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus,
Mercury, the head of the Dragon, and the tail, the numbers by order as we have
said before.

Many by great curiosity, have added to this company other Planets to every
government, the which I find by good reason to be reprehended by the Chaldeans.
For experience has often taught me, and other very expert in this Science,
that this subtilty is too curious, vain, and superfluous.

The Table of the Fridaries by Day.
Years. Months. Days. 1 5 5 2 10 9 4 3 13 5 8 17 7 2 22 8 6 26 10 0 0 11 1 22
12 3 13 13 5 4 14 6 26 15 8 17 16 10 9 18 0 0 19 10 9 21 8 17 23 6 2 25 5 14 27
3 13 29 1 22 30 0 0 32 3 13 33 6 26 34 10 9 36 1 22 37 5 5 38 8 17 40 0 0 41 6
26 43 1 22 44 8 18 46 3 14 47 10 16 49 5 6 50 0 0 52 8 17 54 5 4 56 1 21 57 10
8 59 6 26 61 1 22 63 0 0 64 0 0 65 0 0 66 0 0 67 0 0 68 0 0 69 0 0 70 0 0 73 0
0 75 0 0

The Table of the Fridaries by Night.
Years. Months. Days. 1 3 13 2 6 26 3 10 9 5 1 22 6 5 5 7 8 18 9 0 0 10 6 26
12 1 22 13 8 18 15 3 14 16 10 9 18 5 6 20 0 0 21 8 17 23 5 4 25 1 21 26 10 8 28
6 25 30 3 13 32 0 0 33 0 0 34 0 0 35 0 0 36 0 0 37 0 0 38 0 0 39 0 0 40 5 50 42
10 10 43 3 15 44 8 20 46 1 25 47 7 0 49 0 0 50 1 2 51 3 13 52 5 6 53 6 26 54 8
20 55 10 8 57 0 0 58 10 9 60 8 17 62 6 26 64 5 4 66 3 13 68 1 21 70 0 0 73 0 0
^ 75 0 0 76 3 13 77 6 26 78 10 9 80 1 22 81 5 5

Chap. VII. Of Profections.
FOr the Profections you must resolve the twelve houses of your Nativity in
equal parts upon the Eclipse, so far as the ascendant is in the first degree
of any sign: the second house shall be in the first degree of a sign
following, and the third, in the first degree of a third sgine: and to
conclude, that every house begin by the first degree, as the first house.

Also every house will contain thirty degrees, and the first thirty degrees of
the first house, shall appertain to the first year wherein the infant is
borne: the thirty of the second, to the second year: the thirty of the third,
to the third year, and so consequently until twelve. Twelve years passed,
you must begin again at the first, and then come to the second, third, fourth,
etc. and so from twelve to twelve you must renew the same circuit.

If you find the revolution within the thirty degrees serving to your year, it
signifies some good or evil, according to his nature, or good or evil
disposition, and signification of the place, of which shall be the said
profection; that is to say, of the places of life, sickness, death, or good
health; of the places of goods, riches, loss, or poverty, etc. Commonly they
seek the profection of five places of one nativity, that is to say, of the
place of the Sun for honor; of the place of the Moon for the qualities of
the spirit, toward the body and externally goods; of the place of the part of
fortune, for gain, and profit; of the tenth house for the actions; of the
ascendant for the life.

If the Sun be giver of life, it must be considered as giver of life, and
giver of honor likewise, the which you must do also in other places, when they
import many significations. If then you find any planet within the thirty
degrees of your profection, and would know what month or day the accident by
him signified shall happen*

Look what distance you have between the first point of your profection, and
the faid Planet, if there be 15. degrees between them, the said accident shall
happen out in the end of six months: if there be twenty five degrees, at the
end of ten months, for here two degrees and an half, value one month, one
degree valueth twelve days, and four hours, thirty minutes value six days,
five minutes one day.

Of this there is a very exact Table among the documents of Peter Pitat upon
the Ephemerides. Example of the profections. Suppose that the ascendant of a
nativity was the fifteenth degree of Scorpio, I would know where the profection
shall light of the ascendant at the end of ten years after the child borne. I
account ten signs from the ascendant, after that, I find the fifteenth
degree of Virgo serving after ten years, accomplished to 11. current. I say
then that in the said time, the profection of the ascendant is come in the
fifteenth degree of Virgo, and shall end that year in the fifteenth degree of
Libra: and also shall contain thirty whole degrees, within the which if any
Planet be found, it shall signify good or evil of the life, according to the
nature and disposition, as if in the said time.

Mars being in the fifth degree of Libra, I would say that the infant should be
troubled that year at the end of eight months, because that Mars was in the
place profectionall of life, distant from the first point twenty degrees. We
have showed before, that two degrees and an half value one month, five degrees
two months, and fifteen degrees six months, and by course, twenty degrees
eight months. You must note, that the profections ought to fit to the years
current or complete. It is to be understood the tenth sign, as for incontinent
after nine years complete, which is ten years current, etc.

Chap. VIII. The Lord of the Circulation, from the Lord of the hour of the
Nativitie.
THe Babylonians hold for a great secret, the Circulation of the Lord of the
hour of the Nativity. It is to be understood, that the Lord of the said hour
signifies of the life, as the ascendant: and the Lord of the hour following,
of goods as of the second house: and the Lord of the third hour, of brethren
as the third house, and so consequently of others.

In revolutions, they give the Lord of the hour of the Nativitie to the first
year, the planet following to the second, and so consequently following the
natural order of the Planets. As if one were borne in the hour of Venus, that
Planet should reign the first year, the second year Mercury, the third the
Moon, the fourth Saturn, the fifth Jupiter, the sixth Mars, the seventh Sol,
the eighth Venus, the ninth Mercury, and so by order. And you must note, that
we take here the years current, and not complete, for to fit the said
circulation of the Planets.

Chap. IX. Of the circulation of the Lord of the Ascendant, and of the Planets,
which be in the Ascendant.
THe circulation of the Lord of the Ascendant, and the Planets and parts which
be in the ascendant, they be even as we have said of the Lord of the hour of
the nativity, and by the same order you must place them. The years of the age
of the child, by judgment, we have made mention and proof of Revolutions.

Chap. X. Of the Eclipses, and great Conjunctions appertaining to the
Revolutions of Nativities.
THe Eclipse of the Sun, and the conjunctions of the superior planets,
causes commonly many evils, after the congruence of the stars, and nature of
the signs and planets reigning in the said places, to men causes sicknesses,
when they be within the five next degrees of the Ascendant, or to the giver of
life: if they touch the other parts, Planets or Houses, they pronounce evil
fortune, appertaining to the significations of the same places; principally, if
in the same time of the nativity any such constellations were in force. If they
touch the places profectionals, they do almost the same effect as in nativities.

Chap. XI. Of the particular meetings of all the year.
COncerning the particular meetings of all the year, Ptolomeus, John de
Regiomonte, Ganrique, and many others, do rest hard upon the Profections,
Mensturnes, and Diurnes, of the which you have a perfect Table in the Book of
directions of John de Regiomonte, having more subtilty and curiousness than
truth, as I have often found by experience. It answers better my opinion
Schonor, which every day considered, if any planet touch the places of the
Planets, parts and houses, of the nativitie, or their good or evil aspect,
that I do apply to the places profectionall. As for example, let the ascendant
of a nativity, or the place of his profection be the twelfth degree of Libra,
the Sun in the fifteenth of Gemini, Mars in the fifteenth of Leo: always,
and as often as the Sun, or the Moon do pass over the 15. degree of Leo,
the man shall be moved by angry accidents, as of displeasure, of some
alteration, pain of the head, fevers, hot imposthumes, tetters, etc. Likewise
when it touches the fifth degree of Scorpius, or of Taurus, there where the
quadrate aspects be within the place of Mars, or the fifth of Aquarius, which is
the place opposite to Mars. If any Planet touch the fifth degree of Libra, or
of Gemini (there where the Sextile Aspects be) or the fifth of Sagittarius, and
of Aries, (which make the Trine Aspects of the said Mars) it shall signify
some favorable meetings of Captains and men of war.

If the ill fortunes touch not the said twelfth degree of Libra, as we have
said in the Ascendant, that shall be sign of some evil meeting, as well to
life as to the body. Likewise you must judge of other attouchments, according
to the nature of the aspects by us explained, in the second Book. You must
contemplate the places profectionals. For I do apply every degree and minute to
the days in the which their signification fall, and regard the good and evil
aspects of the Planets every day, if they touch the degree profectionall. As
for example, of the said nativity in the which was the Ascendant Libra, suppose
that the profection was come to the twelfth degree of Cancer, in the ninth
year complete, and the tenth current; The thirteenth degree of Cancer, serves
to the twelfth day after the proper day of the revolution.

Wherefore I consider then the Aspects of the Planets toward the said
thirteenth degree. Likewise, so I do of other degrees and minutes, fitted to
those days in the which they govern. And so much for Revolutions.

FINIS.

