THE POPES NUNTIOES OR, The Negotiation of Seignior PANZANI, Seignior CON, etc.
Resident here in England with the Queen, and treating about the Alteration of
Religion WITH The Archbishop of Canterbury, and his Adherents, in the years of
our Lord, 1634, 1635, 1636, etc.

Together With a Letter to a Nobleman of this Kingdom, concerning the same.

London, Printed for R. B. 1643.

A Letter from a private Gentleman, to a person of Honor, concerning the
Negotiation of the Nuntioes, which follows.
My Lord,
I Have read with a studious eye this Discourse, which your Lordship commended
to my observation; and I must confess, that I was not more sorry that England
loved Rome so well, than I am glad the affection betwixt them is thus
discovered: For although the marks of the Beast for some years past were
legible enough in every corner of this Land, and the Clergy generally could
speak Italian, or were apt to learn it; yet such a spirit of Security did
possess us, and hope and fear had such influence upon our wretched souls,
that we could not see that alteration which we looked upon; and the Gospel
was almost fled away before we believed it had any wings. But the great and
mysterious Riddle is now unfoulded, and those Curtains of Peace and Charity
which did so speciously cover this Work of Darkness, are drawn from off it. He
that will not understand that Tib^^ and Thames were almost in one Channel,
shall have my vote to graze upon the Mountains, and forfeit his reasonable
soul, which in so clear a day will not discern the waters running. I believe
your Lordship with more boldness will concur in this sentence, when you
shall hear that the Venetian Ambassador was the Author of this little Story, A
man, whose Religion would not permit him to favor the reformed Churches, or to
blast his own with any falsehood, especially in an account to a wise State which
had employed him; A man of dear acquaintance with Panzani, and although no
master builder, yet a pious servant and spectator of the work: When you shall
also hear that the Italian Copy was first translated into French for the great
Cardinals satisfaction; and I do not doubt it has good acquaintance in the
Spanish Court, and could speak that language long ago. I could proceed further,
but that the limits of a letter cannot receive my thoughts concerning this
argument, and my eyes behold so much light, that they are altogether dazzled
with the luster. A short time (if God permit) shall produce such a volume,
which may prove me not only a lover of the truth, but in all lawful Commands

Your Lordships most obedient Servant, D. T.

THE POPES NVNTIOES: OR, The Negotiation of Seignior Panzani, Seignior Con,
etc. resident here in England with the Queen, and treating about alteration of
RELIGION WITH The Archbishop of Canterbury and his Adherents in the years of
our LORD, 1634. 1635. 1636. etc.
RELIGION having a great power over the spirit of Man, and an incomparable
force thereupon to produce effects extraordinary; some men embrace it with
sincerity of affection as a way leading to true felicity: but others esteem
more of it for the general profit which redounds from it to humane society,
then for any other excellence discerned in it. Princes, and sage Politicians
are of this latter sort of men, giving reverence to it for the commodity which
they receive from it; as well knowing by experience of all ages, that there is
nothing more proper to preserve men in concord, and render the people obedient
to the higher Powers. Therefore the most advised and reserved Princes, though
in their souls they make no account of Religion, yet in appearance they always
endeavor to seem extremely religious, and inflict exemplary punishment on
such as attempt any thing against the purity of it: foreseeing with great
prudence, that it is impossible any alteration of Religion should happen
without trouble and distraction in the State. And indeed in these latter times
we see those States and Realms which have prevented divisions of Religion have
maintained themselves in peace and tranquillity, as Italy, and Spain: whereas
in others on the contrary where the introducing of new opinions has divided the
people, there consequently Arms have been taken up by one against the other;
witness France and Germany. And though some Countries have undergone change of
Religion without interruption of their Repose; yet if we examine the reason of
it, we shall find the said change to have sprung from some extraordinary
cause, rather then from diversity of opinion amongst the people The separation
of England from the Church of Rome was not caused so much by the desire of
reforming Religion, as from animosities conceived by Hen. 8. against the Court
of Rome, by reason of its difficult consenting to the dissolution of his
marriage with Katharine of Castile. And though under Edward his Son the
Reformation was received by public consent of the whole Realm, it was
grounded upon the same cause, and no obstinate opinion of new doctrine; for
under the Reign of Queen Mary the Kingdom was as easily reconciled to the
Church of Rome again, as it had been separated before. Queen Elizabeth being
come to the Crown, and her interests swaying her to favor the Reformation, she
found her people as far disposed to embrace it as they had been forward to
reject it, in her Sisters time; and so the length of her Reign bringing in a
permanence of form, she so well established it, that it has since firmly
continued under her Successors JAMES and CHARLES. But forasmuch as this
Reformation (as has been said) was induced more for interest of State, and to
deliver that Kingdom from the Popes yoke, then for love of new Opinions:
therefore the English did not so engage themselves to those particular
Opinions, but that they have since set themselves to reform the abuse of
Religion by reducing themselves again to the old practice of their
forefathers. Nevertheless this Realm is so perversely addicted to maintain its
own resolute opinion of excluding the Popes Authority, that this has been the
cause, why the Catholics (who for the first 12. years conformed themselves to
the policy introduced into the Church of England) have since separated
themselves from it; and to testify their uniting to the Pope, have refused to
frequent the Protestant Churches, and thereby have framed One party in that
State England being so divided into Protestants and Catholics, a considerable
number of people by reason of the wars in France and the Netherlands, retired
into it from those Countries with their Preachers; and being seasoned and
initiated with the doctrine of Calvin, they judged the English Reformation but
imperfect, and so refusing submission to that form of policy, by this means
they constituted a third party, named Puritanes. These Three factions are
still at this day in sway. That of the Puritanes is the most potent, consisting
of some Bishops, all the Gentry and Comminaltie. That of the Protestants is
composed of the King, almost all the Bishops, and Nobility, and besides of
both the Universities. The Catholics are the least in number, yet make up a
party in that State sufficiently considerable, because the body of them is
composed of such of the Nobility as are most rich, powerful, and strong in
alliance, and of no small number amongst the inferior sort. Now these three
Factions in Religion, though they all oppose one another, yet the hatred of
Protestants against Puritanes is greater, then against Catholics, and that of
Catholics is greater against Puritanes then Protestants; and that of Puritanes
is greater against Catholics then Protestants. And thus both Catholics and
Protestants do very easily combine together for the ruin and rooting out of
Puritanes: and were it not for the interests of some great ones at Court, who
serve themselves by pretext of Religion to attain to their own ends, and
thereupon to win their attendance have received them into protection, it would
be no hard matter to suppress, and quell the Puritanes. The Realm being in
this condition there is happened a discord amongst Catholics which has
distracted them also into Factions, the occasion whereof was the pretended
jurisdiction of Dr. Smith an Englishman Bishop of Chalcedon, contesting for the
power of Ordinary over all England: in which he was abetted with the favor of
all the secular Clergy, and all Catholics adhering to them. The Regulars
hereupon and more especially the Jesuits; opposed themselves, and wrote diverse
books both scandalous and prejudicial to the power of Bishops: all which have
been censured and condemned by the University of Paris: and Peter Aurelius a
Doctor there has written very learnedly in confutation of the said books. But
this did little avail to the appeasing of the difference, it did exasperate
rather the Regulars, so that they raised such persecution against the said
Bishop, that he was feign to fly out of England into France, and there he is
still residing. And since his retreat the dissension is grown more fierce,
insomuch as the Pope taking notice thereof, and desiring to apply some
convenient remedy, and yet not clearly discerning the truth of those affairs,
so as they were disguised by the cunning and subtilty of each party: He then
resolved to send over some person by whose presence upon the place he might be
best informed of the truth for the applying of some expedient to those broyls.
Thus in the year 1634. his Holiness did dispatch into England Signior Gregory
Panzani, a Doctor in Law and Romish Priest, and by his papal Brief dated the 10
of October of the same year, directed to the English Clergy and Catholics, he
required and commanded credence to be given him in whatsoever Signiour Panzani
on his part should expose to them. Cardinal Fran Barbarini also to accompany
his Holiness Brief, sent a Letter of his own to the said Catholics and their
Clergy, with which and his Instructions Signior Panzani arrived at London the
25. December. 1634 where he saluted the Queen, and afterward the King also who
received and treated him with much kindness, telling him that He was very
welcome: yea His Majesty remained uncovered during all the discourse, and
entertainment. He did also desire conference with the Archbishop of Canterbury,
but was put off and procrastinated therein from day to day: so that at last He
departed the Kingdom without any speech had with him. From his arrival at the
time of his abode in England He much applied himself to Secretary Windebank,
and the Lord Cottington, presuming by the means of the one to maintain
himself in the favor of the Archbishop and his party, and by the other to
avoid the hatred of the contrary side. By means of a Friend of his He
endeavored to sound some of the English Doctors of the Archbishops Adherents,
whether or no the King would permit the residing of a Catholic Bishop of the
English Nation to be nominated by His Majesty, and not to exercise his
function, but as His Majesty should limit. This Proposition was not very
pleasing, yet after better advisement they answered, that Seigniour Panzani
should first declare, whether the Pope would allow of such a Bishop to be
designed as did hold the Oath of Allegiance lawful, or at least would tolerate
the taking thereof by the Catholics. In this Seignior Panz. would not declare
himself, excusing it for want of Commission, and so that Treaty was
interrupted. Nevertheless to his intimate friend on the second of October. 1635.
he declared privately that the Pope would never admit any man to govern as
Bishop that should favor the Oath of Allegiance or fidelity: yet as to the
said Oath, some Divines of the Archbishops party, told the forenamed friend of
Panzani, that forasmuch as Catholics formerly would not take the said Oath of
fidelity, because they believed it prejudicial to the Popes authority, and
that the Pope might not complain, that the taking of the said Oath was contrary
to two of his Briefs prohibiting the same: The King did declare that he did
intend no prejudice to the Popes Spiritual Authority by the said Oath, nor
require therein any other fidelity from his Subjects then such as God and
Nature obliged them to. And this will and intention of the King should be
published to all Catholics, at such time as the Oath should be presented. The
Court of England, and the Prelates, with much zeal and passion, sought to
procure a toleration of the said Oath from the Pope; alleging, That if it
were in the Kings power to change it; He would retrench all such words, as
seemed opposite to his Holiness Authority: But the same being conceived, and
enacted solemnly in Parliament: to change, it was beyond the Kings power; yet
the explication appertained to His Majesty, what the intendment thereof should
be; and so by a Declaration His Majesty would clear, That He intended no
prejudice to the Pope. On the contrary, Panzani replied; That the Oath
containing some formal Terms, contrary to the Authority due to his Holiness,
and the intention of the Parliament; being to oblige Subjects to such fidelity
as was due to Princes only; the King ought to change the said Oath, and put in
such terms as He pleased; so long as He altered not the Parliaments intention.
Whereupon; We are to consider deliberately, the different intentions of these
two Courts. That of Rome, in perpetual pursuance of its old pretenses, is more
solicitous and laborious to reverse and destroy the said Oath, because the same
seems contrary to its temporal Grandour, than to extirpate such heresies as
that Real^^e is infected with. But the aim of the English Court is to procure
either an approbation, or toleration of the Oath from Rome, out of hope to
effect thereby a reconciliation between both Courts; yet not intending to
effect the same without very great advantage, and that in things contrary to
the maxims of Rome, to which that will never accord. As for example, to get
permission that Catholics may indifferently frequent Protestant Churches; That
the Papal power and dignity shall be confessed to be only of humane right,
etc. And that which persuades the Court of England, that the Pope may grant his
approbation to the Oath, is; because it seems that many of the Catholic
Doctors, notwithstanding any Briefs of the Pope to the contrary; have
maintained the lawfulnes of it, both with their tongues and their pens. As to a
reconciliation between the Churches of England and Rome, there were made some
general propositions and overtures by the Archbishops Agents, they assuring
that his Grace was very much disposed thereunto, and that if it was not
accomplished in his life time; 'twould prove a work of more difficulty after
his death, that in very truth for the last three years, the Archbishop had
introduced some innovations approaching the rites and forms of Rome; that the
Bishop of Chichester, a great confident of his Grace, and the Lord Treasurer,
and eight other Bishops of his Graces party, did most passionately desire a
reconciliation with the Church of Rome; that they did day by day recede from
their ancient Tenets' to accommodate with the Church of Rome; That therefore
the Pope on his part ought to make some steps to meet them, and the Court of
Rome remit something of its rigor in doctrine, otherwise no accord could be.
And in very deed, the Universities, Bishops, and Divines of this Realm, do
daily embrace Catholic opinions, though they profess not so much with open
mouth; for sear of the Puritans. For example; They hold that the Church of
Rome is a true Church; That the Pope is superior to all Bishops; that to him it
appertains to call general Councels; that it is lawful to pray for the soul
of the departed; that Altars ought to be erected of stone. In sum; that they
believe all that is taught by the Church; b^t not by the Court of Rome.

There was likewise an English Doctor, that told Panzanies forementioned
friend; that the King did approve of Auricular Confession, and was willing to
introduce it; and would use force to make it received; were it not for fear of
sedition amongst the people.

These affairs being so disposed; and the Overture of a peaceable
Reconciliation, so mature, for the treating of the same. Sig. Panzani was
advised to speak no more of the establishment of a Catholic Bishop in
England; that being so odious to the Prelates there: but to procure from the
King permission for a Nuntio or Agent, from the Pope, to be addressed to the
Queen; which without any bruit, might reconcile the two Courts.

And Panzani's forementioned friend did communicate the same to a personage,
which had many friends about the King: so that this expedient was proposed to
the King; and by Panzani himself to the Queen.

The King entered into deliberation upon it, with some of His most intimate
Counselors; who did approve thereof: upon condition, That he that should be
sent from the Pope should be no Priest.

The King also, to stop the mouths of murmurers, when this should be
publickely rumored, said in the presence of many: Why may not I as well receive
an Ambassador from the Pope, as I do from other Catholic Princes? And an
other time; I can now reconcile my self to the Church of Rome with much
advantage.

This affair being so established by Panzani further, to cover his designs;
and to afford some satisfaction; both to the Popish Clergy, and Regulars of
England: And to testify his care of the maine business, for which he was sent
over; he did procure some accord betwixt the Seculars and Regulars, by common
consent, upon the 22. Nov. 1635. where the Jesuits alone would not come in.

Since that time Panzani did apply himself to court the amity of the Bishops,
and Clergy of England; and particularly, of the Bishop of Chichester; to whom
he was presented by his old friend: by whom he did also caresse others;
injoyning his said friend to make promise of Cardinalships, to such as lived
unmarried; and of pensions, to such as aspired not thereunto.

As to affairs of the Civil State; the said Panzani has used incredible
diligence to discover the passions, inclinations, and dependances of the Kings
Counselors; especially, of such as are well affected to Spain; and to
discern the inclinations of the Prelates, and the means of gaining and
assuring them: as also all the Officers of the Princes House, whose nameshee
has all taken, and entered in his memorial.

In the month of July 1636. there arrived in England as the Popes Resident,
Seignior George Con a Scottish man, Secretary for the Latin tongue to
Cardinal Barbarini, who was most kindly entertained by the King, Queen, and
all the Court: and having great acquaintance and friends; he made much more
noise and bruit, than Panzani had done, by giving and receiving visits from a
great number of the Nobility. Yet there is little evidence that he shall
advance the affairs of religion better than Panzani, because of the diffidence
of the English, to whom he seems a more cunning vulpine man. And though the
report is, that he is insinuated into the hearts of the Jesuits, (who now
govern the best families of England) yet there is little hope of profit by
that means; because if the Court perceive this compliance; it may diminish the
good opinion which is now conceived of him. For both the Archbishop and Bishop
of Chichester have said often; that there are but two sorts of persons likely
to impeach and hinder reconciliation, to wit, Puritans amongst the Protestants,
and Jesuits amongst the Catholics.

Out of this Discourse it may be inferred (if it be lawful to make judgment
of things future by things past) This Realm so divided into so many factions
in matter of religion, and that of the Catholics increasing daily by the
countenance of the King, will in time (as is to be feared) be troubled and
torn with civil wars, which cannot fail amongst so many parties, when some
Heads shall once appear to them, and such will soon be found amongst the
Kings children.

FINIS.

