THE VINDICATION OF CHRIST AND HIS ORDINANCES FROM The corrupt and false
Glosses made thereon by the subtle Deceivers of these TIMES.

By Christopher Pooly, Minister of the Word at great Missingham, in Norfolk.

For there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great
signs and Wonders; in so much that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the
very Elect. Mat. 24. 24. The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear
rule by their means, etc. Jer. 5. 31. LONDON, Printed for Henry Cripps and
Lodowick Lloyd, and are to be sold at their shop in Popes. head Alley. 1652.

The Summary Heads O^ the ensuing DISCOURSE.
THe truth of Faith, and Believing, manifested. Page 1. A Treatise of
Self-denial. 8 The Love and Free Grace of God in Christ, the cause of all good
unto man. 26 Positions about the grounds of the Treatises and Meditations. 37
Arguments, made to uphold Inherent Holiness and Righteousness in Man, by the
Sanctification of the Spirit, are answered. 42 Of the Sanctification of the
Spirit. 51 Six sorts of men of different ways, opinions, or judgments, touching
their estates with God. 49 The Errors of Universal Redemption discovered. 65 A
Catechistical Dialogue useful for the propagation of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ. 74 Another Meditation of the Law. 94 Snares of Popery discovered. 103,
104 Of the Law remaining, and the Law ended in Christ, to the Elect. 110, 111
All Times, Deeds and Things present in Gods sight from Eternity. 126 Another
Catechistical Dialogue, resolving many subtle Questions, raised and made by the
Adversary, etc. 137 Rest to the Souls of Believers. 165 Christ's Government of
his Church upon Earth. 192, 193 The right meaning and understanding of these
words in Joh. 15. 5. [Without me ye can do nothing] gives light to the Truths
in these Treatises. 202, 203.
The truth of Faith, AND Believing, manifested.
BEcause the Apostle says, therefore we conclude that man is justified by
faith, without the works of the Romans 3. 28 Romans 5. 1.
Law, and the like otherwhere. Some take it, and hold forth, that a man is
justified and made righteous by his faith by believing. That he was not before
his faith righteous before God; it is his faith that does him that good to make
him righteous with God, before faith, he is an unjust man, a wicked and ungodly
man, and one of the children of wrath before God, without mercy and
forgiveness of sin before faith and repentance performed of him. There is no
justification of man before God, before Faith.

This taking and holding forth of this Scripture, although it seem to these to
be according to the history, yet it is quite contrary to the mystery of faith,
and of Christ (as the Apostle calls it:) 1 Timothy 3. 9
For it crosses all the most clear and comfortable Scriptures of Gods free
grace and love in Christ to corrupt weak and sinful Hos. 14. 4. Isa. 31. 3.
Romans 9. 11 13.
man before the world. As also the Scriptures of Gods everlasting love to those
he pleased before the world and in continuance. And the Scriptures of Gods
election of those which he pleased and loved, out of the company of the
children of wrath before the foundations of the world in Gods sight, to be holy
and without blame before him for ever in love. And the Scriptures of Gods Ephesians.
1. 4. See Ephesians. 1 4. 5. 6. Act. 13. 48. Romans 8. 30.
predestination to adoption through Christ, and ordination to eternal bliss
before the world of those which he elected in Christ before the world. And
further, of his calling, justifying and glorifying of those which he
predestined before himself, before the world (as the Scripture speaks.) And
the Scripture of the Prophet Isa. 53. 6.
Esaias, that says, God has laid the iniquities of us all upon Christ (meaning
of the Elect) not that he will (says the Prophet) but has done it before the
world, when he loved, elected, and adopted his Elect, etc.

And it crosses the Scripture, which says, that Christ justifies Romans 4. 5.
the ungodly, which must needs be understood of such as were ungodly, and the
children of wrath by the first general sin, who (being elected before the world
out of the same company, to be holy and without blame before God in love,
ordained to eternal life, and adopted Gods children) are then justified before
God, although in themselves and before men, they be still ungodly, corrupt,
sinful and carnal, as Paul said he was in his best estate, I am carnal, Romans
7. 14
sold under sin: Paul could not be loved of God, elected in Christ, and adopted
to be Gods child, ordained to eternal life before the world, and be the child
of wrath, and unjustified before God still, although he did sin in the flesh
before men. And it crosses the Scripture of the same place, where it is said,
A man is justified by Faith without the works of the Law.

To Believe is a work of the Commandment of the Law, as, to love, fear, obey,
to be humble, meek, sober, and temperate, are works of the Commandments of the
Law, and Faith and Believing done, then is the work of the Law, as loving,
fearing, obeying, humiliation, meekness, soberness, and temperance, and the
rest of that sort commanded to man in the law of works, as Paul instances, are
all works of the law, so that if a man be justified and made righteous before
by his faith and believing commanded, he is justified by the works of the law,
which (the Apostle says) no man, no flesh wall be justified by. And here he
says, A man is justified by faith without the works of the law. The doers are
justified. Romans 2. 13.


Certainly no man is justified by any work of his own, not because if he did
the work commanded righteously, the just God would not justify him therefore:
but because no man does or can do the work of the law commanded righteously,
therefore no man is justified (says the Apostle) by the works of the Law.

But (they say) faith and repentance are works of the Evangelicall law, and the
commandments thereof are the commandments of the Evangelicall law to be
performed of man.

Solut. if these take the Evangelicall law to command faith and rep^ntance to
believe and ^^pent in the ^orm of the law and covenant of works to be performed
of man before God, then they are the works of the law, by which no man can be
justified before God. But if they take this Evangelicall law (as the term holds
it forth indeed) to be the law and commandment of the covenant of grace,
whereof Christ the gracious undertaker for the elect of God, did undertake to
do the whole will of God for them, when he said, Lo I come to do thy will O
God: And that Christ has done, does, and ever will do the same of the law,
commandment Heb. 10. 9.
and covenant of grace for the elect of God, which are not, nor were ever able
to do any part thereof sithence the fall of man* and that Christ has fully
performed all to be performed in himself already, to the full satisfaction of
God for the justification, peace and salvation of the elect; so that they are
justified before God, and have peace with God, as the Apostle says, being
justified by his blood we shall be saved from Romans 5. 9.
his wrath through Christ. And Christ died for our sins and rose aagain for our
justification; therefore the elect are justified before they believe, then,
when Christ rose again before God: and God loved Jacob before he was born, or
had done good or evil before men, therefore Jacob was justified before God
before he was born, for God could not love him being still the child of wrath,
wicked and unrighteous before him: and God elected Paul and the rest in Christ
before the world to be holy and without blame before him; they could not have
been holy and without blame before God, which God elected them unto, if they
had not then been justified before God. They could not be elected out of the
children of wrath, and be still (...) children of wrath before God: they could
could not be elected to be holy and without blame before God, and be wicked and
unjustified before God still. And when God predestined those he pleased to
eternal life, he then called, justified Romans 8. 29 30.
and glorified them before himself, says the Apostle.

How then can these hold forth that a man is justified and made righteous by
faith, that it is faith that does him that good that there is no justification
to man, before faith.

And if they take it, that Christ the gracious undertaker for the elect, in the
Evangelicall law, or covenant of grace, has not only done the will of God, and
performed all to be performed, in himself, for the justification of the elect,
but also has done, does and will do the will of Mod to the end in the elect,
in inlightening their dark hearts and souls by his spirit sent unto them, and
in manifesting and witnessing by his spirit to their hearts and souls, that
they are the children of God, elected in Christ, ordained to eternal life, and
justified before God by Christ's performances, and the free grace and love of
God in Gods sight before the world, and in giving understanding, knowledge and
believing to their dead hearts and souls, of their justification, and the rest,
wrought for them by Christ, as David said, Give me understanding and I shall
Psalm. 119. 24.
live, that is, I shall know that I live in Christ, and that Christ lives in
me: then they must needs take it that the performances of Christ in the elect
are but the witnesses and manifestations of the performances of Christ in
himself for the justification of his elect, not their justifying. Christ says,
I am the vine, and he says to his elect, you are the branches. The fruit of
the vine, there bred, is John 15. (...).
conveyed by the spirits of the vine to the branches, the branches bear the
fruits of the vine, and hold them forth as instruments prepared and fitted of
the vine and spirits thereof.

The fruits that the branches bear and hold forth are not the fruits of the
branches, bred of the branches, but the fruits of the vine (so Christ called
them, Luke 22. 18.) bred of the vine, and conveyed by the spirits thereof to
the branches to be born and held forth. The branches cannot bear nor hold forth
any good fruit without the vine, and the spirits of the vine: And the good
fruits do show and manifest the good vine, whereof they are bred, and that the
branches that did bear them did abide in the vine.

So the fruits of the spirit, as love, joy, peace, faith etc. are bred Gal. 5.
22.
of Christ, and conveyed by the spirit of Christ to the elect branches of the
vine Christ, and the elect (as Christ pleases to do the will of God in them as
his branches) do bear and hold them forth. But the fruits of the spirit are not
bred of the elect, but of Christ, and by his spirit conveyed to them, and
therefore called the fruits of the spirit, to be born and held forth by them,
as fitted branches and instruments of Christ the vine, and his spirit; and the
elect cannot bear them of themselves, without Christ and his spirit breed them
and conveigh them; and therefore Christ faith, Without me you can do nothing:
that is, you cannot bear the fruits, nor hold them forth without me; and the
fruits of the spirit, born and held forth in man do witness and evidence
Christ in him that bare them, and do also witness that that man is elected in
Christ, and abides in Christ the vine (as the Apostle says) his spirit
witnesses, and faith is the evidence of things not seen. Romans 8. 16 H^b. 11. 1.


All that which Christ does of the will of God in the elect, does not justify
them, or make them the children of God, but only does witness and manifest to
them that they are justified and made the children of God, by the performances
done in himself, and that (of grace) by the imputation of his Righteousness,
and the Righteousness of his performances in himself to them, they are made
Righteous, the children of God, and saved.

As it is said, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
Righteousness.

It could not be Abraham's believing according to the Commandment of the law of
Works, that was imputed to him for Righteousness, for Abraham, no doubt, was a
corrupt sinful man, as all the Elect are in themselves, and and his believing
was corrupt and sinful as himself was; and God that did never call evil good,
did never impute sin for Righteoulness; and if Abraham's Righteousness had been
of his believing according to the Commandment, then it had been of his works
that he was justified; contrary to the Scripture.

The faith and believing, the fruit of the spirit of Christ, that Abraham did
bear, as a branch of the Vine Christ, did only witness and manifest to him
that he was justified by Christ, and his performances they did not justify
him; But Abraham being one of Gods Elect in Christ, for whom Christ had
undertaken, and in himself performed all Righteousness before God, it, that is
the Righteousness of Christ's performances was imputed to him for Righteousness
by grace.

The Elect in Christ, the Adopted through Christ, those who See Romans 4. 5, 6.
are ordained to eternal life, whose sins were laid upon Christ from the
beginning, which Christ has performed all for in himself, to the full
satisfaction of God, are justified before God, before Faith, before they
believe, (of grace) by the imputation of Christ's Righteousness to them: Their
work of Faith cannot justify them, the grace of Faith wrought in them by the
spirit of Christ does not justify them, but witness and^ manifest that they
are justified by the Righteousness of Christ's performances for them in himself.

The Elect of God in Christ are justified by the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness to them of free grace, and this is the blessedness Rom 4 6.
of Faith the Prophets and Apostles held forth to them.

Ob. But the deceiving spirit and the deceived will object, that these
predecations and and openings of Faith, are a great derogation and undervaluing
of faith, which in the history of the Scriptures is so highly extolled to have
done, and do great things for man, and that man has done great things by
faith; a man (faith the Apostle) is justified by faith; Christ says to the
woman, Thy faith has saved thee; by faith Peter walked upon the Sea, until
R^^ 3. 2. 8 L^ke 7. 50 Man. 14. 29 3^. H^b 10. 38. H^b. 11 4. 5. 7. (...).
(...). 20. 2^. 22. 23 29.
he doubted; by faith, faith the Apostle, the just shall live, Abel, Enoch,
Noah, Abraham, Jsaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses did great things by faith; by faith
the walls of Jericho were overthrown, and fell down.

An. All these and the rest spoken of the faith of Gods Elect in the
Scriptures, do not intend to show, that by the power of Faith these great
things are or were done, but to show, that these great things done of, and by
the power of our great God and his goodness were made known to them,
manifested, evidenced, and witnessed to them, when they believed them so done
of him. Joshua and the Priests did believe the Walls of Jericho fell down by
the power of God, the walls fell not down by their believing, although they
were not down to them before they believed the same. The woman believed that
she was saved by the mercy and performance of Jesus Christ, she was not saved
by the power of her believing, yet she knew not her self saved until she
believed it. So a man that believes that he is justified by Christ, and the
righteousness of his performance, imputed to him, is not justified to himself;
before his believing he knows not that he is justified, until he believe^h
it. His believing is the first Gospel Messenger that brings to him the glad
tidings of his Justification by Christ, and his righteousness, yet not
justified by his believing: and this is the reason why Faith is so much
extolled in the history of Scriptures. If a man were in the prison of a dark
dungeon, and there should come a messenger to him, and assure him of his
enlargement, and to be settled in a Kingdom, would he not ever make much of,
and extol this messenger that brought him this first good tidings? Faith is the
first Messenger of Christ that he sends to poor corrupt man (sitting in
darkness and the shadow of death) of his enlargement, of his Justification,
Adoption and Salvation in the heavenly Kingdom; this Faith therefore must needs
be highly extolled of all men, and all the Penmen of Christ.

Yet it may not be Idolized, set up above our God, Christ, nor equalized to or
before Christ, to justify a man before God, which (...) Fh^s. 2.
is only in the power of Christ, and the gracious work of Christ. This is
Antichrist, the man of sin that does this, it is therefore the deceiving
Spirit, and those which are deceived, that hold forth, that it is faith that
first justifies a man, and makes a man righteous before God, and that does
him that good.

Ob. But the deceiving Spirit, and the deceived, do further object; By the
grace of Christ, by the help of Christ, Christ strengthening me, I am able to do
the ^ommandement of the Law of God, that commands me to believe, to love, to
repent, etc. so Paul said Phil. 1. 13.
(say they) I am able to do all things through the help of Christ that
strengthens me.

Ans. Paul said the truth, that he (being a Branch of the Vine Christ) was able
by the help of Christ the Vine to bear, and hold forth the fruit of the Spirit
of Christ (being strengthened by Christ) as faith, love, repentance, and the
rest; but not to be the worker and doer of the fruits of the Spirit, faith,
love, and repentance, which belongs to Christ and his Spirit only (as the
Apostle Heb. 12. 1.
says) Jesus is the author and finisher of our faith, and the rest, that we
bear and hold forth by his help and strengthening: Paul said he was able to do
all things by the help and strengthening of Christ, belonging to the branch and
instrument of Christ, to bear and hold forth love, faith, repentance, and the
rest of the works of the will and commandment of God wrought up in him by
Christ the undertaker and his Spirit to be born and held forth of him, and
other branches, and these are the all things intended of Paul.

Man cannot do, nor be a doer of the will and Commandment of God, (as to
believe, love, repent, and the rest) by the help and strengthening of Christ;
for if he could, and should do, or be a doer of the work, he should have wages,
and might challenge a debt of God, a share in the work: To him says the
Apostle that Romans 4. 4.
works, the wages is not accounted off vor or grace, but of debt.

Now the Apostle says, all the goodness of God to man is of grace, not of
debt for his work and doing of the will and Commandment of God: we (says he)
are justified freely by his grace, by the grace of God I am that I am (says
Paul) by Christ's grace ye Romans 3. 24 1 Cor. 15. 10. Epb. 2. 5. 8
are saved (says Paul) And Paul said, I find no means to perform that which is
good, that is* no help, no strengthening by Christ to perform the will and
commandment of God, which Christ has undertaken to do, and which only is able
to do the same, J am carnal sold under sin, the good which I would do, that J
do not, and Romans 7. 18.
the evil which J would not do, that J do; when J would do good, evil is
present with me, (says Paul.)

And further, these saying that they are able to do the will and Commandment
of God by the help of Christ, etc. do much exalt themselves, and dishonor
Christ, and his undertaking of doing the whole will of God for poor corrupt and
unable man: for they make themselves the principal doers of the will and
Commandment of God, and Christ but their helper, their auxiliary: a helper is
not the principal in any thing.

Thus they would make Christ a helper of their faith and believing, of their
justifying and saving, but themselves the principal: This is the man of sin,
the Antichrist exalting himself above our gracious undertaker and God, Christ,
Babes keep your selves from ^
Idols.

The mystery of the Gospel of Faith and Christ, is hid to none but those which
are lost, and to those which are lost, it is hid.

A TREATISE OF Self-denial.
Luke 9. 23. And he said unto them all, if any man will come after me, let him
deny himself.
BY the words (it seems) there were many then that showed themselves to come
after Christ; for he said these words to them all in the 14. verse. It is said
there was five thousand then, it is like there are multitudes now, and of all
sorts. But Jesus (it seems) did not approve of their coming after him; and
therefore he sets to them all the way to come after him, that they were not
yet in, which they must needs be in, that come after him in truth; which way,
he says, is every man to deny himself.

All bearing name of Christians, pretend coming after Christ, following of
Christ; they pretend it in coming to Church, in coming to Sermons and
Sacraments; therefore this way prescribed of Christ to these, to deny their
selves, is the way that Christ prescribes to all Christians that come after
him, to deny their selves.

Christ gave this advertisement to all in a legal, imperative, and commanding
way, to do the will of God, let him deny himself, although he had undertaken
before God, and manifested himself that he came to discharge the Elect of that
burden, Lo I come, says Hob. 10. (...).
Christ, to do thy will, O God for thy chosen ones; J came to fulfill the Law,
Mat. 5. 17. to fulfill all righteousness: and although he knew commanding them
would little avail to the doing of the work commanded; because he knew they
were not able to do this, nor other his commandments before God; yet because
he knew man's corrupt estate knew more of the Law and commandment which they
had broken ever sithence the first Adam, then they did of the last Adam, the
Christ, undertaker and redeemer; therefore he spoke unto them in their own
natural corrupt light and knowledge, thereby to set up more light thereof to
them, that so they might more behold and see their nakedness, want, poverty,
and blindness. And Romans 3. 17.
this Christ did for the Gospel sake, as the Apostle said, he often did.

This was done of Christ with these, much after the manner as Romans 9. 23.
he did with the man that asked him, what he should do to inherit eternal
life; who answered him, thou know the commandments; which saying, that he
had kept all those; yet Christ knowing he had not, set him one hard part of the
commandment yet to do, viz. to go and sell all that he had, and give to the
poor, whereat he being damped, went away sorrowful. Mark 10. 1^ 18. 19. 20.
22. Luke 18. 1^ Doct.


The Doctrine here held forth of Christ is this, That all that call themselves
Christians ought to deny themselves.

Two things to be considered. 1. What it is to deny our selves. 2. The mystery
and strangeness thereof to natural man.

For the first to deny a man's self, is not meant of Christ, that a a man should
deny himself to be that which he is in truth, or to have that which he has in
truth, or to do that which he does in truth. But to deny a man's self here
intended of Christ, is to deny himself to be that which he thinks himself to
be, and is not in truth; and to deny himself to have that, which he thinks
himself to have, and has not in truth; and to deny himself to do that which
he thinks himself to do, and does not in truth: wherein these particulars
are intended, specially to be good, holy, wise, just and righteous in himself:
To have goodness, holiness, wisdom, righteousness, etc. in himself. To do
good etc. himself, or at least to behave and do somewhat of these, etc. And
there is no man in this his corrupt estate, but thinks himself verily to be
all these, to have all these, and to do all these before God, or at least to
behave, and to do somewhat of all these, which he neither is, has, nor does,
nor can do in himself before God, no not in the least of any of them, as shall
be made plain.

If any man or woman here should be asked, if he did not think himself to be at
least a little good, holy, wise, just; and to have at least a little some
holiness, goodness, wisdom, justness in Gods sight, as to do some good in
Gods sight, sure though he or she did answer, as they thought, they would say
they were, had, and did somewhat at least, that they had and did something,
that was good, holy, wise, just, and righteous in Gods sight.

If a man should come to any of you here, and should say to the same man or
woman, there is no goodness in you before God; and the rest, you would be
angry, and think he did you wrong. And if any should dissemble, and consent in
present, that he were not, had not, or did not that which is good in the sight
of God, yet in their converse and competitions with men and women, they would
be found to hold themselves forth to be good, to have good, and do good, and
the rest; yea in controversy and contention, to be better, wiser, juster, and
honester then the other before God, and would not deny themselves, as Christ
here teaches them. And this is the cause and raise of wars and contentions
among men, yea among Christians, that profess themselves to come after Christ,
that they will not, nor can deny themselves in these things: For the wise man
says, only by pride comes contention. Prove. 13. 10
Men may allege what they will to be the cause of their wars and contentions,
but the assertion of the Holy Ghost will only stand before God, that only pride
is the cause of contention and wars. But if Christians professing themselves to
come after Christ, would deny themselves to be good, wise, holy, just, or to
have any goodness, wisdom, holiness, justice, and righteousness 1 Cor. 1.
1. Iam. 4. 1.
in themselves in truth, and to do, or be able to do any good thing, holy,
wise, and righteous thing in the sight of God, as Christ here teaches, they
would lay down all wars and contentions, and humble themselves one to another,
and make themselves equal to them of the lower sort as the Apostle advises,
and only look upon Christ to exalt them which exalts the humble and meek,
and gives rest to their souls.

Quest. Some may ask, Is there no man that is good, wise, holy, or just in the
sight of God, that has goodness and can do good in the sight of God, and the
rest, or at least something thereof?

Answ. There is none nor have been any sithence the fall and general loss in
Adam.

The Scripture (to be believed) make it clear, David says, God Psalm. 53. 2. 3.
looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any
that did understand and seek God: But they are all gone back, they are
altogether corrupt there is none that does good no not one. And Paul says
jointly with David, There is none righteous, no not one; Romans 3. 10, 11, 12.
there is none that understand, there is none that seek God. All are become
unprofitable, there is none that does good no not one. And Christ said to the
man, There is none good but one, and that is God. And Esaias Mat. 19. 17. Isa.
64. 6.
says of himself and other like him, We are all as an unclean thing, all our
Righteousness is as filthy rags.

And Paul of himself in his best estate, I am carnal sold under sin, in me,
that is in my flesh, the corrupt man) dwells no good thing, Romans 7. 18.
And if any (says he) is somewhat when he is nothing, he deceives himself in
his own imagination. And Paul said, (he found no means Gal. 6. 3. Romans 7. 18.
to perform that which is good) The good he would do he did not; and when he
would do good, evil was present with him.

Quest. But it will be asked, if no man be good, wise, just, holy, nor have
goodness, wisdom, justice, holiness, nor can do that which is good etc. before
God; Wherefore do the spirit of God in the Scriptures term and call some men
good, just, holy, wise. etc.

A good man (says Solomon) gets favor of the Lord; therefore Prove. 12. 2.
Math. 12. 35. Job 1. 1. Acts 10. 22. Math. 2. 1.
some good man there is. A go^d man out of the good treasure of his heart
brings forth good things says Christ: God called Job a just man, Cornelius
was called a just man, and Zacharias and Elizabeth were said to be just before
God, and to walk in all the Commandments of God without reproof.

They were called Wise men that came from the East to seek, worship, and offer
gifts unto Christ: Paul called those of the church Saints, that is, Holy men:
And Luke says, God spoke by his Romans 1. 5.
holy Prophets: Paul says, God revealed that to the holy Apostles, Act. 3. 21.
Ephesians. 3. 5.
and Prophets, which he did not before to the sons of men: Why are men thus
said in the Scriptures to be good, just, wise, holy, if none are, nor ever were
so sithence the fall and loss in Adam?

Answ. These were so good, holy, just, wise in the estimation of men, and
therefore so reorded of the Penmen of the holy Scriptures; and no doubt but
they were special branches of the Vine Christ, such men as the world was not
worthy of, yea further, they were good, holy, wise, just, and without blame
before God in Christ, as they were elected in Christ, ingrafted in Christ,
abiding in Christ, as Paul said, he and all the elect in Christ were before
Ephesians. i. 4.
the world; God, says he, has elected us in Christ before the world, to be
holy and without blame before him in love. And after the same manner he says,
We are quickened in Christ, raised up in Christ, we live in Christ says Luke:
In him we live, move, and have our being: Ephesians. 2. 6. Acts 17. 8. Col. 3. 3. 2
Cor. 2. 4. Act. 2. 12, 13.
Our life is hid with Christ in God says Paul: These are the mysteries of
Christ, the mysteries of the gospel, the mysteries of Faith so called, hid to
those which are lost, as the Apostle says, The mysteries of Christ are not
manifested tto all.

When the holy Ghost was come plentifully upon the Apostles according to
Christ's promise, that they spoke to much people there gathered the mysteries of
Christ, of the gospel, of Faith; it is said some marvelled, some doubted, some
mocked; some said they were drunk and spoke they knew not what; but some
believed, as they did at Paul's Sermon at Antioch: As many as were ordained As
13. 48.
to eternal life believed.

And it may be there are of all these somes here, some that marvel, some that
doubt, some that mock and deride, some that think and will say these mysteries
now delivered are strange things, things spoken by me, as I know not what, yet
there may be some here ordained to eternal life that believe: Indeed this is a
mystery spoken, that Christ should command men to do that, which in the least
he knows they cannot do themselves; who will lay a burden upon the back of
his beast, that knows he cannot bear it?

It is a mystery that every man should think himself to be, have, and do that
before God, at least somewhat, which he neither is, have, nor does in truth.

It is a mystery that every man corrupted thinks himself to be, have, and do
some good thing at least before God, whenas there is no man that is, has, or
does any thing in the least, good, holy, just in Gods fight.

It is (...), that every man corrupted should be dead in himself, and that he
that is quickened and lives, shall be quickened and live only in Christ; that he
that is holy, good, just, wise, etc. should only be holy, good, just, wise
etc. in Christ, not in himself: And that for these things being in truth so,
Christ sets out to every man that comes after him to deny himself, which no
corrupt man in truth can do, as has been proved.

Object. I say the Prophet did deny himself, when he said, We Isa. 64. 6.
are all as an unclean thing, all our Righteousness is as filthy rags. Paul
did deny himself when he said, When the commandment came Romans 7.
sin revived and I died, and when he said I am carnal sold under sin, and when
he said, there dwelt no good thing in him, and that he found no means to do the
thing that was good, and that the good which he would do, that he did not; and
the evil that he would not do, that he did.

Answ. This denial of a man's self, is that which Christ intended in his
commandment indeed, but it was not Esaias, nor Paul of themselves, that did thus
deny themselves, but this fruit was wrought up in them from the Vine Christ, by
the spirit of Christ, which they as branches of the Vine did bear and hold
forth as Christ pleased to make them his instruments thereof* This was Christ's
work and performance in them, for an evidence, witness, and manifestation to
them, that they were branches abiding in Jesus Christ the Vine, and came after
Jesus Christ in truth, not their own work and performance, howsoever of grace
it pleases the Lord Jesus Christ to account it theirs, for a corrupt and evil
Tree can bring forth no such good fruit.

Quest. If Christ in these words command and call men to deny themselves, which
is too hard for them to do in truth before God, but only outwardly before men,
which is but dissimulation before God, what benefit is this to men, that Christ
teaches and commands them to deny themselves, to come after him, which they
cannot do in truth; they shall come after Christ never the more: for in
whatsoever Christ requires, he requires truth in the inward parts, as David
says; and he says, My son give me thy heart: A corrupt man cannot give a pure
heart. Psalm. 51. 6. Prove. 23. 26.


Answ. Yes, it is much benefit and good to men where Christ commands and
teaches, although they cannot do it themlelves before God, but only outwardly
before men; and therefore the Apostle says, The Law is good if a man use it
lawfully. Tim. 1. 8.


For although Christ holds forth his commandment to show what all were bound
to do before God, which he has undertaken and satisfied God for, touching the
Elect in him; yet he also holds the same forth for the benefit and good of
his church and people among themselves, by his commanding and teaching, and
that many ways.

1. For example and comfort to men; although my well doing extends not to
thee O Lord (says David) yet it extends to the Saints upon earth; and the
Apostle advises to be careful to Ps. 16. 2. 3.
do good works, because they are good and profitable to men: and therefore
Christ said, Let your light so shine before men, that they seeing your good
works, may glorify your Father which is in heaven. Man. 5. 16.
The seeing of good works commanded by Christ done outwardly, may move men to
praise God before men. And if men see others so humble, as deny themselves to
have any goodness, to be nothing but sinful, it may be a means to make them
smite their breasts, and say, Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

2. When Christ by his Ministers and Instruments holds forth his Word, and
teaching, purely and truly, it is a comfortable evidence Mat. 13. 4. 5. 8.
to that people that there are some of Gods chosen ones, some ordained to
eternal life there. When the sower went out to sow, some of his seed fell upon
good ground, although some Act. 2. 41.
upon bad. There was some good ground there, otherwise the wise sower would not
have gone out to sow. When the Apostle preached to those great multitudes at
the glorious descending of the Holy Ghost upon them, although some wondered,
some doubted, some mocked, some railed, yet some there were that believed. And
when Paul preached at Antioch, although no doubt Act. 13. 48
many there believed not, yet so many there as were ordained to eternal life
believed; some believed.

3. The Law and commandment of Christ is good and beneficial to men; for
thereby they come to know sin, to know their error, which otherwise they could
not do. So Paul said, he knew Romans 7. 7.
not sin but by the Law; I had not known lust had been sin (says he) if the
Law had not said thou shall not lust; and again, by the Law came the knowledge
of sin. It is a great good to a man that is Romans 3. 20.
out of his way, to be told that he is out of his way; but indeed it is a
greater good to him to be told the right way.

The Law and command of God can tell thee that thou art out of the way, but it
cannot tell thee the right way. But mark, thou shall hear a voice behind thee,
telling thee, this is the way (says Isa. 30. 31.
the Prophet.) The Law may tell thee of sin and transgression, but the Law
cannot tell thee of Christ, which is the right way, the only way in truth to
heaven, who says, I am the way and truth, and the life no man comes to the
Father, but by me (says Christ) he that climeth another way is a thief and a
robber. O take heed ye be be not found as these thieves and robbers. It is the
voice behind that tells of Christ the way, the right way, the gospel, the
voice of the Son of God in the gospel that came behind after the law that
tells thee of Christ the right way to walk in, to the Father in heaven. The
law now tells of death, but not of life, although it was at first ordained
unto life: for, says Paul, that which was ordained unto life, is now found to
be unto me unto death. The letter kills (says Paul) it is the spirit that
gives life. The Law that tells a man his error, is a benefit, although the
gospel be a Romans 7. 10.
much greater good to man that tells him of Christ the right way to heaven.

4. The holding forth of the law and commandment is beneficial to men; Christ
in the Scriptures speaks of his Law and commandments as he does of
afflictions.

They are (say the Prophets) as a wall of fire and as an hedge of Zach. 2. 3.
Hos. 2. 5. 6 7.
thorns to keep men from transgressing, sinning, and going beyond their bounds.
The curse, thunderings and threatenings of the commandment does scare and fear
corrupt man in sinning, in evil and mischief. And this is much for the good
and safety of Gods chosen people, which are among the reprobate, as sheep among
wolves (as Christ speaks) I send you as sheep among wolves.

5. The holding forth of the commandment is to the great benefit, Mat. 10. 16.
17.
and comfortable good of believers in Jesus Christ; for it has resemblance to
the brazen Serpent that Moses set up in the wilderness, which had the form of
the serpent that wounded man, and it had the figure of Jesus Christ that healed
man. So the commandment held forth has the form of the law that condemned
man, and it has the figure of Jesus Christ and his performances that saves
man, which is clearly represented to believers in Jesus Christ therein: For it
shows what Jesus Christ has done for them, the chains they were bound in,
the curse they were under, and their deliverance. It shows what Jesus Christ
has done for them in himself for their justification and salvation in
fulfilling of the hard law and commandment impossible for them to have done,
or to do before God. I came (says he) to fulfill the law. And it represents
to believers the undertaking of Christ, of all these with God the Father of
mercies, from the beginning, for all those chosen in him, to do the whole will
of God for their justification and salvation, in himself, and also in them by
his spirit sent unto them for manifestation, evidence and witnesses to them of
all undertaken and done for them, to Gods satisfaction, and their salvation by
Christ, as in his own words is held forth, where he says, Lo I come to do thy
will, O God, etc. Heb. 10. 9.


And the Law and Commandment thus held forth (as the Apostle says) he usually
did for the Gospells sake, become a Gospel to believers, a witness of life,
and not of death to Believers. 1 Cor 9. 23.
As in this commandment of self-denial in the Text, if it be holden forth, to
show what Christ has done for his people in himself in denying of himself for
them, who being in the form of God, and equal with God, made himself of no
reputation, took upon him the ^orm of a servant, ana was made like unto men,
and was Phi. 6. 7, 8.
found in shape as a man, humbled himself, and became obedient to the death,
even to the death of the Cross; and all this done of Christ, imputed to them,
and made theirs of grace, and witnessed by the work of the Spirit in them; this
hard commandment to corrupt man, becomes now a Gospel to the Believers.

Indeed, this and other the commandments are commonly taken and held forth to
Gods people under grace in the form of the Law of works, as it was held forth
to Adam in innocence, when he had power and freewill to do, where the command,
and the condition was keep this, do this, and live eternally, break this, and
die eternally, as if men had now power and free will to do the command, as
Adam had before he lost for himself and all.

And some held forth the commandment thus, only the curse and commination
thereof to be taken away, to Gods chosen people by Christ, but that they are
still bounp to do the command, to endeavor rnd do something thereof themselves
before God, that the commandments remain still as a rule for them to follow, in
Gods sight, to please God, to enjoy life, to come to the Father, without which
(themselves endeavoring and doing) they cannot come to the Father in heaven.
But (I take it) they might more truly say, by such endeavoring and doing the
command themselves, no man shall, or can come to the Father in heaven.

For mark (good people of God) what Christ says, I am the way, the truth, and
the life, no man comes to the Father, but by me. I am the door, no man enters
to the Father but by me and he that Joh. 14 6. Joh. 10. 19. Joh. 10. 9.
climbeth up another way is a thief and a robber. Christ, is the only way that
the Father has graciously made for all his chosen ones to come to him by Jesus
Christ is his beloved Son, in whom the Father is only pleased.

This is the honor that the Father has given him for his undertaking, work and
performance for poor lost man, to Gods satisfaction, and man salvation.

If any man therefore holds himself forth to please God, to climb up to the
Father, by his own endeavors, devotions, and performances, he robs Christ
of his honor, of the honor only due to him, and therefore says Christ, he is a
thief and a robber.

If a King should for special love and service done to him, give to his son
that honor, that no man should come to him into his presence, but by this his
Son. And if any man should be so bold, as to endeavor another way to come to
the King, both the King and his Son must needs think it a great affront, and
wrong, and dishonor done to them.

But poor proud man, do what thou can of the commandment, to please God, to
make thy way to come to the Father, yet thou can not do so much as the
Pharisees, Herod, Judas, and Demas did; which although they were much in men's
estimation, yet they are accounted in the Scriptures, to be but Thieves and
Robbers.

APPLICATION.
THat where the Spirit of Christ is, it works up consideration of these
things, and therefore David says, O consider this, Use. (...).
you that forget God, least he pluck you away, and tear you in pieces, Psa. 50.
22.
and there be none to deliver you. Where the consideration of these things is
not, there is the evidence of Gods wrath, that he will tear them in pieces; and
there shall be none to deliver them; where meat is not chewed, there is little
nourishment, and where the Word of God is not considered, there is little
edification. The gold of the Sanctuary was all weighed, the Bereans searched,
Act. 17. 13.
whether those things preached were so or no, to their commendation. But where
the things of God pass away, as they come without consideration, it is a token
and evidence that the Spirit of Christ is not there, that they are not the
children of God, but the children of Wrath.

Use 2. Reproves all men's Pharisaical pride, and boasting of their own
goodness, honesty, holiness, and righteousness; one says, I am good, honest,
just, a Saint; another says, I am better then thou; and another says, I am
not as other men are; whenas all are naught, as an unclean thing, before God,
in themselves. The more any man boasts and seeks the praise of men, the
worse he is before God; and therefore Christ says, Woe be to you when all men
speak well of you.

Use 3. Reproves the high conceit of inherent holiness and righteousness in
man, by the sanctification of the Spirit, whereby Luct. 16 15
he can do, and does the works of holiness and righteousness before God as the
Agent thereof (as they hold:) And it reproves all Popes holiness to be Saints
in themselves, and to be able to sanctify other persons and things by their
inherent holiness; when as it is clear, if any men have had, or have any
holiness and righteousness in themselves, their souls, or bodies, then no doubt
but David, Esaias, Paul, had the same as manifest as any other: But it is showed
before, that they all deny the same, they deny themselves to be holy, good,
righteous, or to have had any such goodness inherent in themselves, or to have
themselves done any works of goodness, holiness, or righteousness before God: They
have acknowledged themselves to be unclean, carnal, corrupt, not any good thing
dwelling in themselves; their inherent holiness and Phil. 3. 8.
righteousness in themselves; to be nothing but filthiness, loss, and dung
before God, that they found no means to do the thing that is good before God.

Use 4. Reproves the idolatrous opinion of many that think and affirm, that
their prayers, and the prayers of esteemed righteous men, have power to move
God and prevail with God to do them good, to forgive them their sins, to keep
and turn evils from them and to deliver them from evils upon them, that there
is much good and virtue in men's prayers, and this they think they have sure
ground of Scripture for; for say they,

Object. Jesus taught his Disciples to pray for all these things in that which
they call the Lords Prayer; Christ commands to pray, and promises to give to
them that ask and pray; and his These. 5. 17.
Apostles command the churches to whom they wrote to pray continually, and say
The prayer of the faithful avails much; and ^am. 5. 16.
to make Gods promises good unto prayer, the Scripture says Moses prayed, and
the Israelites overcame the Amalekites in the Battle; Eliah prayed, and God
sent rain. Iam. 5. 18


Answ. All these set forth in the Scriptures are true and good: But yet if thou
think and affirmest that thine own prayers, and the prayers of other men
have power and strength to move God, to prevail with God, to do thee or them
good, to forgive thy sins, to keep thee from evil, to turn evil from thee, and
deliver thee from evil upon thee, that there is much good and virtue in thine
or their prayers, thou make an Idol of prayer.

Mark this well, When the Israelites had fiery Serpents among them, which stung
many to death, God by Moses set up a Brazen Number. 21. 8 9.
Serpent to figure Christ, that whosoever was stung, he commanded to look upon
the Brazen Serpent set up, and he should be healed; and as many as looked upon
it after Gods command, and according to Gods Ordinance, were healed.

But afterward the people made it an Idol, burnt incense to it, accounting the
goodness and virtue whereby they healed to be in the Serpent of Brass, not in
Jesus Christ, which it figured; therefore the servant and Instrument of God,
King Hezekiah, 2 Kin. 18. 4. 1 Cor. 15. 56.
brake it in pieces.

This fiery Serpent is among us, it does sting all with sin unto death, The
sting of sin is death, (says the Apostle.)

Jesus Christ has set up Prayer in the room of the Brazen Serpent to his
church and people, to be a figure and representation of himself unto them, that
if we his people will return unto prayer according to his Ordinance, and look
upon him represented in prayer (as he has commanded,) then we shall all of us
be sure to be healed, as all were healed that were stung by the fiery Serpent
of the Israelites.

But if we fall to esteem virtue, goodness, power, and strength in our prayers
to do us the good, to be able to move God, and to prevail with God to do us the
good; we make an Idol of our Praver, and we and our prayers shall perish.

I know there are many in these modern times professing Christianity, and
having sundry names for their different ways, as Papists, Arminians,
Anabaptists, Brownists, Presbyterians, Independents, and others; and all
zealous of the commandments of our God, and the duties thereof, especially
they of those sorts, which for the manifestation of their zeal, and increase of
Proselites, make many private meetings and Conventicles, for prayer, and
performances of other duties commanded to edification of men in their ways,
whereby they think, they please God, pacify God, move God, and prevail with
God to do them good: But alas in all these they rob Christ of his honor, and
make an Idol of their Prayers and performances, for that they give the honor
that is only Christ's, (to please God, to pacify God, to move God, to prevail
with God to do men good) unto their own performances, which in truth are
corrupt and sinful, and therefore cannot please God.

Object. But these will say, We do all that we do, to the honor and service of
God.

Answ. The greatest Idolaters have ever said so, and (no question) had
intention thereto; we cannot think but that the Israelites that made and
worshipped the golden Calf, did say they did it to Gods honor and service, and
intended it so; and they that did bow the knee to Baal, did it, and intended it
to Gods honor and service.

And the Papists that bow to the image of Christ, say they do it and intend it
to the honor and service of Christ, and yet the same is idolatry.

So these may do and intend all their Prayers and performances to the honor
and service of God, and yet that they do be idolatry, whilst they give that
honor to their own Prayers and performances, which is only Christ's.

It seems that the Apostle Paul did find many of the Israelites in the like
zealous condition touching the commandment of God, as these profess themselves
to be; unto whom he wrote in these words, (...) bear you record you have a zeal
of God, but not according Romans 10. 2 3. 4.
to knowledge, for you bring ignorant of the righteousness of God, and going
about to establish your own righteousness, have not submitted your selves to
the righteousness of God for Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness, to
every one that believes.

There are three things marked by the Apostle in those Israelites answering to
these zelotes.

1. They were zealous of God, his honor and service, so are these.

2. They were so zealous in ignorance, because they were ignorant of the
righteousness of God, (meaning in Christ) and would not submit unto that, which
is all righteousness that is in Gods sight righteousness, to please God, to
pacify God, to move God, to do men good, so are these. 3. They would establish
their own righteousness, the righteousness of their own performances, to have
power to please and pacify God, to move God and prevail with God to do them
good, (which must needs be understood by establishing their own righteousness)
for nothing can please and pacify God, move and Romans 10. 4
prevail with God, but true righteousness, which Christ (faith the Apostle) is
the only performer and finisher of to those that believe Christ is the end of
the law for righteousness to every one that believes.

In this glass, such as go about to please God by their performances, 1 Job. 5.
21
may see their idolatrous faces clearly, Babes (says the Apostle) keep your
selves from Idols.

Quest. But these will say, Wherefore does God command men to do the duties of
his commands, if the doing of the duties do not please and pacify God, and
move him to do them good?

Answ. For resolution therein, look back to that which has been said before of
the benefits of Gods commandments to men.

Quest. Have not true Believers care and zeal to do the duties of Gods
commandments?

Answ. Yes that they have in all humbleness and reverence, for the care, zeal,
and devotion of the duties of all godliness, is wrought up in them by the
Spirit of Christ, which they, as branches of the Vine Christ, abiding and alive
in him, do bear and hold forth; and they are not so wrought up in them to bear
and hold them forth, that they should thereby please and pacify God, or
prevail with God to do them good; ut to manifest, evidence, and witness to
them, that God is pleased with them, and pacified toward them in Christ, whose
fruits they are that they bear and hold forth: And that Christ's performances in
himself have prevailed, and will ever prevail with God to do them good, that
all shall work together for the best unto them, and herein is the joy and the
rest of true Believers.

Indeed I hear there are some, because they hear there is no goodness in their
Prayers and duties performing to please God, no promise to prevail with God to
do them goed, therefore they give over prayer, etc.

I wish these would observe, if any of the Israelites stung with the fiery
Serpent, did not return to the Brazen Serpent the figure of Christ, to look
upon it, they were sure to die.

Even so they which refuse to return unto Prayer, the figure and representation
of Christ's Spirit in man, which Christ has set up for a figure and represent
on of the same, being stung with sin, the sting whereof is death, they are sure
to die: Must thou needs make an Idol of thy prayers and duties, or else thou will not, nor must not pray?

Thou shall find it true, If thou do not deny thy self to be good, to have
goodness, (as here Christ commands) thou make an idol of thy self; and if
thou do hold thy prayer to have any virtue or power to please God, to move
God to do thee good, thou make an idol of thy prayer, giving that honor to
it, which is only Christ's, to whom all power is given.

Quest. But some will ask, if prayer move not and prevail not with God by the
strength it has to the forgiveness of sin, and to the healing diseases in men,
why does the Apostle say, If any man be sick, among you, let him send for the
Elders of the church, and let them pray for him etc. and the prayer of Faith
shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up, and of he have committed
sin, it shall be forgiven him; and further, The prayer of a Righteous man
avails much if it be fervent?

Answ. The Gospel is a mystery, Faith is a mystery, and Christ is a mystery,
(as the Apostle says) which mystery is hid to those which are lost, be they
never so wise and learned otherwise: And in these words is this mystery, as in
many other of holy Scripture.

The Apostle does not say, that the Elders or the prayers of the Elders shall
save the sick, and raise them up, or procure forgiveness of sins, or avail much
with God; but he says, the prayer of Faith shall save the sick, the Lord shall
raise him up, the sin committed shall be forgiven him; it is the prayer of
Faith that avails, there is the mystery.

Now we are to observe, that both Prayer and Faith are fruits of the Spirit,
and the fruits of the Spirit are wrought up into the branches from Christ the
Vine, as the fruits of the vine are wrought up to the branches that bear them,
by the spirits of the vine: The Representation is Christ, where he says, I am
the Vine, ye are the branches. Ioh. 15. 5.


The fruits of the vine, wrought up by the spirits of the vine to the branches
which bear them, are not to do any thing to, or for the branches, but to show
and manifest that those branches that bear them are abiding alive in the vine,
that they are living branches of the vine, and those branches have those
fruits, and all conveyed to them from the vine by the spirits thereof, that
they are all of the vine.

So then Faith and Prayer being fruits of the Vine Christ, conveyed by the
spirit of Christ, to the Elders of the church, the branches of Christ do not,
nor can do any thing to them, or for them that bear them, but only manifest,
evidence, and witness to them that they are in Christ, that they have all good
for them from Christ, his undertaking and performance, that they are all from
Christ as his instruments; it is none of the Elders power, virtue, or godliness
whereby the sick is healed, saved, sin is forgiven (as Peter said,) It is not
of our power or godliness that this lame Act. 3. 12.
man is healed: Neither must these say so, except they will make themselves
Gods; for there is none that can forgive sins but Mar. 2. 7.
God only, none heal and save but Christ only; there is no salvation in any
other, says Luke. Act. 4 12.


It is meant then that prayer does only manifest and witness the saving,
healing, and forgiveness of sin from Christ and his performances, not that
Prayer, Faith, or any godliness of man does it.

The Brazen Serpent did show and witness their healing from Christ,
represented by it, but it did not heal them by any virtue or strength in it.

The Image or stamp of Caesar's coin made it go for payment, it was not the
metal or matter it self that made it payment: So it is the spirit of Christ in
Prayer that makes it Prayer, and not man's prayer it self.

Use 5. In that Christ holds forth this command to men that follow him, to
deny themselves, as also other commands (which he knows) no man can do before
God, and man himself knows it; as Adam knew himself naked, and made himself
aprons of Genesis 3. 7.
Fig Leaves to cover, because he would not see his own nakedness, but could
not remedy it: And for that (as has been said) Christ holds forth his
commands, that poor naked man, which would cover his nakedness with Fig Leaves
of his own holiness and righteousness, might see it more clearly.

Use. Humiliation. Hence all Believers are ledto humiliation when they hear the
Law and commandment preached, to look well upon their wants, weakness
blindness, misery, and poverty held forth therein, to hang down their heads,
smite their breasts, crying Lord be merciful to me a sinner, as the publican
did in the Temple where the Law was preached; yea the holding forth of the Luke
18. 1^
Law, the justice and judgments of God in the Law, will make a stout heart to
tremble; Felix was a great and stout man, yet when he heard Paul dispute of
justice and judgment to come, he Act. 24. 26.
trembled.

Use 6. For that the holding forth of the Law and commandment shows to
Believers what Christ has done for them in himself, in performing of the
righteousness thereof, and in their deliverance from the curse and penalty
thereof, to the full satisfaction of God: And that the performances of Jesus
Christ in them by his Spirit, sent unto them in the fruits thereof, borne and
held forth of them, as branches of the Vine Jesus Christ, do manifest,
evidence, and witness the same to their souls, fully done of Christ in himself
for their justification and salvation.

Use. Comfort, Thanks, and Love. From hence arises the first unspeakable
comfort to Believers, to see the righteousness of so good, just, and holy a Law
and commandment performed for them, whereunto they were bound upon inevitable
pain, and which they themselves were not able to do in the least; and
themselves to have all the good and benefit thereof; and to see the curses,
dangers, miseries, and penalties they are delivered and freed from, all closed
in the commandment, and before them opened, and the same witnessed and sealed
unto them by the spirit, in the fruits there of wrought up in them.

Suppose a man has taken a great house to build, and is bound straightly for the
performance thereof, and is assuredly to have a thousand pound if he build it,
to be paid when it is finished; But this man is by his failings grown so much
indebted, that he is not able to do any thing of the building, his Creditors
come so fast upon him.

If a friend shall build this house for him, and pay all his debts also, would
not this be a great comfort to him? Yea, sure he would think himself bound to
be thankful to that friend, and to love him as long as he lives, otherwise he
were an unworthy man.

Every man is bound to perform this building, which is the doing of the command
of God, but his transgression is so much, (which is his debt to pay) that he is
not able to do any thing of the command.

Jesus Christ put forth himself a friend to all Believers in him, he builds the
house for them, he has paid all the debt of their transgression, with the
price of his passion, blood, and death, and they have the whole benefit and the
reward thereof.

Is not this a comfort to every believer, will not this make them thankful, and
ever to love the Lord Jesus Christ?

Surely that man is no believer that shows not comfort therein, yea their
fulness and love to the Lord Jesus Christ for this.

This made David to call out, O that men would therefore praise Psalm. 107. 8.
the Lord for his goodness, and declare the wonders that he has done for the
children of men: And What shall I give unto the Lord for all that he has done
unto me? I will take the cup of salvation, and give Psalm. 116. 13. 1 Cor. 16.
22.
thanks unto the Lord. And this made Paul to say, Cursed is he that loves not
the Lord Jesus Christ.

But now the words of many are stout against Christ, his undertakings, and
performances, which notwithstanding say like Hypocrites, Wherein have we spoken
against thee? Of whom the Prophet Mal. 3. 13.
fore told; never so many of these as now are standing up to set up man, and
pull down Christ; yea, instead of denying themselves, (as Christ commands)
deny Christ in the matter.

I know there are many that will say, O that I had assurance of Christ and his
performances for me, and the benefits thereof, of the forgiveness of my sins,
and all my debts paid to God, and of life everlasting by Christ.

Quest. But how shall I know this?

Answ. If thou see and find the fruits of Christ's spirit wrought up in
thee, mentioned and intended by the Apostle, love, Gal. 5. 22.
joy, peace, faith, goodness, etc. and especially this self-denial wrought up
in thee (as Christ in the Text commands) to deny thy self, this is a witness
and an assurance to thee of all thou desire to know and to have of Christ.

The fruit of the Vine, witness and assure, that the branches that bear them
do abide in the Vine, and have all of the Vine behoovable for them; even so,
where the good and true fruits of the spirit of Christ appear, are born, and
held forth in truth and simplicity. it is a certain evidence, witness, and
assurance to that man, that he is a living branch abiding in Christ, and has
all of Christ, that he has undertaken and performed for Gods chosen ones, that
he has forgiveness of all his sins, and everlasting life: For these things
wrought up in him, are the witness and assurance to him of the Spirit of
adoption received, and the same spirit says Romans 8. 16.
the Apostle, witnesses, (that is assures) that we are the children of God,
and coheirs with Christ.

The love and free grace of God in Christ, the cause of all good unto man.
THe Apostle says, We love God, because he loved us first. And again, The love
of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the 1 Job. 4. 19. Romans 5 5. 1 P^^. 4. 8.
Romans 13. 8 Act. 7. 28.
Holy Ghost, which is given unto us: Love covers a multitude of sins. And
again, Love is the fulfilling of the law. From hence I gather, that it is the
love and free grace of God in Christ to the Elect, that is the root, the cause,
and worker of all good to them, and of all good called theirs as the gift of
Christ to them: So God loved the world, that he gave his only Son etc: Their
Election in Christ, Ioh. 3. 16.
their holiness, justification, righteousness, or unblameablenes before God (as
Paul said,) We were elected in Christ before the world, to be holy, and without
blame before him in love: Their Predestination Ephesians. 1. 4.
and Ordination to eternal life, their adoption through Christ, their quickening
in Christ, their raising in Christ, their love to God and men, their believing
and Faith, their obedience, repentance, Ephesians. 2. 5, 6.
prayer and thanksgiving, the Preaching, Teaching, and Exhortation of all, or
any of these to them, as the Text says, The love of God to us causes us to
love God if we love him.

And I take it, the love and free grace of God in his Christ to the Elect, is
the fulfiller and the fulfilling of the will of God, his Law, and commandment
of all these, and the rest for them; (as the Apostle says) Love is the
fulfilling of the law.

But I take it, the love of the Elect to God, and all the performances Romans 13.
8.
of the Elect, never have been, are, or shall be any cause or motive of Gods
love and free grace to them, or of any of the performances thereof, or therein
to them: As, neither of the gift of his Son Christ, nor of their election in
Christ, their sanctification and justification before him; their Predestination
and Ordination to eternal life; their Adoption and Glorification; their
Quickening or Raising up in Christ; their love to God or man; their Believing
and Faith; their Obedience, Repentance, Prayers, and Thanksgiving: Nor of the
true Preaching, Teaching, and Exhortation of all or any of these to them.

And although I find not many that say, the love and performance of the Elect
to God, was the cause of Gods love to them before the world, and of Gods
performances for them, and to them, before the world.

Object. Yet I find many that say, that the love of the Elect to God now in
the world, and their performances of the duties of love to God in the world, do
not cause God, move and incite God to love them, to do them and others good; as
their faith, their obedience, their repentance, prayer and supplications, their
praise and thanksgiving, and the like.

For (say they) God has promised good to them that love God, and do the duties
of love to God and men, as to show mercy to thousands in them that love him and
keep his commandments; and says, To them that fear my Name, the sun of
Righteousness Exodus 20.
shall arise, and health shall be under his wings: And He that Mal. 4. 3.
believes and is Baptized shall be saved. Repent, and cause others to repent,
and return from all your transgression, so iniquity shall not be Mark 16. 16.
Ezekiel. 18. 16. Iam. 5 16.
your destruction. Ask and you shall have, seek and you shall find, knock and
it shall be opened unto you. Acknowledge your faults one to another, and pray
one for another, that ye may be healed; for the prayer of a Righteous man
avails much if it be fervent. Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to
him for Righteousness. Moses prayed, and Genesis 15. 6 Romans 4. 3.
Israel overcame the Amalekites. Elijah prayed, and God sent rain. God
promises to do good to them that love him, and perform the duties of love, and
has showed love, and requited much good to them which have performed the
duties of love unto him: Therefore (say they) the Scriptures hold forth that
the love of the Elect to God and their performance of the duties of love to God
in this world, do cause, move, and incite God to love them and do them much
good, etc.

Answ. These seem to know the Scriptures in the history; But they know them not
yet in the mystery of God and Christ, and in the mystery of faith and
godliness as the Apostle speaks Colossians 2. 2. Ephesians. 3. 4. 1 Timothy 3. 16. 1 Timothy 3. 9.

I find the continual practice of Antichrist is, by his instruments (alleging
the history of the Scriptures) to advance the honor of man, and to abate the
honor of God and his Christ. And this is the certain note and mark of this
deceiving Spirit, as the Apostle expresses to the Thessalonians and elsewhere.

This is a great advancement of man's honor, to teach, that (being 1 Thessalonians. 1.
2. 4.
the Elect of God) he has power to do that which shall cause, move, and incite
God to love him and do him good, and others; yea, and does so by his believing,
praying, and the rest of his performances of his love and service to God.

Were it not a great honor to that poor subject, which for his fidelity, love,
and performances to a great Potent and rich King, should have the assurance of
love, assistance, and good he would request and desire of the King, and that he
by his performances to the King, could cause the King to do such things for him
when he would? Surely any man that were not envious, would praise and honor
the happiness of this subject.

So they which teach that the love of men to God, by their love, do cause and
make God to love them; and by their Faith, do cause God to justify them; and
by their asking and praying, do cause, move, and incite God to grant and give
them that they desire, and by their repentance do cause God to forgive them;
and by their other performances to God, do cause God to do them good; do much
advance and honor men and their performances.

Whenas the very Elect (although they be elected in Christ) etc. yet (as the
Apostle says) in themselves are nothing unto Ep^. 44.
good before God^ If any man (says he) esteems himself to be somewhat when
as he is nothing, he deceives himself in his own imagination. Gal. 6. 3.
No, they can perform nothing that is good before God; so Paul said of himself,
I find no means to perform that which is good, Rom 7. 8, 26, 21.
when I would do good (says he) evil is present with me, and the evil which I
would not do, that I do.

So that it is clear from hence, that the faith or believing, the praying and
repentance, and all the performances of the very Elect in themselves to God are
evil and sin, (which is a mystery indeed unto such as the Gospel is hid: And
therefore they cannot cause, move, and incite God to love them, justify them,
give to them, assist them, or forgive them by their love, faith, prayer,
repentance, or any other performances to God which are evil in themselves; and
the advancing and honoring of man for such his performances to God, as shall
and can so prevail with God, as to cause him to do men good for the same, is
the work of the deceiving spirit, to the greatest abasement of the power of
Christ; or a share of that which is only Christ's; which (as the Apostle says)
1 Cor. 12. 6. Phil. 2. 13. H^b. 12 2.
works all in all, yea, which works in us the will and deed of his own good
pleasure. The work of all is the work of the Workman, which is Christ; Christ
is the Author and finisher of our faith and the rest, the honor of all is his
due; it is Christ and his performances that only causes, moves, and inciteth
God to love, to give to the Elect, to assist and forgive, not any performance
of their own; and it is Christ that covers the sin of their performances, and
therefore to Christ the whole prays and honor of procuring the love and the
goodness of God to man is due; and it is extreme sacrilege to rob our God
Christ of his honor, and to give it to another; and these of God and his
Christ are great mysteries unto those which are lost, to whom the gospel is
hid; the thing wrought does witness the workman, but not that it self was the
workman.

Object. But they say, God has promised to love them, and to show mercy on
them that love him, and to justify and save them that believe, and to give to
them, and assist them that pray to him and ask him, and to do them good that do
obedience to his commandments: Therefore God has bound himself by his promise
to be a debtor to those that love him, believe, pray, and obey his
commandments; As promise is a debt, if the condition be performed: And
therefore the love of man to God, the Faith, Prayer, and Obedience of man to
God must needs cause, move, and incite the just God in his promises to love
them, save, justify, assist, and do them good; the work being done, is enough
to cause, move, and incite every just man to pay the workman his promised
wages, much more does the same the great God.

Answ. This Objection is spread with the deceit of of the deceiving spirit, for
the promise was to Christ; as Gal. 3. 16. Not to the seeds as speaking of many,
but to thy seed, as of one, which is Christ, says the Apostle.

The promise was not to the Elect as they are the corrupt man in themselves,
but to Christ, and to them only as they are elected in Christ.

It was and is Christ only that is able to perform the condition, and not man
corrupted; whereas it is said, the promises were such made to Abraham, the
Apostle means, they were repeated, and clearly manifested to Abraham, which
we made before to Christ, who was before Abraham, although of Abraham's seed is
manifestation according to the flesh.

If the promise had been made to corrupt man as Abraham's also was, it had been
in vain; for there was never any man that was able to have performed the
condition, nor has done, but in Christ which performed it for him.

If a great Emperor should bind himself by promise to a poor Beggar, to give
him a Kingdom if he did pay twenty hundred thousand pounds, which was not able
to pay him one pound, were not this a vain promise and bond, or could this
Beggar look for this Kingdom so promised, which never paid any thing? If man
look for the love, salvation, and goodness of God, for his own performances to
God, he will be deceived.

If poor corrupt man think to have the love of God, for his love to God, to be
saved for his faith, to be helped and assisted at Gods hand for his Prayer, or
to be forgiven for his Repentance, he is deceived: For the Apostle says, To
him that works, the wages Romans 4. 4.
is not accounted of favor or grace, but of debt; now God is a debtor to no
man, he shows mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth, (that is)
leaves him in his own hardness.

To take the Promise of God to be a debt to corrupt man for Romans 9. 18.
his work and performance to God, is a great dishonor to God; yea it is to
make God a mercenary God, that will do some good for man, if he be paid for it,
if man do good for him, and to him; when as all the love and goodness of God
to man is gratis, of free grace, I will love them freely (says God.) We are
justified freely. Hos. 14. 4. Romans 3. 24 Rev. 21. 6.
Take of the water of life freely, says the Apostle.

Indeed God says he, loves them, and shows mercy on them that love him and
keep his commandments, and will justify and save them that believe, and will
give to them that ask, and forgive them that repent; but he does not say, nor
promise to love, or show mercy to them for their love, or because they love
him, nor to justify and save for their faith, because they believe, nor to
give them, because they ask, or to forgive, because they repent, the History
tells us not that.

All that God looks for of man, is in Christ, which performs all, and he is
satisfied for which he loves, gives, and forgigeth his Elect in Christ. Isa.
5. 3. 11.


Indeed God sheddeth his love into the hearts of the Elect by the Holy Ghost
sent unto them, whereby their hearts bear the love of God, and the
manifestations of his love, as the branch of the Vine bears the grapes and
fruits of the Vine, conveyed by the spirits of the vine, to manifestation and
witness, as Christ himself shows in the Parable of the vine. Ioh. 15. 1. 2. 3.
4. 5. 6.


And the love of God shed abroad in the hearts of the elect by the Holy Ghost,
sent to them, does not only manifest the love of God seated there in that soul
passively, but also by the same holy Ghost the love of God is acted, so God and
man by the Instrument of the same soul (as it pleases the Lord Christ,) and
all the fruits of the love of God evidenced, witnessed, and assured to the same
soul, by the spirit of Christ; (as the Apostle speaks) We have received the
spirit of adoption, and the same spirit bears Romans 8. 15, 16.
witness with our spirits (or souls) that we are the sons of God. The holy
spirit manifests, witnesses, and assures the souls of the Elect of the love
of God, mercy, justification, and forgiveness of sins, etc. And this is that
which is called their faith, by which they are said to live, to be justified
and saved, and to have all comfort whilst they are in the body.

And as the Apostle says, The promise of the new Covenant of Gal. 3. 16.
grace, called the new commandment, and condition, was made to the seed,
(speaking of one) which is Christ, only able to do the will of God in the same
commandment and covenant, being the undertaker to do the will of God of free
grace, and freely saying, Lo I come to do thy will O God, for poor corrupt man
which thou have elected in me, not able to do any thing thereof in himself,
although in the history of Scriptures, the promise be often found helf forth to
man, because Christ of grace imputes, and freely gives the good and benefit
of the promise purchased by himself to his Elect; but afterward reserving the
Praise, Honor, and Glory thereof to himself.

So the whole covenant of grace was made of God, with his Christ the
undertaker, to do the will of God for poor corrupt man elected in Christ, as
well the performing of the conditions and commandment therein, as receiving of
the promise; although in the history of the Scriptures, the commandment and
performances of the condition of the covenant be held forth to pertain to
unable corrupt man, which only pertains unto Christ, the gracious and able
undertaker; for what is, does, or has poor corrupt man herein, but in Christ;
Christ's command to the Reprobate, is as he is God the commander in justice, to
the Elect, as undertaker of the work before God in grace.

Indeed our God commands in the history of the Scriptures, both Reprobate and
Elect, and his command is holy, just, and of authority; the Elect of
themselves, are still corrupt in themselves, although holy in Christ, in whom
they are elected, and not able through their corruption to do the just command.

Christ that of authority commands, has undertaken to do the will of God, as
he says, Lo I come to do thy will O God: And no Heb. 10. 9.
doubt but it was for the Elect, that Christ did undertake to do the will of
God, as the payment of the debt in his justice for their transgression, unto
mercy and forgiveness, their holiness and righteousness before God.

This will of God for payment to mercy and forgiveness, for righteousness,
holiness, and goodness to them, which Christ undertook to do for the Elect,
which themselves were not, nor are able to do in the least, no doubt he did,
does, and ever will do; graciously making them his instruments (as he
pleases,) and imputing all to them; upon which account it is said, Christ is
the Priest and the Sacrifice, the Law or Covenant-giver, and the Law or
Covenant-keeper, the Judge and the Advocate, the commander, and the doer of the
commandment; as the renowned Father in the church of Christ said, Do, Lord,
that which thou command, and command what thou will.

And although the afflictions, punishments, and misery of Reprobates be just to
them for their sins against the holy commandment; and although the
afflictions, troubles, and punishments of the Elect be many in this world (as
David said) he was punished every day, yet the afflictions of the Elect in
Christ are not, nor can be for their sins before God, which Christ's full
payment for them to God has satisfied, (as the Prophet says) and which Christ
has Isa. 53. ^1.
covered as David says, Blessed is that man whose iniquities are forgiven, and
whose sin is covered, and which Christ has taken quite away, as the Apostle
says, Christ appeared, we know, that he 1 Ioh. 3. 5.
might take away our sins.

Can it be thought that the just God will exact payment for that which he has
had full payment already, for which he had in his acceptance by Christ's
undertaking, so soon as Christ had undertaken.

If now there are many that hold so th the history of the Scriptures to affirm
and prove the temporal afflictions of the Elect, to be ordered unto them for
their sins against God and men, for their sins before God and before men.

But the mystery of our God and Christ, of faith, and godliness does hold
forth, that afflictions are not ordered of Christ to the Elect for their sins
either against God or men, as the payment of the debt thereof, or as in revenge
of wrath, which are never under wrath, but under love; but are always ordered
to the elect of God in the love, wisdom and goodness of one God Christ,
either to take them away in love from sin, and the misery of sin, as the
Prophet says, The righteous perishes and no man considers it in heart, and
merciful men are taken away, and no man understands Isa. 57. 1.
that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come; or are Zach. 2. 5
Hos. 2. 5.
ordered to them to keep and preserve them from sin as by a wall of fire and a
hedge of thorns, as the Prophets speak, upon which if their corrupt nature
press, drive and force them; they are by this means of Christ constrained to
return to Christ, as the Prophet Hosea at large shows in the second chapter
of his Prophecy, v. 5, 6, 7 etc. A loving father will not chastise his child
for the offense done, if he knows that he will offend no more, but will pass
by the fault; and if he does chastise him, it is that he might not offend
afterward, to keep him from offending: And Psa. 119. 71.
upon this David said, It is good for me that I have been in trouble, for
thereby I have learned to keep thy Statutes. David's troubles were Gods goodness
to him, although he was punished every day, Daily have I been punished (says
he.) The goodness of his troubles Psa. 73. 14
and afflictions drive him back to Christ, as the Apostle says, The love of
Christ has constrained us. 2 Cor. 3. 14.


But still there are some that (it may be) in earnest object, if the elect do
know they can do nothing of the holy commandment; and if they know that Christ
has undertaken to do all and will do all for them commanded to be done before
God: Then they may live without care, fear or regard of godliness, to walk
uprightly before God, so that they live warily before men, and give content and
satisfaction to men.

This objection is not made from the spirit of Christ, but from the spirit of
Antichrist; not from the sense of an elect believer, but from the sense of
reprobates, such as God has delivered up into a reprobate mind (as the Apostle
speaks) and are reprobate Romans 1. 28 2 Timothy 3. 8
concerning the faith, as he faith. For although the elect believers deny
themselves, and see nothing in themselves but (...) crying always, Lord be
merciful to me a sinner; and know that themselves can do nothing of the holy
commandment, and know that Christ of free grace does all for them of the same,
by his holy Spirit sent to them, as he pleases: yet they know also that
because God cares 1 Pet. 5. 17. Psa. 91. 12 Psa. 25. 1^
for them, he will keep them in all their ways, that he will teach them the
way that they shall choose: that he will mortify the deeds of the flesh by his
spirit sent unto them. That the love of God shed abroad in their hearts by the
Holy Ghost sent to Romans 8. 13
them will act in their souls and hearts the love to God and man: Yea they know
that Christ has promised to put such a fear into their hearts that they shall
not depart from him, and has made Jer. 22. 40 41.
such a covenant, that he will never turn away from them, but will delight in
them to do them good: So their knowledge of Christ's grace to them does not make
them worse, but better in themselves. Christ says, natural Heathens or
Publicans love them that they know love them, and shall not the love of God to
the elect Mat. 5. 46 47. Romans 14. 14.
unto whom it is manifested, constrain them (although they be still carnal, as
Paul said he was) to love God and man?

Ob. 2. But the deceiving spirit does further object, If our believing,
praying, praising and thanksgiving to God do not cause, move and incite God to
love us and do us good, then wherefore should or do the elect pray and praise
God? all is in vain they do.

Answ. Indeed all that they do to cause, move, and incite God to love them and
do them good is in vain; for it is Christ only that does and can do that, the
doing of the elect cannot do it, which is sinful and corrupt.

Yet because Christ the undertaker for the elect, which has authority to
command, commands in the government of his Church to love, pray, praise,
give, forgive, and the rest. The elect do the same not in vain, but of duty,
because Christ their undertaker has commanded, although they do not, nor can
do the same, according to the holy command. A Scholar which is commanded of
his favorable Schoolmaster to write his copy given him, and which he knows
can write never a letter right, yet ought to write the same, because he is
commanded, but it were folly in the Scholar to look to be praised of his
Master for his bad writing. And if any man shall ask why christ commands the
elect, which he knows can do nothing of the command, the answer may be;
First, for his good pleasure and will and their humiliation. Secondly, ^^^ist
would have his people exercised, and not idle, although weak. Thirdly, because
although the goodness of their doing the holy command is nothing, or extends
not unto God, is no goodness before God; yet before men, in men's estimation it
is goodness, as David says, My goodness extends not to thee O Lord, but to
the Saints which are upon the earth: It is good and profitable Psalm. 16. 2, 3.
Tit. 3. 8.
(as the Apostle says) to men. Fourthly, for example to and another, and
edification of one another. Fifthly, for their knowledge of their
transgressions, of omission and commission, as Paul said, I had not known sin
but by the law. If Christ had not a commandment to bid and forbid, the elect
had not known Romans 7. 7.
their sins and transgressions. The Scholar which writes never a letter well
of his copy, knows by his copy (if he regard it and perule it well his
fault in every word and letter, although he cannot mend it. So by the holy and
righteous command of Christ, the Elect may see and know their error if they
mind it, and look upon it well, although they cannot amend their error
themselves. Sixthly, Christ commands them to do, although he know they can do
nothing of the holy command before God, because he would have them know and
consider of his grace and goodness to them, in undertaking and performing those
things of the holy commandment for them first and last, unto their salvation
and everlasting happiness, which themselves were not able to do in the least,
and to take up the song of David the sweet singer of Israel, continually before
men, praising the Lord for his goodness, and to declare the wonders that he
has done for the children of men, so that their labor is not in vain in the
Lord. Seventhly, Because when it pleases the L. Jesus Christ to send his holy
spirit to them, 1 Cor 5. 1. 5. 8.
to act in them these things of his holy commandment, and to make them his
branches to bear and bring forth such fruits in singleness of heart, in
sincerity and godliness, as fruits of the spirit in truth; then these are true
evidences, testimonies, and witnesses of the spirit received, as the Tree is
known by the fruits (in the rule of Christ.) And the spirit received, does
witness that they are the children of God; We have received the spirit (says
the Apostle,) and the same spirit does witness, that we are the children of
Romans 8, 15. 16.
God.

Object. Further, the deceiving spirit objecteth, to teach that man's love to
God, his prayer, praise, his giving, forgiving, repentance and the rest like
commanded, do not cause, move, and incite God to love, give, and forgive his
servants, and do them good; is the flaking and quenching of all devotion and
religious service to God.

Answ. This Doctrine indeed may (by the power of Christ) quench the devotion
and supposed service to God of Hypocrites, that there by dishonor Christ, for
what greater dishonor to Christ can be done, then to uphold or think, that
poor corrupt man by his love, believing, praying, praising, giving, forgiving,
repenting, and the rest, can procure God to love, justify, give, and forgive,
which is only the work that Christ has undertaken for poor unable man,
saying, Lo I come to do thy will O God; which only Heb. 10. 7.
procures the love, justification, forgiveness, and all goodness of God to
man, freely, without any work or labor of man's, I will love them freely (says
God.) We are justified freely by grace: Hos. 14. 4.
Take of the water of life freely. And of this work of causing, moving,
inciting, and procuring God to love man, to justify, forgive Romans 3. 24 Rev.
21. 6. 2 These. 2. 3. 4.
and do good to man; the honor and praise belongs only to our Christ, that
sits upon the throne; and it is the Antichrist, the man of sin, (which the
Apostle speaks of) that takes this honor, or any part of it to himself, and
robs Christ of this honor only due to him.

But in those which are true believers, their doctrine does not quench, but
kindle devotion, and religious worship, and service to God and his Christ: For
can there be greater incitement to devotion and Religion, then for a man to be
taught of God, and to be assured by the spirit of Christ in him; that Christ
has undertaken to do all for him, to his justification and salvation before
God; that Christ (with the will and good pleasure of God) has done, does, and
will do all for him to God, paid his debt, made his peace, and made his
reconciliation with God for his sins, obtained the imputation of his
righteousness to him, in and by his fulfilling of the holy Law of God for him,
making him to be holy and without blame before God in love, causing, moving,
and inciting God to love him, give to him, forgive him, and do him all good;
when as himself, in himself, is still a sinner, corrupt, and abominable, and
has no good thing in him, as Paul said, he had not Romans 7. 18.
dwelling in himself; and was not, nor is able to do the least with God, to
procure the least love and goodness of God to himself: Surely if this teaching
will not kindle devotion in man, he is no true Believer; yea he is worse then
the Heathens and Publicanes that Christ spoke of, which he said would love them
that loved them, that would do good to them that did good to them; The Heathe^s
and Publicanes (says Christ) will do the same. Mat. 5. 46 47.


This did kindle exceeding devotion in David (as we read, it made him sing, it
made him praise, worship, fall down and kneel before the Lord his Maker and
Redeemer, and to call others; O come (says he) let us worship, fall down, and
kneel before the Lord our Maker. Psa. 93. 6.


These Positions following, are the grounds of the Treatises and Meditations
following.
The first Position is,

THat God foresaw and fore-knew all things to be in the world, before the
world: A Sparrow falls not to the ground Gal. 3. 8. Act. 2. 23 1. Pet. 1. 2
Mat. 10. 29, 30. Ps. 148. 6.
without his providence.

That God willed and decreed all things before the world, unchangable, to be in
eternity.

That Gods eternal will and decree, was his present and unchangeable act of all
he willed and decreed with and before himself, Ps. 13. 5. 6.
before the world, before whom all things are present and not future; although
in manifestation and appearance to the creature they be in future, and
appointed fullness of time.

That God foresaw and fore-knew all mankind to become the children of wrath,
by the transgression of the first man, notwithstanding Ephesians. 2. 3. Romans 5. 18
he had power given him, and free will also to keep the covenant, and do the
commandment..

That it was Gods eternal act, according to his eternal will and decree of
love, mercy, and free grace, to elect in Christ some of Ephesians. 1. 4. Romans 8. 29,
30. Act. 13. 48. Ephesians. 1. 5.
the children of wrath, out of the general company of the children of wrath,
to be holy and without blame before him in love, to be predestined and
ordained to eternal life, and to be adopted the children of God through Christ,
according to the good pleasure of his will.

That those (which according to the good pleasure of his will God so knew
before, and he so elected in Christ) were holy, and 1 Cor. 1. 2, 3. Act. 13.
48. Romans 8. 29 30. 1 Cor. 1. 8. Romans 8. 33
without blame before God, after they were elected out of the children of
wrath, no more to be the children of wrath, but of God, and were predestined
and ordained to eternal life, were adopted the children of God through Christ;
called, justified, and glorified before God, and were so before the foundations
of the world was laid in Gods sight, although these be not in appearance and
manifestation to the creature till in future, and fullness of time appointed.

That Christ undertook and performed all in acceptance willed Positi. 2. Heb.
10. 9. Rev. 13. 8.
and decreed of God before God, for the justification and salvation of the
elect, before the world.

That man himself does not, nor can do the work of the holy Law and
commandment of God, that is good before God, and Positi. 3.
acceptable to God, as it is man's work.

That Christ does in man all that is done good and righteous before God, by his
holy Spirit sent to man of grace; making his Elect fitted instrements thereof
as he pleases.

There are Antipositions made to these, namely to the form as follows.

First, although all times, things, and acts were present with God before the
world, yet they were not alike present; God sees things as they are,
difference of time, and circumstance adhering, he sees election before time,
justification in time, and remission of sin after it is committed: He sees not
these ab aeterno.

Answ. I take it, if all times, things, and acts were present with God before
the world, there is neither past nor future time, no difference of time and
circumstance before God, although to man there seems difference of time and
circumstance; as past, present, and future; God sees and knows al things,
(as present to him) election, justification, remission of sin whenever
committed, although those and other things are not in man's sight and estimation
until they are manifested; and then as they are manifested, Gods will and his
acts before himself, are together unchangeable, The gifts Romans 11. ^9.
and calling of God are without repentance: And the gifts which God gives to
the creatures were not unknown and undecreed of God to the creature, until
such time as they did appear manifested to the creature, neither is the
creature uncalled of God before him, until his calling be manifested to man;
the Apostle Paul makes it clear, to be before God, before the world: Those
(says he) which God knew before, those also he predestined to Romans 8. 19, 30.
be made like to the image of his Son: And whom he predestined, them also he
called, and whom he called, them also he justified, and whom he justified, them
also he glorified.

The Apostle does not say, that those which God knew before the world, he would
afterward predestinate, he would afterward call, afterward justify, afterward
glorify. But he says, those which he knew before the world, he predestined,
called, justified, and glorified them, before himself unchangable, although
these do not appear, and are manifested to the creature, till fullness of time.

The second Antiposition is, That man not having the Spirit, may and can do
Moral works, yea good Moral works before God: and that man having the Spirit,
can do Moral good works much more, yea and spiritual also, by the
isntrumental assistance of the Spirit.

Answ. I take it the Scribes and Pharisees did Moral good works before men, as
fair in man's sight as any other, then, or sithence, but I do not find them
said, to be as good and righteous be or^ God.

And I take it, if the Spirit be only an isntrumental assistance to them which
have the Spirit, so Christ is at the will and disposition of man, as the
instrument is at the disposition of the workman, and to be procured by man's art
and power to be his isntrumental assistant; a great dishonor to Christ. Paul
called himself Romans 1. 1.
a servant and instrument of Jesus Christ, but he never called Christ his
instrument or servant.

The third Antiposition is, That man having the Spirit, has inherent
sanctification and holiness in himself, and may bring forth, and do the works
of holiness (as the Agent thereof) righteous in the sight of God.

And this Position (they say) the words of Christ uphold, which say, Except
your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Phraisees ye
shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Mat. 5. 20.


This exceeding righteousness to be had, to enter into the Kingdom (say they)
is the inherent holiness and righteousness, which they have, which have the
Spirit, by the sanctification of the Spirit.

Answ. But I take it, the exceeding righteousness to be had of those which
enter into the Kingdom of heaven, spoken of by Christ, is the righteousness
of Christ by imputation to his Elect, Believers, not the inherent supposed
righteousness in themselves, which they have by the sanctification of the
Spirit, whereby, they say, they are enabled to do the works of holiness and
righteousness, as the Agent thereof before God.

For the Apostle says, alleging David for a witness, That man is the blessed
man, that is to enter into the Kingdom of heaven, unto whom the Lord imputes
righteousness without works.

And that further, to uphold inherent righteousness and holiness in man, by
the sanctification of the Spirit, do further allege the Apostle, which says
to the believing Corinthians, neither unrighteous men, nor fornicators,
idolaters, adulterers, wantons, buggerers, thieves, covetous, drunkards,
railers, nor extortioners, shall enter Cor. 6. 9. 10, 11.
into the Kingdom of heaven, and such were some of you, but ye are washed, ye
are sanctified, ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God. He says, they were now washed, sanctified, and justified by
the Spirit.

Answ. But I take it, this does not prove (although these believing
Corinthians) were washed now, sanctified and justified now in their own
knowledge and light in the name of Jesus, and in the Spirit of our God, when
God gave the light to them, that they were not washed, sanctified, and
justified before this, in the sight of God, by Jesus Christ, the Lamb slain
from the beginning. Nor does it prove, that they had now inherent holiness and
righteousness in themselves, to do the works of holiness and righteousness
before God at that time.

I take it, Believers have still inherent corruption and sin in themselves,
which corruption is in every part and parcel of soul and body, as the Apostle
of Christ says, A little leaven, leaveneth the whole lump. 1 Cor. 5. 6


If they had inherent holiness and righteousness in themselves in every part
of soul and body, the same would expel them from corruption, and so there
should be no corruption and sin in Believers, for two contraries are not in one
subject together at the same time, if it be light, it is not dark, if it be
cold, there is not heat, inherent. When a stronger then the strong man comes
(says Christ) he takes away the strong man's armor, dispossesseth him, and
divides the spoils, Luke 11. 21, 22. But of the operation of the Spirit in
Believers, and of the mortification and sanctification of the Spirit, it is
said more afterward. We find it recorded in Scripture, that Moses, Lot, Reuben,
and the rest of the Patriarchs, Job, Moses, Aaron, David, Peter, etc. after
they had the Spirit, had corruption, which brought forth sin mentioned: and no
doubt, but other sin not mentioned in them.

And I take it, Doctrine of inherent holiness and righteousness in man, by the
sanctification of the Spirit, is of Antichrist, and to make men proud
Pharisees, to trust in themselves, and despise others, to make them think they
are not as other men are, nor as this or that sinner.

But I know the Doctrine of Christ's Spirit is to make men humble Publicans, to
smite their breasts, saying, Lord be merciful to me a sinner, and wholly to
deny themselves.

This Doctrine of inherent holiness and righteousness (as is aforesaid) is
confuted by the Prophets, by Christ himself, and by his Apostles.

The Prophet Esaias (speaking of himself and others, having the Spirit) says, We
are all as an unclean thing, all our righteousness is as filthy rags; and after
Paul says, there is nonerighteous that does good, no not one. Christ says to
the same purpose, Thou hypocrite, Rom 3 10.
why see thou the mote that is in thy Brothers eye, and see not the beam
that is in thine own eye? etc. And again, judge not, that ye be not judged, and
when ye have done what ye can, say we are unprofitable servants.

And the Apostle Paul says, after he had the Spirit known to himself, In me,
that is in my flesh, the corrupt man, dwells no good things, I find no means
to perform that which is good.

Where was Paul's inherent holiness and righteousness in himself, when there
dwelt no good thing in him, and when he found no means to perform that which
was good in himself, where was his inablement in himself by the isntrumental
assistance of the Spirit, to do the works of holiness and righteousness in the
sight of God?

And whereas they say, Paul meant (by performance to do perfectly) and that he
might do that which was good and righteous in the sight of God, although he did
not the same perfectly, it is but a sophistical cavil, For there is nothing
good and righteous in the sight of God, which is not perfectly good and
righteous; his Sacrifice is Levit. 3. 1. Numb. 28. Deuteronomy. 13. 21.
without spot or blemish.

Certainly these Positions are from the root of Antichrist, and there is no
essential point of Popery, as I may have ground and sustentation from them, as
man's holy and righteous works before God.

Justification by man's works before God.

Debt and merit of God by man's works.

Sup^rerogations, Popes Holiness.

That the Pope cannot err.

Canonizing of men for Saints in themselves.

Sanctifyings and Consecrations of persons and things by men in the estimation
of God.

Making holy Bread and holy Water, in the estimation of Gods free will.

What Saint in himself deserves not to be canonized?

What holy and righteous works, that are holy and righteous in themselves, in
the estimation of God, deserve not to be crowned of God, as meritorious works?

It is just with men to recompense good works of men, done to their honor and
benefit, with a proportionable price. So no doubt, it is just with God, to
recompense the good works of men (in his estimation good works) wrought of men
themselves, to his honor, and the benefit of his, with a price proportionable.
To him that works (says the Apostle) the wages is not accounted of grace or
favor, but of debt. Romans 4. 4.


I take it, if man holds forth his own works good and righteous before God,
he challenges a debt of God, and forsakes grace, his own mercies.

They which were called Protestants, were so called, because they did protest
against such points of Popery.

Further Arguments made to uphold Inherent Holiness and Righteousness in man,
by the Sanctification of the Spirit, are answered as follows.
Arg. 1. THey say, although Inherent Holiness be taught of Papists, and they
teach so, yet it is not Popish Doctrine. That is Popish which Papists teach and
maintain against the Doctrine of the reformed Churches.

Answ. Those Churches are reformed, where Christ is perfectly formed in them.
Paul said to the Church of Galatia, I travel in birth again, till Christ be
formed in you; he did not mean Gal. 4. 19.
formed in part, but thoroughly and perfectly formed. The Papists teach and
maintain Inherent Holiness and Righteousness, contrary to the form of Jesus
Christ, otherwise they should have no ground for their other Popish Doctrines,
against the true form of Jesus Christ in his Church. I take it, they which
maintain the same with them, close with Popery.

Arg. 2. The Pharisees taught such righteousness, as is neither imputed to
them, nor inherent in them; it is, Iustitia quam docebant, non quam praestabant.

Answ. The Pharisees taught such righteousness as they accounted they had in
themselves, such as your Inherent Holiness and Righteousness is in you, (by
your account,) and they accounted they had it from God, also they thanked God
for it, as I suppose you do. I thank God, says the Pharisee, I am not as other
Luke 18. 11.
men are, unjust, etc. He thought himself to have holiness and righteousness
in himself, so do you.

Arg. 3. You abolish the Moral Law in Mat. 5. held up.

Answ. We do not abolish the Moral Law, further then the Apostle of Christ,
which says, For Christ is the end of the Law for Romans 10, 4.
righteousness (before God) to every one that believes. We say, the Moral Law
is still the manifestation of Gods Justice to the forsaken and Reprobate ones;
it is also the manifestation of sin to the Elect, Believers, and as an hedge of
thorns to keep them from transgressing, (not to be held forth for eternal life
or death to believers) but to show them what Christ has done for them in
fulfilling of the righteousness thereof, in delivering them from the curse
thereof, by his sufferings in himself; and to show them what Christ does of the
same in them (as he pleases) for their comfort, by his spirit sent unto them
in their unablenesse, for a Romans 8. 15. 16.
witness and assurance to them, of their adoption through Christ.

Arg. 4. You say, contraries do not expel contraries, necessarily they may be
in the same subject in degrees, as light and darkness, cold and heat, so may
knowledge and ignorance be in the believing man, so may inherent holiness, and
inherent corruption, be in the man that believes.

And yet you say in your exposition of 1 Pet. 4. 18. The grace of
Sanctification does drive away ignorance and darkness of mind: and what is
this, but to affirm no ignorance in Believers, inherent knowledge has driven
away inherent ignorance, and that inherent holiness has driven inherent
corruption quite away.

Answ. So you deny and affirm the same thing, and need no further answer.

Arg. 5. For to uphold inherent holiness in man, they allege 2 Cor. 5. 17.
where it is said, If any man be in Christ he is a new creature. And also Ephesians.
4. 24. where it is said, Put on the new man, etc.

Answ. In these places, the Apostle shows the great grace of God, to those
which are elected in Christ, and adopted through Christ, that that man is a new
creature in Christ, a new man in Christ, not in himself; therefore he says, Jf
any man be in Christ, be is a new creature in Christ. So the same Apostle
says, he is quickened in Christ, Ephesians. 2. 5. not in himself. He is holy and
without blame before God in Christ, that is, chosen in Christ, Ephesians, 1. 4. not
in himself, his carnal sinful corrupt soul and body. Our life that we live
before God is in Christ, it is hid with Christ in God, says the Apostle, Col.
3. 3. It is not in our selves that we live before God: in that J live, J live
by the faith of the Son of God, says Paul, Gal. 2. 20. It is by faith that we
live, it is by grace of imputation of Christ's life, holiness, and
righteousness, that we live, are holy and righteous before God, not by inherent
holiness and righteousness in our corrupt man, that is, in our selves, as the
Apostle says, Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes righteousness.

Arg. 6. They for their inherent holiness, etc. allege the words of Peter the
Apostle, 1 Pet. 4. 18. Jf the righteous shall scarcely be saved, where shall
the ungodly and sinners appear?

Answ. The words are clearly to be understood, of hypocrites having inherent
holiness and righteousness in themselves, by their own account, and in the
estimation of men, as the Pharisees and Judas had, and others, and of such as
are manifest Reprobates, by their contempt of godliness, and greediness of
transgression.

The Apostle notes the ha^dnesse of salvation to the best of these, but there
is no hardness or scarceness of salvation to those which are in Christ, which
God has chosen in Christ before the world, to be holy and without blame before
him in love, that are so Ephesians 1. 4, 5. Act. 13. 48
ordinated to eternal life before the world, as Paul and the rest were, as he
affirms, and the other Evangelists.

Arg. 7. Thinking that these words of the Prophet will uphold inherent
holiness, etc. they would have them paraphrased, auferam cor lapideum, and dabo
cor carneum, that is, I will take away the stony Ezekiel. 36. 26.
heart, and give a fleshy heart.

Answ. Man by corruption has a hard and stony heart in himself, although the
man be chosen in Christ before the world to be holy and without blame before
God, and is so in Christ, although his heart be still hard in himself. But when
Christ pleases to send his Spirit, the Spirit of promise to him, with his
operations of mortification and sanctification, thereby Christ fitteth his
story heart to be his branch to bear his fruits, wrought up by his Spirit (as
he pleases) such as are called the fruits of his Spirit, inlightning,
softning, love, joy, peace, faith, righteousness, repentance, selfedeniall,
and all manner of goodness; in which respect it is called a fleshy heart, by
reason of the operations of the Spirit unto it.

But the operations are not so, as no hardness remains or returns, or
fruits of the same hardness and corruption in the heart or soul.

Mr. Calls (the memorable Martyr) shows that well in his mournful song,
which every best fleshy hearted man proves. Indeed (says he) sometime I do
repent. To God for mercy call, but yet alas incontinent, to sin again I fall.

Here were in him fruits born, and held forth of the fleshy heart, but
incontinent, the fruits of the corrupt and stony heart are held forth in this
man, no inherent holiness and righteousness proved in man.

Arg. 8. They allege for inherent holiness and righteousness, etc. Act. 10.
35. where it is said, He that works righteousness is accepted with God. From
whence they conclude, that there are some men that work righteousness, and are
accepted of God, for working of righteousness.

Answ. I am sorry that you draw such a conclusion from this Scripture, contrary
to the meaning thereof; and contrary to the plain word of other Scriptures:
Paul says, Rom 9. 16. It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs
(meaning to have acceptance with God) but in God that shows mercy. And again,
if it be of man's working of righteousness, then it is no more of grace, that
man is accepted with God; Rom 11. 6. If it be of his works, then it is of debt,
that man is accepted with God, For to him that works, the wages is accounted
by debt, says the Apostle, Romans 4. 4. The Apostle excludes debt and work to
make acceptance with God.

I wish that Gal 5. 4. were well considered, ye are abolished from Christ,
whosoever are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from grace. He that is
accepted of God for working righteousness, certainly is justified by the Law,
and thinks himself to be so. For by that he is accepted with God, he is
justified before God, God accepts no unjust person.

The Apostle says, he that works righteousness, of whatsoever Nation he be,
is accepted with God, that is just with God; but he does not say, that any man
of any Nation works righteousness before God.

Yet there may be some of every Nation that work righteousness in the
estimation of men, and some, that in Christ (which has undertaken and
performed all righteousness for them before God) work righteousness, and in
Christ are accepted with God, for the work of his righteousness imputed to them.

Arg. 9. They allege Doctor Davenets writing, de babituali justitia, which
says, omnes Theologos concedere inherentem justitiam justificatis, etc.

Answ. Doctor Davenets writing understood in the best sense, as we say, that in
Christ those that are justified in him have inherent holiness and righteousness
in Christ, but not in themselves, in their corrupt souls and bodies. But
understand Doctor Davenet as ye will.

Doctor Davenets Scripture is not canonical Scripture. The Spring of inherent
Holiness, etc.

INherent holiness and righteousness, in part remaining in men after the
general fall and loss in Adam, whereby they had still free will and power to
do the commandment unto their salvation. Was the heresy of the Palagians
confuted and exploded, in the Primitive times after the Apostles.

But soon after, the Papists loath to humble themselves to their corrupt
condition, as Christ speaks, loath to deny themselves, because they would not
come manifestly in the pride of man, with the Palagians, and in their confuted
error.

Therefore acted by the spirit of Antichrist, they invented another way,
whereby, they say, man has inherent holiness and righteousness in himself, by
the sanctification of the Spirit, and hereby they are enabled to do the works
of holiness and righteousness themselves, pleasing to God, accepted with God,
moving, and causing God to do them good.

This is the ground of all their proud Popish Tenants.

And from this ground the Arminians, Anabaptists, Brownists, Presbyterians, and
other, hold forth many things to the exalting of man, and the pulling down of
Christ, to the great dishonor of Jesus Christ's undertakings and performances,
for poor, corrupt, unable dead man in himself, of free grace chosen of God in
Christ, and given to him of God, to undertake and perform all for unto life;
which they do, when they teach and say, that they, by their Inherent holiness
and righteousness have power and free will to do, and can do themselves the
works of righteousness, such as please God, are accepted with God, and do move
and cause God to do them good, which all are the works of Christ, and no part
thereof man's, but by account and grace of imputation; therefore the same and
the rest of that sort, are no better then robbery, sacrilege, and idolatry.

Those which hold forth Inherent holiness and righteousness in man, do boast
themselves to be in a better estate and condition for life, then Adam was ever
in; to have more power then Adam had in innocence unto holiness and
righteousness, and the work of the holy and righteous commandment of God for
life, (which says, do this and live) then Adam ever had: for Adam in innocence
had no power to repent, if he failed that he might live by repentance, if he
failed of life by obedience and words; nor had Adam power to pray for mercy and
forgiveness, to move God by repentance and prayer, and to obtain the same of
God by prayer. For if Adam had had this, there had been no need of the
provision of a Christ for fallen man; for Adams repentance and prayer for mercy
and forgiveness, had been enough to have prayed with God for forgiveness of
the transgression.

But (they say) they have not only power and free will to do the righteousness
of the command, through their inherent holiness and righteousness, but also
such a sanctified will, that their will cannot fail or hinder their power, as
Adams did, to do the work.

They have power to repent and convert themselves unto life, if they fail in
the righteous work; and power to pray, and so to prevail with God by their
prayer, that they shall obtain mercy and forgiveness of all, by virtue of their
inherent holiness and righteousness in themselves. Oh sure they must needs be
as proud of this inherent holiness and righteousness in themselves, by the
santification of the Spirit; and be as thankful to God also, that they are not
as other men are, as the Pharisee was for his righteousness that he had in
himself of the Spirit of God in his own account, for which he thanked God that
he was not as other men Luke 18. 11.
were, unrighteous and sinners. And herein the late upholder of inherent
holiness and righteousness in man, by the sanctification of the Spirit, go
beyond the Papists (which were the founders thereof) in exalting that Idol. For
the Papists will not allow every man that has the same, to be enabled thereby
to convert himself, if he have failed in the work of holiness and
righteousness, and to satisfy with the repentance of his own frame, but he
must be ordered and enjoined penance by the Pope, or other his Substitutes,
Confessors, to men offending, which must be obeyed, and all performed
accordingly by the Delinquents, for absolution and recovery of life and safety
to themselves.

And they must not pray as they will themselves, to move God to mercy and
forgiveness, and to bestow good things upon them, but they must be ordered and
appointed of those Agents and Confessors, how many Pater-nosters and Ave-Maries
they must say for the same, etc.

But these conclude, that by his own power, that every man has of his inherent
holiness and righteousness, he is not only enabled to do the work of holiness
and righteousness acceptable to God, but also (if he fail) to convert himself
to repent at will, to move God to mercy and forgiveness, and to do him needful
good when he will intentionally and devoutly pray for the same.

And to this purpose (for manifestation of the premises to be so, as is said)
the upholders of inherent holiness and righteousness in man, teach and exhort
all men to do the works of holiness and righteousness commanded upon eternal
gain and pain, and to repent of their fallings, that they may not perish but
live thereby, to pray intentionally in public and private, to do duties
commanded; and to do all these to please God, to pacify God, to move God to do
them good by these their performances, without any doubt of going well with
them (so doing) as if all men assembled, had this their supposed holiness and
righteousness, and thereby power in themselves to do the works of holiness and
righteousness, to repent, pray, and prevail with God to obtain all good at Gods
hand thereby, and divert the wrath and judgments from them, as if they had God
in a bond.

When as the Prophets of God, and the Apostles of Jesus Christ themselves, do
acknowledge, that they had no such inherent holiness and righteousness in
themselves, by the sanctification of the Spirit, whereby they were enabled to
do the works of holiness and righteousness before God; and do acknowledge, that
themselves did no such works of holiness and righteousness before God, nor had
any such power in themselves.

The Prophet David says, God looked down from heaven upon the children of men,
to see if there were any that did understand and seek God; but (says he) they
were all gone out of the Psa. 5 3. 2. 3. Romans 3. 10, 11.
way, they were altogether corrupt, there is none that does good, no not one.
And the Apostle Paul jointly with him says the same.

The Prophet Isay says of himself, and the rest like him, We are all as an
unclean thing, all our righteousness is as filthy rags.

And Paul says, There is none righteous, no not one; there is none that
understand and seek God, all are become unprofitable, there is Romans 3. 10, 11,
12. Mat. 19. 17
none that does good, no not one: and Christ says, there is none good, but
one, and that is God. And again, when you have done what ye can, say, we are
unprofitable servants.

And Paul says of himself in his best estate, I am carnal sold Romans 7.
under sin; in me, that is in my flesh, the corrupt man, dwells no good
thing. And if any man, says he, is somewhat, whereas he is nothing, Gal. 6. 3.
he deceives himself in his own imagination: and Paul says further, when he
would do good, evil was present with him, and the good which Romans 7.
he would do, he did not, and the evil which he would not do, that he did.

Where was the power and inablement of these to the works of holiness and
righteousness, or the deeds of these of the holiness and righteousness of the
command above Adam, or endued in innocence in themselves, which deny all, and
any such thing to be in man, and in themselves.

And again the Apostle says, If it be of grace, (meaning that Romans 11. 6.
God is pleased, pacified, moved to do man good) it is no more of works; and if
of works, it is no more of grace, Grace and Christ are quite shut out. But
these are like the Angel or Minister of the Church of Laodicea, that John
speaks of, which said, he was rich, increased with goods, and had need of
nothing: whence the Spirit of God told him, that he was wretched, miserable,
poor blind, and naked, Rev. 3. 17.
and he knew it not. Or like the Pharisees that boasted, that they had that
goodness from God, whereby they were righteous, holy, devout Joh. 9.
men, wise, and did see all needful, no blind men; when as Christ told them,
that they were hypocrites, unjust, blind guides leading the Mat. 23.
blind, such as to whom all we did belong.

If these men which boast themselves to have such Inherent holiness and
righteousness in themselves by the sanctification of the Spirit, had the same,
and were such, whereby they are able to the work of holiness and righteousness,
of the holy command of God, pleasing and acceptable to God (as Agents thereof)
they were, at least, Saints in themselves. And this the Inherent holiness and
righteousness in them, which did enable them to the deed, and the work of
holiness and righteousness, pleasing and acceptable to God, and to prevail
with God to do them good, deserve to be adored and extolled as a God able to
give power, for there is no power but of God, none can give power but God, even
as the great Romans 13. 1.
God the Creator deserved to be adored for giving Adam power to do the work of
holiness and righteousness in his innocence.

But I know there are many amongst us stained with this deceiveable doctrine of
Inherent holiness and righteousness in man, etc. which have a zeal of God,
although not according to knowledge, as the Apostle Paul said, there were of
the Israelites, Romans 10. 2. which being ignorant of the righteousness of God in
Christ, and going about to establish their own righteousness, as these do,
submitted not to the righteousness of God, as these do not, which ordinarily
object and say, shall we not do that we are commanded? shall we not do the good
duties commanded of God? shall we not do our endeavors what we can, although
we cannot do perfectly? are we not commanded to call others to do the same? is
not God pleased that we should do so, and pleased with our doing so? or is God
pleased that we should be idle, careless and do nothing of his command? ^od,
says the Apostle, does accept the will for the deed, if there be first a
willing mind.

Answ. These expressions indeed do show a zeal of God, but the question is;
first, whether it be according to knowledge or not secondly, whether they hold
forth ignorance of the righteousness of God in Christ or no, and no submission
to the righteousness of God in Christ or no: and thirdly, whether they show a
going about to establish their own righteousness or no, that is, to hold forth
their own power, wills, endeavors, and works, to please God pacify God, move
and prevail with God for their good, and to be accepted of God for the same, as
it is their own, which nothing but perfect righteousness can do, which corrupt
man cannot bring forth and do, for that which is of the flesh is fleshy.

Herein they clearly show, that they are ignorant of the righteousness of God
in Christ, and submit not to the righteousness of God in Christ, which is the
only perfect righteousness, and which is all righteousness, that do, or can
please, pacify, move, and prevail with God to man's good; and to make man, or
any thing of man accepted with God. Indeed God is pleased with man, and
pacified toward man in Christ, not in himself, nor in his own corrupt will,
endeavors, or deeds; they that are in the flesh cannot please Romans 8. 8.
God, says the Apostle. Of the Sanctification of the Spirit, etc.

BEcause the Apostle says, As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made
alive; and again, as by one man's disobedience many 1 Cor. 15. (...) Romans 5. 19.
were made sinners, so by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous,
etc. Some say, that Believers in Christ are so regenerate, and renewed in their
corrupted nature of soul and body by Christ, through the inherent
sanctification of the Spirit, that themselves by the power of their sanctified
nature and faculties thereof, are able to do, and do the works of goodness,
holiness, and righteousness in the estimation of God, as Adam had power to do
in his innocence: And this inablement to them, by such sanctification of the
Spirit (I take it) they call the assistance of the Spirit, whereby, they say,
they do such works at best in part.

But I take it such err, not knowing the Scriptures, the truth of Jesus; for
although the Scriptures hold forth the Elect, Believers, to be elected,
regenerated, and renewed, to be righteous, holy, and without blame before mod;
yet the Scriptures hold them forth to be all this in Christ not in themselves.
Paul says he was elected in Christ, to be holy and without blame before God in
Christ, Ephesians. 1. 4. Ephesians. 2. 5. 6 Act. 17. 28
he was quickened in Christ, he was raised up in Christ, lived, moved, and had
his being in Christ, not in himself: he was not elected to be holy, and without
bla^^e, and spot before God in himself, to be quickened and raised up in his
own corrupted man, nature, and faculties of soul or body: Believers are not the
new man, the new creatures in themselves, in their own still corrupt nature,
but they are the new man, the new creature in Christ, which is the only new
man, and new creature in himself, as the Apostle speaks, he makes of ^wain
one new man in himself: and again, put on the new man, which after God, as
created in righteousness and holiness: Ephesians. 2. 15.
and again, if any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature. Ephesians. 4. 24. 2 Cor.
5. 17


If Believers were so made alive in themselves by Christ, to the power and
action of holiness and righteousness, as Adam was made alive, and had power of
action of holiness and righteousness by God, in his creation and state of
innocence, through the inherent sanctification of the Spirit; then corruption,
sin, and death should be gone from believers in this life; for contraries
cannot be together at the same time in the same subject, the one expels the
other, which is not, as is manifest in all: all are corrupted still, all sin
still, all are dead still, ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in
God, says the Apostle. And again, if Colos 3 3. Rom 8. 10
Christ be in you, the body is dead, because of sin, but the spirit i^ life for
righteousness sake: and again, corruption does not inherit 1 Cor. 15. 50.
incorruption, but where this corruptible has put on incorruption, and this
mortal has put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the 1 Cor. 15.
14.
saying that is written, death is swollowed up into victory, death remains in
themselves by their sin, and their life in Christ by Christ's righteousness.

If Believers had inherent power of righteous action to bring forth of
themselves, and from their inherent power actions of righteousness, as Adam had
the power to do them, then the Prophet I say would not have said of himself and
the best men, We are all as an unclean thing, all our righteousness is as
filthy rags, Isa. 64. 6. and David would not have said, There is none that does
good, no not one; and Paul would not have said, in Psa 14. (...)^. Romans 7. 18.
me, that is, my flesh, dwells no good thing: and again, I find no means to
perform that which is good.

Were not that Antichristian pride in any man, now to say, of himself, I have
power by my inherent holiness to do that which is good and righteous in the
sight and estimation of God, the proudest Pharisee said, to deny our selves, is
to deny our holiness and goodness in our selves.

Quest. Is there no operation of the Spirit of Christ in Believers, upon the
corrupted man, soul and body? is there no mortification of sin and corruption,
and no sanctification of the man by the Spirit, or to the man, in soul or body.

Answ. Yes, that must needs be so.

There are four excellent creatures manifest in this world, which all in the
Scriptures are held forth to resemble Christ and the holy Spirit, in their
operations upon the bodies near, and object to them; which four creatures are
the Sun, Fire, Water, and sweet odours.

The Sun of this world is held forth in the Scripture to resemble the Son of
righteousness Jesus Christ, in his operations and actions to Believers, Unto
you that fear my Malach. 4. 2.
name, the Son of righteousness shall arise, and health shall be under his
wings: He, says the Prophecy, alluding to the rising of the Sun of the world
upon the earth and the body therein, in men's appearance and apprehension, to
the comfort and refreshing of them; for being as the Sun of the world to Jesus
Christ, arises and manifests himself to Believers, when and as he pleases,
in their apprehensions, to the comfort and refreshing of the whole man.

And as the Sun of the world arising, does heat the colds object bodies, so
that the heat thereof heateth the cold bodies near them by reflection, yea and
melts some hard bodies by the heat thereof; and yet the natural coldness of
those bodies, and the hardness, remain still in them naturally, as appear in
the stay of the heat to those bodies.

So the Son of righteousness arising in Believers, do heat the near
corrupted man in soul and in body, with his holy heat; which heat also
sometimes reflecteth to others near, yea and melts the hard corrupt heart,
and yet the coldness and hardness of corruption naturally remain still, and
returns in sense and appearance, in the stay of the heat of the Son of
righteousness Jesus Christ by his Spirit.

And farther, as the Sun of the world arising, does in season and time quicken
some bodies dead in themselves, such as have life in their root, which in their
time, appear also to have life in themselves.

So the Son of righteousness Jesus Christ arising in Believers, though the
corrupted man the body be dead, because of sin, as the Apostle speaks, though
they be dead in themselves; as Colos. 3. 3. yet because their life is hid with
and in Christ their root, because they are rooted in Christ, as Colos. 2. In
the appointed due time Colos. 3. 3
of God, their hidden life in Christ will be manifest in themselves, which
shall be to the soul, when the corruptible has put on incorruption; and to
the body, when the mortal has put on immortality, and death be swallowed up
in victory, as the Apostle speaks.

And so the Prophet David said, God is a Sun and a shield, alluding to Jesus
Christ, which is the only shield Psa. 84. 11
and defense of Believers.

And so is Jesus Christ, and his Spirit in Believers, in the Scripture,
resembled to the fire of this world, in respect of the operation thereof upon
the bodies near. The Lord will be as a wall of fire about Jerusalem, says the
Prophet: A wall of fire will defend and keep safe any City from hurt of
adversary and enemies. So Jesus Christ is a wall of fire to save his Elect
Believers from the devil, hell, sin, the law, and death, that they shall not
hurt them. The gates of hell shall not prevail against them, Mat. 16. 18
says Christ; that they may say with Paul, O death where is thy sting? O grave
(or hell) where is thy victory? The sting 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57.
of death is sin, the strength of sin is the Law: But thanks be unto God,
that has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ; which has been a
wall of fire unto us from these our adversary:

And further, Jesus Christ and his holy Spirit in Believers, is in the
Scriptures resembled to fire in the operations thereof; because as fire
melts, purifieth things, so Jesus Christ by his Spirit, and the word of his
Spirit melts the hearts of the Believers, as Josias heart melted at the
hearing of Gods word, 2 Kings 22. 19. and also purifieth their corrupt hearts,
as Peter says, God gave the Holy Ghost to the Gentiles, which purified their
hearts by faith or believing. And for this it is said, Christ will Act. 15. 9
baptize with the Holy Ghost and with fire; and Gods word is as fire, Ierem.
23. 29.

Yet it is to be observed, that although gold or other metal be melted by the
fire, the hardness thereof returns and remains naturally in and to the
same (as is seen) in the stay of the heat of the fire. So though Christ by his
Spirit and spiritual word, melts the corrupt hard heart of believers, yet the
corrupt hardness remains still naturally, and returns in the stay of the
operation of the Spirit.

And as although the fire purifieth the gold, yet the gold must be after melted
and purified by the sire, as the Prophet says, seven times, that is oftentimes
before it be pure gold, Psa. 12. 6.
and is not pure gold, so long as any dross remains in it, in any part
thereof, but still drossie gold. So although Jesus Christ by his Spirit often
melts and purifieth the corrupt heart of believers, yet so long as corruption
remains (which remaining) remains in every part of soul and body, so that
no part is pure and holy before God in man himself, whatsoever it be in man's
estimation, but still corrupt in the whole, and so shall be, till corruptible
has put on incorruption, and mortal has put on immortality.

And Jesus Christ and his Spirit in Believers, are in the Scriptures resembled
to water for the operations thereof, as washing, cleansing, slaking, quenching
and refreshing. So Christ resembled himself to the water of the Well, unto the
woman, If thou had asked of me, I would have given Ioh. 4. 10.
thee of the water of life, meaning himself, and his holy Spirit. And again,
Take of the water of life freely. Rev. 22. 17


For as water washes and cleanses foul bodies, and refreshes weary bodies,
and softneth dry and hard bodies, as Clay, and the like; and quenches and
slaketh excessive heat in earthy bodies, so Jesus Christ by his Spirit has all
these operations upon Believers in the corrupted man. The Apostle writes of
the believing Corinthians, which had been great sinners, that now they were
washed, sanctified and justified in the name of Jesus Christ by the Spirit of
our God, in manifestation to themselves. Christ tells some of his Disciples
that had heard him preach the Word, Now you are clean through the word that I
have spoken unto you. Job said the Lord had softened his heart; God Joh. 23. 16
says, he will take the stony heart away from his people, and give them a
heart of flesh, a soft heart; David said, that his Shepherd the living Lord
would lead him into green pastures and waters of comfort, refreshing waters.
The Spirit mortifieth the deeds of the flesh, says the Apostle. Ephesians. 6. 16.


The faith of Jesus Christ quenches the fiery darts of the wicked, says the
Apostle.

And yet as although water washes and cleanses foul bodies, softneth hard,
refreshes faint and weary, quenches and slaketh heat. If this foulness,
hardness, faintness and heat be natural to those bodies, the same will
return and remain to them in the stay of the operation of the water.

So although Jesus Christ by his spirit washes and cleanses the foulness,
softneth the hardness, refreshes the faintness, mortifieth, quenches, and
slaketh the heat of corruption in the corrupt man; yet because corruption is
inherent in believers, and natural, all will remain and return, till that
which is corruptible has put on incorruption, and mortal has put on
immorrality.

And to go through the resemblances of Christ by his Spirit to believers, as
is in the Scripture; So Christ and his Spirit are resembled to sweet odours.
The Apostle calls Christ the sweet odor to God, Ephesians. 5. 2. And the Spouse in
the Canticles resembles Christ to myrrh, spices, and Cant. 2. 3. 14. Cant. 5.
5. 13.
sweet flowers, saying, his fruit is sweet, his voice is sweet, and his lips
and mouth most sweet; and as earthly sweet odours sweeten things near them, to
the sweeting of other things near them, so Jesus Christ by his Spirit sweetneth
the corrupt soul and body where it dwells in believers, even to the sweetning
of others.

Yet as notwithstanding the sweeting of odours to earthlythings which are
naturally ill-savoured, their ill-savour will return and remain in the stay of
the sweet odours to them. So in the stay of their sweeting of Jesus Christ and
his Spirit to the corrupt man, naturally corrupted, unsavory corruption
returns and remains, till the corruptible has put on incorruption, and the
mortal has put on immortality: and this was that which made the Apostle Paul
cry out, O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? And the same made the Martyr of Jesus Christ Mr. Careless to sing that
mournful song, Indeed sometimes I do repent, to God for mercy call,
But yet alas incontinent to sin again I fall.


Thus we may see much operation of the Spirit of Christ in Believers upon the
corrupted man, soul and body; that there is much mortification of sin and
corruption, and sanctification to the corrupt man in soul and body by the
Spirit.

Although sanctification and holiness be not inherent in the corrupt man, as
corruption and sin is inherent in every part of soul and body; for so (two
contraries being in one subject together at the same time, the one would
utterly expel the other) and there would be nothing but holiness, no sin and
corruption in Believers (which is apparent to be) and the Apostle says there
is, yet there is sanctification unto Believers by the Spirit, as the Apostle
says, Christ Jesus 1 Ioh. 1. 8. 1 Cor. 1. 30.
is made unto us righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.

The Apostle does not say, that Jesus Christ makes or works in us, in our
souls or bodies, inherent righteousness, sanctification and redemption, but
Christ Jesus is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption. He says, Christ is made unto us, not into us, by the imputation of
his holiness and righteousness unto us.

And yet God is not pleased that man should be careless and idle, for Christ
the Vine, has undertaken for those given him of the Father, to make them his
branches, to bear Ioh. ^5. 5.
his fruit wrought up in them by his Spirit, and to make them his instruments
of the Spirit in them, in the doing of every good work commanded of God, called
the fruits of the Spirit Gal. 5. 22.
as he pleases to order, direct, and govern, fit, enable, and strengthen them
thereto; to manifest, evidence, and witness to them, that they are branches
abiding in Christ the Vine, have all of Christ, that Christ is all to them, as
the Apostle says, We have received the Spirit, and the same Spirit does
witness unto our souls, that we are the children of Romans 8. 15 16.
God.

The works of the holy command, called the fruits of the Spirit, are not
wrought up in man the branch, fitted to bear them, etc. that man should rob
Christ of his honor, which only pleases God with that done in himself, and of
himself; but they are wrought up to be born of man, for a witness and
assurance to him of his adoption and grace, both through Christ.

I Find six sorts of men of different ways, and opinions, or judgments,
touching their estates with God.
1. The first, saying in their hearts, that there is neither God nor Devil,
Heaven nor Hell: Of these David Psa. 14. 1.
spoke, The fool has said in his heart there is no God. Such are evident
Atheists.

2. The second, that there is a God and Heaven, but no devil nor hell; so they
question not their estates with God: Of these both (I suppose) these of Calvin
might be principally spoken of (heu vivunt homines tanquam mors nulla sequatur,
and velut infernum fabula vana foret. Alas men live, as though no death did
follow, and as if hell were an old wives tale; so they think all well with
them, if they can shift punishments of men.

3. The third sort do acknowledge a God and Devil, Heaven and Hell; and that
the first man Adam lost both God and Heaven by his transgression, and also much
of his indowments in himself by Creation. But that there was so much of his
indowments in himself by Creation, left unto him, and his posterity of mankind,
as thereby every man that will, may recover Gods favor and love, may pacify
and please God, by doing his holy commands, taught and preached unto him, and
remaining in him by nature, and so attain God, heaven, and salvation, lost by
the first man. (This was that of Palagius) exploded for heresy.

4. The fourth sort say, that there is a God and Diven and hell, and all
mankind lost in Adams transgression; and notwithstanding the loss and death in
Adam there is o Adams indowment left to all men; power and free will to hear
the Gospel of Jesus Christ crucified for the redemption of all men, being
preached unto them, and hearing, they may believe if they will, for faith
comes by hearing, yea by hearing Rom 10. 17
power is given them to believe and live, etc. some say, although dead before:
for the dead shall hear the Ioh. 5. 25.
voice of the Son of God, and they that hear it shall live, says Christ. The
performance of Jesus Christ and Redemption is for all men, but life and
salvation cannot be to any of mankind, that will not, and do not hear the
Gospel of Jesus Christ crucified preached unto them, and believe.

And this Jesus Christ was indeed foreknowne (say they) of God the Father
before the world, to be given to perform for all men unto life, and to redeem
all men; but was not given till his manifestation in the flesh, which did then
undertake with God, and performed for all men, if all men would hear and
believe.

And so their salvation has beginning and first ground from man's own will, and
his own work; he may thank himself first if he be saved, and after, thanks are
due to Jesus Christ: Robbery and idolatry.

They deny Gods choice of men in Christ, of mercy, love, and f^ee grace, and
ordination of them chosen to eternal life before the world, and his
manifestation of the same by his Spirit (when he pleases in (...).) A
desp^sing of Gods everlasting love, goodness, and free grace in Christ, and of
his power thereto, in his pleasure of choosing dead men to life, and specially
Gods choosing of them.

They deny God (which says) thy salvation is only Hos. 13. 9.
of me, thy damnation of thy self. And Peter the Apostle of Christ, that says,
there is no salvation in any other Act. 5. 12
thing but in Jesus Christ: all this meant freely of grace, love, and mercy,
without means of man: It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs,
but in Romans 9. 16
God that shows mercy; willing, hearing, and believeing by the command to
natural men, are means of man (as they take it) in his own natural power. If
they be wrought up by the spirit in man, they are means only in the estimation
of man unto salvation.

But the Apostle of Christ tell us, they are only manifestations, evidences,
witnesses, and assurances of our salvation wrought up by the Spirit in the Romans
8. 16
branches of the Vine Jesus Christ, and not means, Christ has no means but
himself to save man; for man to please God, or prevail with God, is to save
himself by merit; for if man can please God, he can prevail with God to save
him; God will not damn him that pleases him, so he saves himself by pleasing
of God.

5. The fifth sort say there is a God and Devil, Heaven and Hell, that Adam
and all men were lost and dead upon the first transgression, that God foreknew
all so, and of mercy, love, and free grace, did choose some of mankind in his
Christ, which he gave before the world, to undertake and redeem them chosen by
his death and performances.

To whom he sends his quicking and sanctisying Spirit, by his Ordinance of
Prayer, Preaching, and hearing, etc. whereby they believe and repent, and are
then first justified before God, and by the sanctification of the same Spirit
and first grace, they have life and inherent holiness and righteousness in
themselves, as Adam had by Creation, whereby they are themselves accepted with
God, and are enabled to do the works of holiness and rightnousnesse, the works
of the holy command themselves before God, as agents thereof, and thereby
please God, pacify God, and prevail with God to do them good: and (they say)
it is therefore that they teach and exhort men to pray, believe, repent, and do
duties commanded, that so they may serve God, please, pacify, and prevail
with God to do them good, to save them, is for man to merit life and
salvation, God cannot damn him that pleases him.

These go about to establish their own righteousness, which they suppose they
have by the sanctification of the Spirit: for sanctification, and other fruits
and works of the Spirit wrought up in man the branch to bear and hold forth,
are not so that man the branch should or can please the Father the husbandman
thereby, but to manifest, evidence, and witness, that man, that the Branch
abides in Christ the Vine, and that Christ the Vine pleases his Father the
husbandman, not that that which they do, in bearing and holding forth the
fruit, is their righteousness to please God, but that the righteousness of
Christ is imputed to them, whose righteousness only pleases God.

Note. Some of these, and some of the former sort say, that a man that
believes may fall away from the faith, and commit such sin as he may be
damned.

And (they say) a man in Christ is a new creature in himself, the old man with
his corruptions and sin is gone, the heart, qualities, and affections, will,
and understanding, all are made righteous, and sin is gone from the man
himself which is in Christ; if corruption and sin remain thou art not in
Christ.

And many of this fifth sort affirm, that man in Christ is regenerate only in
part, a new creature in part, a new man in part etc. Thus holding forth the new
creature and new man is to be a manifest half or part of a man.

This sense is carnal and monstrous indeed, not consistent with that of the
Apostle, Old things are past, all things are made new.

6. The sixth for say, that there is a God and Devil, Heaven and Hell, that
Adam and all men were lost upon the first transgression, that God foreknew all
so, and of mercy, love, and free grace did choose some of mankind in his
Christ, which he gave before the world, to undertake to do the will of God for,
and redeem them chosen by his death and performances; which chosen, he did
then also of free grace predestinate, adopt his children, ordain to eternal
l^fe irrevocable, call, justify and glorify before himself, although not in
manifestation to the creature till fullness of time, and that he sends his
holy spirit to them as he pleases, to work up the fruits of his spirit in
them, that they (as branches) may bear them and hold them forth (...). (...).
1.
to the glory of the Father the husband man before men; and for manifestation,
evidence, and witness to themselves that they are elected in Christ, adopted
through Christ, called, justified, and shall be glorified in their own sight,
among the Saints in glory, when the time of glory before the creature shall come.

And (they say) that the Law now in the hand of the Mediator, the man Christ
Jesus, was given of him to his people for the government of his Church, and
safety of his Elect; that they may know transgression and sin, that they may
see what Christ has 2 Timothy 1. 9
done for them before God, in performing the righteousness, and fulfilling
that holy Law, impossible to them, before God.

That the outward possible righteousness of the Law and command may be
performed before men, to the good and profit of men (as the Apostle speaks)
be careful of the good works of the Law, for they are good and profitable to
men, which although, as David says, they extend not to to God the goodness,
yet Psa. 16 3.
they extend to men upon the earth in goodness.

But these being blind and ignorant of the mystery of Christ and the Gospel,
take all carnally, when as the truth is, that the man in Christ is a new
creature, a Ephesians. 2. 25.
new man wholly in Christ, which is the new man in himself, as the Apostle
says, and this man in Christ is a new man, by the grace of election,
imputation, and mystical union with Christ, etc.

The error of Universal Redemption discovered.
BEcause the Apostle says, that Christ gave himself a ransom 1 Timothy 2. 6.
for all men.

And again that Christ is the reconciliation for our Sins, and 1 John 2. 2.
not for ours only, but also for the Sins of the whole World; and because
they find some other like Scriptures,

Some collect and hold forth, That Christ dyed for all men, Elect and
Reprobate; That he shed his blood for all men; That he Ephesians. 1. 4.
paid the price unvaluable of his blood, to the great God, for the satisfaction
of the transgression of all men, for the ransom of all men, for the redemption
of all men, for the reconciliation and peace with God of the whole world.

But I take it, although these think they do honor God and his Christ in
stretching out of such his, and his Christ's love, grace, bounty, goodness, and
performance to all men, to the whole world of men, to the vessels of honor and
dishonor, to Reprobate and Elect.

Yet I say, I take it, that these do greatly err and dishonor God and his
Christ, with holding the truth in unrighteousness, covering Romans 1. 18.
the truth with falsehood, against whom wrath is revealed. For first, they
mistake and misconstrue these Scriptures which they allege, for the ground
holding forth the same, to intend that Christ gave himself a ransom for all
men, elect and reprobate. When as the meaning is, that he gave himself a
ransom for all men, elected in Christ; and that Christ is the reconciliation,
not for our sins only which are of his elect, now extant in the world,
believing in him, but also for the sins of all the elect that ever were in the
world, and that ever shall be in the whole world; Not a ransom and
reconciliation for the sins of the forsaken ones of the Reprobate, of the lost
children of wrath, but for the sins of the chosen and elected ones out of the
company of the children of wrath, (which all Mankind was before the Creature)
upon the manifested general fact, by their own fault, and before God, to whom
all things are present (even ab Eterno) before the foundations of the world.
And not for the sins of those which were worthily Ephesians. 1. 45.
hated of God before they are borne, for the first transgression, or have done
good or evil before men, as Esau was. But Christ Rom 9. 11. 13.
is a reconciliation for the sins of the beloved ones of God, elected of God in
Christ to be holy and without blame before God in love, Ephesians. 1. 4.
as Jacob was loved and elected of God before he was borne, or had done good or
evil before men. Romans 9. 11. 13.


The Scriptures do not hold forth, that God gave his only begotten Son to
dye and sh^d his most precious blood, to Ransom, Redeem, and be a
Reconciliation for those of the Children of wrath, by the general fall which
God refuses to Elect in Christ, to be adopted his Children through Christ;
which God would not show mercy upon, but leave them in their own hardness to
the merited everlasting destruction. For then God would not have Elected some
in his Christ, out of the general Company of the Children of wrath, to be
adopted his Children through Christ, to be Holy and without blame before God in
love: And have left forsaken, and reprobated the rest, still to be the Children
of his hatred and wrath, if God had intended the gift of his Son, to
undertake to shed his Blood, to Ransom, Redeem, and be a Reconciliation to
him, for the Reprobate, for all, one and other.

Neither does the Scripture hold forth, that the Christ of God did undertake to
dye and shed his most precious Blood, Ransom, Redeem and was a Reconciliation
to God, for the sins of any of the left Children of Gods hatred and wrath; but
only of those which were Elected in Christ, before the Foundation of the
World, to be Holy without blame with God in love, as Paul says, he and Ephesians. 1
4.
all the Elect of God in Christ were. Indeed for all men in the whole and
Universal world, which now are, being Elected in Christ which ever have been
and shall be in the whole world, Elected of God in his Christ, Christ did
undertake for, shed his Blood, Ransomed, Redeemed, performed all Righteousness
for, paid all Debts for, made full satisfaction for to God, and before God,
that before God there is nothing to be laid to the charge of Romans 8. 33.
Gods chosen, it is God that Justifies. Being chosen of God in Christ, they
are justified of God through Christ, undertaking and performance before God:
And is it not a high dishonor to the great wise and just God, to tell him that
he gave his only Son to death, for to pay the inestimable price of his
Blood, to Redeem, and Ransom from death to life those which he himself
refused to save, which he himself hated to live before him, which he himself
had judged to everlasting death unrecoverable, which he himself knew before,
were left in such their own hardness, that they would not receive the
benefit; yea would reject the benefit of any Ransom paid for them?

Sure no man will give his beloved Son to death, or pay ten thousand pound of
money for to gain that to him, which he refuses to have, or which he knew
will not be gained.

And it had been a presumptuous disobedience in Christ, to his Father; and
prodigality in Christ, of his precious Blood, to have shed it for a Ransom and
Redemption of those, which his Father had not Elected in him, and given him to
Ransom and Redeem, and which he knew his Father hated to be Elected and
Redeemed. And which he knew would not receive, but reject the benefit of his
Blood.

Who is it, that knew the Scriptures, that will not acknowledge that mankind
^n general, upon the general fall of Adam, were judged and condemned of God
to be the Children of Gods wrath, and everlasting death. And that God of love,
free grace and mercy, was pleased to Elect some of those in Christ, which were
the Children of wrath (as well as the other) out of whole Ephesians. 2. 3.
company of the Children of wrath, to be adopted the Children of God through
Jesus Christ (that is) by his performing the righteousness of the Law of
works for them, and by giving of himself unto death for them, and shedding of
his precious blood for them, for a full satisfaction to God in his justice, for
the Ransom, Redemption, Justification, eternal life and glorification. And
this for them only, and not for the least ones in their hardness, and refused
ones of God?

Surely to say and hold forth that Christ gave himself for a Ransom of these,
to shed his blood, to redeem these, is to lay upon God and his Christ
inconstancy, indiscretion, prodigality and folly, to the great dishonor of
God, and his Christ, and to say that Christ did Ransom, and Redeem them with
his death and blood is unrighteousness and salsehood.

We find and read in the Scripture, that Christ redeemed the Elected of God in
Christ (as Paul says of himself and all other Elected of Christ) God has
Elected us in Christ before the Ephesians. 1. 4.
world, and Christ has redeemed us from the curse. But we find no Gal. 3. 13.
where in the Scripture to be said expressly, that Christ redeemed reprobate
ones, which were not Elected in Christ.

The greatest power of their assertion, is in the word (all,) or (all men,)
which word they stretch forth to Elect and Reprobate good and bad (as we say.)
But it is clear that where this word (all) in such manner and matter,
imports only all the Elect. So Paul to the Romans, As by the offense of one,
the fault came on Romans 5. 18.
all men to Condemnation: So by the justifying of one, the benefit abounded to
all men to justification of life, (meaning all the Elect believers) I think
these men will not say that justification of life is to all men Elect and
Reprobate in general, by Christ's justifying them.

So Paul to the Corinthians says, As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all
be made alive; (meaning as all mankind being then in 1 Cor. 15. 22.
Adam, when he transgressed and dyed, then dyed) so all (being Elected in
Christ) shall be made alive.

I hope these will not say that all men Elect and Reprobate in general shall
be made alive in Christ, then none must be damned; and if these will have these
to be confined in the Scriptures to that, why may not they admit of those also,
to be likewise confined to the Elect, they being in the like express of the
same matter.

But they say by Preaching, that Christ has given himself for all men in
general, Elect and Reprobate, that he has shed his blood for the peace of all
men, with God they procure great honor, and the hardest hearted men will be
moved to relent, when they hear that Christ has had such pity and mercy on
them, as to give himself to death for their life, to shed his most precious
blood to make their peace with God. This will move the worst of men to embrace
Christ, to thirst after Christ, and to believe and close with Jesus Christ.

Yet I wish these to consider that the Apostle of Christ says, We may not do
evil that good may come thereof, whose damnation is just. We may not preach
falsehood that Christ may have honor Romans 3. 8.
thereby. This was the great sin of Saul, that brought upon him his woeful
destruction. He spared the best and fattest Beasts of Amilech, contrary to the
command of God, to offer up in Sacrifice to the honor of God, but Samuel told
him, he had done wickedly, to obey was better then Sacrifice. 1 Samuel 15. 19.


It is to be well observed which the Apostle says; That, in that excellent
Sermon which Paul preached at Antioch As many as Act. 13. 48.
were ordained to eternal life believed. No doubt but there were many which
heard that Sermon did not believe: for the Apostle says that only so many as
were ordained to Eternal life believed, And what was the reason that the rest
of the hearers did not believe? Certainly (by the part of the Apostles words)
it was because they were not ordained to eternal life, they were not elected
in Christ before the world, to be holy and without blame Ephesians 1. 4. 5.
before God in love, nor predestinate to be adopted the Children of God through
Jesus Christ according to the good pleasure of his will: (as the Apostle says)
but were the reprobate and the left of God in their own hardness (God being
bound to none) but to have Romans 9. 18.
mercy on whom he will, and whom he will to harden. That is to leave them in
their own hardness (as the Apostle says) for (God leaving them) they grow
into more hardness.

Man has no power in himself, to close with Christ or to believe as he ought,
nor more then to pray as he ought, but the Apostle says of himself and other
the Elect: We know not what Romans 8. 26.
we pray for as we ought; but the spirit helps our infirmities: that is, does
it for us, and makes request for us, etc. It is God our Christ Phil. 2. 13.
that works in us the will and the deed of his own good pleasure. The
praying, believing, and the rest of that sort are the works of our God, Christ
Jesus by his spirit in us, they are none of man's works, Christ Jesus is the
Priest and the Sacrifice which said, Lo, I come to do thy will O God. See 1 Chronicles. 29. 14.

The Apostle says they were ordained to eternal life before Ephesians. 10. 9.
they believed. They had their ordination to life (that is) their election in
Christ and the life also, which is Christ: for Christ is our life (says the
Apostle) Christ is the way, the truth and the life; before they believed a dead
man can do nothing: (and Joh. 14. 6.
Christ says) without me, you can do nothing.

Faith follows after election, ordination, and life; Faith is Joh. 15. 5.
only the manifestation of election, ordination, and Christ to those which God
has elected in his Christ, when and as he pleases to work the same in them
to his glory and their comfort. Heb. 11. 1.


Reprobate men which have not election in Christ, ordination to life, nor
Christ the life, (cannot, nor do believe be any means) So that the conceit
of these men that think the preathing of universal redemption (which is a
false Gospel) will make reprobates to relent, to embrace Christ, to thirst
after Christ, to believe, and close with Jesus Christ, is a withholding of the
truth in unrighteousness, and a covering of the truth with falsehood.

I know these (to bear out their error) allege many other arguments then
are before mentioned (as the Commission of Christ to the eleven Apostles) Go
ye into all the world, and Mar. 16. 15.
preach the Gospel, to every creature.

Now (say they) wherefore, and to what end, did Christ command them to preach
the Gospel of salvation to every creature in the whole world (without
exception) if he knew before, that there were many that would not, nor could
believe the Gospel of salvation preached unto them? This Commission was in
vain, and their preaching in vain to every creature, yet to them which would
not, nor could believe.

Answ. The principal end of Christ's Commission was the manifestation of Christ
and his performances, the love, free grace of God and salvation thereby, to the
which were ordained See Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. 13.
to eternal life, and to believe the Gospel thereof preached: For (the Apostle
says) the Gospel is hid to those which are lost 2 Cor. 4. 3.
(that is reprobate) although it be never so publicly preached to them. But
the reason why Christ commanded the Gospel to be preached to every creature,
was because the preaching (being a public office) the Preacher a public
person, to public Congregations, where the Reprobate is not discerned of man.
The Preacher must of necessity preach the Gospel for the outward hearing
thereof, to every creature in every Congregation where he preaches. And yet
there is no manifestation thereof to the Soul of the reprobate, for they bear
about with them their judgment: Hearing they hear not, neither understand.
Mat. 13. 13. 14.


Again they argue a just complaint of God, for shutting up Gal. 3. 23.
some in unbeliefes, that they cannot believe.

Ans. An unjust offender has a just judgment for his offense without any just
complaint.

All have offended in the first man; By the offense of one the ^om. 5. 18.
fault came on all men to condemnation (says the Apostle) And God is not bound
to any man, He therefore has mercy on whom ^om. 9. 18.
he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardneth (that is) leaves him in his
own hardness. O man! (says the Apostle) who art Ver. 20.
thou that pleadest against God?

Yet they further argue that God would not the death of a sinner Ezekiel. 18. 32
that dies.

No sinner can save it self from death, it is Christ that saves.

Ans. The Prophet speaks of Gods will concerning the death everlasting of the
first man, and the condition of the contract, and of all men in him, when God
with him suspended his own will to their sin, and death which he knew the
sin would bring on them, if they did sin, in the giving to them power and
freewill then to stand or fall. So that's man's fall which was not by Gods will
but his own.

Gods chosen people are delivered from everlasting death in him by Christ, in
whom they are chosen, they cannot dye eternally.

And yet again they argue, that God our Savior will that all men should be
saved and come to the knowledge of the truth: (as the 1 Timothy 2. 4.
Apostle says) Therefore (say they) although all did fall by Adam, yet Christ
would have all men recorded and saved by him, by his death and performance.

Ans. Christ would have all men elected in him, and ordained to God in eternal
life to be saved by him, and to come to the knowledge of the truth thereof by
the preaching of the Gospel thereof, (which is the Apostles meaning) Not that
Christ (which came to Heb. 10. 9.
do his Fathers will) did desire, that those (which his Father had reprobated
and was not pleased to elect in him) and give him to save, as his ordained to
salvation should be saved by his eternal performance; but according to his
Fathers will and pleasure, he, as his Father did, so he does, leave them still
in their own hardness.

Object. They say Christ's blood is price sufficient for all men.

Answ. When a King has Coined a most precious metal, It is treason in any
Subject to Coin the same, or hold forth the same for more or less then the
King has Coined it for; be the metal never so precious or sufficient of it
self.

So I take it great presumption, injury and high treason to our God, Christ and
King, to Coin and hold forth the precious blood of Christ, for more or less
then our God, Christ and King has Coined it for, which has the testimony of
holy scriptures. To have the Image and Superscription of Christ for the
redemption of those which God elected in Christ, given, him to redeem,
ordained to eternal life, before the world. And (as it pleases the Lord
Christ) to have the evidence and manifestation of the same, and the rest of the
graces of God in Christ to themselves in believing.

But have no testimony of scriptures for the redemption of reprobates, or any
way to be sufficient for more then our God or King coined it for.

Indeed if our God and King had coined it, to be payment for more to him then
the elect in Christ, his blood and death had been sufficient for all them, but
we in all humbleness ought to submit to Gods pleasure and appointment. And I
take it all the most fertile grounds of holy scripture will not bear and bring
forth that unsavory fruit to God and his Christ, of universal redemption.

Read more for satisfaction hereof, in the one and twentieth page, of the
second Catechisticall dialogue, useful for the propagation of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, to the end of that Dialogue.

And I add, because of satisfaction this one Argument, (further off those that
would maintain their error of Universal Redemption) saying, that the words
of the Apostle, where he says, (God has chosen us in Christ before the world,
etc.) Do not import, that God did choose Paul, or any particular person in
Christ, Ephesians 1. 4.
before the world, but the word Us, do import that God made only a general
choice in Christ, as of Paul himself, with those believing Ephesians, to whom
he wrote his Epistle to the rest of believers, in a general notion, not in a
particular notion of every one. Which argumentation (although it may trouble
the truth) yet it makes nothing for Universal Redemption: For if God did
choose some in Christ before the world to be Redeemed by Christ's performance,
it could not be all that Christ Redeemed by his Fathers appointment, those that
the Father did not choose in him, he did not Redeem: therefore not all men
chosen, and not chosen.

But if these men had not forgotten the Grammar rules, they woould not have
misconstrued the Scripture; for the Grammar rule tells them, The first person
whether Singular or Plural, speaks of himself, yea the first person plural
(although it speaks of himself, and others) yet it speaks of himself in
particular, with other particulars. So Paul, in the word Us, shows that God
elected him in Christ in particular, in his particular notion, before the
world; and the rest in his particular notion and discernment before the world.
For it was in Gods power to know particulars of the generals, as it was to
know the generals, and is.

And the Apostle says, Rufus was chosen in the Lord, speaking of Romans 16. 12
him in particular, as Paul intended to show that God had chosen himself in
particular, and the rest in particular, in his particular notion.

I wish all would consider this, that uphold Universal Redemption, and answer
if they can, modestly.

Is there any wise man that will give his whole Estate, or the price thereof,
to purchase that inheritance which he knows he neither shall nor can ever
gain, and have?

And is there any wise man, that having laid out his whole estate, to purchase
an inheritance, that will lose his purchased inheritance, if he can keep it
and hold it?

Yet you say, God the Father gave his only begotten Son, all that he had;
and the Son gave himself the inestimable price to purchase, ransom and
redeem all of mankind for inheritance, which (he knew) he neither should, nor
could gain, enjoy, and have; for I think you will say, God foreknew all.

And you say, the Father gave all he had, and the Son in obedience laid down
all, and paid the purchase for all the inheritance, and had power to have and
enjoy all, to keep and hold all, and yet suffered the Adversary to get the
greatest part of his inheritance from him, which he had paid so dear for, to
the utter ruin thereof, and his own everlasting loss, what dishonor, what
injury what folly, what blasphemy, what Robbery is this offered to the Father,
and the Son, everliving, just, Almighty, merciful, and most wise God? The
Apostle says, Christ gave himself to Redeem us from all iniquity. Iam. 4. 8.
Doubtless the Apostle intended this of all that he redeemed. That he redeemed
all that he redeemed from all iniquity, for why should his grace pay the price
of his redemption, for one given him to redeem and did redeem, more or to
more benefit for one then for another? (all being redeemed from all iniquity)
all shall be saved; the iniquity of unbelief can hinder none. Will to believe,
or believing cannot further the work of Christ's redemption. For the Apostle
says, It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that
shows mercy.

Will to believe and believing wrought up in the Heart of Man, by the Spirit of
Christ, does only witness the Redemption of Christ, and the benefits thereof
wrought by Christ of Mercy and Free Grace; They do not perfect and finish the
work of Christ's Redemption, which he himself has perfected and finished,
and is only able without the work and help of man.

A Catechisticall Dialogue, useful for the Propagation of the Gospel of JESUS
CHRIST.
Question, were not you in Adam, the first Man that God Created?

Ans. Yes, I my self and all Mankind were in Adam the first Man.

Quest. Did not you and all Mankind die, and were dead in the first Adam by
his transgressions?

Ans. Yes, I my self died, and all Mankind were dead in Adams transgression,
and became the Children of wrath: So the Apostle says, in Adam all die, by the
offense of one death reigned Romans 5. 17, 18.
through one; And by the offense of one the fault came on all men to
condemation; And again, by Nature we were all the children of Wrath as well
as others.

Quest. Are you and all Mankind dead still in Adams transgressions, as Adam
and all were dead?

Ans. For the Apostle says, as in Adam all died, so in Christ shall all be
made alive, that is, as all which were in Adam died 1 Cor. 15. 22.
So all that are the chosen of God in Christ shall be made alive, and says
Christ, So God loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but have eternal Life.

Quest. How do you know that you are chosen of God in Christ to be made alive
in Christ?

Ans. Because I believe in Christ, for Christ says, Whosoever believes in me,
shall not perish, but have Eternal Life; He shall be Joh. 3. 16.
made alive, says the Apostle; And Luke says, As many as were ordained to
eternal Life, (that is chosen of God in Christ, to eternal Acts 13. 48
Life) Believed.

Quest. How do you know that you believe in Christ, as Christ intends?

Ans. First, I know that I believe in Christ, as Christ intends, Acts 15. 7
because I believe the whole Gospel of Jesus Christ, which is the Gospel of
Salvation through Jesus Christ.

Secondly, the Spirit of Christ does witness with my Soul and Romans 8. 16.
Heart unto me, that I believe as Christ intends.

Quest. Can you not know that you believe in Christ, except the Spirit of
Christ witness the same unto you?

Answ. No, For Faith is the fruit of the Spirit of Christ, as the Rom 8. 9.
Apostle says, Gal. 5. 22. And the same Apostle says, If any man has not the
spirit of Christ, the same is not his, nor consequently Romans 8. 16.
has the witnesses that he believes as Christ intends, for the Apostle
says, It is the spirit that witnesses.

Quest. How do you know that you have the Spirit of Christ?

Answ. By the fruits of the spirit which I have, as, Love, Joy, Gal. 5. 22.
Peace, Patience, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Righteousness, Meekness and
Temperance. For as the good Tree does witness the good fruit, So Christ says,
the good fruit does witness the Mat. 12. 33
good Tree, The Tree, says he, is known by his Fruits.

Quest. Can you not know that you have the Spirit of Christ by that one fruit
of Faith, except there be the rest of the fruits of the spirit withal?

Answ. No, for the Apostle says, Faith without works is ae dead Faith, (that
is) if there be not with Faith the rest of the works and Fruits of the spirit,
my Faith does not witness the Spirit of James 2. 17
Christ in me, nor that I believe (as Christ intends) to witness eternal
Life in me.

Quest. You say that you were dead in Adam, and that you are made alive in
Christ: yea,

That in Christ you have that eternal Life, which you lost in Adam. Do you
believe and feel, that you are quite free from that death which you had in
Adams transgression, that nothing thereof remain yet to you in your self, and
that you have now full possession of that Life purchased and procured, by
Christ's love and performance in your self?

Ans. I believe that I have full possession of that eternal Life in Christ,
which I lost in Adams transgression purchased and procured by Christ's
performance, And therefore I do believe that I am quite freed and discharged
from that Eternal Death, which I had in Adams transgression, through Christ's
performance. But I find and feel a resemblance, and shadow of that corruption
and death in my self, which came by Adams and mine as one in Adam, and the
more because I find not that my eternal Life in my self, which is hid from
me in Christ, as the Apostle speaks to the believing Colossians, you are
dead, but your life Coloff. 3. 3
is hid with Christ in God.

And it is to be observed, that Christ says, who so believes in Joh 6. 16
me shall not perish, but shall have eternal Life: He says not, does not
perish or die in present, and has in present eternal life, but says, shall
not perish, and shall have eternal life? For when this corruptible has put on
incorruption, and this mortal has put on immortality, Then, indeed, (says
the Apostle) Death shall be swallowed up into victory. And when Christ which is
our Life shall appear, 1 Cot. 25
then shall ye appear with him in glory: then shall eternal Life appear in
your selves (says the Apostle) Neither does Coloff. 3 4
the Apostle say, as in Adam all die, so in Christ are all made alive, 1 Cor.
15. 22
But says, all shall be made alive, when the appointed, and fullness of time
is come, then shall all the chosen of God in Christ, whose Life have been hid
with Christ, be made alive in themselves in manifestation. As all died not in
themselves in manifestation which were in Adam by nature, until the appointed
time of their so being in manifestation; So all live not in themselves, in
manifestation, which are by Mercy and Grace chosen of God in Christ, until
their appointed time so to live in themselves in manifestation.

Object. All men in the World are said, and seem to live here in themselves,
and to die in themselves. The same condition (says the Preacher) falls to
all, to the just and wicked, to him that swears, and to him that fears an
Oath.

Quest. Is that Life which all men live here any part of that Life, Eccle^ 9.
2, 3
which Christ purchased, to the chosen of God in him which is (as the Apostle
says) yet hid with Christ in God to be manifest in themselves, in the
appointed and fullness of time?

Ans. No: that Life which all men, are said, and do seem now to live here in
themselves, is not any part of that eternal Life which Christ purchased by his
performance and merit for the chosen of God in him, For the children of wrath,
reprobate, and forsaken ones of God are partakers of this Life: And Christ was
not given of God to purchase and merit any part of eternal Life, nor any of
the loss in Adam for them, But only for the chosen ones of God, ordained to
eternal Life before the World.

Quest. From whence is this Life of Mankind in general, when as all died in
Adam?

Answ. All died in Adam touching eternal Life, and touching the good of
temporal Life, all this was lost in Adams transgression; But temporal
uncertain Life to man at Gods Will by his sufferance, and patience, naked and
void of all good, accompanied with corruption and misery, the shadow of Death
remained still to Adam and all Mankind in general, Adam (being dead according
to Gods Word, when thou shall eat, thou shall die) had naked temporal Life,
He having sinned in present saw himself naked and was ashamed. So that this
Life of Mankind is Adams naked Genesis 3. 7
Life in Death, a dying Life.

Quest. Did not Christ by his undertaking and performance take away from you,
and discharge you, and all the chosen of God from the whole curse of the Law
and sin; Is there remaining any part thereof yet to them in this their
miserable corruption, and Dying Life?

Answ. Yes, Christ by his undertaking and performance has taken away and
discharged me, and all Gods chosen People from the curse of the Law, and sin.
So the Prophet affirms, God Esaias. 53. 6
has laid the iniquities of us all upon Him, and the Apostle says, Romans 8. 33
who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that
justifies, being chosen of God, we are justified of God, nothing can be laid
to our charge. Yet it is the Pleasure of God and his Will, That this miserable
corruption and dying Life in themselves, before men, should remain to all Gods
chosen People for a time, as to the children of wrath, to these, to show his
wrath and make his power to be known, and to the others to declare the riches
of his glory prepared for them. And no man ought to question Gods Will herein
(as the Apostle advises) what (says Romans 9.
he) If God would, to show his wrath and make his power known, Romans 9. 22
suffer with long patience the Vessels of wrath prepared to destruction; And
that he might declare the riches of his glory upon the vessels of mercy,
which he has prepared unto glory? All this is done of God in wrath to the
Vessels of wrath to show his wrath and power, and to the Vessels of mercy, to
declare his glory prepared forthem.

Quest. Is not the corruption, misery, miserable and dying Life, which remain
to Gods chosen People a part of the curse of Adams transgression not yet taken
away of Christ?

Answ. No, it is no part of the curse, for the Apostle says, Christ has
redeemed us from the curse, being made a curse for us, dying Gal. 3. 12
Life and Death it self, is no part of the curse to Gods chosen People, now
being chosen of God, but a blessing, a good, and a benefit to them: we know
(says the Apostle) that all things work together for the best unto them that
love God. It is good for me that I have Romans 8. 28 Psalm. 119.
been in trouble says David. The Apostle says, Our light affliction, which is
but for a moment causes unto us a far more excellent, and an eternal weight
of Glory; Although the affections of the chosen 2 Cor. 4. 17
of God be heavy and grievous for the present (as the Apostle says) yet they
bring the quiet fruit of righteousness unto them that are thereby exercised:
and the Apostle John says, Blessed are they which die in the Lord, for they
rest from their labors, Death to them is advantageous; And again David says
of himself (as one of Gods chosen) yet in this miserable Life, Thy Rod and thy
Staff, they comfort me, in the midest of my troubles thy comforts have
refreshed Rev. 14. 13
my Soul; and the Apostle says of himself and the rest, We are afflicted on
every side, yet are we not in distress, in poverty, but not overcome of
poverty, we are persecuted but not forsaken; cast down, but perish not, we
bear about in our body the dying of the 2 Cor. 4. 8, 6, 10, 11.
Lord Jesus Christ, that the Life of Christ might also be made manifest in us;
For, we which live, are always delivered unto death for Jesus sake, that the
Life of Jesus might be made manifest in our Body.

The Porter carries gladly a burden that he feels heavy for the time it is
upon him, in hope of reward; The Merchant and Mariner abides many a bitter
storm in hope of a good Market; The Soldier fights without fear although
in peril of Death in hope of the victory; The Champion wrestleth in hope of
the Price; The Reward, the good Market, the Victory and Price is sure to the
chosen of God, for the heavy Burden, for the bitter Storm, for their Fighting
and Wrestling, Their labor is not in 1 Cor. 15
vain in the Lord, says the Apostle. So the Scriptures show that the trouble,
misery, miserable Life and Death it self, is a blessing, good, and a benefit
to Gods chosen People.

Quest. You said that your believing in Christ does witness you, that you, of
Gods Mercy, Love and Free Grace are chosen of God in Christ, to be one of his
children; may there not be some that are chosen of God in Christ, which have
not Faith and believing in Christ in manifestation to themselves, to witness
to their souls that they of Gods Mercy, Love and Free Grace are chosen of God
in Christ to be his children?

Answ. Yes, the Mercy, Goodness, Wisdom and Power of God, and charity to
Mankind does move me to say, that there may be some, the chosen of God in
Christ ordained to eternal Life, which have not Faith and believing in Christ,
in appearance to themselves to witness the same to them; For, although the
Lord Christ have been pleased to bestow the grace and gift of Faith, this
great Work and Fruit of his Spirit upon me, and whom he pleases that God
has chosen in him. Yet I do not find that he is bound to bestow and give the
same to all Gods chosen ones ordained to eternal Life; For, I know that I my
self crucified Demas for his offenses, and Paul a persecutor of Christians,
were chosen of God in Christ to be his children, before we believed as the
same Paul ^st fieth, that he and the rest were chosen of God in Christ, before
the World, as also, that Jacob was loved of God before Ephesians. 14 Romans 9. 11, 12,
13.
he was borne, and before he had done good or evil before Men; It was not my
believing and Faith that made me, or, any of us to be chosen of God to be Gods
children, and ordained to eternal Life; But the Mercy, Love, Purpose and Free
grace of God before the World, according with the undertaking of his Son Christ
to do the Will of the Father to his full satisfaction for us, and performed the
same in present, before God, to whom all things are present, and before the
creatures manifestly in fullness of time.

And the Apostle says Christ died for the ungodly when they Romans 3. 6. 8. 10
were sinners, when they were enemies, not when they loved and believed, but
before. The first and the last of God and his Christ, So Ez. 16. 6
to the salvation of man is of Mercy and Free Grace only. The Father did chose
us all in Christ being the children of wrath of Mercy, Love, and Free Grace.
The Son died for all of us being ungodly sinners, and enemies of Love, Mercy
and Free grace, without any foregoing of love, believing, or Merit in us to
either, or of any of us; But this dying of the Son must be understood, before
God, from the beginning, not of his dying in manifestation before men; For, so
his dying before men, should not have reached, been appliable and beneficial
to those which died before his Death upon the Cross, in manifestation before
men, for they could not be ungodly, sinners and enemies to God when Christ died
before men, which were dead, and gone long before, he so died no doubt but
Christ died for them (the chosen of God) in Gods sight and account, as also for
us before his Death in manifestation upon the Cross, as the Apostle says, he
was the Lamb Rev. 13. 8
stain from the beginning, he died before God for us all when we were all the
children of wrath as well as others; The Apostle writing to the Gentiles, says
of the Jews, As concerning the Gospel they are enemies for your sakes, but as
touching the Election, Romans 11. 21
they are beloved for the Fathers sake. The Jews shut up in unbelief and
enemies concerning the Gospel, are yet, beloved touching Election; And poor
Infants dying in their Infancy and Idiots have no manifestation of Faith, and
believing in themselves to Romans 9. 18
witness to their souls that they of Gods Mercy, Love and Freegrace are
chosen of God in Christ, to be Gods children; And yet it were uncharitable in
men to hold and say that none of such are chosen of God in Christ, which has
mercy on whom he will, who Romans 11. 34
(says the Apostle) has known the Mind of the Lord, or been his
counceller, the Lord knows who is his. Therefore there may be some, that are
chosen of God in Christ, which have not Faith and believing in Christ, in
manifestation to themselves to witness to their souls that they, of Gods
Mercy, Love and Free Grace are chosen of God in Christ to be his children.

Object. Jesus Christ says, He that believes not, shall be damned.

Answ. This is meant of him that has not the Righteousness of Christ's Work of
believing the promise, imputed unto him, and of him that wilfully neglects,
despises and contemns the faith and believing in Jesus Christ.

Object. (...). The Apostle says, So many as were ordained to eternal Life
believed.

Answ. This is meant, of so many as were there at the Apostles Sermon and heard
it, which were ordained to eternal Life, not of those that heard not the same.

Object. This Doctrine is a Doctrine of security, a means to make men careless
of Christ's Commandment, which commands to believe, and also, to be careless
of using the means to come to believing, as to hear, to pray for Faith, and
the like commanded.

Answ. This Doctrine is no Doctrine of security, or any means to make any
careless of Christ's Commandment, or using the means to come to believing as
Christ has commanded, but to such as the Lord has shut up in unbelief, for
the Apostle says, all men have not Faith, or which are proud like the Pharise
that trusted 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. Lu^e 18. 9.
in himself, he was that righteous, and despised others, Or which are reprobate
concerning the Faith.

Ans. Indeed this Doctrine may be so to them, which no Doctrine 2 Timothy 3. 8.
will, or can make better.

But unto those which are chosen of God in Christ, ordained to Ephesians. 1. 4. Acts
13. 48.
eternal Life, and to believe the Gospel of Jesus Christ, It is the means of
Christ to make them not to trust in themselves, or in any gifts or performances
of their own, thereby to gain or have any favor of God or their salvation at
Gods hand nor to despise others which have not such gifts and performances in
themselves Mat. 7. 1.
as they have, not to judge and condemn them, as Christ warns, Judge not that
ye be not Judged.

And it is a great help of Christ to those which are weak in Faith, incumbered
yet, with unbelief (as the man in the Gospel) which said unto Christ, I
believe Lord: Lord help my unbelief. For, they hereby seeing the Mercy
Goodness, Wisdom and Power of the Father of Grace, in his choosing of men in
Christ, and Ordaining them to eternal Life. That it was his Will that his
Christ which has power to give gifts unto men (as he pleases) and the same in
measure and weight as he pleases, may also see that the Lord Jesus Christ,
which came to do the Will of his Father, does bestow Faith and Believing, the
gift, grace and fruit of his Spirit here in this life in manifestation to
themselves, to witness that they are Gods children, upon whom of those chosen
ones, he pleases that in what measure he pleases, not to all alike, to
their great comfort in their weakness in Faith and believing.

And I my self know it is the Commandment of Christ in grace to his Church and
People, to believe, as also to do before men the rest of the duties of his
Commandments, and to be careful to use the means of Hearing and Praying for
Faith and the rest; And I my self have been careful of the same, commanded of
Christ, for the government of his Church upon earth, for worship to God, peace
and comfort amongst men themselves, which all ought to do that bear the name
of Christians, and profess themselves to be Subjects unto Christ their King
and Lawgiver to his Church, and may, and will do so, although they be but
natural Men and Hypocrites for formality and reputation, and the rest in the
outward performance thereof before men. But the government of his Church upon
Earth, was not all for which Christ gave his Commandment to his visible
Church: but also to show unto those thereof (which he was pleased to inlighten
by his holy Spirit) what Christ has done and performed for them, before God,
in the righteousness thereof for their peace with God, which they themselves
were not able to do, in the least, before God, That Christ himself has been
Meek, Humble and Lowly of Spirit, believed the Promise, loved and done the
Penance for their, whole sin and transgressions, paid the whole debt, and
satisfied God.

And to show them that the work of the same his Commandment inwardly in their
Hearts and Souls manifested, before Men, wrought by his Spirit sent unto them
(as he pleases) is Romans 8. 16
their witness that Christ is in them, and they in Christ, that Christ has
done all things for them, willed of the Father, and undertaken of the Son
before God; and that they are Gods children chosen in Christ out of the
children of wrath, ordained to eternal Acts. 13. 48
Life before the World, of the Mercy and Free Grace of the Father, and through
the gracious performance and redemption of his Son Jesus Christ.

And this was that which did move me before, to say, and does now, that my
believing in Christ and his performances for me wrought up by his Spirit in
me, does witness to me that I of Gods Mercy, Love and Free Grace, am chosen
of God in Christ, to be one of his children, ordained to eternal Life, through
the performances of Jesus Christ for me, and in this Faith (by his grace) I
hope to live and die.

But there are many in these days in the visible church of christ that
profess themselves to be Christians and Teachers, which say, that they of
Mercy, Love, and Free Grace, were not chosen of God in Christ before the World,
out of the children of wrath to be holy, and without blame before God in love,
to be Gods children, that they were not ordained to eternal Life, and to
believe before the World, that they were not loved of God before they were
borne, or had done good or evil; that they, when they were borne, were still
the children of wrath, and were so, after they were borne until they believed,
and should have gone to Hell if they had died before they believed. And they
teach all men that this is their condition, which I think is a woeful
condition to all that are borne, considering that none have the power of their
own Life, nor any certainty of Life until they believe.

And they teach all, that God yet so loved the whole World of men, being the
children of wrath, that he gave and sent his only begotten Son to die, that
whosoever believe in him shall not perish, but have everlasting Life, shall be
loved, justified, and saved.

And they teach, that his Son Jesus Christ died upon the Cross, in
manifestation before men, and then the Plaster of his Blood and Death was
made, and not before, to heal all the wounded children of wrath in the World,
that would by Faith apply the same Plaster of his Blood and Death unto their
wounds. And they deny that Christ died before God from the beginning, and that
this Plaster of his Blood and Death, was made before God from the beginning,
for the healing of any of mankind dead and gone before it was made upon the
Cross, in manifestation to Men; and then, and after this applied by the Faith
of men: which I must needs say has seemed harsh and uncharitable to me, that
all being (as they say) the children of wrath, until the Plaster of Christ's
Blood and Death, made upon the Cross before men, and applied by their Faith
afterward (so made up) to themselves; And so consequently that all dead and
gone before Christ's Death died in Gods wrath, and must needs be gone to the
Devil and Hell (there being manifested in the Scriptures, no other redemption
from the wrath of God, but Christ's Blood and Death.)

And they teach further, that the merciful Father so loved the World, of the
children of wrath, that he did not only give his only Son to die, shed his
blood and redeem all, pay the ransom for all the whole World of the children
of wrath, which he has performed for all sufficiently. But also of Love and
Free Grace has sent Preachers of the same to all, that desire and will Hear,
believe, and receive the same Gospel of Jesus Christ's precious Blood, Death
and Redemption.

And they teach that God has left unto all men (being the children of wrath)
Free Will and power in their corrupt nature to desire and will, or not to will
and desire, they may choose if they will and desire; they may hear, if they
will, they may believe and receive the Plaster of Christ's Blood and Death, and
if they will, they may apply the same to their wounds and be healed: For, it
has all sufficient virtues, and in tendered to them.

And they teach that the Justification and Salvation of men (whatsoever the
Father, or the Son has done in Mercy, Love, and Grace) consist and rest in
themselves, their own will, and work for the Procuring, Settling, Having, and
Enjoying of the same.

Whereby I have thought, that they think better of themselves then they are,
and that they are some what; when as the Apostle says, they are nothing, and
deceive themselves in their own imagination. Gal. (...). 3.


For how can a man (being still the child of Gods wrath, in the curse death and
loss of Adams sin (and his own) without his deliverance yet made, which
loss was the loss of all good before God, given of God unto man in his
Creation, have so great a good as Free Will unto so great a good Work and Deed
before God, as to hear and believe unto eternal Life lost, unto justification
and salvation, and to have so great a good still before God, as power to do the
same, being yet in the Death, Loss and Want of all good before God. This is
(as I thought) to rob our God, to enrich our selves: For, the Apostle says, It
is God that works Phil. 2. 13.
in us the will and the deed, of his own good pleasure; It is not man's own will
and his own deed. And I think it much contrary to the Scriptures of the
Gospel, that Life and Just^fication should come to man by his own will or
work, any way, but only by grace and mercy, as the Apostle says, we are
justified by Grace, It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but
in God that shows Romans 3. 24.
mercy; If it be of grace, it is no more of works, or else grace were no more
grace; but if it be of works, it is no more of grace, Romans 9. 16.
or else work were no more work. But (says the Apostle) election Romans 11. 6.
has obtained it, and the rest have been hardened (atlthough) Israel has not
obtained, that sought it, viz. by his own will and work. They would strip God
of his Election in Christ, before the world, being the first Act of his grace
to man.

Quest. What may be thought of these in your Christian Judgment, and of their
teaching, I desire to understand?

Answ. I take it, the condition of these is far more out of hope, then of
Infants and Id^ots: for these desperately discover Mat. 5. 19.
their own nakedness and shame, These break the Commandment, and teach men to
do so. There are (as you said) Thieves and Robbers, 1 Timothy 3. 7.
and teach others the same. They are fallen into and holden in the snare of the
Devil, The Devil spoke many truths (always leaving something Mat. 4 3. 6
out) that he may deceive in the end, they are like a cunning Fowler that lays
scraps of wheat to catch the Birds. So these tell men a part of Gods Love,
Mercy, and Free Grace, that they may catch them in the snare and pride of their
own will, and words, of robbery and Idolatry.

Nicodemus a Ruler of the Jews, a Master in Israel, yet understood not that
which Christ said (Except a man be born again he Joh. 3. 3
cannot see the Kingdom of God) unto whom Christ said, Art thou a Master in
Israel and know not these things?

These may be Rulers, Masters and Teachers, and yet be ignorant of these
things; And I conceive these are ignorant of Gods eternal Almighty Power,
Wisdom, Foreknowledge, Foresight, Will, Purpose Decree and Acts, with and
before himself, and of the rest of God and his Christ, which if they were not,
they would not deny that God might and did choose in Christ whom he pleased of
the children of wrath to be his children, so called, and justified through
Christ before himself, even before the World, of Mercy and Free Grace, without
any will or work of their own Ephesians. (...). 3, 4, 5, 6
unchangeable.

Indeed they allege and cite many places of Scriptures, supposed, to their
purpose of Christ's commanding to will, to do, to hear, to believe, to ask, to
seek, to knock, to labor, to speak, to run, to come, to take, to receive, to
give, and the like. And the condition that is annexed of reward, and penalty
unto these commanded to be eternal; And therefore they conclude it is in every
man's will and power, to will and do these things commanded unto eternal Life,
otherwise it were oppression and not Love and Justice of Christ our God and
Lawgiver, to command his Subjects to do that which it not in themselves to
do, which they cannot do, upon such penalty, eternal.

But, alas, they do not consider that this Law of Christ to his Church, as it
includes the Law of God given to mankind in general, in Justice absolute, is
written in the hearts of Heathens, as also of such as have the name of
Christians, which Law of God is therefore known, though weakly and corruptly
to the Heathens and all Mankind (as the Apostle says of the Heathens,) Romans
1. 31
They know the Law of God, their consciences accuse and excuse one another. And
the Heathens have made many Laws, from this Romans 2. 15.
Law of God written in their hearts, of Justice and righteousness before men
in men's estimation good: which with the will and power of men, have been
obeyed: For, as Adam and all mankind had Soul and Body, and the faculties
thereof temporal Life, at Gods will for a time (all weakened and corrupted by
sin and the curse) left to them, so they had Free Will, Reason and power in
natural, humane and temporal things, left all weak and corrupted to choose
and refuse, to will and to nill, to do things good and righteous, before men,
in the estimation of men, although they had lost and had no power left them to
will, choose, desire or do, any thing at all good, righteous acceptable and
availeable before God unto eternal Life lost, to justification before God, to
their peace with God, or to any good in Gods sight good.

And that the Lord Jesus, upon whose shoulders the Government Isa. 9. 6.
of his Church lay, was pleased in great grace as a most gracious Lawgiver, to
manifest in written Tables to his people, the chosen of God in him which he
had redeemed and performed all for, unto Life, Justification, Salvation and
Glorification, before God, all to appear in appointed and fullness of time,
this his gracious Law of greater grace then the first given unto mankind in
general, that it might be established and remain for ever to his people
already redeemed, before God, for the government of his Church upon earth, in
worship to God, Peace, Righteousness, Society, Safety, and Comfort among
themselves, which without a Law could not have government, Peace, Righteousness
and Safety before men, especially in regard of many Hypocrites in closing
themselves among the Elect of God, as Wolves among Sheep. And that those his
redeemed People should do and perform (in the will and power that they had
left them) these his Commandments in righteousness before men, for worship to
God, Peace, Safety, Society, and comfort among themselves, upon temporal
reward and penalty; And that the will work and doing of the same his
Commandment, being the fruits of his Spirit wrought up in their hearts, (where
and as he pleased) might witness unto them that they are Christ's redeemed
ones, that they have his Spirit, and are the children of God, (as the Apostle
says) the spirit received does witness with our souls and spirits Romans 8. 16.
that we are the children of God.

So these confounding the Law and Commandment of God given to man in absolute
Justice (having absolute Free Will and power) upon the condition of absolute
eternal life and death, for keeping and breaking the same, still remaining
written in the hearts of all Mankind (their Free Will and power being wholly
corrupted and weakened through the transgression,) and the Law and Commandment
of Christ given in grace to his Church the chosen of God in him, (whereby Mercy
and Truth met together, Righteousness and Peace kissed each other) upon
temporal reward Psalm. 85. 10.
and penalty for keeping and breaking the same before men (for the condition of
the reward and penalty could not be eternal) of keeping and breaking the
Commandment of Christ given in grace, For, that the eternal reward of
righteousness to man before God, consists only in the Work and Merit of
Christ for man, in Christ himself performed, before God imputed unto man Gods
chosen, without any will or work of man's.

And the eternal penalty of all the sin and transgression of Gods chosen,
and Christ's redeemed, is paid and satisfied by Christ's Death and Blood from the
beginning before God in the fullness of him before them. Although those that
are Gods chosen, and those that are not Gods, may have will and power to keep
the Commandment before men, yet they neither have such will or power as to
keep it before God, to eternal reward.

Quest. Christ commands those he called, and sent to go and teach all
Nations, what is that teaching of Christ that he intends? Mat. 28. 89.


Ans. First, I take it, In that Christ commands to go and teach Mar. 16. 6.
all Nations, he intends not, to all of all Nations, not to cast Pearls
among Swine, which turning again will rend them that teach them, but to teach
such of all Nations as will submit to their Mat. 7. 6.
teaching.

Secondly, that they should teach all them of all Nations that did submit to
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Which is the glad tidings of salvation by Jesus
Christ, That is, that God so loved the world which he intended to make, that
he fore-knowing that mankind would transgress his command, and become the
children of wrath, did purpose, and in his Mercy and Love did choose some (as
he pleased) of the world of those children of wrath in Christ, his only Son,
eternal with himself, before the world, to be his children, holy and without
blame before him in love, (as the Apostle says) and the Father of love and
mercy having Ephesians. 1. 4.
pleased to give his Son, the Christ to perform all things both in doing and
suffering, to the full satisfaction of his Justice for their delivering from
thence, and full settling of those his chosen ones his love and favor for ever,
who did, in present understand to do the will of the Father, saying, Lo I come
to do thy will (O Heb. 10. 7, 8, 9
God) did also, in present perform the same undertaken, before God, and before
men in fullness of time, to Gods satisfaction evermore, that nothing hereafter
is to be, shall or can be laid to the charge of Gods chosen, before God, (as
the Apostle says) Romans 8. 33
shall (...) any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that justifies
the^. That Gods chosen People, are no more under the law of eternal
condemnation, but under grace evermore. And that those of Gods chosen people,
unto whom, it pleases the Lord Jesus Christ to give his holy Spirit, so far,
as by his Spirit to work in their hearts, the fruit of his spirit, of
believing and faith, the same, which the spirit does witness and evidence to
their hearts and souls that they are the chosen of God in Christ, and
justified of God through Christ, before the world in Gods sight, Romans 6. 14
that they are no more under the Law, but grace; that they are the children of
God, etc. This Gospel is the draw-net of Christ, that Mat. 13. 47
gathers of all kinds some. This was that which the Gentiles Acts 13. 42
hearing, desired Paul to preach the same word to them the next Sabbath Day.

Quest. Is the teaching of Christ commanded to those he sent, no teaching, but
of his Gospel to all Nations?

Answ. Yes, it is the teaching of his Law for the government of those, before
men, which he has gathered by his Gospel, for worship to God, for Peace,
Society, Safety, Comfort and Righteousness among men themselves, which could
not be without a Law and government, and this government of his Church lies
upon Christ's Shoulders (as the Prophet says.)

God which was pleased to suffer the children of wrath for the Esa. 9. 6.
time he pleased to show his wrath, and make his power known, was pleased to
write his Law in their minds, given to mankind Romans 1.
in general for government among themselves, before men, and whereby their
consciences accuse and excuse one another, and Romans 2.
whereby they know sin and what deserves death, and there (as the Apostle
says) other wise there could have been no society among them:

But Christ gives his Law for government to his Church, not only to know
sin by the teaching thereof, and to shun sin as all natural men have
will and power to do, although weakly in their corruption, but also that they
may yield themselves to be Romans 6. 13
instruments of the work of his spirit in the shunning of sin inwardly in
their hearts, and of knowing what Christ has done for them in himself, before
God, in performing of the full righteousness of his Laws and Command to
their peace with God, and that the work of the spirit in those of his
Commandments, being the fruits of his Spirit, whereof they are made
instruments, may evidence, witness and assure to them, Romans 8. 16
that they are the children of God chosen of God in Christ, justified through
Christ, and redeemed by Christ's payment to God, and his performance of all to
God for them in Gods sight and acceptance before the workd to their everlasting
Peace, and eternal Life, and to the honor and glory of his grace in the mercy
and love of the Father, and the undertaking and performing of his fulness
only.

But he commands not to go and teach all Nations to rob the Father of
Mercy, Love and Free grace of his eternal power, Almightinesse, Liberty, Will
and Pleasure, and of his Honor Praise and Glory of all the same, and of his
honor and glory of his Purposes, Decrees and Acts eternal with himself
evidently manifested in his Testament to be his Purpose Decrees and Acts of his
power Almighty Liberty, Will and Pleasure; As they do which teach all they can
teach; That,

1. Although God did foreknow, that mankind would transgress and become the
children of wrath, yet he did not give his Son Christ, before the World to
redeem them by his Death, all, or any of those of Mankind, which he fore
knew would transgress and become the children of wrath, notwithstanding Rev.
13. 8
that the Scriptures says, He was the Lamb slain from the beginning before
God, and that Job says, I know that my Redeemer lives, Job. 19. 25
that is, is now in being, and has already performed my Redemption before God,
and that David said, The Lord was his Psalm. 19. 14
strength and his redeemer long before Christ was slain, and died before men
upon the Cross; And the Prophet says, long before his Death, before men, upon
the Cross, God has laid upon him the iniquity of us all (meaning the chosen
of God) and yet all this was Isa 53. 6.
done of the Father in Mercy Love and grace, and all undertaken, saying, Lo, I
come to do thy Will, O God, and so performed of Heb. 10. 9
the Son Christ, in Mercy Love and Free Grace, before the World, to the
satisfaction of God for the transgression of those Isa. 53.
he pleased for Election.

Is not this teaching all Nations, the robbing, and the teaching all Nations to
rob the Father of Men and his Son Christ, of the honor of his almighty
Power, Liberty in Gods Pleasure, graces and gracious Decrees and Acts, plainly
expressed and manifested in the testiment of our God?

Secondly, in that they teach all Nations that God, neither could nor did
choose in Christ, any of these he fore knew, and foresee to become the
children of wrath before the World, to be his children, to be holy and without
blame before him in love, None of them to be ordained to eternal Life before
the world, None of them to be predestinate to be made like to the Image of his
Son, to be called his Children and Saints, to be justified and glorified
before himself in his own sight, and acceptance before the world (although
these not so, yet but in appointed and fullness of time to be manifested to the
created) Notwithstanding our God says in the Scripture by the Apostle of his
Testament. Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has
blessed us, with all spiritual blessing in Heavenly things in Christ, as he
has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be
holy, and without blame before him in love, and that those which he knew before
he also predestinate to be Gods children through Christ to be made like to the
image of his Son, to be ordained to eternal Life, that he might be the first
borne among many Brethren; And whom he predestined them also he called his
children Ephesians. 1. 3. 4
and Saints by calling, And whom he called, them also he justified, and whom
he justified, them also he glorified, and although he says nothing shall be
laid to the charge of Gods chosen, It is God that justifies them: And although
he says, God loved Jacob and hated Esau before they were borne, or had done
good or evil, that the purpose of God might remain according to Election, not
by Works, but by him that calls, and in many other places the like.

Is not this Robbery, and the teaching of all Nations to rob the Father and his
Son Christ of the honor of their allmighty Power, Liberty, Will, Mercies,
Free grace, Purposes, D^^cr^es and Acts eternal within, and all unchangeable
(as the Apostle says) the gifts and calling of God are without repentance,
which is Romans 11. 29
so of his eternal spiritual Gifts and callings, not of temporal, as the
calling of Judas was, and the gifts that Job spoke of where he said, The Lord
has given, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Job 3. 21
Name of the Lord.

Thirdly, in that they teach all they can teach, that it is in their own will,
power and deed to please God, to pacify the wrath of God the Father of mercies
for their sins and offenses, to obtain forgiveness of their sins by
Repentance, Prayers, Devotions, and to obtain good things, deliverance from
the evil that they have deserved at the Hand of God the Father by their
performances and humiliations, by their willingness and endeavoring to hear
the Gospel preached, to get Faith; And by and for their Faith and believing,
to be justified before God, and to have Life before God in themselves, yea to
be Saints in themselves, and righteous in themselves, by these their
performances, before God, That they are not as other men, are Extortioners,
unjust, Drunkards, Adulterers, or as the Publican; that looks upon See Luke
18. 10, 11.
nothing but Mercy and Forgiveness of his sins, and the Righteousness of
Jesus Christ imputed unto him for his peace with God, for his justification,
eternal Life, and Salvation.

Notwithstanding the Testament of our God written by his Penmen, commanded to
be taught is contrary.

The Prophet of God David says, my weldoing extends, or Psalm. 16. 2
is nothing to thee (O Lord) nothing to please thee, to obtain any thing of
thee, to justify one before thee.

And he says, Blessed is the Man whose iniquity is forgiven, and Psalm. 32. 1
whose sin is covered.

And the Prophet Esaias says, we are all as an unclean thing, and all our
righteousness as filthy rags, nothing in our selves, or of our Isa. 64. 6
selves to please God, to obtain any good of God, justify us before God. And
the Apostle of Jesus Christ Paul says, It is not in him Romans 9. 16
that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows Mercy; And
again blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes righteousness without
works. And Christ himself says, when ye have done what ye can say, we are
unprofitable servants; Christ says, He Luke 17. 10
that climeth up any other way to the Father to the Sheepfold, then by him, is
a Theife and a Robber. These would please the Father, Joh. 10. 1
obtain of the Father, to be justified of the Father, and get to Heaven by
their own Prayers, Devotions, Humiliations by their own Faith and performances,
and teach others to do so. Is not this to teach Thee every and Robbery, in the
highest?

And is not this Idolatry to set themselves, and their performances up in the
place of Christ, to please God themselves to obtain of God to be justified
through their own Faith and Performances before God, to account goodness,
holiness, and righteousness in themselves, and in their own wills, works and
performances, Is this to deny themselves?

Is not this to set up the Idol in their Hearts? Haba. 1. 16 Deuteronomy. 29. 19
Ezekiel. 14. 7


Is not this to Sacrifice to their own Nets?

Is not this to bless a Man's self, and yet to walk in the imagination of his
own heart?

Is not this to kiss the Calves, to kiss the works of his own hands? to make
Idols according to their own undertaking? Babes keep your selves from Idols.

Oh that Gods People might not be hindered, to know that Hosee 13. 2
their own weldoing of the command of Christ is nothing unto God (as David
did,) That they might deny themselves. That they might ever honor, praise, and
be thankful for the Love, Mercy, and Free Grace of God the Father to them; And
the undertaking of Jesus Christ his Son, and his performance for them to the
full satisfaction of the Justice of God for their eternal and temporal good,
and that all things shall work together for the best to them that love God.
And that the performances of the Commandments of Jesus Christ (being the
Fruits of his Spirit in them) whereof (as he pleases of grace) he makes
them his Branches to bear, and instruments of his Word thereof might witness
evidence and assure to them all these of God and Christ unto them, that they
are Gods children, as the Apostle says the spirit witnesses.

Object. I conceive that you teach that although God did foreknow in his
Eternity, that mankind would transgress, fall and become the children of
wrath; and had power (of his grace and mercy) to save all fallen in Justice
through the redemption and performance of Jesus Christ his Son. Yet it was
his Will and good pleasure to choose only some of them in Christ, of his Love,
grace and mercy toward them to be his holy ones, and blameless ones in
Christ, to be his children adopted through Christ, to be ordained to eternal
Life, to be Predestined, Called, Justified, and Glorified in Gods Sight
before the World, unchangeably. How is it and what is the true meaning that our
God says in his Testament, That he would not the Death of him Ezekiel. 18. 32
that Dies, that, he will that all men shall be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the truth, and in many like places of Scripture? and 1 Timothy 2. 4.
that our God holds forth in the Scripture of his Testament, that it lies
and consists in the will and the deed of man to have the Salvation of God and
all good at Gods hand, he wills not the death of any man, and would have all
men be saved if they seek it, labor for it, and come unto Christ and do his
Commandment; And therefore so Christ says, If any man will come after me let
him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow Luke 9. 23. Rev. 22. 17
me, Let whosoever will, take of the water of life Freely; If any man will do
his will he shall know the truth. Will a man rob his God? Jos. 7. 17
etc.

Who so will do the will of my Father which is in Heaven, the same Mat. 12. 50.
is my Brother, Sister and Mother.

Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom Mat. 7. 21
of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven.

This do and thou shall live. Luke 10. 28


Ask and you shall have, seek and ye shall find, labor for that which
indureth to eternal Life. Strive to enter in at the strait Mat. 7. 7. Joh. 6.
27 Luke 13. 24 1 Cor. 9. 24 Gas. 6. 9
Gate, run that ye may obtain in due time, ye shall reap if ye faint
not, and many like Scriptures, God chooses none nor refuses any that will.

Again you teach that God did choose in Christ some only unto Life Eternal,
some only to be his children to be justified and glorified before the World,
before they were borne, and that Ephesians. 14. 5, 6
unchangeably; And that the Death, Redemption and Performance of Christ was
only for those chosen of God in him for Rom 9. 11
satisfaction of the Justice of God, which was the undertaking of Christ, to
do the Will of God. Esa. 53.


Notwithstanding our God says in his Testament, that he would all men should
be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth, That Christ died for all Men,
That Christ died for the ungodly, being 1 Timothy 2. 4
yet sinners, That Christ gave himself a ransom for all Men, That Romans 5. 6.
8 1 Timothy 2. 6
God was in Christ, and reconcile unto the World to himself not imputing their
sins to them, and has committed to us the word of Reconciliation. That he is
a Reconcileation, not for our sins only, 2 Cor. 5. 19
but for the sins of the whole World. And notwithstanding our God 1 John 2. 2
says in his Testament, He that walks in my Statutes, and keeps my
Commandments and deal truly, he is just, and shall surely live; And if he
has a Son that is a Theife, a Murderer, an Oppressor Ez. 18. 5, etc.
and Adulterer, an Idolater, etc. he shall not live, he shall die the death,
his blood shall be upon him; The righteousness of the righteous shall be upon
him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon himself. But if the
wicked shall return from all his sins, and keep my Statutes, and do that
which is lawful and right, he shall live, and not die, all his transgressions
that he has done shall not be mentioned unto him, but in his righteousness
that he has done, he shall live. When a righteous man turns away from his
righteousness and continues in iniquity, he shall die for the same. Again
when a wicked man turns from his wickedness that he has committed, and
does that which is lawful and right, because he considers and turns he
shall surely live and not die. I will justify every man according to his ways
(says our God) therefore return O house of Israel, so iniquity shall not be
your destruction: I desire not that the wicked should die (says the Lord) (and
the Apostle says) God wills all to repent. Acts 17. 30


Take heed (says the Apostle) that no man fall away from the Heb. 12. 15. 17
grace of God as profane Esau, that sold his birthright for a Mess of
pottage. A man cannot fall away from grace, but he must have grace, be under
grace, therefore a man that has grace and righteousness unto Life, may fall
away and be in the state of wickedness and death, and may repent and return,
and be in the state of grace and life again, and so often.

Is not that then which you teach robbery, even to rob out God of his almighty
power and liberty of his will to his grace and goodness to all mankind, Is
not this Rabshekahs blasphemy which said, that God could not, nor would not
deliver his People

Answ. I hope my answer to this charge will be sufficient resolution Isa. 26. 14
to those which are Gods People, and all said, only, to the honor of God. We
know the Apostle says Antichrist is an adversary that exalts himself above
all chat is called God, and does sit in the Temple of God or place of God,
showing himself that he is God. But Antichrist does not these things by his
instruments 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4
but by pretending and alleging of Scriptures mistaken, nor can do so. And
do not you allege these mistaken Scriptures for the exalting of corrupt man,
the man of sin, that can Romans 7. 14. 15. 16, 17, 18, 19.
do nothing but sin: yea, for the setting him up in the Temple or place of
God, that is only, good and can only do that which is good in his sight: yea,
further that he exalts corrupt man the man of sin, that can do nothing
but sin, his will, deeds and performances above all that is called God, and
his grace, decrees, performances, when as all those pretenses of yours are
(that, notwithstanding all the will, decrees and acts as the Father in love
mercy and grace to Mankind as having foreknown of God to fall, for their life,
justification, and salvation through his dear Son Jesus Christ in redemption
and performances for satisfaction of justice, before the world.

Yet you say all these are nothing to the life and justification of man without
man's own will and deed; without man's own performance, without man will
apprehend and apply the same Plaster made, has no power to hear without man's
power will and Deed; So that the will decrees and acts eternal with himself,
the love and grace of God the Father, and the death and performance of Jesus
Christ the Son before the Father for the Life, justification, and salvation
of man, do all rest upon corrupt man's power, will, deed, and performance do all
submit to corrupt and sinful man's power, will, deed, and performance; And
thereupon rests his own life, justification, and salvation. Is not this the
exaltion of Antichrist to set up corrupt man, the man of sin, sinful man in
the place of God, and above God and his Christ? that the same must with all
their love, grace, and performance for the life peace, just^fication, and
salvation of man, submit to the power, will, deeds and performances of corrupt
sinful man?

And can the instruments of Antichrist set up the man of sin in the place of
God, and exalt him above God and of his God Christ, without pretending of zeal
(though not according to knowledge) and alleging of Scriptures. But herein
they bewray Romans 10 2, 3
themselves, says the Apostle of Christ, Because they going about to establish
their own righteousness submit not to the righteousness of God, but will have
the righteousness which is of God, submit to their own righteousness which
they establish and set up.

Object. I know they will confess and say that they, their own power will and
deeds are weak, but Christ does help them and enable them with his grace, and
as the Apostle says, I am Phil. 4. 13
able to do all things through the help of Christ that strengthens me.

Answ. Is not this Argument still to uphold man's corrupt will and worth in
present by the help and inablement of grace in present to be above all that
God and his Christ has done to man's life, justification and salvation before
the world? that which they have done must submit to man's own power and
righteousness of his own will and does in present helping by grace.

But tell me, is there any man that will put a Weapon into any Thieves hand to
rob him? Is this wisdom? And will our God and his Christ put the power and
strength of his grace into the hand of corrupt sinful man, the man of sin to
rob him of his honor, praise, and glory? that corrupt sinful man may glory
and boast himself of the spoils of Gods honor; For, corrupt man, to say, I
could not have had life, justification and salvation, but by mine own power,
will and deed, assisted by the grace of God, wherein the grace, love, decrees
and Acts of the Father and the performances of the Son of God, were able to
do nothing without me, my will and work, Is not this more horrible blasphemy
than that of Rabshakahs.

You say God is Almighty, so say I; But Gods almighty power is always
accompanied with his will and good pleasure, and his Almighty power is always
regulated by his will, what he will do, he can do and does, but what he
will not do, he cannot do, nor does: God will not give his honor to any
other, nor can: God will justify freely by grace, without man's will or work;
and otherwise he cannot justify. God had power to choose in Christ before the
World, out of the children of wrath, fore-knowne, those he pleases and willed
to choose to be his children, he could not choose any other, then those he
willed and pleased to be his children. Christ the Son of God could die for,
redeem, shed his blood, pay the ransom for, and make the reconciliation for
those which God had chosen in him before the world, and pray for them which the
Father had given him to die for, to redeem, shed his Blood, pay the ransom,
make reconciliation, and pray for which he undertook to do his Fathers Will,
for therein, saying, Lo I come to do thy Will O Heb 10. 9.
God, but Christ could not Die, Redeem, Shed his Blood, pay the Ransom, make
Reconciliation, and pray for those which God had not choosen in him, and had
not given him to perform the same for.

And therefore (he says) I pray for those that thou have given Joh. 17. 9
me, I pray not for the World of those thou have refused, of the children of
wrath which thou have not chosen in me, which thou have not given me to pray
for, and to do the rest for, of thy Will and good Pleasure.

Yet you further allege Scriptures (mistaking the same.) That Christ died for
all men one and other that are saved, and that perish everlastingly, That he
redeemed, sheed his Blood paid the ransom, and made the reconciliation to God
for the whole World of mankind, when the word all men, and the word work in
the Scriptures import diversely.

Sometimes all, and all men, are taken, as you take them for all men in the
most general, one and other that are saved, and that Acts 1. 24
perish (as the Lord knows the heart of all men.) and death went Romans 5. 12
over all men, For as much as all men sin. And so is the word world, sometimes
taken in the same general for all men in the World Romans 5. 12.
one and other that are savid and perish (as the Apostle says) Sin entered
into the World (of all men) and death by sin into the World of all men. And
so in other places. And all men is held forth in the Scripture for all that God
has chosen in Christ, and given him to retract and perform all things for, to
the satisfaction Joh. 6. 37 Joh. 6. 45 Joh. 18. 9
of Gods Justice for their peace with God, for their justification and
salvation, as Christ said, all that the Father gives me shall come to me,
and them that comes to me, I will in no wise cast off.

All shall be taught of God, of all those men which thou have given me, I have
not lost one.

And the word all, or all men, is sometime put for all the reprobate and
forsaken ones of God. So David said, The Fool has said in his heart there is
no God, they have all corrupted and done Psalm. 14. 1, 2, 3
abominable works, there is none that does good, God looked down upon the
children of men, to see if there were any that would understand, all are gone
out of the way, all are corrupt. So does Beza note upon the place, the same to
be spoken of the reprobate.

And the word World is put in the Scriptures for the whole continent sometimes:
And sometimes for the continent, and all contained therein.

And sometimes for all men in the World that are chosen of God in Christ, that
God was pleased of Love and Freegrace to have Mercy upon foreknown to fall, and
to give his Son Christ to redeem by his performance, and to satisfy his
Justice, for to their everlasting peace and salvation (as the Apostle says)
God Rm. 11. 2. 16. 5. 19. 1 John 2. 2
was in Christ, and reconciled the world to himself, not imputing their sins
unto them. And that he is a reconciliation not for our sins only, but for the
sins of the whole world.

And sometime the world is taken for the reprobate, and forsaken ones of God in
the World (as now you have not received the spirit which is of the World, but
the spirit which is of God, etc. The Saints shall Judge the World, and again I
pray not for the World but 1 Cor. 2. 12 1 Cor. 6. 2 Ioh 17. 9
for them which thou have given me, for they are thine.

So that you may see if the Lord open your Eyes, that gives sight to the
blind, How you wrong our God, mistaking his written Will and Testament, and
deceive the People, when you teach that Christ dyed for all men one and other
that are saved, and perish. That he shed his blood, paid the price and ransom
and redeemed and made the reconciliation to God for the sins of the whole
world of men, one and other that are saved and damned, Elect and reprobate,
when as it is clearly showed to be of those all men of the whole world, of
those which the testament say are chosen of God in Christ, given to Christ to
redeem and perform all things for, to their Life, justification and salvation
only, and that which you teach is great dishonor to the Father and the Son.

If a rich man should, with a great sum of money buy all the beasts in a great
Market for his service, there being abundance to be bought; And when he has
bought and paid for all a like price, he should after, not regard many or most
of them by his power, provision and means, to be guided, drawn and conveyed
to his house and pastures, and there kept for his service, and their safety
which he knew would move, but suffer them as soon as he had bought them to
stray, wander, transgress and trespass till they were imprisoned and starved,
to perish so and decay: would not all others account this prodigality, folly,
indiscretion, yea wickedness, uncharitableness to the beasts? for a good man
is charitable to his beast, says Soloman. Pov. 10. 12


Will you charge our God the Father, and his Christ with such folly and
wickedness. You say the Father has given his Son, Christ to pay the great
price for all men, one and other to redeem all that are saved, and that perish,
to buy all men for his service, and foreknow the straying and wandering
condition of all to be alike, that none could come home to his house and
pastures to do him service without the help, guidance and convenience and
keeping of his grace, yet he regards not to send and give his grace to the
most part of them he had bought and paid dear for to convey them and keep
them, but let them wander, trespass, being wounded and imprisoned, starved and
perish in Hell for ever: Is not this a heavy charge of folly, wickedness, and
injustice upon the Father and his Son Christ Jesus, Is not this greater
blsphemy then that of Rabshakah?

Object. But it may be you will allege the Scriptures of the Testament, God
will have mercy upon whom he will show mercy and Romans 9
he will have mercy upon whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardneth, therefore he suffers whom he will suffer.

Answ. This Scripture of the Testament you mistake as you do other, for this
Scripture has reference to the will, purpose and act of God the Father in his
Election in Christ, of those he pleased of mankind in general feign and
become the children of wrath in Gods sight before redemption; Indeed then of
those, the Father had mercy upon whom he would have mercy, and whom he would
he hardened (that is) left in their hardness, but it has no relation unto
those which Christ redeemed after his redemption of them, which Christ had
undertaken for, to do the will of the (...) for the^ ju^^fication aad
salvation.

If you should (...) a Sessions hire, lay down money for a servant, or servants
time, of serv^ce for a year or years which you know would runaway and ^ander;
If after you had so done you did not regard them, but let them run away, lie
in Ditches and Hedges with you knowledge till they came to decay, are not you
culpable in Law and Justice for the same? This blame you would lay upon Christ,
which has laid down the great price for such as he knew to be such, and might
by his power and grace have kept them, but will not nor does, but let them
perish. Christ against you, says, he has lost none that his Father has
given him to pay for, and pray for.

Object. It may be you will say, Christ after he has bought men does feed
men, and attend them with his Ordinances and Ministers, it is their selfish
fancy, that they perish.

Answ. If you say Christ is at more charge with them then paying the great
price for them, and he let them stray and perish, which he knew would so do
without his holding and keeping, you cast more folly and blasphemy upon Christ.

And you further teach all Nations, that men, that God has had mercy on: that
Christ has redeemed and bought: that God has given his grace unto, and so he
in the state of salvation may by their wilful sin fall away from grace,
mercy and the Love Heb. 12. 15 Rev. 2. 4
of God, by forsaking their first Love, and so become the children of wrath and
destruction; And by repentance may return to God, have mercy, grace and love
of God again and be the children Ezech. 18
of God again, and may often rise, and fall, into these conditions, which is
not the teaching commanded of Christ. It is Psa. 12 1. 5
uncomfortable, untrue and against the Scriptures of the Testament; For there
Christ is said to be the Keeper of his Israel, which Joh. 18. 9
he bought and redeemed; That he loses not one: That none shall Joh. 13. 1
take them out of his hand: That those that he loves he loves to the end,
and many like places. 2 Timothy 2. 19 Heb. 6. Jer. 32.


Indeed a man may fall away from grace, and forsake his first Love, that Christ
has redeemed before men, in the sight of men, and in the estimation of men,
etc. but not before God, in Gods Sight, and estimation: Gods Love is an
everlasting Love to the end, The foundation of God is sure, the Lord knows
who are his: and Jesus Christ is the yesterday and to day, And I will be their
God, and they shall be my people, I will never forsake them, and I will put
such a fear into their Hearts that they shall never depart from me, Jerem.
32. 40.

Another Meditation of the Law.
THe Law is good and holy, and the use of the Law and Commandment appointed of
God to be manifested and published to me in the holy Scriptures, is so evident
both to the Reprobate 1 Timothy 1. 8
and to the Elect (as the Apostle says) The Law is good to man if a man use it
lawfully. The reprobate and the Elect in their corrupted estate, the one as the
other has remaining corrupted reason, wisdom and knowledge of God in the
corrupted nature of man, whereby they have some corrupted sight of the
righteousness of God in the common Law, and the penalty of breaking thereof.
So the Apostle says of the Church; That which may be known of God, is manifest
in them, for God has showed it unto Romans 9. 19
them. For the invisible things of him, that is, his eternal power and God
head, are seen by the Creation of the World (being considered in his Works)
to the intent that they should be with^^t excuse, which men though they know
the Law of God how Verse. 31.
that they which commit such things are worthy of death, yet not only do the
same, but also know them that do them. This righteous Law and command of God
remaining in the corrupt Reason, Wisdom, Knowledge and Nature of men, is
called of the Ethnic Philosophers, the Law of nature; of the Lawyers, the Law
of Nations; And of this Law, the Law of Moses which temperate meekness was a
plain Exposition and manifestation of; Yet this Law and righteousness of God
remaining unto the corrupted nature of man was that which by Gods providence
forced the Philosophers so called of the Ethincks, to write many books of
Ethics to the people, wherein we see many notable Rules and directions for
man's safety and society. And likewise in the Laws of Nations for civilizng and
moralizing of men, And no Nations of people that we have heard of, read of,
there are, or have been, but there have been Rules and Laws amongst
themselves for some civility and morality according to their corrupt reason and
understanding of God, and God not to sanct^fie or justify men before God, for
that is only Christ's Work, but to civilize and moralize them before men for
the more safety of Gods Elect.

And this was the use of the more clear Exposition and manifestation of this
Law of God remaining to man, in his corrupt nature by a special providence of
God, written by Moses to the People of Israel and so remaining written to all
people, to whom it comes (as unto us) to moralize and civilize men, or (as it
may be said) to sanctify and justify men, before men in the sight of men, in
the estimation of men. And that upon the proportionable temporal penalties to
the breakers, and like reward to the Keepers thereof, for the good and society
of men, without which man's life would be miserable. But not to justify or
sanctify men before God by the work thereof, (That being only the work of
Christ, and only in the power of Christ and his performance.) And the Acts 13.
39 Romans 3. 20
Scriptures largely and plainly manifests that from all things, which ye
could not be justified by the Law of Moses, by him (that is Christ) every one
that believes is justified. By the work Romans 10. 6.
of the Law shall no man be justified in his (that is) Gods sight, says Romans
3. 24
the Apostle. If it be of works it is no more of grace, we are justified
freely through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Christ Jesus is 1 Cor.
1. 30
made unto us, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption; The Law (says
the Apostle) came by Moses, but grace and truth by Jesus Christ. Joh. 1. 17


If any Law, and the mark of any Law of Moses might sanctify or justify
before God, then the Leviticall or Ceremonial Law and the works thereof might
have done that, as the Offerings, Sacrifices, shedding of Blood, Purifyings,
Clensing, and Washing, Sprinklings and the like; which all figured Christ and
his performances. But the Apostle says, that all these were nothing to purify
and sanctify men before God, but only outwardly touching the flesh, in the
sight and estimation of men, as Heb. 9. 13. for says the Apostle, It is
impossible the Blood o^ Bulls and Goats should take away sin, and again, in
burnt Offerings, sin Offerings thou had no pleasure therein said I (that is
Christ.) Lo^ I come to Heb. 10. 4
do thy will O God. Man is not justified, sanctified or purified before God by
any of man's works of the Law of Moses, no, God Heb. 10. 6, 7
has no pleasure in them, but only in his Christ, and his works. And yet God
was pleafed his Law and Commandments should remain to corrupt man, even that,
that Moses Law the more clear exposition of the Law of nature should be added,
because of transgression (as the Apostle says) to show sin more clearly to
Gal. 3. 19
man, and the righteousness of God in condemning.

The transgressions of his Law, first and last, and to abate and shake the
current of corruption in the reprobate to the more safety of his Elect among
them, as Wolves to them, and for the mortifying of the deeds of the Flesh in
the Elect by power of the spirit in them. And though the Law of Moses, was
added, because of transgession, servient to civilize and moralize by the
reprobate and the Elect, by the common corrupt Light, Reason, Knowledge, and
Understanding; there is remaining to them both in their corrupt nature, whereby
they also do many things (though failing and corruptly) and that according to
that Law good in the estimation of men, yet there is great difference betwixt
these corrupted works and doings of the Law of Moses wrought by the only
Power, Light and Reason of Nature, so remaining in man, and the works, and
fruits of the spirit of Christ in the Elect of God, which have received the
spirit of adoption whereof (by grace) they are made the instruments of the
spirit, the branches of the Vine to bear forth the fruit, of (...) as Love,
Joy, Peace, Gentleness, Long-suffering, Goodness, (...), Temperance, and such
like commanded in the Spiritual Law of God.

For the corrupt Power, Light and Reason of Nature brings forth love fained
more or less, Love to Friends to those that Love Mat. 5. 10 Romans 12. 2
them. But the spirit of Christ brings love without dissimulation, love to
enemies, The corrupt light of nature brings forth faith, that Joh. 14. 1
is, such as drink love from God, but not in Christ, But the spirit of Christ
brings forth faith unfeigned, faith in God, and in love of 1 Timothy 1. (...)
Christ, For man's power of believing can go no further then Adams in innocence,
know God but no other. Ephesians. 14. 1.


Therefore Christ said, you believe in God, believe also in Me, Certainly man
has corrupted power left him in his corrupt nature, That he can weakly and
corruptly know the righteous Law Romans 1. 19
and Commandment of God: (for that the Apostle says) what so ever is to be
known of God, is manifest in them: for God has showed it unto them, yea the
Apostle says, they know the Law of God, how that they which commit such things
are worthy of death.

And man has not only power left by nature, to know the just Law, though
weakly, but also to believe God, in the same; That, he that does it shall
live, and he that does it not shall die, yea also he has reason, (though
corrupt) to discern, to judge, to pray, to obey, to repent, and to endeavor
the same, though all these weakly and corruptly. Which of these powers of
nature and duties of the Law did not Caine Ismael, Esau, Pharo, Saul, Ahab,
Baalam, Balach and Judas, do, exercise and use the Scribes and Parisees,
Heathens and Publicans did, and do the same, yea, the Devils themselves
confess God and his Christ. They believe and tremble, they pray Christ for
many things, this power of theirs conrupted Iam. 2. 19 Mat. 8. 31
nature remains to them all the power of man's nature, corrupted remains to
him. And natural man does not (of his power left,) these things only
outwardly, but also inwardly and according to his corrupt heart, termed
conscience, and therefore counts it righteousness, yea in some through
moral helps of Examples, Education, Teaching and Industry is exceeding
Righteousness, in the Estimation of men, as Paul accounted those of himself,
advantageous righteousness, righteousness that would do him much good with
God, but (Christ manifesting himself Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9
unto him) he then thought, counted, and judged them all to be loss and dunge
for Christ's sake, for the excellent Knowledge of Christ, for to enjoy Christ.
And desired to be found in Christ not having his own righteousness which is of
the Law, but that which is through the Faith of Christ, even the righteousness
which is of God, through Faith, because that which is Christ's imputed and
accounted to man of grace, is only in estimation with God, and nothing of man's
own, though never so seemly, according to the Law and Commandment, as his
Faith and obedience, repentance and all righteousness thereof.

Object. Christ commands, Let your light so shine before men, that they
seeing your good works may glorify your Father which is in Heaven. Christ
calls their works good works that he exhorts Mat. 5. 16.
them to do; yea, shining good works before men, such as whereby the Father
in Heaven is, or may be glorified, as may bring glory before men to God, surely
Gods glory is in estimation with God as good, and so these are good works that
cause, and bring Gods glory, even in Gods respect.

Answ. Christ as God has authority to exhort and command men what he
pleases, in his corrupted state to do the righteous works of the Law and
Commandment; God lost not of his Power by man's sin, though man lost of his
own power, that God had endowed him withal in his Creation by his sinning, And
man corrupted, is still under the command, and Law of God (as he is natural)
and has corrupt knowledge of the same, and the righteousness thereof, and
corrupt power left him to indeavout. or do the work of the Law and Command,
(yet, his knowledge and power, being wholly corrupted and leavened in every part
by sin) for the Apostle says, A little leven, leveneth the whole Iump, all
man's endeavors and woe, therefore must needs be 1 Cor. 4.
corrupted and leavened and so not good, and righteous in the sight and
estimation of good, though never so seemly good in the sight and estimation of
men. God does not approve of the same as good to his honor and glory; being
leavened with corruption and sin, which is loathsome and pollution to his
Pureness. Yet these works may be good and to Gods glory in the corrupt sight
and estimation of men; And that which Christ exhorts unto, is the good and
righteous work to Gods glory, in the estimation of men. Man does not the work
that glorifieth God, in Gods own estimation, nor can do that; Yet those which
are Christ's Elected of God, do the righteous and good works of the
Commandment in Christ, and the same done of Christ is (of grace) is imputed
and accounted to them, whereby God has great glory, yea and is held forth in
them, and by them, as he pleases, to make them the instruments of his Spirit
then to elect to Gods glory.

Useful Meditations and Resolutions.
THe Apostle says, Christ is all in all, Col. 3. 11. I take it the meaning is,
all goodness, righteousness, holiness to God, all that pleases and is in
acceptance to God for man; And Christ is, in all that are good, righteous,
holy, pleasing and acceptable to 2 Cor. 13. 5
God, through him, do ye not know that except Christ Jesus be in you, ye are
reprobates? says the Apostle. And it is only in Christ, in them, that they are
good, righteous, holy, pleasing, and accepted with God, it is Christ and that
which is Christ's, which is only in respect and esteem with God; and nothing of
our own, as David says, my goodness Psalm. 16. 3
or weldoing extends not to thee, O Lord, or is nothing unto thee, but to the
Saints that are upon the Earth, Ps. 16, 2, 3. To this agrees that of the
Apostle, Christ Jesus is made unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30
and Sanctification and Redemption.

And some object, nothing of man's own, his own faith and prayers in his own
praise please God, nor is acceptable to God; Then wherefore should or do men
pray to God, or give thanks to God all in vain?

Ans. 1. That that has authority has commanded, that is enough Christ, though
all be not worth Gods looking on, which is done.

2. The Heathens and Publicans, the Scribes, Pharisees, yea the Devils did the
same upon slavish fear, and other respects. If thou do not, thou show thy
self worse then those.

3. For morality and example to men, Though my goodness extends Psalm. 16. 23.
not to thee, O Lord, says David, yet it does extend to the Saints upon Earth.

4. Because Christ the Vine makes the Elect of God, and is known to bear such
grapes, The instruments of his Spirit, to hold forth such fruits as are
pleasing and acceptable to God, though man cannot of himself please God with
such of his own.

The Apostle says, The promise was made not to the seed as of man, but to the
seed as of one, which is Christ, Gal. 3. 16. agreeing to that word of promise,
The seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents head, Genesis 3. And Christ did
believe the promise.

From hence I take it, follows that the Covenant of grace, and promise was
made only to Christ, in whom all the Elect of God were as all mankind was in
Adam by natural Creation; And the promise was to the Elect as they are in
Christ, one with Christ, Members of Christ. Therefore the Elect in Christ are
not to challenge the promise of grace made to themselves, but from Christ made
to Christ, and only made to them, as they are in Christ, in that I live (says
the Apostle) I live by the faith in the Son of God, Gal. 2. 20. It is Christ's
faith that Paul lived by. It is a common public confession. Our best
occasions are great abominations, and I take it, this is intended of our
Believing, Praying, Obeying, Thanksgiving, Repenting, and the like.

If these be great abominations to God, they cannot pacify nor please God,
neither sanctify us to God. Yet Believing, Praying, Obeying, Thanksgiving,
Repenting being of the spirit of Christ The fruits of the spirit are acceptable
of God, God is well pleased in his Rom 8. 27
Son Christ, and in him only pleased, Christ makes request for his saints
according to the will of God. Some say, Faith is a condition of man's part to be
performed of man in Gods Covenant of grace, for the obteining and enjoying the
promise and grace; And before man has performed the condition of Faith, and
believing he has neither interest in the promise nor grace, nor can have, for
the promise of grace is upon man's performance of Faith, as they say.

But I take it, if this were so, then Faith is, or was neither a grace of God
to man, nor of grace, nor the gift of God to man of grace, but of nature, which
is contrary to the Scripture. It is not of our selves says the Apostle, it is
the gift of God. Ephesians. 2. 8. Faith is given by the spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 9. Faith
is the fruit of the spirit. Gal. 5. 22. I say if of gift, then of grace, if of
grace and the spirit to man^ then grace and that spirit is to the man before
Faith, the gift, the Heb. 12. 1
Fruit, the Tree is always before the Fruit. Jesus is the Author and Finisher
of our Faith we have Jesus must keep us to work the Faith before the Faith
Wrought in us.

Sol. The gift of Faith, which is of grace given, is the hinderance and
manifestation of the grace of Christ, and Faith is the first light of salvation
by the spirit is manifested. Some say, as when Lazarus was quickened to his
natural Life again by Jesus, and raised out of his grave, he walked; So when
a man is quickened and raised up spiritually by Christ, he is made able to walk
in the ways and commandments of God to do the works of godliness,
righteousness and holiness.

But I take it the similitude holds only thus, Lazarus was dead naturally
before men, and was quickened and raised up miraculously by Christ before men.
So the Elect before they were loved and elected in Christ out of the company of
the children of wrath before God, were dead in trespasses and sins before God,
and after they were elected in Christ of God to be holy and without blame
before him in love. They were quickened together, and raised up together in
Christ Jesus before God, as Ephesians. 2. 1. 5, 6. And they walked in Christ, in
all godliness, righteousness and holiness, before God; But herein the
similitude holds not that as Lazarus was quickened and raised up by Christ to
natural Life, and natural action, and seated in himself by the power of
nature left to man though weakened by the transgression. So Christ quickneth and
raises up his Elect to spiritual Life, and the power and action of spiritual
Life inherent, and seated in themselves in the natural man, either in soul or
body, as Life of godliness, righteousness and holiness, were inherent, and
seated in Adam before his innocence, or as natural Life, Powers and Actions,
(though corrupt and weak) are still inherent, and seated naturally in man, and
other creatures. For though the Elect of God be quickened and raised up to Life,
yet this is only in Christ, as Ephesians. 2. 5. 6. God has quickened us together in
Christ: He has raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly
places in Christ Jesus. So the Apostle, yet it is not Gal. 2. 20
I that us now live, but Christ lives in me, and in that, that I now live in
the flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God, and so again (says the
Apostle) ye are dead, and your Life is hid with Christ. Col. 3. 3. The Elect
are still dead in themselves, only alive in Christ, hidden in Christ, till
corruptible has put on incorruptible, and mortal has put on immortality,
then is brought forth the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in
Victory. In Christ we live, we move and have our being, meaning of spiritual
Life, Acts 14. 28. our spiritual Life, Power, Motion, Action or being is
inherent and seated only in Christ, not in our selves, and is ours only by
gift, imputation, and of grace by our union with Christ.

The Scriptures says, that God did elect Paul in Christ before the Ephesians. 1. 4
Foundations of the World, to be holy and without blame before him in love.
Therefore Christ was with God before the World, and Paul was with God before
the World, And so the company of the children of wrath were with God before the
World, out of which Paul was elected and chosen to be loved, holy and without
blame before God, that is, to be adopted one of Gods holy and blamlesse
children through Christ. Certainly after Paul was elected in Christ before the
world to be holy and without blame before God, and Ephesians. 1. 5.
adopted one of Gods children through Christ, Paul did not become the child of
wrath again, by sinning, nor was unholy and blameless before God, after he
was elected of God in Christ to be holy and without blame before God in love,
and adopted one of Gods children, but was still holy and without blame before
God in Love, although in the flesh he sinned, he was still the child of God,
The Foundation of God is sure, The gifts and calling of God are without
repentance. If Paul should have become the child of 1 Timothy 2. 19 Romans 11.
wrath before God by sinning, after he was elected and adopted Gods child
through Christ, he must have been often the child of wrath and the child of
God, and often none of the children of God, and after elected and adopted which
has no testimony; And if Paul was foreknowne of God, and was so predestinate
that he had the gift and calling of God before the World, that he was actually
elected and adopted with God, and was ever after loved of God in Christ, and
holy and without blame before God. No doubt but Paul was also justified and
glorified, in which, and through Christ before God and with God, before the
world unto whom all is present, although in respect of the creature, and to the
creature the same appear, and is manifested in appointed and fullness of time.
So the Apostle says, he has quickened and has raised us up, and made us sit
together in heavenly places in Christ Ephesians. 2. 5.
Jesus; He does not say he will quicken and will raise again. But says those
that he knew before he also has quickened, and has Romans 29. 30
raised up and predestined to be made like to the Image of his Sone. And whom
he predestined them also he called, and whom he called those also he
justified, and whom he justified them also he glorified; he does not say,
that those which God knew before the World, and predestined before the World,
he would call, and justify and glorify afterward, but he says, those that he
knew before predestinate, those also he Called, Justified, and Glorified in
present.

From this notion we may conclude that the World, Adam, Eve, Elect, and
reprobate were with God in Gods Sight before the World was, and Christ in
manifestation of the creature and before Adam produced of the dust, and Eve of
the rib in manifestation to the creature.

Christ says, That which is of the flesh is flesh, and that which is of the
spirit is spirit; And Paul says of himself, I am carnal, sold Joh. 3. 6 Romans
7. 14
under sin, And again, in me, that is, in my self, dwells no good thing,
And the Prophet Esaias says of himself, and others like Isa. 64. 6
himself, All our righteousness is as filthy rags. Therefore Paul's, and
Isayes, and such men's Faith, Love, Obedience, Justice, Repentance and the like,
is carnal, corrupted and filthy, and whose not? And therefore might truly say,
we are altogether corrupt, That which is of the Spirit of Christ is Christ's,
not man's, as Spiritual Faith, Love, Obedience, Righteousness, Repentance, all
Fruits of the Spirit; They are man's only as man by grace is made the branch of
the Vine Christ. The instrument of the Spirit to bear and hold forth the
Grapes and Fruits of the Spirit in manifestation; and as they are imputed and
accounted of grace to man.

Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, and to God that which is Gods, Let us
not rob God of his own.

Some say that although man's Prayers, and Praises be corrupted and Levened with
sin, yet by the grace of Christ they are made good, pleasing and acceptable to
God.

Sol. But I take it, Christ covers sin (as David says) Blessed is the man,
whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sin is covered, And Christ came to
take away sin as the Apostle says, Christ appeared Ps^* 32. 1, 2.
that he might take away our sins, and lose the works of the Devil. 1 John
3. 5, 8
And grace and mercy passes by offenses, but Christ and grace does not make
evil good, as he does not call evil good, nor does make sin righteousness,
the sin of the flesh being taken away, covered, and passed by in the prayers of
the Elect of God. The Romans 8, 27.
Prayer of the Spirit which always makes request according to the Will of
God, That is good, pleasing and acceptable to God.

Snares of Popery Discovered.
BEcause the Apostle says, we shall or may all appear before the 2 Cor. 5. 10
judgment Seat of Christ, that every man may receive the things which are done
in the body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or evil.

And again the Apostle in the Person of Christ speaks, I come Rev. 22. 1^
shortly and my reward is with me, to give every man, according as his work
shall be.

And again, the unjust man is abomination to the Lord, and shall Pro. 29. 27
1 Cor. 6. 9
ont inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

And again, every one of us (says the Apostle) shall give acconnt of himslefe
to God. Romans 14. 12.


First, from these and like places of Scripture some say that Believers, as
Unbelievers shall all appear before the judgment Seat.

Secondly, shall give account of all done in the body, and by word or deed,
whether the same be good or evil.

Thirdly, that the elected Believers have done, and do in the body (that is)
whilst they are in the Body, evil, in word and deed, as also good and that
Unbelievers and Reprobates do evil and good also.

Fourthly, that Believers and Unbelievers elect and reprobate, shall receive a
reward proportionable to that they have done in the Body, whether good or evil.

Fifthly, that they which have been unjust in the Body in this Life (that is)
have done evil, although they be Believers are all abomination to the Lord,
and shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

Sixthly, That Christ's undertaking and performance for the elect, was to pay the
debt, for the general fin of Adam, only for the which fault (as the Apostle
says) came on all men to condemnation, And for the rest in this Life, To give
the grace of power to the Romans 5. 18
elect to fu^fill the Law, and do the commandment (as man is obliged thereto
by the Law of God) for the justification and salvation, at their own will and
choice upon pain of receiving a just reward of God at the day of account for
their failing.

Seventhly, to make good their collection, from these Scriptures in the Letter,
because the Apostle of Christ says, in earnest of himself and all Believers,
In many things we sin all, and all the evil Jam. 3. 2
which I would not, that I do (meaning in the body.) And again, by the works
of the Law shall no flesh be justified, by no works done in the body. Romans 7. 15
And again, the Law makes nothing perfect, meaning holy and righteous in the
sight of God. And again, If perfection had been by the Romans 3. 20
Law what need had there been of Christ? says the Apostle; And so, Heb. 7. 19.
because from hence with the other forecited Scriptures, It must necessarily
follow that no man, neither Believers nor Unbelievers Heb. 7. 11
shall be justified, saved and inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

Therefore they add that God has his Book, wherein he has the number of all
the sins and good deeds of men (as Job speaks) Thou have numbered my steps, and
do not delay my sins, And God has the Job 14. 16.
Balance of his Sanctuary, wherein he shall weigh the sins of men (as he
commanded the Prophet) to cut off the numberless hairs of his head
(signifying the sins of the People) and weigh them in the Balance; And God
charged Moses, that he should do justly in judgment Ezekiel. 5. 1.
according to line, weight, and measure, which (no doubt) he does, Lev. 19. 35*
and will ever do himself. And God cried, woe, to the Scribes and Pharisees for
omitting the weighty matters of the Law, whereby it appears that God weighs
and will weigh the works of his Law, done by Mat. 23. 23
men. And as God shall find at the time of his judgment, the sins of men
(Believers or Unbelievers) to be in his arithmeticall account, more, or less
then his righteous and good deeds, and in his geometrical account, as he shall
find his good deeds weighty, or lighter then his evil done in the body, so he
shall give to every man as his work shall be, every man shall receive
according to that he has done in the body, whether it be good or evil.

Yet (say they) It is the Justice of God (which is always mixed with mercy)
That to the man whose good deeds overcome his bad, the good reward should be
given unto him, and that he should receive the same which the Apostle proves
in plain words (say they) To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the
Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. See more, Rev. 2.
17. and Rev. 2^ 7
3. 21. And therefore (say they) the Apostle advises Believers to provide that
they may overcome, when they are judged, and to overcome evil with that
goodness; And this (say they) is according to Romans 3. 4 Romans 12. 2^
the proportion of Justice showed of God to men, and practiced of the wisest,
To give the Crown and reward according to the greater voice. And likewise that
the reward of evil should be given accordingly unto him, whose evil deeds
overcome his good in Gods said account.

And yet further they add, because the Apostle says, the unjust shall not
inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, That the man which overcomes in the number and
weight of his good deeds, because Rev. 14. 13
the works of every man follows (as the Apostle says) his works follow him;
They and their works must (before they shall inherit Heaven) go through
Purgatory; The evil of the works must be burnt, and themselves purged with
the fire of purgatory (which 1 Cor. 3. 13. 15
they confirmed by the words of the Apostle, It shall be revealed by fire, The
fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is, but he shall be safe
himself, yet as it were by fire.

And they add further, that whereas some of the sins of Believers are not
unto death, called venial sins, which are to be prayed, and offer pardon
for, upon repentance* and for repentance thereof (as the Apostle says) there
is a sin which is not unto death for which let him ask, and God shall give him
Life for the sins which 1 John 5. 16
are not unto death; And there is a sin unto death (called mortal sin) I
say not that thou should pray for it, for pardon or repentance; All
unrighteousness is sin, but there is a sin not unto death, They are, For the
venial sins, sins not unto death of Believers, which they or other have prayed
for, and repented of, Life is given already, as purged, those sins are done
away and come not to account, of number and weight. But only the mortal
sins, and the venial sins of Believers unprayed for and unrepented of.

But I take it such as these err not, knowing the Scriptures, unto whom the
Gospel is hid.

For although all shall appear before the judgment Seat, give account, and
receive according to their works done in the body, good or evil, yet all
shall not appear alike, give account alike, etc.

The Gospel is, that believers shall appear, by, and with their advocate 1 John 2. 2.
Jesus Christ the righteous, we have an Advocate with the Father 1 John 2. 1. 2
Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, The
Believers shall appear as vessels of honor. The Believers shall appear in
glory, when Christ shall appear, we shall also appear in Romans 9. 21
glory. Collos. 3. 4


Believers shall appear with boldness, as Lions, The righteous shall be bold
as Lions. Pro. 28. 1.


Christ is their Judge and Advocate, and Mediator for their sins, Ephesians. 3. 12
as he was the Sacrifice and Sacrifices. None shall lay any thing to their
charge, for it is Christ their Judge, that justifies them. 1 John 2. 1. 2


But Unbelievers and Reprobates shall appear naked, clothed Rom 8. 33
with nothing but the Fig Leaves, or the unavailable works of the Law, by
themselves, without any advocate to plead for them, or Rev. 3. 17.
maketheir peace, As vessels of dishonor with shame and reproof: In fear
and trembling, having sin, the Law, the Devil, death and Isa. 53. 6
Hell all against them, laying those which they have done in the body to their
charge.

So Believers shall give account by their undertaker their advocate Jesus
Christ the righteous, which is the propitiation for their Collos. 2. 14
sins, upon whom God has laid all their iniquities, and which has taken
their infirmities upon him, which has put out the hand writing of Ordinances
that was against them, he even took it out of the way and fastened it upon his
Cross, of whose Soul God did see the travel and Esa. 53. 11
was satisfied with it for their sins, of his Elect to their justification, for
he shall bear their iniquities, says the Prophet.

^ ^ ^ is discharged and satisfied, and nothing is to be said (...) the charge
of Gods Elect, Christ is the Account and, the Accounter for Believers.

But infidels and reprobates must and shall account for all their sins,
themselves.

And so Believers and Unbelievers shall receive according to that which they
have done in the body, whether it be good or evil. But it ought to be
understood not as it is good or evil before men, in the estimation of men,
that they have done; But as it is good, or evil before God in Gods estimation.

Now as before God in Gods estimation, all that ^^probates and unbelievers
speak and do, in the body, is evil; however the (...) or any thereof, be good,
in the estimation of men. So before God that the Elect believers do in the body
is not evil before God, although in the sight and estimation of men, much or
all, be evil; For, the Apostle says, And they were elected of God in Christ
before the Foundation of the World, to be holy and without blame before God, in
love. And no doubt but that which God elected them unto, they after their
election, we, are, and ever shall be before him, holy and without blame before
him in all their doings in the body, however Ephesians. 1. 4.
their doings are in the fight and estimation of men. The Foundation of God
remains sure, and has this Seal, The Lord knows 2 Timothy 2. 1^
who are his (says the Apostle) upon the esteem of Gods election.

So then it must needs follow (all the doing in the body of the Elect Believers
being good, holy, and without blame before God in love) That the elect
Believers shall receive a good reward of God according to that they have done
in the body before God.

Again, the sin before God of all believers doings is taken away by Christ,
the undertaker to bear, pay and do all for them to the justification and
salvation (as the Apostle says) Christ appeared that 1 John 3. 5 Isa. 53. 6
^e might take away our sins, as the Father had laid their iniquities, all,
upon him. And God looks not upon Believers, and their doings in the body, as
they appear unto men, But he looks upon them as they are elected in Christ,
as they appear in Christ, holy and without blame before him, in love.

Neither is the Gospel of Jesus Christ, That Christ's undertakings and
performances for the Elect, was to pay the debt for the general sin of Adam
only that came over all men to condemnation. And for the rest only to give the
Elect, the grace of power to fulfill the Law, and do the Commandment, as man
is obliged thereto by the Law of God for their justification and
sanctification, at their own will and choice upon pain of receiving a just
reward of God at the day of account for their failing. But the Gospel of Jesus
Christ is more, and better to the elect of God, for the 1 Co^. 15. 3.
Gospel is, That Jesus Christ died for our sins, and rose again for our
justification; That he died for the sins of the elect done in the body 1 John
2. 1. 2
also. If any man (meaning of the elect) for whom only Christ died, that is,
If any man do (in the body) sin, we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins done in the
body, of our selves, not only for the general sin of Adam, but also for our
own done of us.

Neither is the Gospel of Jesus Christ, That the undertaking and performance
of Christ for the elect, is to give them the grace of power to fulfill the Law,
and do the Commandment for their just^fication and salvation (as is aforesaid)
For then the Prophet Isay would not have said, All our righteousness is as
filthy rags, and David, and Paul would not have said, There is none that does
good, Isa 64. 6 Psalm. 14 3 Romans 3. 10, 11, 12. Romans 7. 18
no not one, and Paul would not have said, in me that is, my flesh, dwells
no good thing, and I find no means to perform that which is good before God;
And again, By the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified in Gods sight,
And Paul would not have desired that he might not be found in Christ, having
his own righteousness, which is Romans 3. 10 Gal. 2. 16 Psalm. 3. 9.
of the Law. No, Christ did not give his elect, the grace of power to do the
works of the Law, and Commandment of God for their just^fication before God;
For then Paul doing of the works of the Law would have done him some good for
his justification, he would not have accounted them dross and d^ng.

Yea, the Gospel is, that Christ the undertaker is to do all things himself
for his elect, for their justification before God, and for their salvation, and
of grace to impute his righteous doings for them, unto them, for their
righteousness before God, and of grace to make them his instruments of his holy
Spirit, to bear and bring forth the fruits thereof, as he pleases, as the
branch is made the instrument of the Vine, to bring forth grapes of the Vine,
sweet an, good unto me; I am the Vine (says Christ) you are the Branches Joh.
15. 4, 5
but have no power of your selves to do any thing, to bring forth any Grapes
any good fruit, without me, you can do nothing.

And it is Christ the undertaker for the elect, which by his righteousness and
righteous performances, and in the behalf of the elect overcomes in number,
measure and weight the sins of the Elect for them: unto which the Apostle
aliudeth, where he says, If sin abounded, grace abounded much more, the
righteous performances of Christ imputed of grace to the elect believers abound
much Romans 5. 20
more in number, measure and weight then the sins of the Elect, whereby they
overcome: therefore the Apostle says, Thanks be unto God, which has given us
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 15. 5^


And Christ the undertaker has gone through all the purgatory for the Elect,
with all their unrighteousness laid upon him by the Father of mercies, wherein
he endured the buffetting of Fists, The Isa 53. 6.
spitting on his Face, The scou^ging with Rods, The railing and revying of
tongues, The peircing of na^les, The bitterness of Gall, The sweating of water
and blood, The peircing of the spear, yea, in his humane sense, The desertion
of God, The fire and fury of Gods wrath for sin, The terror of death, The
descention into hell; And all for the burning and consuming of the sins of his
elect, for the purging by his blood, That they themselves might have an
entrance made into Heaven, into which it is sure there enters no unclean
thing. The blood of Jesus Christ is the purgation of all the sins of the elect,
There is no purgatories of sin after this Life They are then blessed in Christ
for ever, see Psalm. 32. 1. 2. The blood of 1 John 17.
man in purgatory cannot purge sin.

And whereas they collect from the words of the Apostle (which says) There is
a sin not unto death, and there is sin unto death, and so forth. That both the
sin not unto death, and the sin unto death are 1 John 9. 16. 17
the sins of the Elect Believers; They utterly mistake the meaning of the
Apostle, for all sin, which is sin before God is manifested in the Scriptures
to be sin unto death; The soul that sins shall die (says the Prophet) The
reward of sin is death (says the Apostle) But Ezech. 18. ^. Romans 6. 23
it is made clear before that the elect after they were elected in Christ the
holy and without blame before God in love, which they cannot be if God sees
sin in them, if they had the fulness of sin in them, (...) God still, which is
always loathsome, blamefull and (...) to God; The sin that i^ not unto death
is the sin of (...) transgression of the Law before men, in the est^^ation of
men, whose sin (before God) Christ has taken away. And the sin u^^o death is
the sin of reprobates and unbelievers, whose sin is all unto death, and always
sin before God.

Of the Law.
THe Law of God to man, was for man's performance of righteousness upon eternal
penalty before God, (The failing whereof soreknown) Christ undertook to
perform the Law of Christ to man, is for performance of righteousness before
men upon temporal penalty.

Of the Law remaining and the Law (...) in Christ to the Elect.

Because the Apostle of Christ says (Christ is the end of the Law Romans 10 4
for righteousness unto every man that believes) and that he again says
couching Believers, ye are no more under the Law, but under grace. Rom 6. 1^


Some collect from thence, that the Law of God called the Law of nature, and of
works given manifested to Adam in Paradise in the time of his innocence and
power, and the same Law expounded and manifested by Moses to the Church, or
people of God, the Israelites in Mount Sinay called the Moral Law, and also
the Leviticall and ceremonial Law; And all Law of God for righteousness is
ended in Christ to believers, no Law for righteousness requiring performance
by the Elect, has any thing to do with them, nor they with the Law.

And some say that these words of the Apostle do not hold forth, That Christ is
the end of the Moral Law for righteousness before God to Believers; Believers
are still under the command, power and obligation o^ the Moral Law for
righteousness before God (that is) to do the works of righteousness before God,
that only the penalty and condemnation of the Moral Law, for omission of
doing the righteous works of the Law, and for their doings of unrighteousnes
and sin against and contrary to the Moral Law, is ended and taken away by
Christ. And that the ceremonial Law the Lev^c^ll Romans 6.
Law, and the Judicial given or manifested by Moses (...) people o^ Church of
the Israelites, which ^^d the Figure and relation to Christ to come in the
flesh, and his performances in the flesh, and to that notion of people (...)
were only ended in Christ to believers: unto which the words of the Apostle
Christ i^ the end of the Law for righteousness, to all Believers, have the
reference only, say they.

Sol. But I take it both these have defection and error. The former holding
forth that all Law of God given to man for righteousness is ended in Christ, to
all Believers, which is only truth thus. That all Law of God given to man for
righteousness before God in Gods sight, righteousness is ended and fulfilled in
Christ, for the Elect; For that was the matter of Christ's undertaking for his
Elect Believers, I came (says Christ) not to destroy the Law but to Mat. 5. 1^
fulfill it. (...) ^e said to John Baptist, where he refused mo(...) Mat. 3. 1^
to Baptize him, (as if he should have said) I have undertaken to fulfull all
righteousness of the Law before God for the Elect of God it behooves me so to
do hinder not me, therefore to Mal. 3. 1.
do it in the lest, let me be Baptized of thee, Thou art the messenger I have
sent; And to that purpose the Apostle says, As by one man's Gal. 2. 2^
disobedience many were made sinners. So by the obedience of one, shall many be
made righteous, we are made righteous by Christ (says the Apostle) Christ is
our righteousness, all which is meant before God. So that though there was a Law
of God made to man, that charged all men upon pain to do their works in
righteousness before God, which they had power also given them to do, but by
their own fault, had lost it utterly; yet the Christ of God having undertaken
to pay the transgression of the same Law, and to perform the full
righteousness thereof before God for the Elect Believers, God delivered up
that Law binding the Elect to righteousness before God, which now, had no
power to do the same, and which his Christ had undertaken to do and had
performed; For the Elect Believers before God, being therewith satisfied Isa.
53. 12
(as the Prophet speaks) yea God delivered that binging Law touching the
Elect of God into the hand, power, disposition of his Christ, the Mediator. And
therefore the Apostle says, Christ is the end of the Gal. (...). 19.
Law for righteousness to all believers, And that, Believers are not under the
Law, but under grace. For there is no reason that when the Son has paid the
full debt, the bond shall lie still against the principal.

Yet I take it, that the Apostle did not intend in his words where he said,
Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to all Believers, That is, the
end of the Law for right^ousnsse before God, and also before men, to all
Believers.

God did not intend in his first giving of Law to men, his own honor, service
and duty to himself only, but also the mutual service duty and good of men,
one to another, as Christ plainly shows in his answer to the man that asked
him, which was the great Commandment in the Law? Jesus said to him, Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soul and with all thy
mind. This is the first and the great Commandment. And the second is like
unto this. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Mat. 22. 37, 38, 39.
On these two Commandments depends the whole Law, and the Prophet. And
therefore Christ says, Let your light so shine before men, Mat. 5. 16. We see
God intended in his Law not only duty to himself, but also to men; And that
unto both upon penalty answerable and proportionable to the breach and offense
of both (as the Law speaks) Breach for breach, Eye for Eye, and Tooth for
Tooth. And although man in his now corrupt nature can do neither of the duties
of these great Commandments of the Law righteously before God, in Gods sight,
and estimation, Because the Rev. 24:
Almighty and holy God as Creator of man, Lawgiver, and Commander of all (of
infinite holiness and righteousness) requires purity and perfection in the
performance of the duty of both the great Commandments, which therefore, he
was pleased, his Christ should undertake for his Elect, and Christ was pleased
to undertake, and has performed to the full satisfaction of God for all
righteousness before God for them required of him, in man's performance Heb. 10.
7, 8, 9, 10.
of the whole Law of God, even of both the great Commandments thereof of duty
toward God, and duty toward man, so far and so much as concerned God
himself therein, and to the discharge to his Elect of the whole penalty
thereto pretaining.

But for that duty of the Law, which concern man himself to man, so far, and
so much, as it only concerns man, for duty of both Commandments of the whole
Law before men, in the sight and estimation of men, good, and righteous to be
performed according to the corrupt knowledge, reason, and power left to man,
Christ (by his undertakings and performance for believers) is not the end of
the Law so far, and so much, but this part and purpose of the Law remains
still for righteousness before men, in the sight and estion of men, and the
only temporal proportionable reward and penalties thereof to believers, for
the reward and penalty of Christ's Law given in grace to his Church redeemed,
cannot be eternal to them.

And that must needs be so, For otherwise in the Church of Christ upon Earth,
visible to men, which is the whole company of men professing themselves to be
believers, whereof, no doubt, but there are abundance of Hypocrites (I say)
otherwise without Law for the righteousness before men, There would be, nor
could be Religion or Worship, nor Safety, Society, or Comfort amongst men one
with another (considering the many Wolves among the Sheep, the many unknown
Hypocrites among the true Believers.) Isa. 9. 6. Ephesians. 5. 23


Again, all bearing the name of Christians, acknowledge Christ's government of
his Church upon Earth, Christ to be the governor and head of his Church (as
the Prophet says) The Government is upon his shoulders, And the Apostle says,
Christ is the head of his Church. Now no government can be without a Law, no
governor governs without a Law, no doubt but Christ has a Law whereby he
governs his Church for worship to God, safety, society and comfort thereof
before men. And no doubt but this is that Law given in grace (God being
satisfied by Christ for righteousness before himself touching his Elect
Believers) which (the Apostle says) was ordained by Angels in the hand of a
Mediator, and which God had delivered up unto his Christ (which had satisfied
Gal ^3. 19
him) the Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, That he thereby
might govern his Church upon Earth in righteousness 1 Timothy 2. 5
before men. By this remainder of the Law for righteousness before men, has
Christ ever fithence his Church was upon Earth governed his Church. Instruments
upon Earth (such as he pleased) to fit for it and assign to his kingly,
priesty and prophetical Offices,

But Christ's most glorious, gracious government of his Church upon Earth;
First, remarked for a pattern to all his Churches in the holy Scriptures by
his instruments is in his Church of Israel, which we may see held forth in the
Books called Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers and Deuteronomy, etc. There we may
see, Christ (...) himself to his Church in the government thereof by his (...)
(which (...) by his spirit had fitted, and was pleased) and most gloriously and
graciously first settled, when his Church Exodus 19. 3
(...) grown into a great visibility upon Earth. For, effecting of which,
First, he called Moses his principal prepared instrument unto him in Mount
Sinai, appointing him, to tell and deliver unto the people the Law in his hand,
as he was the Mediator, which did so, saying to them, God spoke these words
and said, I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt,
and out of the House of bondage, etc. And who can do that this God and Christ
the Mediator, in whose hand now the remainder of the Law was Gal. 3. 19.
(as the Apostle speaks) The undertaker for the Elect people of God, and the
performance of all, what God did ever deliver the Elect of God out of any
misery, or bring them out of spiritual, or bodily bondage, but Jesus Christ,
which was before Abraham Joh. 8. 58
was, yea before the Foundations of the World, before God, although not in
manifestation of the Law to the creatures before the fulness of time, Christ
had delivered them the Elect people of God out of the spiritual bondage which
they were in before God, the bondage of Sin, the Devil, Death, Hell. And out
of the bodily bondage that they were in Egypt; And therefore Moses said to them
that this Christ of God, the Lord the God which had delivered them out of the
Land of Egypt, and out of the house of all bondage both spiritual and bodily,
was their Lord their God that spoke these words to them, which they were to
hear, to obey and do before men conscionably in their hearts, in the corrupt
weak and frail power of reason, and understanding they had, as before in this
Law of Christ, Mercy, Repentance and Forgivenes have place in the other.

And to this accords (that of the Apostle) Servants be obedient to them that
are your Masters, according to the flesh, with fear Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7, 8
and trembling in singleness of heart as unto Christ, not with Eyeservice, as
men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ doing the will of God from the
heart, with good will serving the Lord and not men. And know ye that
whatsoever good thing a man does, the same he shall receive of the Lord,
whether he be Bond or Free. All dissembling and hypocrisy in service before
men, by the Law of Christ in the government of his Church, is cast out as
worthy of penalty, and the service from the heart, of good will has Rom 13. 2,
3.
the reward of Christ proportionable to the service; And to this agrees that
of the same Apostle to the Church of Christ at Rome. Let every Soul be subject
to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God (that is Christ) and the
powers that be, are ordained of God (that is Christ) as Jesus himself said,
All power is given unto me, in Heaven and in Earth, And who should ordain the
powers on Earth, but he to whom the power was given, of all in the earth? And
further says the Apostle, he therefore that resists the power, resists
the Ordinance of God (that is of Christ) and reapeth to himself judgment
(meaning before the power) for (says he) Princes are not to be feared for good
works, but for evil. Will thou then be without fear of the power? do well,
then, So thou shall have praise of the same (that is) not judgment of penalty
but reward, For he is the Minister or Instrument of Christ, for thy wealth; but
if thou do evil fear the penalty, For he bears not the Sword for naught;
For he is the Minister of God (that is Christ that ordained him) to take
vengeance on him that does evil. Wherefore ye must be subject not because of
wrath only, but also for conscience sake. For, for this cause ye pay tribute:
for they are Gods (that is) Christ's Ministers, applying themselves for the same
thing.

So that we may see this Law given in grace, in the hand of the Mediator the
man Christ Jesus, the bringer of his people out of all bondage manifested to
his Church of Believers the Israelites, with Thunder and Lightning, Smoke and
Fire, and the sound of the Trumpet, to incite the people, to hear, obey, and
do the same in singleness of Heart.

And which was by Christ himself written in Tables of stone, to show the
continuance thereof to men. And was delived to Moses by Christ himself, as his
principal chosen and fitted Minister and instrument, that he (as Christ the
Mediator did indite and guide him) might as the pen of Christ draw the branches
of the whole body of the Law into such particulars, and so many, as were
behovable and useful for cleernesse and easiness of understanding, and doing
thereof to weak and corrupted man. And that Moses should call Aaron and his
Sons, and the seaventy of the chosen Believers of Israel to join and be
assistants to him in the Ministry thereof in the several branches thereof, for
worship to God for Safety, Society and Comfort of the people among themselves:
That is the Law Gal. 6. 2. Rom 3. 27
called the Law of Christ, The Law of Faith, The new Commandment love of one
another. Joh. 13. 34.


This Law manifested then to this people by Christ, to be Ministered in his
Church of Israel by such instruments, as he 1 John 3. 8. 2 John 5.
then particularly named, was after held on, in the Ministration thereof, by,
and in the time of Joshua, the believing Judges, Kings, Priests, Prophets; Yea,
and by and in the time of the Apostles of Christ, still to be ministered, heard
and obeyed before men, in singleness of heart and conscious eyes as before
Christ himself, of the whole Church of Christ upon Earth, upon proportionable
temporal praise and reward to be certainly had of the conscionable observers.
And upon proportional temporal penalty to be certainly inflicted (unless
there be true Repentance) upon the failing therein before men by the successive
ordained powers, instruments and Ministers of Christ, for praise and vengeance
according; And this Law to believers, the Apostle Paul most clearly holds
forth for continuance thereof, in his Epistle to the Church of Christ, at Rome,
from the beginning of the twelfth Chapter, to the end of his Epistle both for
the duties therein, and Ministry thereof, but most clearly in thirteenth
Chapter. It was only the Church of Christ upon Earth, that Paul had respect
unto, and a care of, and not of those which were without the Church: Neither
did Christ intend and give his Law in grace, but only to those and in respect
to those which the Father had chosen in him, and given to him to redeem, not to
the least children of wrath.

Quest. Has repentance of the Elect place and power in the Law given in grace
by the hand of the Mediator, the man Christ Jesus to quit the transgressors
thereof before men from the temporal penalty of that Law?

Ans. Repentance which is true, and Faithful Repentance has place in this
Law, and also power to quit the Believers which are transgression thereof
before men, as their transgression was transgression before men. This is plain
and evident by the expressions of Moses in many branches of this Law, indicted
by Christ himself, where Restitutions, Satisfactions and the like are admitted
to quit the offender against the Law, and respect thereof before men. And the
Prophets especially, in the Prophet Ezechiel his 18. Chapter, And John Baptist,
Mat. 3. 2. and Christ himself Mark 1. 15. and the Apostles all show that
Repentance has place in this Law of Christ, and power to quit offending
believers from the transgression, and the penalty of their transgression before
men.

But this true and faithful Repentance must always have these four a juncts,
godly sorrow for the Fault, confessing amendment of Life, and restitution with
satisfaction to men before men. Therefore the Apostle says, godly sorrow
causeth-Repentance unto salvation or safety; and the Apostle says, confess 2
Cor. 10. Mat. 3. 8
your faults one to another; And John Baptist preaching Repentance, says,
amend your lives; And the Law of Christ was Luke 3.
at large for restitution to the acquitting of the Thief, or like offenders.
Exodus 22. 3. 5, 6. 12.
And Zacheus when he believed in Christ presently tendered restitution to all
he had taken any thing from wrongfully; And who can think there can be true
repentance without sorrow Luke 19. 8.
and grief for the offense, whether it be be in word or deed fore men? who
will think that he repent th that goes on still in his sin, and amendeth
not at all? and if Repentance would quit Thieves, Deceivers, and Robbers, etc.
without Satisfaction and Restitution, proud greedy Enemies, and corrupt man
would think Robbing, Theeving, Deceiveing; yea Treason, Murder, Slandering
and the like a good Trade.

But the good and gracious Law of Christ is clear, that although he graciously
admits of Repentance of sins in Believers to quit them of their sins
before men, yet it must be not only with godly Sorrow, Confession, and
amendment of Life, but also with proportionable restitution and satisfaction
to men to the uttermost of their abilities.

And to this purpose, Augustine a renowned Father ^in Christ's Church said, non
dimititur peccatum nisi restituatur oblatum (That is sins) not forgiven
unless restitution be made; And again, without satisfaction there is no
salvation, which is true thus, If Christ has not satisfied God for thy sin,
Thou can not have salvation before God; And if thou do not satisfy men
their Trespass, Debt and Due to thy power, Thou can have no salvation or
safety before men, Thy repentance otherwise is not good, but thou art liable to
the proportion able penalty still.

And as it was a great Love, and Grace of God to his Elect to admit of, and to
be pleased with his Christ's performance and satisfaction for their acquittance
of sin, and for their righteousness before God, which they could no way have
made, or done, and where Repentance had no place (The Law being) do this, and
Live, do it not and Die Eternally.

So was it a great Love, and grace, yea great Mercy of Christ, to his Elect
Believers to make a way for and to admit of their Repentance, for the quitting
of their sin, and for their righteousness thereby before the Mediator, the
Man Jesus Christ, and before all men.

And upon this great grace considered, It was, that the same Father in the
Church of Christ says, Our righteousness is more in Repentance, and
Forgiveness of Sin, then in righteousness of deeds and performances.

Although our work of the Law and Command be no righteousness before God,
yet our Work of the command, and our Repentance of the failing our mercy and
forgiveness is righteousness before Men, This is Christ's Law to Men, for the
order and Government of his Church upon Earth; And this is work enough for
Gods people for righteousness before Men to the good and profit of men,
although they presume not to build up unto Heaven unto God in Heaven (which is
only Christ's Work, as David said) my Goodness and Weldoing Psalm. 16. 2, 3
extends not to thee, O Lord, but to the Saints that are upon the Earth.

Quest. How are repenting Believers upon their repentancy unto satisfaction
before Men, acquitted from their sin and transgression of the Law, and the
penalty thereof before Men, when as Sorrow, Confession, Amendment and
Proportionable satisfaction for the Transgression, is as much as the Law
requires in the penalty?

Answ. As Repentance before men has place in the Law of Christ; So says
Forgiveness, and Mercy before Men, place in the Law of Christ. If thy Brother
Trespass against thee, and if he repent, forgive him, and though he sin
against thee seven times in a Day, and seven times in a Day, Mat. 17. 3, 4.
turn again to thee, saying, It repents me, Thou shall forgive him.

And so says the Law of Christ, He that confesses, and forsakes his Sin
shall have Mercy. And to whom belongs Prove. 28. 13.
this Forgiveness and Mercy? certainly to the penitent Believers (as Christ
says) If he repent forgive him, he that confesses, and forsakes his Sin
shall have Mercy; yea, and CHRIST says further, Forgive and it shall be
forgiven you, Luke 6. 37.
If you do forgive Men their Trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also
forgive you; And if you forgive not Men, no more Mat. 6. 14, 15.
will your Heavenly Father forgive you. And again, Judgment Jam 3. 13.
merciless shall be to him that shows no Mercy, and Mercy rejoices against
Judgment; And if he that sorroweth godly for his Sin before Men, confesses
ingenuously, amendeth righteously; and be willing to satisfy before Men, for
the Trespass before Men, has Mercy and Forgiveness before Men; of his
Transgression before Men; Is not this a sufficient acquittance unto the
repenting Believer of his sin, and the penalty thereof before men?

And again, the Law of Christ binds as much to Mercy, and Forgiveness to
the penitent before Men; As it does to the penalty of Transgressors thereof,
and to Repentance before Men.

Again, the true penitent Offender is acquitted from the Transgression before
Men, and the penalty thereof by his true Repentance, although, he, by
hard-hearted, and merciless Men be holden to the extreme penalty of the Law
for his Transgression, contrary to Christ's Law of Mercy and Forgiveness, For
that he suffers he suffers willingly, and rejoices in his Tribulation
(as the Apostle speaks) now he that suffers willingly, and rejoices in
his sufferi^g by the comforts of the holy Spirit in him, has not the pain of
him that Suffers unwillingly, and forced to suffer for the comforts, and joy
that he has of the Spirit of Christ, does slake, quench, and take away the
Sting of the pain; That he may say, O Death where is thy Sting (as the
Apostle says of such) through which comforts and joy of the Holy Ghost, many
that have suffered Death in the Lord, have dyed rejoicing in the Lord, and in
appearance to Men without pain; Whereby they have manifested themselves
acquitted of their transgression, and the penalty of the Law, in the pain.

And the Repentance of Believers wrought up in them by Christ, does not only
acquit them of the Sin, and the penalty of the Law before Men; But it also
testifies to their own Souls, and to other Men also, that they are living
Branches in the Vine Christ Jesus; For (says Christ) The Branch cannot bear
Fruit of it self, except it abide in Joh. 15. 4:
the Vine, No more can ye, except ye abide in Me. No Man can repent, except
he be a living Branch abiding in Christ, and Christ in him. Hypocrites may
counterfeit Repentance and not repent truly.

And he that lives in Christ, and Christ in him, by his Spirit, has the
witness of his Adoption, that he is one of Gods children through Christ, and
so quitted of all Sin, not only before Men, but also (by the performance of
Jesus Christ) of all Sin before God. So the Apostle says, We Joh. 8. 15. 16.
have received the Spirit of Adoption, And the same Spirit witnesses with our
spirits, that we are children of God; So that although Repentance acquitteth
not of sin before God, as it does before Men, yet it by the Spirit of Christ,
whereby it is wrought up in Believers witnesses acquitance before God, to the
Souls of the penitent, yea, and holds forth great hope and manifestation to
others, that the same penitent Man is the child of God, and is quitted of his
sin before God. And even so it is of Obedience, Mercy, and Forgiveness,
wrought up by the Spirit of Christ, they also witness, evidence and testify
the same.

Quest. The Apostle says of Believers, The Body is dead Romans 8. 10
because of Sin, And Paul says of himself, I am carnal sold under Sin, I
find no means to perform that which is Romans 7. 14. Verse 18 Psalm. 14. Isa
64. 6
good, And David says, There is none that does good no not one. And the
Prophet I say said of himself, and other like himself, All our righteousness
is filthiness.

I will be their God, and they shall be my people, I will never forsake them,
and I will put such a fear into their hearts that they shall never depart from
me, Jer. 32. 40.

Can therefore Believers do the Commandments of the Law of Christ, in
singleness of Heart before Men, and before Christ, the Governor of his Church
which knows all, as R^penting, Forgiving, Loving, Obeying, Praying, Praising,
Thanksgiving, and the rest, how it is faithfully done.

Answ. By the same power they did and do believe in singleness of Heart; They
can and may Repent, Forgive, Love, Obey, Pray, Praise, and give Thanks, and
the rest in singleness of Heart; But indeed corrupt, and carnal dead Men in
Sin, cannot do these or any of these, or the like, in singleness of Heart,
whose Heart is corrupt, carnal and dead in Sin, sold under Sin (as Paul
was (as he says) in his best Estate. Indeed Man can Believe, Repent, Obey,
Love, Pray, Praise, and give Thanks Carnally, and Fainedly by the power of
corrupt nature. As the Scribes and the Pharisees did, and as Christ says, the
Heathens and Publicanes do the same, but not in singleness of heart without
dissimulation.

Therefore note the command of Christ to Reprobates, is, as he is God, and
commander, his command to the Elect Believers, is, as he is Undertaker to
perform all righteousness impossible to them, by his Spirit in them, promised
and sent to them to perform all.

The Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus our Savior,
Undertaker, and God that works in us Phil. 2. (...).
the Will, and the Deed, of his own good pleasure (as the Apostle speaks)
does all in us, which (the same Apostle says) works all in all. It is he
that works in Believers, Believing, Loving, Repenting, Forgiving, Mercy,
Obeying, Praying, Praising and Thanksgiving, and the 1 Cor. 12. 6.
rest.

In singleness of Heart and sincerity, far otherwise, how and wherefore
should he be said to work in Believers, the Will and the Deed? and to work
all in all, if it were not that he works these and such like things of his
own good pleasure in them, which their own corrupt power they have, cannot
work, and do, in singleness of Heart, unfainedly, and without dissimulation.
The Deed is Christ's Deed of these things, according to his own good pleasure,
in Believers.

Therefore Christ himself tells his Disciples, That he is the Vine, and they
are the Branches, and that they, without him can do nothing. The Grapes and
Fruit that are borne of the Branches are not usually, nor properly called the
Grapes of the Branches, the Fruit of the Branches, but the Grapes Joh. 15. 5.
of the Vine, and the Fruit of the Vine, which Grape and Fruit of the Vine, are
by the Spirits and power of the Vine, wrought up in the Branches, which are
only the instruments of the Vine, fitted to bear them (as Christ says) Every
Luke 22 18.
Branch that bears not Fruit in Me (speaking to his Disciples of professing
Believers.)

Believers only are the Branches, and the Instruments of Christ, whith he
has fitted to bear the Fruits of True, Joh. 15. 2.
and Good Believing, Obeying, Repenting, Praying, Praising, Thanksgiving and
Loving, etc. Which Fruit, which Work, and Deed, is Christ's, by his holy
Spirit, wrought up in their Hearts; And of grace, by Christ (being made and
fitted the Branches and Instruments to bear the same Fruits) of grace also,
he imputes to them, and accounts to them the sin, and therefore calls
them, (his Elect ones) Believers, Obeyers, Repenters, Prayers, Thanksgivers,
and Lovers etc. And calls the Fruits theirs, which are but the Branches, as
if they were the Vine, whose, the Fruits are in, Truth.

The Apostle says (speaking of himself and all Believers) We know not how to
pray, as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes Romans 8. 26.
request for us. Corrupt Man, knew not to pray as he ought, nor to Believe,
Repent, Obey, Praise, or Love, as he ought, but the Spirit sent to him of
Christ, does all for him. And this was the cause and reason why CHRIST did ever
sithence his Church was upon Earth, give his Spirit to the Elect of God, for
whom he had undertaken of Grace and Love, to do such things of the Holy and
Good Law, for the Government of his Church, as is commanded therein, to be
done before men, which he knew themselves not able to do (as he pleased.)
And therefore the true Faith, Peace, Obedience, Repentance, Praise, and Love
are called Spiritual gifts, Spiritual things, Spiritual Sacrifices, and 1
Cor. 12. 1. 1 Cor. 14. 12. 1 Cor. 9. 11. 1 Pet. 2. 5.
why so? certainly because they are the Deeds of the Spirit, the fruit of the
Spirit, as so the Apostle calls them, Gal. 5. 22. And upon this same ground,
That renowned Father in Christ's Church said, Fac Domini quod jubes, and jube
quod vis. O Lord, do thou that which thou command, and command what thou will.

And let no man marvel that Christ should be the Lawgiver, and the Law Keeper
for his Elect. The commander, and the doer of the Commandment for them,
whereas the Scriptures hold forth his Grace to be the Judge, and the Advocate.
The Priest, and Sacrifice. Hebrews 2. 17. 5, 6. 7. 3. Ephesians. 5. 2. 9. 26. And
thus much of the Error of those which hold forth no Law remaining to the 1 John
2. 42.
Elect.

And I take it the Error of those which hold forth, that Christ is not the End
of the Moral Law, and all Law for Righteousness, before God to Believers, but
only of the penalty and condemnation of the breaches thereof, is much
dishonorable to Jesus Christ, and unrighteous to his undertakings and
performances, and to the Apostle of Christ, called to set forth the truth of
his Performances, and Merit, and most of all to the Great, Just, and good God,
the Covenant-maker of Works, upon Life and Death, with Mankind in general,
and on remembrance of Mercy. The Covenant-maker of Grace, and promise to his
Christ for all his Elect.

For where all Mankind (having transgressed against the Covenant of Works
before God) were in the state of eternal Death, the God of Love, Mercy, and
Free Grace (having elected some of them in his Christ) with a covenant and
Promise of Grace, that upon his Christ's fulfilling of the Law of Works; And
the paying of the whole Transgression of the Law by his Death, Passion and
Bloudshedding, for them his Elect to satisfaction.

Those his Elect should have eternal Life, the condition, and promise of the
covenant of Works, as if themselves had performed the same, to the full, and
should be also freed from the penalty of Eternal Death, into which, all
Mankind was fallen.

And Christ has done and fulfilled the righteousness of the Law, and paid the
full Debt of the Transgression thereof to God, by his Passion, Death, and
Bloud-shedding for the Elect, even to the full, so much as the Law, and
covenant of Works required, in Justice, either for righteousness before God,
or for payment of the Trangression to full satisfaction of God, for those
Elections, for ever, for past and to come.

Now then why should the Law and covenant of Works remain still, binding the
Elect Believers to righteousness of Works before God, which they cannot in
the least do, and for that in respect of their utter unablenesse CHRIT
undertook and performed all for them? And if CHRIST (God being so pleased)
have fulfilled the whole Law both for performing the righteousness thereof
before GOD, and payment of the transgression thereof; Why should not Christ be
the end of all Law Moral, and the rest for righteousness before God to
Believers? as they say he is the end, of, and for the penalty and
condemnation, for the transgression thereof, to them? Seeing the full is
performed of the righteousness required as the full of the Debt of
transgression is paid? Will these lay such cruelty upon God, and charge God
with such oppression, and wrong, as to take his whole Debt of Christ, for the
poor Elect ones (not able to pay a Farthing of that they ought him) and yet to
keep them in Bonds still, to require that Debt of them still, which was fully
paid, and did acknowledge himself fully satisfied? Men will abhor that Man
for an unjust oppressor; That having a poor Man bound to pay him a great Debt,
(utterly unable to pay any thing) if his Friend have paid him all the Debt to
the full, will notwithstanding, keep the poor Man's Bond, hold the poor Man
bound still, and require some, or what he lost, of the poor man still to be
paid of him, not able to pay any thing.

And how great is the dishonor, and injury unto Christ the Wise, Gracious and
Merciful Savior, Undertaker, and Redeemer of his Elect Believers to charge
him with regardlesnesse, carelessness and indiscretion to undertake to pay, and
pay the whole Debt to God for the poor Elect Believers, and not to make their
peace, not to take out their Bond, and have them acquitted of the Debt
satisfied, but to leave them still in Bond; The Debt still to be required of
them, not able to pay the least mite thereof? When as Christ our gracious
Undertaker says by his Apostle, He has put out the Handwriting of
Ordinances that was against us, He has taken it out of the way, and fastened
it upon His Coloss. 2. 14
Cross.

And whereas they say the penalty of Transgression is taken away by Christ, but
the Law and Bond remain still; Whereby the Elect Believers are still bound to
do the Righteousness of the Moral Law before God. That is (I take it)
ambition without Law, or Reason; For, (as the Apostle says) when there is no
Law, there is no Romans 5. 13
Sin; so when there is no penalty there is no Law, no penalty, no Law
binding, for it is the penalty that is the Bond of the Law; It is the penalty
that makes the binding law. No Man will take upon him to command without a
power to punish the Delinquent, and Transgression of his Commandment, much
less will the great and wise God do so, when as his power of penalty is gone.

If Christ have taken away the penalty for not doing the righteousness of the
Law from Believers, then Christ is the end of the Law, for Righteousness
before God to Believers, although the Law for righteousness before Men remain
still to Believers, in the Hand of the Mediator the Man Jesus Christ.

The Prophet David says, A thousand years in thy Sight, are as yesterdy when
it is past, and as a watch in the Night. Psalm. 90. 4.
FRom hence, and other like Scriptures I collect; That all times (howsoever the
same different to Men, past, present and future, as present to God, as
Eternal. And that all times (so accounted of Man diverse) are not only
present to God, but also, all Deeds and things in the World done, and being in
time diverse and different before Men, in Gods Sight, and to God we present,
ab eterno. For, if all times past present and future in Man's account we
present to God before the World; Then it must needs follow that all Deeds, and
things done, and being in times, by Men's account, were present with God, to
God, and before God ab Eterno, before the World. And also that the Will and
Decrees of God unchangeable were Acts together, of God, before the World. And
this further the said Prophet David confirms in diverse places, As, the Lord
in Heaven does whatsoever he pleases (says Psalm. 115. 3.
he) what he Pleases, and Wills, he does in present. Psalm. 135. 6.
And again, Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in Heaven, in Earth, in
the Sea, and all Deepes, when he pleased, he Willed and did it in present,
although not in manifestation to the creature, till appointed and fullness of
time.

And the Apostle says, As many as were Ordained to Eternal Acts 13. 48.
Life believed, which shows that Gods Ordination was of all, and unto all
things that he pleased to be after and before the World.

And also to confirm this, The Apostle Paul says, Those that he knew before,
them also he Predestined to be made like to the Image of his Son; And
whom he Predestinate them also he called, whom he called them also Romans 8.
29, 30
he Justified, whom he Justified, them also he Glorified, when he did
Predestinate them which he knew before, says the Apostle, he then called
them, justified them, and also Glorified them, in his own Sight, before
Himself, although not in manifestation to the Creatures until appointed and
fullness of Time. Which also the comfortable Words of the Apostle to the
Ephesians confirms; Blessed be GOD, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which has blessed us with all spiritual blessing in Heavenly things in Ephesians.
1. 3, 4, 5, 6.
Christ.

As he has chosen us in him, before the Foundations of the World, that we
should be Holy and without blame before him, in Love; who has predestinate us
to be adopted, through Jesus Christ, unto Himself, according to the good
pleasure of his Will, To the praise of the glory of his Grace, wherewith he
has made us, accepted in his Beloved.

The Apostle speaks, all the Acts of God to be in the time perfectly past;
not in the time imperfectly past, or to come, and that to be done before the
Foundations of the World. He has blessed us, He has chosen us in Christ.
He has predestinate us to be adopted through Christ. He has made us
accepted in his Beloved, and these, has also noted to be before the
Foundation of the World.

The Apostle (speaking of Jacob, and Esau says) Yer the Children were borne,
that is, before they were conceived Romans 9. 11.
by their Natural Parents, and when they had neither done Good, nor Evil,
(that is before Men) for both Jacob and Esau had done evil before God in Adam
(as the Apostle says) By the Offense of one the Fault came on all Men Romans 5.
18.
to condemnation, And Paul says of himself, Jacob, and all the Elect, we
were all by Nature (that is the corruption of Nature by the first
transgression) the children of wrath, and hatred as well as others. Ephesians. 2. 3.


And that (says the Apostle) the purpose of God might remain according to
Election, not by Works, but by him Romans 9. 13. Malac. 1. 2.
that calls; It is written, I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau.

God loved not Jacob before he was borne, for any works, or good that God did
see done of Jacob, but of purpose according to the good pleasure of his Will
manifested in his Election, and the rest.

And God (says he) hated Esau before he was borne (that is) left him still
the child of wrath as he was in the first Transgression.

To show that he is bound to none, That he has Mercy on whom he will, and
whom he will he hardneth, that is, Romans 9. 18
leaves him in his own hardness. And all those do show that Jacob, Esau,
Paul and the rest were in being before God, in Gods Sight before the World,
although not in the sight of Men, in being.

Whom God manifests in time to be in Christ, Loved, Elected, Aadopted,
Redeemed, Called, Justified, and Glorified.

Those were all before the Foundations of the World, before God, and in Gods
Sight, Loved, Elected, Adopted, Ordained to Eeternall Life, Called, Redeemed,
Justified and Glorified through Christ. The Lamb stain from the beginning
Rev. 13. 8.
of the World, unchangably.

Certainly those which God pleased to Love, and Elect to be adopted his
children, out of the company of the children of wrath before the World, were of
the company of the children of wrath in Gods Sight before the World; God
elected them then, that he pleased, out of that company, as Ephesians. 1. 4.
Therefore that company of the children of wrath, was then in Gods Sight.

The Scripture does no where say, that God would after Elect in the time of the
World, but says, he did then Elect in Christ, Paul and the rest before the
World, to be holy and without blame before him in Love, to be adopted Ephesians. 1.
4.
through Christ. And all this before the Foundations of the World, although not
yet to the Creature manifested.

Hence appear the blind Errors and false arguments of those which hold forth
that there is no justification before God of, or to any Man before Faith, which
is only Gods gracious Evidence and manifestation to Man of his Election in
Christ, and justification, and through Christ, and his glorious performances
imputed to his Elect, and certainly acted in Gods Sight, and account before the
Foundations of the World, as the Apostle defines Faith. Faith (says he) is
the ground of things hoped for. And the evidence, or Heb 11. 1.
manifestation of things that are not seen.

Again, Job says, God provideth for the Ravens, and Christ Job. 38. 41.
says, Two Sparrowes are not sold for a Farthing, and not one of them fall to
the ground without the Father (that is) the Fathers providence, yea, the hairs
of your Head are numbered, and Luke says, They are not forgotten of God, Luke
12. 6, 7.

All these and many more Scriptures show, not only all distinguished times by
Men, but also all deeds and things from the greatest to the least done, and
being in time diverse and different before Men, in Gods Sight, and to God, were
all present, ab eterno, and known certainly. And that the Decrees of God
unchangeable of all, were his acts together of all, before the World.

I know the holding forth, and meddling with Gods Foreknowledge, Eternal Will
and Decree, his Predestination, Ordination, Election, and the like have been,
and still is, of many, reputed and said, to be dangerous and useless to men.
And therefore (some have said) those of God and such like, are that Face, or
Fore parts of God, unto which God held his hand toward Moses, that he should
not see the same, Exodus 33. 2^.
but said that Moses should see only his back parts, or hinder parts.

But I take it, If God had held the same dangerous, or useless to men to be
preached, and held forth; He would not have inserted them in the holy
Scriptures, inspired from above by the holy Ghost, and commanded them (the
Foundation 2 Pet. 1. 21.
of the Gospel) to be preached to all Nations, as he did, Mark. 16. 15. For
are not Gods Foreknowledge, Love, Election in Christ, Predestination,
Ordination to Eternal Life, Adoption through Christ, justification by Grace,
his good Pleasure, Eternal Will, Decree, and Acts, with and before himself
unchangeable, the Foundation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. How should any Man
be built up in Jesus Christ, that knows not the Foundation, whereon he is
built?

And these are those back-parts, or hinder parts, of God, which are revealed of
God to Man, in holy Scriptures, that God said to Moses, he should see. And the
Secrets of God are the Face, and foreparts of God, not revealed of God, which
Moses might not see, nor any man pry into.

God said, by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many. Isa. 53.
11.


And Christ said, this is eternal Life that they might know thee to be the
only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have Joh. 17. 3.
sent.

And God said, my people are gone into captivity, or perish for want of
knowledge. Isa. 5. 13.


The Knowledge of God, and his Christ, is the evidence of justification and
Eternal Life to Men. And the want of the same knowledge, is the evidence of
reprobation and destruction, in the holy Scriptures account. Who then may
safely stop the Fountain of these lively Waters? The Philistians were blamed
for stopping Jacobs Well, much more are these Genesis 26. 15. 18.
stoppers blameable, they know not God, and his Christ, that knew him not in
all his Revelations.

Quest. How was Paul Elected in Christ and Adopted through Christ before the
World, when as Paul had then no being?

Answ. Paul was then in being before God, in Gods Sight, unto whom all things
(even being in the World, and in eternity) were present then, although Paul was
not then in being in the sight of Men.

A Catechistical Dialogue, Resolving Many subtle Questions, raised and made by
the Adversary for the deceiving of Gods Elect, to the Propagation of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ.
Quest. WHat is God?

Answ. God is a most pure Spirit, Invisible, Almighty, Eternal,
Incomprehensible, without Beginning in Himself, yet the Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the ending of all things and names, except sin.

Q. How is God further manifested in the holy Scripture?

A. To be one in substance, three in person, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost or
Spirit.

Q. How is the one God, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit?

A. He is Father as Beginner, Son as Worker, Holy Ghost, or Spirit, as Finisher
and Perfecter of all.

Q. Are the Knowledge of God, his will, his Purposes, Decrees, Predestination,
Election, Ordination, and Acts, eternal with himself in his own respect?

A. Yes: they are eternal with himself in his own respect; for all that is in
God, and of God, is inseparable from God: God ever knew that he knows, willed
that he wills, purposed that he purposes, decreed that he decrees,
predestined that he predestinateth, ordained that he ordains, acted and did
that he acts and does with Psa. 135 6
and before himself, howsoever and whenever the same things be manifested to
the Creature; otherwise God could not call himself, I am, and again, I am Alpha
and Omega: And again, it could not be said in the Testament, That God calls
things that are not (meaning in manifestation) as if they were in
manifestation: And that it Romans 4 17
is said of the Son, Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and for ever.

Q. Did God in his own Purpose and Decree make Man before the Heb. 13 8
World, and was Man made actually, in Gods sight, before Man was made in
manifestation to the Creatures?

A. Yes, that must needs be so: for otherwise the acts which are of God should
not be eternal with himself in Gods respect, but separable from God; his Will
and Decree should not be his act: and it would not have been said, that God
calls things that are not, as if they were: otherwise all things and times
should not be present with God, to whom there is nothing past, nor future, as
is to man.

Q. Did God make his Covenant of Works, with Man, before the world?

A. Yea; Gods Will, Purpose, and Decree, is his act with himself in his own
sight.

Q. How could Man close and consent to the Covenant of Works, with God, b fore
the World, when as Man was not created and made in manifestation to any
creature?

A. It was just and righteous that Adam did close with God in the Covenant of
Works, after his creation and making in manifestation: And the wisdom and
righteousness, whereby and wherein he did close with God then in the Covenant,
was the same wisdom and righteousness of God which were eternal with God:
Therefore wherein Adam did close with God after his Creation in the Covenant of
Works, so (he being actually in Gods sight before the world) did close with God
before the world in the decree and act of this Covenant made in Gods sight with
man before the world.

Q. Did God give Adam power and free will, in his own sight before the world,
as he had when he was made in manifestation, to keep the Covenant for himself
and his posterity, and live ever; or to break the same if he would, and dye
eternally, as the children of wrath?

A. Yes: Gods Will, Decrees and Acts are eternal with himself unalterable; and
so the same power and free will which Adam had in manifestation given him, he
had before the world in the sight of God.

Q. Was Adam and all Mankind in him dead before the World, and become the
children of wrath for breaking the Covenant in Gods sight before the world?

A. Yes; that must needs be so in Gods sight: for Paul says of himself, and
the rest of Gods Elect; God has chosen us in Christ Ephesians. 1 4
before the world, to be holy and without blame before him in love, etc. God
could not have chosen Paul, and the rest of his Elect in Christ, before the
world, to be his holy and blameless children adopted through Christ, but they
must be then chosen out of the general company of the children of wrath (in
Gods sight then) before the world; which indeed all Mankind was then in Gods
sight, before his mercy, love and free grace in choosing in his Christ whom he
pleased, as they were after the Creation and Fall in appearance to the
creature: And from hence it is that the Apostle says, We were all the children
of wrath, as well as others. Ephesians. 2. 3


Q. Was Christ the Redeemer of Mankind in Gods sight before the breach and
fall of Man in manifestation, and before the world?

A. Yes: that he was; otherwise Paul would not have said, God has chosen us in
Christ before the world.

Q. Why did God choose those he pleased in Christ before the world?

A. Because it was his mercy, love, goodness, wisdom and counsel, for them he
pleased of the dead children of wrath, that the Christ should undertake to
perform all the Will of God, to the satisfaction of Justice, for those chosen
of God in Christ fully, in present before God, and in future for manifestation
to the creature, That so the Elect in Christ should have restored in Christ all
lost in Adams transgression that God endowed Mankind withal before himself,
or in manifestation to the creature, as life eternal in Christ, holiness and
righteousness in Christ, power and honor in Christ, etc. For as the first Adam
had all these in him, for all mankind in him, to have been manifested to them
and in them in the fullness of time, if the first Adam had stood in his
integrity: So Christ, the last Adam, has all in himself, for all the chosen of
God in him, Eternal life, holiness, righteousness, power, honor, and glory,
etc. to be manifested to them and in them in the fullness of time.

And from hence the Apostle says, God has Elected us in Christ Ephe. 1. 4 and
2. 5 Act. 17 28 2 Timothy 3. 12 Ephesians. 2. 6
before the World, to be holy and without blame before him in love: And we are
quckenod in Christ: And we live in Christ, and we are raised up and sit
together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.

Q. Are those which are chosen of God in Christ before the world, to be holy
and without blame before him in love, ever after they were so chosen holy and
without blame before God in love?

A. Yes, that must needs be so; otherwise they should not be that which God did
choose them unto in Christ: otherwise Christ should fail in his undertaking to
do the Will of God for the Elect in him: otherwise some things might be laid to
the charge of Gods chosen, which the Apostle says shall not be. Romans 8. 33


Object. Paul (being chosen of God in Christ before the world) was a persecuter
of the Church of Christ after he was chosen: Was Paul holy and without balm
before God then, when he was a persecuter of the Church of Christ?

A. It was the flesh and corruption in Paul, not Paul as he was Elected in
Christ: he did it in ignorance (as he said,) It was not I (says Acts 3. 17 1 Timothy 1. 13
he) that did it, but sin that dwells in me: This is the state of the best of
Gods chosen ones, They sin continually in themselves, they are holy and without
blame, and righteous before God in Christ evermore. Romans 7. 14 15, 18, 19


Q. If the Elect in Christ sin continually in themselves in their own
performances, then they cannot please God in any thing they do; none of their
own performances can be good and righteous in the sight of God?

A. No, they cannot please God by their own performances; they are not good and
righteous before God: for the Prophet Isaiah says of himself, and the best
men, We are all as an unclean thing, all our righteousness is as filthy rags:
And the Apostle Paul (alleging David for a witness) says, There is none
righteous, no not one; there is none that does good, no not one: And again,
They that are in the Romans 3. 10 11, 12 Romans 8. 8
flesh cannot please God; (that is, they which are in the state of corruption
and death,) as all the chosen of God are yet, until that which is corruptible
has put on incorruption, and that which is mortal has put on immortality:
Then indeed shall be brought to pass the saying 1 Cor. 15 53. 54 55
that is written, Death is swallowed up into victory, (says the Apostle.)

Obj. The Apostle says to the Elect Believers, You are not in the flesh, but
in the spirit; therefore you may and do please God, although Romans 8. 9
they which are in the flesh cannot please God.

A. Those which the Apostle says there, to be in the Spirit of Christ, are the
same which are said to be the chosen of God in Christ Ephesians. 1. 4 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13
before the world, to be holy and without blame before God in Christ, not in
themselves, their corrupt soul and body, and in their own performances: So
indeed they please God in Christ, and in his performances imputed to them of
grace, not in their own performances which are sinful always. Enoch was said to
please God, it was in Christ, not in himself, but by the imputation of Christ's
righteous performances. Heb 1. 11


Q. Do not the chosen people of God displease God, anger God, and stir up Gods
wrath against them for their sin and transgression?

A. No: for then it could not be, that after they are chosen of God in Christ,
they are holy and without blame before God for ever in love; God cannot be
displeased, angry, and in wrath with those that are ever holy and without blame
before him in love, that he ever loves: Love (says the Apostle) covers the
multitude of sins.

Q. How comes that to pass, when as all sin is lothsom to God, and death unto
men? The wages of sin is death (says the Apostle.) Romans 6 23


A. It comes to pass by Christ's gracious undertaking with God for them in the
Covenant of grace, made between God and his Christ in their behalf, wherein
Christ did undertake to perform the Justice of the whole Will and Covenant of
God, made with man, and broken by man, before God, for those chosen of God in
him, for the recovery of all lost to them: And Christ therefore said, Lo I come
Heb. 10. 9
to do thy Will, O God; and did in present perform all undertaken in Gods sight
before the world to Gods satisfaction; and therefore is Isai. 53 11. Heb. 13 8
said, The Lamb slain from the beginning of the world: And he has performed
all upon the Cross, in and for manifestation to the creature, He took all the
infirmities of the chosen of God upon him; He bare the sins of many, says the
Prophet: And again, God laid the iniquity of us all upon him: and he appeared
to take away sin Isa. 53. 4 6 1 John 3 5
and the blood of Jesus Christ purges all sin, (says the Apostle:) Who shall
lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? it is God that Rom 8. 33
justifies, (says the other Apostle:) and hereupon (it is said) God sees
none iniquity in Jacob, nor sees transgression in Israel (being Numb. 23. 25
Gods chosen:) God looks upon his chosen ones only in Christ, not in
themselves: So the sin and transgression of Gods chosen does not displease and
anger God, or stir up Gods wrath against them, nor can do injustice, because
Christ has undertaken Gods satisfaction of all for them; and has paid and
satisfied God for all their sin in Gods sight, and has endured and undergone
the anger and wrath of God for all. And a debt being paid fully, cannot in
justice be required again to be paid.

Q. Was not the Covenant of Grace made of God with man, as the Covenant of
Works was made of God with man?

A. No; for the Covenant of Works was made with man when man had full power and
free will to perform all therein: but the Covenant of grace needed not, nor had
place, till man had lost all the integrity of power and free will: and having
neither power nor free will, good, nor to goodness, he was in far worse case to
perform the righteous condition on man's part, then when he had power, and yet
failed: It was Christ, the gracious undertaker with God, that had power, and
was only able to perform the condition, to the satisfaction of Justice; he
received the promise for Gods chosen, and performed the condition for Gods
chosen in himself, and in them, by his Spirit sen^ unto them, for their
comfort, witness, and evidence.

Obj. The Apostle says, The Promise was made to Ab aham and to his seed;
therefore the promise was made to man. Gal. 3. 16


A. The meaning is, It was repeated, opened, and manifested to Abraham, as it
was to Adam, and the rest: but the Promise was made to Christ, which (as he
said) was, before Abraham was. And the same Apostle says, It was made to the
seed, speaking of one, that Ibid.
is Christ: Abraham was a corrupt man, as other of the Elect are, carnal, s^ld
under sin, as Paul in his best estate said he was; therefore not able to
perform the righteous condition. Romans 7. 14


Obj. If Christ has so undertaken with God, and performed to God, that God is
not displeased and angry with the sin of Gods chosen; why then does God and is
God said to correct, chastise, afflict, and punish them for their sin, if he
were not displeased with them for their sin?

A. God does not correct, chastise, afflict, or punish sin in the Elect, as an
angry revenger of the fact, not as one that is displeased and in wrath; for the
Apostle says, He loves every one of them that he corrects: It is in love
therefore, not in wrath, not for sin done, Heb. 12 6, 7
but either to keep them from sinning, or to take them away from sin, which in
it self is base and naught, even in the sight of the creature.

Obj. If the chosen of God in Christ do sin, and yet never displease and anger
God by their sinning; if God be not displeased by their sin, they may sin
without fear?

A. No, that cannot be so; for ChrisT has undertaken in the Covenant of Grace,
That he will be their God, and that they shall be his people; That he will
never turn away from them, to do them Jer. 32. 38 40
good; and that he will put such a fear into their hearts, that they shall
never depart from him: Christ has promised to put his fear into their hearts,
that they shall not sin without fear, but have his fear in their hearts, in
sinning, and of sinning: and whilst they have his fear in their hearts, they
never depart from Christ into Gods displeasure.

Q. It seems then, that the Elect of God themselves can do nothing that
pleases God, nor do any thing that displeases God; Is this so?

A. It is certain God is only pleased in Christ's doings and performances for
man, and in man; not in man's doings and performances, which are always corrupt,
and leavened with sin: and Christ's undergoing the wrath of God for their sin,
has already satisfied God, and stopped Gods displeasure and wrath to their
sins. Indeed, in his Justice without Christ, God is said in the Scriptures to
be angry and displeased with sin; but if God be angry and displeased still,
where Christ has satisfied and appeased, who shall satisfy and appease? If
God be angry still, when Christ has finished his satisfaction, who shall
satisfy afterward?

Obj. The Apostle says, That the Ethnicks, which have no evidence, but of the
children of wrath, do know the law or righteousness Romans 1. 31
of God, how that they which commit such things as are contrary, are worthy of
death, and their thoughts or consciences are accusing or excusing one another;
and this they have by the corrupt light of Romans 2. 14 15
Nature left them: Therefore the Ethnicks know when their conscience accuses
them, that they displease God in their performances; and when their conscience
excuse them, that they please God in their performances.

A. It is certain, the Ethnicks and all natural men know the Law of God, yea
that which is to be known of God (as the Apostle says) enough to charge their
consciences with good and evil, with life and death, in their performances. And
although their accusing conscience do manifest to them, that they displease
God, and are worthy of death for committing such things; yet their excusing
conscience cannot assure them, that they please God by any of their
performances: For the Apostle says, Although I know nothing by my self, 1 Cor
4. 4.
yet I am not there by justified; I have no assurance that thereby I please
God, although my conscience excuse me.

Q. Was not the Law written in Tables of stone by Christ, and given after by
Moses to the Church of Israel, the chosen people of God, then in visibility?
the same Law that was given of God to man, when man had power to perform the
same before his Fall?

Ans. It was the same partly in matter and wholly in form of holiness and
righteousness, but not the same in condition and circumstance. For first, The
Law given to Adam was by God as the Creator, when man had power in himself to
have performed the full righteousness of the same before God and man; but Moses
Law, so called, was given, by God the Undertaker and Redeemer of Gods chosen,
to them, when they had no power to perform the righteousness of this Law before
God, nor of that Law.

Secondly, That Law was, That man should do it and live evermore, and should
dye eternally if he did it not; but this Law is, That man Genesis 3. 3. Luke 10. 18
shall have temporal reward, long life upon earth, and the like, if he does it,
and shall have temporal death and punishment if he does it not, or does the
contrary to it; so held forth in the whole discourse of this Law written.

Thirdly, In that Law Justice had only place, If thou do this thou shall
live, If thou do not this thou shall dye; but in this Law of Moses, faith in
Christ, self-denial, prayer and repentance have place; and upon faith in
Christ, self-denial, prayer and repentance, mercy and forgiveness have place:
but neither faith in Christ, self-denial, prayer, repentance, mercy, nor
forgiveness have place in that Law only of Justice made and given of God to man
in power; and if prayer, repentance, mercy and forgiveness had had place in
that Law, no doubt but the good God would of Justice have had patience for
Adams repentance; for Adam in time might have repented, had mercy, and
forgiveness, and lived eternally, and his posterity, and so there should have
been no need of a Christ, a Savior and Redeemer of man.

Fourthly, The Preface to the Decalogue, where it is said, God spoke these
words and said, I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt, and out of the house of bondage, etc. do show plainly, the giver of this
Law was our God, and Christ the Undertaker, Redeemer, Savior, and Deliverer of
Gods chosen people in grace, and that the same was given in grace for the
Government of his Church and people, for worship to God before men, for
righteousness, society and safety among themselves.

Fifthly, That Law was given to Adam requiring performance of the righteousness
thereof before God and before men; but this Law was given requiring performance
of the righteousness thereof only before men: for if this Christ's Law were for
performing of righteousness before God, as Adams Law was, with condition of
everlasting death for breaking of the same, then sin would have the dominion,
then all the chosen of God should be under the Law of death, and not under the
grace of life, because no man can keep this Law in righteousness before God in
the least.

Q. Have Gods Elect power to perform the righteousness of this Law of Christ
before men?

A. This Law of Christ is outward in appearance to men, and man sees but
according to the outward appearance; and this Law is inward 1 Samuel 16. 7 Romans
7. 14
and spiritual, as the Apostle says, the Law is spiritual. Now as this Law is
outward in appearance to man, man has power to perform the righteousness
thereof before men: for although the power of man be so corrupted that he can
perform no righteousness before God, yet he may perform the righteousness of
the Law in appearance before men: So Christ said, the Pharisees did perform the
outward righteousness of this Law before men: and Herod did many things in the
righteousness of this Law as he was taught of John Baptist: and Paul called his
performance of the righteousness of this Law his own righteousness, Phi. 3. 8, 9
which he desired he might not be found in, but counted the same loss and dung
in comparison of the righteousness which is of Christ: David said, I will run
the way of thy Commandments; and Ps. 119. 32
Zachary and Elizabeth are said to have walked in the Commandments of the Lord
without reproof of men. So we see that men may Luke 1. 6.
perform the righteousness of this Law of Christ before men in appearance to
men, yea hypocrites, as the Pharisees and Herod, much rather the chosen people
of God, which have the work of the Spirit thereto in their souls and hearts. If
man had had no power to perform the righteousness of this Law before men, it
had not been love nor justice in Christ to have charged Gods chosen people to
perform this Law upon pain. There is no just and charitable man that will lay a
burden upon his beast that he knows he cannot bear.

Q. But can the Elect of God perform this Law of Christ as it is spiritual?

A. No, that cannot be; for Paul said, The Law is spiritual, but I am carnal,
sold under sin and transgression, meaning of the Law as it is spiritual.

Q. How is this Law of Christ given to Gods chosen performed of them, which
cannot perform the same themselves as it is spiritual?

A. Christ their Undertaker and Giver of this Law as it is spiritual does
perform the same in them by his Spirit promised and sent unto them; and this is
the special cause of the sending and giving of the Holy Spirit to Gods chosen
people to act the same in them, and thereby to evidence and witness to them
that they are Gods chosen in Christ, and his adopted children through Christ;
and that Christ's performances in himself and in them are all imputed to them,
and made theirs by his grace of imputation; therefore Austin said, Do, Lord,
that which thou command, and command what thou will.

Q. Does not man's performance of this Law as it is outward in righteousness
before men please God, and justisie the performers thereof before God?

A. No, for then they that show unto men that they do perform the duties of
this Law, as that they believe, love, pray, give thanks, repent, show mercy,
and forgive, etc. should all please God, and be justified before God; then the
Scribes and Pharisees, and other like hypocrites, should have pleased God, and
been justified before God, and Judas himself should be justified before God;
for although Judas did wickedly, yet it is written, that Judas repented himself
before men to give satisfaction to men for his repentance, therefore it is
written, he Mat. 27. 3
repented; but this outward performance did not justify any of these before
God, nor please God.

Q. Does not the performance of this Law (as it is inward and spiritual) made
by the Spirit of Christ in man, called therefore spiritual gifts, spiritual
faith, spiritual love, spiritual repentance, etc. 1 Cor. 14. 1, 12.
justify Gods chosen people before God?

A. No, that cannot be: for although the performance of the Spirit it self be
righteous in the sight of God, yet this performance being made with the
instrument of corrupt man, his corrupt heart, soul, or members, the same cannot
be pure, as coming through corrupt man, in the sight of God, (as pure water
coming from a pure fountain through a defiled conduit or channel cannot be pure
(although serviceable someway) in the end:) To this the Apostle says, By the
works of the Law shall no flesh be justified: He does not say, by man's own
works of the Law, or by the outward works of the Law, but by the works of the
Law, whatsoever they be, outward or inward: for indeed this Law was not given
to justify men before God, by the performance thereof, but for the government
of Christ's Church upon Earth, and by the spiritual performance thereof to
evidence and witness to Gods chosen people, that they are the children of God;
for if they find in themselves the faithful performance thereof in singleness
of heart, they may thereby know, that they have received the Spirit of
Adoption, and the same Spirit does witness with their souls that they are the
children of God, says the Apostle. Romans 8. 16


Q. We see that Christ in this his Law commands his people to perform the Law
as it is spiritual, to do the inward and spiritual work of his Law; he
requires truth in the inward parts, obedience and service in singleness of
heart, love without dissimulation, prayer according to the will of God,
repentance from the bottom of the heart, which man himself, being carnal, sold
under sin and transgression, as Paul was in his best estate, although chosen of
God, cannot perform: Why does Christ command the chosen of God to do the same
that he knows they cannot do, and for the performance of which in them he
promises, sends and gives his holy Spirit to them (as he pleases?)

A. Christ's giving this his Command is like his sending of John Baptist; John
Baptist was sent to prepare the way of Christ, not to do the work of Christ: So
the Commandment is given to prepare the way of the Spirit, not to do the work
of the Spirit: John Baptist was sent for the bringing down of every mountain,
hill, Luke 3 4, 5
for humbling of the proud carnal man of Gods people; and this Command was
given of Christ to them to humble the flesh which is contrary to the Spirit,
and in itself resists always, that so the Gal. 5. 17
corrupt heart and members may be prepared and fitted instruments of the Spirit
to the spiritual work: And to this purpose is the word of the Apostle, Give or
yield your members weapons or instruments Romans 6. 13 and 19.
of righteousness unto God, unto Gods holy Spirit, that the Spirit may do the
spiritual work in you.

Q. Has the Command of Christ power to humble, fit and prepare the carnal man
of Gods chosen to the way and instrumental service of the Spirit in the
spiritual work?

A. Yea, that it has, for his Word is mighty in operation (as the Heb. 4 12
Psa. 148. 5
Apostle says:) He commanded, and all things were created, said David: The
power of Christ's Command is not shortened where it intends.

Q. Then the preaching and hearing of the whole Law of Christ is useful to Gods
chosen people?

A. Yea, that it is, if it be preached and heard lawfully; for the Apostle
says, The Law is good if we use it lawfully. The preaching 1 Timothy 1. 8
and hearing of the Law (as it is outward and spiritual) i^ good if the
preaching and hearing thereof be to the preparing of the way to the Spirit to
do the spiritual work of the Command of Christ the Undertaker, that Christ may
have all the honor, praise and glory of the work: But for man to preach and
hold forth the Law and Command of Christ, that man himself can and must do the
spiritual work which Christ only can do to please God, to be in acceptance with
God to obtain Gods goodness, as to believe, and by his believing to be
justified, by his obedience, and endeavoring to do duties to please God, and to
be accepted with God, by and for his repentance to have mercy and forgiveness,
and recovery of life, and all lost by sin; this is Robbery and Idolatry: It is
Robbery, because they take away that which is only Christ's to themselves, to do
the spiritual work, to please God, to make acceptance with God, to obtain Gods
goodness by their performance, and mercy and forgiveness by their repentance.
And it is Idolatry, because they they praise, set up, and esteem highly of
their own work, their believing, or faith, their prayers, their doing of
duties, and the like, who although they thank God for it, as the Pharisee did,
yet they listen after their own praise and reputation for the same, despising
others. He that climbeth up to the sheepfold another way then by me John 10. 2
is a Thief and a Robber (says Christ.) He that sacrifices to his own nets is
an Idolater. Hab. 1. 16


Q. Was this Law of Christ written in tables of stone, and given in grace to
his Church of Israel the chosen people of God for the Government of that his
Church given before that to his Church he had upon Earth the chosen people of
God, as to his Church in Adams family, in Noah's family, Abraham's, Lots, and the
rest, noted in the Scriptures to be Gods chosen people?

A. Yes, it was given of Christ to his Church upon Earth in all generations,
although not so gloriously as when it was written of him to them in tables of
stone, but it was written in their hearts by Christ, or otherwise (as he
pleased,) for the Government of his Church was ever upon his shoulders, and he
(as a King) governed not without a Law: And this his Law and Government among
Isal. 9. 6.
them appears plainly in that they brought offerings to the Lord, as Abel,
the best of his flock, and for that it is said, Noah and Lot preached
righteousness, repentance, mercy and forgiveness upon repentance, in that it is
said, Abraham taught his family.

Q. Had not the Gentiles which were not Gods chosen people this Law of Christ
written in their hearts, which he writ in tables of stone to his Church of
Israel? for the Apostle says, Although they had not the Law written in tables
of stone, yet they did by nature the things contained therein before men
(although not all things so) showing the effect of the Law written in their
hearts. Romans 2. 14, 15.


A. The Law and righteousness of the Law of Works, made of God to man in power,
is corruptly remaining in the hearts of the Gentiles (being not Gods chosen)
which is partly in this Law of Christ given to his Church of Gods chosen in
grace; but as it is the Law of Christ in grace, it is not written in the hearts
of the Gentiles: Therefore David said, Neither have the Heathen knowledge of his
Ps ^47 ^0
Laws: His Law or Commandment of Faith in Christ, of Self-denial, of
Repentance, unto mercy and forgiveness, and of mercy and forgiveness one to
another upon Repentance, was not written in their hearts.

Q. Do all the chosen people of God (having corrupt reason, understanding, and
will, left them, of doing the Law of Christ, as it is outward in appearance to
men) perform the same in righteousness before men, in the power that they have
left?

A. No: For, first, we see recorded in holy Scripture, One to have gone beyond
another therein. Secondly, We see recorded in holy Scripture, The best in
appearance, of Gods chosen ones, to have transgressed, and committed the
contrary to that holy Law, before men; much more (we must think) omitted the
performance thereof in righteousness before men: Sometimes we read of Noah's
drunkenness, of Lots drunkenness and incest, of Abraham's teaching his wife
Sarah to dissemble, to call her self his sister, not his wife; of Jacobs
dissembling with his blind father Isaac, saying, that he was Esau; the
Patriarchs transgression; Aarons, and Moses, and David's transgression; Solomon's
closing with Idolaters; Ezechia's, Josia's, Manasses transgression; yea Peter's
lying, swearing, and forswearing; all contrary to the Law of Christ in
appearance before men: and what can we think of our own, and the rest? the
encumbrances, ignorance, blindness, and frailties of the flesh? The tempters
and temptations to the chosen of God are such, and so many, that the
performance of this holy Law of Christ, as it is outward in appearance before
men, has been, and is in all, not without transgression, (as the Apostle
says) in many things we offend all. James 3. 2


Q. What is the danger of this transgression of Gods chosen people?

A. Temporal proportionable punishment before men, an eye for an eye, tooth for
tooth, breach for breach, measure for measure; These David called troubles and
punishments; these the Apostles called afflictions, corrections, and
chastisements.

Q. Is there no way provided of Christ for Gods chosen people (having so
transgressed this his Law) to escape the proportionable punishment?

A. Yes; in great grace he has provided and granted Repentance to be their
refuge for mercy and forgiveness, before him their Head, King, and Magistrate
or Governor, and before one another: And therefore he says, At what time
soever a sinner repent from the bottom of his heart, he will put all his
wickedness out of his remembrance: Ezekiel. 18
And again, If thy brother sin against thee seven times, yea seventy times
seven times, and says, It repents me, forgive him. Mat. 18, 21, 22


Q. Is there no difference of the outward performance of this Law of Christ in
Gods chosen people, and in Hypocrites, in appearance to men?

A. Yes, there is much difference in appearance to men: For, first, the chosen
of God have the work of the Spirit in their souls and hearts (when it pleases
the Lord Jesus Christ) sanctifying and sweetening the outward performance with
humbleness, meekness, and otherwise, in appearance to men.

Secondly, They do it simply in submission and obedience to the command,
accounting the same good and fit to be ^one before men, without the command
pressed.

Thirdly, They do not think that the doing of the work of this Command of
Christ before men reaches unto God, to please God, to move and pacify God; as
David said, My well-doing extends not to thee, O Lord; but to the Saints upon
the earth; for their good and profit, that they seeing the same, may glorify
their Father in Heaven Psalm. 16. 3
before men.

Fourthly, They do it not for their own profit, glory and reputation among men,
as a merit of their worl. in their own esteem; but they wait and rest upon the
promise of the reward in his Law made to the conscionable performers thereof,
in the gracious judgment of Jesus Christ, before men; giving Christ, the
Commander and Lawgiver, King and Governor of his Church, the honor of all their
performance.

But the performance of hypocrites, first, have not the face of the sanctifying
and sweetening Spirit in humbleness and meekness, selfdenyal, and otherwise:
for although the Pharisee went up into the Temple to pray, yet his performance
had the face of pride and selfconceit, not of true humbleness and self-denial.

Secondly, They do it, but not simply in submission to the Command, as good and
worthy to be done without the former Command; but they do it, being commanded,
for company, formality, and avoiding of penalty and other danger.

Thirdly, Hypocrites do the work of the Command often zealously, herein
thinking in their hearts, that their performances thereof reach unto God, to
please God, to pacify and move God thereby to do them and others good, (which
is only the work of Christ to Gods chosen ones) wherein they would convey the
honor of Christ to their performances.

Fourthly, Hypocrites are strict and precise in this, as it is outward, (none
going beyond the^^ therein,) not for the honor of Christ the Lawgiver, but for
their own honor and reputation among men; for their own ends; for their own
gain, profit, and advantages; seeking the same often unjustly, to the damage of
one, for the benefit of another, to their own praise and glory among men.

Q. May not Gods chosen people neglect and omit the outward performance of this
Law of Christ before men?

A. No; for Christ has given it to them in grace, and in his wisdom and
goodness, thereby to govern his Church and people upon Earth, for his own
worship, honor, and their good, peace, comfort, society, and safety; the which
whosoever does neglect, omit, and despise, does manifest himself to be none of
Gods chosen people, none of the chosen of Christ. Whosoever professes himself
to be a subject to an earthly King or Governor, and despises to submit, in
performance, to his wholesome Laws and Ordinances, dissembleth, and is in truth
no Subject to the King or Governor: So it is with him that professes himself
to be a Christian, if he refuses and despises to submit, in performance, to
the most wholesome Laws of Jesus Christ, for the Government of his Church upon
Earth before men, he is no Christian, but an Hypocrite.

Q. We find it clear in the holy Scripture, that God anointed, called, and
sent before himself his Son Jesus Christ to three Offices, for the government
of his Church upon Earth, of a King, a Priest, and a Prophet; and he did
execute the same Offices by himself in manifestation, being upon Earth, in his
Church; and has ever, and will execute the same by his instruments upon Earth:
for the government Isai. 9. 6
is ever upon his shoulders; He is a Priest for ever. And we find in his
visible Church, he called and sent Moses his Minister and Instrument Exodus 24.
1, 9
before men, and appointed him to call and send Aaron and his sons and others
before men; and he called and sent Samuel, and he appointed Samuel to call and
send Saul and David, Elijah to call Elisha in his room; and so (as it pleased
the Lord) it appeared in the rest of the Instrumen^s of his Offices: And having
called and sent his Apostles himself, (as the Apostle says) He gave this to
some, to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Ephesians
4. 11
Teachers; for the gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, and for the edifying of the body of Christ: And says, As the Father
sent me, so send I you: As the Father sent me to call Joh. 20 21
you and send you, so send I you to call and send others; and this was not for
a time, in these his Offices of continuance, but for ever upon Earth, so long
as his Church is upon Earth. So the Apostles called and sent Timothy and Titus
and others, and advised them to call and 1 Timothy 3. 2 etc. Tit. 1 5, etc.
send others, not rashly, but advisedly: And so has been the continued calling
and sending of Pastors and Teachers in the Churches of Christ upon Earth ever
sithence. Now what is to be thought of those which contemn and despise this
Ordinance of God and his Christ, which despise his Ordinance of calling and
sending his instruments, called and sent by such his Ministers and instruments
as were so called and sent for the government of his Church upon Earth; which
despise such Pastors and Ministers so called and sent, their Ministry of the
Word and Sacraments, their long teaching and feeding of Gods people with his
Law for government, and his Gospel for everlasting comfort, by the performance
of Jesus Christ for them? And which call and send themselves, or are called and
sent by others, which were not called or sent by such as were called and sent,
according to Christ's Ordinance, to feed and teach Gods people by his Law and
Gospel, (as they profess?)

A. I take it, the sentence of these is plainly held forth and denounced by
Christ himself, and his Apostles; and of Moses long before that, and the
Prophets: The Apostle says, He that despises Moses Law dies without mercy,
under two or three witnesses; and Heb. 10 28, 29
of how much sorer punishment shall he be worthy, which trampleth under foot
the Son of God, and counts the blood of the Testament an unholy thing, and
does despite to the Spirit of Grace.

And to those that call themselves, or are called by others, not called
according to Christ's Ordinance, Christ says, He that climbeth up to the
sheepfold another way, is a thief and a robber. Joh. 10. 1


And Moses tells us, that Korah, Dathan, and Abiram with great congregations
which they had gathered against him and Aaron, the called and sent of Christ,
for his Ministers and Instruments to execute his Offices (as he pleased) in his
Church; but especially against Aaron, which was called and sent by Moses
according to the Lords appointment and ordinance; saying, that they and all the
congregation were holy, that the Lord Christ by his Spirit was amongst them
all; and therefore they took too much upon them, to be special and only
Ministers and Instruments of Christ in those his Offices, That they and the
rest had holiness and calling by the Spirit of Christ to execute especially the
Office of Aaron, as well and fully as he: upon whom ^oon after this judgment
fell; The Earth opened and swallowed up Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, with all
their families, and all Numb. 16 32
the men that were with Korah, and all their goods.

No man (says the Apostle) takes this honor upon him, but he Heb. 5. 4
that is called as Aaron was: And again, How shall they preach except they be
sent? Certain, the Apostle means, sent according to Ro^ 10, 15
the Ordinance of Christ.

And the Prophet, speaking of them that held forth themselves to speak great
things by the Revelation of the Spirit, and of the people that did adhere unto
such, advises, to go to the Law and the Testimony, Isai. 8. 16 19. 2^
for trial of such; If ^saith he) they speak not according to this Word, it is
because they have no light in them: If they speak without such calling as is
according to this word of th Law, and Testimonies approved, and if they speak
not as is approved in the Law and Testimony, it is because there is no light in
them; they are false Prophets.

Obj. I hear some say. Bishops and Presbyters which were called, called many
lewd persons ungifted to be Teachers and Ministers.

A. Jesus Christ called ^udas to be an Apostle, a Teacher and Minister, which
was as evil as any man, therefore it is possible that those which are called
may call lewd and un^ifred persons; this does not take away the Ordinance of
Christ's calling, neither did.

Q. Does that Law of Christ, first manifested and exbounded by Moses as Christ
appointed to Gods chosen people the visible Church of Israel, continue in force
to all the visible Churches of Christ in the World, for the Government of
Christ's Universal Church in every particular Nation?

A. In Moses exposition of that Law by Christ's appointment to that Church,
there were many Sacrifices, Ceremonies and Figures constituted, which had
relation unto Christ to come in the flesh, and to perform the work of his
coming before men, and thereupon many Judgments to that Nation peculiar, which
(as they had relation to Christ's coming, and performances, and to that Nation
peculiar) are ended, and the Law touching them: And that is one respect that
the Apostle has, where he says, Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness to all Believers.

But the moral and equity of all that Law of Christ, as it is fitting to
Christ's Church of Gods chosen people in all Nations, is remaining for the
Government of his Church upon Earth for worship to God, for peace, society,
comfort and safety to the same; so held forth by Christ and his Apostles, with
some alterations in way of the Government, in respect of those which were then
in relation of Christ to come, and now of Christ come, and the gracious
manifestation thereof by the more glorious Gospel of Salvation to the Elect
Believers, by the performances of Jesus Christ, fully finished in the sight of
men and Angels.

Certainly none of Christ's Church in any Nation decline the moral and equity of
this Christ's Law, so gloriously established by Christ himself, by Instrumental
Headship, Governors, Government, Sacraments, Ministers, Ministry, and
Maintenance; and for that the Ministry of the moral and equity of this Law of
Christ is now more honorable in respect of the Ministration of the gloriously
shining Gospel therewith, which (as the Apostle says) exceeds the
ministration of the Law in glory; but such as are hypocrites, 2 Cor. 3. 8, 9.
professing themselves to be of his Church Subjects, and the chosen people of
God, and are not in truth and appearance; and there are too many of these now.

Obj. Some of them object, affirming, That every man that will (having Corahs
audatious spirit) may be a Minister of the Law and the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
although he be not called and sent by such as were called and sent according to
Christ's Ordinance, and although the Apostle says, No man takes this honor
upon him but such as are called of God, as Aaron was: And again says, They
Heb. 5. 4. Jude 11.
shall perish in the gainsaying of Corah: As Corah p^rished which gain said
this Ordinance of Christ, so shall they perish.

And some of these gain sayers object and say, There need no called Ministers
at all in the Church of Christ, as Corah, Dathan and Abiram said, for that all
the Congregation is holy; and they confirm this with the Scripture of Luke,
where he cites the Prophecy Acts 1. 17.
(...) ^oel in the Prophets mind, not in words altogether; And it Joel (...).
28.
shall be in the last days (says God, (...) will pour out of my Spirit upon
all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, and your young men
shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams: and on my servants, and
on my hand-maidens, I will pour out of my Spirit in those days, and they shall
prophecy, etc. Therefore, say they, after Christ's coming in the flesh, after
his ascension, and after his promise of the coming of his comforting Spirit in
abundance unto and upon his Church and people, to prophecy in these last days,
there is no need of Called Ministers; for all the congregation is holy, all can
and shall prophecy.

A. I wish these did well consider of the Scripture of the Apostles writing of
the last days (which says,) Woe be to them, for they have follow^d the way of
Cain, and are cast away by the deceit of Balaam's (the false Prophets) wages,
and perish in the gain saying of Corah: Jude 11.
I warrant you there are no false Prophets but look for wages: Cain, Balaam,
and Corah, looked upon their gain and honor, although without the ordinance of
Christ. The gainsaying of Corah is still in the last days destruction to such
gainsayers of the Ordinance of Christ. The Apostles do not contradict the
Apostles speaking all by the same spirit: The Prophet and Apostle indeed says,
God will pour out of his Spirit upon all of his Church, all shall prophecy;
that is, all shall consent unto the prophecy by the work of the Spirit in them,
which are chosen of God in Christ, as Christ pleases: But the meaning of the
Apostle is not, that all men and women shall prophecy, minister, teach and feed
the people in the Church and Congregation in public: The Apostle says, Every
woman that prays or prophecyeth bare-headed, 1 Cor. 11. 5
dishonoreth her head: The Apostle says, a woman prays and prophecyeth; but
yet the same Apostle orders, that if a woman will learn any thing, that she
ask her husband at home; for it is a shame for a woman to speak in the Church:
Let your women keep silence in the Church, for it is not permitted to them to
speak, (as the Law says.) The Apostle still confirms the Law and Ordinances of
Christ 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35
in the last days, and shows that the promise of the Spirit in the last days,
in greater evidence and manifestation then, is as much in consenting as in
speaking by the spirit, that both are prophesying: But the speaking,
prophesying, ministering, teaching, and feeding of Gods people in the Church in
public, is the Office of such as are called and sent by such as were called
and sent according to Christ's Ordinance in his Law and Testimonies given for
the Government of his Church upon Earth, so long as his Church shall remain
upon Earth.

3 Object. And some of these gainsayers of Christ's Ordinance say, That now
Christ gives not, nor requires any certainty of maintenance for any Ministers
of his Law or Gospel, as of Tithes, Offerings, or otherwise, but only that
which is arbitrary, voluntary, at will, and elimozinary. For (say they) Tithes
and Offerings, which were appointed by Christ's Ordinance for certainty of
maintenance of the Ministry of the Levitical Priesthood, is ended, the
Levitical Priesthood being ended: And (say they) Christ being personally upon
Earth indeed called and sent his Apostles to preach the Gospel in every place,
and in and to every bouse where they were received, but did settle no certainty
of maintenance upon them, or unto them, only bad them take that which was
arbitrarily set before them, abiding there. And although the professing
Believers, after Christ's Ascension, did many of them bring their goods, and
many sell their possessions, and brought the price thereof, and laid the same
down at the Apostles feet, for disposition thereof to themselzes, and others
(as they thought fit, and need was;) yet it was in their own power so to do, or
not to do so, until they had promised and devoted the same to be so done: as
Peter said to Ananias, the dissembling Believer, and to Sapphira his wife; Was
it not in thine own power before thou Acts 5. 4.
did promise and devote this to be so done? etc. And the Apostles went into
many Cities, Countries and Nations preaching the Gospel without any certainty
of maintenance: And Paul, being called and sent to preach, did it, laboring
more then all; yea and wrought with his hands, that he might not be chargeable
to the Churches, without any certainty of maintenance.

A. First, I say, for Elimozinary maintenance of called and sent Ministers of
Christ's Law and Gospel, there is no witness or president in the Scriptures: It
agrees not to the honor of the Ministry of the Gospel, that the Ministers
thereof should be beggars of their maintenance; we know alms, and beggars, and
relatives: and the Holy Ghost notes in Scriptures, that begging is a mark of
unrighteousness and reprobation: for David says, I never saw the righteous
forsaken, See Psalm. 109. 10 Psa. 37. 25 Luke 16. 3
nor their seed begging their bread: Therefore the ascription of Elimozinary
and begging maintenance to the Office of the instrumental honorable Ministry of
Jesus Christ, is antichristian, and dishonorable to Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Although we find in the Scriptures, that Priests and Prophets,
being Ministers of our God, sometime were put upon arbitrary maintenance, or
miraculous, in times of persecution: and the Apostles, his Ministers, were put
upon like arbitrary and miraculous maintenance, according to the wisdom and
good pleasure of our God, in the alteration and change of the Levitical
Priesthood, and in the beginning of Christ's gathering of Believers of Christ
come in the flesh, and his performing of all before men to man's salvation,
according to the Scriptures, and in the persecutions of adversaries in those
times: yet all these did not destroy the Law and and Ordinance of Christ,
settled and established for certainty of the maintenance of his Ministry
continuing in the moral and equity of that first established Law, for the
Government of his Church upon Earth, in the continuance of the world to the end
thereof, in all Nations, (where and as he pleases) as in the moral and equity
is most fit. And is not the righteous Law of Christ, and the Ministry thereof,
as it was established by Christ to the Church of Israel, as useful and
necessary to the Church of Christ in all Nations, in the moral and equity
thereof, for Government, as it was to Israel? Is it not as useful and necessary
to Believers of Christ come in the flesh, and that he has performed all to
man's salvation before men, as it was to Believers that Christ should come in
the flesh, and perform all to man's salvation before men? And is the glory and
honor of the maintenance of the ministration of the glorious Law of Christ
abated and demolished in the ministration of the moral and equity thereof,
accompanied with the exceeding shining and glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ come
in the flesh, and that he has performed all before men undertaken of him for
the salvation of man, to their everlasting comfort, according to the
Scriptures? Certainly the righteous Laws of our God and Lord Christ, which he
first manifested, written in Tables of stone, to his Church of Israel, for the
Government of his Church in all Nations in the moral and equity thereof, for
worship to God, for righteousness, peace, society, safety, and comfort among
men themselves, notwithstanding all or any eclipses through alrerations,
changes, persecutions thereof, by the providential wisdom of God therein before
men, is useful and needful still. Certainly the need and use of the Law of
Christ is as much now in the moral and equity thereof to Believers of Christ
come, for government, etc. as it was then, in any way, to Believers of Christ
to come.

Certainly the Ministry and Ministers thereof, in the moral and equity thereof,
for Government, etc. in all Nations of Believers of Christ come, etc. are as
useful and needful still; yea as glorious and honorable as ever they were, and
more glorious and honorable then before the Gospel, the glad tidings therewith
of Christ come in the flesh; and to have performed all before men to man's
salvation.

And certainly the certainty of maintenance, appointed, laid out, and
established by Christ himself, to the Ministry and Ministers of that visible
National Church of Israel, in his incomprehensible wisdom, as besitting,
useful, necessary and requisite, is still, and shall be to the end of the
world, sitting, useful, necessary, and requisite to the Ministry and Ministers
of Christ's perpetual honorable Law, for his Government, in the moral and equity
thereof, to his visible Church in all Nations of the World, where the Chuch of
Christ is National, as it was in Israel and Judea: And this maintenance now to
exceed that of the Ministry of the Law to that Nation, by the addition of the
glorious ministration of the Gospel, the work of Jesus Christ come in the
flesh, and to have performed all before men for man's salvation.

And certainly the maintenance of the Ministry of the Law of Christ, for
Government of his Church of Israel, laid ont and established there and then, in
the incontroulable wisdom of the Son of God, our Christ and Lawgiver, for the
certainty of the maintenance thereof by Tithes and Offerings, and the rest; The
same Law, Government, Ministry and Ministers, in the moral and equity thereof,
remaining and continuing to all Nations to the end of the World, where the
Church of Christ is gathered in like manner nationally and visibly, the same
maintenance by Tithes and Offerings is still, and shall be to the end of the
world, in the wisdom of Christ, besitting, useful, necessary and requisite
there; There being in all Nations the matter of Tithes and Offerings remaining,
and in being, at least to answer the moral and equity of the Law and Ordinance
of Christ. And the acutest wisdom of corrupt man, in laying out maintenance of
the Ministry and Ministers of the Law and Gospel of Jesus by other certain
arbitrary or Elimozinary maintenance (as have been by corrupt man corruptly
propounded) is but foolishness with God (as the Apostle speaks.) And
certainly Gods people, that are led by the Spirit of Christ, will submit to the
manifested wisdom of Christ, for the Government of his Church in all Nations,
and the maintenance thereof laid out by Christ. And I must, forced by Religion,
add this further, for the evidence of the wisdom of Christ manifested to men,
in laying out and establishing by Law and Ordinance Tithes and Offerings, for
certainty of the maintenance of the Ministry and Ministers of his Law and
Gospel in all Nations, where his Church is gathered Nationally and visibly;
That Christ did not lay out these, as of that which was man's, but of that which
was Gods, which was his own, and not man's own; therefore in the Law are called
the Lords Offerings, the Exodus 35. 21 Lev. 21. 21 Mal. 3. 8, 9
Offerings of the Lord. And the Prophet called Tithes the Lords; Ye have robbed
me (says the Lord) in Tithes and Offerings: Ye are cursed with a curse; for ye
have robbed me, even this whole Nation, etc. David says, The Earth is the
Lords, and all that therein is, etc. But Tithes and Offerings are at the Lords
appointment in his Psalm. 24. 1
Law and Ordinance, in a special manner, in a special reservation to himself,
for his homage, worship, and service, according to his own disposition in the
Government of his Church upon Earth.

We read in the Testament of our God, that Cain and Abel, being the two
firstborn of woman, mentioned, did bring of their fruits for an offering to
the Lord: sure it is that they did not this of their own corrupted humane
invention, but from some Law and command that they had from our God, either
only written in their hearts, or other ways manifested to them, and in
obedience to the same: For our God shows through the whole Scripture, that he
rejects all sacrifire, offering, service done by corrupt man's invention; as in
that of Saul, 1 Samuel 15 9, etc.
in sparing the fat and best things for offering to the Lord, in his own
invention: And Cain dissembling in his obedience, was also rejected of the
Lord, and his offering, because he did not bring to the Lord of the best of his
fruits, as Abel did according to Gods Law and command to them: and we read it
mentioned in Scriptures, That Abram gave Tithes of all to Melchisedec, the
Priest of the most high God. Genesis 14 20.
Surely this was not done of Abrams own invention, but in obedience to the Law
and Ordinance of God, either only written in his heart, or by some manifested
command of our God otherwise unto him; Abram would not tempt God with his own
Inventions: But this is clear from hence, that our God and Lord Christ,
howsoever the Godhead suffers, and permits to man the use of that upon
Earth, yet reserved to himself from the beginning the Tithes of all, and the
Offerings at his appointment, for homage, worship, and service to himself, in
the government of his Church and people: And this is most clear in that, that
(when his National first Church of Israel was settled) he then, by his Law
written in Tables of stone, in great manifestation and glory, did establish his
Tithes and Offerings, expressly to be to the maintenance of the Ministry of his
Law given, and of his Ministers appointed for the service of the Tabernacle and
Numb. 18. 6, 7, 8, etc.
Sanctuary.

Alteration, change, and persecution made sometime a stay of the manifestation
of the Ordinance of our God and the Lord Christ before men, but his Ordinance
remained still.

God made the Sun to rule and govern the day, and the Moon to rule and govern
the night, by his perpetual Ordinance, and of all thereto belonging.

The Sun and the Moon are sometime in the Eclipse; sometime the Moon changes
before men, and the Sun and the Moon go down in appearance to men; yet the Sun
and the Moon remain still to govern the day and night, and shall do as long as
the day and night remain: Even so the Law of our God Christ, being ordained and
made by him for the government of his Church, his Ministry, Ministers, and
maintenance thereto, useful, and necessarily belonging, in the moral and equity
of his Law, are as useful and necessary for the government of his Church upon
Earth, as long as his Church remain, as the Sun and Moon are useful and
necessary to govern the day and night; and shall continue non obstante.

Obj. But it is the certain maintenance of the Ministry of Christ's Law and
Gospel, by Tithes and Offerings, that trouble the dissembling professors of
themselves to be of Christ's Church now upon Earth: Tithes and Offerings are a
wearisom burden to them; for they say, that they see no reason but themselves
should have the tenth part, as well as they have the nine parts.

A. Ala^s, these do not know and consider, that the Earth is the Lords, and all
that therein is, (as David affirms,) and that they Psalm. 24 1.
have their life, and maintenance thereof, only by the Lords sufferance,
permission, and patience, in the nine parts of that of the Earth as the Romans 9.
22
Apostle shows:) And that the Lord has reserved to himself, and his
disposition, the tenth part of all in the Earth; man to have no property in the
Earth, but at the Lords disposition: and therefore the Offerings he reserved,
he sometimes appointed them, or what of them he pleased, to be burnt, and
sacrificed to him by fire: And this was from the beginning of the generation of
man, and continued; and not only to figure the sacrifice of Christ, but to
show his will and power in reserving to himself that he pleased, to be disposed
of as he pleased, in the government of his Church, for his worship and honor in
the moral and equity of his perpetual Law, etc. in all Nations, where his
Church is Nationally established: And this was that which troubled the
Hypocrites in the Church of Israel; they were weary of bringing their Ty^hes
and Offering to the Lord, at the Lord disposition: Ye said (says the Prophet)
behold it is a weariness; and ye Mal. 1. 13 14
have snuffed at it, says the Lord of hoasts, and have offered that which was
torn, and the lame, and the sick; thus you offered an offering: should I accept
this of your hand, says the Lord? But cursed be the deceiver which has in his
flock a male, and voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing. Will a
man spoil his gods? yet you have spoiled or robbed me in Tithes and Offerings:
Ye are cursed with a curse; for ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation. Mal.
3. 8 9


Thus we see this wearisomness, this snuffing at the burden of Tithes and
Offerings, which our God and Christ reserved to himself to be at his
disposition in the government of his Church upon Earth, from the beginning to
the end, for homage, worship and honor, and the rest, to the good of men: And
also the robbing of the same by cursed Hypocrites, seeking in the same their
own gain and honor among men, is no new thing, no new attempt; but as it was
then, so it is now. But I wish all to consider of the words of the Apostles of
Christ, speaking in the times, the change, and in the times of persecution; If
we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we reap your
carnal things? And again, Let him that is 1 Cor. 9. 11 Gal. 6. 6.
taught in the Word, make him that teaches him partaker of all his goods.

And again, Woe be unto them, for they have followed the way of Cain, and are
cast away by the deceit of Balaams wages, and perish Jude 11.
in the gainsaying of Corah.

The way of Cain was (we know) that although he had the commandment of God, to
bring the best of his fruits for Tithe or Offering to the Lord; yet for gain to
himself did rob God of the best, and like a dissembler brought of the worst, or
such as were not worth the acceptance.

The deceit of Balaams wages, whereby he was cast away, was, for that he knew
the people of Israel to be blessed of God, Gods chosen people, yet for wages
and gain he would have done them any mischief he might.

The perishing and destruction of Corah was his slighting and gainsaying of the
Ordinance of Christ in the Ministry, and Ministers thereof called and sent by
his Ordinance, for the gain of honor, and the rest, to himself.

His woe was not against Cain, Balaam, and Corah, but against those, and such
in the last days, that walk in their ways; who in pride and covetousness of the
riches and honors of this world trample under foot the Son of God, his Laws and
Ordinances for the government of his Church upon Earth, his worship and honor
among men, etc. and for righteousness, peace, society and safety among men
themselves.

Q. Is not this Law of Christ, given to his Church of Gods chosen people,
Justification before God, and eternal Life to the keepers and doers of that Law
and Commandment, for or by the keeping and doing thereof before men; and
condemnation before God, and eternal death, to the neglecters and breakers
thereof before men, for neglecting and breaking the same?

A. No, that cannot be so; for the holy Scriptures show plainly the contrary in
many places.

First, Paul says of himself, and all Gods chosen people, He has chosen us in
Christ before the World, to be holy and without blame before him in love: which
must needs be understood thus; God foreseeing and foreknowing before the world
all men to become the children of wrath by transgression, he of love and free
grace was pleased to choose some of them, then before himself, to be his adopted
children through Christ, to be holy and without blame before him in love; and
being chosen, are justified, and have eternal life in Christ. So the same Paul,
which says, God has chosen us in Christ before the world, etc. says, We were
all the children of wrath as well as others before God, before that (of Gods
love and free grace) we were chosen in Christ out of the general company of the
children of wrath, to be the children of God; but now being chosen in Christ to
be the children of God, we are not, nor can be the children of wrath again: for
Christ loses none chosen in him; none takes them out of his hand, that the
Father has given him. Now to affirm, and hold forth, that Justification and
eternal Life comes to man for or by his keeping and doing of the Law and
Commandment of Christ, given to Gods people, and in Tables of stone written,
long after Gods Election of them before the world, manifested in the Scripture;
and that condemnation and eternal death comes to them for the breaking and
neglecting thereof before men, is to disable, dishonor, and nullify the
gracious act of Gods Election in Christ (of those he pleased) before the world,
to be his loved children, and to leave the rest in the condemnation of their
own transgression.

Secondly, The Apostle says, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
chosen? it is God that justifies them: being chosen of God, Romans 8. 33
they are justified of God: none, after they are chosen of God, shall or can
lay any thing to their charge; therefore their Justification before God, or
condemnation, eternal life, or eternal death, does not depend upon their
keeping or breaking the Law of Christ, given for the government of his Church
upon Earth, although indeed it may manifest the same.

Thirdly, The Apostle says, If Justification before God, and eternal life be
of the Works of the Law, they are not of Grace: But the Apostle affirms, That
Gods chosen are justified freely by grace, and not by the Works of the Law.

Fourthly, The Apostle citing other Scriptures, says, Before Jacob and Esau
were born, and had done good or evil; that the purpose of God might remain
according to Election, not by works, but Romans 9. 11 13
by him that calls; God loved Jacob, and hated Esau: It was because God, of
love and free grace, had Elected Jacob in Christ before the world, that God
continued his love to Jacob; and because Esau was left in the wrath of his
transgression in Adam, that God continued his wrath and hatred to Esau.

Fifthly, If man's Justification before God should depend upon his keeping and
doing of the Law and Commandment of Christ, there were no man could be
justified and saved: for the Apostle says, In many things we offend all: and
his repentance that is finite and temporal, could not satisfy the trespass
done before and against the infinite God; which it must do in justice, if
Christ's Law were, with condition of everlasting life and everlasting death, for
keeping and breaking of the Commandment.

Q. Is there no good nor benefit to Gods chosen people by keeping and doing the
Law and Commandment of Christ carefully and in singleness of heart, nor no
damage nor danger to them by breaking and neglecting the same before men?

A. Yes; Gods chosen people have two special benefits by the keeping and doing
of the Law and commandment of Christ before men in singleness of heart and
carefully.

First, They have the temporal reward in the condition, promised and held forth
in the holy Scriptures; In keeping of them there is Psa. 19. 11 and 58. 11
great reward (says David:) And again, Doubtless there is a reward for the
righteous: And they have much more then is manifested, prepared of Christ for
their reward of grace:) The things which eye has not seen, neither ear has
heard, 1 Cor. 2. 9
neither came into man's heart, has Christ our God prepared for them that love
him, (says the Apostle.)

Secondly, They have the evidence of the Spirit of Christ's work in their
hearts: for the carefulness and singleness of heart is the work and fruit of
the Spirit, which they, as branches of the Vine Christ, do only bear and bring
forth of grace, as instruments wherewith the Spirit does the work, and imputes
it to them of grace; as Paul said, It was not I, but the grace of God with me:
And the Spirit, by 1 Cor. 15. 10 Romans 8. 16
such evidence received, does witness to their Souls, that they are Gods
children.

And the damage and danger to Gods chosen people is great, by breaking and
neglecting this Law and command of Christ. For first, they lose the said reward
of keeping and doing the same; when they break it and neglect it, they forsake
their own mercies.

Secondly, They are liable to the temporal penalties, and are sure thereof
without repentance of their offenses before men: And hereupon it is that Christ
our God shakes his rod of Judgments so often in the Scriptures against the
chosen people of God, which (he knows) in themselves are frail, weak, and
subject to temptations, to keep them from transgression, and the danger thereof.

Q. What is the good and benefit of the Gospel, and the preaching thereof unto
Gods chosen people? Is it beyond and more then the Law, and preaching of the
Law of Christ, for the Government of his Church upon Earth, unto them?

A. Yea; the Gospel, and the preaching thereof by those that are sent, is for
their everlasting comfort and good; That sets forth unto them the
everlasting love, mercy, and free grace of God, in his choosing them in Christ
before the world, unchangeably; their ordination to eternal life, their
predestination to be the children of God for ever, their calling thereto in the
Image of his Son jesus Christ, their justification and glorification then
before God, to be manifested in fullness of time to the creature: And clearly
shows the way and work of all these by Christ's undertaking with God, to his
satisfaction of justice, in doing of his Will (as the Lamb slain before him
from the beginning) and (taking flesh upon him) came into the world, and
performed the full righteousness of the Law of God, in doing and suffering
before men, whereby they have deliverance from all sin, and death by sin before
God, and are made coheirs, annexed with Christ Jesus, of all his riches,
triumph and glory in heavenly places: And that Christ has promised and sent
his holy Spirit to them, to do the spiritual work of the Law in them, as he
pleases, for witness and comfortable assurance to them, that they are Gods
chosen children, and therefore is called the Spirit of Adoption, because he
witnesses the same.

Rest to the Souls of Believers.
GOd has revealed himself unto man, to be one eternal, invisible,
incompr(...)ible essence; in whom is all foreknowledg and will, as he pleases,
all love, almighty power, wisdom, justice, goodness and mercy; and in three
persons in this one essence, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; according to which
eternal qualities of his eternal Deity, he has, in his foreknowledg and
foresight, purposed, predestined, and decreed all things according to his
will; and according to his Will, Purpose, and Decree, made Heaven, Hell, Earth,
and all Genesis 1. Isai. 30. 33
things therein: And with his purpose to make man, he also purposed to make a
Covenant of works with man, which works if he did, he should have the promise
and assurance of life for ever: But if he did fail in the work, and break the
Covenant, he should dye presently: And God foreknowing that man would break the
Covenant, (of his great and mere love, of his free grace, compassion and mercy
to mankind) did provide, purpose, and decree to give to mankind in Christ a
Covenant of Grace, or promise of grace, which was, to give his own only Son to
be made of a woman, by taking man's flesh upon him, to be born and brought forth
of a woman, to take upon him the form of a servant, to be of no reputation
among men: yet as a general person and undertaker for all intended of the
Father; in acceptance to full satisfaction, to do and perform the full
righteousness of the Covenant of Works, Law and commandment therein; and to pay
the whole and uttermost debt, of, and for, the transgression made, or to be
made, by those of mankind, which he purposed to make choice of, for the glory
of his grace, to be performed by his Son Christ Jesus, and to be preserved by
the power of his Spirit, until Psa. 37. 18 19 1 These. 5. 17 Ephesians. 1. 4
they were presented blameless at his coming to Judgment: And according to the
purpose of the Father, he did Elect some of mankind, before the foundations of
the world were laid, to be his vessels of honor, life everlasting and immortal
inheritance, in and with his Son Jesus Christ, which had undertaken in
acceptance, and to full satisfaction of God, leaving the rest to the merit and
punishment of their own transgression: And having made Heaven and Hell, he made
also the Earth, and all creatures therein, in their kind: And placing man his
creature in Paradise, there made and manifested his purposed and decreed
Covenant of Works with man, with condition of life and death, when man was
endued with full power and free will to stand or fall.

And mand did fall, and break the Covenant of Works, which in duty (as the
creature) he ought to have kept and performed to the Creator, having of him
power and free will given to him, to hve performed and done same.

And although God did foreknow, that man would fall and break the Covenant, yet
God did not decree that man should fall, and destroy himself by falling;
neither (having given unto him power and free will to stand or fall) had he
resisted the Will of God, if he had stood; but by falling, and so destorying
himself, he resisted the Will of God, that would not the death of a sinner: For
there was Ezekiel 18 32
one and the same end (in the intention of God) of both the Covenants purposed
toward man, which was the life of man: yea in his Covenant of Works he
intended the life of man: This do, and thou shall live, says God to man,
although he set before him life and Genesis 42. 18 Romans 7. 10
death in that Covenant of Works.

And after man's fall and loss of all, he was endued with all of God; being yet
in Paradise, God manifested to his El^ct of mankind his purposed Covenant of
Grace in his Son Jesus Christ, to be performed of him without any condition of
any performance by man, but in Christ; now being without power of believing, as
appears in the words of the Promise, or Covenant of Grace; The seed of the
woman shall break the Serpents hea^: The seed of the woman was freely promised,
to do and perform all that was to be done and performed for man's salvation to
the end, to break the serpents head, and to destroy the works of the Devil, (as
the Apostle speaks:) and all this grace to be manifested in time, to those in
particular, which should 1 Jo^. 3. 8
in manifestation receive the Spirit of adoption, and bear the fruits of the
Spirit, the believing in the Son of God Jesus Christ: so, that in the
righteousness of his Son Christ's doing the work of the Covenant in himself, as
an undertaker for, and a representative of, all his Elect, in acceptance to the
full satisfaction of God; all the Elect might have this righteousness
accounted, imputed, and so made theirs of God, as if themselves had done the
full work of the Law and Covenant of Works: And by his paying of the full debt
and price for their transgression, they might be assured of the forgiveness of
their sins past, Isai. 53. 6 1 Pet. 2, 24 1 John 1. 7
and to come, as if there had been no transgression at all in them of the Law
and Covenant of Works: And that they thus being justified fully, by the
obedience and performance of Christ before God, and freed by the full payment
of the price and debt with Christ's precious blood, Gods Elect might know
themselves to have an absolute discharge from the Law and Covenant of Works
before God, and to be no more under the Covenant of Works, but only under the
Promise and Covenant of Grace: And hereupon it is said by the Apostle of Christ
touching the Elect; Ye are no more under the Law, but Rom 6. 14 Gal. 5. 1. Romans
10. 4 and 3. 24
under Grace: The Son of God has made you free: Christ is the end of the Law
for righteousness to those which believe: We are justified freely by his grace,
through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus.

And this was not only the end of the Promise, or Covenant of grace, to
justify freely the Elect, and to free them from the Covenant of Works before
God, and set them only under the Promise, and Covenant of Grace, Jesus Christ;
but also that the same Christ should Psa. 121. 8 Joh. 17. 11 1 These. 5. 23 1
Cor. 1 8
rule them, preserve, them, and keep them by the power of his Spirit, and
present them blameless at his coming to Judgment: For this cause is Christ said
to have three offices, of a King, a Priest, and a Prophet; A King, to rule,
govern, and order his Elect, as the Scripture says, The Government is upon his
shoulders: A Priest, to pray and Isai. 9. 6 Romans 8 26
make request for them, as it is said, The Spirit makes request for us: A
Prophet, to teach them powerfully and effectually, not as the Scribes and
Pharisees, as is said, which taught, but had no power upon their hearers
further to their good; as it is said, They shall be all taught of God, even to
the forming of Jesus Christ in them, as ^o^. 6 45 Gal. 4. 19
the Apostle speaks.

And Christ does not execute his Offices only in the universal Church of his
Elect, but also in the particular, and every member thereof: So that every of
his Elect, when, how, and where he pleases, has a better Governor in him then
himself; a better Orator, a better Teacher, and Directer, then himself: So that
although (as the Idolatrous Canaanite remained still in the Land when the
Israelite had Joshua 17.
rule) the flesh remains still in the Elect whilst Christ has the rule at
his pleasure, and although the flesh brings forth many transgressions, yet
Christ by his Spirit (having the rule) does (though not without resistance)
curb the flesh, and bring it in subjection at his Gal. 5. 17
pleasure, and makes the corrupt members instruments of his service: and
therefore the Apostle says, Sin shall have no more dominion over you; for you
are no more under the Law, but under grace; meaning the Spirit of Christ, that
rules, swayeth, and does all things, Romans 6. 14
in the Elect, unto good, where his Grace and Spirit is present; fiting and
making, by his powerful and sanctifying Spirit, all and any of 1 Cor. 15
his regenerate Electones to yield their members, both of soul and body,
instruments of righteousness unto God; that is, instruments of the works of his
righteous Spirit in them, which he of his grace imputes Rom 6 13
to them, and calls them their works, although they be his only in truth, as
is manifested in the holy Scripture; Christ told his Disciples, that he sent
forth to preach the Gospel, That it was not they that did speak, but the Spirit
of the Father that did speak in them, although it was spoken by the instruments
of their mouth, Mat. 10. 20
tongue, and lips: And Paul, when he said that he had labored in the Ministry
of the Gospel more then all the rest, recalleth himself, saying, 1 Cor. 15. 10
Yet it was not I that labored so, but the grace of God with me: His
instrument, my self, being only by the grace of God, Jesus Christ, fitted and
made an instrument of that labor and work, and of his grace only accounted my
labor and work, which is his work.

Thus we may see the end of the promise, or Covenant of grace, made of God to
man in Christ, to be, that of the unsearchable love of God to the Elect through
his grace in Jesus Christ, his Elect in Christ before the foundation of the
World was laid, being of those which were fallen into the misery and danger of
everlasting death by their own transgression of the mutual Covenant of Works,
agreed upon and made betwixt God and mankind, in the first Parents; all of them
(then being, and to be, in the posterity of mankind, to the end of the world
after their Election) are freed from the Covenant of Works, the Law and
commandment thereof before God, and the penalty of the transgression of the Law
and commandment thereof, through the performance made of Jesus Christ their
undertaker, and to be preserved, kept, and ordered, by the performance to be
made in Psa. 121. 5 Ioh. 17 11 15 1 These. 5. 23
them by the Spirit of Christ, until they be presented blameless at his coming
to Judgment.

And as the Covenant of Works was manifested in Paradise in the time of man's
innocence, when man had full power and freedom of will to have performed all
required, and the same broken by man there, being in his full power, unto the
tainture and corruption of all mankind then in Adams loins; So was the Promise,
called the Covenant of grace (touching the Elect of God) first manifested in
Paradise unto man, soon after the general Transgression, Fall, and corruption,
when God said, The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head; which seed
was Jesus Christ, born of the blessed Virgin Mary. Mat. 2. 25


And as afterward the Covenant of works, in grace, was manifested to many (by
the providence of God) repeated and revealed in holy Scriptures, to set forth
the equity of Gods Justice in the death and misery of the reprobate, still
under the Law and curse of the first transgression of the Covenant of Works,
and the succeeding transgression thereof, first especially commented, opened
and interpreted by Moses, then by the Prophets, and after by the Evangelists,
and the Apostles of Jesus Christ, the penmen of the Holy Ghost; and also that
by the thunderings, threatenings, and terror of the penalties of the
transgressions of the said Law, the current and violence of the corruption of
reprobate and carnal men might be hindered, abated, and bridled, through fear,
to the more safety of Gods beloved ones, which are amongst the reprobate, as
sheep among wolves, as Christ himself said of his chosen ones, I send you forth
as sheep among wolves. Mat. 10. 16


So the Promise, or Covenant of Grace, was after opened and manifested to many,
by the providence of God, and specified and repeated in holy Scriptures by Gods
penmen of the same, to set forth the love, compassion, mercy, and grace of God
toward his Elect, and the praise and glory of his grace for the same, always to
be published by those, whose blind eyes are opened, to behold the misery,
bands, and death, from which they are delivered and freed, by the love of God,
in the performance of Jesus Christ, and preserved through his performance and
grace in them, until they be by him presented 1 These. 5. 23
blameless at his coming.

Q. Does not God require good performances of his Elect, to further their
Salvation?

A. God knows that his Elect, as themselves, are able to perform nothing that
is good, not to will or think any thing that is good: Romans 7. 18 Phil. 2. 13 2
Cor. 3. 5
So says his Apostle Paul; I find no means to perform that which is good: It
is God that works in us the will and the deed, of his own good pleasure: We
cannot think any thing of our selves that is good. Therefore God will not
require of his beloved Elect ones, that which he knows they cannot d^. No man
will require him, which he loves, to do and perform that, which he knows he
cannot do. No man will lay a burden upon his beast, which he knows he cannot
bear. God did never require of his Elect performance of his Law and Commands
before himself, after the had lost the power of performing; but of his love and
grace provided a power to perform for them a Christ and Redeemer, which
undertook to do, has done, and does all, and those great things, in them, and
for them, by his wisdom and strength, as, how, and when, it pleases him;
making them, and their members of soul and body, instruments of his righteous
works, which of his great grace he calls their works and performances. For
which reason, Paul, which said, he found no means (meaning in himself) to
perform any thing that is good, or to will, or Phil. 4. 13
think any good of himself, says also, I am able to do all things through the
help of Christ which strengthens me; that is, through Christ's power; his
members were Christ's able Instruments of doing all things righteous (as he
pleases) of Christ's grace accounted his righteous doings, as Paul says, David
declares the blessedness of man, unto whom God imputes righteousness without
works; that Romans 4 6
is, when God imputes Christ's righteous works unto man, whereby he is only
satisfied and pleased with man without man's own works.

Q. Has Christ undertaken to perform, and does Christ perform, all things for
the Elect before God, that they have liberty of idleness, to do nothing, to
live licentiously?

A. The Elect of God are least idle; having in manifestation received the
Spirit of adoption, they are no less idle, then the Spirit can be idle in them,
which in them is as the tree of Life, yielding forth fruit continually: The
fruit of the Spirit is faith, love, joy; peace, Apoc. 22. 2 Gal. 5. 22
meekness, goodness, righteousness, etc. The Spirit, which as a King rules in
them, makes their members instruments, as it pleases, of all such righteous
works and performances; so that the righteousness of Christ will shine in them.

Q. Why does Christ in the Evangelists, and the Apostles of Christ in their
Epistles and writings, give so many precepts and exhortations to the people and
Churches of the faithful for performances, to be made by them; as to believe,
to love, to deny themselves, to pray, to obey, to do justly, and forbidding
them to do the contrary; yea and further, upon penalty for not doing the
precept, and doing the contrary, that they shall not inherit the Kingdom of
Heaven, but shall be cast into utter darkness, which is Hell?

A. All such Precepts and Exhortations of Christ, and his Apostles, are, not to
charge the Elect with performances of duties before God by those precepts,
which they are in no part able to perform, sithence man lost his power of
performing; but to show, and set forth to the Elect and Reprobate, the power
that Adam, and all mankind then in Adam, had, to perform all those Precepts
and Exhortations before is Fall, in the sight of God; and to show the
authority, justice, and righteousness of the Command in commanding those holy
and good duties; and the justness of God in the fearful and miserable penalty
of the transgression, to be certainly executed upon the reprobate, such as are
without Christ, the Redeemer and Performer of those precepts for them; having
by their own fault, when they had power, lost their power of performing: And to
show, that as the transgression of the reprobate increase and multiply, so the
penalty and misery increases and multiplyeth daily; and that by such terrors,
continually proclaimed by the Ministers of God, the reprobate may be abated of
their envious and mischievous transgression, to the greater safety of Gods
Elect.

And yet further, these precepts were written, that the Elect of God, finding
in themselves no more power left to perform them, then the very reprobate have,
which is only before men, may behold (their blind eyes being opened by Christ)
the unspeakable love, mercy, and grace of God toward them, in their Election,
in the promised seed to them and for them; in the performances of Jesus Christ
the promised seed of those holy precepts, first and last, for them, which
themselves neither had, nor have, any power to perform, sithence the general
fall and loss.

Further yet, Christ in his Evangelists and Apostles writings does hold forth
these precepts to the Churches, that the faithful, hearing and seeing these
Precepts and Commandments, which were ordained to life, but are now unto death,
as the Apostle says, The same Commandment which was ordained unto life, was
found to be unto me unto Romans 7. 10
death, might, in their infirmities and transgressions, by Christ and his love,
be gathered together as chickens under the cover of his wings (as Christ
himself speaks,) How often would I have gathered you together, even as an Hen
gathers her chickens under her wings? Mat. 23 37
that so, their eyes being opened by Christ, to see the goodness and love of
Christ the love of Christ might constrain them to yield their hearts and
members instruments of his love, to God and man, before men, as the Apostle
says, The love of Christ has constrained us. 2 Cor. 5. 14


Q. If it be so, that the Commandment, sithence it was broken by man, be now
unto the death of man, and no way unto life, which was first ordained unto
life, and was by ordination unto life to all men before it was broken by man,
in power to have kept it and done it; and if man now have lost all power of
doing the Commandment before God for ever, by the first breaking thereof,
whether is it in the Office of the Ministers and Preachers amongst us now to
read and preach the Law and Commandment to the people, for they cannot hold
forthlife or comfort to them from the Commandment; or if it be in their Office,
how to preach the Commandment, and to whom?

A. It is the proper Office of the Ministers of Christ (as the fitted
instruments of Christ's Spirit) to preach the Gospel of salvation and life, and
only occasionally to preach the Law and Commandment for the Gospels sake (as
the Apostle of Christ says) which in that manner did both: Christ (says this
Apostle) has made us able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the letter,
but of the Spirit; for the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life: And yet
he says, That he 1 Cor. 9. 13 20, 21, 22, 23
meddled with the Law as one under the Law, and became all things to all men,
that he might win some; and that he did for the Gospels sake, that he might be
partaker thereof with them.

Touching the manner of preaching the Law.

The Minister of the Spirit considers two sorts of men; the one unbelievers,
yet all in the same like condition of Reprobates, though some of them many be
of the Elect ones, and heirs of the promise, not yet known to themselves, nor
regarded: To these, being under the Law, even in their own apprehensions, 1. He
preaches the Law, as belonging, and most proper unto them, yet useful to all
for Government before men.

2. The goodness, holiness, and justness of the same Law.

3. The commands, duties, and performances thereof, justly required of God; yet
also withal their own weakness, and want of power to perform before God, by
their own fault lost in the first transgression.

4. He shows them also their continued transgression.

5. He shows their death by their first transgression, and their increase of
pain by their succeeding transgression. But he no way preaches, that life,
grace or peace with God comes, or shall, or may come to them, by their doing
or performing the duties of the commandment now, which though ordained first
unto life in man's innocence and power, yet, sithence it was broken by man, is
found to be unto all men unto death, as the Apostle says: for so to preach,
were to dissemble.

But because some of unbelievers yet may be of the elect ones, as Paul was, I
did it in unbelief says Paul, when he persecuted: therefore the Minister of
the spirit, may and does hold forth amongst these 1 Timothy 1. 13. Joh. 1. 17.
unbelievers, That life, grace, and peace, comes only to believers in Christ
by Jesus Christ, his performing (as the Apostle says) the Law came by Moses,
but grace, truth, and peace by Jesus Christ. And the knowing and manifestation
of this, comes to believers, by the grace of believing given to them (being
the fruit of Christ's spirit in them that believe) whose hearts and souls,
Christ has made the instruments of his grace of faith and believing. Unto the
true believers in Jesus Christ, (which the Apostle says) are not under the
Law, but under grace, which believe their election in Christ, before the
foundation of the world was laid, which believe that God has laid their sins
upon Christ, and that Christ has born them in his body upon the tree. And that
Christ has redeemed them, and bought them by paying the inestimable price of
his blood. And that they are freely justified by his grace, fulfilling of the
Law, and his performances for them. And that he is still a King, a Priest and a
Prophet, to rule, keep, preserve, and do all things for them, and in them,
making their members his instruments of the righteous works of his spirit in
them, until he shall present them blameless at his coming to judgment, which
desire to know nothing, but Jesus Christ and him crucified (as the Apostle of
Christ 1 Co. 2. 2.
says he did.) To such believers the pure Gospel of Jesus belongs to be
preached, and the Law in grace for government before men; for such are not
under the Law, but under grace, That the means of the Romans 6. 10
manifestation and witness of the spirit which is Christ speaking of the word
of grace by the mouth of his Ministers (for it is not the Ministers that speak,
but the spirit that speaks in them, (as Christ said to his Disciples that he
sent to preach the Gospel) may be, as sincere Mat. 10. 20. Ephesians. 4. 15. Tit.
1. 13. Iam. 2 5.
milk unto infants, that they may grow thereby) and that so they may grow up in
all things into him which is the head, that is Christ. That they may be sound
in faith, That they may be rich in faith, That they (being led by the spirit)
may so walk in Christ as they have received the Lord Jesus, rooted and built in
him, and stablished in the faith, as they have been taught, abounding therein
with thanksgiving (as the Apostle speaks) for even as the Child when it is
first born, though then it is a true and perfect man, yet it is but little,
weak, and has need of nourishment for growth, strength, and increasment. So
the fruit and bringing forth of the spirit in man, is at first but little,
small, and weak, and have need of the means of the spirit, the sincere milk of
the word of grace; for the growth, strength, and increasment of beauty to the
fullness thereof; yet let these be rather held manifestations of the spirit,
then means. And thereupon the Apostle says, Christ gave, some Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and Teachers, for the gathering
together of the Saints, and for the work of the Ministry, (meaning the Ministry
of the Gospel of Grace) as the same Apostle says, Christ has made us able
Ministers of the new Testamen, not of the letter, but of the spirit; not of the
letter that is the Law, the Commandments, duties, and performances thereof
before God; for that were to go about to be witch believers, to in^angl^ them,
and to bring them into the yoke of bondage again (as the Apostle says) the
false Apostles did the Galathians, which had received the faith, and to make
them believe, that Christ's performances and grace were not enough for their
peace, with God without their own doing something of the Law, Commandment,
duties, and performances thereof for their peace with God: and that were to
exalt man above that which he is, and to make men believe that themselves are
something, which they are not; and to have a power and strength which they have
not, (as the Apostle advises and gives a caveat of. If any man think himself
that he is somewhat, when he is nothing, he deceives himself in Gal. 6. 3
his own imagination.

He that will be my Disciple, says Christ, must deny himself, Luk 9. 23
(meaning) that man certainly that comes after me, and is my Disciple, does
deny that he has any power, any strength, any ver^ue, any wisdom, any
goodness, any performance in himself, for his peace with God: yea that were to
undervalue Christ, and to derogate from Christ and his grace, which has said,
My grace is sufficient for thee, for my power is made perfect through 2 Cor.
12. 9
weakness, very gladly therefore, (says the Apostle) will I rejoice rather in
mine infirmities, (that is, that I my self have no power) that the power of
Christ may dwell in me, and only have the praise v. 10.
and glory.

Yea further, that were to abolish Christ and grace, and to nullify Christ and
his grace: so the Apostle of Christ holds forth, If it be of works, it is no
more of grace, else were work no more works, meaning, if it be in any part of
works and man's performances to have peace Romans 11 6.
with God, then grace is quite shut out. And if it be of grace, that man has
his peace with God in any part, then (says she) it is no more of works, then
are works quite shut out, else were grace no more grace. The meaning of the
Apostle is, that man's works and performances, and grace, and Christ's
performances cannot go and stand together, in man's justification, in pleasing,
pacifying, or making man's peace with God.

To this purpose the Apostle of Christ says also, I say unto Gal. 5. 2.
you, that if you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. And again,
ye are abolished from Christ, whosoever are justified by the Law, v. 4.
ye are fallen from grace (that is) if any man think or account himself holy,
good, just, and righteous, or more holy, more righteous, or better then he was,
or better more holy, more righteously, then other men by his performances, and
doing duties of the Law, as in his praying, fasting, giving of Alms, building
of Churches, Hospitalls, or giving of every man his due (as he thinks) by
doing penance for his faults, by making restitutions though as Zacheus did,
etc. which all are commandments of the Law: the Apostle says plainly, Christ
shall profit him nothing, he is abolished from Christ.

Obj. If a man may not think and account himself to be more holy, Gal. 5. 2 4
more righteous, and better then himself was before in Gods sight, or more
holy, more righteous, and better then other men, which are without doing the
works of the holy Commandment. By his doing the works of the holy and righteous
Commandment, (as praying, fasting, building Churches, Hospitals,) paying dues,
making restitution, and the rest. This Doctrine will quench all devotion,
goodness, just dealing, and duties to God and man; for wherefore should a man
do these and the like, if he may not think himself the better, more holy, more
righteous in Gods sight by doing, nor be more holy, more righteous, and better
by doing, then other men that do nothing?

Answ. This Doctrine does not quench or abate true devotion, or any thing of
goodness to God in truth; but makes way to the shining of the true light to
man, whereby he may be better indeed in respect with God through Christ,
according to true spiritual manifestaon.

For manifestation of the true light herein first is to be considered, that
whatsoever devotions, or prayers, man has, or does perform of himself, in his
own wisdom and power, or whatsoever works he does, or devises to do, according
to the rule of the Law and holy Commandment of works either toward God or man,
for his own betterness, for his own estimation of more holiness and
righteousness in himself before God, (he deceives himself) to man, there may
be estimation by such devotions and performances, but not to God; for God
knows that man in his mere natural estate, (for his estimation with m^n) may
be so acted by the spirit of Antichrist, that he may show, and do all these
things, and all other outward things of the holy Law, and Commandment
outwardly, as fully as may be seen of man to be done; which for proof thereof,
we may clearly see in the Pharisees Herod, and Judas, especially of the
Pharisees whom no man (now living) in devotions and outward performances of the
holy Law can be seen to go beyond, and they were never the better thereby; but
the worse thereby, as appears by the woe, that Christ pronounced against them
for their hypocrisy in such their devotions, and Mar. 23. 14.
performance of the Law, to be seen of men, to get estimation among men.

Again, (God knows) that man himself has no power at all, nor will, unto
good, that he lost these in the first transgression. And that man himself can
do and perform nothing that is good before God; for Paul a principle example,
one that had then received of Christ as much as any man had, or have
acknowledged, that he in himself found no Rom 7. 18. Ps. 14 3. Romans 3. 10, 11,
12.
means to perform that which is good. And David (a man after Gods own heart)
and Paul says, There is no man that does good, no not one. Then how can any
man think, that he is the better, the more righteous in the sight of God in
Gods estimation by his own devotions, prayers, and all his own outward
performances of the holy Law of God, done in the greatest wisdom of man, no,
they are no better in the estimation of God, then the devotions of the Jews and
their performances, which the Prophet Isaiah mentions were such as God was
weary of, were abomination to him and he hated. Man cannot make himself better
to Isa. 1 12. 13.
God; it is Christ that makes him better, it is Christ's performance that
makes man better to God, more holy, more righteous in the eyes of God, then he
was before.

Yet (so it is.) That Christ by whom God has given all to his elect ones (of
his great grace) makes them (as he pleases) his instruments in the way of
their Pilgrimage of the performances of the holy Law and Commandment, as
devotions, prayer, preaching, hearing, meditation, love, just dealing, etc.
through his holy spirit in them, where by they shine as many lights amongst
men, to the praise of the glory of his grace: yea though they be mightily
wrought upon by the spirit of Christ in them to mortification of sin in their
earthly Members to sanctification, and the purifying of their hearts by Faith;
yet they think not themselves better by any thing in them of their own: for
they acknowledge, that in themselves dwells no good thing (as Paul did) they
acknowledge the flesh and corruption still remaining in them, as in others, and
they give the praise and glory of all good to Jesus Christ.

And herein is the chief discernment of those which are the instruments of the
spirit of Antichrist, which are wrought up many times to as great performances
as the instruments of the spirit of Christ are, and those which are
Antichrists, boast of these as their own to their own praise among men. But
those which are Christ's, put off all praise, of whatsoever from themselves,
giving all to the praise and glory of Act. 3. 12. 16. Act. 14 15 Rev. 22 9.
God, as Peter did, healing the lame man, as Paul and Barnabas did, when they
would have sacrificed to them, oh (say they) we are men, subject to like
passions as ye be, and (as the Angel did, where John would have worshipped him)
saying (I am thy fellow Servant) worship God.

They that uphold this objection want two things, first, the spirit of 1 Cor. 2.
Christ, whereby they discern not: the spiritual man discerns all things,
the^e are taught of God. Secondly, they err not, knowing Mat. 22. 29 Mat. 12.
24
the Scriptures, as Christ said; for which the Apostle Paul labors much in
his Epistl^s, as to the Romans, in the first to the Corinthians, to the
Galathians, Philippians, etc. to the Hebrews, in the Epistle of John, as
knowing that then the spirit of Antichrist was busy, and afterward would be
busy to puff men up with a conceit of themselves, which corrupt man is prone
unto, that they are something, and can do something of the Commandment before
God; yea some conceive they can do all, as the ruler said to Christ, all these
have I kept Luke 18. 21.
from my youth. Yea some say, they can do all, by the help of God, by the grace
of Christ, and by the power that God has given them; As the Pharisee, I thank
God, I am not as other men, extortioners, unjust adulterers, or as this
Publican, I fast often, I pray, I give tithe Luke 18. 11.
of all I possess: mark the Pharisee thanketh God for all these he did boast
of; surely he acknowledged he had power, or grace, or help from God in these
performances, and yet was less justified, then he that confessed he had done
nothing, or failed and sinned in all these. And some thinking to modefie the
injury to Christ, say, that though they do not the work of the Commandment
alone, yet they cooperate with Christ, having a share in the work of the
Commandment done, which they ground much upon a saying of a Father in the
Church, which is, God has made thee without thy self: but he has not redeemed
thee without thy self: which saying is true, thus, man was not with God in the
making of man, but man was with God in his redeeming of man, it was Emanuel
that redeemed man. For God did assume flesh, Christ was made of a woman, that
the promise might be fulfilled. The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents
head. But this does not prove, that man does cooperate with Christ in his
Redemption and performances to his peace with God to the remission of his sin;
justification, and salvation. O Israel, says God, thy damationn Hos. 13. 9.
is of thy flesh, thy salvation only of me.

The work of man's Redemption, reconciliation to God, and of Gods reconciliation
to man, of forgiveness of sins, his justification, sanctification, and
glorification, is all Christ's wholly in himself: no part there of is man's. And
whosoever denies this, denies Christ to become in the flesh: for to deny him
in part of his work and performance, is to deny him in all his work and
performances. To deny part of Christ, is to deny whole Christ: For Christ will
have no partner 1 Cor. 1. 13 Collos. 3. 11. 1 Cor. 12. 6
in his work. Christ is all and in all, and he walks all in all, (says the
Apostle.)

Quest. How can all good performances to God and man, approved in the holy
Testament, as faith, love, thankfulness, joy, humbleness, reverence, peace,
meekness, all goodness, as righteousness, mercy, gentleness, patience,
temperance, etc. be wrought and made in man by the spirit, (that is the Holy
Ghost in him) when as these performances, many of them, are made to God alone.
How can the spirit pray to the spirit, give thanks to the spirit, believe in
the spirit, be humble to the spirit, and the rest. This holds forth
absurdity, that the same, should perform to the same. That a man should pray
and request himself, be humble to himself, is absurd to affirm. So to say the
spirit makes request to himself, is thankful to himself, is absurd.

Answ. This is absurd indeed to them that consider of the spirit, in the unity
of the Godhead: But the spirit is to be considered, as the third person of the
Godhead, proceeding from the Father and the Son, sent to Gods Elect, by the
Father and his Son Jesus Christ, God and man; from which Father, the same
spirit descending by a mighty voice from Heaven, said, This is my beloved
Son, being then a Mark. 1. 1^
Messenger or Representative of the Father. This spirit I say is also the
Messenger, or Representative of the Son Jesus Christ, sent to the Elect, for
the comfort and behoof by the Father and the Son: yet specially in the
behalf, and for the performing the gracious Offices of the Son. So it plainly
appears by the words of Christ, I will pray, (says Christ) to the Father,
and he shall give you another comforter, John 14. 16 17. v. 26.
even the spirit of Truth, that he may abide with you for ever, be in you, and
dwell with you. The comforter the Holy Ghost, which the Father will send in my
name, he shall teach you all things, etc. And again, It is expedient for you
that I go away, for if I go not away, the John 16. 7, 8
Comforter will not come unto you. But if I depart, I will send him unto you,
and he shall reprove the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment.

Now this spirit, sent of the Father and the Son to the Elect, to be a
Representative of Jesus Christ, after his going out of the earth, from them;
for to do and perform for them, that which they are not able to do and perform,
in their state of nothing to good, (as the Apostle says of all) If any man
says he is somewhat, when as he is nothing, Gal. 6. 3.
he deceives himself: Therefore as Jesus Christ, had undertaken to do all for
the Elect, to the Father fore-past, and to come, and did all undertaken, then
to be done of him during his being upon earth, (as amongst the rest.) To pray
to the Father for them, to give thanks for them, to believe for them, to
rejoice for them, to be humble and obedient to the Father for them. So this was
the gracious care of Jesus Christ to provide after his departure a
Representative of himself, for their comfort, even his holy spirit to do all
things for them, and in them, to the pleasure of the Father, in his name and
behalf making and fitting them in their several Members of soul and body, to be
instruments of such his performances. As David said, his tongue was made Psalm.
45. 1.
the pen of a ready Writer: we know the Pen is but the instrument of the
writer, no more was the tongue of David; but the instrument of the Oracle that
spoke, the spirit was the speaker. And so when he said before, his heart was
inditing of a good matter, (he does not say the inditer but inditing) he mean
th that his heart was the instrument of the spirit, which was the inditer of
the good matter, his heart it self not the inditer of the good matter, no more
then his tongue was the writer thereof, which was but only the instrument of
the writer. The of a good matter may ascribe, and account the writing writer
thereof to the pen. And may say, my pen writ this thing; but the common reason
of man knows that the writer himself did sharp and fit the pen, yea and lead
and guide the pen every way: otherwise the pen could have done nothing in
writing, the pen would have laid still.

Even so Jesus Christ, which by his spirit, his representative, is the inditer
of all, the writer of all, the doer and performer of every good matter in man,
of his love and grace to man his creature and instrument, may, and does
ascribe, impute and account all to be man's, and his members instrumen's fitted
by him, lead, guided, and enabled by the spirit, to bear and hold forth the
same, which otherwise could do nothing of the good thing, but would lie still,
thereunto (as Paul was, when he said) I find no means to perform that which is
good; yea, says he there, when I would do good, evil is present with me, and
the Rom 7. 18
good which I would do, that I do not; but the evil which I would not do, that
I do: wherein the Apostle shows, that when Jesus Christ by his spirit, had
framed and fitted his will to good, that was not enough for him to do it: But
Jesus Christ by his spirit, must go on with the instrument of his will, which
he had fitted to the instrument of the deed and performance, in fitting his
other Members also for instruments of the deed to be performed by his holy
spirit, otherwise though there was will ready, yet the deed would be wanting.
Therefore the same Apostle says, It is God that works in us, both the will
and the deed of his own good pleasure. In which words, the Phil. 2. 13.
Apostle shows, that it is our God that works the will to good, and the
good deed also: therefore the will is Gods, and the deed is Gods, not man's,
except by asscription and imputation, and man is not, nor can be the instrument
of the good, unless first fitted by the spirit of Christ, to be the instrument
of the good deed, no more then the 1 Cor. 15. 10.
pen can be the instrument of writing well, without sharping and fitting, it.
And these words also hold forth, that when Christ has wrought up the will, his
working of the deed may be wanting yet, at his pleasure; yea, but the Apostle
says, evil was then present with him, he was ready to do evil, when the spirit
had fitted his will unto good, and the evil which he would not do that be did,
even as a captive and bondman to act sin of himself, and nothing but sin can a
man do of himself, or does, which notwithstanding is abated, and stayed by the
spirit of Christ, as it pleases: so that, at all times, the flesh cannot do
what it would, as the Apostle says, The spirit is contrary and against the
flesh, that it cannot do what it would, no more then the Gal. 5 17
will framed by the spirit, can bring to pass what it would through the
hinderance of the flesh; for says the Apostle, they are contrary one to
another, that ye cannot do what ye would. So that, to conclude, all good
performances in man are Jesus Christ's performances, by his representative the
Holy Ghost, brought forth and done of him by, or with the instrument of the
members of man, together, or severally, framed and fitted for the work: Even as
the body and his members are the instruments of the Soul, and therefore is
called the Organ of the Soul, and can do nothing at all without the Soul: So
the Soul and body both are the Instruments of Christ's Spirit, without which
they neither of them can do any thing that is good before God, and are in the
doing only the instruments of the Spirit of Christ: and yet by grace, in the
word of grace, those doings and works of the Spirit are called and accounted
man's, and so accepted, through Christ, of God the Father.

And all the sin and evil done, is man's own act, even of the flesh and
corruption of such as are Believers; In me (that is, in my flesh, says the
Apostle) dwells no good thing: yet this sin done of the Elect in Romans 7. 18
the flesh (though yet unbelievers) is taken away by Christ presently, as it is
done; yea was virtually taken away by the Fathers D^cree, and acceptance in
Christ, before it was done in appearance, and laid upon Christ: In which
relation, I conceive, the Apostles words are most clear, saying, He that is
born of God, sins not, neither can sin, because his sin is taken away by
Christ before from the beginning, and 1 Ioh. 3. 9
by the Fathers pleasure, and in his acceptance, laid upon Christ: and this the
Evangelical Prophet Isaiah shows plainly; God, says he, has laid upon Him
the iniquities of us all, (meaning the Elect:) And Isai. 53. 6 1 Pet. 2 24 1
Ioh. 1. 7
the Apostle says, He bare our sins in his body upon the tree: And again, The
blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin. And this is the great grace of God
manifested to Believers, that they are cleansed from all their sins, though
subject in the flesh to frequent sins daily: and yet are so governed and kept
by Christ their King, that they do Romans 6. 1
not sin the more, because they know this exceeding grace, that their sin is
taken away, and cleansed in present: This ministers no occasion Gal. 5. 13
to the flesh, which the Apostle advises to take heed of; but this grace,
known to Believers, does stay and hinder the act of sin in the reasonable Soul
of Believers, though the same reasonable Soul be corrupted and fleshly: For the
common reason of men will advise to do less hurt to that man that has saved
his life, or done him most good. Sin is a great grief and hurt to God, as the
Believer knows; for sinful man is warned, Grieve not the good Spirit of God,
whereby ye are Ephesians. 4. 30 Ioh. 19. 34
sealed to the day of Redemption: and again, They shall look upon him whom they
have pierced. Believers know, that the nature of sin is to grieve and pierce
their God, that has saved their life, and has only done them good of love and
free grace, without any desire of their own: Therefore this known grace of
Believers must needs be a great stay and stop to them of doing that which they
know is sin against God, Gods great grief, hurt, and piercing.

Q. Are there not some Hypocrites of such as profess themselves to be steadfast
Believers in Jesus Christ?

A. Yea; there are four sorts of men, that profess themselves constant
Believers in Jesus Christ, that are Hypocrites.

The first are such, which notwithstanding they will say they believe in Christ
to be saved by him, yet they hold themselves under the moral Law, the Law of
Commandments, the Law of Works before God, as man was before he fell, and is
after, not being in Christ.

That notwithstanding all that Christ has undertaken and done for them, the
moral Law is still a rule which they of necessity must follow, and do the
commands thereof before God unto life, as being left in such bonds by Christ;
otherwise they believe they cannot be saved by Christ's performances: For, say
they, Christ came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it: which Scripture
they do, and must Mat. 5. 17
needs take thus, to uphold their dissembling believing in Christ, That Christ
did not, by his coming, take away the power, command, dominion, and bond of the
Law from his Ele^t Believers, but did fulfill the Law for them. But alas, what
benefit should the Elect have by Christ's fulfilling of the Law for them, if
Christ should have left them under the power, command, and bond of the Law
still? If a friend pays the whole sum of money due by a bond, to whom his poor
friend is bound, and leaves the bond still in ^o^ce, and the debt still to be
demanded of the poor man; what benefit has the poor man of that his friend
paid? So if Christ has fulfilled the Law for his Elect, and left his Elect
still in bond to the Law, and under the command and power of the Law before
God, what benefit have the Elect by Christ fulfilling the Law for them?

Solut. But they understand not the words of Christ rightly, for indeed Christ
came not to destroy the Law, that is, not to take away any power, command,
bond, or penalty of the Law, touching the reprobate, which he came not to
fulfill the Law for; yea, nor to take away the Law in all respects touching his
Elect: For it is the justice of Gods righteous Law, that he continually
pleads to and with the Father for his Elect, that he has fulfilled all for,
and done all for, for their peace with God: Therefore the Apostle says, If any
man sin, we have an Advocate (that is, a Pleader of Law and Justice) with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for 1 John 2. 1
our sins. It is the Law and Justice of God that Christ pleads for his Elect,
which he paid the uttermost farthing of their bond and debt to God for, by his
righteousness, suffering, and performances; whereby he obtains discharge from
them of the binding Law, and is the propitiation for their sins; And (says the
Apostle touching the Elect) He has put out the handwriting of Ordinances that
was against Col. 2. 14
us (meaning of all Laws before God) which were contrary to us, he even took it
out of the way, and fastened it upon his Cross.

But that of the Apostle (touching the Elect) where he says, Sin shall have no
more dominion over you; for ye are no more under the Romans 6. 14
Law, but under Grace, does still make more for their dissembling in believing:
For the Apostle says, Sin has no dominion or power over the Elect, because
the Law has no dominion or power over the Elect; they are no more under the
Law, but under Grace: Therefore we must needs conceive the Elect are in truth
discharged, disburthened, and freed from the dominion and power of the Law
before God, that is, the commands and bonds thereof, before they are or can be
discharged, unburthened, and freed from the dominion and power of sin before
God, which is the curse and death. And this Christ showed in the order of his
work to both: For first, Christ fulfilled all righteousness of the Law in his
life before men, that so the power and dominion of the Law, in the commands and
bond thereof, might be answered and satisfied before men; for this command and
bond was but that the Law might be kept and fulfilled of man: And then when he
had fulfilled the command and bond of the Law, he paid his death and blood for
the transgression of the Law, both made in Adam actually, vertually, and
successively, of all the Elect of God then in Adams loins, whereby Christ
leaves not his Elect neither under the command nor bond of the Law, which is
the dominion and power thereof; not under the penalty, curse, and death for sin
and transgression of the Law, which is the dominion and power of sin. Christ
has discharged his Elect, both of the power and dominion of the Law, and of
sin and curse.

And yet this sort of dissembling Believers, not here satisfied (as men not
humbled truly, but deceived by the spirit of Antichrist, which ever exalts
man) will say, They are not blocks and stones unto good unto the holy
commandment; They can endevor, and must; They have power in themselves, if not
to do all, and follow all the rule of the Commandment before God, yet by the
leave of God, by Gods grace, and by the help of Christ, they may: So that they
presume they have power enough of their own to do and follow the rule of the
Commandment before God, if God will give them leave, and give them grace to do
and follow it; at least, if Christ does help them in the work, if themselves be
not strong enough: Herein holding fo^th, as if God were sometime a Hinderer of
his workman, or not always a furtherer of his work and workman, and as if
Christ were as a journy-man at a pinch to help on a work charged or undertaken,
and themselves the principal workmen.

But God has revealed to his Elected Believers, that they know that themselves
lost all power, will, and inclination, to the doing any thing at all of the
holy and just Commandment of God in Gods sight, in the first sin and fall of
Adam, meaning in the estimation of God; and they know there remains to
themselves no power, will, or inclination to good, as in themselves, and of
themselves before God; as Paul, an Elected Believer, acknowledged of himself; I
find no means, says he, to perform that which is good before God: We cannot
Romans 7. 18 2 Cor. 3. 5
think any thing that is good as of our selves: Neither did God in the Promise,
or Covenant of Grace, made to Adam in Paradise, promise to restore or give
again to Adam and his E^^ct of mankind in general, the power which he had lost
of doing the commandment before him: but all the promise of power was made to
the seed of the woman, which seed was Christ; The seed of the woman shall break
the Serpents head, says God: he meant only, that his Christ Gal. 3. 10
should have power to break the Serpents head, to do the work of God, and loose
the works of the Devil. And they know, that in themselves dwells no good thing,
(as Paul confessed of himself,) 1 Ioh. 3 8
but that they are miserable, wretched, poor, blind, and naked in themselves.
Rev. 3. 17


And they know, that God (knowing the loss, weakness, and want of power in his
Elect, unto all good before him did therefore, according to his fore-purpose
and love, give and send his Christ, furnished with all power, righteousness and
wisdom of the Godhead, to perform all before God, touching the holy Law and
Commandment for them, and in their behalf, unto their salvation, without
charging upon his Elect any performance of Law and Commandment at all before
God, which they (he knew) had no power to do and which Christ had undertaken to
do for them, and had performed already before God. When a debt is paid, Justice
does not require it again: and therefore the Elect do not stand bound or
charged before God with the bond, commandment, or rule of the Law, upon
necessity to their salvation. And they know, that God did never hinder,
dishearten, or discountenance any man, in, or from the works of his holy
commandment; and that Christ is no such helper to man, to perform the good
work, as an additional power to the power that man has of his own: But that
Christ is the whole power, and the whole workman of the work, and man, or any
member of man, only the instrument, which he of his grace having sitted as he
pleased to make use of, in the work of godliness and goodness.

So that God knows, his Christ knows, and the Elect Believers, which are
rooted and built in Christ, and stablished in the faith, know, Col. 2 7
That for a man to say, as a Believer in Christ, that he is only saved by the
performances of Christ; and yet to believe that himself is bound to perform
something for his salvation, is but halting, hypocrisy, and dissimulation in
believing, and an undervaluing of Christ and his performances, as if they were
not able and suffici^n^ enough for man's salvation: A great injury to Christ and
his merit, and a charging of God with injustice; To take the whole debt of
Christ, and yet to hold the poor man bound when the debt is paid.

And for a man to say, he lost all power in Adams fall to do the Commandment
before God, and yet to say, he believes (if God will give him leave, if God
will give grace and favor, if Christ helps him) he can do it, or something of
the commandment, is mere halting, hypocrisy, and dissembling.

For, for a man to say, he lost all power, and to have some power still, is to
dissemble.

For a man to say, that God commands him to do a work, and to question his
leave to do it, is to dissemble.

For a man to qu^stion Gods favor to him in doing that he commands, is to
dissemble; for no servant of man will question his Masters leave, or favor, to
do his command: nor call him a helper, as a co-operator (as they speak and
intend) which is whole doer of the work, and which they ought to call the whole
and only workman, without halting, dissembling, hypocrisy and injury.

The second sort of hypocrites in believing, are those, which say, They believe
to be saved by Christ, if they stand and held in the says; but they believe
they may fall away from the faith, and commit such sin, as may shut them out
from salvation by Christ, and from believing to be saved by him, and so be in
the state and danger of damnation, and yet upon repentance may have forgiveness
then granted of God, and may believe again to be saved; and so may fall and
rise again often in their life: and as they dye in either state, be saved, or
damned.

Which manner of believing (pretended in the true God and Christ, holden forth
in the Word of Truth and Grace, to be a God and Christ of certainty, constancy,
justness, grace, unchangeable, without repentance) Mal. 3. 6
clearly appears to be hypocrisy and dissembling in believing: For their
believing is, indeed, in a God and Christ that is uncertain, inconstant, not
just, and in his grace changeable, and repenting of that he has done and
covenanted of his free grace, according to the inconstancy and changeableness
of weak, frail and failing man, which of himself has no power to do good
before God, to believe, to repent of evil, and so to continue; but to sin
only, and to do evil: The true God (true Believers know) is a constant God,
that loves those which he loves to the end; which according to his endless
love Elected those, which he of free grace did love, in and through Joh. 15. 1
his Christ, to be redeemed and carried on to their salvation, according to his
unchangeable love and purpose, by the performances of his Christ, the full
furnished undertaker for them all, without any condition or consideration of
man's weakness frailty, doing, changing, or failing: for this was his Covenant
of grace, which otherwise had been no Covenant of grace; but an harder Covenant
to man, now in weakness and frailty, yea in bondage of sin, then the Covenant
of Works was to Adam, when he had power and freedom of Will.

And true Believers know further, that Christ is unchangeable and sure in all
he undertook for the beloved chosen of God; and that he has done all for them,
and paid all for them in himself, and will certainly preserve and keep them all
to be presented blameless at his coming to judgment.

Therefore their believing of their possible often falling from, and rising to
Salvation again by Jesus Christ, grounded either upon God, his Christ, or man
himself, is but a fiction of another God and Christ then the word of Grace
holds forth, and a making man's salvation to depend upon himself, not the true
faith, but a false, halting, and dissembling says, yea to hold forth God and
his Christ inconstant, changeable, unjust in Covenant and promise, failing in
undertaking and performance, is blasphemy, Rabsheka's blasphemy.

The third sort of professing Believers in Christ, which are hypocrites in
their believing, are such as hold forth in their believing universal Redemption
by Christ Death and Blood, which, say they, was paid for all men's
transgression, for the Redemption and Salvation of all men, as a price
sufficient for the same, but not to be effectual and efficient to the
unbelievers thereof: That it is their believing only that makes the price paid
for their Redemption to be effectual to their Salvation.

This believing is ungodly and antichristian believing, for it exalts man and
man's own work, to man's own salvation, above Gods and Christ's work, above the
virtue of Gods love, free grace, truth, and Christ's blood and performance,
undervaluing all of God and Christ to man's work of believing to his Salvation;
as if the price of Christ's blood, and the precious blood of Christ, were but a
dead thing without the life and soul of man's believing, to act and effect the
salvation of man: Herein is horrible blasphemy against God and Christ, Gods
love, free grace, Truth, Christ's blood and performances: For Gods love,
purpose, decree, Covenant or Promise of his free Grace in Jesus Christ, his
Christ's precious blood and performances for man's salvation, are the whole
cause, both material and effectual, efficient, formal, and final, of man's
salvation, without any dependence of man, or his doing, to the same. Man's
believing is no efficient or cause thereof, but God only. Salvation is of the
Lord, says the Prophet: Our God is the Salvation of Israel: There is no
Salvation Jonah 2 9 Jer. 3. 23 Act 4. 12 1 Timothy 4. 10 Ephesians. 2. 5. 6
in any other, says the Apostle, speaking of Christ and his performances:
Christ is the Savior of all men, that is, which are, or shall be saved. By
grace ye are saved: We know that all things work together for the best to them
which love God, even to them which are called of his purpose: For those which
he knew before, he also predestined to be made like to the Image of his Son:
And whom he predestined, them also he called; and whom he called, them also
he justified; and whom he justified, them also he glorified. God predestined,
called, justified, and glorified before himself those he pleased before the
World.

What need more testimonies of Scripture for man's salvation only to be by God?
his love, grace, decree, purpose, and his Christ's undertakings and performances
to be perfected certainly to those which God did love; to be elected and
predestined, to be called, justified, and glorified by his Christ, and his
performances, for them undertaken, and all faithfully and effectually performed
by him, before men, in his obedience, suffering, cross, death, and resurrection.

But yet further, the Apostle says, He dyed for our sins, and rose again for
our justification; where the Apostle holds forth plainly, Romans 4. 25
that Christ justified those which he dyed for, that he paid his blood for. And
the same Apostle says, that being justified by his blood, we Romans 5. 9
are saved from wrath: Then it must needs follow, if Christ redeemed all
universally in paying his blood, and justified all universally that he paid his
blood for; and saves all from wrath that he justified by his blood, None shall
be damned: which must needs be the Conclusion of Universal Redemption, which is
denied in the whole Scripture.

And whereas they pretend man's believing to be the efficient cause that only
makes Christ's Redemption effectual to man; it is certain by the Scriptures,
that man has of himself, or in himself, as of himself, no power to believe in
Christ, or his Redemption, as he ought to believe, no more then he has to pray
as he ought to pray: Now the Apostle says, no man knows, or has power to
pray, as he ought: We know not to pray as we ought, but the Spirit makes Romans
8. 26
request for us, etc. Yea, the Apostle says, that in him dwells no good
thing, then no power to believe in Christ, or his Redemption: Romans 7. 18
Yea further he says, that he found no means to perform that which is good;
Therefore not to believe in Christ, or his Redemption. And further he says, We
cannot think any thing of our selves that is good; if not to think to believe
in Christ, much less to 2 Cor. 3. 5
believe in Christ, to believe his Redemption: And David says, There is none
that does good, no not one; if no good, then not to believe Psa. 14. 3
in Christ, for that is a great good thing.

It is the Spirit, sent by Christ to man, that has the power to do the good
work of praying and believing for man; The Spirit it self (that is, alone)
makes request for us, says the Apostle, not man himself: Indeed the Spirit
fitteth the Soul, or heart of man, to be his Instrument in the work of
believing, as the pen is the instrument of the writer in his writing; but the
believing is no more man's Believing, then the Writing is the Pens Writing.

The Spirit opens the blind eyes of man's soul, (as the Prophet Psa. 146. 8
Isai. 29. 18 and 35 5 and 42. 7
says,) and holds forth Jesus Christ, and his Redemption, by his precious
blood paid, his justification and salvation, by the same and other his
performances, and by the power of the enlightening, acting, and guiding of the
Spirit, the blind eyes of the Soul, opened, are the instruments of the Spirit,
fitted to behold, see, and apprehend Jesus Christ, his Redemption made by the
price of his blood paid, his Justification and Salvation wrought out: So that
the believing of Gods Elect is none of their own work, but the work of the
Spirit every way; it is only the manifestation and evidence of Christ, etc.
made by the opening the blind eyes of the reason and understanding, to let in
Christ, and to be instruments for apprehending and applying the same to the
soul: And so the Apostle describes or defines faith; Faith (says he) is the
evidence of things that are not seen: Faith is Heb. 11. 1.
the fruit of the spirit, (says the Apostle;) not of man, or the flesh, but of
the spirit; yet, not before redemption and justification, effected Gal. 5 22,
and perfected, but only brought forth and manifested after redemption,
justification and salvation, made sure; which notwithstanding are first made
manifest and known to the elected believer, when by grace he is made a believer.

These premises plainly conclude, that says is not the cause efficient, or
maker of the Redemption of Christ, effectual to man the believer; nor the
antecedent to justification, and assurance to salvation; but only the
subsequent, consequent, or fruit following the manifestation and evidence of
the same, to the elect Believer, where it pleases God to bestow this grace
upon his Elect.

And charity will not suffer us to doubt, but that many which die before faith
is manifest in them, are of Gods Elect: For (no doubt, but that the just God
gives his Christ: all those he paid for with his precious blood; And that
neither the Devil, Hell, unbelief, nor any sin can take them out of Christ's
hands, nor hinder him of those he Ioh. 17. 12. v. 28.
paid for.

Obj. The Apostle says, We conclude that a man is justified by Faith,
Therefore faith is the cause of justification.

Answ. Faith is there meant of the manifestation of justification; as Romans 8. 28
if the Apostle had said; we conclude, that the justification of a man; which
first manifested and made known to him, by believing, or in Heb. 11. 1.
believing, then a man has the first evidence thereof, faith is the evidence
of things that are not seen.

Obj. Christ says, he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, Mark 16.
16.
he that believes not shall be damned: therefore none shall be saved, but
those which believe, none that are prevented by death, which did not believe,
shall be saved.

Answ. It is to be understood of those which slight, despise, and contemn the
faith and believing in Jesus Christ, the manifestation and knowing of
Redemption, justification, and ^^ivation only by Christ.

Obj. The Apostle says, as many as were ordained to eternal life or salvation,
believed therefore all that are ordained to eternal life, Acts 18 48.
do believe, and none but believers are ordained to eternal life. All must be
damned that believe not.

Answ. This Text is to be understood, of as many of those present; which heard
the word of the Apostle preached at that time, not of all men and women, young
and old, when, where, and whatsoever, whereof many never heard the Gospel
preached, and are departed Nehem. 1. 7
this life not utterly without hope to us, of their eternal life, though
without manifestation thereof in believing: the Lord knows who are his, Paul
was elected in Christ before the world, and made sure of Ephesians. 1. 4 1 (...) 13.
eternal l^fe: when Paul persecuted the Church, and did it in unbelief, he had
not says.

The fourth sort of professing believers in Christ, which are Hypocrites, are
such, as the Apostle speaks of, that turn the grace of God Iud 4
into lasciviousnes or wantonness, which rather use the liberty that they
conceive in their corrupt understandings, the grace of God, Christ brings to
believers, for to be an occasion to the flesh, to give unto Gal 5. 13.
them the raines of licenciousness and sinning, that the abounding of grace
above sin, spoken by the Apostle, gives all liberty to do any sin, Romans 5. 10
the flesh inclines unto. And for that the Prophet says, all their
iniquities, being believers, are laid upon Christ. And for that the Apostle
says, he has born them already upon the tree in his body, and washed Isa. 53.
6.
them away with his blood. There is no conscience or question (say they) to be
made of sinning, or not sinning, grace has made no stop or exception of
sinning.

This believing is ungodly, and like to the woman's e^ting of the forbidden
fruit; wherein the old Serpent the devil, made her believe there was no sin: so
the Devil makes these believe there is no sin in this their believing, that is
most abominable sin in the sight of God.

For the faith and believing, which is the fruit of the spirit, is quite
contrary believing; for although the true says, which is the fruit of the
spirit of Christ, apprehends the love and grace of God in their election, in
the promise, in the laying of all their sins and iniquities upon Christ, and in
Christ's bearing them in his body upon the tree, and in his washing them away by
his blood. Yet they which have this true faith, do not believe that Christ
leaves them there to themselves, to live after the flesh licenciously with
loose reigns of sinning. But they believe the free grace of God, that has done
these great things for them, through Jesus Christ's performances, will go along
with them, and teach them, that is, fit them, enable, direct and guide them as
the instruments of his spirit, to deny ungodlines and worldly lusts, and to
Tit. 2 11.
live soberly godly, and righteously in this present world.

That the spirit of Jesus Christ will fit them to be his instruments of Romans 8.
13
mortifying the deeds of the flesh by the spirit, and lead them, that they
shall walk after the spirit, and favor the things of the spirit; yea that the
more they have of the spirit in them, the more the fruit of the spirit will
appear in them, in all manner of goodness, and less of the flesh unto sin and
wickedness. The more of Christ they have, the more will Christ and his
righteousness shine in them. The manifestation of 1 Cor. 12. 7.
the spirit, says the Apostle, is given to every to profit, or do good
withal, where good is not the spirit is not, where sin is abounding, the
spirit is wanting. 1 Cor. 12. 3.


No man, says the Apostle, can call Jesus Christ the Lord, but by the Mar. 7.
1.
Holy Ghost, meaning, except he be an Hypocrite. Therefore those which call
Jesus Christ their Lord and Savior, for their liberty of sinning, Gal. 5. 23.
are palpable Hypocrites. For sin is not the fruit of the spirit, but goodness
and righteousness.

It is grace indeed from Christ to wretched sinful man, to have wrought out his
deliverance from Hell and from sin, against his good God: But it were no grace
from Christ to have wrought forth for Leu^^. 19. 17. Romans 8. 13 P^^. 37. 24, v.
35.
man a liberty to sin against his good God. But herein appears the grace of
Christ to his elected believers, that he suffers them not to sin, as the
flesh lusts, that he mortifieth sin in them by his spirit.

That though they fall, they shall not be cast of, for the Lord puts Ierem.
32. 40^
under his hand.

That the righteous shall never be forsaken, I will put such a fear into their
hearts, says the Lord, with whom I have made my Covenant, that they shall
never depart from me.

Christ's Government of his Church upon Earth.
The truths and lights in this Treatise, discover the errors of the
Independents, Anabaptists, and Brownists, and of their pharasaical Legalists,
the great opposites, and may reconcile them all through the power and working
of the grace of Jesus Christ, touching Christ's Government of his Church here
upon Earth.

IF those amongst us which are called Independents, and the rest which harp of
that string, who to uphold their Independency and immunity amongst men.
Therefore hold forth Christ their only head, King, Ruler, Governor, Lord, Law
giver, Magistrate; Pastor, and Teacher, etc. and not man. And that Christ only
has the office and power to rule, govern, give Laws, feed, teach, etc. and no
man.

And that the Laws given by man to the republique and Kingdom, whereof Christ
is the head, King, Governor and Lawgiver only, are not of bounden duty and
Conscience to be obeyed. But only those given by Christ himself, and under his
rule and Government only.

If those I say which hold forth Christ thus unto men, do also further hold him
forth, to have all power to good, all good, wisdom, righteousness, holiness,
and true goodness in himself alone; And that by his own soul and absolute power
he does all good things, whether good rule, Government, Order, Law-giving; yea,
love, joy, peace, patience, meekness, righteousness, temperance, yea all
goodness whatsoever, as he pleases in his universal national political,
parochial particular Church, and in any member of any of them, through his holy
and incomprehensible spirit in them, sent unto them for their comfort, keeping,
preserving, and fitting to the Kingdom of glory, and the praise and glory of
his grace for ever.

And that every good thing among the Sons of men, done in truth, Gods sight
good, so done, and is the deed of Christ himself, by his powerful spirit, and
not of the will of man, but of the will of God only.

And if those do acknowledge, that in man as himself dwells no good thing:
And that in and of himself he has no means to perform that which is good
before God, as Paul the Apostle of Christ did Romans 7. 18
confess and acknowledge of himself.

And that they have no power to good, before God, or can think or do any good
themselves of themselves, but that they know they are wretched, miserable,
poor, blind, and naked. And so by consequence, Rev. 3. 17.
that man, or men, of their own power and wisdom, cannot rule well, govern
well, order well, give Laws well, in Gods sight, with any goodness in their
ruling, ordering, Law-giving, teaching; no, nor can love well, rejoice well,
nor pray well, as they ought to pray, (as the Apostle says) we cannot pray as
we ought, that is, with any goodness Romans 8 26.
in our prayers.

And if those will acknowledge this undoubted truth, That although man cannot
do these, or any good things of himself of the holy Law, and Commandment before
God: yet because it pleases Christ, all such works of righteousness and
goodness, should be done among his Elect, and other, to the glory of the Father
in Heaven, in the way of man's pilgrimage, (as Christ speaks,) Let your light
so shine before men, that they seeing your good works, may glorify your Father
which Mat. 5. 16.
is in Heaven.

And that Christ therefore has sent his holy spirit to his universal,
national, political, parochial, or particular Church, (all being but one
Catholic Church, though severed into particulars) and to every member of the
same, to bear and hold forth such fruit of his spirit of all manner of
goodness, as should be most fit and most behoofful to all or any of them, for
the glory of the Father, and their comfort, whether it be the goodness of
ruling, governing, ordering, commanding, teaching, obeying, serving, loving,
etc. And of his great grace to man, to make and fit corrupted man in his
Members of soul and body, (as he pleases) to be his instruments of such his
good and righteous works, best befitting public and private, universal,
national, political, parochial, and every particular Church, and every member
thereof, in their Relations to the glory of God, and the good and comfort of
his elect people.

And that those good and righteous works, which Christ does by his spirit in
his Elect, He of his grace to his Elect, in his word of Romans 4. 6.
grace, imputes and accounts to them, and calls them their works, (as if
they had been done of themselves,) Although they were but instruments only of
his spirit, whereby, or wherewith Christ himself by his spirit did them. As if
a writer of a good matter should sharp, fit, lead, and guide his pen
wherewithal he writes, and should afterward praise his pen, and say, my pen
writ this good matter.

Certainly man is no more the doer of the good of the holy Commandment, then
the pen of the writer is the writer of the good matter. It is Christ only of
his grace, that accounts it unto man, to be man's, and of grace to call it
man's. So (through his great grace) as he accounts his own works and doings,
to be the works and doings of his Elect, and calls them their works, whereof
they are only instruments fitted of him and by him, not of, nor by themselves;
even so those which are but his fitted instruments, he in his word of grace,
calls the doers of the work, which himself only does; And gives them the
titles of the doers of his work, which are his own only titles due and proper
to himself, the doer in truth only. So the Lord made and called Saul, David and
Solomon, Kings over Israel. Now my 1 Samuel 12 13. 1 Samuel 16. 1. 1 King. 3. 37.
Act. 7. 35.
Lord and God, says Solomon, thou have made me King over Israel, instead of my
Father David. So God made, and called Moses, a Prince, a Judge, and a deliverer
of his people Israel out of Egypt. Moses whom they forsook, saying, who made
thee a Prince and a Judge? The same God sent for a Prince and a deliverer. So
God made and called Judah his Lawgiver, and likewise Moses his Law giver to
his people, saying, Judah is my Lawgiver. The Law came by Moses. God called
Saul, David, Solomon, by the names of Kings, Rulers, Psalm. 6^. 7 Joh. 1. 17.
and Governors. And he called Moses by the name of Prince, Judge, and
Deliverer. And he called Judah and Moses by the name of Lawgivers, which names,
titles, and works of the Offices of such titles, although, were only his, and
proper to him alone. As the Prophet Isaiah says, The Lord is our Judge, the
Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us. As if he should
have plainly said, There is Isa. 33. 22.
no Judge, Lawgiver, or King that can save, or do man any good, but the Lord,
(as being such:) And the Apostle says, There is one only Lawgiver, that is
able to save and destroy; who art thou that judge Jam. 4. 12. Ephesians. 1. 21.
26. Mat. 27. 18
another man? (meaning) there is none but that one Christ, to whom the Father
has given and committed all judgment and power, yea made all unto good, and
unto all that can do any good, either to save righteously, or destroy
righteously, or judge righteously, but only Christ Jesus the righteous. Yet the
Lord Jesus Christ, can and may do these good things, and works, for the good
and comfort of his Church, and for his own glory, (as he pleases) by any means
and Instruments, as he pleases, even as he smote the waters of Egypt with
Moses, rod, and the waters were turned into blood. And with the same smote the
Rock, and the waters gushed out, and overthrew the Exodus 7. 20
walls of Jericho, by the sound of Trumpets of Rams Horns. And sed seven
thousand, and again five thousand men, besides women and Children, Joshua 6. 20
Mat. 14. 19 Mat. 15. 34 John 2.
with a few Loaves and Fishes; And turned the water into wine.

So Christ can do his good works of all sorts, both public and private, yea
in public and private, for his universal, national, and particular Church and
people, to their best behoof and comfort, by the Instrument of man or men, both
in ruling, governing, ordering, Lawgiving, commanding, and in obeying, serving,
and submitting; which good works of obeying, submitting, and serving, Christ
also himself did upon earth, being present; I am among you (says he) as one
that serves: he took upon him the form of a Servant, and made himself Luke 22.
27. Phil. 2. 7.
of no reputation, he submitted and humbled himself unto death: To show that
his goodness is as well, yea as much in obeying, submiting, and serving, as in
ruling and governing; and he makes men his instruments of those goodnesses and
good works, as behoofful for the good and comfort of his Church and people, and
the societies of men in the way of their pilgrimage, for private and public,
as governing, Law-giving, teaching and commanding, is good, and behoofful for
his glory, and the good of his Church and requblique. And are now those
instruments of Christ, which he of his grace honors with his own Names and
Titles of his Offices, (as King, Lord, Prince, Ruler, Governor, Law giver, and
the rest) to be honored with the same Titles, as the Instruments of Christ our
God?

And are not the Ruling, Governing, ordering, Law-giving, commanding, teaching
of Christ by his spirit, in those his Instruments of his ruling, governing,
commanding, judging, and the rest, wrought, done, and brought forth by his
spirit in them, as the fruits of his spirit, by or with them his Instruments,
and of his grace imputed, accounted and called by Christ himself, there ruling,
governing, judging, Lawgiving, ordering, commanding, and teaching (though they
be Christ's) to be accounted and called of men, their ruling, governing, and
therest, though they be but instruments thereof? when as Christ our God himself
so accounts and calls them there, (providing always) that they do
acknowledge, as Peter did, It Act 3. 12. 16. Rev. 22. 9.
is not through our own power or godliness, that we have done this, but the
name and power of Jesus has done it. And as the Angel did to John; I am thy
Fellow Servants, worship God; that is, that men do not take Christ's honor to
themselves, not give Christ's honor to men.

Then do not those manifest themselves, not to have the spirit of Christ, whose
fruit is all manner of goodness, as well the goodness of obeying, submitting
and serving, as the goodness of ruling, governing, ordering, Lawgiving,
commanding, and teaching, etc. and so to be none of Christ's; for the Apostle
says, he that has not the spirit of Christ, is none of his. Yea rather do
those not bewray themselves to have the spirit of Antichrist, that deny and
withstand to obey, humble, submit, and do service to such Christ's ruling,
governing, ordering, Law-giving, commanding, teaching, and judging, as is
wrought, done, and performed of Christ, by or with his instruments of men? or
that deny to account, and call such Christ's instruments, Kings, Lords,
Governors, Lawgivers, and the rest, as Christ himself so calls of his grace;
or that deny to call that Christ's Government of his Church, which is done of
him, by and with his fitted instruments of men: for 1 Cor. 15. 25. Heb. 5. 6.
and chap. 6. 20. and 7. 3.
Christ is a King, Priest and Prophet, still; he shall reign till all his
enemies be subdued under his feet: he is a Priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedeck: yea certainly, Christ is not a titular King, but does execute his
Offices of King, Priest and Prophet, still amongst men, for the good comfort
and society of those which are his, in his power, wisdom and grace, by and with
his instruments of men, in the ruling, governing, ordering, Law-giving,
judging, commanding, teaching, etc. and in obeying, submitting, and serving:
And to make this clear and plain unto men, the Apostle of Christ (himself being
the instrument of Christ's spirit) advertiseth much to Christians and
Christian-churches, of ruling, preaching, or prophesying, teaching, waiting on
the office men have, exhorting, doing service, giving honor; And of submitting
to powers, paying tribute, resisting See Romans 12. Rom 13. 1 Timothy 2
of powers, praying for Kings and all that are in authority, that under them we
may lead a godly and peaceable life, and many more touching ruling, governing
and obeying. And wherefore should the Apostle of Christ hold forth these things
belonging to the Church and republique of Christ, but to show that these good
things being Christ's performances in his Church and republique, which has only
power to do that which is good by his spirit, in his Elect with, them his
instruments: for man himself of himself can do none of these good things (as
has been showed) That those are, and in those is, Christ's Government of his
Church, as by, and with his fitted instruments.

Neither (touching Gods Elect people) is the Government of his Church (taken
for inward spiritual Government) Christ's Government only, and Republique
Government, taken for outward and bodily Government, man's Government, left to
man's corrupt wisdom, reason and power; for then Christ should not do all good
to and for his Elect people, then the Government of the Republique of Gods
people must needs be evil wholly; for man of himself cannot do and bring forth
with all his wisdom, reason and power any thing that is good, either spiritual
or bodily, inward or outward, before God: I Romans 7. 18
find no means to perform that which is good, says Paul: But he that is the
Keeper of Israel, keeps spiritually and bodily, inwardly and outwardly, does
govern his people Israel, his chosen ones, spiritually and bodily, does all
good to them by his Spirit in them, with such fited means as he knows best
and pleases for their good; for the Apostle says to Gods people, The Lord
cares for you. 1 Pet. 5. 7.


And why should men question where Christ's Government of his Church is, or what
the Government of Christ's Church is, when they see Christ has always had, has
now, and undoubtedly will always have his Instruments of his goodness, the
fruits of his Spirit, both in ruling, governing, and the rest of that kind, and
also of obeying, submitting and serving, for the comfort and society of his
Church and people in the way of their pilgrimage, and for his own glory? As he
had Abraham his Instrument, and his most public Instrument, then, of his
Church, to govern and teach, by him, the Church in his house, Genesis 18.
and those that belonged to him: And Moses, and Aaron, and Joshua, his
Instruments, to govern, teach and take such other offices of his (as he
pleased) to make them his fitted Instruments in his Church, the people of
Israel. And after Joshua, the Judges, David the King, Solomon, and others, to
judge and govern (being his Instruments:) And afterward his Apostles, Bishops,
or Overseers, Presbyters, Christian Emperors, Kings, and (by whatsoever names
or titles they were called) many other his Instruments of his goodness of
ordering, governing and teaching his Church: And whilst goodness appeared or
appears in the ruling, governing, ordering, Lawgiving, judging, teaching and
Isai. 8, 20. Act. 20. 32
guiding of the Church according to Christ's Law given in Grace and the
Testimonies, is not this Christ's governing of his Church? For it is sure, there
is no true goodness nor righteousness but that which is Christ's, but that which
is the fruit of Christ's Spirit, which is always accompanied with the rest of
the fruits of Christ's Spirit, Love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
meekness, righteousness, faith, temperance, Gal. 5. 22.
and all manner of goodness, as the Apostle speaks: Certainly that was the
Government that was laid upon Christ's shoulders, Isai. 9. 6.
and is still his Government, ordering, teaching and guiding, which has true
goodness, righteousness, meekness, love and peace, known to be Christ's, by
holding forth the fruits of the Spirit, and agreeing to Christ's Isai. 8. 20.
Acts 14. 3. Act. 20. 32
Law given in Grace, and the Testimonies, whomsoever he pleases to make his
Instruments of the same; and those in whom Christ is by his Spirit, are made
and fitted by his Spirit to be his Instruments of the goodness of obeying,
submitting and serving willingly and joyfully as unto Christ, his Government,
Order, Law, guiding and teaching; having goodness, it is Christ's, although by
or with the instrument of man: Therefore the Apostle says, Be obedient as unto
Christ, as the servants Ephesians. 4 6 7
of Christ; and again, Serving the Lord, and not men. Certainly man of himself
cannot rule well, neither can man of himself obey well, nor do any good thing:
This David, a King and Prophet, a man after Gods own heart, shows; There is
none (says he) that does good, no not on^: Psalm. 14. 3
And the Apostle of Christ also says, I find no means to perform that which is
good. It is certainly true, that which the Spirit writes to the Romans 7. 18
Angel or Minister of the Church of Laodicea, of all men, Thou art wretched,
miserable, poor, blind and naked, meaning in respect of good, Rev. 3. 17
and righteousness before God.

Good ruling and governing is Christ's ruling and governing, and good obeying is
Christ's obeying; they are the good works of Christ wrought by his Spirit in
man, and brought forth of his Spirit by or with the fitted Instrument of man;
and no doubt but they that have the Spirit of Christ, their conscience will
tell them, that unto good ruling, governing, teaching, ordering and commanding,
it pleases Christ well, that there be good obeying and submitting, by or
through whatsoever means and Instruments Christ holds forth the same, as he
pleases.

If Independents, and those with them, acknowledge that Christ has power to
good only, and does all good in man only by his holy Spirit sent to man, of
ruling and obeying, and whatsoever else; and that man himself of himself can do
no good; and that the good ruling, governing, Lawgiving, judging, ordering and
teaching, done of Christ, by and with his Instruments, fitted of him, by his
Spirit, given them, for the good, comfort, and society of his people in the way
of their pilgrimage, is the Rule and Government of Christ himself, though with
the Instrument of man, and of his pleasure and grace accounted man's by him (as
he does all manner of his righteous and good works, love, joy, peace, etc. done
of him by his Spirit in them) which he pleases, of his grace, to make his
Instruments of the same, and of his grace, as appears in the word of grace,
names and calls them theirs: Then there will be no question of Christ's
Government of his Church, nor of the obedience, submission and service due to
his Government, without which the question is not, nor will be satisfied with
answer: and in truth it is the same of righteousness only, that gives light to
them that sit in darkness and the shadow of death, to guide their feet in the
way of peace.

The Legalists strive much about this undecided question of Christ's Government
of his Church, against the Independents, Anabaptists, and Brownists, much of
the same way; but being misled by the Spirit of Antichrist, they prevail
little; for all their Arguments are but man's, as Antiquities, Customs, humane
Reasons, conveniences and inconveniences, the letter of the Scripture of Laws
and Ordinances; but they draw not so deep as out of Jacobs Well, the fountain
of Grace.

They say, Though Christ has power over all, and has Almighty power, yet man
has power of his own unto good, as unto evil; and that man has power of his
own to get to himself habitual virtues, by studying, laboring, practicing, and
endeavoring the same.

And they say and hold forth, That although Christ be King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, that is, supreme King, supreme Prince and Lord, etc. yet there are
Kings, Princes and Lords upon Earth; and that Kings, Princes and Lords upon
Earth, are Kings, Princes and Lords of themselves, and their Titles are their
own, of their own right, property and interest; and that they by their own
power, rule, govern, command, and order, their people under them, and of their
own right; and that by their own power and right they do and may command the
whole Church and people under them, and all ought to obey and do service to
them, and submit to their power and command, as their Kings, Princes and Lords
absolute; and that through this their power, ruling, governing, Lawgiving,
judging, and the rest, the people have their peace, safety, society and
communion; and that they have right to honor for the same.

But these and such attributions to man, favor too much of the spirit that
dis-throneth Christ, and exalts man into the Throne of Christ.

There is no man that is a King, Priest, or Prophet of himself; Christ only is
so of himself by the eternal Unction; man is nothing of good himself: Therefore
the Apostle says, If any man think himself to be somewhat when as he is
nothing, he deceives himself in his own imagination. Gal. 6. 3.


And there is no man, whatsoever he be, that has any power to Man's power
rotten and corrupted. See Iam. 4 13. 14, 15 Romans 13. 1
get, or procure to himself, an habit of holy virtue or virtues, or any
goodness before God, by his own labor, industry, study, practice, or endevor;
or that has any power of his own to any good: All power (says the Apostle) is
of God; it is Gods power, not man's own: neither can any man do any thing that
is good of himself, although he has the Spirit of Christ; for so David, who
had the Spirit of Christ, acknowledged of himself, and all others; There is
none that does Psalm. 14. 3
good (says he,) no not one: And Paul, which had received the Spirit of
Christ, acknowledged the same of himself, saying, I find no means Romans 3. 10
11, 12 Romans 7. 18 Isai. 64 6
to perform that which is good: It is Christ only, by his Spirit, that has
power, and that does the good work, by or with his fitted instrument of man (of
his grace;) and accounts the work done by his Spirit (of his grace) the work
of man, his instruments only thereof, made and fitted by his Spirit, whereby
and wherewith Christ does the work.

And so, as the good works of Kings, and Rulers, and Governors, are not theirs,
but Christ's; or theirs only by account and of grace, as they are the
instruments of Christ: So their Titles of Kings, Rulers, Governors, Lawgivers,
Judges, Teachers, and the rest, are not man's Titles by any merit, interest, or
property, they have to them, or in any of them, but only of grace and account;
as Paul, called an Apostle, acknowledged he had no property or interest to that
Title of Apostle, but by account and grace; By the grace of God (says he) I am
that I am: I am an Apostle, but by the grace of God it is that I 1 Cor. 15 10
am so; not of my self, my property or interest thereto.

Man is not of any property King or Lord over Gods heritage. 1 Pet. 5. 3


It is Christ alone that is of property, due, right, merit, and interest, King,
Priest, and Prophet, Lord, Ruler, Governor, Lawgiver, Judge, Teacher; and men
only by account and grace so called and honored of Christ: and they all to cast
their crowns down to the ground before him; and to give and ascribe all honor,
glory, power, might, and Rev. 4. 10
majesty unto him which is all in all.

And thus the discovery of the Errors of Independents, Anabaptists and
Brownists, touching Christ's Government of his Church, is made by the Spirit of
grace and truth: And also of the Error of the Legalists touching the same; and
their Reconciliation to the Truth, by the grace and power of him that is able
to open the eyes of the blind, and bring him home that wandereth and goes
astray.

And certainly, if Independents, Legalists, and all Dependants will acknowledge
the undoubtable truth, That Christ did ever give, does, and will ever give, his
holy Spirit of Adoption to all of his Elect people, to all of his Church
catholic; as the Apostle says undoubtedly of all those, We have received the
Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father: And again, He dwells in
you, and shall be in Romans 8. 15 John 14. 1 Romans 8. 9 2 Cor. 13. 5
you, (meaning by his Spirit:) And further, If any man has not the Spirit of
Christ, the same is none of his. And yet further, Know ye not your own selves,
how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates?

And also, if they will acknowledge, That man has no power nor wisdom to do any
good thing of himself; That all power unto good Psa. 62. 11 Mat. 6. 13
belongs unto good only; That his is the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory
for ever, (as Christ himself taught.) And if they will acknowledge, That Christ,
by his Spirit given to his Church (disposed as he pleases) does, works, and
brings forth all good things, for public and private, for the whole Church
and particular; as well of ruling, governing, lawgiving, ordering, commanding,
judging, teaching, and guiding; as also of obeying, submitting, and serving,
for his own honor and glory, and for the good comfort and society of his
people, by or with such his instruments of men, fitted by his Spirit, as he
pleases.

Then they must needs conclude, That this is Christ's Government of his Church,
which is made, done, and wrought by his Spirit, by or with such fitted
instruments of men, as are held forth in the word of Grace and Testimonies, and
guided by his Spirit (as he pleases,) having evidence of the fruits of the
Spirit, love, joy, peace, long-suffering, righteousness, gentleness, goodness,
faith, meekness, and temperance, always accompanying the same. Gal. 5. 22


And as Christ governs his Church upon Earth by diverse his fitted instruments
of his Spirit, called by him with his own names and titles, Kings, Princes,
Lords, Rulers, Governors, Lawgivers, Judges, Bishops or Overseers, Presbyters
or Elders, Pastors, Teachers, Deacons, Ministers, Helpers, or whatsoever other
names mentioned in the Word of Grace, in such place and office of his, as he
pleases to make them fit for by his Spirit of Grace, to be his instruments in
his complete Government of his Church, and Republique thereof.

So Christ being the Head of his Church, and being the Head of the whole body
of his Church in all things upon Earth, thus governed by him (as the Apostle
says) He has undoubtedly his instruments of Ephesians. 4. 26
his Headship of his Church severed into many National Churches, to which his
Government belongs: And certainly, to that instrument of Christ upon Earth,
which he has fitted and placed for the first and principal of his Government
in his ordination and subordination, Christ is well pleased to account to him
his honor and title of Head of that National, Political, and Parochial Church.
So Samuel, the Prophet of God, accounted the same to Saul, being made King;
When 1 Samuel 11 17
thou wast little in thine own sight (says Samuel) wast thou not made Head
over the Tribes of Israel? for the Lord anointed thee to be King over Israel.
And David the King praised the Lord, saying, Thou have preserved me to be Head
over Nations. a Sam. 22 44


Now to Christ the Head (says the Apostle) the whole body is coupled, and knit
together in every joint, for the increase of the body, Ephesians. 4. 16
unto the edifying of itself in love: So the whole body of the Church is
coupled and knit to Christ's instrumental Head, for the good and benefit
thereof, in all things of goodness to be directed by the Head, for the edifying
of the whole in love: Every body has his head, otherwise it were a monster.

The Body of Christ upon Earth cannot be without an Head of Christ's upon Earth,
in which have rested all disquietness and questions of the Church from the
beginning: As in Moses, Joshuah, the Judges, David, Solomon, and the rest of
the good Kings; in the Apostles of Christ, and other the Heads of the Church
ever sithence, and from the beginning.

Non bona tam sequitur, quam bona prima fuit.

When the Son of man shall come, shall he find Faith upon the Luke 18. 8
Earth?

JOHN. 15. 5. -- Without me you can do nothing.
The right meaning and understanding of these words of Christ gives light to
the Truths in these Treatises, which must needs be included in one of these six
Expressions following.

First, That Christ is the Helper of man in the good work.

Or secondly, That Christ is a co-operator with man in the work.

Or thirdly, That Christ is the Instrument of man in the work.

Or fourthly, That man is the Helper of Christ in the work.

Or fifthly, That man is the co-operator with Christ in the work.

Or sixthly, That man is the Instrument only of Christ in the work.

Solut. If Christ be the Helper of man in the work, then is man the beginner
and master of the work, the principal worker or workman of the work, and man is
exalted above Christ.

If Christ be a co-operator with man, then Christ is only a partner with man in
the work, and so Christ has only his share with man of the work, Christ is
disthroned.

If Christ be the Instrument of man in the work, then Christ is not the doer of
the work, but man is the doer; the work is wholly man's: for the Instrument is
only fitted, guided, and acted by the workman; and so is Christ only fitted,
guided, and acted by man, if Christ be his Instrument: man is exalted above
Christ.

If man be the Helper of Christ in the good work, then Christ is not able and
strong enough, or not sufficient to do and perform the good deed, but has need
of man's Help: so man is exalted, which 2 Cor. 12 11 Gal. 6. 3
is nothing, (as the Apostle says.)

If man be a co-operator with Christ in the good work, then man may of right
claim a share in the work, and of the work that is righteous; and so man has
something to boast of, contrary to the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9. 16
and man is exalted.

If man be only (by grace) a fitted Instrument of Christ in his good and
righteous work (as he pleases,) then Christ is the only doer and workman of
the work, and the work is wholly Christ's; the honor wholly belongs to him: and
man is so made graciously his Instrument also of the praise and glory of his
grace; especially for Christ's accounting and imputing his own work, and the
righteousness thereof, to man; as Paul says David said, Blessed is the man to
whomthe Lord imputes righteousness without works of his own. To. 4. 6, 7


To this agrees that of the Apostle, Give, or yield your members instruments
of righteousness unto God: And again, Yet it was not Romans 6 13 1 Cor. 15. 10
Mat. 10. 20
I that labored, but the grace of God with me, (meaning in his instrument.) So
Christ told his Disciples, It is not you that speak, but the Spirit of the
Father in you; you are but the instruments.

So David said, My tongue is the pen of a ready writer; that is, the Psalm. 45 1
instrument of the Spirit of God, as the pen is of the writer.

The pen writes not without the writer, no more can man do the good thing
without Christ the doer; as Christ says in the Text, Without me you can do
nothing; no, not being the branches of the Vine, the Elect of God: The branch
cannot bear and hold forth the fruit without the Vine and spirits thereof.

This way Christ indeed is exalted, as God exalted him; and any the other ways
not so, but dis-throned.

FINIS.

