A Spiritual SNAPSACKE FOR THE PARLIAMENT SOVLDIERS CONTAINING, Cordial
Encouragements, Effectual Persuasions, and hopeful Directions, unto the
Successful prosecution of this present CAUSE.

BY J. P.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Overton, in the Year, 1643.

To His Excellence ROBERT EARL OF ESSEX; Viscount Hereford, Baron Ferrars of
Chartley, Lord Bourcheir and Lovaine, One of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, and General of the Army raised by the Parliament, in Defense
of the true Protestant Religion, his Majesty's Person, the Laws and Liberties
of the Kingdom, and the Privileges of Parliament.
Right Honorable,
Greatness and Goodness as they are infinitely in GOD, so in what degree they
concentre in Man, they have a God like Divine influence and power to create
Love, and Respect Boldness and Reverence in Persons Inferior; Your goodness
has made you Great, and your Greatness (contrary to common Experience) has
made you Good; and both these has emboldened me humbly to solicit your
Excellence, that this small Snapsacke, upon the strictest search of your
dilligent Sentinels, and approbation thereof, may freely pass among your
Common Soldiers: It is not my presumption to present your Excellence, with the
broken Morsells Crammed up therein, knowing that Curious Carving fit for such a
personage, becomes not a Snap sack; and well Considering, both your plentiful
Supply from your Spiritual Quartermasters, and mine own insufficiency, being
neither a Prophet, nor a Prophets Son: but the best of my hopes, is your
EXCELLENCIES permission of its free Portage; and could it procure the light of
your countenance, and your Command of it is use as a taken hereof it would be to
its Author like the filling of the poor Widows Vess^lls for the Oil in the
Cruce, a greater reward, then ever ^^s looked for: howsoever, the Eternal God,
and our succeeding Posterity shall call you blessed for your Love, Zeal, and
Courage, in Gods and your Countries Cause: And that the Almighty may not only
make you a Moses, to lead his Israel out of Egypt, and bring you to Mount Nebo
in the sight of the good Land; But a Ioshuah to bring them into the Possession
thereof, removing all Obstacles, supplying all wants, in your way; fill you
withal the divine qualifications of the worthies of Israel; make you Strong
and of good Courage, be with you, never leave you nor forsake you, is the
earnest Prayer, as of many thousands the Israelites of GOD, so amongst them, of
your EXCELLENCIES most humbly Devoted, Unworthy, whose Name should be Spel'd
out,

J. P.

A SPIRITVALL SNAPSACKE FOR THE PARLIAMENT SOVLDIERS.
MAN is borne to sorrow, because borne in sin, and his insensible security is
his chiefest misery; common Soldiers and common Saylors are most commonly
under the shadow of death, and seldom mindful of another life; the
consideration whereof, is the ground of our present discourse; wherein as
brevitie must be our practice; because many morsells must be crammed up in a
small Snapsack; so spiritualitie must be our Subject for these Reasons:

First, because the Soldiers for whom this is chiefly intended, have a
spiritual Palate, the bread of life is their Honeycomb, and Angels food their
fare, Gods word is their delight, and all their well Springs are therein, (a
rare thing in common Soldiers.)

Secondly, because they cannot come to the common Markets where this Provision
is to be had, this is their sorrow, but not their sin; Gods Ordinances are
rarely in the Soldiers march, and therefore a little in the Snapsack will do
some good, for to the hungry stomach every bitter thing is sweet.

Thirdly, through constant want of wholesome diet, corrupt food may do some
hurt, I mean the body of sin within; and evil Company without, proves
bitter to an honest mind, to dwell in Kedar is his woe, and to march in Mesech
his complaint.

Fourthly, because they are subject to many sorrows, for good Soldiers must
endure hardness, cold and hunger; Wounds and Soars are commonly the Soldiers
share, spiritual refection will bear them up, the waters of Life proves
Cordial in fainting fits, and in outward troubles inward comfort refreshes
the mind.

But least we should be longer in untying the strings; then your stomachs will
bear (being sharp set) roll these considerations, as so many sweet morsells
under your tongue, to bear up your hearts in your hardest work)

First you HAVE A GOOD CAUSE (a singular encouragement to a pious mind)
amongst all other causes that ever drew Armies into the field, yours for
goodness has the precedencie; and this will appear by these particulars.

First it is a most clear and candid cause, whose shining beauty and refined
perspicuity amongst all other causes, is like the Sun in the Firmament. It is
not my purpose to answer scruples about the clearenesse of the Cause, they for
whom this is provided, are not to seek in this particular, the Swords in their
hands argues the clearenesse of their Judgments herein, neither are they
singular in this opinion; all the Godly, Learned, and conscientious Ministers,
and people of the Kingdom will join issue with them herein; satisfaction
herein from learned Orthodoxe, and godly Divines in this particular has bin
like the waters of Jordan in the time of harvest: witness, Goodwins Anticaval:
several Answers to Dr. Fearne, a late Treatise made by many Godly Ministers,
in justification of Defensive Arms, and few there are of the contrary
judgment, but Papists, Athiests, Praelates, Delinquents, and profane wretches
(excepting such who may exchange their eyesight with Balaams Ass) and cannot
see the drawn sword of ruin or slavery in their base submission to the
adverse party.

Secondly, as the Cause is clear, so it is A MOST FULL AND GENERAL CAUSE,
soul and body in all their present concernments are deeply interessed in the
same.

First for Matters of the Soul consider:
First, you fight for God, who will therefore fight for you, the Battle is
his, the Victory therefore shall be yours, mighty in Battle is God for you,
Courageous in Battle be you for Him, you fight for Him; whose glorious
Attributes will be unto you a munition of Rocks. 33. Esaias 16. You fight for Him
whose glorious name will be unto you a strong Tower, Prove. 18.10. You fight for
Him, at whose Command is Heaven and Earth for your defense; you fight for Him
who has divided the Seas for passage, Exodus 14.21. smitten Rocks for drink,
Ex dus 17.6. given Angels food for meat. Exodus 16.14. Who has made the
Mountains to skip like Rams and the little Hills like Lambs, 114. Psalm. 6. Who
has bound Kings in chains and Nobles in Fetters of Iron. Psalm. 149.8. Who
has rebuked Kings and destroyed mighty Princes in the behalf of those that
fought for him; you fight for Him in whose hands is the breath of your
nostrills and all your ways, and without whose Providence not one hair of your
head shall fall to the ground; Who can protect in Battles, succeed Battles,
restore losses, make up breaches, and give you an inheritance and Crown with
glory, who would not fight for such a God?

Secondly, you fight for Jesus Christ, who has fought with Heaven and Earth,
and Hell for you, who became sin to make you righteousness, and a Curse to
make you a blessing; who gave Glory for shame, Life for death Joy for sorrow,
that you may exchange shame for Glory; death for Life; and sorrow for Joy;
broken for your sins was he, that your breaches may be made up, crushed was
Jesus Christ for you, that you might once be crowned with him; you fight for
that Jesus which is the God of Glory the Lord of Hoasts the Head of Angels,
the Heir of Heaven, the Prince of Peace, whose everlasting thoughts eternal
purposes, timely actions, most bitter passions, whose present work at the
throne of Grace, whose all in all, was and is and ever shall be, for your
present and eternal good; and who would not fight for such a Jesus?

Thirdly, you fight for the Holy Ghost, his work in the World in the hearts of
the Saints, is the great Controversy between you and your Adversaries. God in
you is their malice against you, you fight for that spirit that fills you with
joy unspeakeable, and full of Glory: by which you are sealed to the day of
Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. by which you are comforted in all your tribulations,
John 14. which makes you meet for the inheritance with the Saints in light, 1
Col. 12. which stays you with Flagons, and comfort you with Apples, 2
Cant. 5. affording such meat which the World knows not of, which hall be as
Rivers of water in a dry place, and as the shadow of a mighty Rock in a weary
Land, whose inward heat of life and joy shall (like the fire in the Temple)
never be extinct.

Fourthly, you fight for the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, and the
through-fare thereof in your Native Country: that Gospel that has brought
life and immortality to light, which has discovered bowels of Grace in God
to you from all eternity, the treasure of Comfort, the vision of Heaven, the
support of Saints, the rule of life, the way of Peace, the path to Glory.

Fifthly, you fight for Sion and all her privileges, for Sion and her
Ordinances, for Sion and her children, for Sion, the house of God, 76. Psalm. 2.
the Ark of God, the Temple of God, the joy of God, 132. Psalm. 13. the
perfection of beauty, 50. Psalm. 2. for Sion the Subject of Gods love, 87.
Psalm. 2. of his desire, 132. Psalm. 14. of his Jelousie, 8 Zachary 2. the
friend, the Sister, the Spouse of Christ, for Sion which whosoever hates shall
be turned backward 129. Psalm. 5. to favor whose dust is an acceptable service
in the sight of God.

Thus you see the fullness and generality of the Cause, in respect of the
soul, you fight for the God of Grace, for Jesus Christ the gift of Grace, the
spirit of Grace; the Gospel of Grace and the children of Grace.

Secondly, see the fullness of the Cause in respect of the outward man, in many
particulars.

First, you fight for your King (though this be esteemed a Paradox, a Riddle, a
lie, a scorn, because it is contrary to his Commands, and his Person is with
those against whom you fight, and so in danger) yet first you take up Arms in,
under, and for the defense of his lawful Authority settled in Parliament, and
not among Cavaliers, against those whose endeavors are to destroy the
Parliament, and Laws of the Land, and consequently all his Royal and lawful
authority, and so either to unking and dethrone him, or make him a Tyrant, the
high way to ruin him, by exposing him to the wrath of God, and the dangerous
hazards of a Tyrannical Government, which are commonly stabs, poison, plers,
and Treasons.

You fight for his Authority which is greater then his personal Commands, if
he should personally edmmand to murder, which is forbidden by his Authority;
which would be most disloyal; he that disobeyeth the one, or the other? the
King says he will rule us by Law; and make his will that Law, though it be in
things contrary to known Laws, and you fight against his will, because
contrary to his Authority, which is greater than his Will; the party you fight
against resist his lawful Authority, you his corrupt Will, they his power,
you his Command, they withstand him as a King, you as a man, who are the
greater Rebels? his deliberate Will is in Parliament, signified by his Writ,
and Act of continuance, his passionate will is in his Camp signified by his
Commands, that you should not obey his will in Parliament, what will you do?
you will say he is not present in Parliament, therefore the third Estate which
is essential thereunto is gone and, so there is a diffolution of the whole. I
answer his power is there though not his Person, he is not in his inforiour
Courts personally, but vertually, and so he is in Parliament his Person may
die, but not his power, you are proclaimed Traitors by his mouth, your Enemies
by his Law, you by his Person, they by his power, you are proclaimed Traitors,
but what is the Treason? you will not quietly let your throats be cut, nor
suffer the Parliament to be destroyed, you will not advance Prerogative above
Law, nor permit an Army of Theives to take away all you have without
resistance, you will not destroy the Kings lawful Authority by submitting your
selves to his unlawful Commands; you will not permit cursed men to destroy the
Parliament as Doog at Saul's tyrannical command, did destroy the Lords Priests,
1 Samuel 22 18 but defend them from slaughter, as David did Abiathar v. 23. in a
word, you will not be made slaves, but say you are free borne, and this is
Treason, how prove you that? why your Enemies call it so?

2. You fight for the recovery of his Royal Person out of the hands of those
miscreants, and reinstate Him in his Royal Throne and Dignity, that both He
and his Posterity (if God will) may yet flourish in their Royalty, so that
notwithstanding all contradictions you fight for your King.

Secondly, you fight for your Country, for the peace of it against the great
disturbers thereof. 2. For the plenty of it against the Plunderers, tobbers,
spoylers, destroyers thereof. 3. For the Liberty of it, the Laws power and
Privileges thereof in Parl our National Inheritance. 4. For all your common
Interests in any thing you enjoy, your Houses, Lands, Estates, Callings, what
ever you have is lost if the day be lost. 5. You fight for your nearest
relations, your Wives and poor children who are undone; if you give up the
Cause: if the Principles of Heathens have rendered them valiant for their
Countries good, and their Valor famous to succeeding posterity; shall not the
Principles of piety be stronger in Christians? thus you have a good cause, it
is clearly good, it is fully good, for God, your King, your Country, in all
their references, never the like cause (all things considered) from the
beginning of the World until this day.

Secondly, as you have a good Cause; so consider WHAT A LIFE GUARD God has set
about you for your security.
First, God himself is your Life guard, 52. Esaias 12. the Lord shall go before
you, and the God of Israel shall be your Reereward, there is God in Front and
Rear, he shall be unto you a munition of Rocks, 33. Esaias, 15.16. He that
walks righteously etc. he shall dwell en high, his place of Defense shall be
a munition of Rocks, and the Church is said to dwell in the clefts of the
Rocks, 2 Canticles 14 and the name of the Lord is a strong Tower Prove. 18.10. a
little Sauctuary will God be unto you, 11. Ezekiell 16. He will be a shield, a
buckler, a strong Tower, a Refuge, a Defense, against the terror of the night,
the arrow or bullet that flies in the day: Psalm. 91.5. what though Ammon and
Geball, Edom and Ishmaell, Moaband the Agarims, what though Amaleck and the
Philistims, Ashur and the Children of Lot; though Papists and Atheists, and all
their Allies though France and Spain, though Turk and Pope, though all the
World should compass you about like Bees; yet if the Lord be your strength and
refuge, he will become your song and your salvation, Psalm. 118.12. was not God
thus unto you at Keynem Battle? to the amazement of your Enemies? and the joy
of your hearts? when the instruments of death went over you, and about you, and
scarce touched any of you that stood to the Cause, and did not fly away: when
thousands fell on each side of you and you were preserved; do not your hearts
leap at the remembrance of it? did not the Lord appear at that day glorious
in holiness, fearful in praises, working wonders? did not the Mountains skip
like Rams, and the little Hills like young sheep at that day? did you not hew
down mighty Cedars at that day? did not God throw down Mountains, and fill
up Valleys for you at that day? when he brought you to Plahiroth the very
mouth of straights, as he did the Israelites, Exodus 14.2. when your Enemies
thought you were entangled, and when they cried, we will pursue, we will
overtake, we will devide the spoil, our lusts shall be satisfied, our Sword
shall devour etc. Exodus 15.9. then did the Lord blow with his wind and the
waters and waves of his wrath did overwhelme them, and they lay weltering in
the red Sea of their own blood: was not this a taken that your cause was good,
and your Enemies bad? when those of you that fled, were slain, and those that
stood to it were preserved? and those of your Enemies that stood to it
perished, and those that fled escaped? how did GOD the Father protect you with
his attributes? how did God the Son surround you (as it were) with his
merits? and entrench you with his blood? how did God the Holy Ghost cheer you
with his comforts? working your hearts to a holy ecstasy of joy, making you
(like David, when he danced before the Arc) to forget your selves, and upon
the discharge of your Muskets to cry out in holy and spiritual rapture, now
for Jesus Christ, now for the Gospel, now lets see what prayer can dee etc.
when you were in the valleys of the shadow of death, yet did you not fear: and
has not God gone all along with you ever since? has not God always as before
Ephraim Benjamin, and Manasses stird up his strength, and came and helped you
from time to time? as the Psalmist has it, 80. Psalm. 2. alluding to these
three Tribes which went immediately after the Arc, 2 Numb. 17. and 18.
consider therefore God the Fountain of life, the great Preserver of men, the
upholder of all things by the word of his power is your Lifeguard.

Secondly, you have a guard of Angels to attend you, 34. Psalm. 7. the Angels
of the Lord pitch their Tents round about them that fear him, and delivers
them, yea the Charets of God are twenty thousand thousands of Angels, and God
is amongst them for your security, 68. Psalm 17. God shall give his Angels
charge over you to keep you in all your ways, 91. Psalm 11. little do you
know what Charets and Horsemen there are in the Mount ready to fight for you,
when you come to battle, 2 Kings 6.15, 16, 17. God has legions of Angels to
come to fight for you when you call upon him in the day of Battle, Matthew.
26.53. tender is God over you to give his Angels for your guard, and his
Ministers a flame of fire round about you, can you miscarry with such a Life
guard?

Thirdly, consider you have a guard of promises to attend you, where ever you
go, first the promises of military dexterity, that God will teach your hands
to war, and your fingers to fight and of protection that he will cover your
heads in the day of Battle: 144. Psalm 1. you have been looked upon as an
unskilful, meek, pusillanimous Dove-like spirited people, and indeed so you
are, but has not God given you the skill; courage and valor as of mighty
Princes, and made old Soldiers, fly like hares and hide their heads from you?
to their terror and your wonder, that ever you should have such capacity for
such services so unsuitable to your genuine temper.

Secondly, you have the promises of provision and plenty, that though the
Lions lack and suffer hunger, yet you that fear the Lord shall want nothing
that is good for you, 34. Psalm 10. in your march toward Canaan to worship
God, (for that is your case) rather then you shall want, if you be upright and
ingenuous in the cause purely for God, he will smite Rocks for you spread
Tables in the Wilderness, feed you with Angels food, the delicates of Heaven,
the upper springs, dulcius e font, you shall have the very well of Life for
your refreshment.

Thirdly, you have the promises of victory, that one shall chase a thousand,
and two shall put ten thousand to flight, 32. Deutro. 30 that if your Enemies
come one way they shall fly from you seven ways, that no Sword nor Weapon
that is framed against you shall prosper, 54. Esaias 17. that God will make his
Church and People his battle Axe and Weapons of Warfare to break in pieces
the Nations of the Earth. 51. Jeremy 20, 21. etc. and that God will make his
people a new sharp threshing instrument, having teeth to thrash the Mountains,
and to beat them small, and to make the hills as chafe Esaias 41.15. that the
Stone cut out without hands shall be that Kingdom, viz. of Christ, that shall
never be destroyed, but shall destroy all Kingdoms, and people that shall rise
up against it, 2 Daniel 44.45. that God will bind Kings in chains, and Nobles
in Fetters of Iron, Psalm 149.8.9. and to execute upon them the judgment
written, this honor have all his Saints. You may expect all these promises to
be fulfilled, and the face of things do look as if they were now in
fulfilling; and they must be fulfilled in and about that very cause which you
have in hand; and why may we not believe but that even now the day of vengeance
is in Gods hand, and the year of his redeemed is come?

4. You have a guard of prayers round about you, millions of prayers like a
Cloud of incense, Lev. 16.13. do always hang over you, and hover about you,
the Prayers of many generations that went before you; you shall reap in joy
what they have sown in Tears; little do you know the many thousands of
prayers night and day in your behalf, when you happily have not opportunity,
nor company, nor place of convenience to pour out your hearts before the Lord.
What are these great Victories and wonderful deliverances vouchsafed unto you,
but the return of prayers in your behalf? that you so often prosper fighting
in the valley is, because so many Mosesses and Hurs are praying in the Mount.

Lastly, consider you have a guard of providence for your defense, all
transactions of all passages shall still be loaded with your security; the
Sun is willing to stand still in Gideon, and the Moon in the Valley of
Dialon. The Sea will as gladly run backward, as forward for your deliverance.
The Creatures delight to do you service: if God does at any time bring you to
straights, it is for nothing, but to show his power and love for your defense;
if he brings you to such a posture as that you can do nothing but stand
still, it is only to show you and the whole World, the salvation of God.

Thus you have a good first cause, and Secondly, a sure life Guard you have,
God, his Angels, his Promises; the Prayers of the Saints, and all providence
for your encouragement.

Thirdly, Consider the many infallible intimations, as so many predictions from
heaven of your success; which are a thousand times more promising then Elijahs
Cloud, 1 Kin. 18.44. of great Rain, or an Evening red and lowering Sky, of a
succeeding fair day, Mat. 16.3.

First, the Spirit of Prayer and Supplication, is abundantly poured forth upon
all the Saints in your behalf. An infallible sign of your success. The Cloud
of Incense Leviticus the 16.13 which are the prayers of the Saints, as will
appear by comparing that place, 141. Psalm. 2. is the Cloud of his presence;
and a little cloud of that nature, though but so big as Elijahs hand presageth
a plentiful shoure of heavenly blessings upon your heads. When God prepares
Daniels heart to pray, Sions captivity is at an end, Dam. 9.4. He that
prepares the heart to pray, will cause his ear to hear, Psalm. 10.17 such
prayers, and tears, such sighs and groans, such surrounding the Throne of
grace, in public, in private, in season, out of season, was never known
since Adams days, as are now in your behalf. How many thousand lies in the
gap in your behalf? every Jacob is become an Israel in your cause, can you
think you shall miscarry?

Secondly, The Spirit of Faith and confidence of your success in this cause,
is poured forth upon all the Saints, and this also is a certain Omen of your
prosperity: when God does draw out the hearts of men to believe and to hope in
his mercy, it is a ground of strengthening their hearts, for then will he
preserve the faithful and plentifully reward the proud doer, Psalm. 31.23. the
Lord shall help deliver, and save his people, because they trust in him, Psalm.
37.40. should God enable men to hope, and trust in him, and that upon
Evangelicall and Divine grounds, and fail them how would he dishonor his son?
prejudice his faithfulness? and discourage his people? nor certainly as the
unbelief of the Israelites was a provoking cause of Gods displeasure against
them, so the confidence of his people in this cause, is most acceptable in his
sight, and a certain sign of good success.

Thirdly, Consider, God has slirred up the heart of the State of the Kingdom,
viz: the Parliament, and to lo^ke out and endeavor after a Reformation of all
things that they can find displeasing unto God, another most infallible and
promising token of your success: we shall most commonly find, that
humiliation, repentance, and Reformation in a people, have bin signs of mercy
toward a people.

It is true, we have an instance in Scripture of a most sweet and glorious
Reformation in matters of Idolatry and profaneness. viz: the Reformation of
Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 35. and yet notwithstanding the Lord turned not from the
fearcenesse of his great wrath wherewith he was angry against Judah, etc. 2
Kin. 23.26. but yet there was a great deal of difference between that
Reformation and ours. For, first that Reformation was began by the King, and so
he compelled the people by his Regal power hereunto; but this Reformation is
from the people, taking the first lawful and best advantage from the
constitution of the Kingdom to take up Arms in and under the Kings power and
authority, settled in Parliament and consequently by his command virtuall,
though not personal, so that that Reformation of Iosiab was by compulsion upon
the people, whereunto they yielded for fear: but this Reformation is even from
the people out of love, though with the hazard even of the Kings displeasure.
Secondly, when GOD does afflict a people from his former displeasure; yet there
is commonly some new sin which comes in as a mediation, and so provokes God to
remember the old score: thus when Gods anger was stirred up against Israel,
the Devil moved David to number the people, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. But hear we find
no such thing, as any new National sin* viz: any act of the State authorizing
sin, and the good Lord keep our Parliament from such a thing; we see rather
that it is not because we have sinned that our enemies quarrel with us, but
because we will not sin: our enemies quarrel against us, is not because we
have bin or are profane in our lives, Idolatrous in our Worship, but because
we will not be so for if we would join with them in these abominations, we
should quickly be at peace with them so that the very sourse and rise of the
wars, is the glory of God, and blessed be his Name that the cause is the Lords,
and that we can plead that before him, otherwise we might give our selves for
lost.

Thirdly, the Affliction and judgment upon Judah (the fruit of old displeasure
against them for the blood of the Saints spilt in Manassah his days) was the
taking away of good Josiah from them by Pharaoh Neco King of Egypt who slew him
at Megidde, 2 King. 23.29. so that God took away the Reformer from them, and
so way is made for judgment upon them. But now God increases the number of
Reformers, and has so graciously opened the eyes of our Worthies in matters
offensive unto GOD, as that they have done that which I am persuaded they never
purposed to do. viz: in the particulars, but only to fulfill the whole mind
of God as he should reveal it unto them. And therefore notwithstanding this
instance, we have still good hope from the Reformation begun: that God will own
it, and the Temple shall be built though they build fighting, and that God will
bring his people into Canaan, though their enemies hearts are hardened, and
pursue them with full purposes to destroy them. Yet their ruin will be both
seasonable and certain.

Fourthly, Consider The parties against whom you sight, are a most Idolatrous,
Superstitious, Delinquent, Profane, Ignorant, or Hypocritical Generation,
take them where you will, from one degree to another, and you may fitly rank
them under some of those unworthy denominations; for either they are Papists,
and so Idolatrous; Praelaticall, and so Superstitious; Offenders of several
kinds, and so Delinquents; Men of cursing deboist, lips and lives, and so
Profane; Men so incrediby besotted, as to believe that the Gospel, the
Kingdom, the Laws of the Land, the Liberty of the Subject, the Privileges of
Parliament, the Execution of Justice, the common peace and good of all is the
only Crown, that these men fight for, and that you fight against these; which
argues, the very sensible thickness of Ignorance: or else lastly, God and
their own Consciences can, and do, and one day will evidence to their
everlasting shame; disgrace, and torment, that they are as base dissembling
Hypocrites, as ever could be found among those Scribes and Pharisees, against
whom their are so many woes denounced, Mat. 23.13. well, look upon your
Enemies, they are the very worst of sinners, such as we thought could scarce
have bin consistent with English Ingenuity. God has seemed to gather the very
scum of all sorts and qualities of men together, whether they be Men of high or
low degree, and although their intention is to destroy Sion, 4. Micha. 10. and
though they say we will now make an end of them at once and happily swear and
curse that not a Roundhead (as foolishly they call Gods people) shall be left
in the Kingdom, yet Gods purpose may be the same measure unto them, as they
intended unto us, 4. Mich. 12. Namely, to thrash them, and even to break them
in pieces. Your enemies are a people most ripe for judgment, they do as it
were invite the Sickle of Gods wrath to cut them down. The sins of the
Amorites are full, some of them are as it were rotten Ripe, and so have dropped
down before the time that God will shake them down together.

Think you that this Generation of Men shall be your ruin? That the Stubble
shall destroy the fire? Nay that hell shall ruin Heaven? and the Devil
himself shall destroy the works of Christ, in revenge that Christ once came
to destroy the works of the Devil? No let us cast away such surmisings, and
verily believe that the wickedness of the wicked shall come to a perpetual
end, and their own devises will GOD make to fall upon their own pates.

Fifthly, Consider, God has drawn the eyes of the while World, as it were upon
his proceedings in this cause, and has invited them to wait upon, and
seriously to consider the issue and upshot of all; now when he causes men to
mark and consider the upright; it is to show that the end of these men is
peace, 37. Ps. 37. he has drawn the eyes of all the pious, and godly in the
World, and this he rarely does, except it be to show them the salvation of God,
14. Exo. 13. He has drawn the eyes of the wicked to look upon the success
of the quarrel, and this he rarely does, except it be to let them know that
God the Lord, is Isreal's God, and to make them confess that there is a reward
for the righteous and that verily there is a God that judges the Earth, Psalm.
58.11. When the Lord did draw the eyes of the Israelites, and the Philistims
together to try a single combat, between Goliath and David, 1 Samuel 17. though
Goliath was for strength, for greatness and bigness of person, for
fearcenesse, for weapons every way incomparable with David; yet this act of
Gods providence in drawing men together to see the duel was to let all that
Assembly know, that the Lord saves not by Sword nor Spear, for the battle is
the Lords, and that he would give that uncircumcised Philistim into David's
hands, ver. the 47. and so has God done already, he has made little
striplings, London Boys as they call them, the ruin and downfall of the
sons of Anacke, and many Guliahs who has come out against them with
blaspheming tongues, and railing lips, shaking Locks. and sparkling eyes, have
fallen by their hands. Can you think that ever God should call all men to
look and gaze, and wait for the success of this present controversy, wherein
his glory is every way so concerned, and leave his people to the worst? Did he
ever do such a thing as this? Testify against God, O thou doubting Israelite,
did ever God do such a thing as this? Would he not hereby discourage all men
that come unto him? And scare away all men that incline toward him? A thing
which his Soul abhorres.

Sixthly, Consider how Gods name is every way engaged in this quarrel; a
pregnant omen of blessed success. It is true, we are a people (simply
considered in our selves) fitted for judgment, having all, yea, and more
provocations of Gods displeasure against us, then ever any people that
professed the name of Christ, or could hope for mercy, barrenness under so
much means, abuse of so much grace, slighting of so much Judgment, sinning
against so much experience, has scarce been found amongst any that ever
professed the Name of Christ, whose present ruins does testify Gods sore
displeasure against them for these things; and the good Lord give these
thoughts of our own abominations, a seasonable, suitable, and pious
Evangelicall operation upon our Spirits: but yet notwihstanding though this
might move God against us, yet this is not that which has moved our Enemies
against us; no, it is because we are Gods people and Sheep of his pasture,
that these Wolves worry us: it is because we desire to repent and reform, and
will not join with them in all cursed ways of Idolatry and profaneness; it is
because we would now worship God according to his will, and have no King in
matters of our Consciences but Jesus Christ, that our enemies are so full of
venom, fury, and madness against us; and can we think that God will decline
such a cause as this? Did he ever do such a thing? Look upon all the causes
in the World, was he ever more engaged, nay so fully and circumstantially
engaged in any as in this? how will his Name be blasphemed amongst them, if he
should do thus? Would they not either say that your God is not able to help,
and so mock us and jeete us, and say* where are your Prayers, and your
Fastings? and your hope? and your faith? and Your God? or that God is the God
of Papists, and Atheists; and Blasphemers, etc. and not the God of Israel? and
can his sacred ears abide such language as this? No surely, so long as we have
Joshua's argument to plead, Lord what will thou do with thy great name? Josh.
7.9. surely the end shall be good, and Israel shall have the day.

Seventhly, Consider, Your Enemies have begun to fall already, and this Hamans
wife took as a sad Omen of her Husbands ruin, Hest. 6.13 and God has begun
to deliver us, and this was also a good omen and blessed encouragement unto
David, 1 Samuel 17.35, 36. and both these may be the like unto us. How have our
enemies fallen at Edgehill? at Winchester? at Chichester? at Gloucester? at
Dorchester, at Stafford, at Caversham near Reading, and in many other places,
how has he discovered their plots? infatuated their Councels? and blown up all
their designs, given them all barren wombs, and dry breasts, and how has God
also delivered us, and driven back multitudes of our enemies by little
handfuls, to the glory of his name, and the gnashing of the teeth of the
Enemy, and their perpetual shame and scorn; let this also give you
plentiful encouragement of good success.

And therefore in the Eigth place, Consider the consequences of any loss you
shall sustain in this Service; it is true, all experience witnesses that all
things in external providence falls out alike unto all men, and that no man
can know either love or hatred: viz. of God, by any occurrences that are before
them, Eccl. 9.1, 2. even a Jonathan, a Josiah, may fall in the day of Battle
as well as others; but yet there are very many cordial encouragements in
respect of any consequences whatsoever. Consider, suppose you should lose a
leg, an Arm, and Eye, etc. have you not carried your lives in your hands,
willing to surrender all up unto God, and are you afraid lest God should take
you at your word? You offer your life, and he takes but a Limb, and is this
your complaint? or do you think that being dismembered in Christ cause, he
will not know you; is the badge of Honor (the marks of Christ your fear. Do
you think that that eye, or arm, or limb which you loose for Christ shall be
forgotten, and not found at the day of your Resurrection, but that it shall be
a flaw in Gods Jewels even to all eternity? shall a Cup of cold water in Christ
cause, given, be remembered, and the blood of your veins, an arm an eye, a leg
be forgotten? is doing for Christ so esteemed, and suffering for Christ so
flighted, suppose you loose your lives in the cause, have you not offered them,
and are you afraid lest God should accept of your offering? are you troubled
least you should go to God too soon, do you fear your Crown of glory
should be too heavy, and make your head ache at that day? are you fearful of
being chief in the Kingdom of God? and of having part in the first
Resurrection? are you afraid you shall sit too near unto Jesus Christ in
Heaven? is his right hand in his glory your jealousy? be not discouraged, your
losses shall be gain, and the degrees of the one shall answer the degrees of
the other, God will be unto you our Wives, and Children like himself in a way
of recompense, for your afflictions you shall have glory; for your light
afflictions weight of glory, for your short afflictions eternity of glory, for
your very light afflictions a far exceeding eternal weight of glory 1 Cor.
4.17. let all these encouragements fill your hearts with a holy boldness, and
Confidence, Valor and Resolution, to go on, and to follow God fully in the
mannaging of this Cause; and because Dignity does always imply Duty: and
Knowledge practice, take these few Directions for your more hopeful Success
and comfortable proceeding in this Warfare.

First in the mannaging of this outward Warfare, do not forget your more
considerable, inward and spiritual Warfare; it is a sad and bitter thing to
see how few Soldiers mind this thing, nay to see men (who before they entered
into this Condition were seemingly, Religious Modest, Sober, Temperate men) so
exceedingly changed unto worse, that few would believe they were the same men:
what a sad thing is it, to see mad men dance about the brincke and pit of
ruin, without care or fear, alas! you are in danger of Death every moment,
you know you walk in the Val^ey of the shadow thereof, if you have not
Interest in Christ, your case is sad, if you have, and yet a guilty Conscience
of a loose and careless and negligent life and Conversation; alas! how can you
expire, and breath out your souls into the hands of God with a cheerful and
comfortable Spirit? suppose you prove Victorious, and prosper in all your
designs (which the Lord grant) yet what advantage will you have by gaining
without, and loosing within? what will the spoils of your Enemies advantage
you, when Satan shall spoil your inward Treasures? what is it to lead your
Enemies into Captivity; when your own souls are lead into Spiritual bondage
by the Devil himself? what is it that you let out the blood of your Enemies,
when your vital blood of inward strength and Communion with God seems to
waste? that you surround your Enemies, when your selves are surrounded with
your spiritual Adversaries, and therefore put on the whole Armor that you may
be able to stand in the evil day, and having done all to stand still,
wrestling with Principalities and power, the Rulers of the darkness of this
World, and spiritual wickedness in high places, Ephesians. 6.11.12:

Secondly, remember the advice of our Lord Jesus in the 3. of Luke 14. do vi
lence to no man, accuse no man falsely, and be content with your wages.

1. Do violence to no man, nay, put no man in fear: Courage, and meekness,
stoutnesse and tenderness of Spirit, Resolution and love, mingled and well
tempered together makes a man meet to fight under Christ's banner; if a man
wants Courage his Enemies will not fear him; if meekness, his own Soldiers
will not love him; had there been more Courage, stoutnesse, and Resolution both
in Commanders and Soldiers, there had not been such flying away at Edge Hill;
had there been more meekness, tenderness of Spirit and love, especially in
Commanders, happily there had not then so many of their own Soldiers deserted
them, and got away from them; look upon Jesus Christ, who for his meekness
and love, to those that fight under Him, is called a Lamb, a Dove etc. and for
Courage, stoutnesse, and Resolution is called the Lion of the Tribe of Judah: a
cowardice milksop in the day of Battle, and a passionate hot-spurre in his
own Qu^rters, does ill become a Soldier of Christ.

The second Rule of Christ is, accuse no man falsely, a thing as common as
sinful among Soldiers, to accuse men of malignitie, that they may the more
colourably plunder them; and so take away both men's Estates, and good name at
once; Justice and Righteousness does as well bese^me a Soldier as a Citizen;
and the account of both before God shall be a like.

The third Rule of Christ is, be content with your wages. As Covetousnes does
always ill become a Soldier: so especially in this particular Cause and
quarrel: for consider, first this Cause is for the exaltation of Jesus Christ,
and therefore those who look for comfort from the Cause, and Success therein,
must aim at Him, and not to themselves; if your aims be pure for Him, He will
see your pay good in due time.

Secondly, you pretend the righteousness of the Cause, and not the benefit of
the War that sets you on work, but is it so indeed? Come see my zeal for
God says Iehu: for the Throne says God, and his own Conscience Judas did
seemingly forsake all and follow Christ, but the benefit of the bagg was his
hand and hopes. When precious ointment was spent upon Christ, he pleaded for
the purse under the notion of the poor, for his own base ends under the
color of Charity, are you for the Cause indeed? what, and not content with
your Wages? yes, with all our hearts if we could get it, says the common
Soldiers. How have you wanted it, by the deceit of Officers, says the common
Voat; who like the unjust Steward in the Gospel, which cozened his Master by
his accounts; write upon the mustering days a hundred for fourscore, and
fourscore for fifty, who makes as little Conscience of lying for money, as of
telling the money they lied for. I give not the lie to Noble Soldiers; but to
base dissemblers; and to be offended at these words is, (as the dipping of
Judas his finger in his Masters dish) a certain sign that that man will
betray the Cause, if he can make a bargain on it, though a Halter in the
conclusion may determine there is nothing gotten by it. Well let those (whose
Consciences speaks plainly with Achan, Joshua 6. the 21. I took the Goodly
Babilonish Garment, the two hundred shekells of Silver, and the wedge of Gold
etc.) let these I say who have troubled the Camp. the whole Kingdom, by
deceiving them, both see the aggravations of this Delinquencie under these
considerations.

First it is the most sacrilegious Robbery that ever was committed, for it is
most particularly against the very person of Christ, whose Cause chiefly it is,
and how can you answer this at the great day?

He that will rob Christ in a thing so deeply concerning his glory, would sell
Christ as Judas did for the like profit. I could wish you would seriously
remember the sad example of Annanias and Saphirah, smitten by God to death; for
keeping back the account of his own Estate; and his sin is aggravated from
this consideration, that he had lied against the holy Ghost Act. 5.4.

And if so? what will become of you, who keep back not your own but the Lords
own moneys, being the Free Will offering of the Kingdom unto him. What do
you when you say I must have moneys for one hundred under me and return it?
when happily you have not about 60. or 70 to pay, and keep up the rest? but
even lie against the Holy Ghost, and rob Jesus Christ, and to as great shame
you shall one day acknowledge it, as ever did Thief make his Confession at
Tyburne; when Jesus Christ shall bring to light your hidden baseness, lies,
and dissimulation; again you rob the whole Kingdom, and are thereby as great
oppressors, as ever Monopolists, or Patente^s have been, nay more in a great
measure, you retard the work of Christ, and are (horresco referens) guilty of
a great deal of blood shed in the Kingdom; I would you would seriously
consider of it. I have heard that some of you that have made a great profession
of zeal to the Cause, and of love unto Jesus Christ, and that you applied your
selves unto the working the Wars out of these Principles; but now who more
covetous than you? who more forward to comply with a sinful custom of others
in abusing the State by base and selfeish dealings than you? which, (if you
have true Principles of Piety) you could never do without great pains
sinfully taken in stopping and in muzzeling the mouths of your own
Consciences; which does secretly vex you within, if spiritual life be in you
but as a grain of mustard seed. Consider, consider, do you know how soon your
breath may be wrung out of your Nostrills, and will this comfort you in your
dying agony? does the wages of unrighteousness please you better than the love
of Christ? let me be plain, take heed of base dissimulation; and hypocrisy.
You would be thought to fight for the Cause, and for love unto Jesus Christ,
and this you say is your comfort, if you perish you perish in a good cause; and
you are in Gods way, and you expect comfort; I would not trouble peace of
conscience; but why do you trouble your own peace. What, fight for Jesus
Christ; and rob Christ? do you fight for Christ and steal away the Free Will
offering of his people from Him? do you fight for the Kingdom and deceive the
Kingdom? what, and cannot endure to hear of any ways of reforming abuses;
whereby the State has been deceived? well, know this, your greatest gains
will be your loss, and your greatest deceit will be in your own souls.
Remember the Counsel of Jesus Christ, do violence to no man, accuse no man
falsely, and be content with your wages. In the last place take heed of the
common sins of common Soldiers, of swearing, drunkenness, looseness
lightness, vanity of spirit, labor for assurance of the love of God, and
visible Interest in Jesus Christ; mind your mortality, and let the thoughts of
eternity poyse your spirits, keep Faith and a good conscience, get your hearts
into a dying temper, and keep them therein, for you walk in the shadow of
death, let God, and Heaven, and the deep things of the other World fill your
thoughts, and in all your conditions study to be found in Christ, that having
fought your good fight, finished your course, and kept the Faith, your Warefare
being accomplished, you may receive that Crown of righteousness, which God
the righteous Judge shall give unto you, and unto all those that love his
appearing.

FINIS.

