THE CITY-REMONSTRANCE Remonstrated.

OR An answer to Colonel John Bellamy, his Vindication thereof, in
justification OF The Moderate Reply to the CITY-REMONSTRANCE. By I. P.

18. MAT. 6. But who so shall offend one of these little ones which believe in
me; it were better that a Millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he
were drowned in the midst of the Sea.

2 PET. 2. 20. 21. For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world
through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; they are again
entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them then the
beginning.

For it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness,
then after they had known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto
them.

London, Printed by Tho. Pain, for Henry Overton and are to be sold at his
Shop at the entering into Popes head alley out of Lumbard street. 1646.

To his honored Friend Colonel JOHN BELLAMY.
Sir,
FAwning Flattery spoils many; but plain dealing is every man's duty: The wounds
of a Friend will heal, when the kisses of an Enemy will hurt. The City
Remonstrance is no caracter of the Cities excellency: Nor your Vindication
thereof, of your Perfection. And the truth is, the former Expresses of this
worthy City, and the common observation of your old Profession, quitted our
expectations of such a Remonstrance from them: And such a Vindication from you.
For as we do not expect Grapes from thorns, so neither sour Sloes, from
generous Vines, as not Figs from thistles, so neither prickles from
Figge-trees; But it is the City above which is only pure, and the man at Gods
right hand, who is only Perfect: And therefore: As the Moon is not defineable
by her Spots, Jewels by their flawes, nor Gould by its dross; so, is not the
City by their Remonstrance, nor your self by your Vindication thereof, (though
I must needs say, the pleading for evil, is worse then the evil it pleads
for, and therefore your Vindication, then the Remonstrance it self but yet the
greatness of the temptation, ( viz. your presumption of the Cities favor, and
Popular applause) calls for more Grains of allowance concerning your self,
in the thoughts of your Friends. I confess you are once more assaulted with a
fresh temptation, viz. to hate your friend, (even to revenge) for his plain
dealings, and how it prevails, your future deportment toward him and his
Friends, I mean the Servants of God, differing in Judgment from your self
will help men's intelligence were we to know men after the flesh, your former
acquaintance, and your kindness to me, had held my hand from this present
work, but Self denial is both your duty and mine; Your strange siding, and
keen penning it against your Brethren, makes them afraid of you, lest you
should be one of those many, who in the latter days shall be offended at the
name, of Christ, betray one another, and bate one another; believe it, how ever
you may flatter your self, you are already come to a nearer degree of open
persecution of the Saints of God, then Haza^ was unto those blouddy executions
against Israel of old, when he said to the Prophet, (lamenting at the
foresight thereof) Is thy Servant a Dog, that he should do this great thing,
2. Kings 8. 13. the present distance wherein you stand, from such proceedings,
is not so great as the former was from your present practices, during the time
of your old profession; those that begin, not only to forsake the fellowships
of their old Companions in the ways of God, but also to make them obnoxious to
the Stroke of the Magistrate, as you have done, are posting apace to that
irrecoverable sin, of doing despite to the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10. 29. I know
Sir, these are cutting words, but their propper tendency, is your personal
good, and the timely prevention, through Gods mercy, of your future evil, for
how ever you take me, my heart-knowing God, and my thoughts-knowing conscience
can witness for me, that I am,

Your real and faithful Friend J. P.

THE CITY REMONSRANCE Remonstrated.
First, Mr. Bellamy, Let us consider the title page of your Book.

Secondly, We shall mind your book it self.

Your Title page begins thus.

A VINDICATION.

WHat cause is so bad that an advocate cannot be had for gold or silver, or
something equivalent, to plead the same? What Declarations or Remonstrances,
were ever penned against the Parliament? Which had not some under the specious
pretenses and color of Religion and liberty to abet the same? Absalom will
find an Achitophel (a cunning Counceller) to draw away the people in the
simplicity of their hearts, knowing nothing to accommodate his rebellion
against his own father, the Idolatrous Ephesians had their coveteous
Demetrius, to advance the greatness of their Diana, against the preachings of
the Apostles; and the superstitious Jews had their eloquent Tertullus to
represent the Apostle Paul, for his zeal to his master a pestilent fellow, a
pernicious incendiary, a notorious Sectary, Acts 25. 5. And as it was in the
beginning so it is now, witness the present case. A moderate reply to the City
Remonstrance, In justification of the Parliaments innocence, from the
prejudice raised against them, by the said Remonstrance, (as shall fully be
evidenced before we have done, being pressed hereunto) meets with Adversary
upon adversary, representing the Author of the said Reply, a liar because he
tells the truth, an Heretic, a Sectary, because a friend to the Parliament,
an incendiary between the Parliament and City, because impleading the
Remonstrance, he implores favor from the Parliaments hands in its Authors
behalf, the Replyer is assaulted with keen oppositions, the Remonstrance
justified by a double vindication, both coming forth in one day, striving for
prioritie in the execution of vengeance, according to all their might, and
length of their arm, against the said replyer, the one written by Mr. John
Bellamy, a man (we presume) well known to us, the other, a partner in the same
employment, whose learning and reading, whose style and dialect, whose temper
and genius, so far as perceivable by his profound vindication of the City
Remonstrance, argues his birth, breeding and education, not far from
Billingsgate, for he has the perfect art of railing, and raving, and nonsense
writing, calling men Sectaries, Heretics Scihsmatique Liars, Incendiaries, by
roat, more befitting unreasonable scoulds then rational men, and therefore
shall take no farther notice of his nonsense scribbling.

OF THE HUMBLE REMONSTRANCE, etc.

Court Complements are worth nothing, and the humility of of the Remonstrance
is better discerned by the matter it self then the title thereof, your humble
servant (says the Cavaleer) though his desire to serve you is by cutting your
throat; the hand declares (when the tongue dissembles) the intentions of the
mind. A Remonstrance invective against the Parliament, and yet humble, this is
somewhat a kin to a contradiction, Epithites alters not the nature of
Actions, the humility of the Remonstrance; will be ever an annon before our
eyes, and as we apprehend it, we shall speak unto it.

OR AN ANSWER TO TWO LATE LIBELLS PUBLISHED BY TWO ANONYMUSSES.

1, And why two libells Mr. Bellamy? you might have forborne that, until you
had proved them so, but it seems this is a taste of your Presbyteriall justice,
we are like to find from you, when power is in your hands: First pass
sentence, and after examine, what ever it is, because written (as you suppose)
by an Antipresbyter,, it must needs be a Libell, is this Christian Mr. Bellamy,
to condemn men's persons for Heretics: Sectaryes, Schismatiques (though you
never define the things you affirm, their doctrines for errors, untruths,
blasphemies (though you hear not what they say) their writings for lies,
falsity, libells, so soon as ever you look on their books.

But Secondly, must they needs be libells, because reflecting upon the City
Remonstrance, is not the Remonstrance it self reflecting upon the High Court
of Parliament, (by this kind of arguing) what would follow?

Thirdly, Are they therefore libells, because written by two Anonymusses? if
so, how many Presbyterian Libells do you fell in a year? may it not as well
be the modesty of some to forbear: as the impudency of others (as the case may
stand) to affix their names to their writings, some men will blush even in a
good cause, when others will brazen their foreheads, and audaciously set to
their names to that which is bad, apprehension of self abilities, wit, and
worth, and affectation of popularity being strong temptations hereunto, but
what are names to things? the Author to the matter? does this add or take
away? it is the weakness of the Reader; when the knowledge of the Author
helps his opinion, as touching the matter, he that shall judge the better of
your vindication because John Bellamy appears in the frontispiece, or the
worse of the reply because written by an Anonymus, is more acquainted with
titles then books, and regards more the authority of men's persons then
Arguments, but because some men cannot find fault with that that is, they will
be quibling at that that is not, and truly Sir, by that time your vindication
has been thoroughly examined; it willappeare to have been as much for your
credit, if you had crowded your self among the sect of Anonymusses; as to
stand out by the name of John Bellamy. In the title page thereof. And the truth
is of all Sects, that is the most innocent, for though they differ from one
another in many points, yea all the heavens over, yet they never seek the
ruin and destruction of one another, may not you learn of them Mr. Bellamy?

Fourthly, In the fourth place, are they therefore, Libells because containing
in them, lies, falsities, untruths? as for one of those books, viz. the
Interest of England maintained, I never read, and therefore shall not at all
intermeddle therewith, but leave it to the Authors justification, as for the
other. viz. The moderate reply to the City Remonstrance. I confess I have
read it over and over, once and again, and however there may possibly be
mistakes more then enough (for the holy Scripture it self excepted, where is
that writing without mistakes, surely neither this Vindication, nor the City
Remonstrance are any) but I am so persuaded of that spirit that framed it, that
he would not willingly write lies for all the estate and preferment either
Civil or Martial that the City or Kingdom can confer upon him, but let us
see what mistakes, untruths, or lies you can find therein, that so we may the
better know the nature of a libell hereafter.

Fifthly, In the last place, are they therefore Libells, because little books,
though the word is always taken with us in the bad sense, yet it properly
signifies nothing more, why then your Vindication, yea the Remonstrance it
self, with those you speak of, may all pass for Libells, and the Authors of
them all for so many Libellers.

We have done with your title page, wherein you have been very free in
accusations and promises, but how short you are in the proof of the one, and
performance of the other, your book will declare.

It begins thus in Capital letters.

A VINDICATION OF THE CITY REMONSRANCE. That is,

A Vindication of that which is invindicable, and therefore better it would be
that both the City Remonstrance, and the Vindication thereof were written in
Ashes, with the finger of vanity, then in marble with the pen of a Diamond,
except men should look upon it as a beauty spot, the better to set off the
other more fair, beautiful and praiseworthy expresses, from the City of
London.

But to come to your Book.

You begin with a truth in the position and proof, to this purpose. Satan's
instruments like Athaliah, 2 King. 11. have always accused others first,
whereof themselves are chiefly guilty, even so the disturbers of the quiet and
peace of the Church and State, viz. the Heretics and Sectaries, which of late
in this Nation do so much abound, cry out upon those which endeavor their
discovery, as the only perturbers of the Parliaments proceedings.

Ans. It was the observed custom of the Bishops Chaplins (great Apostates in
their latter days) that they did very frequently carry on the Doctrinall part
of their Sermons after a very sollid and orthodox manner, but marred all in the
Application thereof, bending the force of all that they said against the
peaceable in the Earth, the sons and daughters of the most high God, under the
black and ugly vizards of Heretics and Sectar^es, disturbers of the quiet and
peace of the Church and State, even so Mr. Bellamy, whose former ways were the
very self same (as shall be proved anon) upon which the malice, ignorance,
and envy of those present times writes. Heresies, Sectarisme, Disturbance of
the quiet and peace of the Church and State, lays down a truth in the
position, cleares it by Scripture, but bends the application of it against
others, though it turns back like a sharp sword into his own side, for see
his applycation of the aforesaid truth.

Mr. Bellamy. A^ by two late libells put forth in answer to the City
Remonstrance, and in defense, of Heretics, and Sectaries does appear.

But Sir, were you as wise, or rather conscientions in giving to every one his
portion, and to devide the word of truth aright, as you seem to be able to
observe truth from the word, you would apply it else where, and nor where you
have done, for if you examine things by their nature, or by their effects, you
shall not find the moderate Reply. but the City Remonstrance, to be the
disturber of the quiet and peace of the Church and State, witness the
divisions which it has wrought in Bedfordshire. Hartfordshire, Norfolk,
Suffol^^ and in many other places* (an account whereof you may have in season,)
raising up parties after Londons example, to set forth such peremptory
Remonstrances to the Parliament and people, as never were known in this
Kingdom before, though (through the blessing of God) they have been crushed in
most places, and the truth is, the printing of twenty thousands of the said
Remonstrances; (as intelligence informs) the dispersions thereof, both in all
the parts of this Kingdom, and beyond the seas, with the strong and powerful
enforcements thereof; by the Ministers upon the people after Londons example to
do the like (as time and opportunity may evidence to the World) did argue the
desires of many the prime ^romoters of the city Remonstrance, to be no less
then to make divisions, and to disturb the peace and quiet of the Church and
State.

Mr. Bellamy, You proceed to make good your charge against two Libells, viz.
the one a Moderate reply to the City Remonstrance: the other the Interest of
England maintained, you encounter chiefly with the first: and I shall second
the same, and leave the other; having never perul'd it.

First, you acknowledge the City Representative, is made up and chosen of the
City Collective, and I likewise acknowledge the Kingdom Representative to be
made up and chosen by the Kingdom Collective, neither is there any thing
charged as criminal by the Reply in this constitution, you grant this likewise
a truth that it is more common then commendable, for men trusted with other
men's goods to behave themselves to their trustees hurt. But you demand, what
does this reflect upon the City Representative, or its Remonstrance? Since you
will not see, you shall see; except with your tongu^ you will deny, what you
see with your eyes (a common thing in these back sliding times) you tell us
against whom this charge is made good: and you tell us the truth, viz. against
such, who being trusted with the souls of a people by their common consent and
choice to be their Pastor. (Whether Presbyterian or Independent, Parrochiall or
Congregationall) have in stead of feeding them with the sinceere Milk of the
word, that they may grow thereby fed them with the foolish fancies of their
own brain, vi^ that such a kind of government, (so and so disposed and
digegested into a Parochial* Classical, Provincial and Synodiall
constitution, with power and authority here and there placed, to compel and
enforce men to submit thereunto, though against their own judgments and
consciences, and that the Magistrate ought to exact uniformitie from all that
live under them) (is jure Divino) a mere fancy of their own brain and in
stead of keeping them together in the bond of unity, have broken them to pieces
with rents and divisions, viz. representing those who agree not with them, to
be Heretics, Sectaries, Schismatiques, and what not? and thus re^ding a
sunder a people of as sweet nature, heavenly spirit, and loving conversation in
former times, as the world has known. It is confessed Mr. Bellamy, that these
these are the men which behave themselves to their trustees hurt, you proceed
to answer what the Replyer tells you, viz. that there are 4. cases wherein the
City collective, is not bound to the City Representative, but ought in duty to
dissent from it, if not to protest against it.

Moderate Reply. First when the City representative, acts, in a direct, evident
and obvious manner, against the express will and word of God

2. When in the like plain and direct manner, it acts against the apparent
welfare, peace, and good of the Kingdom.

3. When it acts after the same manner, against the proper end of its own
being, the Cities welfare.

4. When it acts beyond the bounds, limits, and extents appointed, to the
endangering of all its immunities, and freedoms.

This (you affirm) is the replyers plat-forme, or groundwork of his after
building, and scoffingly say it is suitable thereunto, though you except not
against any one of these propositions, but say you, he dares not affirm that
the City representative does act in any one of the four cases, it may be it
was more his modesty to forbear, then his impudency, in case he had charged
the City by that Remonstrance, to act in them all, and had it been Mr. John
Bellamies act, as it was the act of the City, I would have undertook (and
would have looked upon it as no great task) to have proved him acting against
every one of them, and for that time made a separation, a schism, from the
society of Anonimusses. You parallel the City Representatives, and the City
Collective unto the Kingdom Representative and the Kingdom Collective, and I
freely grant that the parallel holds good (I mean as touching the constitution
of the Kingdom Representative, and City representative* viz. by the collective
body of the one, and of the other, though not in respect of their power) and am
not a fraid to grant it likewise, that if the Kingdom representative, should
act in a direct, plain and obvious manner, against the express will, and word
of God, against the apparent welfare peace, and good of the Kingdom^, etc. That
the Kingdom collective, ought in duty not to consent unto it. As for the
instance which you bring from Mr. Burtons affirmation from his 51 and 52. pages
of his book called the vindication of those Churches commonly called
Independents, to make good your logic, had not your silver shrines of the
Presbyterian Temple dazzled your eyes, and d^mmed your sight you might have
found assertions in abundance from the Presbyterian Authors, which differ no
more from what Mr. Burton says in that point, then twelve pence differs from a
shilling, please you Sir examine Mr. George Gillespy* in the 13. Page of his
book called Nihil respondes, written against Mr. Coleman and Mr. Samuel
Rutherford in the last page of the Epistle to the Reader, in his book called
the divine right of Church g^vernment and Excommunication. And see if he says
not as much and more of Mr. Burtons sense in that point, then Mr. (...)
hims^^fe has said, I for bear to set down the words, as supposing you are
not without the books I refer you to, and if th^se two will not suffice (as
occasion is offered) you shall have 20 and (...), of the Presbyterian party
that shall be produced to have sai^ the same; but to the point in hand, suppose
the representative Kingdom (that, I may give you an instance, in a case, as
you have given to the replyer) should make a law for the hanging, burning, or
banishing all such as shall deny the Popes supremacy, the real presence in the
Sacrament of the Lords supper, or other gross popish absurdityes; suppose they
should establish Mahomatisme etc. Is not the Kingdom collective, bound in
conscience: and duty, to dissent from it, if not to protest against it, suppose
they should command us to abjure Jesus, Christ, and turn Jews, ought not you
and ^. and every man in the Kingdom to dissent from it, if not to protest
against it, nay suppose that they should set up a government in a direct and
known opposition, to the word of God, and the example of the best reformed
Churches, ought we not to d^ssent from it etc. For this (as Paul did refer
the Athenians to one of their own Poets) so shall I you to your own Oracle,
the City Remonstrance, where you do in express terms affirm, and from the
botome of your heart, you do seriously profess before Almighty God, that you
do not conceive it in the power of any humane Authority (King, Lords, Commons,
together or apart, in Parliament, or out of Parliament, to discharge or absolve
you from adhering to the Covenant, see Mr. Bellamy, if you your self with all
your brethen, Remonstrants; do not make good wht I have affirmed viz. that when
the Kngdome representative acts in a direct evident and obvious manner, against
the express will and word of God, the Kingdom collective ought in duty to
dissent from it, if not to protest against it, and thus Mr. Bellamy your foot
is taken in that very snare which you laid for your Brethren, and now Sir should
I as weakly sult over you, as you, do over the Replier, I may say, what I pray
you will tha^ produce think you in the common Wealth^er Kingdom of England, and
anon after* if this be not, then I pray tell me, what is the highway to
desolution of Parliaments, and consequently to the distructon of the Kingdom,
and therefore have not I as good reason to say to you, and the rest of the
Remonstrants, as you had to the Replyer, either show me whether the
Remonstrants have not said as much as the replyer, or else confess your error,
and cry peccavimus, but to go on the Replier says,

All which granted as cannot be denied: You demand what he means by all which
granted, as cannot be denied, I answer for him, that surely he means nothing
but what he did affirm: Viz The undoubted truth of those 4 conclusions, for he
had said no more, although he might have made it very good, that the Common
counsel had acted in all and every one of the 4. forementioned cases; I shall
instance in the first of the 4 and if that be cleared that the Common Council,
by their Remonstrance did act in a direct, evident, and obvious manner, against
the express will and word of God, it will follow, that they did act against
the apparent welfare of City and Kingdom, etc.

LET US TRY THEN:

WORD OF GOD. CITY REMONSTRANCE. Romans 14, 5. Let every man he fully persuaded
in his own minds.

That as we are subjects of one Kingdom, so all may be equally required (be
they persuaded in their own minds, or not persuaded to yield obedience to the
government (...) forth, or to be set forth by Parliament. Romans 14. 13. That no
man put a stumbling block or an occasion to fall, in b^ brothers w^y*

That all such Sectaries as conform not to the public Discipline
established, or to See stablished may be fully declared against, and some
effectual course settled for proceeding against such persons. 5. Petition.

Hear is a stu^blingblock viz. a menace in a Brothers way.

Deuteronomy, 19. 15. At the mouth of two or three witnesses, shall every thing be
established.

That Quarter-man may be brought to some exemplary punishment, for the affront
done by him etc. Though no such thing was ever proved by one witness, or
testimony, that what he did, was any affront done to the privileges, and
government of the City. Hang him, hang him, what has he done. Mat. 7. 12. As
you would that men should do unto you, so do unto them, for this is the Law
and the Prophets.

Page 3. We will not receive impression of any forced construction of the
Covenant. Compare this with page the 7th.

The 4. Petition. That no person disaffected to Presbyterian Government, may be
employed in any place of public trust, but some effectual course settled to
proceed against such persons, (as in the 3. Petition.

Presbyteriall government is not in the Covenant, therefore an interpretation;
and this you force upon others, though you will receive no forced construction
of the same your selves.



And thus the word of God, and the City Remonstrance, proclaim open war one
against the other, and it is no hard matter to determine which shall get the
victory, and take the spoil: And for the other 3. cases the Replyer has said
more then your Vindication (as substantial as it is) has yet disproved: But
let us hear what your Vindication further affirms: The Replier deals with
your Remonstrance.

1. In the Narrative Part of it. 2. Petitionary Part of it. 3. The tendency and
dangerous effects of both.
1. In the Narative part of it, he tells you the phrase, and Dialect of it,
carried afull compliance with his Majesty's wonted declarations against the
Parliament; to this you answer; it complies in verbis with a declaration of the
House of Commons, and referres your reader to the Remonstrance of the state of
the Kingdom, Page 19. where there are in deed the same words with your
Remonstrance; the Replier tells you that the phrase, style, and dialect of your
Remonstrance agrees with the Kings wonted declarations against the Parliament,
infinuating into the people, that all manner of Heresies, and Sectaries, etc.
are tolerated by the Parliament etc. you do not seem to deny such things in
the Kings Declarations, but you deny any such things in the City Remonstrance,
and for this you compare the words, of the Remonstrance, with the words of the
Replyer, and demand whether the words of the Remonstrance, be the same with the
words of the Replier, I answer you, the Replier did not say they were the same,
but yet they were insinuations, for the boldest and brazen ^ac'd Malignant that
is, durst not positively affirm it in the Parliaments quarters, and should we
produce (as a very little labor will serve to do it) several passages and
expressions from the tongues, pens, and pulpits of several and diverse sorts of
men, who had no small influence in the business of the City Remonstrance, and
reference unto it since it came out, it would very easily appear what were the
Insinuations of the phrase, style, and dialect thereof, you say the Sectaries
are encouraged by their misconstruction of that expression in the late
declaration, concerning tender consciences, but how do you know they are
encouraged? Surely it must be your observation of them and their expressions,
as you have occasion to converse with them, give us but this ground to build
assertions upon, and we can boldly affirm that the phrase, style, and dialect
of the City-Remonstrance, insinuates, that the Parliament under a pretense of
their respects to tender consciences, designs a toleration of Sectaries,
Heretics etc. and more, that Malignants, Royalists, Cavaliers, Ignorant,
Scandalous, Profane, Lewd, and wicked persons, are more imboldned, encouraged,
tickled, and comforted, by this Remonstrance, then by anything that ever came
out against the Parliament, blessed be God, the Parliament has still respect
unto tender consciences, surely the Remonstrants consciences were not very
tender, in taking any offense thereat, and if they were not offended, why is
there not one word in all the Remonstrance: arguing some care in reference to
Tender conscience, nay if there be but disaffection unto Presbyteriall
government in any, though never so holy, Godly, learned, fit, able; yet let
them not have any place of trust in martial or civil affairs, says this
hard hearted Remonstrance. You bid the Replyer tell you which are the words in
the Remonstrance, which intimates to the people, that a sacred obligation lies
upon them from the solemn league, and covenant unto a down right suppression
of all those, who out either of weak or tender conscience cannot submit to
Presbyteriall government. He tell you; they are the words of the Second, Third
and Fourth Petition, wherein you desire that all non-conformists to
Presbytery, may be proceeded against and put out from any place of public
trust, and this you infer to be the intent of the Covenant, by comparing
these petitions with the third page of the Remonstrance, upon which you build
the same.

In the next place you except against the Replyer, for saying the Parliament
has promised in several Declarations a gracious respect unto Tender
Conscience. You bid him show those Declarations, it seems you are wi^^ing to
hide your eyes from such observations, in the Parliaments Declarations, as
though this were an abomination to you that they should have any respect to
Tender Consciences, have you fo^gotten the very last Declaration of the 17* of
April 1646* page, 5, Pray you mind it, it is worth your imitation, it is the
Parliament of Englands Declaration by your own assertion, for you call the
House of Commons the Parliament: In the 4* page of this Vindication and the
last Line, and were I as well furnished with books as your self, doubtlessed
I could show you several other Declarations, where they promised a Christian
respect unto Tender Consciences, I am sorty Mr. Bellamy, you should be so apt
now adays to ^ast out of your memory, the praise worthy acts of the Parliament.

You proceed again, affirming the Replyer charge another falsho^d upon the
Remonstrants, by this interrogation, is it not most abjurd that the Parliament
shall compose and enjoyne the Covenant, and other shall put their sense upon
it, and endeavor the enforcement of their own sense, both upon them, and the
whole Kingdom, for no less is insinuated (says he) in this Remonstrance,
page 3. I pray you Sir, do not you enforce both upon the Parliament, and whole
Kingdom, this to be the sense of the Covenant, viz. such an universal
settlement of the Presbyteriall government, as that all that will not submit
thereunto, should be by some effectual course proceeded against, admitted into
no place of public trusts, and yet you say you will not receive any forced
construction thereof, and do not you (in your own judgment) walk according
to the word of God in so doing, and yet you endeavor to enforce all
Annabaptists, Brown^usts* Sectaries, etc. to receive this for a reformation,
viz. Presbyteriall Government, and is there such a word in the Covenant? is it
not therefore a forced interpretation? You go on and tell the Replyer he
jeares you, in saying you told the People in print, as well as the Parliament
in their written Remonstrance, what vows you have made in the Covenant, and
bring in the order of the House of Lords for the printing thereof, together
with their gracious answer thereunto, as your justification for your princing
the same; and hereupon you quibble, and insult over the Replyer, as if now you
had met with him to purpose, but I Will answer for him, by asking you a question,
or two: Did the House of Lords command or order the printing of your
Remonstrance, before it was ever tendered to them? I am confident they did not,
and as confident I am, and can prove it by a cloud of witnesses, that a copy of
that Remonstrance of which the Replyer speaks, was printed, come forth of the
Press and many of them sold when you were at Westminster with the Original
thereof, yea several hours before you came home.

Secondly I demand further, did their Lordships order that Remonstrance to be
printed which you tendered to the House of Commons? If they did not, you do
but falter and baffle, as if you had children to deal withal, by urging their
Lord-ships order, to print that that was delivered to them, as a justification
of printing the other, and the Replyer speaks of that which was tendered to
the Commons, not of that which was tendered to the Lords. Page 3. You said the
Replyer deals like a juggl^r, who juggles now Mr. Bellamy? Doubtless juggling
better becomes an Anonymus then a Colonel.

In the next place you demand of the Replyer wherein the Remonstrance
discourageth the Parliament, and it is answered to your hands by pressing them
to a sudden enfeebling of their strength, by crushing a considerable party of
as Cordial friends, as ever they had since the wars began. And is not this
evident when you desire an effectual course might be taken for the suppression
of all those (whereof there are many thousands in the Kingdom as cordial
friends to the Parliament, as any the Remonstrants whatsoever) who cannot
submit to Presbyteriall government.

In the next place, you begin with an Interrogation, and as if you had gotten a
commission to insult, thus, What? Is Londons care to keep their Covenant, now
become Londons ruin? etc. Doubt less these are doctrines of a new date, and
near a kin to those new lights, which so many now a days do so much boast
of. Whether now Mr. Bellamy? I profess my heart aches, and my hand trembles,
shall I write, or shall I forbear? I passed by your scoffing at new lights,
page 10. once before, and took no notice of it. But I meet with it again yea
with an additionall scoff, Doctrines of a new date and new Lights, well Sir,
are you not ashamed to appear as you do against your brethren, under the name
of Heretics, Sectaries, Schismatiques, in Common-Counsell, in the City
Remonstrance: and in print after such a jearing and scoffing manner* what can
the world judge of your self, who have made so many turnings in matters of
Religion as you have made? How can you scoff at new lights; since your self
have been of so many various, and contrary opinions in matters of Religion? If
intelligence speaks true, you are that Mr. John Bellamy, who was borne at or
near Oundle in North-Hamptonshire, a Son of the Church of England, under
Episcopasie: who (after breeding, years and capacity had made you meet) was
brought up to London, and bound Apprentice to Mr. Nicolas Bourne, Citizen and
Stationer of London, and in a considerable part of the time of your
Apprentice-ship. As concerning Religion (for thereto only I ref^rre) was a very
zealous professor even to a very popular observation, exercising such
strictness, and exactness, in keeping and preserving (that rich Jewel) a
quiet and tender conscience; as that you would not personally sell such books;
(as prayer books etc.) which were ordinarily sold by other Stationers, and in
your Masters shop, in so much as that your name grew famous, for a most pious
and conscientious man, to the multiplying of your acquaintance, and the
begetting, and increasing your customers; when you set up shop for your self,
and studying to know more of the mind, and will of God, as touching the
dispensation of his public Ordina^c^s and worship; the business of infants
baptism came into your consideration, and in that point, you fell into the
opinion of Anabaptists, (but whether rebaptized or no, I cannot tell) after
this, still respecting (so far as men could judge) the main duty of
christ^anity, viz. not to sin against your conscience; condemn^^^ your self in
the thing that you allowed, according to the (...) of your own judgment and
conscience, you applied your s^ll to a ^eparate congregation, whereof Mr. Jacob
was Pastor and desired admission thereunto, and (upon your acknowledgemen^ o^
your error, concerning Anabaptism) you were admitted; with whom continuing, and
frequen^ing, to walk with them in their more private meetings; through the
tyranny of those times, you were by the Bishops officers apprehended and so had
up into the High Commission Court, at which time your godly friends (as was
their duty) came unto you, and gave you brotherly exhortations, and
encouragements unto Christian courage and fortitude, not to sh^inke but to
honor God, by suffering according to that present call which you had
thereunto, but it seems you had not yet received strength to abide such a
temptation; and therefore grievously took on, wishi^g you had never been
borne; and in short, by the mediation of some friends, and upon the giving of
your bonds that you would no^ go among that separate Church, and congregation
any more etc. you were set free again, and being called in question by some of
your brethren, for so doing, you endeavored to satisfy them; as concerning
your giving bonds, to come among them no more, with this consideration, viz you
could better give bonds (thereby only hazarding your purse) then your verbal
promise to do so no more, to the hazard of the peace of your conscience
insinuating thereby, that it was not the care of your purse, but of your
conscience, that made you run that course; at which answer, your friends being
satisfied for the present, (as judging the best of you) they expected your
Communion and fellowship as before, but considering (it seems) the danger
thereof you withdrew from them, made a Schism, and went away: and (as some
say) after along times forbearance, and many admonitions was at last
excommunicated, which act of theirs (it is presumed) is the maine sourse of
those bitter proceedings of you^s against these wares, revenge (its feared)
putting you on work.) After your separation and rent from them, you became
again an obedient and dutiful child to the Canons of Episcopacy: giving ample
testimony hereunto by singular observance of one of their great Commandments:
viz. the frequent and decent public use of the Common prayers of the Church:
observing their injunctions even to a tittle, standing when they bid you stand,
kneeling when they bid you kneel, and so observing your postures to the life,
yea, your dutiful obeisance to the fathers of the Church (falsely so called) (I
mean) the Prelates, was abundantly testified by your exact performance of
another of their great laws like unto the former, viz receiving the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper kneeling at the high Altar: as intelligence affirms, if
men may believe their eyes; but before your stomach could digest a high Alter,
you prepared your self for it by degrees, first, refusing to come to common
Service, but going only to hear Sermons, after this common prayer would down
with you, but not if read by any with a Surplisse, a while after neither Common
Prayer, nor Surplesse, nor high Altar it self was to hard meat for you, to the
great grief and amazement of godly non-Conformists, who were never in the
separate Churches; and the rather considering your Christian dial^ct, and
language of Canaan which was yet (notwithstanding all this) often found to
proceed from you, and not very long since, (the glory of Christian society, and
brightness of such a fellowship dashing upon your conscience) you betook your
self to a very precious select company of christians who met togetherin a
coutsary manner according to agreeme^, for the mutual comfort and edification of
one another by pra^er, exhortation, and the exercise of one another gifts, in
which company, none more free frequent, and forward then Master Bellamy, and
indeed according to their acknowledgements exceeding and excelling them all, in
delivering many lushious soule-refreshing, and heart-quickening truths, both in
pra^er and other exercises, the sweetness, benefit, and comfort, thereof being
yet as Manna in their palates, and the dew of Heaven upon their hearts; who
with much grief of soul assert these things. Now sir, I beseech you take
notice that I do not in the least reflect upon you, for your difference in
judgment from what you have been heretofore your self, nor from your
brethren, nor yet for your so often altering your judgment and practice, but
this is that that I would you, and all others, should observe in you, how you
have made a personal experiment of all those ways; have been for Bishops and
against Bishops: for Anabaptists and against Anabaptists: for Sepatates and
against Separates: for Bish: ^gain, and against Bish: for Common prayer book
and against Common Prayer book, for conformity and against conformity, and now
(as it were half facing) you are for Presbytery: viz. jure humano, and so left
to the wisdom of Parliament. and the prudence of Christian Magistrates; this is
the profession of your lips, and yet (you act and that to the utmost) with
those that hold it Jure divino, and seeks the establishment of it in that
consideration, so that your tongue complements with the Parliament, and says
as concerning the power of Church government: let the Crown be set upon the
head of Civil authority, the high Court of Parliament sitting at Westminster,
and yet your hands endeavor to lift it up and fix it upon the Temples of the
Episcopal Corporation the London Ministers sitting at Sion College, and so
you are likewise. for Presbytery and against Presbytery, and yet that you
should scoff and jeere at your brethren that differ from you, (though you
agree not even with your self) as men intoxicated and elevated with new
Lights, doctrines of new date, Sectaries, heretics, more beseeming a Judas, a
Julian, a Baalamite; then Master Bellamy, oh Sir, whither are you fallen?
Master Bellamy, what is salt worth that has lost its sav^u^? will you that
have been enlightened and tasted of the Heavenly gift and been made partaker
of the Holy Ghost tasted, the good word of God, and the powers of the world to
come, crucify to your self the Son of God afresh in his members, by seeking
for, and endeavoring after an effectual course of proceedings against such
persons, whom your own soul and consci^^ce cannot but know to be as tender
unto God as the apple of his eye, will you put the Lord Jesus again to open
shame by representing his Servants and redeemed ones in the eyes of the world
for Sectaries: Schismatics Heretics, will you prove the earth that drinks
the rain^ that comes often upon it, (I mean one of those, who have been so
ancient a professor, conversant in so many precious meetings, heard and
received so many glorious truths of God, powered forth so many prayers and tears
unto Cod, made so many Covenants of love and tenderness to the Saints of God,
professing such indeered and intimate respects to godly men, retained such
noble resolutions to follow God, according to your light etc) not bringing
forth ^^earbs (I mean meat for him, his children, and family, viz. Glory to
God, love kindness, gentleness, meekness, mercy, goodness to his children)
meet for him by whom it is dressed, that you might receive a blessing; but
contrary wise, bring forth thorns and briers, scratching, galling and vexing
your brethren in the faith, undermining their peace and comfort, not only
joining with, but stirring up the Magistrates against them, and appearing in
print in the vindication thereof, is not the end of such ground everlasting
burnings? God deliver you from it, consi^e^ Sir, your master is coming, if you
smite your fellow servants, he will call you to an account for it, and how will
you answer it? I know you do not think that you persecute the Saints; but
what is persecu^ion, if this is not? To seek for a suppression by an
effectual course, of those Saints and servants of God, that submit not to
Presbyteriall Church Government, which your self (except altered of late in
your judgment) will not acknowledge of divine institution? If you do the same
things which the Bishops did, is it persecution in them, and not in you? I hope
Mr. Bellamy you have yet those sparks in you of divine heat and fire, which
may yet kindle into a glorious flame, quench^t not, I confess it will be a
great piece of selfe-denyall in you to retract such unworthy proceedings,
especially lying under such great temptations to the contrary, as you do, but
Sir, the world to come is the everlasting world, the riches thereof the durable
substance, the praise of God, and not of men the chiefest honor, consider of
it, and do as God shall persuade your heart, but listen then unto his
persuasions, and stifle not the motions and dictates of your own light
hereunto. Consider Sir, the day wastes, the night is coming, your house of
clay cannot last long, your soul must shortly sit upon your trembling lips,
you have a precious soul in a vile body, and your Antagonist loves it (what
ever you suppose) who is more bold with you in this kind of dialect, because
you very well know the meaning thereof, I have more to say concerning your
book, otherwise I would be more pressing and urgent with you th^n I am.

But you demand What, is Londons care of keep their Covenant, now become
Londons ruin?

I answer, Sir, did our Covenant bind us to suppress all the holy, godly,
conscientious sons and daughters of God, which were but even di^affected to
Presbyteriall government? if so; bold I am to affirm, that Londons care to
keep the Covenant, Will now become Londons ruin; a bloody, cruel, cursed,
Covenant, if that be the meaning of it, but confident I am, as there is no such
thing expressed in the Covenant, so no such meaning can be rationally gathered
there from, and therefore it is not the Covenant, but such an interpretation
that is here impleaded, can we think that the present Parliament of England
(the great benefactors of tender consciences) for which the good will of him
that dwelt in the Bush, be ever amongst them) would ever bind the inhabitants
of this Kingdom, in such amonstrous design? if persecution of tender
consciences evidenced, but by so much as disaffection ^o the Presbyterian
government, be the matter of the Covenant, what have we done, but even struck
hands with the Devil, and said a confederacy, with all his cursed seed that we
will root out a great part of as holy, harmless, and blessed a generation as
is in the world, is this the meaning of the lifting up of your hands unto the
most high God, to give the greater blow upon the head of his servants here upon
earth? Surely Sir, if I had lifted up my hand in taking the Covenant with such
an intention, I should have expected the withering of it, and better it should
be so, then ever it should be found performing such a cursed thing, but the
truth is, the holy Scripture it self, by a wicked interpretation proves the
bane and ruin of some, and so may this Covenant, upon such an interpretation;
but who ever it is, that makes such an interpretation of the Covenant, let him
be for ever numbered among the Cananites; covenanted Enemies against the
Isralites, but let the Heavens be astonished, and the earth tremble, that ever
any professing Christ (not filled with malice and despite against the Spirit of
grace) should take such a covenant, with such an interpretation.

You go on with more interrogatories, which are little more then mere
flourishings, and that which any impartial man may answer, even in reading
them, and therefore I shall wave them.

In the next place, where you deal with the Replyer (for I observe nothing
else) you take upon you to decide a State question, and that none of the
meanest neither; I confess, some Common Council men need to be statesmen;
for they intermeddle with States-matters; more I presume then ever any, that
were before them, and more (I believe) then ever God or man gave them authority
to do; I fear some of them do much forget themselves, and take themselves to
be Londons Parliament and not Londons Common Council; for it is the Kingdom,
the Church, the State-affaires that they intermedle with, not confining
themselves unto their City-Charter, but acting according to Parliament
principles, in time they may be better instructed; but to the question, and
that is this;

Wherein resides the Supreme power of this Kingdom?

Mr. Bellamy answers thus,

The two Houses of Parliament, viz. the Lords and Commons, with the King, who
is always in his Kingly power present with them, though in person sometimes as
now) is absent from them, are those three Estates, of which the fundamental
constitution of this Kingdom is made up, and have in them jointly and
together, all the Supreme power of this Kingdom, and not any one of those
three Estates considered apart, and by it self, can properly be said to have
the whole Supreme power of the Kingdom residing in it, and therefore the
House of Commons being but one of those three estates, well might the
Remonstrants say that they are betrusted but with a share of the Supreme power
of the Kingdom, and for proof of all this his reading, referres us to a
Remonstrance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, of the second of Novem.
1642. to these words, we did and do say, that the Sovereign power, does
reside in the King and both Houses of Parliament.

Here you think you have given the Replyer a fair fall, and therefore insult
over him ever and anon upon this point, but forbear Mr. Bellamy, turpe
insultare jacenti, for however you think you have given the Replyer such a
full and ample satisfaction yet all the world cannot so easily be satisfied,
and therefore though for my part I was never yet a Common Counsel man, and
therefore cannot so possitively speak to such deep states business, yet since
you are so willing to satisfy the ignorant, what I shall say herein, shall be
by way of quere.

First then I quere Mr. Bellamy;

What mean you by three Estates? I have heard the term once by the Bishops
friends when they were a falling, and they concluded that there were three
Estates in this Kingdom, viz. the King, and the Lords temporal were the
first, Lords spiritual were the second; the Commons the third Estate; and they
gave this reason, that the King and the Lords were but one Estate because the
King made the Lords, but though the King conferred the Honors, and profits of
Bishops, yet did not make the Bishops themselves, they as Bishops, were jure
divino, you determine it otherwise, I pray you Sir a little more satisfaction
to that point.

2. What mean you by fundamental? you say the King Lords* and Commons are the
three Estates, of which the fundamental constitution of this Kingdom is made
up, are there three fundamentals? I confess I have not understood so much, I
ever thought there had been but one, and that I took to be the Commons, and
these reasons made me think so.

First, because I ever thought, that the Commons made the King, and the King
made the Lords, and s^ the Commons were the Prime foundation.

Secondly, I ever took this for a truth likewise, that both the King and the
Lords, were advanced for the benefit, quiet, and welfare of the Commons, and
not the Commons made for them, and if I was deceived, the Common maxim of
salu^-populi suprema lex deceived me.

You see my doubt, you see my reason, a little satisfaction here also Mr.
Bellamy.

Thirdly, I quere, whether (upon this supposition) that the Kingdom is made up
three Estates (as you say) and so we must not understand the Parliament
consisting of so many men, but of three Estates distinct, quatenus estates
apart by themselves, those are your terms. I quere (I say) whether that the
King, and suppose the major part of the Lords, which make up two Estates, do
agree together; suppose it be to set up absolute prerogative, and the Commons
will not assent here unto, whether the major part of Estates, must not conclude
the minor, the two conclude the third, and so as for the Commons, will they,
nil they, slaves they must be, and slaves they shall be, your judgment here
likewise good Mr. Bellamy.

Fourthly, Whereas you say the King is present in Parliament, viz. in his
Kingly power, though absent in person. I quere whether he is present with them
as a distinct Estate, I know Sir he is present in power in all his inferior
Courts of justice, as well as in the parliament, but is he present as a
distinct estate? If so, if one distinct Estate, may be present in power,
quatenus an estate, and absent in person, may not a second Estate be so
present, though absent in body? yea a third Estate so present, and yet absent
in body? and so we shall have three Estates in Parliament, and not a man
amongst them; this is a Riddle indeed Mr. Bellamy: I pray you unfould this also.

Fifthly, The Replyer observing the Remonstrants ascribing only a share of the
Supreme power to the House of Commons, proposes this question to them, will
not you allow so much power to the Kingdom Representative, in reference to the
Kingdom, as to the representative City, in reference to London: see page 13.
And so do I quere, will not the Commons of London, yield of ascribe unto the
Commons of England, as the Commons of London to thmselves will ascribe?
Therefore Mr. Bellamy, to make your absurdities the better appear, in your
parallel between the Kingdom Representative, and the City Representative; I
come upon you thus.

First, you grant that the Common Council is the City Representative: page the
2. of your Vindication.

Secondly You grant that, the House of Commons in Parliament assembled, is the
Kingdom Representative, in the same page.

Thirdly, You say, the City Representative, has power to make a Law for those
whom it Represents: in the 12. page of your plea for the Cmonalty of London

Fourthly, I desire to know whether you allow the Kingdom Representative, the
same power to make a Law for those whom it represents, if so, then let us
examine your argument: May we reason after your Logic Mr. Bellamy, see your
Sillogisme; Sir in the said book called a plea for the Comonalty of London (I
think I hit the right name of it, though the Replyer was mistaken before) in
the 12. page it stands thus:

That Court which has a power to make a Law, and by that Law, to confer a
power upon the Lord Major, and Aldermen, which as Lord Major and Aldermen, the^
had not before, must needs be quoad hoc unto the making of a Law, above the
Lord Major and Aldermen.

But this Court of Common Council has etc. Ergo, this Court of
Common Council so far as to the making of a Law, must needs be above the
Lord Major and Aldermen.

Now Sir I quere only (for I cannot presume such skill) may not I reason thus,
after your pattern.

That Court, that has a power to make a law, and by that law, to confer that
power upon the King, and Lords, which as king and Lords they had not before,
must needs be quoad hoc unto the making of a Law, above the King and Lords.

But the House of Commons (which say you is the Kingdom R^presentative, even
as the Common Council is the City Representative, upon your supposition) has
a power etc. Ergo, the House of Commons so far as unto the making of a Law
etc.

May I not reason thus likewise, according to your example, from your own
supposition still, that Court which has a power, to make or repeal what laws
they judge meet, for the Common wealth, and whereunto the King himself is
bound by his oath (and therefore ought in duty) to consent, must needs be quoad
hoc, unto the making and repealing Laws, the Supreme Court.

But the House of Commons ( which say you is the Kingdom Representative, as
the Common-conncell is of the City of London) upon your supposi^ion, has such
a power etc. therefore.

Or may I not reason thus, for I do not conclude any thing; I do but (as a
Pupil to his Tuter) propound queres to Master Bellamy

That Court which has a power to make Laws and rules, for all the Courts and
people in the Kingdom, to be steered, and acted by, and whereunto the King is
bound b^ oath to consent; must needs have the supreme power of the Kingdom
residing in it.

But the House of Commons in Parliament assembled (which say you as the
Kingdom Representative, even as the Common Council is the City
Representative) upon your supposition has such a power etc.

Therefore the House of Commons has (it seems, even by your own arguing) the
Supreme power of the Kingdom lesiding in it.

One touch mo^e Mr* Bellamy, from your Plea for the Comonalty of L^n^on (...)
Mr. B^llamy, you grant this arguing, from your for (...), of the Kingdom and
City Representative to (...), or ^r^^se I may reason upon you and that thus Sir:

He th^^ shall a^^^ be that power unto the City Representati^e, in ref^ence to
the government of the City, which he shall deny unto the Kingdom
Representative, in r^ference to the Government of the Kingdom, does quoad hoc,
prefer the City Representative in its power, before the Kingdom
representative in its power.

But Mr. Bellamy ascribes that power unto the City Representative, in reference
unto the government of the City, which he denies unto the Kingdom
Representative, in reference unto the government of the Kingdom.

Therefore ^ B^llamy does quoad hoc prefer the City Representative, above the
Kingdom Representative.

The Major proposition I think will not be denied, for the proof or the
minor, I must do two things.

First, show what power Mr. Bellamy asc^ibes unto the City Representative, in
reference to the government of the City.

Secondly, show what he denies the Kingdom Representative, i^ reference to the
government of the Kingdom.

Forth* first Mr. Bellamy ascribes so much power unto the City Representative,
in reference unto the government of the City; that the Lord Maj^r and Aldermen
must have no negative vote, as Lord Major and Aldermen, out must be considered
as so many distinct persons together with the Commons, concluding by the major
vote of the whole Conjunctim, and as unto such conclusions, regarding the Lord
Major and Aldermen but as so many distinct persons, a^ is the whole drift of
the 15. and 16. pages of the said Plea for the Comonalty of Lond^^.

Secondly, let us consider what he deni^^ the Kingdom Representative, in
reference unto the government of England, and that is in term^^is, that the
Supr^am^ (...) of this Kingdom, does not r^side there, neither wi^^ he (...)
the King, Lords and Commons in Parliament to be con^^^er^^ pe^sonaliter, and as
so many distinct persons, but (...) so then, this (...) case; The City is
govern^ ^joy Common Council consisting of Lord Major, (...) Commons of the
City, but not three distinct Esta^e, but as (...) men amounting to such a
number the may (...) concluding; but the Kingdom is govern^^ by a Parliament
(...) s^tting of King, Lords and Commons* not consider (...) pers^ns who have
their equal vot^, (...) Mr. Bellamy, and so the two Estates, being the major
part of Estate, must conclude the third.

Now I appeal to all, whether according to Mr. Bellamyes Logic, the Kingdom
representative, which he himself says is the House of Commons be not qu^ad
hoc, (...) in its power, in (...) government of the Kingdom, then the City
(...) in ^^ference for the government of the City.

Well Mr. Bellamy, (...) the case be so (I only quere for my further
satisfaction) and unti^^ you have answered these que^es, do not insult over
(...), nor charge him with destroying the power of two ^stat^s o^ the Kingdom,
when he did (...) desire you ^o (...) him the truth; as concerning the
residence of the supr^ame power of the Kingdom, until I hear your answers I
shall never in (...) of your (...) to vn^ou^d Riddles and by (...) your self
the questions will be no (...), unto you neither are they intended so to (...)
Take heed you do not make a Not of your answers.

Here, you slide from the Replyer and deal with others, as Lieu. Col. John
Lilburn, and anon after with Mr. (...) Buroughs, and the truth is, I wonder
how you can write so irreverently of him as you do, you call him one of the
most moderate opposers of Presbyteriall Government, and (as if your
bitterness, and unworthiness of Spirit, did resolve to be master) you check
your soft saying with ( if any of them may truly be so called) well Sir, what
say you of Mr. Buroughs? thus in his book which he writ against Doctor Fern
page 125. of the first impression of his book called the glorious name of the
Lord of Hosts, but in the last impression, the 9. page.

(It seems by the way, that Doctor Fern and you are agreed, and now what was
written against Doctor Fern, proves written against you, is this becoming a
christian, thus in your Spiritual warfare, at the command of the world, to
face, to the right, to the left, to the front, to the rear, half face, face
about, and as you were;) but what says Mr. Buroughs in the place before
quoted, thus:

But if the Parliament should degenerate, and grow tyrannical, what means of
safety could there be for a State.

Answ. I confess the condition of such a State would be very dangerous, and
like to come to confusion, particular men could not help themselves, and the
whole State ought to suffer much, before it should help it self by any ways
of resisting, but if you can suppose a Parliament so far to degenerate, as
all to conspire together with the King to destroy the Kingdom, and to possess
the lands and riches of the Kingdom themselves; in this case, whether a law of
nature would not allow of standing up to defend our selves, yea, to reassume
the power given to them, to discharge them of that power they had, and to set
up some other, I leave to the light of nature to judge.

You will say, This cannot be, because the higher Powers must not be resisted
by any.

Answ. This is not properly to resist the power, but to discharge the power,
and to set the power elsewhere (hitherto Mr. Buroughs) and is this all you
can say of Mr. Buroughs? It is well malice it self can pick no worse from his
writings; and truly Sir, you might have spared your marginall hand and finger,
except you intended to direct the Reader to observe your ignorance and envy in
collecting his saying, for first Mr. Buroughs did assert nothing, but left it
to any man's determination whether the Law of Nature would not allow of such and
such a course, in such and such a case; and it seems you the State case
resolver general, undertakes the decision: Once more Mr. Bellamy^ give us but
this foundation to build upon (as none but malignant-royalists will deny it)
viz. salus populi suprema lex, and then I think you will hardly like a wise
and solid man speak otherwise to that point; the rest of your proceedings in
your Vindication is of little worth, granting almost what the Replyer required,
only I see you most extremely shuffling in one point, that (were you nor so
well skilled in facings might make men wonder at you) and that is where the
Replyer charge an untruth in the Remonstrance, and bring in your self to
stand by him, and that is about the displacing or casting out of Mr. Quarterman
from his Marshall ship of London, the Remonstrance says the City did cast him
out, the Replyer says the City did not cast him out, but it was the Lord
Major, and Court of Aldermen which are not the City either collective or
representative, and in no sense the City, as having power hereunto, and he
produces you to stand by him. What, Master Bellamy, will you not stand by him;
in your book called a Plea for the Commonalty of London, we have your
judgment under your hand in black and white, and will you faulter now, you
are called out to make it good? Had you not better been an Anonymus when you
writ that book: Then Master John Bellamy, what kind of man are you? They that
observe your sayings, what they have been formerly concerning the King,
concerning the Lords, concerning the power of the Commons, (whispering your
thoughts in the ears of many that now speak of it) what your carriages have
been, not very long since, in the Common Council, in or among your brethren the
Stationers, the Committee appointed for the keeping up and maintaining the
expository Lectures, and what your carriages are now, stand with admiration and
amazement at your wheeling thus about.

You say little more to the Replyer, only I find you once more in an extreme
heat of passion against him because he told the Remonstrant,s of their pressing
the Parliament, to a sudden payment of their debts etc. you take on thus.

What, is it now come to that pass, that when the City, and Cityzens of London
who have lent and expended, for the use and service of the Parliament more and
greater vast sums of^money, then ever any, if not all the Cities in the Land
have done, nay then ever any City in all the world (a great word Mr. Bellamy,
and you need to be as able and dilligent a Reader as seller of books to make
good what you say) have done at any one time to and for the service of that
State in which it stood, and yet must it now by an Anonymus, a Libeller, be
taxed, etc. Hold Mr. Bellamy, le^'s have less of your passion and more of your
reason, do not you give as just an occasion for others to say, if they should
steer their pens by your compass, What? is it now come to that pass? Shall
not only the City (overtaken as the best of Ci^ies may sometimes be) see forth
as strange a Remonstrance, reflecting prejudice upon a Parliament, that have
done more, and suffered more for them and by whom they have received more good,
then by any Parliament that ever they had, nay (it is verily believed) then
ever any Parliament in the world ever did, for a City in any state where it
has been, but must a private person, a John Bellamy, an Episcopal man, an
Anti-Episcopall man, an An^baptist* an Anti-Anabaptist, a Separate, an Anti
Sep^rate, an Episcopal man again, an Anti Episcopal man, a Presbyterian, a
half Presbyterian, so bi-fronted, as to deny Presbytery to be Jure Divino,
and yet helping on the pressing and enforcing of it upon his bret^ren, that
cannot submit unto it, because they cannot see it Jure Devino, a Sectary, an
Anti-Sectarie, a Schismatique, an Anti Schismatique, a Scoffer at new lights,
Doctrines of a new date, a some thing, an any thing, an every thing, must such
a man as this stand forth in print with his vindication of such a Remonstrance?

You have a few words more yet to the Replyer he tells you, he knows not your
meaning by private and separate Congregations, you tell him what the City
means, but truly Sir, except you show your commission to be the City
Interpreter, you must give men leave yet to scruple what they meant thereby, he
tells you again, he know^s not your meaning by: An^baptists and Brownists, you
tell him they mean those so called by the Parliament (not by the King) printed
in the book of Declarations, page 659. What ever the Replyer thinks, I believe
the Remonstrantes means those who ever they be, that are but dis^ffected to
Presbyteriall Government, as will easily appear by comparing that second
Petition of the Remonstrance, with the third and fourth, which next follows.

You find fault with the Replyer, because he will not join with you in the
third Petition, viz. that as we are all sub^^cts of one Kingdom, so all may
be equally required to yield obedience, to that government, set forth, or to be
set forth by the Parliament; The Re^^yer says, that such a thing is against
Religion and reason; you answer no, the meaning of this Petition, is that one
Law may equal^y ob^ieg^ every Subject in this Kingdom, and for this you give
us a cluster of proofs, you bid the Replyer make it out i^ he can, ^f there
was any more then one Law, that did bind the Church of Israel of old, in the
times of any of the Pattiarchs, the Judges the Kings, the Governors, either
before, in, or after the Captivity, o^ since the coming of Christ, or of the
Apostles, either in the Churches of Jerusalem, Antioch, Rome, Corinth, Galatia,
Ephesus, Philippi, Colosse, Thessalouica, and the seven Churches of Asia etc.
But what is all this to the point in hand? were any of these Churches you
speak of, governed by a politticall government? according to the prudence of
the States wherein they were or, according to a divine rule given unto them
from God? do yon Mr. B^llamy, with your brethren Remo^strants desire the
Parliament to settle that p^at^forme of government which Christ has appointed,
or no^l^ no al^ your great ^cap of Scripture ^nstances are not to the purpose,
(...) so be you do so; Why then one turn more Mr. Bellamy, and conlesse that
though yesterday you did not own any plat form of Church government to be
Juredi^ino yet to day you have new light (and if so, do no longer jeare at new
^ight) (...) so be you hold Church government to be Jure politice, why then i^
^he Parliament judge Jus politicum, to permit u^en differing in judgment in
that point, let them alone.

You have here done with the Replyer, and ^un to his Partner, and let him
answer you, for I neither know him, nor his Book.

FINIS.

