A TRVE RELATION OF THE TAKING Of ROGER MANWERING Bishop of St. David's coming
from Ireland in a disguisd habit, in the Ship called the Eagle, the 28. of
June, 1642.

By Captain John Pointz.

Also the Relation of the sudden rising of the Lord Strange in Lankashire, and
of his intention of the taking of the Magazine of Larpoole.

Likewise concerning the Lord Digbies coming over in the Ship called the
Providence, his being chased at sea by our Ships.

And how Sir Edward Stradling, and Colonel Asbburnham were with a Frenchman
of War taken coming from Holland in a Pinnace, going for YORK.

Unto which is annexed a Conspiracy against Sir Henry Tichbourn Governor of
Droghedagh, by Captain Garner; and how Tradagh had like to have been betrayed
by the Rebels.

Also an Order against Proclaiming any Proclamation, Order, or Declaration,
contrary to any Order or Ordinance of both Pouses of Parlia^^^^.

Hen. Elsing. (...) Earl. D.

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Banks, July 9. 1645

A TRUE RELATION OF THE TAKING Of Roger Manwering Bishop of St. Davis coming
from Ireland in a disguised habit; in the Ship called the EAGLE.
By Captain JOHN POINTZ.
IT being my fortune by Profession to be a Soldier, and being employed
according to my abilities to his Majesty and Parliaments Service against those
Rebels in Ireland; and having dispatched some affairs, I was resolved for
England: But before I came, I had intelligence of a Fugitive that had been
Voted a Delinquent in Parliament, viz. Roger Manwering late Bishop of St.
David's, and sometime Parson of St. Giles in the Fields. He lying under the
censure of the Parliament; I thought became me as a dutiful Servant of the
Commonwealth, not to let this business go undiscovered, and to bring him to
light, that had been such an Enemy to the Church and State; and as the
Parliament has formerly censured him and degraded him from his dignities, and
made him incapable of the Ministerial function; and since the intermission of
Parliaments, be has taken upon him the degree of a Bishop, yet has not
amended his manners, but still persevered in former courses; he being as I
heard bound for England in the ship called the Eagle; when he heard how
business fared in England, and that there was some hopes of regaining his
former dignity: It was my fortune to come over in the same ship; where having
as God would have it, some conference with his man which was with me in this
ship, coming for Minyard in Somerset-shiere where finding contrary to my
expectation, but as God appointed it, the Bishop to ride in the same ship I
came over in, whereupon knowing of him, intimated so much to the Master of the
ship with the whole business, the Bishops wife was with him, a very near
kinswoman to him before he married her, being of the age of 22. years, far
unfit for such a man, he being aged 65. years, his sister poor and lying on the
Parish where he formerly lived in, without any relief, and he suffers his
children by his former wife to shift for themselves; he being examined before
Thomas Lutterall Esquire, he confessed that he departed from the Kingdom of
England into Ireland, for preferment upon the Kings promise: Let the world
judge, if his cause had been good, but that a guilty conscience pursued him,
whether he would have left a settled Revenewe of 1500. pounds per annum, to
adventure into an unknown Fortune; but he remains in durance, until the
Honorable High Court of Parliament take further order with him, and the
Captain well rewarded. So much I will averr.

JOHN POINTZ.

Likewise it was related unto me since my coming over, that the L. Strange was
risen up in Arms in Lancashire, intending to take away the Magazine there of
Larpool and Manchester, with 12000. men of the same County to assist him, and
to resist him, a great number were raised to resist him, and by the assistance
of Mr. Moore; who being Commanded by the Parliament to demand that Lords reason
of raising such Forces, and to take away the Militia. By his care the Magazine
is stayed and brought unto the Lieutenant of the County till further order be
heard from the Parliament: Had not Master Moore came, there had bin a great
deal of mischief, for there were on both sides raised, near nine score
thousand people; but thanks be to God all things are there at peace.

There is a report likewise of the Lord Digby and others to have bin Landed
near Hull, and that they were brought in a ship called the providence, with a
number of brass pieces, and other ammunition, he being chased by some of our
ships at sea; but Dighy as yet is not taken, Sir Edward Stradling is taken, and
Colonel Ashburne and a French man with them, which came from Holland in a
Pinnace going for York.

Also new from Droghedagh, of the discovery of dangerous and wicked designs
upon Sir Henry Tichbourne Governor of Droghedagh. As appears, that Captain
Garner did always frequent Sir Henry Tichbourne, and did furnish him with
abundance of victuals, only to make him his prey, and to get himself a good
opinion in him, and his officers, that they might have a good conceit of his
Loyal affections, and respects unto his King and Country. But falsehood is hid
in his dissembling breast, he under shadow of inviting Sir Henry Tichbourne and
his officers to dinner, gives them all the entertainment they could expect from
him; but he had so provided the business, that if God had not had a provident
eye over that City of Droghedagh; it had bin betrayed to the wicked Rebels,
but as it is in holy writ, the wicked have dug a pit for others, and fall
into it themselves, for by the means of one of his own soldiers, all the
treachery was brought to Light, which came to Sir Henry Tichbourne and craved
his pardon, which he obtained, upon which, he related how captain Garner who
was so intimate with Sir Henry, had provided an Army of men to take Tradagh,
and another Army of men to take Dundalke, and another to surprise Sir Henry
Tichbourne and his officers coming their to dinner; but this being discovered,
the Captain was taken, and his Soldiers were brought to Dublin and put to the
sword, the Captains Castle surprised, and seized upon by Sir Henry Tichbourne.

BE it Ordered and declared by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That no
Sheriff, Major, Bayliffe, Parson, Vicar, Curate, or other Officer, shall from
henceforth publish or Proclaim, or cause to be Proclaimed or published, any
such Proclamations, Declarations, or papers, which are, or shall be contrary to
any Order, Ordinance or Declarations of the said Houses of Parliament, or
tending to the scandal or derogation of their proceedings; but shall use all
lawful ways and means to restrain and hinder the proceeding and publishing
thereof. And all Sheriffs, Majors, Bailiffs, Parsons, Vicars and Curates, or
other Officers that have forborne or refused, or shall forbear or refuse to
publish or Proclaim any such Proclamations, Declarations, or Papers as
aforesaid, or have, or shall hinder the publication thereof, shall be protected
by the power and authority of both Houses of Parliament.

Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, That this be forthwith Printed and
Published.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

