CLERICO-CLASSICUM, OR, The Clergi-allarum to a third war.

Being an Answer to a Pamphlet, ENTITLED, A Serious and Faithful
representation of the judgments of Ministers of the Gospel within the Province
of London, contained in a Letter from them to the General and his Council of
War.

Delivered to his Excellency by some of the Subscribers, Jan. 18. 1648.

Which may likewise serve for a brief answer to their late Vindication,
relating to their former actings, touching the Capital punishment of the
Person of the King.

By John Price, Citizen of London.

MALACHI, 2. 7, 8, 9. For the Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they
should seek the Law at his mouth: for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts.

But ye are departed out of the way: ye have caused many to stumble at the law:
ye have corrupted the Covenant of Levi says the Lord of hosts.

Therefore have I also made you contemptible, and base before all the people,
according as ye have not kept my ways, but have been partial in the Law.

Published by Authority.

Men who lie under the guilt of much innocent blood, are not meet persons to be
at peace with, till all the guilt of blood be expiated and avenged, either by
the Sword of the Law, or Law of the Sword, else a peace can neither be safe nor
just: Christopher Love, page 37. of his Englands Distemper. LONDON, Printed by
M. S. for H. Cripps, in Pope's Head Allie, 1648.

To His Excellency Thomas, Lord Fairfax, and his Council of War. And the
Honorable the Lord President and high Court of Justice.
May it please your Excellency and Honors.
ALthough the old enmity between Satan and Saints has been always improved
by power and policy, yet the Serpents seed appearing in or opes, and the
Serpents head applying his traps, have been hitherto crush't by the foo^e of
truth, and the (...) thereof; It is hard to say whether Isreal's Assistannt, and
Isreal's Assaultant, have more hotly disputed in combats or counsels: but
frequent experiences, and faithful promises do abundantly certify, that
neither weapon nor wisdom shall stand against God; yet Balack and Balaain, the
Prince and the Priest (as of old, so now) from Pisga to Peor (or Pulpit to
Pulpit) pr^sume to bless the Lord by cursing his Armies, as if God would
exchange the blood of his people for that of Bulls and Goats,; for their talk
of Reformation, give them (the longing of their souls) the Armies destruction:
Numb. 25. 24.
Nevertheless the people shall rise up as a great Lion, and lift up himself
as a young Lion; he shall not lie down till he eat of the prey; and drink the
blood of the slain. It is not one of the least advantages of Isreal's
adversaries, that they know their colors can speak their language, understand
their word; by means whereof their deceitful spies come to their counsels,
find out their purposes; nay sometimes get under pay, procure preferment, and
draw out parties, as Absalom did, 400. men, that in the simplicity of their
hearts, knowing nothing, did follow their Leader) to their own ruin; the
inconsiderate subscription of so many judicious, grave, and learned men to that
abusive. Letter sent in private to your Excellency and general Council out of
their Christian amity, and published in print to procure your infamy,
scandalously aspersing the High Court of Justice, delivered Jan. 18. 1648. does
abundantly argue the yet living efficacy of that Serpents subtlety, which
(with Gods words in the lip) cheated our first Parents into most deceitful
actions. Su^^^^ some Judas or Jesuit under the shape of a Brother, (...) their
Function, has got this subscription, since the publishing (...) (as a due
punishment (they have run the gauntlet, each tongue and (...) has a lash at
their nakedness. For although it be your glory to pass by your injuries, yet
it is our duty to vindicate your innocencie^; ^^ey charge you with perjurie for
keeping your Covenant, in bringing Dilinquents to condign punishmeut; they
charge you with (...), for a judicial execution of the grand murderer of this
latter age; they charge you with break^ in the Parliament, for not permitting
them to enslave and ruin (their Lord) the Kingdom. Honored (...), suffer not
their chantings to obstruct your proceedings; they pretend a message from your
Lord and theirs; containing an inhibition of his express command Numb. 35. 16,
17.
, and a plain contradiction to their fello. Ministers opinion John Knox his
history of the reformation of religion in the Realm of Scotland, l. 4. p. 397.
where he asserteth it to be the judgment of Calvin, and of the most godly and
most learned Presbyterian Divines that ce in Europe, that the inferior
Magistrates, and upon their final default, the people may and ought to execute
their Princes for murdering and destroying their liege Subjects.
. I have not the least enmity against lawful Magistracy, nor the smallest
reluctance against the public Ministry, the one and the other being Gods
Ordinances for our present and eternal good: but whom Magistrates shall
enslave, and Ministers deceive, and both officiate for their private interest,
they are most noxius to public benefit: when that Caleb leads Israel that
will follow the Lord fully, and that man is found out that will seek judgment
and execute the truth. We may hopefully expect our duction by the (...) into
the land of Promise, though through several combats (...) sons of Anacke, and
our happiness by the other through a pacification of an angry GOD, who will
spare the NATION by just execution: The presence of GOD, and the prayers of his
people (whose guard you are in those troublesome times) shall ever attend your
just attempts: And although your zealous Enemies, under the specious pretenses
of a pious Reformation, and deep devotion, do fast for strife and debate, and
to strike with the fist of wickedness; yet while you loose the bonds of
wickedness, and und^^ the heavy burt^ens, free the oppressed, and break every
yoke; your light shall break forth as the morning, and your health shall
spring forth speedily; your righteousness shall go before you, and the glory
of the Lord shall be your rearward Isa. 58. 8.
: so prays, and so believes

Your daily remembrancer at the throne of grace, JOHN PRICE.
February 18. 1648.
Clerico-Classicum, OR THE CLERGY-ALARUM TO A THIRD WAR.
THat the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, Mal. 2. 7, 8.
whereby men may be encouraged to seek the Law at their months, in the
Scriptures assertion, that they have often departed out of the way, Zachar. 13.
3. Jer. 23. 21.
and caused many to stumble, is most men's observation, and the old Artifice of
a presumptuous arrogation to themselves the name of the Lord, and of his
mission (when he sent them not) to charm the people into a credulo^^ reception
of their deceitful sayings, is still in use, a proof whereof, is newly
exhibited in a late Pamphlet; whose Frouricepiece flourishes with the specious
^wordxs^ of deep devotion; calling it, A SERIOVS AND FAITHFVLL REPRESENTATION
OF THE JVDGEMENTS OF MINISTERS OF THE GOSPEL WITH IN THE PROVINCE OF LONDON,
CONTAINED IN A LETTER FROM THEM TO THE GENERAL AND HIS COUNCIL OF WAR,
DELIVERED TO HIS EXCELLENCY BY SOME OF THE SVBSCRIBERS JAN: 18. 1648. wherein
we observe:

First, the Letter writers, set forth, first by their function, Ministers of
the Gospel: secondly, the place of their residence and relation, WITHIN THE
PROVINCE OF LONDON.

Secondly, the persons to whom it wan written, THE GENERAL AND HIS COUNCIL OF
WAR.

Thirdly, the nature and subject matter of this Letter, viz. ASERIOVS AND
FAITHFVLL REPRESENTATION OF THEIR JVDGEMENTS, etc.

First, Jer. 23. 21.
the Letter-writers are (as they say) Ministers of the Gospel, so the false
Prophets of old, pretended to be the Prophets of the Lord; so the Pope, Christ's
grand Ambassador and Vicar upon earth, so the Popish Priests and Jesuits, the
Ministers of Christ; so the Prelates, and Prelaticall Parsons, Vicars, and
Curats, the Ministers of the Gospel; so many others as faithful, serious,
judicious, learned, and godly as these that are of quite contrary judgment to
them, and the contents of this Letter, do style themselves the Ministers of
Christ, messengers of the Gospel, etc. Which of these shall the people
believe? Surely who ever among them can vindicate their Divine origination,
these men have administered cause sufficient to question their abilities
hereunto, especially concerning the present Message, which in the name of the
Lord they here tender unto the General and the Council of War as from the
Lord, wherein they do very authoritatively, as from Christ, charge them for
acting things clearly against the direct rule of the Word, (...) 3.
though they point not to the Text, and some of them have promoted, encouraged,
and abetted, the very self same actions done at another time by other persons
(as we shall speak too anon) which here they have so anathamatized and branded
as an accursed thing, as if these men had the liberty and power (and that from
Jesus Christ) of making the same actions, with all their circumstances (their
own interest excepted) one while good, honorable, and commendable, and
another while wicked, vile, and intolerable; a prerogative which the Almighty
himself never yet claimed.

Secondly, for the place of their residence and relation, THE PROVINCE OF
LONDON* poor London, Thy Pr^phets make thee to err, Micha 3. 5.
that bite with their teeth, and he that puts not into their mouths, they
even prepare War against him; how art thou precipitated and hurryed by thy
Teachers into oblique, cross, and contrary actions; one while some of them
pretend to a Vision from the Lord, commanding thee to do this thing; when (at
the same time) other^ of thy See^ have the same pretense to a contrary Vision,
commanding thee still in the name of the Lord, and in the authority of Jesus
Christ, to the most contrary action; some injoyning thee, a from the Lord, to
go no to Ra^^oth Giliad and prosper, others in the same name, conjuring thee
not to go up upon pains of perishing; one while thou must take up Annes, by
the instigation of thy Ministers, requiring and commanding thee in the name of
the Lord, with fire and Sword to asser^ and maintain the cause of God, the
truth of Jesus Christ, de^e^sie of his worship: viz. The Prelaticall faction,
or the glorious interest of ( the Ministers of Jesus Christ) the Clergy
thereof; another while thou must arm thy self, from the same instigations, in
the name of Jesus Christ, to sacrifice thy Gold and thy Silver, thy Mon^ye and
thy Plate, thy Horses and thy servants, thy very life and being, upon the happy
promotion of the house of God, the government of Christ; a blessed Reformation!
the suppression of error, heresy, and blasphemy (otherwise more cruely called,
the service and interests, honor and preferments, of (the Ministers of Jesus
Christ) the Presbyterian Clergy, and the cause thereof; how must thou put on
thy Armor and put it off again, advance and retreat, do and undo, according
to the crooked motions of thy uncertain Teachers, ^ormenting thy mind, vexing
thy thoughts, and harracing thy person into contrary actions by their contrary
orders, by means whereof, the ancient love, union, and goodness of thine
Inhabitants, is turned into hatted, division, and bitterness, each against
other, causing thy foundation to shake, and thy pillars to tremble, which is
all the benefit thou have received by (...) exchange of thy late Diocese for
THE PROVINCE OF LONDON.

The second thing considerable, is the persons to whom this devout letter was
written and delivered, viz. THE GENERAL AND HIS COUNCIL OF WAR, though
chiefly intended for the mutions, malignant, perplexed, and distempered party
of the common people; that these letters (by the midwifery of James Cranford,
that bo^ntifull and liberal Imprimatur-donor to any lying, scurrious, and
scandalous Pamphlet against the Parliament and Army) might stir them up (if
possible) to any desperats, bloody, and dangerous attempt, to interrupt the
present current of justice, to hunt after, and to procure at last, that savory
(...) which the souls of these zealous Clergymen so greatly long for, viz. to
be listed up into the chair of impulsory authority and government, though it
be by the ruins of their native Country, so that that which Gregory writ to
M^^riti^^^ concerning the ambition of the Preliticall Patriarcks of
Constantinople, may be as truly said of our present Clergymen; E^^^^m^re
compellor, Greg. lib. 4. Epist. 323.
ac dicere o tempora (...) mores (...) cuncta in (...) partibus, barbarorum
juri sunt tradita, destructae urbes everso castra depopulatae provinciae, etc.
That is, I am compelled to cry (...), Oh times, Oh manners; behold in all the
part of Europe all things cry under the reverence of barbarous people, Towns
are destroyed, ^^^iles overthrown, Provinces are spoiled, no labourer
inhabiteth the Land; notwithstanding the Priests, who should lie in ushes upon
the ground weeping, they are seeking unto themselves names of vanity, etc. Nay
have not we cause to say that the like things have befallen us by the only
means and procurement of the men of this function; for was not the rice of the
late sad and miserable Wars, the pride and arrogance of those that styled
themselves the Ministers of the Gospel, the Ambassadors of Christ, viz. the
proud Prelates: And was not the late second War, and the flames thereof
inkindled and blown up by the Pulpitincondiaries, the like Ministers of the
Gospel, Ambassadors of Jesus Christ, viz. The ambitious Presbyters, who are now
again by their fi^y tongues and ^urious pens, scattering their (...) Pamphlets
among the people, and hissing them on to a third War, resolving (as it
appear) to s^e the Kingdom in ashes, but they will have their wishe^.

A third and last thing considerable in the Title of this letter, is the nature
and subject matter thereof, viz. A SERIOVS AND FAITHFVLL REPRESENTATION OF
THEIR JVDGEMENTS.

That you are serious and faithful in the prosecution of your judgemen^ i^
general, touching your own interest, power, and preferment, we have reason
enough to believe: but how shall we know when you are serious and faithful in
the REPRESENTATION of your judgment in any particular; for we shall anon mind
you of a represen^ation of your judgments, and that by your s^lves, as far
differing from this, as light i^ from darkness, and yea from nay: and we had
as much and more ^eason to believe your seriousness and faithfulness in that
representation of your judgments, then in this; the right eye whereof (...)
darkened, and the right hand so withered, that there is ^arc^ the least
glimmering or motion of light, or arguments ^or your judgment represented in
all your letter: and did not a ^resumptuous opinion swell in your minds, that
your very ^^mes, titles, and presumed vocation, viz. (Ministers of the ^ospell,
Ambassadors of Jesus Christ) would challenge a ^uddaine entertainment of what
ever you represent, asking no question for conscience sake, and that the
rhetoric of the bramble should silence the Vine and all the tree^ of the
Forest (you know our meaning) you would never present the world with such a
vain, poor, ba^ron, empty nothing, for satisfaction in so great and weighty a
cause as this, which you c^ll A serious and faithful representation of the
judgments of Ministers of the Gospel within, etc.

Your Letter stands, though faintly, upon four feet.

1. The occasions of your writing it.

2. The mattere criminal contained therein, charged upon the General and
Council of War.

3. The grounds and reasons of your charge proving the same.

4. Your Ministerial advice and council thereupon.

That they are all so feeble as not able to bear up your presumed authority
thereof, in the judgments of rational and ^^partial Readers, will quickly
appear; for,

First, for the occasions of it, which were,

First, The several applications as well by writing as verb^^ll messages,
inviting the Ministers of London, or some of them, (...) meet with the
Officers of the Army in their consultations (...) matters of Religion, page 1.

2. The refusal of these Ministers of Jesus Christ, so invited.

3. The reasons of this refusal.

From the first of these, may we not behold as on the one hand, the Christian
candor, ingenuity, and condiscention of the General and Council of War,
forgetting the many false, notorious, and public slanders of these men cast
upon them, from their pens and Pulpits from day to day, endeavoring (if it
were possible) to defile and be-spatter that garment of honor which God put
upon them, that they should apply themselves; nay, make several applications of
themselves unto them, send to them, and write to them, etc. So on the other
hand, the domineering, Lordly, and Prelatical pride of these un-Christ-like
Ministers of Jesus Christ, that would not vouchsafe such a condiscention as to
give them a meeting; surely that Papal unction (which was by the spirit from
beneath powered forth upon the heads of the Popes of old time, pussing up their
minds to that measure of pride, arrogance, and supercilliousnesse, as Kings and
Princes with their Wives and Children, must gladly, even with their hare feet,
attend their Holinesses pleasure day after day, before their admission) has
plentifully extended to the skirts of their clothing; these servi servorum
dei, these Ministers of the Gospel, these zealous and hot disput^^^ against the
errors, heresies, and blasphemies of the Army, cannot be prevailed withal by
several applications, by writing, by verbal messages, to advise, counsel,
and direct them in matters of the greatest concernment to the whole Nation, to
prevent the subject matter of their daily Pulpit-invectives against them, from
the power of tyranny, and the pride of the Clargy: (...) nos Domine, they can
lift up their voices like a Trumpet In most scandalon^ accusations, slanderous
defa^^ations, and bitter invectives, allarming people against them, but cannot
he prevailed withal, no not by several applications of several kinds to
advise and consult, to direct or instruct in the greatest matters concerning
the good or evil, saving or loosing the whole Nation, is this; while you have
opportunity to do good to all: and is this is vindication of your Ministerial
function wherein you so often glory?

We Ministers of the Gospel within the Province of London, hold it our duty as
then to refuse any such meeting as was proposed: so now to give your Lordship
and Council the reasons of that refusail, lest by our silence we should seem
to be wanting in that ingenuity and candor which becomes all, but especially
the Ministers of Jesus Christ, etc.

We Ministers of Jesus Christ within the Province of London: what are the
signs and tokens proving the same? your ingenuity and candor which becomes the
Ministers of Jesus Christ? excellent, a testimony whereof you give by all your
carriages as to all men that observe your footsteps: so especially,

First, To the Army, calling them in your Pulpits a rebellious Army, a
generation of vipers, a viprou^ brood, an oppressing Army, an Army of
Heretics, a Schismatic Army, an Army whose lives are not worth a prayer,
and whose deaths are not worth a tear; an Army, though conque^ing, yet they
were not fit nor worthy to conquer; that we had been better without those
great victories, then to have them by such hands. Admirable ingenuity,
unparalled candor, such ingenuity and candor appearing in Mr. Canton, Mr.
Cranford, Mr. Case, Mr. Love, Mr. Jenkins, Mr. Tailor, and some others, which
did never appear in Peter, James, or John; yea, nor even in Jesus Christ
himself.

Secondly, Your ingenuity and candor further appears by your submissive and
Christian respects to authority, especially the Parliament: and as at all
times, so chiefly when they contend not, though with the ruin of all, for your
greatness and interest; then your Ministerial ingenuity and candor do appear
in all their glory, calling them (while they delay your work) an apostatizing
Parliament, a Covenant Breaking Parliament, a Parliament at whose doors may be
laid all the errors, heresies, and blasphemies of the times; a Parliament that
has wrought a great Reformation amongst us in Church and State, taking away
High Commission Court, Star Chamber, Council Table, etc. and bringing in the
room thereof several Committees, whose little fingers in way of oppression,
were heavier then the loins of the former Courts; a Parliament suppressing
Popery, Ceremonies, Crucifixes, Crosses, Service Book, etc. and in the room
thereof giving liberty of Conscience, otherwise called a cursed tolleration of
errors, heresies, blasphemies, and all manner of licentiousness; a Parliament
that has taken away Ship Money, coat and conduct-money, monopolies, etc. and
in the room thereof bringing in taxes, assesments, free-quarters, and the
heavy burden and bondage of Excize, which neither we nor our Fathers were
ever able to bear: Is not this excellent Provincial ingenuity and candor,
which further dazles men's eyes: and therefore,

In the third place (for the same of your ingenuity and candor is known to all
men) do not they further appear by your abetting, countenancing, and
encouraging violence and force upon the two Houses by a company of loose,
profane, and wicked fellows at one time, as some of you did (for we would not
be understood of you all, many whereof are merely drawn in to the amazement of
those that read their names, though not for lack of inconsiderateness) falling
in with the disaffected, delinquent, and malignant party; and at another time
crying out, exclaiming, accusing, arragning, and condemning that very Army,
which (from some of your own mouths it has been spoken) have been instruments
of the preservation of your very lives and liberties, the Lords battle-axe, and
arm of salvation to this Kingdom, and the interest of the Gospel and all
honest men amongst us, because necessiatated upon the peril of losing the
benefit of above 7. years wars, and suffering all to return again into their
old channel; yea, reducing the Nation to more intolerable bondage and slavery
then ever) they did secure the persons of those Members of the Commons House
that did most basely promote, and end^^vour to bring about the Kings and
Cavalliers most tyrannical and wicked design.

Fourthly, For the ingenuity and candor of London Pre^chers is famous
throughout the whole Kingdom; does it not further appear, by setting the
people at first against the King and his party, firing men's spirits against
him, charging him with the guilt of the blood of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, conjuring men by all your devout and Ministerial artifice to fight
against him, etc. And now having raised men's spirit^^^ a resolution of
requiring just and Scripturall satisfaction, that blood may be avenged, and
according to Gods express word expiated, to cry out in your Pulpits and
Pamphlets, murder, murder, and innocent blood, and the staining the
Protestant Religion with the blood of the King, etc. Is not this excelling
ingenuity and rare candor? It you shall deny thy, I shall show you several of
your own books and Sermons, proving both the one and the other: and for a
taste at present, take one instance of a very zealous Paster of your Catalogue,
Mr. Chrestopher Love, Pastor of Anne Aldersgate, when he was an Army man of
Windsor Garrison, preaching at Vxbridge, when the treaty with the Kings and
Parliaments Commissioners began there; read his words in his Sermon, called
Englands Distemper, page 23. It would search to the quick, to find one whether
King James, and Prince Henry his son, came to a timely death, yea or no: Some
Parliaments have been but short lived when there was but a muttering, that
enquiry should be made into their deaths. It would search to the quick, to know
whether Rothel, and all the Protestants in it were not betrayed into the hands
of their Enemies, and by whom. It would go to the quick, to find out whether
the Irish Rebellion was not ploured, promoted, countenanced and contrived in
England, and by whom.

Again, page 32. The Lord heales a Land by cutting off these distempered
members that endanger the health of a Land; it was the Lord that troubled
Achan, and cut him off, because he troubled Israel! Oh that in this our
State-Physicians would resemble God, to cut off those from the Land who have
distempered it; melius est ut pereat unus quam unitas. What is this but to
incence the people to an implacable spirit of revenge against the King? and was
not this the tune of most of these Subscribers, though I cannot say so of them
all, (some of them being true to their principles of Cavall^^risme from the
beginning) and yet now how do these men speak the very language of Ashdod,
and outstrip those Ministers of Jesus Christ too, (if ordination and
Academicall education can make them so) I mean Mr. Love's sons of Belial, as
he calls the sons of Lavi, in page 31. of his said Sermon, in calling those
that continues their faithfulness to the Kingdoms interest against the late
King and his tyranny, Traytos, Rebels, and Murderers, etc. Is this the
ingenuity and candor that becomes the Ministers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ?
But I need not go farther then this very Pamphleticall Letter of yours, and
vindication, to find out your ingenuity and candor.

First, You tell the world, that some of your brethren at one conference with
the General and some of his Council, and at another with some of his chief
Officers, did manifest their dislike of their late actions, etc. Was this
ingenuity and candor either in your Brethren or your selves, to make their
private meetings and conference a ground of a public charge, and print it
abroad without consent? Was this ingenuous and candid for some of these
Brethren only to publish the same without consent of the rest? Was it ingenuous
for you to print it without consent of all? Was it ingenuous for you to make
your Brethrens only dislike (we know not upon what grounds and arguments, not
one is declared (except distempered, jealous, and uncharitable thoughts against
the Army) a sufficient ground of your firing the City and Country, Pulpits and
Presses, against the proceedings of Justice and Judgment amongst us? Is it
ingenuous and candid for you to tell the Army, that the constant judgment of
Protestant Divines (with whom you do fully concur) is, that they disclaim,
detest, and abhor the wicked and bloody tenets of Jesuits concerning the
opposing of lawful Magistrates by private persons, and the murdering of Kings
by any, etc. As if the Parliament and Army were no more an authority then a
private single person, and that their just proceeding against the King for his
bloody and wicked Government, was even a murdering the King? Do you not show
your selves ingenuous and candid as Ministers of Christ in the sight of Heaven
and Earth: would you not count others that should do so, false, bold,
pertenacious, scanda^ous, mutinous, seditious, rebellious fellows, if men of
your ^is-interest? Does the Parliament, or Army, or any man of ^isdome or
reason, maintain it lawful with Jesuits to murder Kings? Will you say that
all Protestant Divines hold it unlawful to depose, or capitally to deal with
Tyrants and Murderers, if Kings and Princes? Though Doctor Burges ^ndeed (and
it may be some other of the quondam-Prelaticall ^ribe, that can face about with
times and Interests) did so ^aintaine and hold, vid. Dr. Burges fire of the
Sanctu^ry, page ^88. Yet you shall have an answer drawn from some of your ^wne
parties labors proving the contrary: but if not, your ^genuity and candor
which you show to the World, do more ^come Mountebanks then Ministers; Juglers
and Jesuits, then ^e faithful dispensers of the word of truth: Is not this
^^eer blinds to the people, to say all Divines that are Prote^nts are against
murdering of Kings, therefore Parliaments and people must not proceed against
traiterous and murthe^ous Tyrants, that make no conscience of shedding the
blood (...) thousands and ten thousands; yea hundreds of thousands ^f poor
innocent persons and Protestant people, for the satis^action of their mere
filthy lusts, and wickedness.

Again, was it not an ingenuous, candid, and brotherly (...) ^n you (because
Mr. Peter's did Christianly advise you to forbear ^o stir up the people to
sedition (for so you have endeavored, if ^here can be any such thing in
P^lpits) least Soldiers should do ^ou a mischief, and you may thank your
selves, assuring you that if a third War be stirred up, they will give no
quarter, etc.) to ^print him to the World as if he threatened the people, and
was the great man of their trouble and distemper, that if it was possible he
might not walk the streets in safety?

Again, was it not yet more of your ingenuity and candor to assert several
notorious falsities and untruths, and to give your Readers a cluster of these
bitter grapes together, as to instance page 6. of your Vindicationiin the
margin; Page 6. of your Vindication.
where you say that the agreement of the people was the same for substance,
with an agreement of some in the Army, declared against by the Parliament in
December, 1647. There is one untruth, that because, that, therefore this,
(being the same in substance with that, at least in the matter of it) was then
declared against by both Houses, and condemned heretofore by the General and
his Council of War, there is one untruth within another.

Again, You say that one of the soldiers was shot to death for promoting it;
this is first, a most notorious untruth, and secondly, a most injurious
charging the Army with the blood of that man, the man that was shot to death,
was not as all so much a^ questioned for promoting that agreement, or (as some
of the Soldiers affirm) did at all promote that agreement: but being sent
with his Company by the General to Newcastle, did with others make a mutiny,
resisted, and beat their Officers, took away the Colors from their Ensign,
beat him with his own Colors, for which this fellow that was shot to death,
being found most guilty, was condemned and executed, and yet you have the
boldness and confidence (you would call it in us) the face and impudence to
assert it as a truth to the very teeth of those that know the contrary; and all
this in the profession of superlative ingen^ity and candor, even such as
becomes the Ministers of the Gospel, and Ambassadors of Jesus Christ. Were
these things subscribed and asserted by some of you, whose tongues are famous
for slander* as Mr. Cranford, who once either did or should have sat in the
stool of repentance even at the Exchange for his slanderous forgeries; or Mr.
Cauton, who makes it but a small thing to ve^t his viprous language, of
Traitors, Rebels, generation of Vipers, murderers, etc. against those with
whom he is not worthy to be n^med for piety and prudence, it was not much to
be wond^ed at: but that Mr. Gataker, Mr. Fuller, Mr. Blackewell. Mr. Haviland,
Mr. Manton, should subscribe such notorious falsities, argues that indeed the
best of men are but men at best, and that the wisest are sometimes weak; where
i^ the wisdom of the wise, and the understanding of the aged? Is not this the
high way to prejudice your Ministry, and provoke unto contempt and scorn?

Again, (For there is scarce a lease in your Letter, wherein your ingenuity and
c^ndor do not appear^ in the like colors) you assert another gross untruth
(to call it a mistake, we^e to mistake its name) in the beginning and threshold
of your Letter which you make the occasion thereof, and that is, that sev^rall
application^ by writing and verbal messages were made unto you to meet with
the Officers and some of the Army in their consultations about matters of
Religion, which after you say was only to contribute your assistance in
prosecution of what they had undertaken before, informing your ^eaders as if
you were sent merely to confirm and ratify, assist and further that which
they had wickedly begun before, and not at all to debate and consult about the
lawfulness of any of their ways to give or receive satisfaction therein, and
you that know the truth of ^he whole matter, are not you^ consciences smitten
within ^ou for mis-informing your Brethren, and drawing them in ^o subscribe
such gross untruth^* Can you face such a Scripture as you quote, when you say
you are comm^nded to cry aloud (...) life up your voyees as trumpets to show
the p^opl^ their transgressi^^^, and the house of Jacob their sins. Were not
you solicited and invited to come unto them, and that with expressions to ^his
purpose, that all honest interests might be satisfied, and ^ot yours neglected;
were not your several objections answered why you denied to come, again and
again? did not some of you urge this a^ one reason against your coming, that
they had agreed upon their way, and were resolved hereupon say you what you
could: and therefore lest you should be looked upon as concurring with them,
you denied to go: and were not you answered to this purpose, that whatsoever
was done, if you could show satisfactory ^eason^ against the same, all that was
done should be as if nothing at all had been done; speak your consci^nces, are
not these things so^ why then do you stain the profession and function of
preaching the Gospel with such noto^ious falsehoods: Are you no^ herein like
unto Kings and Princes, that prosecute the greatest designs against Religion
and Liberty under the color of the preatest professions and ^rotestations of
promot^^ the (...) and the other? Is this your Christian ingenuity and (...)
this your abstaining from all appearance of evil? and your having no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reproving them?
were there ever so many untruths so subscribed before? The true reason of your
refusing to come unto them, you somewhat tenderly, but clearly declare, viz.
their no^ observation of that which you seem to conceive to be the^ true
distance from you; they came not propounding their (...) unto you in such a way
as was suitable for private pers^ns (...) have propounded, and for Ministers of
the Gospel to have resolved. Oh high strain of ingenuity and candor becoming
the Minister^ of the Gospel of Jesus Christ! Is this to take hold of all
occasions of doing good? Is this to preach the Word in season and out of
season? Is this like Jesus Christ? Did he give commission to his Disciples to
go no where but unto such as should enqu^^^ after them in a regular way? Is
this that humility, sweetne^^ ingenuity and candor becoming Ministers? Once
more yet, concerning your ingenuity and candor in the title of your Letter, you
say it is a representation of Ministers of the Gospel (...) Province of London:
And among your subscriptions I find (...) Joshuah Kerby, Minister of the Word,
but I pray of what place; in what Parish is he either Pastor, Minister, or
Preacher within the Province of London? Do you begin, conti^^^, and conclude
with such ample testimony of your ingenuity (...) candor? Had you been as
ingenuous and candid as you would seem to be, you would have said Nicholas
Profet, Minister of the Word at Fosters, alias, at Marlborough in
Sommerset-shire (if I be not deceived) and Stanly Gowre, Minister as Martins
Ludgate, alias, Pastor of Dorchester in Dorcet-shire (if I be not deceived) you
would have written John Hulke, Preacher at Alhallows upon the wall, immediately
after Andrew Janeway, Pastor of the same place, and not put down 27. between,
that the Reader may presume so many distinct Parishes as you place Ministers;
and have told us whether this wa^ that Hu^ of Essex which was sequestered, yea
or no: and in the Title of your Vindication you would not have put in that
particle of universality; A vindication of THE Ministers of the Gospel is and
about London, fetching such a circumference, and bringing in not a third part
of the (...) of the same (...) and in the subscription of the same Vindication,
you would not have gone so far as Walsingham in the Bishopric of (...) for
(...) Devere^x, and palliate the same by calling him late Minister at Andrews,
Holborne: Neither would you have stained your reputation with the mention of
Thomas (...) Pastor of Mar^ins-Outwich, carried from ^lym^^th for his notrious
D^l^nquency, and worth^ly sequestered for the same* (...) no more now (if
possible) of your ingenuity and (...) -- you proceed to matter of charge
against the Army, page 3.

It is (...) known what attempts of late (...) practice against lawful
Authority, especially by your late (...) and (...) published in opposition to
the pr^ceedings of (...), ^ also by se^zing and impris^ning the Kings Person
without the knowledge and consent of Parliament, and by that (...) offered to
the Members of it, many of whe^^ are (...) to us to be man of (...) worth and
integrity, etc*

It has been already sufficiently replied by way of answer to the paper of
the Armies Proposals of the sixth of December, last, in several other
expresse^ from the Army, viz. in a Remonstrance come forth after those
Proposals, a Declaration after that Remonstrance, a^ (...) Answer of the
general Council of Officers of the Army to the Demands of the Hono^rable the
Commons of England, all which contain the grounds and reasons of those
^^tempts of late put in practice by the Army against lawful authority, etc.
But you have got the ar^ of stopping your ea^^ like dea^e Adder^, vid. The
humble answer of the general council to the demands of the Commons of England,
touching the securing and secluding some Members, p. 2.
to any argument of satisfaction, and still to insist upon the Armies
proceeding^ against the Members which themselves do acknowledge, simply
considered, irregular, and not justifiable, but by honest ^^^^tions for
public good, and an extraordinary necessity for the same end, ^^ding them
thereunto.

And though your ears have been often heaten with reasons, vindicating such a
necessity, whereunto you have been^ mute; yet do you your selves judge,
whether in case either by the artifice of the King and his wicked party,
malignant (...) bars should be brought into the House, or those that were
formerly against the King, because their interest and his were inconsistent,
should (having received satisfaction in that point) make their own advantages
in a corrupt closure with the King, endeavoring to bring him in upon his own
terms without satisfaction or security to the Kingdom, as they did upon his
own Message of the 12. of May, 1647. and presently to diaband the Army,
protecting the 11. Members impeached of Treason, endeavoring with them to
raise a ne^ War, listing Reformadoes, altering the Militia of London,
imb^zeling the 200000. pound appointed for the relief of Ireland in such
endeavors, countenancing, abetting, and partaking with that tumultuous
violence of the Apprentic^^ and others against both Houses of Parliament,
driving awa^ the Speakers and many faithful Members, August, 1647 setting up a
new Speaker, giving large power, and passing diverse Ordinances for the raising
of a new War, arming Malignants, stirring up the City, authorizing Massi^ and
others, all in prosecution of the treasonable Engagement, of bringing in the
King upon his own terms, and (all this blasted through the grace of God by the
courage, constancy* and faithfulness^ of this (your great eyesore) Army.) Then
again trying a new feate, viz. contriving, promoting, and assisting tumultuous
Petitioners for a Personal Treaty, corresponding with the rebellious
insurrections in Kent, Essex, etc. The revolted ships, Prince of Wales, the
Scots Army invading this Kingdom, that so the Army may be shattered into
several dispersions, precipitating thereby the Kingdom again into a new,
bloody, and fierce War, hazarding the cause of all the former troubles, and a
total conquest of the whole Kingdom; during which second War, many of the
faithful Members being employed abroad; others discouraged through malignant
tumults about the City, to forbear their attendance; these Members formerly
impeached and voted Tra^tors were recalled, and others that were elected in
their room cast out of the House. Votes for no further Addresses to the King
recalled, and made void, voted to treat with the King upon such Propositions
as himself should make, exempt from Justice the capital Leaders in the last
Summers Wars, by an hypocritical voting many of them to be banis^t, fin^ng the
rest, etc. resolving the Kings re^ran^ation with freedom^, safety and honor: I
say do you your selves judge whether (all these things with many more) being
true, they were not necessitated to do that which you call putting attempts in
practice against lawful Authority, viz. seizing those Members, although many
whereof were known to you (though to few else but Malignant^ and men of your
interest) to be men of emminent worth and integrity. Suppose the Army (who are
bound by their Commissions, by their Oaths, Protestations, Vows and Covenants;
by all the interest, peace, and liberties of the Kingdom, to bring Delinquents
to con^igne punishment) should find their grand Enemies (against whom they
formerly did engage in open Field) in the House; or that those in the House,
formerly faithful as Hotham and many others, were turned as had, as base, as
malignant a^ Hotham did prove, and every way the same with Malignants, should
they let them alone because sitting in the House? I^ i^ ^awfull to kill and
destroy them, if they go about to destroy (...) in the Field, and not so much
as interrupt them though they should enslave us, ruin and destroy us by a law?

And again* whereas you speak so much of (...) authority, and fill the ear^^
of your Auditors from you^ Pulpits from day to day with rebellizing the Army
for their late proceedings against the Members, mustering up these Scriptures,
teaching and pressing duty to authority which the Prelaticall party did
formerly use against you, Prove. 24. 21. Ti^^s 3. 1. Romans 13. 1, 2.
as that of Solomon: P^a^e thou God and the ^ing: Pu^ them in mind to be
subject to Principalities and powers. Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers, etc. Yet we heard not of these things from you when the mutinous
Apprenti^es and others offered violence upon the Houses formerly spoken of, no
noise then of such Scriptures, no putting m^n in mind to subject to
Principalities and powers; no such word as let every soul be subject to the
higher powers, etc. As if these Scriptures were ad^led since that time. Can you
presume that men are so blind, dull, and (...), as not to observe such partial
and crafty handling of the Scripturer, word and will of God; do not these
practices of yours^ s^ttle and establish atheism, irrel^gion, and profanen^sse
among men, making them to look upon Religion, the Gospel, the Word of God, a^
upon a mere pee^e of juggling, cheating, and deceiving the World: and should we
take your counsel which you give us from the words of Solomon, ^^ddle not with
them that are given to change, we should all turn S^paratists from you and
your ways, who have been as full of changes at the Vanes of your Steeples;
one while stirring up the people against the King, and for the Parliament,
writing Books, answering objections, and using all manner of endeavors that
way (that so the Bishops may be dethroned, and you advanced) witness many of
your Sermons preached before the Houses and elsewhere: another while stirring
up the people against the Parliament, and for the King (left the Independents
should hinder your advance) as you did of late in your Prayers and Preaching,
expressing greater malignity against the Parliament and their party, and
greater (...) for the King and his interest, then those very Ministers whose
very places you possese, they being sequestered and cast out for the tenths of
that Anti-parliamentary malignancy which you have vented, and indeed this is
according to the example of your Fathers before you; for it was generally
observed of the Clergy of old, that in Henry the eighth ^ time they were first
for the Popes supremacy, and then with the King for the Kings; With Edward the
sixth they were Protestants, with Queen Mary, Papists again; With Queen
Elizabeth they faced about, and of 9400. promotions, not too of them stood
firm: Nay does not our own age give sufficient testimony of the Clergies
changes; nay are not many of your selves living instances thereof, have not you
been for Bishops, and against Bishops, for Common Prayer, for Geremonies, and
against them? Have you not sworn and subscribed, and subscribed and sworn over
and over, again and again, conformity and subjection hereunto, and yet cast
away all, and entered into Vows and Covenants against all? Can Dr. Burges,
Master Cauton, and several others of you deny this, and yet now advise us not
to meddle with them that are given to change.

You say page 5. It was deemed a horrible violation of the Privileges of
Parliaments in the King, to come to seize upon the five Members in the
beginning of this Parliament. And you quote the opinion of the House for that
purpose in their Order of the 3d of January, 1641. What violation of their
privileges then must this needs be, so and so aggravated to seize upon many,
etc. I may answer you by telling you that you never (...) that Order of the
House in aggravating of the Appren^ion ^orcing of the House the last year: and
to give you any other ^nswer, were but to beat the air, for (...) are like to
hear no reply to it, having the art of neglecting all that has been ^poken by
way of satisfaction from the Army to this purpos^ and insisting still upon
matter of fact, as if (...) thereof ^ad been given in justification.

You tell us that both Houses of Parliament are (jointly cons^^ed with the
King) entrusted with the supreme Authority of the ^ingdome. Page 6.
I desire to know what you mean by the King, his ^^^son or his Authority? If
his Person, then have we been (...), and you the cause of it, stirring us up
hereunto; If you (...) Authority, then let your Readers revise your Letter
(...), and they will see you say nothing, but (according (...) your custom)
blind the people, which is not like that (...) and candor becoming Ministers
of the Gospel of Jesus christ.

But the maine thing you insist upon is the business of the Protestation, Vow,
and Covenant, and the Solemn League and Covenant; by these sacred gin^ (as you
use them) you presume (...) the Scots Commissioners heretofore) to catch us all
(...) ^our net, doing little service thereby, except to draw men into
dishonorable thoughts of them: and as you do in (...) ^our Function (of it
self honorable, and of God) yet you ^ake it contemptible and vile; even so in
reference to these (of themselves just and good) you, and chiefly you render
them as an Almanac out of date; for what do you make especially of the
Covenant, but (as some do of the Scriptures) a nose of wax, making it to serve
all their opinions) to maintain all interests; for do not all men know that
you were the men pressing people to oppose, with-stand, and fight against the
King, and that upon penalty of breaking the COVENANT of God, the COVENANT of
peace, conjuring men as they would answer it before the Lord, as they would not
be counted COVENANT breakers, Truce Breakers, false to the COVENANT of their
God, etc. to go out to fight against the Lords Enemies, to fight the Lords
battles, etc. And now again do not you make the Covenant to serve the
Malignants interest, and the late Kings interest, by pressing that article of
the Covenant of preserving the Kings person, honor and dignity, etc. and that
with the same strains of sanctimony, viz. by calling it the Oath of God, the
Covenant of God, making Malignants jeere and laugh at you, and those that did
first hate the Covenant, and some that never yet (...) the Covenant, to plead
and argue our Covenant Breaking, etc. Did not some of you demand, I^ this
preserving the person of the King by cutting off his head, Mr. Yenkin. Mr.
Love. Mr. Case. Mr. Canton, etc.
by murdering him, by (...) the Land with the blood of their Sovereign, etc.
And did not the King heretofore, and Malignants with the like reason, demand of
you, is this to preserve the person of the King, to fight against him even in
pitched Battles; in this to maintain his (...) and dignity, to charge him with
all the blood that has been (...), etc. But more particularly touching the
Protestation, May 5. 1641. the Vow and Covenant made afterward, and the solemn
League and Covenant made after that: From these mountaine^ you strive (though
with very much devotion as Bala^^ once did) to curse the Army and Parliament,
when lo your cursings prove so only to their Authors, and (like the Conjurers
in the Acts of the Apostles, when the name of Jesus whom Paul preached was used
as a piece of enchantment to dispossess^ the sons of Sceva, a Jew, were
overcome even by that spirit whom they would conjure to come out of them)
these, Protestation, Vow, and League which you so press, not regarding all
that has been said again and again by way of answer, as supposing that when
argument, Scripture, and reason cannot help you, yet the Protestation, Vow, and
Covenant will do it; these like the Egyptian reeds run into your sides, and
do no service at all for you, but discover your nakedness; for

First, For the Protestation, that passage concerning the late King (the main
thing you drive at by quoting the same) can mean only a lawful defense (
according to the duty of Allegiance) of his royal Person, honor, and estate.

First, We protested to defend his Person according to the duty of Allegiance,
whereby we were tied to his just authority, and not abstractively to his
Person, if acting contrary and destructive to his just authority, as you know
he did.

2. Again, our Allegiance (...) no further lawful then relative to the
kingdom whereunto even he himself was tied in Allegiance.

3. Again, Allegiance if relative, binds no further then according to the laws
of relation, and relations are (...), and the root of all obli^ations; which
whether (...) all or otherwise, yet when on^ party shall seek the destru^tion
of the other, the other may justly claim a recesse so far (...) absolute
preservation require^.

4. Again, The Protestation is not only for the defense of (...) Majesty's
Person: but the sentence is complex, and takes (...) his honor and estate, the
impairing of the one, and the s^^estring or s^l^ing of the other, has been
(without scandal (...) it spoken to you) the use and application of your own
former ^octrine^, no party in the Kingdom having more stained (...) honor, if
declaring his wickedness can do it by Press and ^ulpit-worke then your
selve^; and if his estate had been (...) for the defense and preservation of
his Person in your present apostate sense, all the benefit (that I know of)
that you should have thereby, would be the receiving of your torment before
your time, for your new friends (Malignan^) are in your debt, and was it not
for your Enemies (the Army) they would quickly pay you.

5. We did likewise protest for the defense of the power and privileges of
Parliament, the lawful rights and liberties of the Subjects as well as the
Person of the King; If the Person of the King be engaged against the
privileges of Parliament and liberties of the Subject, or the Parliament
themselves (...) privileges against the lawful rights and liberties of the
Subjects, the Protestation cannot be obligatorie unto (...), the (...) rights
and liberties of the Subjects being the great end of (...) Parliament, must
prostrate both King and Parliament, the King and Parliament as such, having no^
so much as their being, much less privileges against the lawful right^ and
liberties of the Subjects, so that by the Protestation (the greater being (of
duty) to be profes'd before the less^r) if the Person of the King, or
privileges of Parliament stand in the way like a Lion and a Bear to devour
the lawful rights and liberties of the Subjects) we are bound to know neither
King nor Parliament, but the people (the root of them both) better the King and
Parliament should perish then the people.

6. We are bound by this Protestation to maintain and defend the King,
Parliament, and People in a lawful manner, so far as lawfully we may, which
refers unto the (...) of (...) defense; while the King was in Person against
the Parliament, we were by this Protestation to defend the Parliament and
People, though with the hazard of the King (otherwise you have preached false
Doctrine to us) if the King and Parliament should engage against the people, we
are by the (...) tied to preserve the people though with the hazard of both;
when the Parliament engaged against the King in a milita^y way, we were not
tied by this Protestation to (...) to def^^d his person: If the Parliament
engage against the King in a lawful judiciary way, was were neither obliged by
this Protestation to rescue the Kings Person against such proceedings.

7. We protested by all good means and ways to b^ing to ^^^digne punishment
all such as shall either by farce, proctise, c^^cels, plots, conspiracies, do
any thing to the contrary of any thing contained in the Protestation. If then
the King himself, or the Parliament in the several Members thereof shall
either by force, practice, councels, plots, conspiracies, or otherwise do
things contrary to the great end (the very spirit and life of this
Protestation) viz. the lawful rights and liberties of the Subjects, the
Subjects are bound by this Protestation by all good ways and means (and God
does not leave a people without any grounds of selfe-preservation) to bring to
condign^ punishment both King and Parliament, none being here excepted.

8. And lastly, we protest that we will neither for hope, fear, nor other
respect, relinquish this Promise, Vow, and Protestation.

Now let the World judge, who it is that does violate this Protestation so as
you do; do you not cry up the Person of the King without any reference to the
safety, peace, and liberties of the people; do not you rail out in the Pulpits
as the Prelaticall party did in the beginning of this War, Traitors, Rebels,
summoning up all those Scriptures which they likewise did (as if they were
added but as yesterday to the Text) My son fear thou God and the King,
meddle not with them that are given to change, and he is the Lords Anointed,
and will thou say to the King what do thou? Did you plead for the Kings
Person before, as you do now? Why then did you stir up m^n to fight against
him? Did you plead for his honor and estate before as now; why then did you so
represent him to the people in your Pulpits from day to day? Do you maintain
and defend the rights and liberties of the Subjects; why then do you brand
them with the name of Rebels and Traitors, that did not lay down the sword at
the feet of the late King and Parliament at their bare command, before any
security at all given for the preservation thereof? Do you ende^vour to bring
Delinquents to condign punishment; why then do you charge those that have
brought him, whom your selves and the Church of Scotland have charged for the
greatest Delinquent, guilty of the blood of hundreds of thousands of
Protestants, the bloudiest man under Heaven) for Murderers, Traitors, Rebbels,
as Mr. Jenkins, Mr. Case, Mr. Love, Master Cauton have done, calling the
offering up of the most acceptable and fattest sacrifice unto Justice that ever
was offered in this Kingdom, the staining of the Land with the blood of our
Sovereign, the imbruing our hands with our Sovereigns blood; yea, murdering
our King, striving thereby if possible, to stir up the people to cut the
throats of the Parliament, Army, and high Court of Justice, and to sheath
each neighbors sword in his brothers bowels, and yet you think your selves
wronged to be called Incendiaries? Have you endeavored to preserve the union
and peace between the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland; How is
it then that some of you even in Pulpits have prayed for the good success of
those Scots that invaded this Kingdom with an Army of wicked and profane men
the last year, breaking all Leagues, Covenants, Compacts between the two
Nations, and so voted by this Kingdom? Have you neither for hope, fear, nor
other respect, relinquished this promise, Vow, and Protestation; how is it then
that you are so shoffling, changing, and uncertain, for the King* and against
the King, for the Parliament, and against the Parliament, for the Army, and
against the Army, for Justice, and against Justice, m^king your vicissitudes
and turnings up and down the subject matter of scorn, contempt, and derision
both of your persons and Function.

Again, Whereas you mention the Vow and Covenant, you might have indeed showed
your ingenuity and candor bee^mming the Ministers of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, to have taken notice of that which was the maine end of that Vow and
Covenant, contained in these words; That I will according to my power and
vocation assist the Forces raised and continued by both Houses of Parliament
against the Forces raised by the King without their consent. Have you performed
this Vow and Covenant made and taken in the presence of Almighty God the
searcher of all hearts, with a true intention to perform the same as you shall
answer at the great day, when the secrets of all hea^ts shall be disclosed:
What means then your lowing and bleating in the cares of the people from day
to day, stirring up the City and Country if it be possible, to break the
Forces raised and continued by both Houses of Parliament, requiring them in the
name of the Lord to rise up as one man against that rebellious Army, assuring
them that God has given it unto you that they shall not prosper, but be broken
in pieces coming against London, as once that Army was which came against
Jerusalem, and venturing the credit of your Function upon your passionat
tongue; affirming that if this comes not to pass, the Lord has not spoken by
you as one of you affirmed; and if deliverance comes not by you (speaking to
your Auditors) God will bring it in some other way: and since that God has
given most ample testimony against you, by blessing that Army which you have
cursed from Pulp^^ to Pulpit in the name of the Lord, against whom you begged,
and prayed, and went, and raised up the (...) groans of your women-audience by
your pathetick investiv^^ while they happily have been fighting in blood, and
many of them expiring and breathing out their lives to save you from apparent
ruin and destruction, making some of your own party more Christian and
ingentious then your selves to bless God for them, acknowledging their own
mistakes and weaknesses in their former opposing them; yea, and the whole
Church of Scotland to acknowledge the same, and to give a candid and thankful
testimony of them: and since that time have not some of you prayed God to
forgive the cowardice of the City, that they did not take hold of the
opportunity of rising up against the Army, admonishing them to be humbled for
it; As Mr. Jenkin before the Lord Major and Aldermen, February 4. at Mercers
Chapel, especially that they did neglect the opportunity for fear of
Reformation, fearing that a rigid Presbytery would be set up, they chose rather
to (...) still; urging, that because they neglected the government of Jesus
Christ in the Church, they shall have no government (...) the State (yet
stroaking that party that was hopefully firm to them) acknowledging that there
were some that did keep^ the Covenant of their God, and were loyal to their
late Sovereign, and zealous for the government of Jesus Christ, insinuating
that the Parliament and Army, and Court of Justice were guilty of the blood of
the King, of breaking the hedge of Government, of levelling men's estates, of
sedition, treason, and rebellion, etc. Is this your keeping the Vow and
Covenant which you here make mention of? Is this your ass^sting the Forces
raised and continued by both Houses of Parliament against the Forces raised by
the King? Were there ever such enemies to the Parliaments Army in all the
Kingdom as your selves? Did not your very Sermons and prayers tend to little
else all the last Summer, then to break the Forces raised up by the
Parliament? But the truth is, your folly is made known unto all men, and you
shall proceed no further; your P^^pit language of this nature is of (...) use,
except it be to the pouring forth contempt upon your own heads.

But the maine thing you insist upon is the solemn Leagu^ and Covenant; this
indeed serves you at every turn, when all things else, when Scripture and
reason, civility, justice and honesty leave you, you make the Solemn League and
Covenant to go along with you, using it as you do the holy Scriptures
themselves, dispossessing them of their true, natural, and genuine meaning;
and (as Satan once assumed Samuels body to deceive) you spirit them with your
own opinion. Hence it is, that when you were for the Parl. against the K. and
his Forces, you stirred up the people with Scriptures, Curs^yee Meroz, etc.
When your interest (your great Commander) bids you fac^ about, or makes peace
with your Adversary, and it may be lists you under his Colors; then (like
mercenary soldiers that sights for money on either side) you engage against
your quondam party, and run to the Magazine of the Scriptures to furnish your
selves with weapons (making them like those Con^treyes that indifferently sell
arms to their friends or foes) then you cry out, fear thou God and the King:
Let every soul^ he subject, etc. When the Prelaticall party stood in your way,
then you summoned up all the Scriptures that you could come at, relating to the
wickedness of superstition, Idolatry, and of Prophets that tell lies in the
name of the Lord; if on the other hand (the Prelates removed) you sit not in
their seats under a new notion; then you summon up the other strain of
Scriptures, relating to the sins of the people, in contemning the Prophets of
the Lord that despise his Messengers, etc. Just so you deal with the Covenant:
when the Prelaticall party opposes you, then you run to that Article of the
Solemn League and Covenant, which engages against Popery, Prele^y,
Archbishops, Bishops; etc. When a contrary party stands in your way, and do
not conform to your Discipline, and bow down to your sheafe, then you pay them
with another Article, engaging our endeavors for preservation of the reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in doctrine, worship, discipline and
government, etc. If the Kings party lifts up a Standard against you, then you
stir up the people from another Article of the Covenant, engaging the
discovery of all such as have been: or shall be, Incendiaries, Malignants, or
evil instruments, by hindering thereformation of Religion, and those pas^ges
obliging the preservation of the rights and privileges of Par^ament, etc. If
the Parliament stand in your way, and joining ^ith the contrary party, may
hopefully help, you slye to tha^ ^rt and article of the Covenant, engaging for
the preservation (...) defense of the Kings Majesty's person and Authority,
etc. As (...) the Scripture in the several vein^s thereof, and the Solemn
^ague and Covenant in all the Articles thereof, intended nothing else but
Presbytery: and as if Presbytery were no^^hing else but the lifting you up
into an absolute, indepen^ent, uncontrollable Supremacy in all Ecclesiastical
dignity and glory, and by your example are all contrary paties taught (...)
plead the Covenant; those that you call Sectaries, Schisma^eks, etc. plead the
Covenant, engaging each to go^ before other (...) matters of Reformation. The
Presbyterian pleads Cove^^nt-engaging conformity (as they urge) with the Church
of ^^^tland: The Parliamenteer pleads Covenant, engaging to ^^serve the rights
and privledges of Parliament: The Royallist ^^^ads Covenant, engaging to
preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority: The Armists plead
Covenant, ^^gaging to preserve the liberties of the Kingdom, etc. So that you
have made the Covenant a mere contradictions thing, like unto one of the
Diabolical Oracles of the Heathens, spea^^ng nothing certain but ambiguitie^:
but let us a little examine how pertinently you bring i^ in in this place, to
show the Parliament and Army their wickedness, in going about to ^ring the
late King to his Trial for his vicious, bloody, and tyrannical Government;
you put them in mind of their Solemn League and Covenant to preserve and
defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority. in the preservation and
defense of (...) Religion and Liberties of the kingdoms, that the world may
(...) witness with our Consciences of our loyalty, and that we have (...)
thoughts or intentiens to diminish his Maj^sties just power and greatness.

First, We were bound to preserve and defend his Person, when we first took
this Covenant, and at that time you know very well you stirred up the people to
sight against his Army, though his Person was the Leader thereof; which
presume^ first, that either you persuaded the people against the (...) of your
own consciences; or secondly, that you conceived that though his Person should
be smitten into the chambers of Death by those that did fight against his Army,
yet they did not break the Covenant: If so, then there is a case wherein the
KINGS Person may be ^ut off without breach of Covenant.

Secondly, The oligation is for the preservation of his Person and AVTHORITY;
not for his Person simply, but his Person and Authority: If both come in
competition, then the greater is to be preferred before the lesser; that is, his
Authoririty before his Person. If his Authority (that is, that by which the
execution of all just laws of the Kingdom is legally performed) enjoynes the
cutting off of Murderers and Traitors by death* if his Person be found to be a
Murderer or Traitor, then either his authority or person must dye. If his
Authority dies, then no Murderers and Traitors or any other Delinquents must
die or suffer; for what reason can be given that the greatest Traitor or
Murderer should be spared, and not others? The nearer relations are, the
greater is the sin of the violation thereof; the King is the Father, the
Husband of his Country, if he shall murder his Children, his Spouse, he
deserves a sorer death then common murderers doe^ Treason is the betraying of
just trusts, the greater the trust, the greater the treason, the worse the
Traitor; the Covenant then engages to preserve his Authority rather then his
Parson; for (though his Person may be engaged against his people, yet) his
authority cannot withstand his people, no Prince having authority to destroy,
kill, and murder his people; it is true, he may have potentiam, but not
potestatem, an opportunity, but not an authority; might, but not right
hereunto. If his person rises up against his authority, and his authority
against his person; if one of these must perish, the Solemn League and
Covenant obliges us to preserve his authority, though with the destruction of
his person.

Thirdly, The Covenant binds us to preserve his person in the preservation and
defense of the true Religion; true Religion does not command to punish the
poor, and spare the rich; true Religion does not say, if the Subject do kill
and murder, rob and steal, he shall be so and so punished: but if the King
does these things a thousand times over, he must not be meddled withal by any
but God alone; true Religion says, he that sheds man's blood, by man shall his
blood be shed, the murderer shall surely be put to death, the revenger of
blood shall stay the murderer, etc. If then the King be a murderer, true
Religion comman^^ that he be put to death; true Religion (as to matter of right
or wrong) makes no difference, nor has respect of person, it does not
justify the wicked, though he be never so great: and whereas you may urge
that the meaning of those Scriptures have a special reference to the Authority
by which the murderer must be put to death, by man shall his blood be shed;
that is, by man invested with lawful authority; not by every man, or any man;
and that Court by which the King was condemned and executed, was no more a
lawful Authority then the doing thereof by a private person, having not the
least color of the law of the La^d for it. Says that profound Lawyer Mr.
Love, only as solemn a piece of mockery as ever was acted upon the stage of
this world, and so thin that every eye may pierce it, and the solemnity thereof
excepted the same with John of Leyden. Says another grave and judicious
Divine, Mr. Jenkin; His life being taken away unjustly, and his blood drawn by
unrighteousness. Says another meek Minister of the Gospel, Mr. Cauton, an
imbr^ing of their hands with the blood of their Sovereign. Says another
pathetick and compassionate messenger of Jesus Christ, M. Case, a staining our
Land with innocent blood, and notorious scand^lizing the Protestant Religion,
say many of the Subscri^^^: but to answer;

First, This serious and faithful representation of the judgment of Ministers
of the Gospel within the Province of London, do not so much as intimate that
the life of a King is in any case to be taken away, but rather that the Lords
Anointed at no hand must be touched: and the truth is, it is to be feared that
this Doctrine preached by men of this Tribe was one of the great causes both of
the Kings wicked and tyranni^ll government, and so by consequence of his death
and destruction: so that if the King be murdered, the Clergy of this Kingdom
have murdered him, one part of them being the cause of his sin, filling and
furnishing him with principles of tyranny, and another party of them stirring
up the people, and conjuring them in the name of Christ to rise up against him,
and to oppose him even unto death, Affirming that men guilty of blood must not
be at peace with, until it be avenged, page.
as Mr. Love in his Sermon at V^bridge did. If so be that true religion which
we have Covenanted to preserve, does teach this Doctrine; these Subscribers in
their serious and faithful representation of their judgments, may do well to
declare it.

Secondly, If so be they will grant that Kings and Rulers are not to be
suffered to live as they list, to murder, kill, and destroy their Subjects, to
burn their Houses, and ruin their Families at pleasure, and never be
accomptable for the same to their people over whom they were set, but ought to
be brought to punishment, as many even of the Presbyterian^ and Protestant
Divines have held, as shall be declared; then (if Kings may be dealt withal in
a judiciary way) why are they so angry that the late King was brought to
cond^gne punishment; if they say they had no authority to judge him, I demand
who had authority to do it? If they say no Court by the laws of the Land had
any authority hereunto, then it would be worth our enquiring, whether every
man, even to the last man left, was not bound to lay his hands upon him, for
the murderer must not be suffered to live, but must surely be put to death,
the Land must not be defiled and polluted with blood. If you say the Lords and
Commons should have done it, and not the Commons alone, it is demanded, what if
the Lords refused to join with them, and put them off by an adjournment of
their House, etc. If it be replied that then the whole Representative should
do it, and above half of them were violently kept out of the House and
detained prisoners, making themselves thereby an unparliamentary Junto, as Mr.
Prinne, called them; it is replied, that those that were so detained, voted a
Treaty with the King (after the Houses when they were free, had resolved,
voted, and declared upon pai^ of Treason, that there should be no further
Address unto him, nor any Message be carried from him, both Kingdoms having
declared against any Treaty with the King until satisfaction for blood already
spil^, and security for the peace of the Kingdom) endeavored a peace with
him, and thereby to contract the guilt of the blood of the three Kingdoms upon
the Land, which those that had power and assistance to prevent, ought not to
suffer: that true religion which we had covenanted to preserve and defend,
requires satisfaction for blood: And this is considerable, that the commands of
God to do Judgment and Justice, to put to death the Murderer, is given and
delivered in the same phrase and manner of speech a^ all the rest of the
commands of God; Thou shall not kill, thou shall not steal, etc. So the laws
of punishing murderers were given to the children of Israel, and not to Moses
^^ly, or the Judges and Princes In Israel, N^mb. 35. 10. And the Congregation
was to judge between the slayer and the revenger of blood, verse. 24. Whether
it was done wittingly, and of purpose, or by accident; and it is said, verse.
31. YE shall take no satisfaction for the life of a Murderer, etc. And what
is more common in Scripture then this, that if the King do popular
wickedness, the people suffer, because the King cannot do such wickedness
but by the people, and the people ought no^ to suffer the King so to do: And
if the people do wickedly, (the King not punishing them) the King suffers;
because did he execute judgment and justice, the people would not do
wickedly, and God has not exposed either the King to suffer by the people, or
the people by the King, without control or just punishment, proportionable
unto their mutual demerits; and that the people should not suffer their Kings
and Rulers to do wickedly, but ought to punish them according to their
demerits, has been the declared judgment of many Protestant Divinee.

I shall begin with one of these Subscribers, not that I think he deserves the
honor of priority, but that his own^ mistake may be the more obvious unto
observation; It is Mr. Christopher Love, Pastor of Anne Aldersgate, in his
Sermon preached at Vxbridge, and printed, having spoken before of the
bloodguiltinesse of the King; yea intimated unnatural and horrible
blood-guiltinesse in him, as if he had been guilty of K. James his death, and
Prince Henrie's death, the blood of the Protestants in R^^hel, and the
Rebellion of Ireland, and all the Protestant blood shed there, page 23. of the
said Sermon, styled Englands Distemper, and thereby made him the troubler of
England, as Achan was of Israel, has these words, page 32. It was the Lord
that troubled Achan, because be troubled Israel! Oh that in this our State,
Physicians would resemble God, to cut off those from the Land who have
distemperd it. Melius est (...) perea^ unus quamunitas.

-- Immedicabile vulnur.
Ense recidendum est ne pars sincer a trabatur.
But yet more plain, page 37. Speaking of those with whom we should not admit
of a peace, has this entire sentence --

Thirdly, Men who he under the guilt of much innocent blood, are not meet
persons to be at peace with, till all the guilt of blood be expiated and
avenged either by THE SWORD OF THE LAW, OR LAW OF THE SWORD, else a Peace can
neither be safe nor just. Mr. Love will not say that the King was not guilty of
much innocent blood, lest he should contradict himself; neither will he say
that blood-guiltinesse can be expiated but by blood, lest he should contradict
the Scriptures: neither can he say, but the King was cut off either by the
sword of the Law, OR LAW OF THE SWORD, without which he has already said, that
a Peace can neither be safe nor just.

Again, Mr. John Knox, the Scottish Reformer, a man of known Religion and
Learning, of the Presbyterian judgment, in his 78. page of his Book, called the
appellation of John Knox, having declaimed against the establishment of
Idolatrous and persecuting Kings and Rulers by the people, has these words,
Neither can oath or promise bind any such people to obey and maintain Tyrants
against God and his truth known: but if rashly they (viz. the people) have
promoted any manifest wicked person, or yes ignorantly have chosen such an one
as after declares himself unworthy of Regiment over the people of God (and
such be all Idolatrous and cruel persecuters) MOST JVLTLY MAY THE SAME MEN
DEPOSE AND PVNISH HIM, that unadvisedly before they did nominate, appoint, and
elect.

Again, Doctor John Ponnet, a Protestant Divine, in his Book^ called Ashore
Treatise to politic power, published (...) Queen^ Mary's days, 1556. in the
45. page, Chap. 6. of the said Book, handles this question; whether it be
lawful to depose an evil Governor, and kill a Tyrant: carri^^ it in the
affirmative, proving the same from the very law of Nature, Nations, and
Scriptures, both Old and New Testament; yea, affirming, that the laws of many
Christian regions do permit, that pr^vate men may kill Malefactors; yea,
though they were Magistrates, in some cases, as when a Governor shall suddenly
with his sword run upon an innocent, or go about to shoot him through with a
gunne; or if he should be found in bed with a man's wife, or go about to
de^^owr or ravish a man's daughter; much more if he go about to be^ray and
make away his Country to Foreigners. And the said Doctor himself declares
it for his own opinion, that where execution of just punishment upon Tyrants,
Idolaters, and traiterous Governors, is either by ^he whole State utterly
neglected, or the Prin^^ with the Nobility and Council conspire the subversion
of their Country and people, any private (...) have some some special inward
commandment, or surely approved motion of God, as Moses had to kill the
Egyptian, Phinea^ the lecherous, and Ahud King of Egion, with such like. And
^^^ther affirms, If a Prince rob and spoil his Subjects it is theft, and as a
Thief he ought to be punished: If he kill and murder them contrary, or
without the laws of his Country, it is murder, and as a murderer he ought
to be punished, saying the same, if he commi^ adultery, ravish men^ wives,
daughters or maids, he ought to suffer the same pains as other the like
offenders; if he go about to betray his Country, he is a Traitor, and as a
Traitor he ought to suffer, and aboundly more to that purpose.

Again, Junius Brutus, supposed by good Authors to be Beza his works, in his
Book called Vindiciae contra tyrannos, written in Latin and French, and
lately translated into English, in the 118. page of the said Translation, has
th^se words; If the Prince persists in his violent courses (as King Charl^ did)
and contemn frequent a^^onitions, addressing his design^ to that end, only that
he may oppress at his pleasure, and effect his own desires without restraint,
he then doubtless makes himself liable to that de^ested crime of tyranny:
and whatsoever either the law or lawful authority permits against a Tyrant,
may be lawfully practiced against him. Tyranny is not only a will, but the
chief, and as it were the only abstract of vices: A Tyrant subverts the State,
pillages the people, lays stratagems to entrap their lives, breaks promise
with all, scoffs at the sacred obligation of a solemn Oath, and therefore he
is so much the more vile then the vilest of usual Malefactors; by how much
offenses committed against a generality, are worthy of greater punishments then
those that concerve only particular and private persons: If thieves and those
that commit sacrilege be declared infamous; nay if they justly suffer
corporal punishment by death; can we invent any that may be worthily
equivalent for so outrageous a crime. And in the 119. page, says further, if
tyranny has gotten such sure footing, as there is no other means but force to
remove him, then it is lawful to call the people to arms, etc. Briefly the
same sentence may be justly pronounced against him as was pronounced against
Manlius Capitolinus, at Rome, Valerius, lib. 6. cap. 3.

Thou wast to me Manlius, when thou did tumble down the Gauls that did
scale the walls of the Capitol: but since thou art now become an Enemy like
one of them, thou shall be precipitated down the same place from whence thou
formerly tumbledst those Enemies; the said Author has much more to this
purpose:

Brutus, General of the Soldiers, and Lucretius Governor of the City of
Rome, assembled the people against Tarquinius Superbus, and by their authority
thrust him from his royal Throne, his goods were confiscated: and if
Tarquinius had been apprehended, undoubtedly he should have been according to
the public laws corporally punished.

Christierne lost the Crown of Denmark, Henry, that of Sweden, Mary Steward
(King Charles his Grandmother) that of Scotland, and Edward the 2d that of
England, for the same mis-government a^ our late KING, lost his Crown and head.

That the people may punish and correct offending Princes, is the affirmation
of the Wickeliffs and Waldenses, and are therefore enumerated in the catalogue
of the testes veritatis, by our Foxes Martyrologie.

Goodman, that great associate of John Knox, said, that Queen Mary deserved to
be put to death as a Tyrant and m^nster, in his Book of obedience, page 94.

That superior Magistrates may be put to death by the inferior, because
domesticke Tyrants are chiefly to be represt, was the opinion of Parreus in his
Commentary on the Judges.

The English ought to punish that Mary, Je^^bel, whom they call Queen, said
Knox that Scottish Luther.

That famous Dudly Fennor affirms, that an evil Prince may be taken way,
either in a way of justice in the time of peace, or by war, which they may
do, which are either ephore or ordinum omnium conventus, says he.

It was Asa his want of zeal, that Macha the Queen Mother was not as well put
to death as from her regency, vid. the Notes upon the Geneva Bible.

When a Tyrant is taken away either by the suff^r^ge or consent of the people;
fit deo auspice says Zwinglius.

See more to this purpose in a Book not long since put (...), as it is upon
very good grounds supposed, by Mr. Rutterford of Scotland, calleed Lex Rex: and
especially in Mr. Pryn^^s works, chiefly his large 4. volumes of the sovereign
power of Parliaments and Kingdoms, where you may read his judgment touching
capital proceedings against Emperors, Kings and Princes, for their tyranny,
cruelty, etc. especially in his Appendix to his 4th part of the sovereign
power of Parliaments and People, page 190, 191, 192, 193. and answering all
Objections out of the old Testament, and out of the (...) (to which I refer
you for the answering those very Te^ts which you so cry up against the
Parliament and Army) a^ also objections from supposed reasons, and the example
of primitive Christians.

But because you plead the Covenant against the Parliament and Army, especially
the Army, for their irregular c^^^se that they of late have taken, having no
authority for wh^^ they have done: nay all established authority against their
proceedings. If so be I can prove that the very like, or a seeming worse act
have been done by others, and yet approved by Queen Elizabeth, King James, King
Charles, the (...) Parliament, when they were consisting both of Lords and
Commons in a full and ample manner; yea and by the Ministry of London, your
selves, and the Assembly of Divines (as such) that then either you Will for
ever hereafter hold your tongues, or else give us sufficient reasons of your
envaig^^^ against the Army notwithstanding; for the proof (therefore) of this,
you may please to bestow the pains of reading the Exhortation of the Assembly
of Divines to the taking of (...) Solemn League and Covenant, ordered to be
printed by the House of Commons, Febr. 9. 1643. you shall find these words, nor
has this Doctrine or practice (viz. of entering into a Cov^nant without, yea
against the consent of the King) (...) ^^med seditious or unwarrantable by the
Princes that have sa^e upon the English Throne, but justified and defended by
Queen Elizabeth, of blessed memory, with the expense of much treasure and noble
blood (observe what instance is brought) in the united Provinces of the
Netherlands combined not only without, but against the unjust violence of
Philip of Spain; King James followed her steps, so far as to approve their
union, and to enter into league with them as free States, which is continued by
his Majesty now reigning unto this day (speaking of King Charles) who both by
his expedition for the relief^ of Rochel in France, and his strict confedera^y
with the Prince of Orange and the States General, notwithstanding all the
importunity of Spain to the contrary, has set to his Se^^ that all th^^ has
been done by his Royal Ancestors in maintenance of those who had so engaged
and combined themselves was just and warrantable. And what had become of the
Religion, laws and liberties of (...) ster Nation of Scotland, had they not
entered into such a (...) League and Covenant at the beginning of the late
troubles there; which course however it was at first by the Popish and
Frelati^^^ projectors represented to his Majesty as an offense of his, the
highest nature, justly deserving chastisement by the fury of a puissant Army;
yet when the matters came to be debated first by Commissioners of both
Kingdoms, and then in open Parliament here, it was found adjudged and declared
by the King in Parliament that ou^ dea^ Brethren of Scotland had done nothing
but what became loya^^ and obedie^^ Subjects, and more thereupon by act of
Parliament publicly righted in all the Churches of this Kingdom where they
had been defamed. To this may be added the late undertakings of our Brethren of
Scotland, who contrary to the Parliament and Estates, and the established Law
of the Land, did without any shadow, color, or pretense of warrant from the
State, raise Forces under Arguile against the Forces raised by the authority of
Parliament under Hamil^on; who were assisted by the authority of the Parliament
of England, and many of the godly Ministers of London did both seek unto God
for their success, and blessed the Lord for granting the same. Here are three
notorious examples of the same actings, though not with so great an Authority
as our Armies were; and why do you not cry out in your Pulpits against the
rebellious Netherlands, and the rebellious Scots, as well as the rebellious
Army, and with what face can you plead the Covenant against the Army for
rebellion, which very Covenant was founded (according to your malignant
interpretation speaking in your sense) in rebellion it self; either answer
these instances, or for shame speak no more of the Covenant.

By all this it appears that the Army has not broken Covenant, and we were
not tied by the Covenant against bringing the King to condign punishment, but
to defend true Religion; and true Religion, and many of the true professors
thereof, would have the persons of Kings to suffer punishment as well as other
offenders if they deserve it: and if so; w^^ are bound by Covenant to preserve
the Kings Person, no further then in the preservation of true Religion. If so
be the saving of the Kings person being a Murderer, etc. be the destruction of
the command of true Religion, that the Murderer shall surely be put to death,
we must by the obligation that lies upon us from the Solemn League and
Covenant, cut off the Kings head for the preservation of true Religion.

Fourthly, We are obliged by the Solemn League and Covenant to preserve and
defend the Kings person in the preservation and liberties of the Kingdoms: so
that the Kings Authority, true religion, the liberties of the Kingdoms, are
still to be defended and preserved before and above the Kings person: and the
Kings person in subordination only unto these, the King^ authority and true
religion, command that if the Kings person did commit murder, or was guilty of
blood ((...) these ver, Ministers at least many of them, together with the
Ministers of the Church of Scotland did confess) that his Person should be
executed; which neglected, the liberties of the Kingdom could never be
secured; for it is righteousness and justice that makes a Land to flourish,
besides, though these Ministers of Jesus Christ are pleased to say, page 15. of
their serious and faithful representation of their judgments, that the
Parliament (when the Army seized some of the Members thereof) was acting (viz.
in the business of the Treaty with the King, and their vote^ to settle the
Kingdom upon his concessions) what was Covenanted for, and (if we mistake not
say they) what was agreed upon long before by the Parliaments of both
Kingdoms, intimating thereby as if the liberties of the Kingdoms were
sufficiently provided for and secured in the said Treaty; yet there are other
Ministers of Jesus Christ, viz. The Ministers of the Church of Scotland, not so
apt to mistake as our subscribing Ministers are in England, nor yet so apt to
be seduced and drawn aside by Malignants, shufling and shifting, preaching and
printing, backward and forward, for and against, as these are, that concerning
the Treaty in the Isle of Wight, speak seriously and faithfully in their late
necessary and seasonable testimony against tolleration in page 12. after this
manner; And doubtless the Lord is highly displeased with their proceedings in
the Treaty at Newport, in reference to Religion and Covenan^, concerning which
they accepted of such concessions from his Majesty as being acquiesced in,
were dangerous and destructive to both. It seems these Ministers of Jesus
Christ in London, I mean these Subscribers, could acquiesce in such
concessions from the King; which being acquiesced in, the Ministers of Jesus
Christ in Scotland do profess were dangerous and destructive both to Religion
and Covenant. Here are Ministers of Jesus Christ of the Province of London, and
Ministers of Jesus Christ of the Church of Scotland, both pretending an
Embassy from the same Lord, and yet as contrary one to the other as salvation
is to destruction; surely contradiction^ cannot be truth, the Ministers of
Jesus Christ in London plead Covenant for the Parliaments acquiescing in the
concessions of the King at Newport, which (by the testimony of the whole
Ministry of Scotland) acquiesced in, would destroy both Religion and Covenant;
if the keeping the Covenant destroye^ the Covenant in Ministers of London^
opinions, the breaking of Covenan^ preserves the Covenant in the Ministers of
Scotlands judgment: I^ not this the way to make the Covenant like AN ALMANACKE
OVTO^ DATE?

It seems our Ministers (the Subscribers) make little difference between
Covenant or no Covenant, Religion or no Religion, when these stand in their
way; but are ready to acquiesce in that which destroys both the one and the
other; whether Bishops be abolished, or not abolished, whether malignants be
punished, or not punished: Nay, they can plead for the King, or join with
Malignants, or what not, in the prosecution of their game, though the Minister^
of Scotland (...) of another opinion.

These Subscribers make little difference between seven men excepted from
pardon in the late Treaty at Newpor^, and si^^ of these out of the reach of
Justice; an old man, Judge (...), that never personally shed blood, only left
behind, and about 37. or 38. before excepted from mercy by the 2. King^omes,
the liberties of the Kingdoms, Religion, Covenant, all must velle and pay
tribute unto these men.

In the 5th place whereas th^se Ministers both in their serious and faithful
representation of their judgments; and in th^^ vindication plead Covenant: I
desire to know of them whether one of the great and capital ends both of the
Covenant and War it sal^e; has not expressly been set forth by (...)
Kingdoms from time to time to be the bringing of Delinquents to condign^
punishment, and is made the subject matter of the 4th Article thereof; is not
this then an abominable mocker^ in the fight of Heaven and Earth? and shall
this be indulged and pleaded for by the Ministers of Jesus Christ in the
Province of London? Do^ you think the blood of so many thousand Protestants in
England and Scotland could be expla^^d by the blood of David (...), who was not
so much guilty of blood in all these War^ a^ some of your selves have been in
(...) men up to the late second War^e? Is this your keeping of Covenant? Is
this the fruit of all your Sermons, lasting and praying, exciting and stirring
up the Parliament as several of your printed Sermons do witness, to cause
judgment and justice to (...) down like amighty flood amongst u^? Will the
blood of David Jenkin make such a flood think you? You say to the Army, page
12. be not deceived, God is not mocked: but they may retort it upon your
selves, and God will require the^ things at your hands above all others.

In the 6th and last place, whereas you always plead Solemn League and
Covenant (and leaving the Scriptures) cry o^ Covenant, Oath of God, Covenant of
the Lord, and breach of Covenant, perjury, etc. Does not the All-seeing eye of
Heaven know, and will he not judge think you between you and others in these
things: has any generation, party, or society of men in the Kingdom taken
more Oaths, Vows, Covenants, directly cross and contrary each to other then
your selves? Look back into your former course of life, and call to mind how
many oaths and subscriptions, subscription^ and oaths you have made from time
to time, over and over, and how you have either made it a mere, vain,
sinful, customary thing, to swear solemnly in the sight of Heaven and Earth,
or have been very rash, hasty, and injudicious. In so doing, or 3dly have
directly forsworn your selves against the light and sense of your own judgment
and conscience; have we not cause to judge better of many of the Prelaticall
party, who being men of learning and conscience, and never so violent against
their opposers in Church and State as your selves making no disturbances,
rents, divisions, factions by Pul^^ and Press as you do from day to day (as
all men observe) that being conscious to themselves of the many Oaths, Vo^^
Covenants that they have made of subjection and obedien^^ unto Bishops, the
then established Church Government (...) of Common Prayer, Homilies, Canons,
etc. cannot take (...) Solemn League and Covenant, and rather choose to lose
the^ livings and livelihoods, committing themselves, Wives and Children to the
mercy of God, having no visible means (...) subsisting, then to break the
peace of their consciences by taking an Oath, Vow, and Covenant, contrary to
all their former oaths before satisfaction received; then for you or some of
you that presently turned Presbyterian^, cast away Episcopacy, took the
Covenant: and having taken it, turn in and wind it, wring it and wr^st it,
making it to look East and West, North and South, as your interest works with
King, Parliament, or Army, or against them all: and this is not my saying only,
whom I expect you will represent as a Schismatic, Sectary, Heretic, a bold,
impudent, inconsiderate, etc. But it is Vox Populi, the late KING, the Lord,
the Commons, the City, the Country, the whole Kingdom observed it; it would
have been rather expected that you should have made, published, and printed a
Recantation of all your former Oaths, Vows, Covenants, Promises, Subscriptions;
then (as if people knew neither you nor your ways) to exclaim at men for
breaking Cove^^^^, because they subject not themselves unto your interest and
judgment under the Notion of Presbytery, putting the Crown upon Christ's head,
building his house, etc. not one word of Presbytery in the Covenant, and the
very mention of Episcopacy and Government of the Church by the Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. expressly made in some of your former (...) which you have taken;
you tell the Army, page 9. of your serious and faithful representation, that
they have made Religion to stink by reason of their miscarriages, and like to
become a (...) and reproach in all the Christian world. The truth^^, they have
spread the sweet savor of Religion abroad throughout this Kingdom more then
thousands of those that style themselves the Ministers of the Gospel, and
Ambassadors of Jesus Christ. And although some of them may have some mistaken
about religion in some points thereof, as you cannot deny (...) your selves
have their errors; yet their fame in matters of Religion has sounded
throughout all the Christian world, beyond all Armies that ever were before
them; notwithstanding all your black lines and language, ^owle, scandalous,
and false aspersions cast upon them and this Kingdom in the several parts of
it, yea in almost all the parts of it, yea and the Kingdom of Scotland also
have received full and ^^ple testimony of their worthiness, and declared the
same to your vexation unto all the world, and whether that your (...) have not
made Religion to stink (I would not use (...) words were they not your own)
and like to become a scorn (...) reproach to all the Christian world: Let all
men judge* nay, the truth is, almost all men have already given in their
judgment against you, many of your own party being more moderate, meek, and
considerate then your selves, have declined you, and are ashamed of you; no
men, party, or faction, Schismatics, Heretics, or call you them what you
please, have been greater hinderers of Reformation, or the establishment of a
moderate, holy, peaceable, quiet advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ
and his truth and Gosp^ll, be it Presbytery or whatsoever else then your selves
have been, and you may thus contend all your days: but you will never thrive
and prosper in the settlement of Religion and Reformation until a more meek,
quiet, forbearing spirit be more predominant in you then as yet does appear;
which if it once be made manifest in you, your parts, gifts, and abilities
would be serviceable unto God, and your faces would shine in the sight of
honest men.

Having repeated the Protestation, Vow and Covenant, and Solemn League and
Covenant, as if your very calling men Covenant-breakers had sufficiently proved
them so, you presently fly into the faces of the Army with all those
Scriptures that make mention of Gods displeasure against Covenant Breaking, and
that without once giving any argument, proving that they are Couenant-breakers:
but what have been answered over and over, again and again, though you have
gotten the art not to take notice thereof; then you tell them page 8. of your
serious and faithful representation, with what a jealous eye and severe hand
the Lord avenged the quarrel, of (...) Covenant made by Zedekiah King of
Babylon; then we hear of God^ avenging the quarrel of his Covenant, of
despising (...) Oath, by breaking his Covenant, of lifting up the hand to the
high God; of the despising Dominions, and speaking evil of Dignities; of Gods
judgments against Corah, Dathan, and Ab^ram for their mutinous rebellion and
levelling design against Magistr^^y and Ministry in the persons of Moses and
Aaron, (...). But may not others upon better grounds summon up all those
Scriptures that speak of the miscarriages of false Prophet^, that prophecy
lies in the name of the Lord; that pretend to a vision from God which he did
never show, and to (...) messages which he did never send, etc. and dash them
all into your faces, then you can those Scriptures that speak^ of
Covenant Breaking, despising Magistracy and Ministry, into the faces of the
Army; you tell them of Gods judgments against Saul for violating the Covenant
which was made with the Gibe^nites: but may not that as well be re^orted upon
you for violating the Covenant which you made with the Parliament, not to make
defection to the contrary party, to assist the Forces raised and continued by
authority of Parliament, to bring Delinquents to condign punishment, etc. which
is a positive, not conditional Article of the Covenant (as that (...) the
preservation of the person of the King was) yea one of the great ends of the
whole war, and when the Lord General and Council of Waried ^once yield unto
Articles of quarter for life (upon very weighty grounds and reasons so voted by
the Parliament themselves) to some capital Malig^ant at the rend^tion of
Oxford; what a clamor and noise was heard against them, though we hear as
great an exclamation for their contrary proceedings at this time.

Again, Did the Covenant made with the Gibeonites give them a dispensation to
do what they could against the Israelites, and they must not so much as be
questioned for it by virtue of a Covenant made before: If not, your instance is
nothing, for no such Covenant was made with the King, that do he what he would
or could to ruin and destroy religion and liberty, and all godly men, that yet
we bound our selves to preserve his Person: and you know that when we entered
into this Covenant, it was p^esumed that not the King, but his evil council
was the cause of our Wars and miseri^^, though since we have found that not
his council, but himself was the chief cause thereof, and your own
consciences do tell you so, or else you have wronged him.

Page 9. of your Letter, you tell them while they kept Covenant, they had your
hearts, your help, and your prayers; that they have broken their Covenant, is
your slanderous aspersion, and how your hearts, your help, and your prayers
have been toward them, is all men's observation; that the very scope and drift
of many of your prayers and preaching, especially the last Summer, and about
18. months since, was to rend and tear the Army to pieces, and like B^la^m's
prayers for the hosts of Israel (though blessed be God with the like success)
may be proved by many heaps of witnesses, and yet the Armies success in all
their proceedings must still be appropriated to your prayers that were bent
against them, though indeed in some sense it cannot be denied; for it is usu^ I
with God to turn men's curses against his people into blessing^ upon their head*

Having sufficiently insisted upon the Solemn League and Covenant by way of
anticipation, you answer their objection by telling them.

First, That they must not be too confident from former suc^esses, showing them
that God suffers men sometimes to prosper in wicked courses; that there be just
men unto whom it happens according to the work of the wicked, and that there
be wicked men unto whom it happens according to the work of the righteous.
Page 12. of your Letter.

But to reply in the first place, why may not they conclude from successes as
well as you, how often have we heard you attribute the successes of the Army
from time to time, to your prayers and morning meetings and Lectures, though
made use of both by prayer and preaching, to render them odi^^^ in the sight of
God and man (if it was possible) but

2ly. Though successes are not always the infallible testimonies of the
goodness of the cause on which side they fall^ yet successes with their
circumstances do sometimes (...) evidently vindicate the mind of God in a
questionable (...) as,

First, when both parties have appealed solemnly (...) God in a doubtful case,
or at least so appearing, (...) him to bless or blast, make to prosper or to
perish that (...) that is not righteous in his eyes: As for instance, when the
false Prophets commanded to go up to Ramoth Giliad, and prosper: and the
Prophet of the Lord told them that if they went up they should perish, and both
parties pretended to the message of the Lord herein. Certainly the succe^se in
this case argues the mind and will of God, touching th^^^ going or not going
to Ramo^h Giliad, when some of (...) did ^id the City go out against the Army,
when they came toward the City, telling them you had a command from God to
this purpose, assuring them that if they did let the Army come in, 1646.
they would plunder the City, ruin and destroy them. And others of the
Ministers of Jesus Christ, pre^ending to the same name and authority a^ you
did, required them in the name of the Lord not to go out to fight against ^he
Army, assuring that if the Army did come, not a hai^^ of their heads should
perish. Doubtless the success in this case was very argumentative touching
the will of God: So (...) the Scots came the last year into this Kingdom,
pretending ^he quarrel of the Covenant (for whose prosperity some of ^id so
earnestly pray unto God (...) your Pulpits) and some part (...) the Army of
England though under many disadvantages, was about to engage against them,
prayer being solemnly ^ade unto God by the Commander in Chief I. Genesis Cromwell.
, impor^^^ing ^od, that for as much as both parties did pretend unto the
Covenant, that they did refer themselves unto the Lord, and ^egg'd from heaven
to give sentence between them. Doubt^esse either such pr^yers are vain, or God
does use to (...) and to inform us of his mind by answering herein: so here,
when you have endeavored to curse the Army from Parish to Parish, and from
Pulpit to Pulpit, to sti^re up the City and Country, to join with Malignants
and Royallists against the Army, assuring your party that God will break them
and rend them. And another party of Ministers pray for them from Pulpit to
Pulpit, from place to place, enconr^^ing them not to fear, for God will be
with them: d^^htlesse the success is very declara^^ve touching the will of God
herein, and especially,

In the second place, when those success^^ are carried on from time to time in
an uniform manner, the Lord giving several years success upon their several
appeal unto him: and yet more, In the third place, when the glorious Majesty,
power and presence of God does appear after such appeals made unto God, when
the Lord does (as it were) send the Ang^ll of his presence to save his people,
being few, and the Angel of his fury to make the Armies, the great and mighty
hosts of the Enemy to fly and scatter as dust before the face of the wind,
when he makes one to chaseten, and two to put a hundred to flight; when he
breaks the heavens and comes down, making the mountains to flow down at his
presence; when he shall with alsmal inconsiderable Army of about 16000 men,
scattered and divided in several dispersions. East, West; North and South, to
destroy near a hundred thousand men in arms (as if the Scots Army, the Welsh
Army, the Kentish Army, the Essex Army were considered, it would appear besides
the City and Ships all engaged,) yea and should take away the hearts and
spirits of their Enemies, and make the proud, high, and lofty thoughts of their
adversaries to tremble. Certainly such kind of successes, wherein God does
appear in the very majesty of his power and presence, cannot but be very
convincing, touching the truth of their cause: and you above all others, who
should rather exhort Malignants, Royallists, and the enemies of the peace and
liberties of the Kingdom in general, and the people of God in special to
give glory to God, to cause the high praises of God to be in their l^ps, who
has pulled down the mighty from their seat, and raised up the poor out of
the dust, that he may set him with Prin^ces, even the Princes of his people:
That the loftiness of man is bowed down, and the haughtiness of men is bowed
down, and the Lord alone is exalted in the work. I appeal unto all your
consciences, whether God did ever appear since the coming of Christ in more
visible characters and prints of his foot steps, then in bringing down that
proud Nimrod, and in executing vengeance upon that hardened Pharaoh, who did yet
more and more harden his heart against all the wonderful appearances of God
against him, and would not bow and bend, and subject himself unto the God of
Israel. Nay I appeal yet unto you, whether the millions of prayers and tears
that have been powered forth unto God by his faithful servants in public and
in private, in Churches and in chambers, did not beget a faithful expectation
that God would make him exemplary in mercy or judgment, returning those
prayers either upon his heart or head. And I appeal likewise unto you, whether
he has not answered such expectations accordingly, causing him at such a time,
in such a manner, to be brought to cond^gn punishment, as was beyond all the
expectations either of his friends or enemies, the like never known in our
Nation. And I appeal further unto you, whether you do not think in your
consc^ences (or have not sufficient reason so to do) that if ever he had come
unto his Throne again, he would not have made as great havocke of godly men,
whether Presbyteria^, Independent, or what ever else, as Nero himself has
done; and whether you would not have been driven into your old corners,
chamber^, and closets, and there tear him to pieces with your prayers; is it
not then to be lamented, that you should (you above all others) cast a blind
before men's eyes, and hide the glorious presence and appearances of God,
evidenced by those great and most stupendous successes vouchsafed unto the
Army in bringing that man of blood unto judgment.

The next thing you anticipate the Army, is, that they pla^^^ not their
justification of their present actings from impulses of spirit, ^orpretended
impressions on their hearts, without or against the rule of Gods written word.
Page 13. of your Letter, putting them to consider, whether any history, sacred
or profane, records any example of an impulse of spirit falling upon
multitudes of persons at the same time, putting them all at once upon
perform^nces contrary to moral precepts, etc.

It may be demanded of you who call your selves the Ministers of God, and
Ambassadors of Jesus Christ, and who wou^d be looked upon as guided by the
Spirit of God, and speaking in your Pulpits as he gives you utterance; whether
any history, sacred or profane, records any example of the true spirit of God
falling upon a great company of the faithful. Ambassadors and true Ministers
of Jesus Christ, putting them all at once upon performances contrary to moral
precepts and principles, making them violate the rules of civility and honesty,
speak and write most notorious, scandalous, and known falsities, when another
part of the Ministers of Jesus Christ do speak and write directly contrary
unto ^he former. This spirit that has made you abuse the Army, by casting
filthy reproaches upon them and the Parliament, by scandalizing the highest act
of Justice that ever was performed in this Land, calling it sedition,
rebellion, murder, staining the Land with the blood of their Sovereign, I
believe came not from above, neither had it any higher ascent then the air, or
an upper room in Sion-Colledge, from whence the City, and Countrey-Ministers
capable of the impression, receive an impulse of spirit, to speak and write
(as it were) with one month and pen, as that spirit of error and scandal
gives them utterance; that the holy spirit of God makes no impressio^s upon the
hearts of m^n without and against the word of God, putting them upon
performances contrary to moral precepes, cannot be denied: but that there are
such pretenses either in the Army to whom you write, or the Parliament, or high
Court of Justice, who are alike concern'nd in what you say for doing such
things, i^ but the inspiration of that spirit in you which stands in perfect
contradiction to the spirit of God: and these impulses of spirit, and
impressions upon the hearts of the Army, to put the Parliament into a condition
and capacity of executing judgment and justice upon that great Delinquent of
the Land, and which did inspire the highest Court of Justice with courage and
faithfulness therein, was the same spirit whole finger has written that
moral precept in the hearts of men, and that sacred rule of Gods written word,
Numb. 35. 16. The murderer shall surely be put to deaih. And verse. 31: Ye
shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer: and all those other
Scriptures, commanding to execute judgment and justice impartially; and that
spirit that would not have the K. (guilty by your own confessions of the blood
of many thousands) so much as convict and condemned (as you declared your
selves, page the 3d of your Vindication) much less executed, notwithstanding
such bloodguiltinesse, can be no other then that spirit which said unto our
first Parents, contrary to the express word of God, Genesis 3. 4. Ye shall not
surely dye. Moral principles, and the written Word of God says, that the
blood guilty pers^n must dye, you say that the greatest blood-guilty peson in
the kingdom shall not surely dye: that impulse of spirit, and those
impressions of heart that were in the Subjects of Amaziah King of Judah,
putting him to death for his wickedness, 2 Chronicles. 25. 27. (The word of God not
blaming them for any thing we hear of) and that stirred up Jehoiadab the Priest
to raise up several parties to put Queen Athaliah to death for her cruelty
and murders; did stir up the Army, Parliament, and Court of Justice to put the
late bloody Tyrant to death, and we may expect (through the grace of God) rest
and peace as the issue thereof; for it is a blessing to a Kingdom to do
justice impartially, and a curse to neglect it, 1 Kings 2. 32, 33. Numb. 35.
33, 34. Jer. 5. ^. 5, 6. and since you speak of impulse of spirit, and
impressions of heart, without and against the rule of Gods written word,
putting men upon performances contrary to worall precepts. It would be known in
what heart was this written as a moral principle, that Kings and Princes
though they should prove Tyrants, murderers, Traitors, etc. yet it is a sin
to put them to death. In what book or page of the holy Bible is the execution
of such persons exempted from justice; you say to the law and to the
testimonis, if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no
light in them. Surely if you cannot produce such a law and ^estimenie,
inhibiting the execution of justice upon persons of Kings and Princes, guilty
of murder, treason, etc. You have taught us by Scripture to conclude against
you, that there is no light in you as concerning your opinion in th^s case: but
that you are steered by an impulse of spirit and impressions of heart against
the express word and will of God.

In the third place you anticipate the Armies plea of necessity, urging that of
Job: Job 13. 7.
will ye speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him, that no
necessity can justify perjurie, or dispense with lawful oaths, page 14, 15.
of your Letter.

I may reply by re^orting your own argument, where you say, Page 15. of your
Letter.
that if a precept of God may be dispensed with upon a necessity, yet this
necessity must be absolute, p^esent and clear, that the murderer shall surely
be put to death, is a known precept of God: If th^s o^ust be dispensed
withal, show us the absolute, present, and clear necessity for it. If you
cannot, will you speak wickedl, for God, and talk deceitfully for him? As for
the Armies proceedings, if there was a necessity that the land should be
c^eansed from blood guiltiness, that the great ends of the Covenant and all
our Wars should be secured, viz. the bringing Delinquents to cond^gn
punishment, the reformation of Religion according to the word of God, and the
example of the best r^f^rmed-Churches, the establishment of righteousness and
justice in the midst of us, then was there a necessity of the Army to take
that course which they did.

You conclude your Letter with your serious exhortat^on to the Army to decline
their present actings, and declaring unto them your M^nisterial faith^u^nesse
in dealing p^ainly with them, expecting sufferings, and telling your Readers a
story of M^. Peter's language, strengthening your expectations of a suffering
condition, page 16.

Had the Army always obeyed the law of your lips, it had been no hard matter
to prophecy what had become of us by this time: Doubtless Rome had been the
pattern of the Eclesiastical Reformation, and Turkey of the civil liberties of
this Kingdom before now, had religious Massy, and devout P^iniz, and those
piou^ Reformades, your Champions of Israel, stirred up to sight against the
Army, that did cut, flash and kill the Citizens in the Guild Hall, London,
prevailed against the Army; do not you think we should have had most pious and
prec^ous times by this? As for Mr. Peter's, whose bloody language you so
seriously and faithfully represent in your serious and faithful
representation: Let the Readers understand the truth of the matter, which (your
own consciences can witness) was thus: Mr. Peter's and some others were sent to
you from the Council of War (whom you had offended by your invectives,
slanders and scandals in prayer and preachings without your coming unto them,
to give or receive satisfaction touching their proceedings) who in the name of
those that sent them certified from whence they came, and for what end; Mr.
Peter's told you that they came in obedience to Christ's rule in Matthew. 18.
telling you that you had offended your Brethren of the Army by your Pulpit
exclamations against them, desiring that if you had any thing to say touching
any of their actings, you would come unto them, and they would give or receive
satisfaction, repeating this unto you over and over to prevent mistakes; adding
moreover, that they did not come to scare you, neither were afraid of you;
what proud, Prelaticall, imperious, and unbrotherly language he received from
some of you, is very well known, though he had a more civil and candid
reception from some others; the discourse which was had with him was intended
it seems on your part, to catch matter of an ill resentment to publish it
against him, one of you pr^ssing the dangerous consequences of proceeding
against the King, likely engaging into more war, occasioned Mr. Peter's to say
that the Army did resolve to give no man quarter in the next War, (or to that
purpose, which words you represent as threatening you) to which reply was given,
that you did expect sufferings, etc. To this Mr. Peter's said, that if you put
your selves upon suffering, you may have suffering enough, or to that purpose,
and advised you moreover to forbear your provoking language in your Pulpits,
lest the common soldiers should do you a mischiese, and you may thank your
selves. This was the sum of that discourse, and now let any man judge whether
he did you any wrong in all this, or where lies the unbrotherlinesse and
unworthiness of these passages; or whether your Christi in ingenuity and
candor becoming the Ministers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, does not
gloriously appear in printing Mr. Peter's unto the world at you have done.

And now let heaven and earth judge whether that the whole series of your former
proceedings do not speak plainly, and not in parables, that as the Popes of
old did command men to subject unto Magistracy as Gods Ordinance, and unto
Kings and Rulers, as unto those that were set over them by the Lord for their
good, while these Kings and Rulers did subject themselves unto them, casting
down their Crowns at their feet.

Then they shall have titles of honor conferred upon them, as Most Christian
King, Catholic King, Defender of the Faith, etc. and to allure them to permit
that Romish Harlot to reign over the Kings of the earth, Revel. 17. 18. that
she might fit (...) Queen. She would chant them with her alluring tongue;
her lips dropping as an honeycomb, Prove. 5. 4.
and her mouth smoother then eyl, and bewitching them with her gilded
language, during their obedience to the holy chair, they should be called the
frinds of Jesus Christ, sons to St. Peter, obedient children to their mother
Church: assuring them that God would be merciful unto them when he came with
St. Peter to judge the world, they should have Indulgences and pardons for all
their sins, they should have their Holinesses benedictions, and the prayers
of the Church to prosper them in their wars and expeditions for their success
in the advance of the Catholic cause; yea for a time, until their turns be
served, they shall have an acknowledgment that such and such things are proper
unto them, which afterward it shall be no less then sacriledg to proclaim,
viz. The calling of general Councels, appointing and ordering the elections of
Popes, and the investitures of Bishops; yea sometimes to court Princes, spared
not to present them with the treasures of the Church, as Pope Gregory did
Charles of France, when he sent him the keys of the holy Sepulcher, and S.
Peter's chains, and other things; all which, at other times, when they were sixth
in their chair of pestilence, they stiffly affirmed to be irrelative to them:
and for claiming of which, pronounced them guilty of Simony, and excommunicated
them. And when at any time these threw off the papal yoke, the very same Popes
did issue out their Bulls against them, and did absolve the people from any
further subjection unto them, even so do not you (I still speak not of all,
but some of you) when that authority stears by your compass, then all goes
right; then we bless you in the name of the Lord; then you can bid them
Godspeed; then they shall be called the repairers of Israel, and of the
breaches of Zion, and ages to come shall call them blessed; then g^^ on and
prosper; then they are the Zerubbabels, the David's, the Solomon's, the Worthies
of Israel; these are the blessed times of Reformation: If any in place of
authority do withstand and oppose, though it be the King himself, and
several of the Rulers with him, as the late King and many Lords and Commons
did, then how did you allarm the people, conjuring them in the name of the Lord
to go out against them to fight the Lords battles; then curse ye Meroz, curse
ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof, because they went not out to help the
Lord against the mighty. And as for those Magistrates or others, that drive on
in a hopeful advance of your interest, then my heart is toward the Governors
of Israel that gave themselves willingly, etc. And to encourage the people, you
tell them that Kings and Princes, and all authority and power must stoop unto
Jesus Christ and he will break^ them in pieces like a potters vessel: Your
several Sermons in print will witness this.
He will bind their Kings in chains, and their Nobles in fetters of iron: And
this honor shall all the Saints have. Then go out and fear not the battle is
the Lords, and he will teach your hands to war, and your fingers to fight,
and cover your heads in the day of battle. Then you tell them, if they be not
valiant, and quit themselves like men, their ears shall be boared, and
themselves, their wives and children shall be everlasting slaves and vassals;
then their eyes shall be put out as were Sampsons, and they must be the sport
and scorn of their enemies, and grind in their mills all their days; then you
cry, how will your children, and your childrens children curse your cowardice,
and bewail your treacherous betraying their peace and liberties, therefore you
stir up the people to assist with moneys, horse, plate, and persons If any
doubts do arise concerning resisting Kings and Rulers, especially in case of
Oaths, Vows, or Covenants, touching preservation of the person of the King (as
there did from the Solemn League and Covenat) then you are ready to give
satisfaction, and to tell the people that that clause in the Covenant is to be
understood not simply, but relatively; that i^ i^ not a single, but a complex
engagement; no^ an absolute, but a conditional clause (with many such
distinction^) t^is for the Kings Person in the preservation of our Religion and
Liberties Many of you have made such answers to them that did scruple the
Covenant being to go to wars, or fight as occasion should be offered, because
of that clause concl^ing the person of the King.
: And though the King should be destroyed by you, you have notwithstanding keps
your Covenant, and that men's spirits may be free without regret. You tell the
people that the King in a man of blood, taking hold of all whispering
hear-sayes and probabilities of his wickedness, to m^ke him odious to the
people; then the death of King James, of Prince Henery, the betraying of
Rochell, Mr. Love in his Sermon at Vxbridg.
the contriving the promoting of the Iri^^ rebellion, the blood of England,
Scotland, and Ireland is laid upon him; then the wickedness, idolatry,
profanesse, luxury, and all kinds of impiety; of the licentious Court, loose
Nobles, and lewd Gentry, are set forth; then God is coming to avenge the
injury and wrong, and to make inquisition for the blood of his people; Let Mr.
Love speak, if there are not many old Conventiclers (as they are called) that
can witness this.
Then you pray, Lord either conv^^^ the King, or confound him. Lord let the
prayers of thy people fall upon his heart, or upon his head, either in shewres
of grace upon his soul, or judgments otherwise upon him. If an Army be
raised up, though for its paucity and contemptiblenesse it be called a new
Noddle, fresh water Soldiers, etc. you encourage them notwithstanding, calling
them an Army of Saints, telling them that God will be with them, and will make
them his battle, axe, and weapons of War, and that this new Noddle shall break
in pieces their enemies, etc. When the War is ended, the Enemy vanquished, the
liberties of the people recovered, the freedom of godly, honest, and
tender-conscienc'd men secured, if that they bring not the spoil of their
victories, and lay them down at your feet, and guard themselves to serve you
with your savory meat which they have gotten (I mean sacrificed to your power
and greatness.) Nay, if they that sit at the stern do no^ lay aside all other
business (though never so much concerning the common peace and safety) and do
nothing else but build your Palaces, then you run to the quiver of the holy
Scriptures, and choose out the sharpest and keenest arrows you can meet withal
to wound the credit and reputation of the Parliament and Army: and all that
(having a supposed opportunity) do not toil and travel to get your bread in
the sweat of their brows, and build your houses, though in the blood of the
whole Kingdom, then you cry out, why do you dwell in seiled houses, and the
house of the Lord lie wast? cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
negligently: You are to serve the Lord with the first fruits of your victories
and successes: and because ye neglect the work of the Lord, and do not put
the Crown upon the head of Christ, and the Scepter into his hand, therefore he
will power forth contempt upon you, and break you in pieces, and shatter you and
your Forces, etc. If this chanting will not serve turn; then forgetting those
Scriptures which speak of subjecting to authority, and of the danger of
despising Dominion, and speaking evil of Dignities, etc. You fall upon
downright ralling against them; then they are an apostatizing Parliament, a
degenerating Parliament, a Parliament at whose doors may be laid all the
errors, herefiet, and blasphemies of the times, an oppressing Parliament, etc.
If all this will not do; but your Temple-worke goes on slowly; then the City
is set on work, and the Country is excited, Apprentices and others encouraged
to offer violence upon the 2. Houses, forcing them to vote and unvote at
pleasure, and encouraged by some of your Tribt and Subscribers (as shall be
made good if occasion be) then if this will not yet do, i^ Balacke and Balaam
cannot curse Israel from Mount-Pisga, they will strive to do it from
Mount-Peor: and observing that the Army (that quondam new Noddle, that Army of
Saints, while they were hopefully your servants) prove your supposed and
conjectured obstructors, (I say supposed and conjectured, for indeed they have
saved your throats from being cut, whichis all the injury that ever yet they
have done you) now a rebellious Army, an oppressing Army, an Army of
Heretics, Schismatickes, Seperatists, etc. Then you think of a new course,
and Bishops being hopefully abolished, and no great danger that they will any
longer stand in your way, you venture in joining with notorious Malignants, as
presuming, that though the King and his party should raise themselves in the
ruins of the Army, yet Episcopacy is damned that could not hinder you; then
City and Country Petitions are promoted for a Personal Treaty for the
restoration of the King, in safety, freedom, and honor. Then you temper your
Sermons, and turn your tongues, your lines, your language for the Royal
interest: but to be brief, when nothing serves, but the Army prevails, the
King is brought to condign punishment, a Prelaticall Presbytery shall not be
suffered; what patheticke crie^ and moanes, sighs and groans are heard in your
Pulpits, wringing your hands in bitter complaints, that the Land is stained
with the blood of our Prince, etc. when alas the Royal party, and most
judicious men with them, cannot believe but that the root of all this
bitterness is, that your crown of Cla^^icall Jurisdiction is fallen to the
ground.

I have a few queries to tender to your serious consideration for a final
conclusion.

First, Whether it would not be a most acceptable service to God and man, that
you above all others, whose Function, Profession, and daily employment should
he the promotion of righteousness and justice, truth and peace in the world,
should improve your heads and y^^^ hearts, your interests and opportunities,
your time and your studier to compose our differences, make up our breaches,
heal our divisions, and to promote love and good ^orkes amongst all people:
and whether you think in your conscience^, you as well as others have not
been remiss and negligent in your duty herein.

Second^y, Whereas you complain that the bedge of Magistr^^^ is broken down,
and lawful Authority swallowed up in a confused Auarchy, etc. Whether you
conceive in your consciences, that the way to reduce all, and to r^cover in
this ^ase, be to trample down all that visible Authority which is yet extant;
You say we have^e King, no Lords, no Parliament no^ government: If so, is it
(...) farae better to think upon, contrive, and study to settle some
government, then that we should live together without government (any
government being better then none) it is said we have had (for a great while) a
King and no King, a Parliament and no Parliament, one party setting it self
against another party, and as p^^er and opportunity did appear, each party
plucking the other out by the ears, voting and unvoting, doing and undoing, no
man knowing where to fix, since then the foundations of government being
shaken, and the pillars thereof removed, and the nerves and sinews broken in
pieces? Is it not best for every party and society of ^en to improve themselves
and all their interest in the timous sev^lement of some government amongst us,
and whether your present actings have such a tendency.

Thirdly, Whereas you complain of the contempt of the Ministry, whether this
bulrush of contempt has not grown from the mire of contention between godly
men, and whether the seeds thereof have not been son even from the Pulpits
themselves. You complain that the Army, your dissenting brethren and others,
do despise and contemn the Ministers of Jesus Christ: but how can you presume
it otherwise, while such reproach and contempt is cast upon them from the
Ministers, whether you can in reason expect it otherwise until such time as a
more soft and quiet spirit remain in you.

Fourthly, Whether it can in reason be imagined that the Parliament and Army
can be gained over unto you by these ways of bitter invectives against them:
and if not, whether that your hope^ otherwise can be founded upon any thing
but an expectation of another war, and consideratis consider and is, what is
the condition of England like to be in such a case; for God and your Countries
sake if you love the one or the other consider of it.

Fifthly, Whether that the ingenuity of the Army, especially the Officers
thereof, whose principles of religion and wisdom do enable them to bear
reproaches, be not a snare unto you, to abuse them as you do: and whether you
are persuaded in your consciences the Kings Army would have suffered you to
have given them the like measure?

Sixthly, Whether that an overweening opinion in you of your popularity and
public interest of the Kingdoms nec^ssity of Ministers, of the clamor of the
people in case you should be called to question for your irregular preceedings,
together with a secret kind of pride and ambition of some small sufferings, to
contract, if possible, the credit, glory, and repute of Martyrs or sufferings
for Christ, be not likewise another snare of death unto you in this kind? and
whether this be suitable to that ingenuity and candor which becomes the
Ministers of the Gospel.

Seventhly, Whether that the spirit of perverseness does not blast your
abilities to the popular observation of your apprehensive Auditors, causing you
to spend your precious hours in Studies and pulpits, in the saplesse savor of
simple notions. I shall only instance in one of your Rabbis, Mr. E. C. of A.
B. We should pray says he to be delivered from 6. ( shallow) deeps, the deep
of Anarchy ( or a boundle^s Presbytery) the deep of perjury ( chiefly that of
the Clergy) the deep of tolleration ( especially of the State-troubling
faction) the deep of an everlasting Army ( or the disbanding our present Army)
the deep^ of shedding the blood of our King That has made no more conscience
of s^lling men then Moles, and destroying his people then pis^mires, o^ burning
their houses then walps nests.
, (or sp^ring the great murderer of the Kingdom) the deep of Hell (or that
dungeon thereof, paved with the creasts of that scandalous Clergy) let m^n of
reason judge of the profundity of this Divinity, whether this ^e ^o preach
Christ crucified, or to crucify Christ preached, may quickly be determined.

FINIS.

