UNITY OUR DUTY.

IN TWELVE CONSIDERATIONS Humbly presented to the Godly, Reverend, and Learned
Brethren of the Presbyterian judgment; and the dissenting Godly, Reverend, and
Learned Brethren, commonly called Independent; contending together about Church
Government.

Which tends earnestly to dissuade them from bitter speaking, and writing one
against another.

By I. P.

Phil. 2. 3.That nothing be done through strife or vain glory, but that in
meek^nesse of mind every man esteem other better then himself. James 3. 14,
15, 16, 17.But if ye have bitter envying, and strife in your hearts rejoice
not, neither be liars against the truth. This wisdom descends not from
above, but is earthly, sensual, and devilish. For where envy and strife is,
there is sedition and all manner of evil works. But the wisdom that is from
above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of
mercy and good fruits without judging, and without hypocrisy. Romans 14. 19 Let
us then follow those things which make for peace, and wherewith one may edify
another. Licensed and Published according to Order.

London, Pinted by T. Pain, for John Hancock, and are to be sold at his shop
at the entrance into Pope's Head Ally out of Cornhill. 164^.

UNITY OUR DVTY.
In Twelve considerations humbly presented to the godly, Reverend, and learned
Brethren of the Presbyterian judgment, and the dissenting godly, reverend, and
learned Brethren, commonly called Independent, contending together about CHVRCH
GOVERNMENT.
THe errors of the times does abunantly vindicate the defect of our faith in
the knowledge of the truth, And the divisions of the times the defect of our
love in the prosecution of the same, the form of sound words is to be held
fast in faith and love, 2 Timothy 1. 13. The devouring sword abroad, and the
deviding pen at home, renders our condition very near the pit of destruction,
and that by a Divine hand of Justice? for as the want of sound knowledge
argues the weakness of our heads, (and so our unprofitablenes for God) so
the want of love the rottenness of our hearts, and what shall God do with a
weak headed and rotten hearted people. It is hard to say whether is the
saddest Omen of our approaching misery; either the unhappie divisions of our
own party, or between our selves and the common Enemy, whose promising
advantage against our selves in that particular, is their greatest hopes, and
our greatest fear; they are united, we divided; they are all one against us,
and each of us one against his brother, unity acts the sons of error and
division the sons of truth, which is as if the good should with the wicked,
change quallities, and yet retain privileges; the spirit of pride,
peevishness* ^ssion, perverseness, malice, confidence, envy and Emulation
does apparently look (as through a lettice)* through these late times of
contention about Church Discipline, between (I hope) godly parties on each
side, which is as sad in it self as the consequence, (if not prevented) are
like to be; The Melancholy and serious observation whereof has cast me upon
these present, sudden, but seasonable thoughts, which I have molded into
several considerations and motives unto a more sweet, christian, and lovely
demeanor of our selves in our mutual pleadings and writing against one
another unhappily dissenting about the truth, first consider the mind of God,
revealed in the Scriptures about the same who has commanded us, to love one
another, John 15. 17. to follow the truth in love, Ephesians. 4 15* to provoke one
another to love, Heb. 10. 24. to reduce the fallen brethren either in judgment
or practice with the spirit of meekness, bearing one another burdens, and
so fulfilling the law of Christ, Oal. 6. 1, 2. to take heed of biting and
devouring one another, least we be consnmed one of another, Gal. 5. 15. to
walk by the same rule so far as we have mutually attained, and if any be
contrary minded, to wiate with Christian respect and love in confidence that
God will seasonally reveal the truth unto the mistaken, Phil. 3. 15, 16. To
be kindly affectioned one toward another with brotherly love in honor,
preferring one another, Romans 10. 12. and that this love should not be
complementall, but without dissemulation, Romans 12. 9. with a pure heart
fervently, 1 Pet. 1. 22. in deed and in truth, 1 John 3. 18. that this
brotherly love should continue, Heb. 13. 1. and be daily increasing and
abounding one toward another, 1 These. 3. 12. with many other Scriptures of the
like importance.

Consider the pattern which is set before you, God is love, and he that
dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John 4. 16. We differ
from God in heart, in life, in judgment, in practice, and yet still God is
love, the father himself loves you, John* 16. 27. be ye therefore followers
of God as dear children, and walk in love, Ephesians. 5. 1, 2. the Son has
loved you* in nature, kind, and degree, even as the Father has loved the
Son, John 15. 9. That is infinitely, Eternally, and in things infinite* there
are not degrees of comparison, he gave himself (a measure of his love to us)
then the which there could be no greater love, John 15. 13. the inference from
hence is verse 17. that ye love one another, the holy spirit is a spirit of
love, 2 Timothy 1. 7. and the fruit of it is love, Gal. 5. 22. And where ever it
is in truth, it knits the heart with the Saints in love, Colos. 2. 2. rooting
and grounding them in love, Ephesians. 3. 17. causing not only the report of their
faith in Christ Jesus, but also of their love to all Saints to be heard abroad
in the world, Colos. 1. 4. the father, the son, the holy spirit loves us not
withstanding our vast and infinite disproportion and difference from this holy
Trinity in our judgments, wills, affections, lives, and conversations, and
surely they that are taught of God do love one another, 1 These. 4 9. Consider
how sweetly, and kindly the almighty treats with the sons of men, his words
are soft breaking our bonds, Prove. 25. 15. and his writings are words of
reconsiliation* sending his Ambassadors to beseech us, and most kindly to pray
us in Christ's name and stead to be reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5. 20.

Thirdly consider, we cannot as yet be all of one mind, which is our
affliction as well as our sin, yet may we be all of one heart, the fallings
wherein is more our sin then our sorrow, unity in judgment is the promised
blessing of another age, but unity in affection is our present duty, though we
cannot speak all the same things of says, though our difference in judgment,
yet we may all speak the same things of love through the unity of our
affections; though we cannot agree in all things, which should be all our
grief, yet we all agree in this thing, to strive together to know the truth as
it is in Jesus, which calls for our love to one another, God in Christ, and
Christ in God is the pure spring of that divine love which is always running
from God to Christ, and from Christ to God, the streams whereof do cheer the
hearts of all the Saints, but the Saints in Christ and Christ in Saints should
make each lovely in each others eyes, our mutual interest in Jesus Christ
should make us value each other as precious jewels which God will make up in
the day of his glory, Mal. 3. 17 We are all acceptable to God in the beloved,
Ephesians. 1. 6, and why not then unto one another.

Fourthly, Consider, we all know but in part. 1 Cor. 13. 9. And therefore none
are so perfectly acquainted with one truth that he needs no further light about
the same, and it is to beconceived that the errors of judgment in the godly,
arises not from the love of error, but the mistake of truth; so that the light
of the Saints possibly may be dim; and their darkness or ignorance not
absolutely without or utterly remote from some light: they ought therefore to
here on another patiently, and to bear with one another kindly, it is the
property of the Father of lights* and* of the Son of righteousness, the
light of the world that in him should be all light and no darkness at all: He
that dwells in love dwells in light, for God is light. He that says he is
in light, and hates his brother is in darkness, and walks in darkness.
(Notwithstanding his great presumption of his large abilities.) He knows not
whether he goes, because that darkness has blinded his eyes. verse 11.

Fifthly, Consider a passionate, peevish, froward, pettish, perverse Professor
is seldom acquainted with the truth as it is in Jesus, meekness encapableth a
man to receive the truth. James 1. 21. A froward heart and a perverse tongue,
or pen commonly goes together, and Solomon says that one finds no good, and
the other falls into mischief, Pro. 17. 20. He that thinks he knows
nothing as he ought to know is in the sweetest capacity to be taught of the
father, who fills the hungry with good things, but sends the rich empty
away. Resisting the proud, he gives grace to the humble, the Lord guides the
meek in judgment, and them will he teach his way. Psalm. 25. 9. Those who are
become like weaned children does he teach knowledge, and understand doctrine.
Esaias 28. 9. A froward heart, tongue, or pen, is an abomination unto the Lord,
and therefore the secrets of the Lord cannot be with such Swelling words
commonly come from shallow brains; and the most ignorant are most conceited;
With the lowly there is wisdom. Pro. 21. 2. A railing tongue or pen is like
the rageing waves foming out it is own sham^. Jude 13. The Lord teaches the
lowly person, and such is fit to teach his brother.

Sixthly, Consider how much men preiudiceth the truth by apassionate endeavor
to vindicate the same, railing language and invective lines* vailes the truth
that it cannot be seen, who loves to drink in troubled waters? or puddle
streams? When men's foame of malice, envy and discontent, appear* in the
surface of their peevish lines, who will look for truth therein* A smooth pen
shall not bewitch me, for I will examine what it affirms. A scolding dialect
shall not corrupt me, for I will never bestow the pains to read it, truth has
never need of passion, but often of patience. A froward pen often times stir up
other men's passions, but seldom setleth any man's judgment, frowardness
raises up frowardness, and strife stirs up strife, and both together
rejoices the Devil and sporteth his children, and the truth is neglected all
the while: He that endeavors to conquer error with good success, must bring
along with him meekness and truth, and having both may ride on and prosper.
Psalm. 45. 4.

Seventhly. Men do seldom contend for truth in a railing dialect, it is
mystery more then truth that is so sought out, passion, envy, hatred, malice
are the fruits of the flesh, and can these contend for their distroyer the
spirit of truth? an unbridled tongue, a licentious pen, is the common
charracter of a rotten heart, 1 James 26. The passion of the pen above that of
the tongue is the more dangerous sign that the heart is rotten: A passionate
tongue does many times argue the distempers of the head, when the consent of
the heart cannot begotten* but a railing pen does clearly evince the hearts
malice, commanding the head to subserve the same, a passionate tongue does
often declare a man robbed of his reason, but a passionate pen does more
clearly evince a man robbed of the truth, for his reason is ranged in his
malicious lines, the passion of the tongue does largely proclaim sin in the
heart, but the passion of the pen the heart in sin, for deliberation,
invention, memory, wit, reason, all are commanded by that heart of sin, truth
triumphs only in tittle, but pride and arrogance in the matter it self.

Eighthly, Consider how does it gratify the designs of the adversary, that
the Saints should thus wrangle each with his brother, how does this cheer up
the popish, Episcopal, Presbyteriall, Independent, Antinominicall,
Annabaptisticall, Jesuit: For I presume the Jesuit personates them all: and
whose ends we prosecute by our unhappie divisions amongst our selves, how is
this told in Gath, and published in Askalon, how do the daughters of the
Philistims rejoice? and the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph? How do
they jeare at our discord* that we our selves proves thorns in one another
eyes, and goade in one another sides? boasting that they lasht us with rods,
but we our selves with scorpions, and that our own little fingers will be
heavier upon one another, then their loins were upon us all. They oppressed us
and we were pitied of all, we oppress our selves and then who pitieth us: They
ruined us by an usurpation, and shall we strive to ruin one another by a law?
They crush't us by the heavy sentences of the Heigh Commission, and Star
Chamber, and shall we endeavor to do the same by the Authority of Parliament?
If we love not one another, let us love our selves, for each undermineth his
own security by circumventing his brothers peace.

Ninthly, Consider how do Saints loose in each others hearts, when they gall
and greive and vex one another in each others pen. To give milk and honey for
vinegar and gall, blessing for cursing, kind words for bitter language, this is
indeed our duty, but hereunto who has attained? And shall we tempt one another
with such provocations* Sorrow and trouble, persecution and affliction, envy
and malice, evil speaking and railing, we expect from the world, but bitter
quarter from bitter people: The Saints should be each others shelter, we do
not gather grapes from thorns, not briers from vines, men do not gather figs
from thistles, nor prickles from figg trees. Churlish language I expect from a
Nabell, not from a David, Scoffs from an Ismael not from an Isaac, Railing
from a Rabsheika, not from an Hezekiah, Dungeons from an Ahab, not from a
Michaiah, Prisons from an Herod, not from John the Baptist, Chains from a
Nero, not from a Paul, Banishment from Flavius Domitian, not from John the
Evangelist, Jeares from a Julian, not from a Christian. No, no, gentleness and
meekness, love and peace, kindness and goodness, bowels of mercy and
compassion from the hearts and tongues, the hands and pens of all wherein
dwells the spirit of Christ. But when our expectations are failed, looking for
peace with Jeremy and no good comes, for help from the Saints and behold
trouble. When our brethren turns Dragons, as Job says, and we are companions
to Owls even birds of prey: How will our bowels boil and rests not, our
harp turns into mourning, and our Organs into the voice of them that weep?
Job 30. 29. 31. Hard speeches and heavy hands upon the Saints of God from
great Professors, proud looks, and swelling words have formerly been the
certain prognostics of approaching Apostasy: and that Charracter seldom
fails. As for my part God give me favor in the eyes of those who are his
Favorites, love in their hearts, intrest in their prayers, and make me to the
uttmost a friend and a favourer of them, however they differ from me in my
judgment.

Tenthly, Consider, wrangling, writing, and railing language each against other
in our own party, hastneth our destruction* and hinders our reformation and
who but a Jesuit delights herein? What is it which obstructeth the
Parliament Assembly, or Armies, but our unhappie divisions amongst our selves?
We want love, and where love is not, where is our piety? and where there is no
unity, there is as little policy. For my part the unhappie quarrel between
Presbyterian and Independent speaks as sadly to me, and threatens as sorely,
as the woeful distance between King and Parliament, and the happy
reconciliation of the former parties would quit my thoughts of the fear of the
latter, and happy should that man be called by this present age, which should
prove an instrument of so good a work, But where is that pen of peace? and
that heart of love? that spirit of meekness? and that head of wisdom? How
beautiful should the very feet of those be which could bring such tidings of
joy to this Kingdom.

Eleventhly, Consider, the difference is more in the heart then in the head, in
the affections then in the judgment* which is more dangerous because less
reconcilable, a gracious heart commands the head to hearken to truth, but a
more sound head cannot command a perverse mind, the difference between the
parties we speak of is more in show, then in deed and truth, the Presbyterian
is departed from Episcopacy. the Independent questions such and such a
qualified Presbytery, but they that are godly of both parties, are not engaged
past a retreat to the truth of God. Who ever can show it, could each of us
lovingly here his brother, happily each might be bettered by the other, those
that are the strongest Antagonists about Discipline suppose it a piece of
policy, not of divinity, and is it policy for the Saints to ruin one
another? Inteligent men are of opinion that i^ each party would with
meekness and patience here one another, reconciliation between them would
attend the issue, and shall we destroy one another before we will give one
another the heating? What aparrant untruths, and gross mistakes even in
matters of fact have been reported of their dissenting brethren; for want of
hearing them speak for themselves? I could instance in many in mine own
observations, but that the making up, and not the widenning of breaches is my
present purpose.

Twelfthly, Consider the dear relation wherein we stand each to other in Jesus
Christ, Have we not the same Lord? the same faith? the same baptism? Did not
we all lie together as it were in the same womb of the Almighties gracious
purpose? are we not all the price of the same ransom? the redeemed of the same
Savior? Does not the same spirit of Jesus breath in our hearts? the same blood
of Jesus run in our veins? Are we not all brethren in the faith? and shall
brethren reproach brethren? brethren rail against brethren? brethren undermine
the peace and comfort of one another, is it brotherly to discover one another
weaknesses, failings, and indiscretions? brethren accuse brethren? brethren
betray brethren? What! brethren without bowels? without natural affection to
brethren? Who but a Cain will seek the ruin of a brother Abell, because his
holy services are more acceptable then his own? Who but a Ham will betray the
nakedness of his own family? God put enmity between Satan and Saints, but
Satan puts enmity between Saints and Saints; whose works they do that foment
the same. An ungodly man diggeth up evil, and in his lips there is a burning
fire, and a froward man sows strife, and a whisperer separateth chief
friends. Pro. 16. 27. 28. and it is a wicked man that walks with a froward
mouth, Pro. 6. 12. And shall such be found among the Saints? Oh where is that
spirit which should knit our hearts together in love? Are we not all members
of the same body? if one suffer do not all suffer? and shall we persecute one
another? if one be disgraced do we not all blush? and shall we shame one
another? is love the figne of a Disciple of Christ? and shall we hate one
another? does not each member need his fellow: and shall each destroy each
other? Is the body of Christ the horrid monster of these monstrous times? Is it
thus amongst Turks, and Pagans, Mahumitans, Atheists, or Papists? Do
Malignants thus pen it against Malignants, Cavaliers against Cavaliers? are
there such bitter words or bitting language? such harsh sayings or hard
speakings to be heard in the Camp of our adversaries? Dear sirs is it truth or
trouble you thus pursue? if the truth, fight for it in its own way, it calls
for your love to it self and children and not for your ranckor, for your pains
and not your passion, it calls for help and not for hindrance, If truth does
reign, why scratch you her with a crown of thorns, giving her vinegar and
gall to drink, If truth be queen her royal attendance and maids of honor
should be love, and meekness, gentleness and goodness, kindness and mercy,
forbearance and pity. Why do men vex her with pride and passion, strife and
contention, frowardnes and anger? Her Kingdom is peace, her commands are love,
her royal law to her ^oyal Subjects is follow the truth together in love,
Ephesians. 4. 15. Lions and Wolves, Bears and Tigars, Dragons and Ultars, with
such hurtful creatures becomes the shady wilderness of the wicked world, but
none that do destroy should once approach the Lords holy Mountain. it becomes
Toads to belch out venom, and hellish furies to spit fire, each at other* and
not the Saints of the most high God, shall they dig out one another bowels,
rend one another name, plunder one another reputes dearest sirs Turn your
swords into plowshares, and your spears into pruineing hooks, and learn no
more to war one against another. Esaias 2. 4 Let the Wolf dwell with the Lamb,
and the Leopard lie down with the Kid, and a child by truth lead them both*
Let no corrupt communication come out of your mouth (or pen) but that which is
good for the use of edifying, that may administer grace to the hearers, and
readers, and let all bitterness and wrath and anger, clamor and evil
speaking (or writing) be put away from you, with all malice* and be ye kind
one to another, tender hearted* forgiving one another, as God for Christ's sake
has forgiven you. Ephesians. 4 29. 31. 32.

FINIS.

