PRAYERS OF WAR FOR THE KINGDOM, Judgment and Justice which God has
promised to execute under Heaven here on Earth, for to maintain his WORD (or
HOLY NAME) and to deliver his people. Against the Rage and Fury of the Horrible
and pernicious Beast, which devoureth and breaks in pieces, and stampeth the
residue with its feet, blasphemeth God the Most High, and endevoreth to change
Times and Laws. Daniel. 7. Whereunto is added an earnest voice or Letter to
the late Roman Emperor.

Written and set forth first in the German Tongue by one, who through many
dangers a long time undantedly has in person denounced unto the Roman
Emperor, and many Kings, Princes and States, the Judgment of God over the
world, and the deliverance of Israel, and still does continue to admonish all
people of the same.

London Printed for G. Thompson. 1642.

PRAYERS OF WAR For the Kingdom, Judgment and Justice, which God has
promised to execute under Heaven here on Earth, for to maintain his Word (or
Holy Name) and to deliver his People.
1. GOD THE FATHER, who has of Nothing Created Heaven, Earth, the Seas and All
that therein is, by the hand of his Divine and Almighty power, have pity, and
deliver the Creature of his hands, through the Grace, Virtue and Strength of
his Divine Justice, from the power of the Kingdom of Eternal Darkness.

2. O LORD JESUS CHRIST, Thou only Begotten Son of God, and Savior of all
those that truly believe in Thee, Thou Eternal King and Prince of Victory,
by whom Sin, Death, Devil and Hell is overcome and destroyed: Have pity,
and deliver those People from the Might and Power of all thine and their
Enemies, which Thou have redeemed with thy most Holy and Precious Blood, and
exceeding dearly bought to thy Everlasting Kingdom.

3. GOD THE HOLY GHOST, Thou Divine Fire, which art the burning flame, light,
virtue and strength of all believers, kindle and revive thy members with the
virtue of thy Strength, that they through the power of God may be preserved to
eternal Salvation,

Thou Holy Trinity, God the ^ather, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, in
One Eternal, Divine and Vndivisible Essence, perform and fulfill what thou
have promised, concerning the maintaining of thy Word and Holy Name, and the
deliverance of thy People, and have in thy Eternal Counsel decreed and
established against the rage and fury of the Devil and all his members.

For there is none like unto thee O Lord, thou art great, and thy Name is
great, and thou can show it in the very Deed; who should not fear thee, O
King of Nations: To thee Obedience is due, forasmuch as among all the wise men
of the Nations, and in all their Kingdoms, there is none like unto thee: Thou
Lord art the true God, and the living God, an everlasting King, at thy wrath
the Earth trembles, and the Nations cannot abide thine indignation. The Gods
that have not made the Heavens and the Earth, even they must perish from the
earth, and from under the Heavens. But thou have made the Earth by thy power,
and established the world by thy Wisdom, and have stretched out the heavens
by thine Understanding, When thou utterest thy voice, there is a multitude of
Waters in the Heavens. Ier. 10.

Thou Lord most high art very terrible, a great King over all the Earth, thou
reignest over the Heathen, thou sit upon the Throne of thine Holiness.
Psalm. 47.

The Heathens must despair, the Kingdoms fall, the earth must perish when he
utters his voice; he that makes Wars to cease unto the end of the Earth,
that breaks the Bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder; that burns the
Chariot in the Fire. Psalm. 46.

Thou breakest the ships of Tharsis with an East wind; as we have heard so
have we seen in the City of the Lord of Hosts, in the City of our God: God
will establish it for ever, Selah. God we wait for thy loving kindness in thy
Temple. According to thy Name, O God, so is thy praise unto the ends of the
Earth. Thy Right Hand is full of Righteousness, Psalm 48.

Let the Heavens rejoice, and let the Earth be glad, let the Sea roar and the
fullness thereof, let the Field be joyful and all that is therein, and let all
the Trees of the Wood rejoice before the Lord, for he comes, he comes to
Judge the earth; he shall Judge the World with righteousness, and the People
with his Truth. Psalm. 96.

He bowed the Heavens and came down, and darkness was under his feet.
Psalm. 18.

A fire goes before him and burns up his Enemies round about; his Lightning
enlightens the World; the Earth sees it and trembles, the Hills melt like
wax at the presence of the Lord, at the Presence of the Lord of the whole
Earth. The Heavens declare his Righteousness, and all people see his Glory.
Psalm. 97.

For the Lord shall Judge and avenge his People, and have pity upon his
Servants. Deuteronomy. 32.

In Salem is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Sion: there breaks he
the Arrows of the Bow, the shield and the Sword and the Battle, Sela. Thou
art more glorious and excellent then the Mountains of prey, the stout hearted
must be spoiled, and sleep their sleep, and the Warrious must let their
hands sinck, at thy rebuke O God of Jacob, both the chariot and the horse are
cast into a dead sleep; Thou, even thou art to be feared, and who may stand
in thy sight when once thou art angry, when thou causest the Judgment to be
heard from Heaven then the Earth fears and is still, Psalm 76.

For, thou O Lord art a Jealous God, and a Revenger, yea a revenger is the Lord
and furious; The Lord will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserveth
wrath for his Enemies, Nahum. 1.

Thou coverest thy self with Light, thou stretchest out the Heavens like a
Curtain, thou layest the beams of thy chambers in the Waters, thou make the
clouds thy Charet, thou walk upon the wings of the Wind. Psalm. 104.

Thou art the Lord, Whose ways are in the whirle-winde and in the storm, and
the clouds are the dust of thy feet; thou that rebukest the Sea and make it
dry, and dryest up all the Rivers: the Mountains quake at Thee, and the Hills
melt: the Earth quaketh at thy presence, yea the world and all that dwell
therein; who can stand before thine Indignation, and who can abide in the
fierceness of thine anger; thy fury burns like fire, and the Rocks are
thrown down by him. Nehemiah. 1.

Thou look on the Earth and it trembles, thou touchest the Hills and they
smoke: the earth trembles and is moved, and the foundations of the Mountains
are moved and do tremble, when thou art angry. Psalm. 104.

Smoke goes up out of thy Nostrills, and a consuming fire out of thy Mouth,
whereby coals are kindled: thy Pavillion round about thee is dark, and dark
thick clouds wherein thou art hidden: at the brightness before Thee the
Clouds pass with Hail and lightnings, and the Lord thundered in the Heavens,
and the highest gave his voice with Hail and coals of fire: He sent out his
arrows and scattered them, he short out lightnings and discomfited them. Psalm.
18.

Who is so great a God as Thou O God, thou art the God that do wonders; thou
have declared thy strength amongst the People; thou have powerfully redeemed
thy people, the sons of Jacob, and Joseph Sela. The waters saw Thee, O God,
the water saw thee and were afraid, the depths were troubled, the thick clouds
powered out Water, the clouds did thunder, and thy arrows went abroad: thy
lightnings lightened the world, and the Earth trembled and shook. Psalm. 77.

Great is our Lord, and of great Power, his understanding is infinite. Psalm.
147.

Whatsoever he pleases that he does in Heaven and in Earth, in the seas and in
all deep places, that causes the Vapors (and clouds) to ascend from the
ends of the Earth, that makes lightnings to rain, that brings the winds
out of his Treasures. Psalm. 135.

Who covers the Heavens with clouds, who prepares rain for the Earth, who
makes grass to grow upon the Mountains: he gives Snow like wool, he
scatters the Hoare frost like ashes; He casts forth his Ice like morsels;
who can stand before his Cold? He sends out his word and melts them, He
causes his Wind to blow and it thawes, Psalm. 147.

By the Word of the Lord the Heavens were made, and all the Host of them by the
breath of His Mouth. Psalm. 33.

For who in the Clouds may be compared unto the Lord, who among the Sons of
the Gods can be likened unto the Lord. Psalm. 89.

There is none like unto the God of Iesurun, (or of the righteous) who rides
upon the Heaven, whose excellency is in the Sky, and underneath are the
everlasting arms Deuteronomy. 33.

Who executes Vengance in anger, and fury upon the Heathen, that would not
hearken. Mich. 5.

For the Lord is a great God and a great King above all Gods; in his hand are
the deep places of the Earth, and the hights of the Hills are his, for the Sea
is his, and he made it, and his Hands formed the dry land. Psalm. 95.

The Lord is great, and greatly to be praised, he is to be feared above all
Gods: Honor and Majesty are before him; strength and beauty are in his
Sanctuary. Let the Heavens rejoice, and let the Earth be glad, let the Sea
roar and the fullness thereof, let the Field be joyful, and all that is
therein, and let all the Trees of the Wood rejoice. Psalm. 96.

Make a Joyful Noise unto the Lord, all the Earth, serve the Lord with
gladness: come before his presence with singing, Know ye that the Lord he is
God. Psalm. 100.

For thou Lord, art high above all the Earth, thou art exalted far above all
Gods. Ps. 97.

The Floods lift up, O Lord, the floods lift up their Voice, the floods lift up
their Waves: The Lord on high is mightier then the Noise of many Waters, yea
then the mighty waves of the Sea. Psalm. 93.

Therefore will not we fear, though the Earth be removed, and though the
mountains should sinck in the midst of the Sea. Psalm. 46.

For thou stillest the Noise of the Seas, the noise of the waves, and the
tumult of the people, Psalm. 65.

Why do the Heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing: the Kings of
the Earth rise up, and the Rulers take Counsel together, against the Lord and
against his Anointed; therefore shall his wrath soon be kindled Psalm. 2.

The Indignation of the Lord is upon all Nations, and his Fury upon all their
Armies, Esa. 34.

His Anger burns, and is very heavy: His lips are full of indignation, and
his Tongue as a devouring fire, and his breath as an overflowing stream, Esa.
30.

Our God shall come and shall not keep silence, a fire shall devour before
him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him Psalm. 50.

He shall let burning Coals fall upon his enemies, and he shall with fire
throw them down into deep pitts, that they never rise up again. Psalm. 140.

Behold he comes says the Lord of Hosts, but who may abide the Day of his
Coming? and who shall stand when he appears? Malach. 3.

Deur. 4. 6. 9. and 32. chapter Heb. 1^. and 12. chapter Psalm. 103. Esa. 45. Deuteronomy. 10.
Exodus 15.
For He is a Jealous God, and a consuming fire, that shall devour all the earth
with the fire of his Jealousy, Zephan. 1. and 3. chap.

Therefore bow the Heavens, O Lord, and come down, touch the Mountains that
they smoke, cast forth Lightning and scatter them, shoot out thine arrows and
destroy them, Psalm. 144.

Psalm. 103. Esa. 45. Deuteronomy. 10. Exodus 15.
For thou Lord of Hoasts art the only God, the God of all Gods, and the Lord of
all Lords; terrible, worthy to be praised, and doing wonders.

Thou have a Mighty arm, strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand. Psalm.
89.

Thy righteousness is like the great mountains: Thy Judgments are great
deapths. Psalm. 36.

Surely the wrath of Man shall praise Thee, the remainder of wrath shall thou
restrain, Psalm. 76.

Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, and his greatness is
unsearchable: his Kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and his Dominion
endures throughout all generations. Dan. 2. and 4. Psalm. 145.

The Lord bringth the Counsel of the Heathen to naught, he makes the devises
of the people of none effect, but the Counsel of the Lord stands forever:
the thoughts of his heart to all generations. Psalm. 33. Esa. 8. and 13.

Make a joyful noise unto the Lord all the earth: Make a loud noise, and
rejoice, and sing praise: sing unto the Lord with the Harp, and the Voice of a
Psalm, with Trumpets and sound of Cornet, make a joyful noise before the
Lord, the King. Let the Sea roar, and the fulness thereof: the world and they
that dwell therein: Let the floods clap their hands, let the hills be joyful
together before the Lord, for he comes to judge the Earth, with
righteousness shall he judge the World, and the people with equity. Psalm. 98.

There is no King saved by the Multitude of an Host: a mighty man is not
delivered by much strength; a horse is a vain thing for safety, neither shall
he deliver any by his great strength. Psalm. 33.

O Lord God of Hosts, who is a strong Lord like unto thee? Thy truth is round
about thee, Thou rulest the raging of the Sea; when the waves thereof arise,
thou stillest them: thou breakest Rahab in pieces as one that is slain, Thou
scatterest thine Enemies with thy strong Arm. psalm. 89.

Thou devidest the Sea by thy strength, Thou breakest the Head of the Dragons
in the waters: thou breakest the heads of Leviathan in pieces, and give them
to be meat to the people inhabiting the wilderness; thou cleavest the
fountain and the flood, thou dryest up mighty Rivers: The Day thine, the Night
also: thou preparest the Light and the Sun, thou set all the Borders of the
Earth, thou make Summer and Winter Psalm. 74.

The Heavens are thine, the Earth also is thine: as for the World and the
fullness thereof, thou have found them; the North and the South, thou have
created them: Tabor and Hermon shall rejoice in thy Name, Psalm. 89.

Blessed is the Nation, whose God is the Lord, and the people whom he has
chosen for his own inheritanc, Psalm. 33.

God thy Work is Holy, unsearchable and incomprehensible are the Judgments.
Psalm. 77. Romans 11.

Thou have prepared thy throne in the Heavens, and thy Kingdom rules over
All. Psalm. 103.

Thou make thine Angels winds, thy Ministers a flaming fire, who laidst the
foundations of the earth that it should not be removed for ever: ever: Thou
coveredst it with the Deep as with a garment: The waters stood above the
Mountains: at thy rebuke they fled: at the Voice of thy Thunder they hasted
away. Psalm. 104.

Eccle. 43. Esa. 2. 3. 40. 50. chap.
The noise of his Thunder makes the Earth tremble, and the Mountains quake
before him, for the Glory of his Majesty, and for the Voice of his Glory
shall, the Mountains depart, and the Hills be removed. Rev. 6.

The Voice of the Lord is upon the waters, the God of Glory thundreth, the Lord
is upon many Waters; the Voice of the Lord is very powerful; the voice of the
Lord is full of Majesty: the voice of the Lord breaks the Cedars, yea the
Lord breaks the Cedars of Lebanon; the Voice of the Lord divides the flames
of Fire: the voice of the Lord shakes the wilderness; the Lord shakes the
wilderness of Cades, the Lord sits upon the flood, yea the Lord sits
King for ever: The Lord will give strength unto his people: the Lord will
bless his People with peace, Psalm. 29.

For he is the Lord strong and Mighty, the Lord mighty in battle. Lift up your
Heads O you gates, even l^ft them up ye everlasting doors, and the King of
Glory shall come in. Who is the King of Glory, the Lord of Hosts, he is the
King of Glory, Sela. Psalm. 24.

He shall Judge the ends of the earth, and he shall give strength unto his
King, and exalt the horn of his Anointed: But the Adversaries of the Lord
shall be broken in pieces, out of Heaven shall the thunder open them. 1. Sam.
2.

Upon the wicked he shall rain Snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible
Tempest; this shall be the portion of their Cup. Psalm. 11.

He shall let burning coals fall upon his enemies, he shall let them be cast
into the fire, into the deep pitts, that they rise not up again. Psalm. 40.

Heb. 1 and 7. Psalm. 45. 97. Mich. 4. 5. 7 chap.
O God, thy Throne is for ever and ever, the Scepter of thy Davidicall Kingdom
is a Scepter of Righteousness. Psalm. 89. 110. 145.

Praise ye the Lord, praise the Lord O ye Heavens; praise Him in the Hights;
Praise ye Him all His Angels: Praise ye him all His Hoasts: Praise ye Him
Sun and Moon, praise Him all ye Sarres of Light: Praise Him ye Heavens of
Heavens, and ye Waters that be above the Heavens: Let them praise the Name of
the Lord; for He commanded and they were Created. He has also established them
for ever and ever. He has made a Decree which shall not pass. Praise the Lord
from the Earth, ye Dragons and all deepes, Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapor,
Stormy Wind fulfilling His Word, Mountains and all Hills: fruitful Trees
and all Cedars. Beasts and Cattle: Creeping things and flying foul. Psalm. 148.

Bless the Lord ye His Angels that excel in strength, that do His
Commandments, harckning unto the Voice of His WORD. Bless ye the Lord all ye
his Hosts, ye Ministers of His that do his pleasure.

Bless ye the Lord all His Works in all places of His Dominion: bless the
Lord O my soul. Psalm. 103.

Praise and Glory and Wisdom, and Thanks, and Honor, and Power, and Might
be unto Our God for ever more Amen. Revel. 7.

A Warrior from God, ACcording to His Grace, Truth and Righteousness, which
God has promised to keep unto David and his Seed after Him for ever, (to
wit) so long as the Ordinance with Heaven and Earth, Sun and Moon, Day and
Night endures. Revel. 10. Psalm. 89. 2 Samuel 7. 1 King. 2. 6. 8. 9. 2 Chronicles. 6.
7. chap. Ier. 30. 31. 33. chap. Mich. 7.


A VOICE or Letter which denounces Gods Vengeance and Judgment to the
Emperor and his Adherents.
Esa. 30. A Voice, By which the Lord of Hosts out of Sion warns thus.
Ierem. 25. Joel 3. Amos 1. Deuteronomy. 1 and 10 Esa. 2 and 3. 1 Pet. 1. Eccl. 1. 10.
35. Romans 2. 14. 4 Esd. 11. 12. Sap. 6. Psalm. 36. 58. Revel. 16.
It needs not many disputes or proofs to show that the Ruler is no more
esteemed in the eyes of the Majesty of God the most High; (by whom there is no
respect of Persons, 2 Chronicles. 19. Gal. 2. Ephesians. 6. Col. 3.) then he that is under
the rule.

Neither are further Demonstrations necessary to prove that the Emperor, (who
is the Horn or Temporal Head of that Terrible and hurtful Beast, which
breaks all in pieces, and stampeth the residue with its feet, Dan. 7.)
neither regards nor has regarded either the Laws of God or of Nature, to
conform his Government thereunto, according to Conscience, but by the Power of
Satan domineereth directly against them, upon the Throne of God.

Genesis 4. Number. 23. 24. Heb. 11.
The Blood of the oppressed, and the Violence used against those that suffer,
has long enough cried to Heaven to the Eternal God. Revel. 6. Deuteronomy. 32. Deuteronomy.
17. Mich. 5.
Who therefore is risen against the Emperor and his Adherents, to bring to
naught in them, all the plots and devices of the Devil, which they have
devised against God, His Word and believers. Esa. 4. 14. 15. 35. 49. Chap.
Zephan. 3.

Joel 3. Nah. 3. 1 John 3. Romans 1. 6. Sap. 6. Psalm. 2. 76. 137. 2 These. 2. Esa.
51. and 5. 4. chap.
And because those that serve him, have not only no lawful calling, but submitt
themselves also to the Devil, when they rise and lift up themselves against
God, and torment poor men here upon his Earth, by no other then by the power
and workeing of the very Devil: They have reason to look well about them, and
consider how their Master will be able to help them when they have served
against God. Zach. 2. 12. 14. Ierem. 30.

Revel. 13. Deu. 7. 12. Esa. 61. 63. 2 These. 1. Sap. 5.
Seeing the Emperor, who in poor and afflicted Mankind lifts himself up
against God, both in a Coporall and Spiritual manner, is not able to help and
deliver himself from the day of the Vengeance and Judgment of God, much less
to assist those that help him, or do desire to fulfill his diabolical
devices and enterprises. Hab. 1. Psalm. 137. Esa. 31. 49. 52. 59.

Sap. 18. Mat. 24.
Out of Midnight, OR

Mala. 4. 2 Cor. 4. Genesis 49. Genesis 49. Revel. 5. 22. Esa. 4. 8. 11. 28. 42. 59.
66. Mal. 4.
IN the midst of the Night, when Faith is extinguished, Jesus Christ the Sun
of Righteousness, set, yea no light more is within the Hearts and Consciences
of men, Zach. 4.) Comes the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Esa. 65. Heb. 7. 10.
The root of David, by whom God the great Lord, for the maintenance of the
Honor of His Word or Holy Name, Eze. 35. 36. and the full Deliverance of
Mankind will make himself known amongst the unbelieving and ungodly Heathen.
Romans 1. and 11. chap. Hypocrites, Scorners and Despisers, Epist of Jude; or
false and titular Christians. Tit. 1. Mat. 24. Mar. 13. 2. Pet. 3.

4 Esdr. 11. 12. Esa. 47. 52. Revel. 10. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. chap.
Men shall fall upon thy feathered Wings, O Thou Eagle, and thy claws and
feathers, Kingdom and government, namly they whole Body or adherents, shall
in the DAY of the LORD and IVDGEMENT OF GOD, utterly be destroyed from under
the Heavens, Ierem. 10. 25. Dan. 7.

Esa. 66. Revel. 20. 2 Pet. 3. Mich. 5. 6. and 7. chap. Revel. 2. Psalm. 49. 96.
97. 98. 99.
The Contents of this VOICE have binn insinuated to the late deceased Emperor
many years ago, who for his doings undoubtedly is now under Gods Judgment
and in the bottomless pit, Revel. 17. For God will not suffer His Holy Name to
be defiled, nor his people forced against their Souls and Consciences:
therefore this Letter or Earnest Voice, Concerning the Judgment of God is now
again published, that no man assist another in his unjust cause against God
His Faithful, and so bring them both into Hell. But they that will escape the
Fiery Lake in regard of these present tumults, they must in all their actions,
2 Cor. 5. not only outwardly in the Eyes of Men, Psalm. 14. but also in their
hearts, not go against God. Romans 9. 1 Pet. 2.4. Who tries the hearts and
reins, Ier. 11. 17. and looks into the secrets of Men, Esa. 29. Ierem. 23.
according to which He will also Judge, 1 Cor. 4. Ier. 30. Ezech. 34. 37.

Dan. 12. Revel. 12. and 20. 2 These. 1.
A WARRIER according to the Truth and Righteousness of God and His Judgment,
Crowned with afflictions and Sufferings, armed with Faith, Hope and Patience,
Heb. 10. Which is in our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 These. 1.

FJNJS.

