A LETTER FROM Colonel General Points, TO THE HONORABLE William Lenthall
Speaker of the House of Commons: Concerning Sir Tho. Glenham, Colonel Gerard,
And Sir Marmaduke Langdale,
In the last fight near Chester.

With a perfect narration of Colonel Parsons of the said proceedings. And the
number of horse and men taken in the pursuit, and which way His Majesty is fled.

Die Lune, 29 September. 1645.

ORdered by the Lords assembled in Parliament that Col. Genesis Points his Letter,
with Colonel Parsons Relation be forthwith printed and published.

J. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the King's Head in the Old Bailey. Sept. 30.
1645.

For the Right Honorable WILLIAM LENTHALL Esquire, Speaker of the House of
COMMONS.
SIR,
IN the conclusion of a hard march it has pleased God to deliver the enemy
into our hands, wherein he has sufficiently manifested his providence.
Yesterday we discovered the enemy on Millers heath within three miles of
Chester, whereupon I sent to Chester for some foot, which was very seasonably
sent me, and in my advance toward them we unawares met a body of them in a
narrow pass on the top of the heath, where we had a very violent encounter,
wherein we cut off many of the King, Life guard and re^ted the rest, then we
retreated to ^ne maine body, and toward four of the clock in the afternoon we
advanced toward them, and finding the enemy ready for battle we presently f^ll
upon them, killed, took, wounded, and routed the whole army, and I am confident
they never received a greater blow. I have only a Catalogue of few, the rest
being sent to Tarvin and other garrisons in these parts, cannot as yet be
collected. These Colonels, Sir Thomas Glenham. Sir Thomas Dacres, Sir Philip
Musgrave, Sir Thomas Dawbridge court, Sir Tho Gower, Col. Tho. Weston* son to
the Earl of Portland and Col. Cromwell, James Martin Quartermaster general,
Col. John G^fford, Lieutenant Col. Edward Hatton, and Lieut Col Constable, Cap.
Wyvell, Cap. Co^terill, Cap. Morgan, Cap. Mountain, Cap. Le Strange, Cap.
Swinho, and Cap. Constable. Its reported Sir Marmaduke Langdale is either
killed or taken: you shall with all convenience receive a complete List from
me. There was killed the Earl of Litchfield, brother to the Duke of Lenox, and
Sir Brian Stapleton a notorious Papist, who was lately in Ireland His Majesty's
solicitor for ten thousand men. In this tender of my service I desire it may
be forthwith communicated to the House, from whom I desire to receive further
orders, in the mean time I shall continue thereabouts, using my endeavors in
reducing this City, wherein, and in all other my endeavors, I shall ever rest,

Sir, Your most humble and faithful servant, SEDNHAM POYNTZ.
Milers-heath, September. 25. 1645. Gerrard is deadly wounded if not already
slain.

This Gentleman Colonel Parsons having the charge of bringing up the reserves,
has done very good service in the discharge thereof. I desire the house may
think of some further encouragement for the Yorkshire horse.

Col. Beathell and Col. Graves deserves very much for their service.



The Relation of Colonel Parsons communicated to both Houses of Parliament,
Sept. 29. 1645.
ABout the 18 of August last, the King with about 4000 horse and Drag^oues
advanced into Yorkshire. The 19. Col. Rossi^ers horse came up to General
Poyntz. The 21, they joined with the Scots and Cheshire horse, a days rest the
Scots horse would have, the next day all marched; But the King got by that
means a days retreat before, whom Gen Poyntz according to his Order from the
Committee of both Ki^gdomes, through many difficulties persued above 300 miles,
not resting above a day in any place. The knowledge of the Kings advance for
the relief of Chester, being the only certain intelligence he received of his
motion, he marched day and night to be there before him, and took in a strong
house with a Drawbridge, moted, (which stood in the way of his march, and
opposed him) in less then an hours space; And after a very hard march all
night, on the 24 of this instant in the morning, his Van curriers discovered
the enemy on a moore within two miles of Chester called Rowten-moore, whereupon
immediately he drew into Order, and advanced upon them (though all his force
were not then come up) for he supposed to take the enemy at unawares, it being
probable they could have no intelligence of his being so near, though it
proved otherwise, for his Letters (written that night to the Commander within
the out-Lines of Chester, giving notice of his advance) were intercepted and
the enemy being poss^ssed of the advantage of ground, and in order confronted
out van led by Colonel Hugh Bethell in the midst of a Lane betwixt two
Moors covered with the armed men of both Battaliaes, where was given a very
sharp and gallart charge by both parties, for after Pistolls were discharged at
half Pikes distance, they disputed the matter with their Swords a full quarter
of an hour, neither yiedling ground to other, till at length the enemy were
forced to retreat, whom, our men pursuing were re-encountred by a fresh
reserve at the Lanes mouth, and they were likewise discomfited, and a third,
but being over powered were in the end forced to retreat through the Lane,
incapable of receiving a Reserve to second them: here we had some loss, the
enemy pursuing to the Lanes end, but were beaten back, for there were space for
our reserves to advance, Colonel Bethell and Colonel Graves were then sore
wounded, after this the General perceiving the ^nemy lay upon his advantage,
only skermished him with some flying parties, while he h^ld correspondency
with his friends in Chester Suburbs, whose sign was the discharge of two
pieces of Ordnance when they would issue out with horse and soot to join with
him, upon whose appearing the enemy quitted their station, and the General
with a party advanced to take the most convenient ground giveing command to
Col. Parsons Quartermaster general of the Army, Col. Sandies who performed the
duty of Commissary General of the horse, during the aforesaid march being then
employed to the Committee of both Kingdoms to order up the rest, which was
opportunely done, for they joined with the Auxiliary force of horse and foot
in the enemies ground, and was drawn into many small divisions and reserves,
being much over numbered by the enemy, who accounted themselves 5000 horse, and
Genesis Poyntz not above 2500 horse, besides two small bodies of foot, who were
disposed in the two outmost intervals of horse; upon the very instant of this
juncture the enemy advanced with their whole body, and the General (leaving
the charge of the reserves to Col. Parsons) took care of, and led up the van
divisions, with which after a round volly of shot from the foot, he joined
battle, charging the enemy in Front and Flanck, where his horse was deeply
wounded on the head, being continually seconded with reserves as often as there
was occasion, the rest being kept entire followe^ at a due distance; The
prevailing General who put the Enemy to a total r^ut, and al^hough the
pursuit was as hot as could be expected from such wearied horse, through narrow
durty lane and over ditches, the enemy ralied in a great moore wide of Chester
in two vast bodies a great distance assunder, the first (not without some
dispute) were again routed. and the other likewise, who retreated upon the
Warwick Regiment with such violence as bore them away confusedly, intermixed
with the flying enemy up to the outworkes of the Suburbs, the Musketteers
within were never the less liberal of their Gunshot, but the Divine
providence appeared much in the distribution of the impartial Bullets, few or
none lighting upon our men, though many of the Enemy were found there expiring.

A Body of horse all the while of these last disputes appeared fixed on the top
of a Hill, a little distant on that side Chester, wherein the King was very
confidently reputed to be, for confronting whereof a party of foot winged with
Colonel Lidcot, and Colonel Bethells Regiments were drawn into a convenient
Close in the bottom as a grand reserve; but the night by this time falling the
body on the Hill appeared not, and those in the bottom returned to their
comrades saciated with slaughter, prisoners, and booty of the vanquished Enemy;
while these things were thus agitated in the field the remainder of foot left
with Colonel Lowthian in the Suburbs were not idle, for the Enemy made a
strong fally upon them out of the City, and were more stremously repulsed, the
number of the slain of the prisoners and horse taken is not yet known, but is
generally conjectured 800 slain, 1500 men and 2000 horses taken, there was
brought in that night the und^rwritten list, of the considerablest men taken
and slame in the fight, the King with a party of about five or 600 was seen
going into Wales.

Prisoners taken.
SIr Thomas Glenham. Sir Thomas D^cres. Sir Philip Musgrave. Sir Thomas
Dabridgecourt. Sir Thomas Gore. Col. Thomas Weston, son to the Earl of
Portland. Col. Cromwell. James Martin, Quartermaster general. Col. John
Gifford. Lieut. Col. Edw. Hatton. Lieut. Col. Constable. Lieut. Col. Wigmore.
Captain Wivell. Cotterill. Morgan. Mountain. Le Strange. Swinoe. Constable.
It is reported Sir Marmaduke Langdale is slain. The Earl of Litchfield,
brother to the Duke of Lenox, slain. Sir Bryan Stapleton (the Kings agent for
10000 men in Ireland, slain.
FINIS.

