THE PRESBITERIAN CATECHISM, PSALM. 116: verse 12. What shall J render to the
Lord for all his benifits toward me?

Verse 13. I will take the Cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord.



LONDON, Printed for Richard Burton. 1647

THE PRESBYTERIAN CATECHISM:
WHat Religion do you profess to be the truest, and most grounded of the Holy
Scriptures?

A. The Protestant and Christian Religion.

Q. What is that Christian Religion?

A. To know and acknowledge the only true God and Jesus Christ our Crucified
Lord and Savior, whom he has sent to redeem, miserable men, dust and ashes,
worms and no men, from Hell, Death and Damnation if we lay hold on him by
speedy Faith and unfeigned repentance.

Q. How do thou know the Love of God to thee and other notorius, Sinners, as
thy self?

A. God has promised, that whosoever believes and repents of his sins from
the bottom of his heart shall find mercy through Christ Jesus.

Q. How know thou the love of God to thee?

A. In that he so dearly loved mankind, that he sent his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life.
John the 3. verse 16,

Q. How know thou that God had a son.

A. I know it because he was manifest to us

Q Prove that.

A. Without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness, God was manifest
in the flesh, Justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the
Gentiles believed on in the world, and received up to glory. Tim the 3. verse
16. And says St. John the word was made flesh and dwell amongst us.

Q. Tell me what is the office of Christ?

A. To be the alone mediator, Intercessor, and advocate between God and Man,
to reconcile us to our God, and to work our salvation, and likewise he is
called Jesus, that is a Savior because he came to save his people from their
sins. And likewise he is called Christ, which is anointed, because he is the
anointed of God, with all gifts and graces of the holy Spirit, to be a Prophet
Priest and King, for his people. And likewise for me. 1. Timothy 2.5. Heb.
9.15. Job. 14.6. Matthew: the 21. Esaias: 61.1. Acts. 4.26: Luke the 4th. 18: Heb:
the 1. 9th.

1. His Preisthood, was the first part of his mediation consisting of two parts.

2. By his satisfaction for sin.

3. By performing that obedience which we did owe.

4. By suffering that punishment which was due to our sins.

Q. What are the parts of Christ's satisfaction by his obedience?

A. 1. His suffering. Phil. 25. Peter 1^.24 Job. 6.33.34.

2. His perfect Righteousness.

By the first our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus died for our sins. By the
Second he purchased righteousness for true humble and penitent Sinners, both
which are necessary for our Justification.

Q. How did our Savior satisfy by his suffering?

A. In two ways.

1. in soul by drinking the full Cup of Gods wrath by which he felt
unspeakeable vexation greifes, fears of mind, feeling as it were the pangs of
hell.

2. In body by Scourging, Spitting, Buffeting (as it is recorded in the Story
of his passion) And lastly Death, that most reproachful, and Ignominious death
of The Cross Phil 2, 8.

Q. Now tell me How many Sacraments there be?

A 1. Baptism In the place of Circumcision.

2. The Supper of the Lord Answering to the passover. Romans 4.1. Genesis
27.10.11. Cor 10.^1.12.13.

Baptism is the first Sacrament which by the washing of water represents to
us the Powerful washing of the blood and spirit of Christ sealing unto them
which are within Gods covenant, their birth, in Christ, and entrance into
Christianity. Mat 26.26:8:19. Baptism Ephesians. 5.26 1 Cor 6.11. Heb 10.^2.

Q. To whom is Baptism Effectual?

A 1 The Church not only Baptizeth those of riper years as pagans which are
brought within the Church, and testify their understanding in Christianity,
profess their faith in Christ Jesus and in the precious promises of remission
of sins by his blood and their earnest desire to be sealed with Baptism to
strengthen their Souls in faith, and all this with sincerity. 2. Acts: 8th 37.

2. But Infants also borne of believing parents and are within the Covenant,
whereby they have a right to the seal thereof and this effectual to those
Infants who belong to the Election of grace.

Q. How can Infants be capable of the grace of Baptism?

A. Though they be not capable by that way the grown are: Yet it follows not
that they are not capable another way, we are to distinguish between the gift
convighed, and the manner of conveighing it: Faith is not of absolute necessity
to all Gods elect, but to those only to whom he affords means to believe, it is
the application of Christ's righteousness, not our apprehending it that
Iustifies us God can supply the defect of Faith by his sanctifing Spirit, which
can do all things on our part instead of that which faith should do, he has
said of Infants, to the^ belongs the kingdom of God. God knows to settle it
upon them though he ties us to means, yet he tyeth not himself.

Q. Are bread and wine Changed in the Sacrament into the body and blood of
Christ?

A. They are not changed in nature but In use. Cor 1.10 By Eating and Drinking
of it we have communion with our savior Christ, of whom we are as verily
pertakers by a livly Faith. as of the bread and of the wine by eating and
drinking them, and thus we say they are changed by use because Being separated
from a common use they are consecrated to sign and seal to us our spiritual
nourishment by the body and blood of Christ Jesus. Luke the 22.19.

Q What is the Sacrament of the Lords Supper?

A. It is the second Sacrament of the Gospel wherein the outward Elements of
bread and wine sanctified and exhibited by the Minister and rightly received by
the communicants, assurance is given to those that are ingrafted into Christ of
their continuance in him and receiving nourishment by him unto eternal Life.

Q. Why is it called the Lords Supper?

A. Not that he appointed a supper to us, but because he sitting at his last
supper ordained it in stead of the passover and gave charge for continuance of
it till his second coming Cor 11.20.

Q. Are the bread and wine changed to the body and blood of Christ?

A. They are not changed in nature but in use, by the eating and drinking of it
we have Communion with our Savior Christ, of whom we are as verily pertakers
by a lively Faith as of the bread and wine by eating and drinking them and thus
we say they are changed in use because being separate from a common use, they
are consecrated to sign and seal to us our spiritual nourishment and grouth
by the body an blood of Christ Jesus, therefore the bread and wine are not the
true body and blood of Christ, but the signs and tokens of them, as in
Baptism, water is only a sign of Christ's blood. Not his blood 1 Cor: 10.19:
Luke 22.19: 1 Cor 10.3.4.

Q, (The Use) What are the special ends and uses for which it was ordained?

A. 1. To call to mind the memory and uer, tue of Christ's death.

2. To confirm our Faith to increase our love to God, our Joy in the holy
ghost peace of conscience hope of eternal life, and other Gods graces in us.

3. To quicken our hearts to all holy duties, our thankfulness to God for his
mercies in Christ Jesus.

4. To keep us in obedience to God and to unite us in communion with Christ.

Q. How are we to prepare our selves before we receive it.

A, By due trial of our souls whether we be fit partakers of so great a
mystery, and fitting our hearts thereto.

2. By Examining our knowledge in it, and our need of it.

3. by examining our faith, and by true repentance, a true love of God Zach: 12
10. 1. Cor. 10.25.12.28. Romans 4.11. 1 Cor. 10.3.2. Cor: 23.5 Heb. 10.22.

4. By freeing our hearts from malice 1. Cor. 16.14.

5. By Invocation for a blessing upon it.

Q. What is to be done in the present acttion?

A. 1. We must use a reverend gesture and attention.

2. We must receive it with hearts elevated to God,

3. We must use thanksgiving, offering up our hearts and souls to god. Rom
12.1.

Q. What after the action?

A. We must praise the Lord for so great benefits And pray for his grace to
keep us from new sins and that we return not to the old.

Q: What is censures?

A. The Judgment of the Church ratifying the Threats of the gospel for abuse
of the word and sacraments.

1. Admonition of those that sin openly Mat. 18.15. etc:

2. By suspension of them from some exercise of Religion, as sacraments.

3. If they amend not, to cut them off from the Church by excommunication and
delivering them to Satan.

Q. What is meant by the last Judgment?

A. The pronouncing and executing the Irrevocable sentence of absolution or
condemnation.

1. Partly upon every man in particular at the hour of his death Heb: 9.21

2. Fully and generally upon all men at the second coming of Christ. Act 17.13.

Q. How are men Judged at the hour of Death?

A 1. God at that instant pronounces, and the conscience apprehends the
sentence of blessing and cursing Heb 9 27.

2. The Soul is by the power of God and Ministry of angels immediately
conveyed into the state of happiness or misery to remain til the
resurrection, and thenceforth both soul and body for ever. Luke, 16.22.23.26.
Ecl, 11, 3.

Q What is the general and final Iudgemen.t?

A The general Assise of the whole world wherein all men's lives that ever
were, are, or shall be, being duly examined every one shall receive according
to his works.

1. The wicked shall be condemned for the merit of their works To. 6.23,

2. The godly shall be pronounced Just Because their works though imperfect do
prove their faith (by which they lay hold on Christ and his righteousness) to be
a true faith as working by love in all parts of Obedience Ia. 2.18. Gal: 5.6.

Q. What shall be the estate of the Reprobates in Hell?

1. Everlasting torments of Body, and anguish of soul.

2. Expulsion from the favorable presence of god, and the glorious fellowship
of Christ and his Saints.

3. Utter darkness in that horrible Dungeon.

4. weeping and gnashing of teeth.

5. with the worm that never dies and the fire that never goes out. Romans 29.
Mat. 8 22.31.4 1. Isay. 66.24.

Q. What shall be the estate of the Elect in Heaven?

A. 1. Everlasting blessedness and glory in Soul and body.

2. Freedom from all infirmities, and imperfections.

3. They shall be endued with perfect wisdom and holiness.

4. Possessed with all pleasures at the right hand of God,

5. Seated in thrones of Majesty.

6. Crowned with Crowns of glory.

7. Filled with the glorious presence of God and the Lamb Christ Jesus.

8. in the Company of inumerable angels and holy Saints. 1. Cor. 13.12. Psalm.
16.11. Rev. 8.21.2. Tim 4.17 Heb 12 22

Q. What shall follow?

A. Christ shall deliver up that dispensatory Kingdom (which he received for
the subduing of his enemies and accomplishing the salvation of his Church) unto
God the Father, and God shall be all in all for Eternity. 2. Cor 24.28.

Seeing then al those things must be dissolved, what manner of persons ought we
to be? let us give diligence, that we may (...) of him in peace without spot
and blameless. 2. Pet: 3.11.14.

Blessed is he whom the Lord shall find prepared for his coming, for he shall
say to him well done thou good and faithful servant, enter into Thy Masters
Joy. Luke 12.43. Mar 25.21.

A Prayer.
O Eternal God which dwell in the highest Heavens, Look down upon us dust
and ashes, who at this present desire thy most gracious blessing to descend
down upon these distressed Churches, of England, Scotland, and miserable
Ireland, Lord if it be thy gracious will say now it is enough, suffer not the
sword any longer to devour one another, and Lord I beseech thee let us hear
no more the sound of the Trumpets, the noise of the Drum, nor the alarm of
War, but that the voice of the Turtle may be heard in our streets. Subdue
all Scisme, Faction, and Antichrist that man of sin, and Compose all our
unhappy differences both in Church and Common wealth, and make us to be all of
one mind fearing God and hating wickedness, and as thy Sons Coat was without
rent or seame. So let thy Church be without Schism and division, that we may
all be of one sheepefold under one shepherd Christ Jesus, Lord hear our
prayers, and make us all true servants to thee, Loyal subjects to our gracious
King, and loving and Charitable one toward another, and bring us from one
degree of grace to another, from one Sacrament to another, from one sabbath to
another, til at length thou bring us to that Everlasting Sabbath in thine
Everlasting Kingdom: Where Angels sing, Halelujah, honor and glory and praise
to him that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb Christ Jesus, to whom be all
honnour glory and praise and power, and strength and Salvation, by men and by
Angels, In this world, and the world to Come.

Amen.
FJNJS.

