Major Gen: Poyntz's LETTER TO The Honorable William Lenthal Esquire; Speaker of
the Honorable House of COMMONS: OR, A true Relation of the Storming and taking
of all the Works and Stables of BELVOYR-CASTLE.

Together with a Letter from Adjutant Gen: Sandys, concerning the same Fight,
wherein the Enemy had no Quarter granted them.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That these Letters be
forthwith printed and published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of the Golden Dragon in Fleetstreet,
near the Inner Temple, November 25. 1645.

To the Honorable, VV: Lenthall Esquire; Speaker of the House of Commons.
SIR,
THe last night I drew up these Forces with me before Belvoyre Castle, and
sending in a Summons, the Governor returned me this Answer; Sir, I am no less
distrustful of Providence then you are: and return you Answer, That I was not
placed here by the King to surrender to Rebels; And for the effusion of blood
you mention, the crime will be your own, not mine; Therefore I will not give
one inch of ground I am able to maintain with my sword, against all your
attempts made against this place, and your Servant Jervace Lucas; whereupon my
men being in readiness, we stormed their works in four several places, and
after an hours dispute entered, and possessed our selves of all their Works and
Stables, so that in a short time I hope to return you a good account of that
place: I cannot as yet, hear any thing of the Foot ordered to me out of the
Eastern Garrisons, so that my going against Newark is much retarded thereby,
and out of York there is neither horse nor foot as yet appears: I shall,
according to the trust repofed in me, use my best endeavor for the Public,
and ever remain, Sir,

Your faithful and humble Servant, Sednham Poyntz.
Botsford, 21. Nov.
SIR,
I Am extremely tired with the last nights storming, and being assured that you
will have a more particular Relation from others, but I shall say thus much,
the Works were the strongest I have seen in England, and gallantly defended,
and our men at first discouraged so much, that the General, my self, and some
other Officers were fain to keep the men at the Works with our swords: we had
one Major and two Captains wounded, and two Ensigns killed; the number of
Soldiers lost I yet know not, they had no more quarter then their bold answer
to our Summons deserved: we have possessed our selves of the Spring that
supplies them with water, and doubt not but fuddenly to reduce it. I am in
haste, and rest

Your Servant, Richard Sandys.
Botsford, 21. Nov. 1645.
FINIS.

