AN APPEAL TO The Reverend and Learned Synod of DIVINES: FOR Resolution of the
grand Controversy of these times;

Concerning KINGS:

1 Whether their Constitution be divine, or no. 2 Whether by their Place they
be next under GOD, and above all others, beside GOD, or no. 3 Whether their
Power be resistable, or no. 4 Whether their Office be forfeitable, or no. 5
Whether their Persons be sacred, and not to be touched, or no.
By M. PRICKET.

2 Pet. 1.20. No prophecy of the Scripture is of any private interpretation.

1 Cor. 14.32. The spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets.

Published by special Command.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1644.

To the venerable Synod.
THe ground of the Controversy is a Passage in the perfect Occurrences of
Parliament, passed, printed, and published according to Order, the Passage is
this:

On Saturday June 29. there was a complaint made against one Pricket, a
malignant Minister, a Barbars son of Oxford, who preached the last Fast day
at the Fleet, he taught, viz.

1 That we could not read in all the Scripture, that ever any did rise up
against the King though never so wicked.

2 That it was said in the Proverbs, Fear God and the King, the King and God,
all one, but an AND between them; and that the King was Gods second.

3 That Christians formerly did not oppose any of their Kings, not Nero, etc.
nor Julian the Apostate, much less depose them: but rebellion now was covered,
by saying, it was against the Kings wicked Council, and not against his
person, thereby to take away the Kings life.

4 That all they are Rebels that oppose their King, though never so unrighteous.

Oh, the horrible blasphemies, taught by the malignant Clergy!

Reverend Sirs, to whom belongs the vindication of divine Truth, and the
resolution of Cases of Conscience, I desire you, as you will answer it at
Christ's Tribunal at the last day, to define, and to declare to the people of
England plainly and briefly, whether of the two have blasphemed, the Preacher,
or the Pamphleter; and, as you are zealous of the honor of the Protestant
Religion, vigorously to prosecute the blasphemer.

Now for your better direction, and his fuller conviction, I have made bold to
lay before you the doctrine of the reformed Churches in general, and of the
Church of England in particular, concerning Magistracy,and Subjection:

Give me leave also to put you in mind, how the Papists teach, That Kings have
their power from the people, and that the people may reassume it, for the
better reformation of Religion: also, That the Pope is above Kings and Princes,
and that he has authority to depose them, and to dispose of their Kingdoms
and Dominions; and to give power to their subjects to depose and murder them.

Of the Civil Magistrate, and Subjection.
Collections out of the Confessions of the Reformed Churches, Imprinted at
Cambridge, 1586.
1 THe Helvetian Confession teaches, that Magistracy, of what sort soever it
be, is ordained of God himself, for the peace, and quietness of mankind, and
so that he ought to have the chiefest place in the world (and afterward) God
does work the safety of his people, by the Magistrate, whom as he has given to
be as a Father of the world, so all the Subjects are commanded to acknowledge
this benefit of God in the Magistrate, and honor him, as the Minister of God.
And if the common safety of the Country, and justice require it, and the
Magistrate do of necessity make war, let them lay down their life, and spend
their blood for the common safety, and defense of the Magistrate; and that in
the name of God, willingly, valiantly, and cheerfully: for that he that
opposes himself against the Magistrate, does procure the wrath of God against
him. We know, that though we be free, we ought wholly in a true faith holily to
submit our selves to the Magistrate, both with our bodies, and with all our
goods, and endeavor of mind, so far forth as his government is not evidently
repugnant to him, for whose sake we reverence the Magistrate.

2 The Confession of Bohemia runs thus: It is taught out of the holy
Scripture, that the Civil Magistrate is ordained of God, and appointed by God,
who both takes his original from God, and by the effectual power of his
presence, and continual aid, is maintained to govern the people in those
things which appertain to the life of this body here on earth: whereof is that
of S. Paul, Romans 13.1. There is no power, etc. (And afterward.) Magistrates
must know and remember this, That they are Gods Deputies, and in his stead, and
that God is the Sovereign Lord and King, even of them all, as well as of other
men; to whom at length in the last day they must give an account of the degree
wherein they were placed, and of their Dominions, and of the whole
administration of their government, whereof it is expressly written in the Book
of Wisdom, Chap. 6.1. The people also are taught their duty, and by the Word
of God are effectually thereunto enforced, that all and every of them in all
things, so that they be not contrary unto God, perform their obedience to the
superior power, first to the Kings Majesty, then to all the Magistrates, and
such as are in authority, in what charge soever they be placed, whether they be
of themselves good men or evil.

3 The French Confession: We believe that God would have the world to be
governed by Laws, and by civil government, that there may be certain bridles,
whereby the immoderate desires of the world may be restrained, and that
therefore he appointed Kingdoms, Commonwealths, and other kinds of
Principalities, whether they come by inheritance, or otherwise: (And
afterward.) Therefore because of the author of this order, we must not only
suffer them to rule whom he has set over us, but also give unto him all
honor, and reverence, as unto his Ambassadors, and Ministers, assigned of him
to execute a lawful and holy function. We affirm, that we must obey the Laws
and Statutes, that tribute must be paid, and that we must patiently endure the
other burdens; to conclude, that we must willingly suffer the yoke of
subjection, although the Magistrates be infidels; so that the Sovereign
government of God do remain whole or entire, and nothing be diminished.

4. The Confession of Belgia: We believe, that the most gracious, and mighty
God did appoint Kings, Princes, and Magistrates, because of the corruption and
depravation of mankind; and that it is his will, that this world should be
governed by Laws, and by a certain civil government, to punish the faults of
men. Therefore he has armed the Magistrates with swords, that they may punish
the wicked, and defend the good.

5. The Confession of Auspurge; We are sure, that seeing the godly must obey
the Magistrates that are over them, they must not wring their authority out of
their hands, nor overthrow governments by sedition; forasmuch as Paul wills
every soul to be subject to the Majestrates; We know also that the Church in
this life is subject to the Cross, as S. Paul says; We must be made like to
the image of the Son of God.

6. The Confession of Saxony: We teach that in the whole doctrine of God
delivered by the Apostles, and Prophets, the degrees of the civil State, are
avouched; and that Magistrate, Laws, order in Judgment, and the lawful
society of mankind, are not by chance sprung up amongst men: And although there
be many horrible confusions which grow from the Devil, and madness of men;
yet the lawful society, and Government of men, is ordained of God; and
whatsoever order is yet left by the exceeding goodness of God, it is preserved
for the Churches sake (and, afterward) subjects owe to the civil Magistrate
obedience; as S. Paul says, not only because of wrath (i) for fear of
corporal punishment, wherewith the rebellious are rewarded by the Magistrate,
but also for conscience sake, (i) Rebellion is a sin that offends God; and
withdraws the conscience from God. (And again) God would have all men to be
ruled, and kept in order by civil government; even those that are not
regenerate; and in this government, the wisdom, Justice, and goodness, of God
toward mankind is most clearly to be seen.

1. His wisdom, by order, and the societies of mankind under lawful
government.

2. His Justice, in that he will have open sins to be punished by the
Magistrates; and when they that are in authority do not take punishment on
offenders, God himself miraculously draws them to punishment; and
proportionably does lay upon grevous sins grevous punishment in this life.
Mat. 26.5.2. Heb. 13.4.

3. His Goodness toward mankind, in that he preserves societies of men after
this order: and for that cause does he maintain it, that from thence his
Church may be gathered, and he will have Common wealths to be places for the
entertainment of his Church.

4. The Confession of Scotland: We confess and acknowledge, Empires,
Kingdoms, Dominions and Cities to be distincted and ordained by God: the
powers, and authorities in the same, (be it of Emperors in their Empires,
Kings in their realms, Dukes and Princes in their dominions, and of other
Magistrates in their Cities) to be Gods holy Ordinance, ordained for the
Manifestation of his own glory, and for the singular profit, and commodity of
mankind: so that whosoever go about to take away or confound, the whole state
of civil policies now long established, we affirm the same men, not only to
be enemies to mankind, but also wickedly to fight against Gods expressed will.

Out of which confessions put together results this Doctrine. God, to prevent
the horrible confusion which would grow from the Devil and madness of men,
through their depravation, and corruption, appointed civil government, as a
bridle to restrain the inordinate desires of the world; and also distinguished
and appointed several sorts of civil government; Empires, Kingdoms,
Commonwealths, Cities, and in them he ordained supreme governors to have the
chiefest places in the world; who are his ordinance, and have their Original
from him, and are his Deputies, and do rule, and govern in his stead; into
whose hands he has put the sword to punish the wicked and defend the good; and
by his effectual power, and presence, and continual aid, they govern the
people and preserve peace and quietness amongst men: And because of the Author
of this order, we must both suffer those whom he has set over us for to rule,
and also honor them in their Place and Office, as his Ambassadors and
Ministers, of which their ministration they must give account at the last day.
And in all thing that be not contrary to God, we must perform obedience to
the Superior power, first to the Kings Majesty, then to all Magistrates,
whether they be of themselves good men or evil: yea we must willingly suffer
the yoke of the subjection, though they be infidells.

And if the Common safety of the Country, and Justice require it, the
Magistrate do of necessity make war, we must lay down our life, and spend our
blood for the Common safety, and defense of the Magistrate; And in the name of
God willingly, valiantly and cheerfully; for that he that opposes himself
against the Magistrate does procure the wrath of God against him.

Lastly we must not wring their rule and authority out of their hands, nor
overthrow governments by sedition: and they that go about to take away civil
policies established, are enemies to mankind: and they that resist and rebel
against their Prince, resist God himself, whose Deputy, and Ambassador, and
Minister he is, and they who teach such Doctrine withdraw the consciences of
men from God.

And see the Harmonicall concent of the Doctrine of the Church of England, with
other reformed Churches, concerning Magistracy and subjection, as it is
delivered in the first and second Books of Homilies.

The Authority of the Books of Homilies.
The 35. Article of Religion.
The second Book of Homilies does contain a godly and wholesome doctrine, and
necessary for these times, as does the former Book of Homilies, which were set
forth in the time of King Edward the sixth: and therefore we judge them to be
read in Churches by the Ministers diligently, and distinctly, that they may be
understood of the people.

Collections out of the first and second Books of Homilies; Imprinted A.D.
1633.
God is the universal Monarch of the world. lib. 2. page: 278. lin. 7.

God has appointed all things in a most excellent order. Lib. 1. p. 69. Lin. 1

Where is no order nor Magistrate, there is confsiuon. Lin. 31.

Kings are from God. 1.70.81.2.276.39, 45.278.1, 10, 23.

Kings have their power only from God. 1.71.31.

They are the chief and supreme rulers next under God. 1.76.15.

They only have the use of the sword. 1.74.19.

Evil Kings are from God. 2.276.45.

God places them over a Country for the sins thereof. 2.278.31.

They are reserved for Gods punishment, and judgment. 1.74.10.

We learn by the word of God to yield to our King, that is due to our King:
that is, honor, obedience, payments of due taxes, customs, tributes,
subsidies, love, and fear. 1.77.7.

This is Gods Ordinance. Gods Commandment, and Gods holy will, that the whole
body of every Realm, and all the members and parts of the same, shall be
subject to their head their King. 2.77.2.

They that live in true obedience to God and the King, please God, and and have
peace of conscience; and having God on their side, let them not fear what man
can do against them ibid. 37.

We must obey sharp and rigorous Princes. 2.277.46. and patiently suffer under
them. 2.289.39.42. and pray for their prosperity. 2.280.46.288.3.

If the King command any thing contrary to Gods Word, we must rather obey God
then man: yet in that case we may not in any wise withstand violently, or make
any insurrection, sedition, or tumults by force of Arms, or otherwise, against
the Anointed of the Lord, or any of his Officers. 1.74.44.

If God give a Heathen tyrant to reign over us, we must obey him, and pray for
him. 3.282.13.

Where is obedience; there is the figure of heaven. 2.296.46.

Heaven is the place of good Subjects. ibid. 44.

We must not judge of the King his government or Counselors, yea it is a
perilous thing to commit unto the Subjects the judgment, which Prince is wise
and godly, and his government good, and which is otherwise, as though the foot
must judge of the head: an enterprise very heinous, and must needs breed
rebellion. 2.279.9.23.

We may not murmr against the King, or speak evil of him. 2.299
12.31.34.300.3.

We may not in any case resist, and stand against the superior Powers, though
they be wicked; because they have their power from God. 1.72.12, 29.30.2.280
5.35.285.6.28.

Though we have great numbers of men (2.286.40.) yet we must not attempt any
thing against the King, though hated of God, and Gods enemy and so likely to be
pernicious; to the Commonwealth (287 2.16) though he does not consider our
faithful service, or safeguard of our posterity (22) and lastly though he be
our known mortal, deadly enemy, and that he seeks our lives, 26.

They that resist, resist not man but God. 1.71.35.

Rebellion the sink of all sins, both of the first and second table. 2.292.19.

Lucifer the first author of rebellion. 2.276.7.

The two principal causes of Rebellion are

1. Ambition and restless desire in some men to be of higher estates then God
has given them.

2. Ignorance in the people; or lack of knowledge of Gods blessed will
declared in his holy word concerning their obedience. 2.307.16.20.313.14.

Rebels no true Christians. 2.289.45.

Rebels a wicked example against all Christendom, and whole mankind.
82.282.24.

Rebels pretenses vain, viz. redress of the Commonwealth, Reformation of
Religion. 2.301.19.302.2, 22, 25, 29.

Rebellion no good means of Reformation. 2.279.34.

Miseries following rebellion, viz. Pestilences, Famine, the Calamities of
War extraordinary. 2.294.29.

Gods Judgments on Rebels. 2.300.9.

Rebels never prospered long. 2.300.45.

Hell the place of Rebels. 2.296.45.

Unless we do what we are able to stay Rebellion we are most wicked. ^. 282.36.

The Clergy ought both themselves especially to be obedient unto their Prince
and also to exhort others to the same. 2.308.27.

ALmighty God, whose kingdom is everlasting, and power infinite, have mercy
upon the whole Congregation, and so rule the heart of thy chosen servant
CHARLES our King and Governor, the he (knowing whose minister he is) may above
all things seek thy honor and glory, and that we his subjects (duly
considering whose authority he has) may faithfully serve, honor, and humbly
obey him, in thee, and for thee, according to thy blessed Word and Ordinance,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, who with thee and the holy Ghost lives and
reigns, ever one God world without end. Amen.
FINIS.

