A PARADOX.

THAT DESIGN UPON RELIGION, Was not the cause of STATE Misgovernment: But an
effect of it.

LONDON, Printed for T. W. 1644.

A PARADOX.
That design upon Religion, was not the cau^^ of State misgovernment, but an
effect of it.
HOw much the English Nation for many years has groaned under the oppression
of Illegal government, the meanest of understanding among all the people
cannot be ignorant. The particular grievances are too well known, and too many
to be recited in a short Discourse: but whether those illegal actions of them
that sat at the Helm in England proceeded from mere injustice, and temporal
ambition, or had a further end, as relating to Popery, and Jesuitical
continuance, is made a great question. Some suppose the latter; and think that
so great a violation of Laws tended not only to deprive the people of their
just liberty, but to make them Papists as well as Slaves. And indeed there are
great inducements to that supposition, considering the many entercourses
between Rome and the English Court of late years, the particulars of which
are fully expressed in some rational discourses, which I will not here meddle
with at all. But let it be granted that there might be a concurrence of wicked
designs upon this unhappy Nation: yet it is my opinion that Popery was not the
first intended, and chief end of our Rulers; but rather subservient to
tyranny, or (as they called it) Absolute Monarchy. Nor can I think that the
Jesuits taught our Statesmen to be unjust: but the unjustice of those Statesmen
taught the Jesuits to hope for their ends; and that the waters would be at last
enough troubled for them to fish in. As we shall see the ancient Popes (though
then the State of England was of their Religion, and there was nothing for them
to seek further in that kind) did always take advantage for their temporal
ends upon such times, and in the reigns of seduced Princes advance their
revenues and civil power. Such Princes have therefore been most enslaved by
Popes, and their Thrones shaken by Papal thunderbolts, because their Thrones
were not so firmly established in justice as they should have been. Then when
there could be no aim at all at changing of Religion, when there were no
Jesuits in the world to tempt or plot; this very Kingdom (for foreign
instances are not so proper) had seduced Princes and wicked Statesmen, who
acted the same parts that we have lately seen, who labored to overthrow
Parliaments, and utterly subvert the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom; nor
could they have taken greater pains to have brought in a new Religion, then
they did to gain an unlawful power: by those unhappy actions instead of
strengthening their estates, they much weakened them, and made themselves liable
to the Popes temporal encroachments, and no doubt had they been of a different
Religion, from the Pope, the same injustice had made them more liable to his
Spiritual underminings; and his pretense had been fairer for Religion, though
his end were not, which was only power and revenue. For whosoever knows
history, can tell what were the great causes from time to time of the Popes
anger against any Kingdom, and provoked his excommunications and other
censures, namely, denying of his power, and stopping his revenue; not
contradicting the tenants of his Religion, unless in the case only as that
might cause the former. To keep a Town, which he claimed from him, has been
called in plain terms, Heresy, and the parties excommunicated in as great
fury as if they had denied an Article of the Creed. Henry the eight, though he
retained that Religion, yet for denying the Papal power, and revenue, was as
great an Heretic as Queen Elizabeth. And the King of Spain in this age for
detayning the Kingdom of Naples from him, is at certain times accursed in as
solemn manner, as Arrius or the greatest Heretic would be if he were living.
So that we see it could not be matter of Religion, that caused either the Popes
encroachments, or the injustice of those Princes: but they were therefore more
subject to the Popes injuries, because they had lost that shield that should
have been their defense against him, the strength of right government in a
Parliamentary way; by which Edward the first was able to resist him in those
things, which King John and others could not do. And as this Kingdom by bad
government was made more liable to those encroachments in temporal cases; so
may it be in Spiritual matters, when those fenses are broken down, by which
(next under God) the Church is established and defended: for if they can take
away all privileges of Parliament, and all lawful power of resistance from
the representative Body of the Kingdom, where is the strength upon earth that
should defend our established Religion? but whether our Rulers of late times;
together with their injustice and oppression of the people did intend to change
Religion, or not, I think we need not much trouble our selves to consider:
Though they had no design upon Popery at all, yet were they enough guilty in
robbing the People of those Laws and Liberties which were their due, and a
guard to whatsoever else they possessed. Therefore let a State look first upon
that cause which is nearest and most visible. If we see thieves breaking of our
house, we do not stay, and make it a long dispute within our selves, what
kind of goods they intend to steal, or what they would leave behind; but
presently apprehend, and cause them to be punished as felons for breaking of
the house. And indeed such disputes do sometimes so amuse the People, that
whilst they look farther off at things which they cannot so well, perchance,
and clearly discern, they lose the sight or consideration of that, which is
near at hand, and easy to discern, and which is of concernment and weight
enough, though nothing else were put into the scale. Besides, consider this,
That our Religion, like a most precious Pearl, and more in value then all the
other goods, is contained within this House, whose walls are thus broken down:
perchance those Thieves which break them, look not for this Pearl, nor
think of it, but some other goods; yet when the walls are broken, another
Thief, who better understands the value of that Pearl, may come with more
ease, and rob us of it: It was far easier for the Jesuits and the Church of
Rome to rob us of the true Religion in England, when the just power of
Parliaments, by which (under God) it was established and defended, was so far
trodden down; though perchance those Thieves which break them, look not for
this Pearl, nor think of it, but some other goods; yet when the walls are
broken, another Thief, who better understands the value of that Pearl, may
come with more ease, and rob us of it: It was far easier for the Jesuits and
the Church of Rome to rob us of the true Religion in England, when the just
power of Parliaments, by which (under God) it was established and defended, was
so far trodden down; though perchance those Statesmen, who trod it down, had
no design of letting in the Church of Rome to supplant the Truth, but only to
exercise their own robbery upon men's Estates. But to persuade the truth of this
Paradox, I do not see any reason why I should believe, that those great men,
who for many years have sitten at the Helm in England, and given so ill
counsel to our Sovereign, were in the generality Papists, or that way
intended; but only tainted with the same injustice and ambition that others
were in former times, labored to bring the People into slavery, that they
might oppress at their pleasure, and stand above the reach of any Law.

Whosoever has observed how the Sabbath was kept of late years at White Hall,
what businesses of Monopolies and other Oppressions were transacted in the
afternoon, what kind of Sermons in the forenoon, about State and Prerogative,
were preached before the King; he must needs believe that none of these men had
any design upon Religion at all, neither indeed was there any reason wherefore
to attain those unjust ends, they should desire a change of Religion: for if
we consider what Religion will best serve to advance Tyranny in the Kingdom of
England, and look into History for examples of that kind (for History has
been counted the best glass through which Prudence can look, when she makes
her judgments upon humane actions) we shall find that Popery could not do it
so well as that Protestant doctrine which has been taught at Court these
thirty years; and not only preached, but printed to the public view by
Authority, even to this last year 1644. Consider what Principles they
maintain, and against whom they write: Their Adversaries, whom they choose to
deal withal, are all the modern Authors of greatest Learning and Reason, and
of all Religions; whom in their writings they style Jesuits, and Puritans;
under the latter of which names all the Reformed Churches of Europe are
intended, except only the Prelatical Clergy of England, to whom, it seems, in
the point of flattery to Princes, both Papist and Puritan, with all Lawyers and
Political Authors are quite opposite: But before we express their Tenants in
particular, look into the English Chronicles, and you will find (as we said
before) that direct Popery did not so much advance Tyranny, as our late
Prelacie. When the Bishops of England had another Head, which was the Pope, you
may observe, that in matters of State they went many times very justly, and
according to the interest of the whole Commonwealth: in the times of seduced
Kings, they many times sided with the Parliament, and opposed the illegal
desires of the Prince: many of them gave good advice to Kings, and did
excellent offices in reconciling them to their people, and keeping them in the
right way. I could give many instances, especially in three Reigns, which
indeed had the most need of such endeavors. But in these latter times, our
Protestant Bishops were wholly by assed at the Kings side, and mere servants
to the Prerogative, against all Interests of the Commonwealth: they never in
Parliament gave Vote contrary to any of the Kings desires, how prejudicial
soever it were to the Kingdom in general, insomuch as the King counted them a
sure part of his strength in the Lords House, to all purposes: and when their
voices in Parliament were lately to be taken away, it was a common speech of
the Courtiers, That His Majesty was much weakened by losing six and twenty
voices. But consider now what they have preached and printed concerning
Monarchy, and you will wonder, that rational men in any Kingdom, to flatter
Princes, should make all Mankind else of so base a consideration, as if
Princes (as one says) differed from other men in kind and nature, no less
then a Shepherd from his Sheep, or other Heardsman from his Cattle. I will
instance, for brevitie and clearness, in one of them, who speaks the pith of
all the rest in a large Book printed at Oxford this present year 1644. and
dedicated to the Marquess of Ormond; the Book is entitled, Sacrosancta Regum
Majestas; where that Author undertakes to vindicate the Power and Majesty of
Kings against all Puritanicall and Jesuitical grounds and Principles, as he
calls them. Those Puritanicall and Jesuitical Tenants are all Discourses, that
have been written in this Kingdom for defense of the true and lawful
liberties of men, or by any Political Author in Europe of note, since
Monarchies have been well and Civilly constituted for the behoose of Mankind.
Among all those Puritanicall and Jesuitical Tenants which this Author is angry
with, and labors cagerly to confute, I will name a few:

I. THat a King is greater then any particular man; but less in value then the
whole body of his People.

II. That a King receives his Crown from God, but not immediately, for it is by
the hands of his People.

III. That the power of Kings is different in several Kingdoms; and their
Prerogatives according to the Laws of those Realms in which they reign.

IV. That the Body representative of a whole Kingdom, where there is such, may
and ought to restrain the King from impious actions, which tend to the ruin
of the Kingdom.

V. That People may live without a King, but a King cannot be conceived without
People.

VI. That Kings were ordained for the People, and not the People made for Kings.

These are some of those Puritannicall and Jesuitical Tenants and the chief,
which he condemns so many writers for maintaining, such as Bourchier, Rossaeus,
Buchanan, Suarez, Tho. Aquinas, Ocham, Bellarmine, Marsilius, Almontus, and
many more, whom he there names against himself. But the Bishop, with the help
only of Scripture, and some places of the Fathers, interpreted and managed by
his own reason, is able to encounter them all; and has drawn these Positions
quite contrary to the former. Take them in his own words truly set down, and
the places quoted.

I. The King is better then all the people put together: and when David's people
say, Thou art better then a thousand of us; that is (says he) in sound
meaning, better then all of us. p. 169.

II. The interposing of an humane act in the constitution of a King, does not
hinder his Sovereignty to be immediately from God: That though he gain the
Crown by Election or Conquest, yet he has it from none but God, and that not
mediately, but immediately, p. 122.

III. That it is a poor and ignorant shift of Lawyers to wrong the sacred
Prerogative of Kings, when they acknowledge no more for the Royal Prerogative,
then what the Municipall Law of the Kingdom has allowed to is, p. 144.

IV. In abuse of Sovereignty to the ruin of the Kingdom, the Character of
Nature does not entitle us to so much self defense, as in this case to resist
the King, p. 9. And in the first page he says, That it is not lawful, in any
case or cause, for the Subject, or Subjects, in what notion soever imaginable,
singly or jointly, collectively or representatively, to oppose the sacred
Authority of the King by force or arms, or to resist him in a defensive or
offensive War.

V. That saying, That a People may be without a King, but not a King without a
People, is very deceitful; for (says he) God fixed Government in one, and
appointed a Governor, before that ever there were People to be governed, p.
178. And in page 84. he says, That God sixed Monarchy in Adam, before he had
any child; which shows, that God liked best of Monarchy, and that Kings were
before People.

VI. That salus Regis is to be preferred before salus Populi; for it has the
prerogative like to the first Table, and salus Populi as the second, p. 170.

These are the Positions which he boldly sets down contrary to the first. But
will you hear others as good as these, in his own words, and without any
straining or hiding any part of the sense, but plainly set down.

I. That Sovereign power is not originally and radically in the people, nor by
way of reduction, as in case of total defailance of a King and his posterity;
the right cannot revert to the Community again, p. 11.

II. It is a foolish new-coined distinction, to make a difference between a
Kings person, and his authority; between his personal will, and his
authoritative will, p. 32.

III. To derive Kings from the people, is a great disgrace to Kings; for it
makes them the basest extract of the basest of rational creatures, the
Community, p. 45.

IV. It is a foolish fancy to make any coordinate power in any persons to the
Sovereignty of a King, p. 62.

V. How different soever Monarchies are in the world, yet there are some prime,
radical, and essential constitutives of Monarchy belonging to all Kings,
which are three:

1. They are Potestas suprema, subordinate to none but God, they admit of no
coordinate or collateral power. 2. Perpetua potestas, he cannot fall from his
Sovereignty while he lives. 3. Potestas legibus soluta, and as they say, from
any humane ^oactive, or coercive power or censure, p. 140.
VI. When any King, or his ancestour has been cheated out of his sacred rights
and Prerogatives by fraud or force, he may at any sit opportunity afterward
resume them, p. 144.

VII. Seeing that the Puritans do say that if the Parliament do err, the
remedy is to be left to the wisdom and justice of God; why will they not
acknowledge that it is as fit, when the King transgresses against the rules of
government, that the people and subjects submit in patience, till it pleases
God to send a remedy, p. 148.

VIII. That the old received sentence, Salus populi, suprema lex, must be
carefully understood in Monarchy, and that it is more consonant to Scripture to
say, Salus Regis suprema populi salus; which thus he Englishes, The safety of
the King, and his divine Royal Prerogative is the safest sanctuary for the
people, p. 163.

IX. What is the meaning of that sentence, Salus populi suprema lex, he tells
us in these words; the meaning of it is that the Kingdom or State may not only
probably and possibly, but really and existently be such, that the King must
exercise an arbitrary power, not stand upon private men's interest, or
transgressing of laws made for the private good of individuals; but for the
preservation of himself and the public, may break through all laws. This
case may be when sudden foreign invasion, or homebred sedition threaten King
and Kingdom, p. 176.

Of this nature are all the positions and principles, which this book
contains; and not only this book, but all Treatises, which have (since this
unhappy difference) been authorized at Oxford. Some of less art and learning,
but as much honesty as this Author, express the same sense in plainer terms,
and tell us, That the King is proprietary Lord of the whole Kingdom, and all
men's estates are his. Another concerning his sacred authority, says, That if
the King, like Nebuchadnezzer, should set up a golden Image to be adored, the
whole Parliament, if they refuse that Idolatry, are bound to suffer death
quietly, and not to resist the King. These barbarous positions can serve to no
other end then to mislead Princes from the ways of reason and moderation; and
to make them lift up their hearts above their brethren, as the Scripture
speaks, to make them esteem themselves so far above the rest of Mankind, as if
whole Nations were made for their pleasure, and so subject to them, as the
Beasts were to Adam: for so our Author would seem to make them, when, to
overthrow (as we said before) that ever received, and undeniable saying, People
were before Kings; he says that Adam was a King, before there were any other
people. It must needs be therefore granted that his Subjects were Beasts, which
is the same (without jesting) which this Author would have the people in every
Monarchy to be: therefore cannot I imagine that so holy a thing as Religion was
any way in the design of those English Clergymen, who wrote against the
liberties of their Country, or of those Rulers who governed according to the
prescript of that kind of writing; but only an intention of stretching the
Prerogative Royal to such an unmeasurable greatness, as might secure and
advance the temporal ends of them, which depended on it. But some may object
against this Paradox, and say, Though it be granted that corrupt Statesmen had
no aim at all at alteration of Religion; yet surely our greatest Clergymen
had. For what else could make them of late years in point of doctrine approach
so near to the Church of Rome, unless it were a desire of bringing both
themselves and others by degrees to a conjunction with it? that they have so
written, their books will show you; but if you would save a labor of searching
whole volumes, you may find their chief sentences collected out of their own
books, the pages and lines quoted by a Scottish Minister Mr. Robert Baily in a
discourse of his called (...) Laudensium, which he sent to our last Parliament
of England. The men, whose sentences he there recites, are the Archbishop Laud,
Montague, Pocklington, Helyn, Shelford, and others; where you may see what
fair approaches in many points of doctrine they make toward the Church of
Rome, with what reverence they speak of her; and with what scorn they name the
Protestant Churches and their Authors, under the style of Puritans, but this
proves not that their design was Religion, but rather temporal ends: for
these very men have written bitterly against the Church of Rome, and most of
them have professed that the Puritans did not so far nor fundamentally
dissent from their opinions as the Papists did: But it is true that the
Puritans did go more cross to their temporal ends, pomp and revenue, then
the Papists would have done. So that extremity of hatred against the Puritan,
though he were nearer to them in matter of Religion, caused them to make these
approaches toward the Papist, as being not so great an enemy to their
temporal promotion. So that we see Religion it self was no more the end of
their exorbitant actions, then it was of injustice in the great Statesmen, who
have labored with the same disease in all ages and Religions, whenever it
has pleased God by such instruments to punish the sins of any Nation.

FINIS.

