To the supreme Authority, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND: The
humble Petition of John Poyntz, alics Morris.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioner having suffered the loss of that Estate, unto which he
conceives he has a good Right, and Three years false Imprisonment, by the
usurped power and Tyranny of the late House of Lords, and Mr Brown their late
Clerk, is now by the subtilty of his Adversaries made Defendant in the same
case in the Court of the Upper Bench, which is to be heard on Thursday next,
the 21. of this instant November.

That your Petitioner having found by sad experience, That the professed
Lawyers have slighted and neglected his Case upon all occasions, and, That the
most eminent of them have been always retained by his adversaries to the number
of 20. or 30. who have overawed those few that your Petitioner has been able
to retain, and now being admitted to sue in Forma Pauperis (as they style it)
he finds the Lawyers to slight his Case more then before, and that many who
have been of his Counsel formerly, are now for his Adversaries; And thereupon
your Petitioner has petitioned the Court of the Upper Bench, to admit such
Friends to be heard speak for him, or plead his Case, as he should be able to
procure, as by the Petition hereunto annexed may appear.

But the said Court have denied your Petitioner that common Justice, and your
Petitioners Case is like to be lost, through want of that common Justice which
he hoped he should have enjoyed without Petitioning, seeing that the Law of
God, of Nature, of common Reason, and the Statute Law affords it.

He therefore humbly prays, That such Friends as he shall procure to speak for
him, may have as free and full Audience in his Case, as any professed Lawyers
at the Bar.

And he shall pray, etc. John Poyntz, alias Morris.

To the honorable Henry Rolls Lord chief Justice of the Upper Bench: The humble
Petition of John Poyntz, alias Morris.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioner having bin under great oppression by the tyranny of the
late House of Lords, and having been a Prisoner and in a famishing condition
several years (as he is at this instant) in the Upper Bench only by their
power; And having a great cause depending before your Lordship, has found by
sad experience, that though he has spent all that he has upon the professed
Lawyers and pleaders, yet upon all occasions they have neglected or slighted
his cause, and that his Adversaries being able to give many and great Fees, do
retain commonly most of the Counsel at your Lordships Bar, and do overawe
your Petitioners Counsel.

That your Petitioner being now very poor, and admitted to Sue in Forma
Pauperis, finds that all professed Lawyers are now more unwilling to take any
pains in his Cause then they were formerly.

That although it be the known right of every Englishman, and suitable to the
Law of God and Nature, that he should either speak or plead before any Court of
Justice in the defense of his own Cause: And that any Friends of his should
speak or plead for him; yet the professed Lawyers assume to themselves the sole
privilege of pleading at your Lordships Bar.

That your Petitioner could procure some honest Gentlemen that in Charity to
your Petitioner would faithfully plead his Case before your Honor; if your
Petitioner may have that Right and Justice afforded him, that they may have
favorable Audience as any of the professed Lawyers at your Bar.

Your Petitioner therefore humbly prays,

That such Gentlemen as he shall nominate may by your Lordships Order be
admitted to have free and full Audience in his Case before your Honor: He does
humbly propose the Gentlemen under-named to be assigned to plead for him, in
case he can procure them; and that any others, whose assistance he can procure,
may have the same liberty.

And he shall pray, etc. Lievt. Col. John Lilburne Major John Wildman Mr.
Robert Wakeman Mr. Fontleroy John Poyntz, alias Morris.



