THE PULPIT INCENDIARY: OR, The Divinity and Devotion of Mr. Calamy, Mr. Case,
Mr. Cauton, Mr. Cranford, and other Sion-Colledge Preachers in their
Morning-Exercises, with the keen and angry Application thereof unto the
Parliament and Army.

TOGETHER With a true Vindication of the Covenant from the false Glosses put
upon it, and a plain Indication of Covenant-breakers.

Micha 3. 5, 6. Thus says the Lord concerning the Prophets that make my people
to err, that bite with their teeth, and cry peace: and he that puts not
into their mouths, they even prepare war against him; therefore shall night
be unto you, that you shall not have a vision; and it shall be dark unto you,
that you shall not divine; and the Sun shall go down over the Prophets, and the
day shall be dark over them: then shall the Seer be ashamed, and the Diviners
confounded, yea they shall all cover their lips, for there shall be no answer
of God.

Verse 10. They build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity, the
Priests thereof teach for hire, the Prophets thereof divine for money; yet will
they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord amongst us? none evil shall
come upon us.

Published according to Order.

Printed by C. S. in the year 1648.

THE Pulpit Incendiary.
IF the ear tries words, as the mouth tastes meat, we have cause to complain
against some of our City Preachers, whose professed function, place and calling
is to be the faithful Stewards of Jesus Christ, appointed by him to give us
our portion in due season, viz. to break unto us the bread of life, that in
stead thereof feed us with wormwood, and make us to drink the waters of gall,
as at other times, so especially in their MORNING LECTVRES day after day,
affording us little else than (in stead of the pleasant fruits of the garden of
Eden, and the sweet bunches of the land of Canaan, the milk and honey, the
marrow and fatness of the Gospel of Christ) the apples of Sodom, bitter
clusters, and bitter herbs, bitter waters from bitter vessels, corrupting the
streams of the waters of the Sanctuary, and making them taste like the waters
of Marah, imbittering ou^ spirits each against other, filling our mouths with
bitter complaints, making us to lead bitter lives, whetting our tongues (by
their morning instigations) like swords, and shooting out arrowe^ (each against
his brother all the day long) even bitter words, so perverting the natural,
sweet, and candid Genius of our English nation; whose common propensity is, to
respect, refresh, and love one another) that we are ready to be devouring and
biting one another, and in danger to be consumed one of another, to bathe our
hands in one another blood, and sheath our swords in one another bowels. We
did hopefully expect, that the powerful predominancy of that divine Spirit of
Jesus Christ (which we hope is in them) together with the woeful experience of
continued peevishness each against other, producing nothing but distempers in
the mind, and distractions in the State, a sad estrangement from the life of
God, (who will not dwell with a froward heart) the due observance of the great
law of our liege Lord, that we love one another, the lifting up of the hands of
our enemies which did hang down, the strengthening of their knees which were so
much infeebled, the refreshing of their fainting hearts that did wither like
grass, the enlivening of their drooping spirits, which did fall and pine and
die within them; we did hope (we say) that these particulars, and the
considerations thereof, would at least have been like the tree cast into the
waters of Marah, Exodus 15.
to sweeten and heal the bitterness thereof: But alas we looked for healing,
but no good comes, the morning Lectures, which they are pleased to call the Ark
of God in their frequent removals month after month from place to place, are so
modeled, framed and constituted, that they are not like the Ark of old in the
Camp of Israel, ^ Sam. 5. 1.
but like as that Ark was in Ashdod, Gath, and Ekron, the Cities of the
Philistines, a judgment rather than a mercy, the spirits of men that look into
it (like the men of Bethshemesh) being smitten with ranchor, frowardness and
distemper each against other, making a lamentable slaughter of those sweet
affections of love, kindness, gentleness, goodness, patience each toward
other, which did so famously abound amongst English Christians in former days,
we cannot deny, but with all thankfulness acknowledge that this Ark of God (as
they are pleased to tea^m it) is sometimes drawn by milch kine, we mean this
morning Lecture sometimes performed by truly pious and ingenious Ministers,
feeding our souls with the milk and honey of the land of promise, rejoicing our
spirits with the blessed melody of the joyful sound coming unto us with the
fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of peace, and furnishing our judgments
with divine principles of faith toward God, and love toward brethren, and the
Lord recompense their labor of love, bless them with all spiritual
blessings, pouring forth into their souls the blessed streams of the waters
of life, and so supply them from day to day, that out of their bellies may
always flow rivers of living waters. But woeful experience makes us complain,
that this Ark of theirs seems frequently to be drawn rather by Bulls of Basan
than milch kine, tossi^g and goring the Parliament and Army, and their
dissenting brethren from day to day, maliciously fomenting contentions, strifes
and divisions, even amongst the children of grace, and love, the sons and
daughters of the most high God; we did verily hope that our uniting together
(as by so many bonds of Nature and Grace) so especially by the SOLEMN LEAGUE
AND COVENANT, which we have taken in judgment and understanding, as themselves
have done, would have been a sovereign Balm to have healed our breaches, but
Simeon and Levi deceived the Sechemites by charming them into the bond of
Circumcision, and then destroyed them while they were sore; but Jacobs curse
will be upon such instruments of cruelty, Genesis 49. 5.
which is, to be divided in Jacob, and scattered in Israel; but lest it should
be said unto us as the Jews said unto Christ, Joh. 7. 20.
Thou have a Devil, who go about to kill thee? we are slanderers in our
assertions, who have so abused the Parliament, Army and people of God, as these
words express? we have here set down some few, and but a few, of those froward
expressions of this nature vented in pulpits from these morning preachers;
which though they have been so managed by some (though not by all) that they
have blindfolded the Parliament and Army by cunning expressions, as the Jews
did Christ: yet they very well know, it would be no hard matter for their
audience to prophecy who it is that smites them: the truth whereof will
clearly appear by these FEW instances, (for we are not willing to offend the
palats of ingenious men with too many of such bitter clusters) but if occasion
requires, we can make it appear, that there is a greater vintage of these
wild and sour grapes, then we are willing to produce to set on edge the
Readers teeth.

Mr Witham Minister at Albans Woodstreet, Mr Peter Witham at Albans Woodstreet.
London, after morning Lecture in Walbrooke 1647. March 3. prayed for the King,
Parliament, and Army thus:

FOR THE KING, Lord advance the King, put the Crown AGAIN upon his Head, and
the Scepter into his hands, give him the heart of David, the head of Solomon,
etc.

FOR THE PARLIAMENT, Lord humble the Parliament for all their abominations:
May not we say of this Parliament as once the Prophet said of Israel, Ah
sinful people! so may not we say, Ah senfull Parliament! Ah Lord, may not all
our troubles, sorrows, miseries, the Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies of the
times be laid at the Parliaments doors? etc.

FOR THE ARMY, Ah Lord, we fear that this Army is like the Beast spoken of by
the Prophet Daniel, which had ten horne^, out of which sprung a little horn to
push thy truth withal, etc.

Mr Witham, what is the meaning of these passages in your prayers, Advance the
King, Humble the Parliament? Is it not to justify the King and condemn the
Parliament? to bewail the dejection of the King, and the exaltation of the
Parliament? to tell the people that the Parliament has taken away the Crown
from the Kings head, and put it on their own? Is the Kings condition under
restraint by the Parliaments order, and the Parliaments condition somewhat
advanced through Gods mercy, the one the object of your pity, the other of
your envy, that you thus pray for the advance of the one, and the humbling of
the other? would you not that the people endeavor to bring to pass the matter
of your prayer, viz. the advancing of the King, and the humbling of the
Parliament? Is the Parliament so guilty, and the King so innocent, that you can
lay all our evils at the Parliaments doors, and none at the Kings? Had the
King vanquished the Parliaments forces, as the Parliament has the Kings, durst
you thus openly have prayed for the advance of the Parliament, and the humbling
of the King? Are you so pure, so perfect, so hearty a Royalist, that your
spirit thus pants and thirsts after the advance of the King, and the humbling
of the Parliament? Is not your mental design, and the natural tendencie of
these your prayers to raise up the affections of the people toward the King;
and incense them against the Parliament? and are no^ ^nce^diari^s as bad as
Sectaries? Is the Parl^ament so blamewo^^hy in the tole^^ion of the one, and
innocent in the toleration of the other? ^^e you not c^ll the toleration of
Sectaries an abomination to the Lord? and would you not call the punishing
^n^endiaries, (if you be one of them) the persecution of Saints? Could Oxford
Aulicus, or Pragmaticus himself, ever do more, than to lay all our evils at the
Parliaments doors, as you have done? Nay, is it not questionable, whether ever
the prayers of the one or the other (at least publicly performed) were ever
guilty of such scandalous slanders as these import? Can Papists or Prelates,
Priests or Jesuits, Monks or Friars in England, France or Ireland, or any
where else, more effectually inveigh against our present Parliament in the face
of the people, than by crying out, Ah sinful Parliament, as you have done?

And as for the Army, many a good work they have done for you; for which of
these do you thus abuse them? Are THEY the Beast with ten horns to push down
the truth withal? What? because they have knocked off the horns of those who
would have pushed, and goar'd, and killed the children of truth? You cry out
against the Army as the Jews against Christ, Away with them, away with them,
though under God they have been your Saviors, and malice it self cannot
declare, why, what evil they have done you? Would the Kings Army (think you)
if they had been victors, have suffered such bold abuses from you, as these
have done? Did they take such pleasure in pushing with their horns, as your
words declare? Might not they have pusht you out of your pulpit^ for such
provocations before now? Do not you push, and punch, and go^^ them morning
after morning, in one pulpit after another; and yet complain of their pushing,
though they let you alone? I^ it not their TAMENESSE and unaptnesse to push,
which makes you so WILD and bold in pushing them? Suppose some in the Army
should push at the truth by error and wickedness, must the Army be charged
with it? Would it bewell taken, think you, if that because some of the
Ministers and Elders of the Province of London, are perhaps proud, froward,
peevish, pragmatick, incendia^ies, stirring up the people against Parliament
and Army, the Ministry and Eldership of the Province of London are all these?
Mr. Witham summon up your Christian experiences, and then tell us, Can the
spirit of love, desire, and affection to the Parliament and Army (suitable
dispositions for that part of prayer which is called Intercession) breathe out
those requests which are so full of angry invectives against them both? If not,
are revenge, disa^^ection, anger and passion (think you) some of these spices
to make a confection, and pleasant incense for the nostrils of the Almighty
morning after morning? Will the spirit of Prayer and the spirit of Slander
mingle together at the throne of grace? Are not your prayer-expressions seeds
of divisions between Parliament, Army and people? and do you pray for Peace;
and sow the seeds of War in one breath? Can the same Fountain yield forth
bitter waters and sweet; the same mouth bless and curse at the same time? Are
such Muleto prayers, think you, the genuine product of the divine Spirit? No
more to you Sir, but only this, Take heed of bringing your holy sacrifices to
the heart-seeing God with an evil mind.

Mr. Edmond Calamy of Alderman-Bury, Mr Edmond Calamy of Aldermanbury, London.
London, preaching at Michaels Cornhill, London, about the Doctrine of the
Resurrection, pressing his auditory to rise from sin, would needs be pleased
to enforce his exhortation with an uncoth motive after this manner, WE LIVE NOW
IN RISING TIMES, WHEREIN MEN RAISED UP FROM THE DUNGHILL, DO GOVERN THE
KINGDOM ALMOST.

Mr Calamy, who are those men raised up from the Dunghill in these rising
times, who do govern the Kingdom almost? Either they must be the Parliament
or the Army? A man would presume you more richly furnished with noble
principles of civility and piety, (not filled with such gross malignity) than to
reflect such baseness either upon the one or the other; the Parliament being
the only visible authority of the kingdom; and the Army both theirs and the
kingdoms security against the engaged enemies of them both: but your
restrictive and coercive expression almost, like the point of the Dial to the
time of the day, directs our thoughts to the men of your meaning, viz. the
ARMY: Are these men raised up from the dunghill who do govern the Kingdom
almost? If so, first, what mean you by DUNGHILL MEN? Secondly, what by their
governing the kingdom almost? Do you mean men of base, that is, of mean and
low bird? your phrase ( raised up from the Dunghill) does intimate so much; if
it be so, this is no new thing under the Sun, Was it not but as yesterday
when BASE MEN intiruling themselves of the Tribe of Levi, did govern the
Kingdom almost? and such as you, Mr. Calamy, did not only subject themselves
unto these base men's Injunctions, ready to lick the dust at their feet by
conformity thereunto; but provoked the people unto a base submission unto their
arbitrary Prelaticall government: which plant of Rome is not so rooted up by
Parliament and people, Orders and Ordinances, Vows and Covenantr, but a stump
thereof is still remaining in Sion College Lndon; which like the Bramble
contends for government, and strives for the Crown, as if it had entered into a
* sacred covenant or resolution, Auri sacra fames.
that it would reign as King, and sit in the Throne, though it made its way
through the blood and misery of Parliament and people, shaking the peace of the
kingdom, and removing its foundations out of their places. And hence it is,
that (like Absoloms snares of promising to do justice to the people, would
they set him on the Throne, thereby accusing the government of his father
David) we are so early solicited morning after morning, with bitter invectives
against Parliament and Army, to withdraw the affections of the people from
them, and in true construction to advance basemen to govern the Kingdom
almost.

But secondly, by men from the Dunghill, do you mean men of corrupt
dispositions, that is, men that will basely dispense with their principles of
light, knowledge, and understanding; who for fleshly ends and carnal
interests, do things unworthy their own judgments and consciences, what is
this any more than has been, we have heard of Mr. Edmond Calamy, we do not
know whether you know the man (for some men do not know themselves) who (in
the times when the Priests did bear rule, did subject to unworthy men who did
govern the Kingdom almost, obeying their Laws, Canons, Injunctions, Orders
and Ceremoni^s, (we say not wearing the Surplice, reading the Service book,
crossing in Baptism, etc. which many honest and godly Ministers in those dark
days did likewise perform) but reading the second Service at the high Altar,
preaching in a Surplice and Tippet, bowing at the name of Jesus, and so zealous
an observer of times and seasons, that being sick and weak upon Christmas day,
yet with much difficulty got into the pulpit, declaring himself there to this
purpose, that HE THOUGHT HIMSELF BOUND IN CONSCIENCE TO STRIVE TO PREACH UPON
THAT DAY, LEST THE STONES IN THE STREET SHOULD RISE UP AGAINST HIM.

And yet upon the wonderful turn of the times, ejection of Episcopacy and
advance of Presbytery, did presently and without delay, not only assert the
same, but instructed the people in Presbyteriall principles, after such a rate
of confidence and skill, as if his education and condition had been some
Superintendent among the Presbyterian provinces of the reformed Churches
beyond-seas, and not such a notorious conformitant unto, and notable stickler
for the Prelates fooleries in the county of Suffolk in the kingdom of England.
Would you not think, Mr. Calamy, that such a man once truly touched with the
divine sense of former vanities, could hardly, if ever, be bitter and rigid
against his brethren for nonconformity to unknown Presbytery? Did not many
poor illiterate men re^use conformity to such idle vanities, choosing rather to
suffer afflictions with the people of God, than to enjoy the benefit of such
conformity with the troubles of their consciences for a season; may we not
thereby clearly perceive, that unlearned men of low parts and cognizance in the
things of the Gospel, may see into some things of that nature, which learned
men, yea Ministers themselves of no small name for eminency and greatness, may
not be able to understand; which may be a continual bi^ and bridle in the lips
of those who are calling for fire from heaven, and the sword of the Magistrate
to suppress and molest their conscientious brethren for their nonconformity
to their judgment in Ecclesiastical discipline. For may not he that was
ignorant of the will of God in the times of Episcopacie, be justly suspected
for weakness and mistakes about his most perfect will in the days of
Presbytery, especially when the most pious, godly, and learned men of the
kingdom, have engaged themselves with all their might for several years
together, to find out the will of God herein, and cannot come at it.

If Mr. Calamies old conformity to Episcopal ceremonies, was at that time
against the light of his judgment and conscience, though we will not say such
an one is a Dunghill-man, but Christianly allow for the manifold temptations
which may surprise him in those persecuting days, knowing our selves to be
but men not having yet attained the resurrection, and therefore we consider our
selves obnoxious to the like temp^ations. And as the Moon is not to be defined
by her spots, gold by its dross, the Jewel by its flawes, and Peter by his
denial of his Master, and Mr Calamy by his former conformity; yet Mr. Calamy
himself, if truly touched with the feeling of his former infirmities, and
graciously sensible of the mercy obtained (would he but suffer the
consideration hereof to work genuinely and naturally in him) is the most
competent Judge to accuse, arraigne, and sentence himself for his former
vanity, and not inveigh against, abuse and traduce his brethren for Heretics,
Sectaries, Schismatics, according to the example of the Doctors of the
Prelacie, for nonconformity to his new Presbytery: For can we believe, that
that spirit which made Peter to weep for denying his Master, and Paul to judge
and sentence himself for persecuting the Church, and his old conformity to the
Scribes and Pharisees; will suffer Mr. Calamy to run a contrary course, viz. to
vex and gall his weak brethren for their present refusal to Presbyterian
subjection. Was Mr. Calamy a man, and therefore fallible in the times of
Episcopacy, And is he a ^od, and cannot mistake, having attained unto the state
of Presbytery? Again, is it not base for men to pretend one thing, and
practice the contrary, to deal with the Parliament or Army, as Ehud did with
Eglon, in words to pretend a salute, and yet to stab them at the heart a^ the
same time? or as Judas did with Christ, to pretend a kiss, and to betray them
into the rage, malice, contempt and scorn of the people at the same time.

But secondly, what mean you by governing the Kingdom almost? Is it in plain
English thus, The Army governes the Parliament almost the Parliament governes
the Kingdom, therefore the Army ( men raised up from the Dunghill) do govern
the Kingdom almost. If it should be so by Mr. Calamy and his party, what is
this but what has been? Who governed the Kingdom almost when the Parliament
was forced by the grand Assertors of Sion College cause, and their sturdy
boye^, to do and undo, call and recall, vote and revote what Orders and
Ordinances they pleased? Which of you have publicly declaimed against that
unparaleld and horrible rebellion either in Pulpi^ or Press? Do you suppose
that we can be so dim-sighted, or so dull-headed, that we neither perceive nor
remember these things? Had that villainous act been committed by the men of your
wrath, (the non-conformists to your present practice) how would you have beaten
the ears of your auditors with the sound thereof? What was in design when
Massy, Poynz, and other Reformadoes, (those famously pious and religious
zelots for a blessed Reformation) were entertained, courted, and advanced you
know where, by whom, and by whose influence, but for the raising of a factious
party to destroy the Armies, order the Parliament, and govern the Kingdom
almost? Were they not the Prophets of Sion College that said unto them, Go on
and prosper, go out to meet with that proud and blasphemous Army, the Lord has
delivered them into your hands, though they have prospered in many battles and
enterprises, as that blasphemous Army of Senacharib did; yet as that Army fell
and was destroyed coming against Jerusalem, so shall this Army coming to this
City, therefore go out and fear them not? Was it not the Oracle of Sion
College that deceived, chanted and charmed several of our weak and
simple-hearted Citizens, under the deceitful notion of keeping covenant,
promoting reformation, establishing religion, suppressing error, heresy,
blasphemy, into such destructive ways, practices and courses, which had not a
hand of mercy from heaven graciously interposed, would have engaged us all into
another unnatural, bloody, and cruel war; and without the mercy, candor,
and goodness of the Parliament, will prove the utter ruin of them and their
families who were seduced thereby, it was their Leaders that caused them to
err? The truth is, we commend your charity more in praying for their support
in, and deliverance from prison, than your piety in exhorting them into such
actions which brought them thither. We shall say no more to your uncivil
terms of men raised up from the dunghill, to govern the Kingdom almost; only
we are apt to believe your greatest trouble is, that men raised up from the
dunghill, are not permitted to govern the Kingdom almost. For do we not see
the center of all your motions? What is our reformation but Presbytery? What is
our solemn league and covenant, but Presbytery? What is our zeal for God, the
government of Jesus Christ, religion, etc. but Presbytery? Who are the
Sectaries and Schismatickes of the times, but non embracers of Presbytery? And
what is Presbytery? Surely when we perceive that all that the Parliament has
done by Orders, Ordinances, etc. to establish Presbytery in such a manner as
may stand with the word of God and peace of the kingdom, yet will not give you
content; but H^man-like you cry out, what is all this, so long as M^rd^cai sits
in the Kings Gate, and a Decree cannot be procured from the Parliament for the
ruin of those whose laws of Church government are diverse from yours; what can
you mean by such a Presbytery, but the mere exalting of men raised up from
the dunghill, to govern the kingdom almost. Mr. Calamy, civility does as well
become the Pulpit, as Nobility the Throne; Dunghill men do not become the Seat
of Magistracy, nor dunghill terms the mouth of the Ministry; Divinity does
not so much appropriate baseness to men's persons, as to men's practices, evil
words do corrupt good manners, but never confirms divine Doctrine. When we
come to hear YOU, we expect to be instructed in Divinity, and not to be
corrupted in Civility; if we had a desire to learn the language of Billinsgate,
we should not have gone to Michaels Cornhill in London, especially when Mr.
Calamy was the Teacher. If by your base men you intended the Parliament, that
these are Dunghillmen, raised up from the Dunghill, it is a most impudent and
intolerable scandal; if the Army, a most daring and unsufferable slander, so
that the best is scandalous or slanderous; if you intended the Parliament, the
Army may better escape the reflection thereof, than the Parliament can if you
intended the Army: For suppose you judge the Army, not the Parliament, the
Dunghill men that do govern the Kingdom almost, it must needs be by their
governing the Parliament almost; and do not you thereby represent the
Parliament to be Dunghill men, in suffering themselves to be governed by men
raised up from the Dunghill. Sir, had we a pleasure to be dabling in such
silth, you have afforded enough of this nature once and again: but we desire
you would not offend our ears any more herewith. Surely the waters of the
Sanctuary (if genuine) are more pure, and it is not corrupt communication which
becomes the Pulpit, but only such which tends to the use of edifying; and
remember, Sir, that the words of the pure are pleasant words, Proverbs 15. 26.

Mr. Mr. Cawton Minister at Ba^tholomew Exchange, London.
Cawton Minister at Bartholomew Exchange, London, at a morning Lecture at
Woodstreet* about the 17. of February 1647* preaching upon the 17 of Job, v. 8.
The Innocent shall stir up himself against the Hypoer^e, did most uncivilly
and maliciously inveigh against the Army thus: Who drove awa^ on^ good members
from the Parliament; but THAT GENERATION OF VIPERS THE ARMY? Who REBELLED
against the authority of Parliament, and denied to disband at Chelmsford, etc.
but that VIPEROUS BROOD THE ARMY, proposing several queries one after another,
making the answer to be in express terms, the viperous brood the Army, the
generation of vipers the Army, the rebellious Army. And preaching upon the same
Text the next month in Walbrooke at a morning Lecture, said thus, If the Army
had not REBELLED, and the Parliament had KEPT THEIR COVENANT, we had a blessed
Reformation before this time, etc. And in Woodstreet speaking about
Independents, said thus, This plot was discovered five or six years ago,
those that then did set themselves against the hypocrites, did clearly discern
it; but then the cry was, Alas they are honest men, and pious godly men, and
useful in the Church of God, and we must use moderation, and they must come up
into our Pulpits forsooth; but now you see what your honest and moderate men
are. And speaking of the Army, thus, You must suffer them to go through the
City, and they would do no hurt, etc. But it was the greatest dishonor that
ever fell upon the City, professing his zeal in speaking plai^^y of these
things, and bewailing the mealy-mouthednesse of the Ministers in mincing, and
not speaking out these things to the people; and in his prayers earnestly
pleaded the cause of those worthy. Citizens that were cast into prison for
their faithfulness to the Covenant, and for our banished ones, that God would
revenge the blood of them that were dead, upon the heads of those that drove
them away; professing thus in prayer, Lord, thou know that we all own their
cause, etc.

First, let us observe the Tex^, and Mr. Cawtons pertinent and orthodox
observations upon it.

Text, Job. 17. 8. And the Innocent shall stir up himself against the
Hypocrite.



1. Who are the Inn^^^nt? Mr. Cawtons Divinity tells us, the RIGID, not your
moderate Presbyterian, not such as talk of a thing called Christian forbearance
one of another, and of bearing one another burden, so fulfilling the Law of
Christ, taking heed of devouring and bi^ing one another, nor yet of your mealy
mouthed Ministers, that count it unworthy the Gospel of Jesus Christ aud^cter
calumniare, to charge the Parliament with breach of Covenant, and the Army with
rebellion, etc. nor yet any man whatsoever, let him pretend to never so much
holiness and ex^ctnes; yea though no man in the world can charge him to the
contrary: but you^ zealous high Presbyteriane, the eleven members, the Aldermen
in the Tower, these and those only are the innocent.

Secondly, who are the HYPOCRITES? Mr. Cautons doctrine tells us they are
Covenant-breakers. Who are they? That he tells you first implicitly, to be the
Parliament, thus: If the Parliament had kept their covenant. Secondly, expressly
the Army, all sorts of men whatsoever, godly or ungodly, civil or profane,
malignant or roundhead, that are not for the settling of Religion in this
nation, that is, that are against Presbyterian government, in the most rigid,
severe, harsh and unknown consideration of it.

Thirdly, what is it for the Innocent to set themselves against the Hypocrite?
Orthodox Mr. Cauton tells us, it is to inveigh against them in Pulpit, to call
them Rebels, generation of vipers, a viperous brood, etc. in stead of
arguments, reasons, motives, etc. (the method of Christ and his Apostles, for
the eviction of gainsayers) to use railing accusations, scurrilous calumnies,
scandalous reproaches, slanderous aspersions, it seems Mr. Cauton is an
excellent Catechist. Who drove away our good members from the Parliament, but
that generation of vipe^^, the Army? Who refused to disband at Ch^lmsford, but
that viperous brood the Army? Mr. Cauton, is it not your design to teach your
audience? If so, were we your exact Disciples, and could speak your Dialect, we
might multiply questions and answers thus: Who has divided the well-affected
party from the Parliament, but that generation -- (pardon our dullness, Mr.
C^uton, we cannot well pronounce the next word) the members of Sion College,
who deluded our simple-hearted Citizens into such actions, a^ (had not God
prevented) would have engaged us into a new war, but that -- Sion College,
who foments that spirit of division and distemper between the dissenting
brethren of the City and Kingdom, but that -- (what call ye it Mr. Cawton) Sion
College. Who drove away our good members the Speakers and others from the
Parliament, enforcing them to fly to the Army for refuge? who encouraged the
City against the Parliament and Army? who promoted that traitorous engagement
amongst the Citizens? Who encouraged and abetted that horrible and unparalleled
force upon the Houses? Who pretends the glory of God, the honor of Christ, the
blessd reformation, the suppression of error, here^ie and blasphemy, and yet
drive on their own carnal interest, honor and preferment? Who declaimes
against f^ctions, rents and divisions, and yet make the greatest faction, cause
the greatest rents and divisions? Who are the greatest hinderers our peace,
concord, union, and all our good in the commonwealth, but that generation of
Sion College?

First of all, the divisions between a good part of the formerly well-affected
party and the Parliament, are they not caused by the members of Sion College,
who morning and evening, Sabbath days and Fast days, in preaching and
praying, still gird at the Parliament, as men that declines their solemn
League and Covenant, hinders reformation, minds nothing but their own interest.
As for instance, Mr Wall of Michaels Cornhill.
Mr. Wall of Michaels Cornhill, London, God knows (says he) who they are that
like Athaliah cries treason, treason, and yet are the greatest traitors
themselves: Who they are that talk of saving a kingdom, and mind nothing but
themselves. And frequently in ^his prayers for the King, bew^^ls his being
driven like a Partridge from mountain to hill, and his sad condition under
restraint. And so Mr. Tailor in Celemanstreet, Mr Tailor of Colemanstree^
bewailing our present condition in point of present government, It were well
for us if we had more of the Olive, and less of the Bramble, said he. And in a
morning Lecture, when the Declaration of the Parliament came forth, declaring
the former miscarriages of the King in his Government, one spoke thus, They
declare and publish the miscarriages of the King, and tell the world of his
neglects and failings toward his subjects, and insinuate strange things about
his fathers death, etc. but do they tell their own neglects and miscarriages?
Oh that they would consider that they are our Fathers, and how they deal with
us, etc. And so Mr. Mr Case of Milkstreet.
Case in his prayers for our Counselors, Lord, says he, they have fallen
fearfully, let them not fall finally, let not them that were appointed for our
salvation, prove our perdition, them that were intended for physic, prove
poison to us: if they will not do us good, let them not do us hurt, etc. And
how often does he gird at the Parliament in his Sermons, showing himself by his
affected twinges and reaches against them, to be more inveterate in malignity
and rancor against them, than any of the Prelaticall party that we know of
within the City, is may be made good several ways. Mr Crauford of
Christophers near the Exchange
We very well observe Mr. James Cra^ford stirring up the people to stand by
those that are imprisoned, and are to be called out to answer for their
faithfulness and courage in keeping their covenant, insinuating this to be the
case and condition of the Aldermen in the Tower; and that the Parliament (for
we know not who else he could mean) dealt with us as the Wolves did with the
Sheep, make a peace with them upon condition tha^ the Sheep should give up
their Dogs to the Wolves, which done, they tore them without remedy: so
(says he) they take away our Leaders and Champions, and clap them up in
prison, and then use us at their pleasure, choosing his Text (it seems, to that
very purpose to stir up the people to stand by them) from 2 Timothy 4. 16. At my
first answer no man stood with me, but all men forsook me, etc.

And so Mr. Jenkin, that pertinatious Mr. Jenkin, praying for our Governors,
(for the word Parliament is now dissolved in some of their mouths) Lord (
says he) let them recover their first love, make them know that it was better
with them when they took the Covenant, than since THEY BRAKE THE COVENANT, Lord
let them seek thee, and not themselves, that they may find thee, and themselves.

And so Mr. Harrison of Grace-church, reflecting disparagement upon the
Parliament for their proceedings against the Citizens in the Tower, for whom
he prayed as for sheep appointed to be slain, or at least to be fleeced, etc.
choosing his text likewise for that very end, it seems, to direct the thoughts
of his Auditory to his particular meaning, from the 44. Psalm, verse. 17. All
this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee, nor yet dealt falsely in
thy Covenant.

And so Mr. Mr Cawton*
Cauton, bold down right Mr. Cauton, courageous valiant Mr. Cauton, not so
mealy-mouthed as the rest of his brethren are, that speak so covertly, and with
such caution, wariness and circumspection, professed solemnly in prayer unto
God, that both he and his auditory for their parts, did all own them and that
cause for which they were imprisoned: who is it that has wrought distempers in
the people against the Army, but Sion College? For do not we hear the joint
declamations of the members thereof from day to day in Pulpit, and otherwise
against them. Take two or three instances, Mr Jenkin*
that imperious Mr. Jenkins in a Sermon at Milkstreet preaching for Mr Case,
exhorting not to fear the Grandees of the times, O that the people of God,
said he, would rather fear an Army of lusts within them, than an Army of
REBELS without them, God shall disband them, and you shall see them melt and
pine, and moulder away, and come to nothing.

And Mr. Mr Ash, March 29. 1648.
Ash, even in a solemn day and duty of humiliation, God speak, said he, to
the General, and other officers of the Army, that this Kingdom may at last be
delivered from the sad consequences of an OPPRESSING ARMY* unworthily
representing the A^my as the just object of our d^^^espect, though confident we
are, never an Army in all the world, all things considered, has ever proved
less oppressing ^h^n this Army ha^h done.

We could name several more, whose tongues have been sharpened like Serpents,
Adders poison being under their lips, stinging and poisoning the names and
reputes of the Army.

But above all, Mr Cauton.
famous Mr. Cawton (like Goliath defying the Host of Israel in their very faces)
defies Englands suc^essfull Army in the presence of all the people, for a
REBELLIOUS ARMY, A GENERATION OF VIPERS, A VIPEROUS BROOD, A FACTIOUS ARMY, A
BLALPHEMOUS ARMY, etc.

Who is it that hinders our uniting together of dissenting brethren, but Sion
College? witness the carriages of their members in the City, Mr. Case.
as Mr. Case) take heed of that thing that is called in our days moderation (
said he) we have moderated it so long, that we have moderated away the City,
the privileges and honor of it; the Parliament, the honor and sovereignty of
it; yea the Covenant is moderated away, and Jesus Christ, and almost Religion
out of the Kingdom. Go from one end of the City to the other, and find me but
one man that talks of moderation, and cries out for moderation, moderation in
the vulgar sense, that is not tainted in his judgment, or unsound in his life,
or engaged in THE DESIGN, and I will be bound to ask forgiveness for what I
have said. Thus far Mr. Case.

But Mr. Mr Ca^ton*
Cawton speaks it out with a grace, thus: We must use moderation, and we must
not be bitter against them that dissent, no by no means, they are good men,
and they must be suffered to come up into our Pulpi^s forsooth; but now you see
what it is to be so moderate, etc. Have we not reason to suspect the spring of
these bitter waters to be in Sion College? For,

First, do we not see an uniformity among the members thereof in their
preachings from day to day, that they are commonly all upon one strain. Surely
we cannot conceive the divine Spirit can direct their hearts and lips in the
conception and utterance of such scandalous, sla^derous, and bitter
expressions; neither can we think so badly of the men themselves, as if they
should be given up to be acted by that spirit which is from beneath, in an
insensible and secret manner, causing them (as it were) with one shoulder to
help on the affairs of the malignants, and the works of darkness, division and
distempers amongst us: Surely God will not, we hope, suffer that lying spirit
to fill all the mouths of the Ministers of Sion College, as he did the
mouths of the false prophets of old; and therefore we conceive their manner
of preaching to be nothing else, but the fruits of combination and
consultation, and pre-debates.

Secondly, this we have observed, that as the constitution of public affairs
do vary amongst us, so the constitution of these men's Sermons do alter and
change; one while we find them all for moderation and Christian accommodation,
and forbearance one of another; another while all for reformation again, that
is, Presbytery in the rigid sense thereof, that is, that all power may be in
the Ministers hands, and the Magistrates engaged to put their Orders and
Edicts* wills and pleasures into execution, one while pleading for and pressing
the setting up the government of Christ in the hearts of men, minding men to be
zealous for the great things of the Gospel, faith and repentance, and love
amongst brethren, and not thus to contend so strenuously for the mint and
cummin, Discipline and Government, etc. Another while calling with might and
main for Reformation, Reformation, putting the Crown upon the head of Christ,
and the Scepter into his hands, pleading for the government of Jesus Christ,
that is, the exalting of themselves above their brethren.

Thirdly, our jealousy that Sion College is still that root of bitterness
that fills our pulpits with such bitter clusters from day to day, is further
strengthened by this, that we do observe those Ministers which before they came
to the City, before they walked in the counsel of Sion College, stood in
their ways, and sa^^ in their seats, before their souls did enter into their
secrets, they were men of calm, quiet, meek, sweet and precious spirits; but
as we have heard of some kind of worms, if brought into some air, are thereby
turned into Serpents, so these very men once admitted into the assembly of Sion
College, are very commonly turned into most venomous, serpentine and bitter
spirits, changing their very genius and candid nature and disposition, to the
very amazement and admiration of those that knew them, differing as much from
their former customs and behavior (as Nebuchadnezzar did when he lost the
nature and noble principles of a man of honor and greatness, and had in the
room of it the nature of a wild beast, whose nails grew like talons, which
he improved doubtless in procuring and devouring his prey) we could give
instances in several men of our own knowledge, who are no more like the men
that formerly they were, than Hazael when he did set the strong holds of Israel
on fire, destroyed their young men with the sword, dashed childrens brains
against the stones, and ripped up women's bellies great with child, was like
himself when he said unto the Prophet who told him he should commit these
cruelties, Is thy servant a dog that be should do these things?

Fourthly and lastly, another ground of our jealousy that Sion College is
still the womb of all these illegitimate and unchristian, peevish, froward,
perverse and bitter passages that we meet withal in pulpit from morning to
morning, and from day to day, from the lips of Sion College men, is the
changing of their countenance toward some of their members, that at last
recover themselves from out of that snare of death, a froward heart and a
perverse tongue against their brethren. When any Minister sits among them
observing their order, and feeling their spirits, but cannot approve of their
bitter proceedings against their dissenting brethren, or if any (formerly
overtaken with the gilded species of their zeal for God and Jesus Christ, a
reformation of ordinances, etc. that joined with them) upon a due and
experimental perception of their deceitful guiles, and crafty wiles, promoting
little more than their own interest under the glorious pretense of a blessed
reformation, who cannot act in pulpit according to the [supposed] resolves of
Sion Assembly; what an ill aspect is cast upon him by the rest of his brethren?
how are their countenances changed, and the form of their visages altered
toward him? Nay, if he shall publicly, especially at Paul's, before the
Magistrates of the City, preach for moderation, peace, gentleness, goodness,
forbearance, and a good accommodation between dissenting brethren how is he
malign'd, and looked upon as an apostate, a man that has lost his first love,
because he cannot say a confederacy with thm in their present practices: all
which considered, gives us just cause to suspect at least, if not to conclude,
that Sion College is Londons, nay Englands distemper: for do we not perceive
that this great Wheel sets the City and Country in motion; is not this the
method (as the Apostle speaks of lust when it is conceived brings forth sin,
and sin when it is perfected, brings forth death) even so I do not
self-love, and selfe-interest, honor and greatness, fomented, promoted and
begotten in one another by conjunction of counsels and debates in Sion
College, conceive sinful resolution, to engage and tamper privately with
chief Citizens in public places, as Common Council men, etc. and publicly
in Pulpit and Press, stirring up the people, by all possible means, under the
pretense of the glory of God, a blessed reformation, the keeping of the
covenant, the suppression of error, blasphemy, heresy, etc. to set us all
together by the ears, fighting to set up the interest of the Clergy under the
color of a new form of government.

Secondly, how often have conception^ of theirs brought forth sin, we mean
sinful practices suitable thereunto, were not the City Remonstrance, the
solemn Engagement promoted in the City, the forcing of the House by the rude
multitude, the endeavors to raise up a new war, the delinquencie of the
Aldermen and other Citizens about that business, the fears of troubles and
wars that are now upon us, etc. were not all these birds hatched at Sion
College? Truly they give us just cause to suspect it: for who pleads more for
the City-Remonstrance than the members thereof? which of them declaimes against
that rebellious force made upon the House? We hear enough of rebellion fixed
elsewhere, though all their Logic cannot make it good? Who promoted the
raising up of a new war? Did not they read a Declaration in the Churches to
little less purpose, when the Army was coming toward the city? Did not these
men in their several places (at least diverse of them) stir up the people to
withstand the Army, and to this day declaim against the city for not standing
up at that time, but gave in, and would not stand to the cause of God, as they
are pleased to call it, complaining ever since in their prayers, that the city
is become desolate, she that was great among the nations, and a Princess among
the provinces, is now become solitary and tributary, upbraiding them for their
heartlesnesse in declining their zeal for God in the day of trial; do not
several of them publicly and privately upon all occasions, gird at the
Parliament for their imprisoning the citizens, and represent their cause to be
no Delinquencie, but keeping their covenant. And for our present fears of a
new war (which God divert) may we not justly fear, (if not Sion College,
yet) that Sion College* men do what in them lies to promote the same, some of
them not sticking to say, we shall never have Presbytery settled until our
brethren of Scotland come into the ki^gdome to settle it. March 30. 1648.
And Mr. Cawton even in pulpit, Lord (said he) put it into the hearts of our
brethren of Scotland to settle Reformation in their own Kingdom, and in this
also, and quash all those that shall rise up against them. And so Mr. Jenkin,
that Metropolitan-like Mr Jenkin of Christ church, praying for Scotland,
praising God for the good which this Kingdom has received by them, used these
words; We thank thee for any hopes thou have given us to make them further
instrumental for the advance of thy truth amongstus, LORD BLOW UP THOSE SPARKS
INTO A FLAME. What can these words imply (considering the time when they were
spoken, viz. the fifth of April 1648. when there was a common jealousy and
fear of a breach between the two kingdoms) but to kindle and heighten
divisions between the two Nations?

Thirdly, as these men's lusts have conceived and brought forth sin, so these
sins among others, without the mighty and merciful hand of heaven interposing,
will bring forth ruin, destruction and death unto us. How near unto ruin
were we but as yesterday through these men's means, when a new army was
endeavored to be raised, sing the advance of the Army toward the city? How
did these men encourage and stir up the city hereunto, which if once had
been begun, might have concluded in the ruins, and heaps, and ashes of the
city, and have caused the generations to come to call them cursed that
provoked her^ unto. And as the influence of Sion College does thus work in the
city; so who sees not how this great Wheel causes the motions of the
several parts of the Kingdom in the same circle? Is not that the center, and
are not the eyes of the Ministers of the countries round about fixed upon it,
and are not their motions spi^ited and enlivened from hence? as these act, they
act; if these stand still, they stand still; if these set out any thing in
point of dislike of the Parliaments proceedings, that they do not act
vigorously in suppressing those which perhaps are more righteous than
themselves, you shall have the Ministers of Lancashire, Essex, Suffolk, etc. to
appear in the same colors; if these set forth that which they call a testimony
to the truth of Jesus, and against error, heresy, blasphemy, etc. though they
tender unto us no argument for the truth of Jesus, nor against any error,
heresy, blasphemy, etc. they will set forth a testimony to their testimony,
etc. And we presume their country preaching is like to these men's
^itie-preaching, and so Sion College, or Sion Colledgemen ( for the court is
not always kept in one place) endeavors to steer about the whole Kingdom.
It is no pleasure unto us to be engaged in this displeasing subject, and long
it has been before we would be provoked hereunto, hoping that these men would
at last have recovered themselves out of this snare of death, viz. railing
accusations, bitter speeches, and perverse language against their brethren;
that they would at last have seen that their town shall not be built with
blood, H^b 2. 12, 13.
nor their city established by iniquity, that it is of the Lord that they have
labored in the very fire a great while about the same, and wearied themselves
with vanity: for alas, the Sun is too much up, and the earth is too much
filled with the knowledge of the Lord, then that thus we should be charmed into
a mere footstool unto the throne of the Clergy: and most confident we are,
that the Prophets imprecation will ever light upon all attempts of this nature,
viz a barren womb and dry breasts; and therefore (waving our further
complaints) we shall address our selves in the most earnest requests of our
souls unto these men.

Reverend Sirs,
THe long observation of your general proceedings, your pulpit-work from day to
day, your diligent improving of all your interest to advance your selves,
suppress your brethren, directs our thoughts and troubled spirits in the sad
tender of our woeful complaints, unto your selves; Are you the Ministers of
Christ? Why are you then the fomenters of trouble? Did he come to setle the
world in peace, and do not you disturb the peace of the world? Your masters
work and design in the earth was to bring glory to God in the highest, by
settling on the earth peace, and good will toward men; but is this your
practice? Your Lord was humble in mind, lowly in heart, courteous in his ways,
meek in his words, of a lovely, kind, and affable deportment toward all men,
filling the earth with righteousness and peace; do you act according to this
pa^erne? His Kingdom was not of this world, neither did He seek for great
things here; Is i^ thus with you? He went about doing good, healing the sick,
curing the lame, the blind, the deaf, the dumb, making glad the most
miserable in the earth; are you like Him? Is this to walk as you have Christ
for an example, to stir up brethren against brethren, and neighbor against
neighbor? to revile Parliament, Army, Magistrates, Ministers, all sorts
whatsoever, that cannot come up to the full length of your desires and
judgments. Your Sovereign Lord gave unto the sons of men beauty for ashes;
but you baldness for beauty; He the garment of praise for the spirit of
heaviness, you sad the hearts of those whom God has not made sad: He took
away sack cloth, and girded men with joy and gladness, you endeavor to take
away joy and gladness, and gird them with sackcloth: He preached peace in the
earth, you stir up trouble: He sild men with principles of love, you with
principles of wrath. Is it not thus with you? If not, what means your daily
invectives, your rigid, harsh, and bitter speeches morning after morning? Your
Lord did bear with the weak, support the feeble, instruct, teach, direct, not
inveigh, declaime, revile. We know your objectione.

Object. Did not John call the Pharisees and the Sadduces generation of vipers,
Moses the Israelites Rebels, Jesus the Scribes Hypocrites? Paul Elimas the
child of the Devil; why then may not Mr. Cawton call the Army, and
Independents a generation of vipers, Mr. Jenkin, an Army of Rebels, etc.

Reply. First, can Mr. Cawton, Mr. Jenkin, etc. plead that authority as Christ,
John, Paul could? Can these say, We came down from the besome of the Father,
as Christ did? That which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, etc.
declare we unto you, as John did? that which we have received from the Lord, we
have delivered unto you, as Paul did? Can they plead the infallibility of the
Spirit, as these could? if so, let them evince it unto us: for if other men as
godly, as learned, as wise, every way as good as themselves, pleading the same
authority, the same commission, etc. declare to us in the name of God, of Jesus
Christ, as speaking by the Spirit things contrary unto these men's sayings,
which of these shall we believe? Is Christ divided? Nay, is Christ against
himself? Did he command Peter and the rest of the Apostles, to feed his sheep,
and Mr Cawton, Mr. Jenkin, etc. to worry his sheep? Did he command his Apostles
to preach peace, and Mr Cauton and Mr. Jenkin, etc. to propagate war in the
earth? must others provoke one another to love, and may M. Cauton, M. Jenkin,
etc provoke one another to revile, to abuse, to slander one another? Must the
Apostles and Disciples of Christ do good to them that hate them, pray for them
that persecute them, and may Mr. Cauton, and Mr. Jenkin, etc. hate them that
love them, persecute them that pray for them? Must others of the Disciples of
Christ render good for evil, and may Mr Cawton, Mr. Jenkin, etc render evil
for good, rail against the Army and Parliament, calling the one Rebels, the
other covenant breakers, for all the good they have received by the courage of
the one, and the counsels of the other? Was it evil in Canterbury, Wren, and
others of the Prelacy, to persecute their brethren for non conformity to
Episcopacie; and is it commendable for Mr Cauton, Mr. Jenkin, etc. to do the
same things for nonconformity to Presbytery? Was it a sin in them to abuse,
rail against, and revile their bre^hren, calling them Heretics,
Schismatickes, Sectaries, etc. and is it a virtue in Mr. Cawton, Mr. Jenkin,
etc. to do the same? is this to follow the truth in love, to bear one
another burdens, to restore one another fallen with the spirit of meekness,
to be kindly affectioned one toward another with brotherly love, in honor
preferring one another? is this to walk in love? is this to cause your faith in
Christ Jesus, and your love (not to some of your own judgment but) to all the
Saints to be heard abroad in the world? is this to be ROOTED and GROUNDED in
love? are these like the treatings of God with you? were they not his soft
words which brake the bones of your stubbornness against him in your
unregenerate state? And as you are Ambassadors for Christ, is it not your duty
to BESEECH in Christ's stead, and to PRAY men to be reconciled unto God?

Object. Titus 1. 13.
We have often heard your Apology; Rebuke them sharply or cuttingly, that
they may be sound in the Faith.

Will you be pleased to receive a Reply: Are you commanded to reprove
cuttingly, and not to convince clearly? are you always to inveigh, and never
to instruct? does not the Apostle in the very same Chapter, and upon the very
same occasion, command the Bishop or PRESBYTER, to be able by sound doctrine;
first, to exhort and convince gainsayers, and so to stop their mouths by
arguments and reasonings; and after, if that will not serve turn, to rebuke
them cuttingly, that they may be sound in the faith? And have you yet taken
this course with your dissenting brethren? if you have, refer us to your pains
of this nature, surely your brethren will presently either yield unto you, or
give you good reason for the contrary.

Secondly, the Apostle commands, to rebuke them sharply, but WHOM must they
rebuke sharply or cuttingly? their brethren, acknowledged to be holy, learned,
useful in the Church and Commonwealth, only differing in judgment about
government and discipline; as for matters doctrinall, no more differing from
the Presbyterians, than the Presbyterians differ among themselves; are these
the men that must be reproved or rebuked sharply? Surely the Apostle gives no
such instruction unto Titus concerning such men, but the unruly, vain talkers,
deceivers, they of the Circumcision, who subver^ whole houses (much more Cities
and Countries) teaching that which they ought not for filthy lucres s^ke,
ly^rs, evil beasts, slow bellies, these are to be rebuked cuttingly; and man
not this as truly be charged upon some Presby^erians, as upon some
Independents, and may not as clear an account hereof be rendered as well by the
one as by the other, but when shall this striving for mastery between them both
have an end?

Thirdly, rebuke them sharply or cuttingly, not slanderously, uncivily,
charging them falsely and scandalously with rebellion, as Mr. Cawton has
charged the Army, and Covenant Breaking, as Mr. Jenkin has charged the
Parliament, etc. You have yet another covering for this nakedness, which you
steal away from the divine Wardrobe the holy Scriptures, which serves you no
more to that purpose, than Jonas Gourd did to cover him in his pettish mood,
and that is the saying of our Lord:

Object. Mat. 10. 34.
I came not to send peace but a sword, for I am come to set a m^^ at variance
against his father, and the daughter against the mother, and the daughter in
law against the mother in law, etc. and the like in the 12 Ia^k. 51. I am come
to send fire on earth, etc.

Reply 1. How often have you taught us that these are the accidental, not the
natural products of Christ's coming into the world? was not the proper end of
his coming to furnish his Ministers with the subject matter of their
Commission, viz. a message of peace, that they may say to every Country, every
City, every man, peace be to this Country, this City, this man, if they know
not, or mind not, or acknowledge not the things that belong unto their peace;
if they will not receive a message of peace, but stand it out to the utmost
against God, their blood is upon their own heads; have not you often told us
thus?

Secondly, Did Christ come into the world, to put a sword into the hands of his
converted ones, to kill and destroy the unconverted, or the contrary? Did he
come into the world to make wolves or sheep, leopards or ^ambs, vultures or
doves, that believers should destroy or save men from destruction?

Thirdly, Did Christ come into the world to send a sword among brethren, that
they may be digging one another bowels, cutting one another throats, bite,
devour, and consume one another? what miserable Text-men are these to take the
mind and meaning of Satan, and fasten it upon the words of God? may not truth
justly complain of these men, as David in the like case, they wrest or torture
my words daily, intending to do me mischief? does not the Apostle bid us mark
such which cause divisions, and tells us that such, how ever they pretend, serve
not our Lord Jesus, but their own bellies, and by good words and fair
speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple? and is not the consent to divide
the child, an argument of no natural relation to the child, the trick of a
strange woman, and not of a natural mother? We meet yet with your main
Objection, with which you always flourish, as if that like the sword of Saul,
or bow of Jonathan, did never return empty: and when that you have spent your
selves by searching up and down the Scriptures for some grounds to justify
your unbrotherly proceedings in bitterness against your brethren; fishing
night and day, and catching nothing to relieve you in this point, at last you
take up the Covenant, the solemn League and Covenant, that blessed Covenant,
and make such a noise with the word Coven^r, as if no man could pronounce it
but your selves; you manage this after such a manner, as that if the word of
God cannot help you, yet the Covenant will; if principles of civility,
morality, will not help you, the Covenant will; if Orders, Votes, and
Ordinances of Parliament cannot help you, yet the Covenant will; as if the
Covenant did say unto you, as Peter did unto Christ, Though all forsake you,
though Scripture, and reason, and argument, and principles of common honesty
forsake you, yet will not I; but alas, if you will but a little thoroughly
examine the Covenant, with a very few Queries, as the maid examined Peter, the
Covenant it self will be ready to protest that how ever it might be indeed
with some of the thoughts of those that did promote the Covenant at the
beginning, yet in true construction and intent, it never knew any such meanings
as you are pleased to put upon it; but if truly and thoroughly examined, it will
prove as B^alam did unto Balack, though it was sent for out of Scotland, with a
design of some, it seems to curse Israel, yet it will not curse them but
bless them altogether; for what can you find in this Covenant, either feeding
or justifying that spirit of bitterness, wherewith you are possessed against your
brethren; is there any one word, jod, or tittle of Presbytery in any Article,
line or letter of the Covenant? Is there any one word that looks toward such a
thing, as a rigid, fierce, biting, devouring, persecuting Presbytery? All that
possibly you can plead for out of the Covenant to your purpose, is it not
contained in the first Article? and what is that?

With hands lifted up to the m^st high God, we do swear, that we shall
sincerely, really, and constantly through the grace of God, endeavor in our
severali places and callings, the preservation of the Reformed Religion in the
Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, against us
common enemies, the reform^tion of our Religion in the Kingdoms of England and
Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, according to the
Word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches; and shall endeavor
to bring the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms, to the nearest conjunction
and uniformity, in Religion, Confession of faith, form of Church government,
Directory for worship and catechizing, that we and our posterity after us, may
as brethren live in faith and love, and the Lord may delight to d^ell in the
midst of us.

First, What is here for Presbytery? especially a vexatious Presbytery? a
briery, thorny, persecuting Presbytery? We have engaged our selves for the
preservation of the Reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and government, does that justify your railing against
your brethren, and your charging the Parliament with Covenant Breaking, as Mr.
Cawton, and that peremptory Mr. Jenkins have done in express terms? What an
affront is this upon our brethren of Scotland, as if the Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline, and Government of our brethren of Scotland, were constituted,
framed, and calculated for the Meridian of wild beasts of the Desert, for Gim
and Ogim, owls and satyrs, dragons and vultures, that live and prey upon
their fellow creatures, and not for the sons of Sion who are the children of
peace? Do you represent the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government of
our brethren of Scotland, in such horrid black and bloody colors, as such a
taking object unto the sons of England, if the Cannons, and Laws, Edicts, and
Orders, Statutes and Ordinances of the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government of the Church of Scotland, enjoins to rail and rage, slander and
abuse Magistrates or Ministers, Parliament or people, that will not act
according to the fiery fierce and furious motions, of peevish, froward, and
angry spirits, such Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, does more
become the American Pequids, Cannibals, or Men eaters in New England, than
those that have heard of a Gospel of peace, or the least sound of that sweet
Commandment of Jesus Christ our liege Lord, who has said; This is my
Commandment that ye love one another.

Secondly, Are not Presbyterians by this Covenant as well bound to hearken to
the counsels of their dissenting brethren, as their dissenting brethren to
hearken to their counsels? and is not Scotland as well engaged to listen to the
advice of England, as England to Scotland? For are not all of them to make THE
WORD OF GOD, AND THE EXAMPLE OF THE BEST REFORMED CHURCHES (whose walking must
be judged by their conformity to the Word of God) the golden Standard to
measure them by?

Thirdly, who must judge and determine the meaning of the Covenant? Presbytery
is not in the letter of the covenant, and we hope (though we do not in the
least implead a holy, godly, peaceful and pious Presbytery, but do wait and
hope for the establishment of it in all our Congregations in the Kingdom) that
such a Presbytery as seems now to be contended for, will never be found to be
the meaning of those that imposed the covenant. Shall the Parliament of England
enjoin a Covenant upon the people, and Sion College in London give, nay
command or conjure such a meaning into it as was never intended; what is this
but to put Sion College above the Parliament of England? The Parliament of
England commands the Kingdom to take the Covenant, and Sion College (upon the
matter) commands the Parliament to subject themselves unto their interpretation
thereof, upon pain of being arraigned in their Pulpits for Covenant-breakers,
forsakers of their first love, yea and of vilifying, scorning and abusing them
in the eyes of the people, stirring up a spirit of contempt in the people
against them, as many of you have done from day to day.

Fourthly, what is such an interpretation of the covenant, but a mere
profaning of the covenant it self? Does the covenant obliege us to rail and
rage, revile and abuse men that are holy, learned, godly, peaceable, useful in
Church and commonwealth, to brand them with the odious names of Heretics,
Separatists, Schismatics, etc. who cannot subject themselves (we say not to
the covenant, for they took it, yea defended the taking of it; yea, stirred up
their brethren to take it in its true, proper, natural, genuine, and literal
meaning of it) but unto such a sense, meaning, and interpretation as will serve
only to drive on the designs of the faction of Sion College: for most
confident we are, there is at this day no faction in the Kingdom more
dangerous and obnoxious unto the peace, prosperity, and welfare of the
Parliament, Army, and consequently whole Kingdom, THAN SION COLLEGE IS. What
greater dishonor, indignity and scorn, can be put upon the SO^EMNE LEAGUE AND
COVENANT, than to justify not only those bitter, cruel, unbrotherly,
unchristian, nay unnatural invectives each against other; but rebellion,
treason, mutini^s, insurrections against the Parliament and Army, the raising
up of new wars to the utter ruin of the whole kingdom; as the sense and
meaning of the solemn League and Covenant: and do not many of you in your
prayers and Sermons justify the proceedings of those members that fled beyond
seas from the justice of the Parliament, and the prisoners in the Tower
committed thither by Parliaments order for such misdemeanors, in pleading
their cause with God, as men persecuted, imprisoned, for nothing but keeping
their solemn League and Covenant, professing for your selves and others, that
you own their cause; so deluding and captivating the judgement^ and consciences
of many of your hearers (as you did (some at least) of those said prisoners,
who doubtless in the simplicity of their hearts were charmed into that
delinquencie through your devout chantings) under the color of zeal for the
glory of God, a blessed ref^rmation, and we know not what, as that they are
ready upon all (...), to side with any mu^inous insurrections against the
Parliament and Army; what is this but to abuse and profane the innocent
Covenant, which intended union, peace, love, and goodness amongst brethren,
and the banding them together as one man against the common enemy. Doubtless
the true natural soul and spirit of the Covenant, was Union, and not division
amongst brethren: But when men force that soul out of the Covenant (we mean
that meaning of the covenant which is natural) and possess it with a contrary
spirit or meaning, though it pretends zeal for God, and a blessed reformation,
etc. yet this is to represent the covenant like Samuels body without his
natural soul, possessed with the spirit of Satan, speaking indeed like
Samuel, but with a wicked and Satanicall design; what is this but to make the
covenant not like an Angel of God, a messenger of peace and union among
brethren, but a very Fury from beneath, furnishing men with firebrarnds to
hurl and throw each against other, to the danger of fiering and enflaming the
whole kingdom. You complain of contempt of the covenant, that it is looked
upon as an Almanac out of date, etc. and most confident we are, that no
pretenders to the covenant under heaven, have rendered the covenant more vile,
base and contemptible, than your selves have done, by the interpretation, sense
and meaning which you have put into it. But the truth is, it is no great
marvel that you make the covenant speak what you please for your own designs,
since you make (or at least strive to make) the holy Scriptures themselves,
whose natural juice is milk and honey, to yield forth gall, yea blood it self.

Fifthly, who are they which truly and properly break the Covenant? Either
those that act contrary to the very letter of it, or those that deny to subject
themselves unto that illegitimate and forced interpretation which Sion College
men put upon it; surely they are the covenant-breakers who act contrary to the
letter and most natural literal and obvious meaning of it: If so, let us
examine each Article of the Covenant, and compare it with the practice of Sion
College men, and let indifferent men judge who break the Covenant.

In the first Article we swear, with hands lifted up to the most high God, to
endeavor in our several places and callings, the preservation of the reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government, AGAINST OUR COMMON ENEMIES, etc. THAT WE AND OUR POSTERITY AFTER
US, MAY AS BRETHREN LIVE IN FAITH AND LOVE, AND THE LORD MAY DELIGHT TO DWELL
IN THE MIDST OF US. He^e are two things which are to steer us in our
endeavors to preserve the reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland, in
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government. First, our endeavors must be
against our common enemies. Secondly, our endeavors must be so ordered, that
we and our posterity may as brethren live in faith and love, and the Lord may
delight to dwell in the midst of us: it so, they that do join with the common
enemy, they that divide brethren each from other, hindering brethrens living
together as brethren in faith and low, do break the covenant in the express
letter of it; but who they are that join with the common enemy, that divide
between brethren, that obstruct their living together in faith and love, and so
provoke the eye of jealousy, that the Lord delight not to dwell amongst us,
i^evident to all the world, and almost the complaint of all disengaged men.
Take but one instance from one of them, I had rather (said he) that the great
Turk should come and enslave this kingdom unto his tyranny, and that I should
be a slave among the rest of the Kingdom, than that there should be a
toleration of I dependents. He cannot but suppose, that if the great Turk was
Lord Paramount in this Kingdom, that he would establish his Religion amongst
us: (...) who is he that breaks the Covenant? he that shall profess he cannot
in conscience subject unto such or such external discipline, being very
doub^^ull and disputable whether it be agreeable to Gods word or no, though
otherwise he be acknowledged to be holy, learned, useful in Church and
Commonwealth; or he that shall profess his desire rather that the great Turk,
and by consequence, the Religion of the Turks should rule over us, than a
toleration should be allowed to such a man; considering withal, that there is
no Article, word or syllable in the covenant engaging against the toleration of
such a man; and the very letter of the covenant binds us unto such endeavors
for uniformity that brethren may live together as brethren in faith and love,
that the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of them. We know it will be
replied, that we are tied in the very letter of the covenant, unto unity and
uniformity in the three kingdoms, which is inconsistent with a toleration of
Independents, or any other way whatsoever that is against the received way of
the authority of the Kingdoms* and therefore an absolute breach of covenant,
which we must not commit upon any terms, better the great Turk should come in,
and we suffer for our faithfulness to Jesus Christ, holding fast the
profession of our faith under his tyranny, than be actual breakers of our
covenant by such a toleration. We answer,

First, if we had promised absolutely to be uniforme in the three Kingdoms,
except we had attained to a most certain infallible knowledge of the mind of
God herein, we had sinned by such an engagement; for we had sworn to we know
not what, and so had-sinn^d against the law of Covenant-making, which is to
swear in righte^usnesse and judgment, and by consequence were not bound to
keep such a covenant, every man being bound to forsake, and not to continue in
a sinful engagement.

Secondly, ABSOLUTE uniformity in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government
in the three Kingdoms, is not our covenant, but our ENDEAVORS after such an
uniformity is our-covenant; and doubtless we are all bound by all just ways
in our several places and callings to endeavor the same.

Thirdly, our Covenant has tied us to order, manage, and frame our endeavors
so, as that brethren may live together in faith and love: all other endeavors
directly hindering this blessed issue, is against the express letter of the
covenant.

Fourthly, that not an absolute uniformity, but a Christian, loving and
bortherly endeavor was (not only the express letter, but also) the intent of
the covenant, appears both by the persons that made the covenant, whom we all
know not perfectly agreed at that time about a certain way of
Church Government, calling the Assembly of Divines to consult withal about it,
as also by their several Declarations since that time; and also by the persons
that did promote the covenant, and took the covenant, being men known to be of
another judgment and practice at that time, and so continue unto this day,
than the now received way of the Nation: so that in the mean while we cannot
but take notice what a sad case, a miserable and intolerable CASE this is, that
we should desire rather slavery under Turcisme, than though enjoying our own
judgment in our own persons, yet the permitting our brethren to enjoy
themselves, though not disturbing our peace and wolfare in the least kind.

In the second Article, we swear that we shall endeavor without respect of
persons, the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, that is, Church-goverment by
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. and all other Ecclesiastical Officers, depending
in that Hierareby, superstition, heresy, schism, profaneness, and what
soever shall be found contrary to sound doctrine, and the power of godliness,
least we partake of other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of
their plagues, and that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three
Kingdoms.

As for this Article of the Covenant, it is the jealousy of a great many, that
the very authority and jurisdiction of Sion College it self is a branch
sprung out from the root of Prelacy, and until their Pattent be showed, and it
clearly appears in the contrary, we shall still conceive so, and the truth is
that branch yields such (...) as if it did still grow upon that old stock, and
was not removed thence, their words and ways being as like the Bishops as one
egg is like another: did the Prelates endeavor to get power into their hands,
to suppress their brethren, so do the Sion Colledge-men? did the Prelate^
debase, abuse, and vilify those that would not stoop unto their humors, so
do these? did the Prelates rail against their Non-conformists, calling them
heretics, schismatickes, separatists, sectaries, so do these? did the
Prelates make divisions, disturbances, and distractions in the Commonwealth;
so do these? did the Prelates vex and g^^d, even Lords, Knights, Esquires,
Justice^, Gentlemen, that did not humor them, subject themselves unto them,
help up their glory; so do these, even the Parliament, Army, people, all that
will not submit unto them; so that as the maid said unto Peter, Surely thou
were with him (speaking of Christ) thy very speech bewraieth thee; so may we
guess shrewdly of these men's relation unto Prelacy, their very speech, ways,
practices, bewraye^ them, and we believe so ingeniously of them, that they
dare not curse and swear the contrary, as not depending on that Hierarchy: as
for our endeavors to root out superstition, heresy, schism, and
profaneness, we can expect little success from the methods and ways of
these men to that purpose, if they root out SUPERSTITION (upon supposition that
they are a branch of Epis^opacy) they must root out themselves; as for HERESY,
they talk much of it, but never informs us what it is, except it be what they
please to call so; and most confident we are, that the truth it self (as
Christ crucified among thieves) is branded with error and heresy; and many of
themselves disagreeing among themselves (as they did about the crucifying of
Christ) some saying, We see no reason or cause at all why such an opinion
should be numbered and dealt withal as an error or heresy: others intimating,
that these might have escaped had they not appealed unto the judgment and
learning of such and such anti-highPresbyterians for their vindication; but the
truth is, most of them like the common people, without debate, examination, and
consideration, cry out, Away with them, away with them, and subscribes
presently for the suppression with club-law (as the Jews dealt with Christ) of
many of the truths of God, under the notion of errors and heresies: as for
SCHISM, most confident we are, that they make more Schismatics and SCHISMS,
rents, and divisions in Church and Commonwealth, than any others whatsoever;
driving men from them as not being able always to bear bitter clamorous
invectives, instead of the sweet and precious Word of life: for PROFANENESS,
and whatsoever shall be found contrary to sound doctrine, and the power of
godliness, some of these men rather support than suppress the same; is it not
PROFANENESS, contrary to sound doctrine, and the power of godliness, to
revile the only visible authority of the Kingdom the Parliament, as Covenant
breakers, as Mr. Cawton, and that Mr. Jenkins, and others? What can men say to
such expressions as these (and that in prayer, which dictates more plainly the
true frame of heart, than at another time) Lord we have a Parliament, such an
one as it is, we do not know whether it be a Parliament or no; if it be a
Parliament, Lord deliver us by a Parliament, if it be not a Parliament, Lord
deliver us from a Parliament: A man would think that such a piece of
non-sensicall invectives could not be found in the lips of a man of learning
and goodness, but it is an intolerable and unsufferable CASE, not to be
endured by ingenious men. Again, is it not PROFANENESS, to abuse the Army
(who have made themselves walls and bulwarks unto them, ready upon all
occasions to interpose between them and ruin and destruction, by whose
courage, valor, and faithfulness, these men live and enjoy themselves)
calling them, a rebellious Army, a viperous brood, a generation of vipers, as
that Rhetorical Mr. Cawton, An Army of Rebels, as that conceited Mr. Jenkins,
An Oppressing Army, as Mr. Ash did; if this be not contrary to found doctrine,
and the power of godliness with Sion Colledge-men, most confident we are, it
is so reputed amongst others that never pretended to such exactness as they
do; and how the Lord can be one and his Name one in any one of the Kingdoms,
much less in the three Kingdoms, while these things are practiced, we cannot
conceive?

In the third Article we swear, that we shall with the same sincerity, reality,
and constancy in our several vocations, endeavor with our estates and lives,
mutually to preserve the rights and privileges of the Parliament, and the
liberties of the Kingdoms, and to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's
person^ and authority in the preservation and defense of the true Religion, and
liberties of the Kingdoms, etc.

As for this Article of the Covenant, if to vilify the Parliament in the face
of the people, if to charge them with Covenant Breaking, as Mr. Cawton and Mr.
Jenkins have done, if to lay our evils, miseries, errors, schisms, heresies,
blasphemies of the times at the Parliaments doors, as Mr. Witham did, if to
gird and fling and fly out against them from day to day, at Mr. Case does, if
to represent the Parliaments proceedings against Delinquents, as punishing men
for keeping Covenant, as many of them do; if these things are to preserve the
rights and privileges of Parliament, etc. then do these keep their Covenant,
yea at a higher rate of excellency than other men do; but if to do these is
absolutely to break the Covenant, then are these as palpable Covenant-breakers,
as any are in the Kingdom.

In the fourth Article of the Covenant, we swear to endeavor the discovery of
incondiaries, malignants, evil instruments, by hindering reformation of
Religion, dividing the King from his people, or one of his Kingdoms from
another, or making any faction or parties among the people, contrary to his
League and Covenant, that they may be brought to public trial, and receive
condign punishment, as the degree of their offenses shall require or deserve,
etc.

Whether any of these Sion Colledge-men were so far from discovering
incendiaries, malignants, and (...) instruments, as that some of them did
encourage that rebellious force upon the Houses of Parliament, is not only
known unto their own Consciences, but unto some others, and most notorious it
is how careful some of them have been to dis^^ incendiaries, malignants, and
evil instruments, by their animating and stirring up a party against the Army
when they came to the City, by their daily invectives against Parliament and
Army, by their kin^ling and e^flaming men's spirits each against others,
declaiming against moderation; and those Ministers and others that shall engage
for Christian forbearance and meeknest: toward dissenting breth^en, if their
d^ssenting brethren should have been found in such de^^uct^ve ^wayes against
M^gistracy and Authority, if any of that party and their servants had been
found in one insurrection after another, with their sword^, pistols, and other
Arm^ and in prosest opposition to the Parliament and M^gistracy of the Kingdom^
and City, as these have been, how would Sion Colledge-men have beaten* the
ear^ of their hearers with it? how would they have cried out in their Pulpits,
This is a second Mu^sier, these are your secta^ies, your Anabaptists, y^^ur
Independents; these are they that we often forewarned you of* and told you how
they desp^sed Magistracy and Government; the noise of Munster, Munster,
Munster, would have so filled the pulpit^ and presses, that we should have
heard little else from them; but we hop^ their mouths are for ever stopped from
their Munster clam^rs again, howsoever they have furnished men with a
sufficient reply to them for time to come about that business.

In the fifth Article of the Covenant, we swear that each one of us according
to our place and interest, endeavor that England and Scotland may remain
conjoined in a firm peace and union to all p^steritie, etc*.

Whether these men observe this Article, we leave to the judgment of those
that observe the many expressions that fall from their lips from day to day,
asserting that the presbytery will never be settled in this Kingdom, until
the Scots come to settle it here; especially those passages from Mr. Jenkins,
spoken at that very time (as has been said) when jealousies and fears were
raised in men's hearts of a breach between the two Nations; Lord we thank thee
for any hopes thou have given to make-them (speaking of the Scots) further
instrumantall for the advance of thy truth amongst us, LORD BLOW UP THOSE
SPARKS INTO A FLAME: if this be not an Incendiary in the very latter, we know
not who is or can be an Incendiary: and so Mr. Cawton praying for the Scots,
Lord, give them a heart (said he) to settle a reformation amongst them, and
also amongst us, and QVASH ALL THOSE THAT SHALL RISE UP AGAINST THEM TO HINDER
THEM. Whether this be a keeping this Article of the Covenant (all things
considered) let indifferent men judge.

In the sixth and last Article we engage to defend all those that entered into
this League and Covenant, in the maintenance and pursuance thereof, not
suffering our selves by any means to be divided or withdrawn from this blessed
union or conjuction; but that we shall all the days of our lives zealously and
constantly continue therein against all opposition, etc. And what we are not
able our selves to suppress, or overcome, we shall reveal and make known,
that it may be timely prevented, or rem^ved. All which we shall do as in the
sight of God.

Whether that these men can say, as in the sight of God, that they have kept
this Article, that they have zealously and constantly continued in the
observati^n of this Covenant, and the main and principal ends thereof, viz.
the promotion of the glory of God, by the p^opagation of faith and love among
brethren, the uniting all the well-affected party of both kingdoms against the
comm^n enemies, the power and interest of the supreme Ju^icatories of both
Kingdoms, especially the Parliament of England; let the general strain and
daily course of their public prayers and Sermons declare, and let heaven and
earth judge who they are that are Covenant-breakers, the Parliament of England
or Sion College: we scarce ever hear them mention the Parliament of England
in p^ayer or Sermon, but with some disparaging reflection upon them, as
covenant-breakers, men that build their own houses, but suffering Gods House
(that is, Sion College) to lie waste, that they have slighted the affairs of
Jesus Christ, and reformation and therefore the Kingdom slight and scorn them,
not regarding their Orders and Ordinances, when the truth is, these Ministers
have put principles into the people, leading them into such contempt of the
authority of Parliament. It cannot be denied but the characters of flesh and
blood, we mean failings and weakness, have been seen upon them; but it is the
property of a Cham to detect his Fathers nakedness in the face of his
brethren; and among their failings, we know none greater than a permission of
such daily affronts from the pulpits in the face of the people, as these men
offer them without control. It is a very poor and unthankful requital of
all that the Parliament has done for them: has not the Parliament freed them
from the yoke of Episcopacy, Ceremonies, high C^mmission court, cast out others
from their places in the City for scandal and malignity, and put them in
their room, given them all just encouragements to preach the Word, suffering
nothing to disturb them, only hindering them from disturbing their brethren,
as holy, harmless, useful, faithful, as themselves: and yet as Haman in the
like case, they cry out, All this is nothing so long as Mordec^i sits in the
gate, and will not, dare not, cannot in conscience bow unto them, submit unto
their yoke and bondage. And hence it is that they are thus complaining of that
people whose laws are contrary unto them, seeming to resolve to shake the very
foundations of the Kingdom, but they will ro^t them up. It is true, they
charge them with many grievous and bitter things; but their proofs are like
those that charged Christ, alleging many things, but able to prove nothing
against them, and yet represent them so unworthy, as if the very permission of
such to live, was the great sin of the Parliament, and that for which God will
reckon with them even in blood: these are the Heretics, Schismatickes,
Sectaries, the non-suppression whereof they cry up to be the cause of the
judgments of God upon this land: but did they search the Scriptures with a
single eye, they might find other matters to be an indication of Gods wrath
upon a land, namely, the sins of their Prophets and their Priests, their
Shepherds, their Watchmen, their Pastors and their Teachers, that bite with
their teeth because men put not into their mouths, and he that puts not
into their mouths, they even prepare war against him, Mich. 3. 6. It is not
unknown unto themselves, that of all sorts of people in a land and nation the
holy Scriptures declare the sins of that sort of men to have constan^ly as
chief a hand in pulling down judgments upon the whole people, as any other
sort whatsoever; and it is known unto us, that of late the men of that Order,
viz. the Prophets and Priests, etc. have venomously bitt^n the Parliament and
Army with their teeth and tongues together in respect of their repute and good
name; more than any other sort of malignants wha^soever have publicly done;
they frequently complain that we are without government, the case being with us
as it was with Israel at that time when there was no King in Israel, every man
doing that which was right in his own eyes. Suppose it be thus, who is it of
all sorts of men, that take such advantage thereof as these men do? who is it
that has rendered the present government of the Kingdom more contemptible than
these men have done, making their government as no government, and then
complain that we live without government? what party has taken more advantage
from the want of a severe and strict government, than these men and their party
have done? insurrections, rebellions, treasons, murders, and robberies
committed by those who have professed themselves abettors of the Presbyterian
cause, as in the tumult and riot at Westminster, when the force was committed
upon the two Houses of Parliament: and so the late insurrection when the Lord
Major himself, the chief Governor of the City, was in danger of his life,
men being killed and wounded that came to preserve him. Who is it that have
cast dirt, reproach and contempt upon the Parliament (the only present visible
government) but these very Sion College men? A Parliament that has broken
their covenant, says Mr. Cawton and Mr. Jenkins, A Parliament at whose doors
may be laid all our evils, errors, heresies, blasphemies, says Mr. Witham A
Parliament such an one as it is, says another scornfully and scandalously, we
know not whether it be a Parliament or no, as if he had been Chaplin to the
Lord Inchequeen, not a City preacher, much less an Assembly man, and one that
has received favor and respects from the Parliament. If we have no
government, is it not pity but that we should have a government, to suppress
such lawless and ungoverned tongues as these are? It is true, they do indeed
sometimes talk of a Parliament, and call them by the name of our Governors*
but with such phrases, terms and expressions, with such stings and hips, and
lashes at them, such derogatory diminitive and debasing Ephithits, that they
seem to do by them as the Jews by Christ, put ind^ed a crown up ^n their
heads, but it is a ^own^ of thorn^s, intended more to prick and scratch them,
than to ho^our them: they seem to put indeed a scepter in their hands, but it
is a^eed rather than a Scepter of Gold: they in one br^ath seem to cry out unto
them, Hail Masters, and in another to spit in he^r faces: For let but
indifferent men observe their prayers, and still they shall find, that as the
Apostle Paul complains of some intending his misery, and to add affliction
unto his bonds, that they did indeed preach Christ, but it was out of envy, and
not out of love; so these men pray for the Parliament and Army sometimes
(though but seldom for the Army) yet they manage their prayers so, as that it
easily appears to be rather out of envy to the Parliament and Army, than out
of love, adding thereby to the disparagement and dishonor of the Parliament
and Army. Hence it is, that when the Parliament is named, we have a remembrance
of their covenant breaking, of their declining from, and losing their first
love, of their building their own houses, of neglecting the House of God, of
their toleration of errors, heresies, blasphemy, etc. And when we hear any
mention of the Army, we hear o^ their oppressions, rebellions, heresies,
blasphemies, as if indeed the Parliament and Army had done us hurt and no good
all their days; the truth is, we find the general scope, design, and drift
of their preaching and praying, so far as it relates unto the Parliament and
Army, and their ^issenting brethren, is to have this threefold rend^ncy therein.

The diss^lution of the Parliament, the di^banding of the Army, and the utter
suppression and ^xtirpation of all those that will not conform unto their
government. If it be not thus, what means such bitter invectives against the
Parliament, but to fill men's spirits with distaste against their government;
what means such passages as these, A Covenant Breaking Parliament, a Back
s^iding Parliament, ^ Parliament such an one as it is, an heresies and
blasphemies tolerating Parliament, a selfe-seeking Parliament, etc. but to make
men weary of them and their government? And hence it is, that we have such a
crying out for the King a^ain upon any terms.

As for the disbanding of the Army, and the utter extirpation of their
dissenting breth^en, they are pl^ased in express terms to declare themselves
herein. But may we desire these m^n to suspend their peevish, ^^oward, and
distemper^d spirits, and conjure their quietness and silence, and then
seriously like th^mselves and men of judgment, ^eason and observation, to
weigh the consequences of these things were they accomp^ished as they seem to
desire. Supp^se the Parliament was dissolved what can be expected but the most
sad and li^mall con^quences to these very men, especially so many of them as
have ind^^d tender consciences, as would make their ears to tingl^, and their
he^ds to h^ng down, and their knees to w^x feeble, and their hearts to wither
like grass within them; how would heir oppressing ^yants the Prelates and
others, rise up as young Lions out of their ^^hickets, who have long been
witout their prey, tearing them and treading them like mire under their feet,
until they had made an utter end of them, how would they meet them as Bears
robbed of their whelps? how would they be avenged for that blood, contempt, and
devastations which have been made upon them? Besides, the miserable havoc that
would in all likelihood be made of Religion and religious men throughout the
Kingdom. How would Superstition, Idolatry, Ceremonies, Altars, Copes, Rochets,
Hoods, Surplic^s, Service Book, Crosses, and other old fooleries, rise up like
armed men upon us, without resistance? How would the bondage, slavery,
oppression and misery of our poor Country fill the ear of all Kingdoms
round about us? how would a rod of Iron and whip of Scorpions, be ever held
over our naked backs? what Armies would be raised up, maintained by us, to keep
us under in everlasting bondage and slavery, our selves and posterity being in
a worse condition than in Turkish slavery? How many of our Worthies that did
interpose between us and death in the days of our fear and trouble, would
loose their lives for their faithfulness to us? how would the Kingdom be
filled with fatherless and widows, through the executions of the
well-affected of the Kingdom, for their former adhering to the Parliament? How
would profaneness, open blasphemy, oaths, drunkenness, and all kinds of
wickedness abound in the midst of us? Can these men with the least shadow or
show of reason, suppose the contrary? we want indeed the parts and abilities of
these men to set out the woeful intolerable consequences of such a time, then
would they curse the day of our divisions and perverseness toward one
another; then would they bewail their bitterness and srowardnesse one toward
another; how would our Taskmasters insult over us, and our oppressions be
multiplied? how would we say of THAT DAY, as Job of the day of his Birth; Let
that day perish (wherein this Parliament was dissolved upon the terms we speak
of) and that night wherein it was said, it is broken up, let darkness and the
shadow of death stain it, let a cloud dwell upon it, let the blackness of the
day terrify it; how will your adversaries rise up like a sweeping rain (as
Solomon speaks) that will leave no food, taking away your precious things
without control? into what kind of bondage (think you) will you be brought,
if you be subdued unto them, of whomsoever a man is overcome, of the same he is
brought into bondage, 2 Pet. 2. 19. If we lived under the great Turk, or in the
state of Persia, or even in France it self, and did but observe the miserable
and slavish bondage of those poor people that are under their tyranny; how
would a little of that liberty which we now enjoy, be as a wedge of the gold
of Ophir, and as a drop of water would have been to the rich man in hell, could
he attain unto it? do not you think, but if the Cavaleerish party get the day
(as most certain it is they will, if our divisions do still thus continue)
they have their bands and chains and setters already prepared for your hands
and feet, and irons that will enter into our souls? are they not animated and
acted with the spirit of the fourth Beast spoken of by Daniel, which was unlike
all the other, very fearful, whose teeth was of iron, and his nails of
brass, which devoured, brake in pieces, and stamped the rest under his feet?
Would not their insolent Lordly domineering and tyrannizing spirits, sport
themselves in their cruelties, and delight to ride over the heads of them that
they can get under them? how do they long after the blood of the Parliament,
and all those that have stood in the way of their rage and lust, during all
these wars? how do they thirst after the blood of all sorts, Presbyterians,
Independents, and all others, under any notion whatsoever, more than David did
after the waters of the Well of Bethleem? If these men of blood shall carry the
day and overcome, to set up their Banners amongst us, shall we not be sold as
cheap as sparrows were among the Jews, five or two for a farthing? would not
our flesh be as a feast of fat things unto them, and ou^ blood as new wine? or
if they did spare our lives, would it not be out of an intent to add unto our
misery? as that cruel Nero, when any person was under the stroke and dint of
his power, desiring that he might be quickly dispatched, was wont to say, Non
ita tecum in gratiam redii, that is, he was not so far friends with him, as to
give him leave to die. But behold, greater miseries than these are like to
overtake us, if these men prevail, if ever we come to be at the allowance of
Cavaliers, Atheists, and Papists, for the things of our souls, how shall we be
fed with stones instead of bread, and scorpions instead of fishes? those golden
pipes, by which heaven and earth are joined together in sweet communion (that
is) the pure Ordidances of worship will be cut off from us, and others of lead
laid in their stead, Ordinances according to the wills of men, which God will
be ready to cast as dung into our faces; do you think that all the rabble of
the Kingdom, all the Cavaliers, and Atheists of the Land? do you think that
the Lord Taffe of Ireland, and the Cavaliers that are gone into the North, that
these will settle Presbytery? No, no, you must never look to see the goings of
God in the Sanctuary again, to see the visions of life and immortality, as
you have done, those excellent ravishments and raptures of spirit, those
takings up into the third heavens, by seeing him that was greater than Solomon
in all his glory, will cease from you, those pure streams of the Gospel will be
smeared when you come to drink of them; you must look to have the Gospel turned
upside down, and to be made to stand in perfect conjunction with hell, with
looseness, wickedness, and profaneness, and in opposition to Heaven, grace,
and holiness: What a bitter thing will this be unto us who have been ^ed with
honey out of the rock, and with the finest wheat of Heaven; that have had an
open and a free trade to Heaven, and have had glorious returns from them day
after day, to whom the Ministry of the Gospel, has been as the wings of the
morning, as Chariots of f^^e to carry us as it were up and down in spiritual
glory and triumph, between heaven and earth? Oh how will that day be us the
shadow of death unto us, wherein we shall exchange our Quails and Mann^ from
Heaven, for the garlic and onions of Egypt! When we shall hear the Pope and
his Hierarchy preached up to the heavens, and Jesus Christ and his Saints
preached down to the earth, and made their footstool; when our souls and
Consciences shall be compassed about with lies, and the Commandments of men
inste^d of Gods word: how would the Ark of God be taken away, and Dag^n be set
up in his room? how will the day of Gospel-dispensations be turned into
darkness, and the Sun of a godly holy Ministry be covered with sack cloth,
and the Moon turned into blood, and the Stars of Heaven loose their light?
How would this be as gall, bitterness, and worm wood unto us, that God sent
(...) Saviors, and would have delivered us, yea and brought us unto the very
edge of the Land of Canaan, that we looked into it, and did begin to eat of
the very fruits thereof; and we would not be delivered, but return again to the
bondage of Pharaob, choosi^g rather to make bricks and pots, to feed upon
garlic and onions, than to live as Princes in the enjoyments of the blessed
treasures of life and immortality in peace and love one with another.

Secondly, Consider the miserable consequences of disbanding the Army: is not
the Army the walls and bulwarks of the Parliament? if you disband the one, you
shall see them that will quickly dissolve the other, and then the miserable
consequences of the Parliaments dissolution, would be the same of the Armies
disbanding; has not God been a front guard, and a rere-ward unto this Army?
has he not made it his battle-axe and weapons of war? has he not made it
like a new sharp thrashing instrument having teeth? has he not made the
mountains plains before these Zerubbabels? has he not made the mountains to
skip like rams, and the little hills like young sheep, before the presence of
God in this Army? has he not risen up against them that have opposed them?
has he not honored them in the face of the people? and have not you
endeavored to cast reproach and scorn upon them, making them the basest,
vilest, most blasphemous, heretical, erroneous, plundering, oppressing Army
that ever marched into the field? have not Gods dealings and yours toward this
Army been like the contest between Michael and Satan about the body of Moses?
has not God plainly and evidently set himself in direct opposition unto you
about this Army, he honoring them, you dishonouring them, he causing a spirit
of glory, you a spirit of shame to rest upon them; did not you prophecy bitter
things of this Army, if the City would permit them to march through, and did
not God make you all deceivers, and false Prophets in the eyes of all men? they
marching through the City with weapons in their hands, at such a time when
professed resolutions and endeavors were used through your means to raise up an
Army to cut their throats, yea, when a spirit of fear and trembling took hold
upon their enemies, having all advantages put in their hands to avenge
themselves for all the wrongs and injuries that were offered them, and yet did
they not march peaceably and quietly throughout the City, not offering the
least wrong to man, woman, nor child, to their honor, and your shame?

Again, what had been the issue of that horrid insurrection, made the ninth
and tenth of April, 1648.
assaulting the Lord Mayor of the City, robbing, killing, and destroying those
that opposed them, had not some part of this Army suppressed the same, (the
influence of your doctrine so prevailing with men, that not one of many would
appear to rescue the Governors and Government of the City from the sons of
violence) and yet did not these contemptible Army-men put their lives in their
hands, and preserved the whole City from the woeful consequences of that
rebellious insurrection, yea, when brick-bats and stones were cast out of
houses, and some of them were shot out of windows; which affronts had they been
offered unto some Armies, would have rendered the City in ashes, but they
would have had satisfaction, and yet, as if they were men in valor, and
children in malice: having rescued the City, departed in peace, blessing and
praising God, that he had made them able to render good for evil; and do not
all reasonable men clearly perceive, that if Sampson-like you lay your hands
upon Parliament and Army, to dissolve the one, and disband the other, you take
hold of the pillars of the kingdom, which being removed, you bring all into
confusion, ruin and misery, and pull down destruction upon your own heads.

Thirdly, consider, the most probable, if not certain consequences of the
suppression and extirpation of your dissenting brethren, were all your
dissenting brethren suppressed, and not one remained, but only your selves and
the Prelaticall party in the kingdom, do but seriously consider what a
through, a blessed, a perfect Reformation you would be like to carry on.
Suppose the dissolution of the Parliament, the disbanding of the Army, the
destruction, banishment or imprisonment of your dissenting brethren, do not
you think that the malignant and Prelaticall party would not join together
with you to set up Presbytery in a pious, pure, strict and godly way? May not
we say of such among you, that shall think so, or acts as if they did think
so, as the Prophet Hosea says, The Prophet is a fool, and the spiritual man
is mad. In short, you must both unite and live, or both divide and perish,
choose you whether; you may both wriggle and wrestle, contend and contest, weary
and worry one another, but the resolve of all must be one of these two, either
agree and live, or else strive thus, and fall both together.

First, consider what faith the one party which the other may not say: You say
of the Independent party, These are the troublers of Israel, the hinderers of
reformation, the disturbers of our peace, the incendiaries of the times, the
Covenant breakers; and they say the like of you, and both of you argue it each
against other in the eyes of the world; but were it not better that both of you
did join together in joint promotion and joint opposition of such things as
were according to your joint opinion, you both profess your hatred of known
sin and wickedness, the profaning the Lords day, drunkenness, swearing,
lying, cozening, deceiving, ignorance and loosnesse; you both profess it your
duties to promote the glory of God, the name of Jesus Christ, the fruits of the
Spirit, the obedience of faith, the works of repentance, love, meekness,
gentleness, patience, brotherly kindness, mercy, bounty: Did both parties
join together in the propagation of those things which were according to both
your judgments, how quickly would your differences be reconciled, did both
parties seek the things of Christ, and each others good? how quickly might you
both rejoice each in other, and bless God each for other?

Secondly, consider the things wherien you agree, and wherein you differ: most
confident we are, the difference is more in the heart th^n in the head, more in
the affections th^n argument; is the one for the glory of God? so is the other.
Is the one for Reformation? so is the other. Is the one for purity of
Ordinances? so is the other. Is the one for a holy, pious, peaceable
Presbytery? so is the other? Is the one for the suppression of error, herefie,
blasphemy, and whatsoever is contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of
godliness? so is the other; only differing about the manner of this
suppression, the one affirming it must be done by the Magistrate, by censures,
punishments, imprisonments, banishments, etc. the other making a distinction,
and granting that some kinds of errors, blasphemies, directly repugnant with
the light of nature, the peace and quietness of the Land and Nation, breaking
the rules of civility, morality, and common honesty, that the Magistrates may
and ought to punish such things; but for those errors and mistakes in matters
of religion, which cannot be rectified but by a supernatural illumination, and
work of the Spirit; that these are to be suppressed by argument, reasoning, and
debates out of the word of truth, as the only means sanctified by God for the
pulling down of all such imaginations that exalt themselves against the
knowledge of Jesus Christ; nay, in the very argument of Church government, the
difference is not so vast and great as seems to be by these unhappy
miscarriages toward one another. Are you for a Presbytery, that is, the
government of the Church by Pastors, Elders, Helpers? so are they. Are you for
the admission of none but godly persons in the eye of charity, into these
societies? so are they. Are you for combination of Churches? they are for
association. Are you for subordination of one Church to many? they are for a
brotherly and Christian reference of one unto more. Are you for an
authoritative jurisdiction of some Churches over others? they are for brotherly
advice and exhort^tion, and admonition of one Church to another? Are you for
excommunication of such Churches as do not reclaim after admonition,
exhortation, reprehension, etc. for error, heresy, blasphemy, or evil of
doctrine or conversation, though they are not for excommunication of Churches,
yet they are for non-communion with Churches in such cases, etc? Why should
there be such an irreconcilable distance between one another?

Thirdly, consider there have ever been greater differences in the Churches of
God than these are: you very well know, that among the Churches in the Apostles
days, there were differences about Circumcision and keeping the Law of Moses,
about the Doctrine of the resurrection, about eating meats offered up to Idols,
etc. and the like in after times; and though it be granted that there should be
no allowance of any evil whatsoever, yet they managed their differences in
such a sweet, meek, moderate, and Christian way, as that faith and love, and
the unity of the Spirit was still preserved among them; and were they not meet
and fit examples unto us upon whom the ends of the world are come?

Fourthly, what do you complain of whereof you have just cause, and which is
not in your power to reclaim?

First, you complain of your misery, bondage and slavery, of oppressions,
sorrows and troubles of the Church: that is, doubtless, of the Church
Presbyterian, and no other: What does aile you? what troubles you? who does
oppress you? Have you not authority on your side? Have you not all the Church
livings in the Kingdom? Have you not Declaration upon Declaration, Ordinance
upon Ordinance, Order upon Order, for to back you? Is there the least show of
oppression, sorrow, or cause of complaint administered unto you, except it be
because you are not suffered to oppress, vex and gall your brethren that join
not with you? Can you feed upon nothing but blood, yea the blood of your
brethren, that though you have every thing else (that only prohibited) you
complain of sorrow, slavery, oppression? Is this only your torment, that you
cannot procure a Decree against your brethren, whose laws are but a very
little differing from yours, that they should be cut off their houses pulled
down, their wives and children destroyed as some of your bloody brethren
professed even in pulpits (an account whereof shall be rendered upon the next
occasion offered?) Is this your slavery and captivity, that you cannot enslave
and lead into captivity? Is this to kill you with the sword that you cannot
kill your brethren with the sword? Is your brethren^ ease your pain, their
liberty your restraint, their plenty your penury, their good your evil? May
you not have what you will almost of Authority, but will nothing serve you but
John Baptists head? Do you plead your authority for a severe domniering rigid
Presbytery, from the Presbytery of Jerusalem in the fifteenth of the Acts, for
which you find not a syllable in that Chapter? And will you reject one of the
main Canons of that Presbytery, Abstain from blood? verse 29. Do you not know
that blood-eating shall be the death of Antichrist, which being diffected the
Scripture shows that the blood of Saints was found to be the death of the
Whore, In her was found the blood of Prophets and of Saints, Revel. 18. 24.
Will God give blood for drink to bloody Popery? Has he given blood unto bloody
Prelacie in our own Kingdom, and will he give milk and honey (think you) to a
bloody Presbytery? How long might the Popish government and the Prelaticall
government, yea and the Presbyterian government also live and flourish in the
earth, were they not bloody? But is not that true of a bloody government which
the Scripture speaks of a bloody man, that it shall not live out half its
days? We know your answer* and we expect to hear it over and over in Pulpit
and Press from you day after day, that you are men of peace, and desire not
the trouble of any man, much less of Saints, appealing to God that searches
your hearts, whether you are the men whom we thus represent, and call God to
judgebetween you and us, whether it be thus as we have said; that it is Gods
glory, not any man's ruin, the blood of errors, heresy, blasphemy,
profaneness, etc. that you seek after, not the blood of men; the building of
Gods house, not the pulling down of any men's houses; the setting up of Christ
on the Throne, not the casting of any man upon the dunghill; the good of men's
souls, and not the hurt of any man's body; yea and happily you will call upon God
to do so to you and more also, as your hearts are upright and perfect before him
in these particulars. But to reply to these answers.

First, you may appeal to God that searches your hearts; but we are taught by
God to appeal to your words and actions to understand your hearts; God can
come at your hearts immediately, we come at them by your words and works; your
hearts cannot dec^^ve the eye of God searching your hearts: your words and
worke^, daily, constantly, deliberatly, dispassionatly proceeding from you, can
hardly deceive the eyes of man, looking into your hearts through your tongues
and hands, what is the meaning of these words, Let these Sectaries, etc. these
remnants of Baal be destroyed, with their wives and children, and their houses
pulled down, (says one) let these Sectaries, (these walking dreamers) be
cudgled ou^ of their dreams, (says another) a viperous brood, a generation of
vipers, croaking Frogs, Caterpillars (say others) (an account whereof time may
discover) is not the heart the treasure from whence these words flow? God knew
your hearts immediately, you know your own hearts by your Consciences (if you
have not silenced them) and we come to know your hearts by your words and
actions.

Secondly, whereas you pretend your zeal to be for Gods glory, not man's ruin,
the destruction of errors, not of men, etc. We answer, that the Pope and the
papal persecutors said the same, the Bishops and the Prelaticall persecutors
said the same; why should we believe the Presbyter before either, when his
ways are the very self same with the two former? did not the Papists say of
the Protestants whom they burned, that they were heretics, sectaries,
schismatics, separatists; did not the Prelates say of those whom they
persecuted, that they were factious, seditions, heretics, sectaries,
schismatics? and do not Presbyterians call those whom they would banish,
imprison, whose houses they would pull down, and whose wives and children they
would destroy, Independents, sectaries, heretics, schismatics, etc. Their
words and sayings, their ways and proceedings being as like the Prelates, as
their ways were like their fathers in persecution of whom Christ spoke in Luke
6. 23.

Secondly, Do you complain, that the Ministry is despised? Why do you make
your selven despicable? Can sober disengaged men always honor those that
leave preaching of Christ (the life of Saints) the propagation of love and
goodness among men, and fall upon scandalous clamours against Parliament,
Army, Magistrates, Ministers that dissent from you, throwing firebrarnds out of
Pulpits from day to day, making the Pulpits little else but the Trumpets of
war, and alarms to battle, heightning divisions, differences, and distempers,
that are too high already amongst us.

Thirdly, Do you complain of the increase of sectaries, you multiply them by
your carriages toward them? the persecuting Papists made Protestants, the
persecuting Prelates made puritans, and the railing Presbyter that sharpens his
tongue to utter bitter words, to call men a generation of vipers, a viperous
brood, the remnant of Baal, etc. These make Independents, whom you call
sectaries.

Fourthly, Do you complain of the growth of errors, do not you cause (...) by
casting mudde and dirt at the root of these bulrushes, i^stead of plucking them
up by arguing, reasoning, and debating the same? It is true, about 58 Ministers
of London, 84 Ministers of Lancashire, 43 Ministers of Warwick shire,
subscribes against error, heresy, blasphemy, but you shall have one sectary
in a corner will give it, may be, or pretend at least to give more arguments to
maintain his error, than 185 Ministers to maintain the truth in opposition to
these errors; you shall have, it may be, one sectary pretend to offer 185
arguments to maintain an error, and to give testimony to it, when 185 Ministers
of London, Lancashire, and Warwickshire, give testimony indeed to the truth of
Jesus, by asserting such and such things for truth, and by calling such and
such things errors, heresies, etc. (as so many Leather coats may do) but not
one argument among them all to assert the truth of Jesus, or destroy error
withal, had we more of your pains, and less of your passions, more of your
arguments, less of your anger, more reasonings and less railings, would you
be pleased to set up Lectures of confutation of errors in a soft, meek, wise,
and Christian manner, and decline these fiery, fierce and furious Lectures of
strife, divisions, reproach, and contempt upon Parliament, Army, brethren, etc.
How quickly would error be cast upon the dunghill, and truth get up into the
throne? Error is seated in the imaginations of men, and they are high thoughts
that exalt themselves against the knowledge of Jesus Christ; those means
therefore that are effectual for the suppression of error, heresy, etc. must
be calculated for the casting down of imagination^, or reasonings, and strong
holds, in men exalting themselves against the knowledge of Jesus Christ; stout
railing will never demollish strong reasonings; the weight of the little finger
of truth and sound reason does more effectually crush error, heresy, etc. than
the very loins of railing and raging at them; one sound argument coming against
error in the name and according to the will of God, will be unto an whole host
of errors, as the Angel of God unto the host of Senacherib, viz. scatter and
slaughter them, that the place thereof shall not be found any more; one sound
argument from the holy Scriptures wisely and skilfully managed against a
capital error, does often prove like David's stone slung at Goliath, viz. strike
it dead in the face of many abettors thereof, making them quickly throw down
their weapons at the feet of truth, and become captives unto it; bitter
invectives without arguments against errors, heresy, etc. are unto them as the
Egyptian persecution was unto the Israelites, the more they be thus dealt
withal, the more they grow; the spirit of conviction does not usually appear
in whirlewinde, blustering, stormy, tempestuous railing, raging, and wrangling
exclamations, but in the still and soft voice of brotherly, meek, ^ollid, and
Christian debating, reasoning, and arguing out the truth; it is most true, it
is good to be zealously affected in a good thing, yea, that our zeal should
even eat us up, but we must be zealous according to knowledge, not to eat up
our brethren; it is reason and not railing that conjures errors out of men's
judgments; why should the sons of error be wiser than the sons of truth?
they insinuate errors into their proselytes, they watch to deceive, they come
under the vizard of humility, meekness, and sweetness, to seduce the simple;
if you will undeceive them, you must be that in sincerity, which deceivers are
in hypocrisy, viz. truly humble, truly meek, and kind; 'twas Paul's rule,
especially toward fallen brethren, to restore them with the spirit of
meekness; it was his practice to catch men by guile; its no marvel, that
errors abound amongst us, when men instead of rooting them up by a strong hand
of arguing, do only tread upon them (as upon Cammamell) by loud reproaches,
reasonlesse declamations, etc. making them indeed rather to grow and multiply;
God (if we may so say) does often need men's patience, meekness, humility, but
never needs men's passions, frowardness, perverseness; this is to go down
into the Land of darkness to fetch light, to apply our selves to Satan's
Magazin, to furnish us with weapous to fight the Lords battles; this is for
vice to correct sin; When men come to hear reason against error, and find
nothing but railing, what is this but to feed men with stones instead of bread,
and with serpents instead of fishes, would men endeavor to convince men by
arguing and reasoning, as Christ did, and not as the Scribes, it would make men
astonished at their doctrine, and error and heresy, like Dagon before the
Arc, would not stand before the truths of God so managed and asserted.

Fifthly, Do you complain that the work of reformation is hindered,
Sanballads and Tobyasses obstruct the building of the Temple: we have been a
great while in expectation of settling Religion, but alas all is in vain, we
have nothing but an empty show of reformation, Presbytery is despised,
slighted, we are farther off from reformation than we were several years
since.

Who hinders your reformation but your selves? have you not all encouragements
unto a reformation? were ever any of you troubled for the exactness,
strictness, or purity of your reformation? may you not keep any man, how great
soever he be, from your Communions, who lives scandalously, loosely, or in
gross ignorance? is it not evident, as the Sun at noonday, that nothing
stands in your way, but your selves? may not all men of discerning spirits see
and perceive, what it is that hinders your reformation? shall we dictate unto
you the common observations of seeing men, viz. that you take not a right
method for a pure reformation; for is not this your Custom, you call in all
your Parish (if housekeepers) to choose your Elders, your Elders they admit of
your members to the Sacrament, and so your reformation is made up? is it not
too notorious that the most of men are not the best of men; nay, have not you
often told us, that the most of men are the worst of men? and can the worst of
men bring about the best of reformations? will the worst of men make choice of
the best of rulers, except it be through the wonderful providence and
interposition of the hand of God? do not we plainly see, that the most of men
have not principles leading toward a strict, a pure, a spiritual reformation?
do not men generally know men after the flesh, and esteem them accordingly?
Whence is it, that we see the great man, though the ignorant man, the rich
man, though the profane man, the Deputy, the Common-Councell-man, the Justice
of peace, the chief man in the Parish, he must be the Elder, though an
ordinary swearer, an ignorant, a loose, a covetous person? Does not every eye
observe this in the City, in the Country, etc. and can you drive on that
reformation which you pretend unto in this method? are you tied and
necessitated unto this way? Will not swearing, ignorant, covetous, unclean, and
unworthy Elders admit of the like Communicants and Members? and can you reform
according to your professed desires in this course? Do you say, you have not
power to do otherwise? is your government from heaven, or of men? if it be
from heaven, as you profess, and a jus divinum be stamped upon it; what though
you have not the powers of men to join with you in the work of the Lord; the
time (perhaps) is not yet come when the earth shall help the Woman? will you
do nothing for the Name of Christ, until you have the powers of the world to
assist you? is this to do the will of your Father? is this to walk as you
have Christ and the Apostles for your pattern? do you please men? if you yet
please men, how are you the servants of Christ?

Will that old spirit of fearing the face of man, which possessed many of you in
the days of the Prelates, never be gone out of you? Do you profess with the
Scribe, Mat. 8. 19, 20. to follow Christ whithersoever he goes; and when he
tells you, The Foxes have holes, and the Fowls of the air have nests, but the
Son of Man has not where to lay his head: will you with the Scribe steal
away, and let Christ hear of you no more? Is it not a Snaily dispositi^n to
come abroad only in the dew, and to creep in during the heat of the day? Is it
Christian to cry Hosanna unto Christ with the people, while the garments and
Palm-branches are spread, but to slink away when he is led to mount Calvery?
Would you live by the Truth, and not suffer the Truth to live upon you?

Perhaps you will say, that however the Sectaries despise Magistracy, yet you
will not distaste Authority by such an hasty practice of that government which
you could wish was set up, and therefore would have power from them to carry on
the work of Reformation in peace, that the noise of the hammer may not be
heard in Temple work. We reply,

Your care not to provoke Authority we abundantly perceive by the Dialect of
your Sermons and Prayers from day to day: we shall give you but one instance
more, (which we thought to have reserved for the next, but that we have more
than a sufficiency of straw already for that tale of Brick if it be required)
and that is of Mr. Thomas Case, preaching at Christ-church about the 26. of
March, 1648. from Jeremy 14. 19.

We looked for peace, and there is no good, and for the time of healing, and
behold trouble.

Making almost every particular of his Sermon to reflect dishonor, reproach
and contempt upon the Parliament; among other things, spoke thus, We looked for
hurthens to be taken off; but behold, straw is taken from us, and our tale of
Brick is still required of us: Coat and Conduct money, High Commission and
Star Chamber, these were but childrens play in comparison of the oppressions of
our times; bitterly complaining that we are now become captives unto the lusts
and fury of men. That you would have power in your hands, we do not question;
but wheth^r to advance your selves, or Jesus Christ, is somewhat our doubt all
things considered. As for your carrying on of your Temple work without the
noise of a Hammer, have we not the sound of Drums and Trumpets, sounding to
battle in the building of your Temple? What Is the meaning of these
expressions, Draw the Sword and avenge the Lord of all the blasphemy, etc. that
is done unto his Name? It is a s^d symptom of Gods displeasure when he
thinks a people not worthy the looking after, but lets wicked men get the
upper hand over them, and let them perish by the lusts and pride of men, as Mr.
Case said. And, Lord, we thank thee that thou have given us any hopes to make
them (speaking of the Scots) further instrument all to settle thy truth in this
Kingdom; Lord blow up these sparks into a flame, as Mr. Jenkin said. Is this
to build the Temple without the noise of an hammer?

You complain you want power. Have you not power to do what you will in a
peaceable, sweet, and Christian way? Did the Parliament, or any authority under
them, reprove, inhibite, or censure any of you for keeping away any scandalous,
ungodly, unworthy man whatsoever, though he was never so great and mighty in
the world? Do you want power? May you not thank your selves? H^d y^u carried
your selves meek, humble, lowly, preached Jesus Christ as he is tendered in the
Gospel, minded indeed a Reformation according to the word of God, and the
example of the best reformed Churches; what power might you not have had from
the Parliament? Did not many godly, sober, wise and judicious Presbyterians,
Parliament men and others, join with you, stick unto you, engage for you, who
now begin to decline you, being so greatly mistaken in you? How had God
honored you in the eyes of Parliament and people, had you indeed thrown by
your own honor, and in the simplicity of your hearts honored him? Had you
humbled your selves, God had exalted you; but exalting your selves, God will
bring you low. Have not you so represented your Presbytery in the eyes of men,
by your flying out against Parliament, Army, dissenting Brethren, with such
bitter, scandalous, slanderous terms, that many wise and sober men decline you,
and are even ashamed of you, though some shallow, fiery, furious spirits are
gratified by it, and side with you in it; it is no marvel that the Sectaries (as
you call them) like the house of David, multiply, grow stronger and stronger,
and rigid Presbyterians, like the house of Saul, decay and grow weaker and
weaker, since you have often cast your Javelins for the destruction of those (
viz. Parliament and Army) that have fought your battles, destroyed your
enemies, yea the Goliabs thereof, doing you good and no hurt all your days.
Do not you see English spirits cannot endure the Bramble-government, even in
the Commonwealth, much less in the Church? Would you indeed (the godly party
of you) join together, keep out wickedness and wicked men, be they Lords or
Commons, Princes or peasants, high or low, rich or poor, from your holy
things, would you preach Christ, and not your selves, would you oppose Eryor,
Heresy, Blasphemy, etc. with arguments, meekness, and wisdom, with power and
demonstration from Scripture and Reason, would you look to your offending
brethren of your own Societies, provide for your poor, watch over one another
for good, promote holiness, love and kindness among brethren, would you endeavor
to unite the godly against the common enemy, promote the common interest of
the Kingdom. Did men see your communions beautiful as Tirza, comely as
Jerusalem? Did men see Christ walking in the midst of your golden Candlesticks?
Did you put on indeed beautiful garments? Did men hear the joyful sound and
voice of the Turtle in your congregations? Did your lips drop as the nony comb,
honey and milk being under your tongues, the smell of your congregations being
like the smell of Lebanon? Did men see that your plants, or members, were as an
Orchard of Pomegranates, with pleasant fruits, Camphire and Spiknard, Calamus
and Cynnamon, with all the trees of Frankincense, Myrrh and Aloes, with all
the chief spices? Did men observe your societies as fountains of gardens,
wels of living water, and streams from Lebanon, the Spirit of God so blowing
upon them, as that the Spices thereof, and their sweet savor did flow out, and
were acceptable to God and man; how would you ravish the lookers on? How would
they be taken in the beholding your faith and order? How would you ravish the
hearts of your spectators? How would you drain the private meetings of
Sectaries, as you call them? But when men in stead of beauty see nothing but
bald^es; in stead of the Spirit of Christ, which is a spirit of holiness, love,
gen^lenes, and goodness, men see n^thing but the spirit of pride, of envy,
rigidnesse, cruelty, slander, and mischief.

When you talk of a reformation, profess indeed principles of purity in
government, viz. that your members must be godly, profane persons kept from
the Lords Table, promoting love, goodness, kindness, etc. and yet act not
accordingly for want of power as you say, not improving what power you have
unto these things, but complain of the Parliament, as if they were the cause,
hindering all good government, to make them odious in the eyes of the people;
yea, oppose, vilify, and reproach your brethren even for reformation. What do
these things but harden men's hearts, and steel men's spirits so against you,
that you may as soon unite light and darkness, Christ and Belial, as drive on
(...) reformation which you thus would make the world believe you ^o earnestly
co^^nd for? Are you not offended with your brethren for putting in practice
your own very principles? Does it not clearly appear, that their reformation
is rather your envy, than the want of reformation among your selves is cause
of your complaint? As the Ruler of the Synagogue envied the glory which the
people cast upon Christ for his great works which he did amongst them, yet he
covered his pale of envy with the red of zeal, pretending to stand for the
honor of the Sabbath: There are six days, said he to the people, in which men
ought to work, in them therefore come and be healed, and not on the Sabbath
day.

Can men be so truly and heartily zealous for a blessed reformation in matters
disciplinall, and Church government, and yet in the mean while break the very
law of morality, and the rules of good manners, abusing Parliament, Army, and
all that will not bow down their backs, and subject their necks to your yoke,
it makes men think that your zeal for reformation is your zeal to make your
selves great in the world, especially when they see you seek the suppression of
those that act your own very principles of reformation. Is it not like Herod,
to pretend to seek Christ to worship him, with a true intent to kill him, to
pretend reformation, and to set up principles leading that way, and where ever
you find them put in practice, to persecute, molest, and suppress them that
do put them in practice?

Some of you were great conformitants in the days of Episcopacie, have you
indeed a mind to return again? Do your souls long after the Summer fruits of
Popery, Organs and Altars, cringings and crouching, Tapers and Wafers, Copes
and Rochets, Tippets and Surplices, Caps and Hoods, Crucifixes and Crosses,
Pilgrimages and pictures, with all the accoutrements, and the whole profane
glory of the Romish Synagogue? Do you long indeed to have Lucifer put again
into Heaven, and the Angels of God thrown down into hell in stead of him, viz.
Popish and Prelaticall Priests restored to their former thrones and dignities,
and faithful Ministers of the Gospel (the great troublers of the Israel of the
Devil) trodden and trampled on like clay and mire under their feet? Is it the
great desire of your souls that profaneness and ungodliness, lightness and
loosnesse, oppression and tyranny, drunkenness, uncleanness, and all sorts of
wickedness may fit in the throne, and that holiness and righteousness, piety
and purity, religion and liberty should be thrown upon the dunghill? If these
be not the venison and savoury meat that your souls thirst after, why do you
hunt so diligently after it?
do not you see that all the Malignants, the Papists and Atheists, the
prelaticall and profane party of the Kingdom joins with you in your present
proceedings? are not your present ways unto them as the resurrection from the
dead?

Some of you have been very zealous against Conformity in the days of Prelacy,
bearing the reproaches of heretics, separatiste, schismatics, from your
clamorous adversaries; had you the glory of God in design, or somewhat else?
we have observed in former days, that some have set out, Jehu-like, against
the superstition, pride, and oppression of the Clergy, overrunning even a
civil behavior in some houses where they have come, tearing and defacing any
devotionall pictures, scarce enduring a cross in a Gentleman's Coat of Arms;
and yet afterward a favorable Prebend-winde, or Chancellour-ship, Deanery, or
Bishopric, did so cool them, that they grew the greatest factors for
superstitious innovatione, and fiercest persecutors of the contrary minded; as
once Harding, Bishop Jewels adversary, who one while was a thundering
Preacher, wishing he could cry out against Popery as loud as the bells of
Osney, yet afterward proved a bitter adversary to the truth: if such things as
those are in your eyes, viz. to be some body in point of power, honor, and
greatness, under the form of Presbytery, as others have been under the
shameful glory of Prelacy; What do you all this while but sow the wind, and
what shall you reap but the very whirlewinde? labor after vanity, and may
expect nothing but vexation of spirit; dig unto your selves Cisternes, but
broken Cisternes that will hold no water; if this be the firstborn of your
desires; viz. that you might be honored before the people, as was Souls
request unto Samuel, 1 Samuel 15. 30. the Lord will rend your kingdom from you,
as he did the kingdom of Israel from Saul, and it may be give it unto others
better than you; but if this indeed be the true strain, and drift of your
hearts, viz. That God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ, as
the Apostle has it, 1 Pet. 4. 11. You may expect honor upon a Gospel ground,
viz. a Covenant of grace, wherein it is promised, that God will honor them
that honor him, and therefore we beseech you (if you can bear an exhortation
from Heaven by the hands of your brethren, who in the sincerity and
simplicity of their spirits do judge themselves not worthy to be named the
same day with many of you in respect of your piety and parts, learning and
abilities to serve the Lord Jesus) that you would be pleased to follow the
truth in love, Ephesians. 4. 15. and to provoke one another to love, Heb. 10. 24.
Bearing one another burdens, and so fulfilling the Law of Christ, Gal. 6. 1,
2. Taking heed of biting and devouring one another, least we be consumed one of
another, Gal. 5. 15. Walking by the same rule so far as we have mutually
attained, confidently expecting that God will seasonably reveal himself unto
the mistaken, Phil. 3. 15, 16. God is love, and he that dwells in love,
dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John 4. 9. We differ from God in heart, in
life, in judgment, in practice, and yet still God is love; The Father has
loved us, be ye therefore followers of God as dear children, and walk in
love, Ephesians. 5. 1, 2. The Son has loved us, even as the Father has loved
the Son, Joh. 15. 9. The holy Spirit is a Spirit of love, 2 Timothy 1. 7. and
the fruit of it is love, Gal. 5. 22. And where ever it is in truth, it knits
the heart with the Saints in love, Colos. 2. 2. rooting and grounding them in
love, Ephesians. 3. 17. causing not only the report of their faith in Christ
Jesus, but also of their love to all Saints to be heard abroad in the world,
Col. 1. 4. The Father, the Son, the Holy Spirit loves us, notwithstanding
our vast and infinite disproportion and difference from this holy Trinity in
our judgments, wills, affections, lives, and conversations; and surely they
that are taught of God do love one another, 1 These. 4. 9. Consider how
sweetly, and kindly the almighty treats with the sons of men, his words are
soft, breaking our bones, Prove. 25. 15. and his writings are words of
reconciliation, sending his Ambassadors to beseech us, and most kindly to pray
us in Christ's name and stead, to be reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5. 20.

Consider, we cannot as yet be all of one mind, which is our affliction as
well as our sin, yet may we be all of one heart, the failings wherein is more
our sin than our sorrow, unity in judgment is the promised blessing of
another age, but unity in affection is our present duty, though we cannot
speak all the same things of faith, through our difference in judgment, yet we
may all speak the same things of love through the unity of our affections;
though we cannot agree in all things, which should be all our grief, yet we
all agree in this thing, to strive together to know the truth as it is in
Jesus, which calls for our love to one another, God in Christ, and Christ in
God, is the pure spring of that divine love which is always running from God
to Christ, and from Christ to God, the streams whereof do cheer the hearts
of all the Saints, but the Saints in Christ, and Christ in Saints, should make
each lovely in each others eyes; our mutual interest in Jesus Christ should
make us value each other as precious jewels, which God will make up in the day
of his glory, Mal. 3. 17. We are all acceptable to God in the beloved, Ephesians.
1. 6. and why not then unto one another.

We all know but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 9. And therefore none are so perfectly
acquainted with one truth, that he needs no further light about the same, and
it is to be conceived, that the errors of judgment in the godly, arises not
from the love of error, but the mistake of truth; so that the light of the
Saints possibly may be dim; and their darkness or ignorance not absolutely
without or utterly remote from some light: they ought therefore to hear one
another patiently, and to bear with one another kindly, it is the property of
the Father of lights, and of the Son of righteousness, the light of the
world, that in him should be all light, and no darkness at all: He that
dwells in love, dwells in light, for God is light. He that says he is in
light, and bateth his brother, is in darkness, and walks in darkness.
(Notwithstanding his great presumption of his large abilities.) He knows not
whether he goes, because that darkness has blinded his eyes, verse. 11.

A passionate, peevish, froward, pettish, perverse Professor, is seldom
acquainted with the truth as it is in Jesus, meekness encapableth a man to
receive the truth. James 1. 21. A froward heart and a perverse tongue, or pen,
commonly goes together; and Solomon says, that one finds no good, and the
other falls into mischief, Prove. 17. 20. He that thinks he knows nothing
as he ought to know, is in the sweetest capacity to be taught of the Father,
who fills the hungry with good things, but sends the rich empty away.
Resisting the proud, he gives grace to the humble, the Lord guides the meek
in judgment, and them will he teach his way, Psalm. 25. 9. Those who are become
like weaned children, does he teach knowledge, and understand doctrine, Esaias
28. 9. A froward heart and tongue, is an abomination unto the Lord, and
therefore the secrets of the Lord cannot be with such. Swelling words commonly
come from shallow brains; and the most ignorant are most conceited; With the
owly there is wisdom, Prove. 11. 2. A railing tongue is like the raging waves,
foaming out its own shame, Jude 13. The Lord teaches the lowly person, and
such is fit to teach his brother.

Men do much prejudice the truth by a passionate endeavor to vindicate the
same, railing language and invective lines, vailes the truth that it cannot be
seen, who loves to drink in troubled waters, or puddle streams? When men's
foame of malice, envy and discontent, appear in the surface of their peevish
lines, who will look for truth therein? A smooth tongue shall not bewitch us:
for we will examine what it affirms. A scolding tongue shall not corrupt us;
for we will never bestow the pains to hear it, truth has never need of passion,
but often of patience. A froward tongue oft-times stirs up other men's passions,
but seldom setleth any man's judgment; frowardness raises up frowardness,
and strife stirs up strife, and both together rejoices the Devil, and
sporteth his children, and the truth is neglected all the while. He that
endeavors to conquer error with good success, must bring along with him
Meeknes and Truth; and having both, may ride on and prosper, Psalm. 45. 4.

Men do seldom contend for truth in a railing Dialect, it is mastery more
than truth that is so sought out, passion, envy, hatred, malice, are the fruits
of the flesh, and can these contend for their destroyer, the spirit of truth?

Consider how does it gratify the designs of the adversary, that the Saints
should thus wrangle each with his brother? how does this cheer up the Popish,
Episcopal, Presbyteriall, Independent, Antinomian, Anabaptisticall, Jesuit:
For we presume the Jesuit personates them all, and whose ends we prosecute by
our unhappy divisions amongst our selves: how is this told in Gath, and
published in Askalon? how do the daughters of the Philistims rejoice, and the
daughters of the uncircumcised triumph? how do they jeere at our discord, that
we our selves prove thorns in one another eyes, and goads in one another
sides? boasting that they lasht us with rods, but we our selves with Scorpions,
and that our own little fingers will we heavier upon one another, than their
loins were upon us all. They oppressed us, and we were pitied of all; we
oppress our selves, and then who pitieth us? They ruined us by an usurpation,
and shall we strive to ruin one another by a law? They crushed us by the heavy
sentences of the high Commission and Star Chamber, and shall we endeavor to
do the same by the authority of Parliament? If we love not one another, let us
love our selves; for each undermineth his own security, by circumventing his
brothers peace.

How do Saints lose in each others hearts, when they gall and grieve and vex
one another in each others pen? To give milk and honey for vinegar and gall,
blessing for cursing, kind words for bitter language, this is indeed our duty;
but hereunto who has attained? And shall we tempt one another with bitter
provocations? Sorrow and trouble, persecution and affliction, envy and malice,
evil speaking and rail^ng, we expect from the world, but better quarter from
better people: the Saints should be each others shelter, we do not gather
grapes from thorns, nor briers from vines, men do not gather figs from
thistles, nor prickles from figge-trees. Churlish language I expect from a
Nabal, not from a David; scoffs from an Ismael, not from an Isaac; railing
from a Rabsheika, not from an Hezekiah; Dungeons from an Ahab, not from a
Michaiah; prisons from an Herod, not from John the Baptist; chains from a
Nero, not from a Paul; banishment from Flavius Domitian, not from John the
Evangelist; jeeres from a Julian, not from a Christian.

Consider the dear relation wherein we stand each to other in Jesus Christ,
have we not the same Lord, the same Faith, the same Baptism? Did we not all
lie together as it were in the same womb of the Almighties gracious purpose?
Are we not all the price of the same ransom, the redeemed of the same Savior?
Does not the same Spirit of Jesus breathe in our hearts? the same blood of
Jesus run in our veins? Are we not all brethren in the faith? and shall
brethren reproach brethren? brethren rail against brethren? What! brethren
without bowels, without natural affection to brethren? Who but a Cain will
seek the ruin of a brother Abel, because his holy services a^e more acceptable
than his own? Who but a Ham will betray the nakedness of his own family? God
put enmity between Satan and Saints, but Satan puts enmity between Saints and
Saints; whose works they do that foment the same. An ungodly man diggeth up
evil, and in his lips there is a burning fire, and a froward man sows
strife, and a whisperer seperateth chief friends, Pro. 16. 27, 28. And it is
awicked man that walks with a froward mouth, Pro. 6. 12. And shall such be
found among the Saints? Oh where is that Spirit that should knit our hear^s
together in love? Are we we not all members of the same body? If one suffer,
do not all suffer? and shall we persecute one another? if one be disgraced,
do we not all blush? and shall we shame one another? Is love the sign of a
disciple of Christ, and shall we hate one another? Does not each member need
his fellow, and shall each destroy each other? Is the body of Christ the horrid
monster of these monstrous times? Is it thus amongst Turks and Pagans,
Mahumitans, Atheists or Papists? Do Malignants thus rail against Malignants,
Cavaliers against Cavaliers? Are there such bitter words, or biting language,
such harsh sayings or hard speakings to be heard in the camp of our
adversaries? Dear Sirs, is it truth or trouble you thus pursue? if the truth,
sight for it in its own way, it calls for your love to it self and children,
and not for your rancor; for your pains, and not your passion; it calls for
help, and not for hindrance; if Truth does reign, why scratch you her with a
crown of thorns, giving her vinegar and gall to drink? If Truth be Queen, her
Royal attendance, and Maida of honor should be love and meekness,
gentleness and goodness, kindness and mercy, forbearance and pity. Why do men
vex her with pride and passion, strife and contention, frowardness and anger?
Her kingdom is peace, her commands are love, her Royal law to her loyal
subjects is, Follow the truth together in love, Ephesians. 4. 15. Lions and Wolves,
Bears and Tigers, Dragons and Vultures, with such hurtful creatures, becomes
the shady wilderness of the wicked world; but none that do destroy, should
approach the Lords holy mountain. It becomes Toads to belch out venom, and
hellish Furies to spit fire each at other, and not the Saints of the most high
God; shall they dig out one another bowels, rend one another name? Dearest
Sirs, Turn your swords into plow-shares, and your sp^^rs into p^uning hooks,
and learn no more to war one against another, Esaias 2. 4. Let the Wolf dwell
with the Lamb, and the Leopard lie down with the Kid, and a child by truth lead
them both. Let no corrupt communication come out of your mouth, but that which
is good for the use of edefying, that may administer grace to the hearers, and
let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, clamor and evil speaking, be put
away from you, with all malice, and be ye kind one to onother, tender hearted,
forgiving one another, as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you, Ephesians. 4. 29,
31, 32.

We beseech you, Sirs, have mercy upon your own native Kingdom, and do not
sacrifice it upon the sinful service of carnal interests; we come to hear
you preach the Gospel of peace, do not cast amongst us the seeds of war; we
come for bread, do not give us stones, for fish, do not give us Scorpions; for
the waters of life, do not put into our mouths the waters of gall; for the
Apples of Eden, feed us not with the Apples of Sodom; shall our reformation be
reformality? have we sworn against Prelacie only in title? We shall say no
more, but referring all that has been said unto your most candid and Christian
con^ideration, shall here conclude with the brief tender of some few Queries.

First, whether you did ever perceive such a spirit of profaneness, lewdness
and wickedness, such contempt, scorn and reproach cast upon Authority and all
Civil Government in City and Kingdom, such a spirit of life, power and vigor
among the troops of malignants, since the beginning of this Parliament, as you
do now: And whether this kind of preaching and praying as bath been here
declared, do not beget these things, every malignant rejoicing in it?

Secondly, whether you think in your consciences that this spirit that is thus
raised, can be so soon allayed or no; and if not, what will be the issue of it
in the latter end?

Thirdly, whether you have observed since such kind of preaching and praying
has been practiced among you, that the spirit of Faith and Repentance, of
conversion unto God, and confirmation in Jesus Christ, such a spirit of
knowledge, of love, and holiness, has accompanied your Ministry, and the
observation thereof has comforted your hearts?

Fourthly, whether you are not persuaded in your own hearts and consciences,
that you have a great influence both in City and Country, upon the hearts and
spirits of the Inhabitants of the Kingdom, so far to prevail, as to
encourage or discourage, to engage the inhabitants of the Kingdom one way or
another by pressing upon them the solemn League and Covenant, and whether your
endeavors have not been improved to stir up the people against that party
which God has blessed in the subjection of the common enemy of the Kingdom,
and whether you can suppose, that if the enemy prevail, the consideration of
your own endeavors in pulling down mischiefs upon your own heads, and upon
the heads of all the godly party in the Land, will not be as gall and wormwood,
as a fire from beneath in your very bowels, as darts of the Almighty sticking
in your sides, and as a sword that will pierce your very souls?

Fifthly, whether you do not think in your consciences, that the main end of
the Covenant, (so far as it was religious) was the u^iting of all the godly
party against the common enemies of the kingdom of Jesus Christ, the profane
rabble of the world, and so far as the end of the Covenant was Civil) the
uniting of all the well-affected against the common enemies of the peace,
interest, and liberties of the Kingdom, (the Covenant binding us absolutely to
the Parliament and their privileges, the Kingdom and its liberties, and to
the King but relatively and in subordination and subserviencie unto these,) and
whether that now the Covenant be not made (through the interpretation put upon
it) the great engine to divide the godly party, and to unite the profane party
against them, and to engage and stir up men's spirits against the Parliament
and well-affected party, and to stand for the King absolutely, without any
relation or respect to the Parliament and their privileges, the Kingdom and
their liberties?

Sixthly, whether the Army of England be not the great obstacle and Remora of
the Malignants, the Papists, the Cavaliers, the Prelaticall and disaffected
party of the Kingdom; and whether any thing appears in reason to hinder the
King and his party, that have engaged themselves in such bloody wars in the
two Kingdoms, the Prelates to return to their glory, power and greatness, the
Papists to return into, nay to advance their interest in this kingdom; and not
only the reducing of this Kingdom unto all its former sinful vanities,
wickednesses, miseries and oppressions, but also the bringing of it up (or
rather down) unto that state of Popery and slavery that was in prosecution
before this Parliament began, (whether we say any thing hinders these things at
this time) but the Army, or at least so hinders as could hinder, was it not for
the Army, and whether any party has cast such scorn, shame and contempt upon
the Army as your selves have done?

Seventhly, whether it would not be more for the glory of God, the peace of the
Kingdom, the healing our divisions, the settling of reformation, to throw by
your froward preaching, and to use no more perverseness in prayer, but to
promote faith and love amongst the the Saints, and the reuniting them aagainst
that flood of ungodliness, malignity and wickedness that is now ready to
swallow them up.

Eighthly and lastly, whether it would not be the best vindication of your
holiness and goodness, the most effectual answer that you can make to the
charges that are laid against you in this book, to behave your selves so (for
future) especially in Pulpit, that others, and not your selves, may hereafter
plead your integrety and reformation; we expect to have little from you in
preaching and praying (at least a good while) but a justification of your
selves, and lifting up of your selves, and pleading your own innocence, etc.
but whether it be not better so to order your ways, that others (and they not
your own engaged party) but moderate, pious, learned, and godly (Ministers and
others) may praise you, and not your own lips.

If you do judge a just and righteous judgment in these Queries, we are
confident of common good; but if not, we shall conclude with that of Hosea 9.
7. The Prophet is a fool, and the Spiritual man is mad.

FINIS.

