modern bookplate Francis Groyn of Lansanor in the County of Glamorgan. And of
Ford-Abby in the County of Devon Esquire.r School.


MEDICAMENTS For the Poor; Or, PHYSIC For the Common People.

Containing,

Excellent Remedies for most Common Diseases, incident to Man's Body; made of
such things as are common to be had in almost every Country in the World: and
are made with little Art, and small Charge.

This Book is of admirable use for, 1. Purging Medicines, for Choler, Phlegm,
Melancholy, or Watery Humous. 2. Vomits. 3. Such things as evacuate by Sweat,
Spittle, the Palate, Nostrils, or Insensibly. 4. Women's Diseases. 5. Worms. 6.
The Stone. 7. Poisons. 8. The Head over-heat, or over-cooled. 9. The Eyes. 10.
The Joints. 11. The Nerves. 12. Breathing. 13. The Heart. 14. The Stomach. 15.
The Intestines. 16. And for Diseases of ill Conformation. 17. Or in Faulty
Magnitude. 18. Or in Number. 19. Or in Situation, and Connection. 20. Or in
dissolved unity.

First Written in Latin, by that Famous and Learned Doctor, John Prevotius,
Philosopher, and public Professor of Physic in Padua.

Translated into English, and something added,

By Nich. Culpeper, Student in Physic, and Astrology.

London: Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the sign of the Printing-press in Cornhil, near the Royal Excharge. 1656.

The Printer to the READER.
I Thought it convenient to give thee notice of some Particulars to be minded
in this Book.

1. That thou have not more in the Title Page, than is in the Book (as is too
often used by many in these times) For every one of the twenty Particulars
there named, is distinctly treated on, under that Head, and sometimes much more,
as thou may easily find, if thou please to peruse the Contents before the
Book; by which thou may easily turn to the page in which each Head is
treated on.

2 If thou meetest with hard words that thou do not well understand, look at
the end of Riverius Practice in English, and most of them are there explained.

3 Things that are here but briefly touched, are much more largely treated on
in Riverius Practice of Physic in English

4 For the rest of Mr. Culpepers Works that are yet unprinted, I refer thee to
his Wives Information and Testimony, printed before this Book. I remain,

Thine, to serve thee, Peter Cole.

The Contents.
THE Beginning. Page 1 Physics that purge the Belly. Page 3 Strong Purgers in
a Chollerick Cause. Page 4 Purgers in a Phlegmatic Cause. Page 6 Purgers in a
Melancholy Cause. Page 9 Medicaments that soften the Belly. Page 10 Things that
mollify the Belly in a Chollerick Cause. ibid Medicaments that loosen the
Belly in a Phlegmatic Cause. Page 12 Medicaments that soften the Belly in a
Melancholy Cause. Page 14 Lenitive Clysters. Page 15 Loosening Suppositories.
Page 16 Purgers by the Belly. Page 17 When Choler Predominates, what
Medicaments are Convenient for a gentle Evacuation. Page 19 Strong Purgers.
Page 20 Violent Purgers. Page 21 Such things as purge Phlegm gently when it is
predominant. Page 23 Strong Purgatives. Page 25 Such things as Purge Violently.
Page 28 A Drink. Page 30 A most pleasing Powder. Page 31 A Bolus. ibid Pills.
Page 32 When Melancholy prodominates these will Purge gently. Page 32 Such
things as purge Strongly. Page 34 Such things as purge Violently. ibid What
things will purge gently, when watery Humors prevail. Page 40 Purging Clysters.
Page 46 Sharp Suppositories. Page 48 For Vomiting Medicaments. Page 49 What
things move Vomit gently. Page 49 Purging Vomits. Page 51 Such things as void
Phlegm strongly that is predominant. Page 53 Medicaments that evacuate by sweat.
Page 63 Medicaments that evacuate by Spittle. Page 67 Medicaments that evacuate
by the Pallat. Page 72 Medicaments that evacuate by the Nostrils. Page 74
Medicaments that evacuate insensibly. Page 77 Digesters. ibid Discussives. Page
79 Rubificatives. Page 83 Medicines that augment necessary Matter where it is
dificient. Page 85 Medicaments that increase Milk. Page 86 Things that increase
Seed. Page 88 Medicaments that alter the Cause of the Disease. Page 90
Medicaments that prepare Choler. Page 91 Preparatives for Phlegm. Page 94
Preparatives for Melancholy. Page 97 Medicaments that allay Acrimony. Page 98
Scouring Medicaments. Page 101 Remedies to soften hard things. Page 110
Remedies that move Preternatural Matter that lies still. Page 119 Remedies that
move the Courses. ibid Helps for Delivery of Women. Page 125 Remedies to drive
out the Secundine. Page 126 Remedies to open the Hemorroids. Page 127 Remedies
to force out the dead Child. ibid Remedies that quiet the Matttr, that is
carried with a wrong Motion. Page 229 Remedies that Root out the Cause that is
offensive in the whole substance. Page 231 Remedies for Worms. Page 233 Remedies
to break the Stone. Page 237 Remedies that move Corruption. Page 240 Remedies
contrary to Poison. Page 245 Remedies for Symptoms that are Urgent. Page 257
Medicaments that alter a sick distemper of the whole Body and of the parts. Page
268 Medicaments that alter the Head that is overcooled. Page 271 Altering
Remedies for Eyes that are overcooled. Page 274 Arthritick Remedies, for the
Joints that are overcooled. Page 276 Remedies for the Nerves over-cooled. Page
279 Remedies for the parts of breathing. Page 282 Cordials for the Heart that
is over-cooled. Page 285 Stomach-heating Remedies. Page 288 Remedies that alter
the Intestines? when they are over-cooled. Page 293 Remedies of the Matrix,
either over-heat or over-cooled. Page 306 Remedies of Diseases in ill
Conformation. Page 310 Remedies of Diseases in faulty Magnitude. Page 350
Remedies for Diseases in Number. Page 363 Remedies of Diseases in Situation and
Connection. Page 367 Remedies of Diseases in dissolved Unity. ibid
TO THE READER.
ALL those that were famous in the Art of Physic, and by taking care of the
health of Man gained to themselves great Honor, may be supposed to have laid
the first foundation of all their glory in the Cottages of Poor Men. For since
two things chiefly commend a Physician; skill to cure the sick, and great
charity to the Poor, without which there can hardly be so much sense of
another misery that can invite one carefully to lend his utmost help. These
two are so united, that a Physician can hardly be approved amongst Rich Men and
Princes, unless he has showed himself to be such a one by his frequent
Practice amongst the Poor: For they that abound with all those things, the want
whereof makes life to others not so desirable, will suspect the skill of such
as begin, but now to Practice; and who have not been emnent by many
experiments, and famous Cures, that are divulged by the Testimony of the common
People. And the Physician alone shall not easily persuade great Men, to whom he
may be called, that he has seriously taken care for the Disease, but rather
for his own gain and profit, who has not sometimes done his best endeavors to
help poor distressed Men, and by such a Custom, learned to deal gently with
those that are sick. And this is the Cause, that, those who begin to study
Physic, and by the profession of it, seek for renown and much profit, must in
the first place make it their greatest care, that when by study they have
learned the precepts of Physic, they may know how to apply it to Men of mean
fortunes that are Sick; and from thence they may happily begin their first
Practice. In which business, a small estate is no little hindrance to the
endeavors of the Physician, when oftentimes not only fit Nourishments cannot be
afforded to sustain the strength of Nature, but also fit Remedies for the Cure;
much dear and costly Physic fetched out of the Apothecaries Shops, would undo
the Poor and so make a new addition of more misery to the former. Nature is
liberal to provide for the necessities of the Poor, and has sent forth many
matters for Medicaments, that may be found almost every where, and with little
Art may be prepared for every use. In which a Physician ought to be as well
skilled, as he should be in Medicaments that are for the Rich as Galen writes,
6. de Comp. Medicam. Per Loca. Cap. 1. Especially since those Obvious Remedies
are not only profitable for the Poor, But as necessary for the Rich, when they
are upon a Journey, if perchance they should fall sick, when they are far from
Cities, and Apothecaries Shops. This Treatise therefore shall be concerning such
Remedies as are easy to be procured. Thus far I have followed in this Epistle
the Expressions of the Famous and Learned Doctor, John Prevotius.

My intent in Publishing Books of Physic in English is not to make Fools
Physicians. but to help those that are Ingenious, Rational and Industrious,
though they have not that knowledge of Tongues that were to be desired. I have
and shall in my Books of Physic follow the most Honest and Learned in that Art;
But let me warn thee now (as I have often before) That there is great danger in
Physic if they be not rightly prepared and given in their due quantities. And
always remember, thou shall give an account to God for all thy actions done ^n
the Flesh; Therefore when thou have to do in what concerns the lives of Men; do
nothing but what thou would do, if thou were sure the great and dreadful day
of Judgment were to begin the next hour.

I shall say no more but this; I am resolved not to give over, until I have
Published in English whatsoever shall be necessary to make an Industrious,
Diligent, Rational Man a knowing Physician. This is the aim and endeavor of.

Nich. Culpeper.

Mris. Culpepers Information, Vindication, and Testimony, concerning her
Husbands Books to be Published after his Death.
Courteous Reader,
SO great are the Afflictions wherewith our Heavenly Father has been pleased
to exercise me his poor Handmaid, that I have not only lived to see my dear
Husband, (the Stay and Solace of my Life) taken from me: but it has been my
hard hap also to see his Reputation, and Memory (which will be dear to all
Posterity, for the Works he has written for the Common Good of this Nation)
blemished, and Eclipsed, by the covetous and unjust Forgeries of one, Who,
though he calls himself Nathaniel, is far from being an Israelite in whom there
is no guile; who was not content to publish a Hodg-podg of indigested
Collections, and Observations of my dear Husband deceased, under the Title of
Culpeper's last Legacy; but to make the Deceit more taking, he steeled his
Forehead so far, and brased it so hard, as not to be ashamed to forge two
Epistles, one in mine, and the other in my Husbands Name; of the penning of
which, he nor I, never so much as dreamed: And yet he impudently affirms in
my Name, that my Husband Laid a severe Injunction on me to publish them for the
general Good, after his decease; and that they are his last Experiences in
Physic and Chyrurgery. And in the Title of his Book, he says, They are the
choycest, and most profitable Secrets, resolved never to be published till
after his Death. All which Expressions in the Title and Epistles, are as false
as the Father of Lies; and every word in them, forged and feigned. And he knew
well enough, that no discreet, honest man, that was a friend to my Husband, or
me, would ever have agreed to such infamous and dishonest Practices; and
therefore I desire all Courteous Readers of the Writings of my Husband, to take
notice of this Deceit, and to assure themselves that it never entered into his
head, to publish such an undigested Gallimoffery, under the promising and
solemn Name of his Last Legacy, and that whereby he gained his Reputation in
the World, as the Imposter makes him speak in his forged Epistle. And I desire
any indifferent Reader, that has observed my Husbands lofty, and Masculine
manner of expressing himself in his Prefaces, and Epistles Dedicatory, whether
in case he had been minded or disposed to take so solemn a farewell of the
world, as the Forger makes him to do; whether, I say, he would have done it in
such a whining fashion, and so in the Style of a Ballademaker, as to say, And
now, if it please Heaven to put a period to my Life, and Studies, that I must
bid all things under the Sun farewell: Farewell to my dear Wife and Child,
farewell Arts and Sciences, farewell all worldly Glories, adieu Readers.
Certainly my Husband would have been far more serious, and material, in such a
case, as any discreet man will judge. Neither can it be thought, that in such a
solemn Valeduction, he could possibly forget his wonted respects to the College
of Doctors, to whom he did so frequently address himself, in diverse of his
Writings.

Courteous Readers, I shall say no more touching the abuse of the Bookseller,
only to prevent (as much as concerns me) thy being abused for the future, know,
That my Husband left seveyty-nine Books of his own making, or Translating, in
my hands, and "I have deposited them into the hands of his, and my much Honored
Friend, Mr. Peter Cole, Bookseller, at the Printing-Press, near the Royal
Exchange (for the good of my Child) from whom thou may expect to receive in
Print, such of them as shall be thought fit to serve thee in due season,
without any Disguises or Forgeries, unto which I do hereby give my attestation.
Also my Husband left seventeen Books completely perfected, in the hands of the
said Mr. Cole, for which he paid my Husband in his lifetime: And Mr. Cole is
ready and willing (on any good occasion) to show any of the said seventy nine
Books, or the seventeen, to such as doubt thereof.

And if any Person shall question the Truth of any part of this Vindication, or
Epistle; if they will take the pains to come to me, I will face to face,
justify the truth of every word thereof, as I have subscribed my Hand
thereunto in the presence of many Witnesses.

I profess in the Presence of the great God, the Searcher of all hearts, before
whom Mr. Brooks and I must one day give an account of all our Actions; That I
have not published this Epistle or Vindication, out of any dis^respect to Mr.
Brooks (for I much respect the man, and would he glad to serve him to my power)
but only to clear my Husband from the folly and weakness cast upon him by the
means above expressed. And out of tenderness to Mr. Brooks, I first tried other
means of keeping, and afterward of repairing my Husbands Credit, and then
stayed long to see if be would repair (in any measure) the wrong done to my
Husband, and my self. I desire to be

From my House, next door to the Red Lion in Spittle-fields, October, 18. 1655.
Your Servant (in, and for the Truth) Alice Culpeper.
Mris. Culpeper did the 18. of October, subscribe this Epistle in Vindication
of her Husband's Reputation, before Ten Witnesses, as she had done another
Epistle on the ninth of October, almost in the same words with this, except
near the Conclusion.



The Names of several Books Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, London, and
are to be sold at his Shop at the sign of the Printingpress in Corn-hil, near
the Exchange.
Ten several Books, by Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physic and Astrology.

1 The Practice of Physic, containing seventeen several Books. Wherein is
plainly set forth, The Nature, Cause, Disserences, and Several Sorts of Signs;
Together with the Cure of all Diseases in the Body of Man. Being chiefly a
Translation of The Works of that Learned and Renowned Doctor, Lazarus Riverius,
Now living; Councellor and Physician to the present King of France. Above
fifteen thousand of the said Books in Latin have been Sold in a very few Years,
having been eight times printed, though all the former Impressions wanted the
Nature, Causes, Signs, and Differences of the Diseases, and had only the
Medicines for the Cure of them; as plainly appears by the Authors Epistle.

2 The Anatomy of the Body of Man, Wherein is exactly described, the several
parts of the Body of Man, illustrated with very many larger Brass Plates than
ever was in English before.

3 A Translation of the New Dispensatory, made by the College of Phyfitians of
London. Whereunto is aded, The Key to Galen 's Method of Physic:

4 The English Physician Enlarged; being an Astrologo-Physical Discourse of the
vulgar Herbs of this Nation; wherein is showed how to cure a man's self of most
Diseases incident to Man's Body, with such things as grow in England, and for
three pence charge. Also in the same Book is showed, 1 The time of gathering
all herbs, both Vulgarly and Astrologically. 2 The way of drying, and keeping
them and their Juyces. 3. The way of making and keeping al manner of useful
Compounds, made of those Herbs. The way of mixing the Medicines according to
the Cause, and Mixture of the Disease, and the part of the Body afflicted.

5 A Directory for Midwives, or a Guide for Women. Newly enlarged by the Author
in every sheet, and Illustrated with diverse new Plates.

6 Galen's Art of Physic with a large Comment.

7 A New Method both of studying and practicing Physic.

8 A Treatise of the Rickets, being a Disease common to Children; wherein is
showed, 1 The Essence, 2 The Causes, 3 The Signs, 4 The Remedies of the
Disease; Published in Latin by Dr. Glisson, Dr. Bates, and Dr. Regemorter,
translated into English. And corrected by N. Culpeper.

Medicaments for the Poor, Or Physic for the Common People.

Health for the Rich and Poor, by Diet without Physic.

A Godly and Fruitful Exposition, on the first Epistle of Peter. By Mr. John
Rogers, Minister of the Word of God at Dedham in Essex.

The Wonders of the Loadstone. By Samuel Ward of Ipswitch.

An Exposition on the Gospel of the Evangelist St. Matthew. By Mr. Ward.

Clows Chyrurgery.

Marks of Salvation.

Christians Engagement for the Gospel, by John Goodwin.

Great Church Ordinance of Baptism.

Mr. Love's Case, containing his Petitions, Natrative, and Speech.

Vox Pacifica, or a persuasive to peace.

Dr. Prestons Saints submission and Satan's Overthrow.

Pious Man's Practice in Parliament Time.

Mr. Symsons Sermon at Westminster.

Mr. Feaks Sermon before the Lord Major.

Mr. Phillips Treatise of Hell.

-- of Christ's Genealogy.

Eaton on the Oath of Allegiance and Covenant, showing that they oblidg not.

Eleven Books of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs lately published; also the Texts of
Scripture upon which they are grounded.
1 The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment on Phil. 4.11. Wherein is showed, 1
What Contentment is, 2 It is an Holy Art and Mystery, 3 The Excellencies of it,
4 The Evil of the Contrary sin of Murmuring, and the Aggravations of it.

2 Gospel Worship, on Levit. 10.3. Wherein is showed, 1 The right manner of the
Worship of God in general; and particularly, In Hearing the Word, Receiving the
Lords Supper, and Prayer.

3 Gospel Conversation, on Phil. 1.17. Wherein is showed, 1 That the
Conversations of Believers must be above what could be by the Light of Nature,
2 Beyond those that lived under the Law, 3 And surable to what Truths the
Gospel holds forth. To which is added, The Misery of those men that have their
Portion in this Life only, on Psalm. 17.14.

4 A Treatise of Earthly-Mindedness, Wherein is showed, 1 What Earthly
mindedness is, 2 The great Evil thereof, on Phil. 3. part of the 19. Verse.
Also to the same Book is joined, A Treatise of Heavenly-Mindedness and, Walking
with God, on Genesis 5.24. and on Phil. 3.20.

5 An Exposition, on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of the
Prophecy of Hosea.

6 An Exposition on the eighth, ninth, and tenth Chapters of Hosea.

7 An Exposition on the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth Chapters of Hosea,
being now complete.

8 The Evil of Evils, or the exceeding Sinfulness of Sin, on Job, 36.21.

9 Precious Faith, on 2 Pet. 1.1.

10 Of Hope, on 1 John. 3.3.

11 Of Walking by Faith, on 2 Cor. 5.7.

Twelve several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into one Volumn. Viz.
1 The Great Gospel Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and
applied from Christ's Priestly Office.

2 Satan's Power to Tempt, and Christ's Love to, and Care of His People under
Temptation.

3 Thankfulness required in every Condition.

4 Grace for Grace; or, the Overflowing of Christ's Fullness received by all
Saints.

5 The Spiritual Actings of Faith through Natural Impossibilities.

6 Evangelical Repentance.

7 The Spiritual Life, and In-being of Christ in all Believers.

8 The Woman of Canaan.

9 The Saints Hiding Place in time of Gods Anger.

10 Christ's Coming is at our Midnight.

11 A Vindication of Gospel Ordinances.

12 Grace and Love beyond Gifts.

A Congregational Church is a Catholic Visible Church. By Samuel Stone in New
England.

A Treatise of Politic Powers, wherein seven Questions are Answered, 1 Whereof
Power is made, and for what ordained. 2 Whether Kings and Governors have an
Absolute Power over the People. 3 Whether Kings and Governors be subject to the
Laws of God, or the Laws of their Country. 4 How far the People are to obey
their Governors. 5 Whether all the people have, be their Governors. 6 Whether
it be Lawful to depose an evil Governor 7 What Confidence is to be given to
Princes.

The Compassionate Samaritan.

Dr. Sibbs on the Philippians.

The Best and Worst Magistrate. By Obadiah Sedgwick.

The Craft and Cruelty of the Churches Adversaries. By Matthew Newcomen.

A Sacred Penegerick. By Stephen Martial.

Barriffs Military Discipline.

The Immortality of Man's Soul.

The Anatomist Anatomized.

King Charles his Case, or an Appeal to all Rational Men concerning his Trial.

Mr. Owens stedfastness of the Promises.

A Vindication of Free Grace; Endeavoring to prove, 1 That we are not elected
as holy, but that we should be holy; and that Election is not of kinds, but
persons. 2 That Christ did not by his Death intend to save all men, and
touching those whom he intended tosave, that he did not die for them only if
they would believe, but that they might believe. 3 That we are not justified
properly by our believing in Christ but by our Christ, believing in him 4, that
which differenceth one man from another, is not the improvement of a common
ability restored through Christ to all men in general, but a principle of Grace
wrought by the Spirit of God in the Elect. By John Pawson.

Six Sermons preached by Doctor Hill. Viz.
1 The Beauty and Sweetness of an Olive Branch of Peace, and Brotherly
Accommodation budding.

2 Truth and Love happily married in the Church of Christ.

3 The Spring of strengthening Grace in the Rock of Ages Christ Jesus.

4 The strength of the Saints to make Jesus Christ their strength.

5 The Best and Worst of Paul.

6 Gods eternal preparation for his Dying Saints.

The Bishop of Canterbury's Speech on the Scaffold. The King's Speech on the
Scaffold.

The Magistrates Support and Burden. By Mr. John Cordel.

The Discipline of the Church in New England, by the Churches and Synod there.

A Relation of the Barbados.

A Relation of the Repentance and Conversion of the Indians in New England; By
Mr. Eliot, and Mr. Mayh^w.

The History of Montross: and his Actions for Charles the First. His passions
for Charles the Second King of Scots.

The Institutes of the Laws of England by John Cowel, Octavo.

A description of the Grand Signiors Seraglio; or the Turkish Emperors Court.
By John Greaves. Octavo.

The reigning error Arraigned at the Bar of scripture, and Reason. By Franscis
Fulwood. Octavo.

The state of Future Life. By Thomas White. Twelves.

The Royal and delightful Game of Picquet, written in French, and now rendered
into English. Octavo.

De copore Politico: or, The Elements of Law, moral, and politic. By Thomas
Hobbs of Malmsbury.

The History of the Rites, Customs, and manner of life, of the present Jews
throughout the World. Octavo.

The London Dispensatory in Latin in Folio.

The London Dispensatory in Latin in Twelves.

A Poem upon the late Fight at sea, between the two great Fleets of England and
Holland.

These several Books of Physic and Chyrurgerie will shortly be printed in
English.
Riverius Observations, with fifteen hundred and seventie other Histories and
Observations of other men.

Riolanus Anatomy.

Bartholinus Anatomy.

All the Works of Daniel Sennertus, except some few, not proper for Translation.

The Idea of Practical Physic, being a complete Body of Physic.

And Fernelius his Works.

There wilspeedily be printed these Several pieces of Mr. Bridge of Yarmouth.
Viz.
1 Scripture Light the most sure Light: compared with, 1. Revelations and
Visions. 2. Natural and Supernatural Dreams. 3. Impressions with and without
Word. 4. Light and Law within. 5. Divine Providence. 6. Christian Experience.
7. Humane Reason. 8. Judicial Astrology. Delivered in three Sermons on 2 Pet.
1.19.

2 Christ in Travel: Wherein, 1 The Travel of his soul. 2. The first and after
effects of his Death. 3. His Assurance of Issue. 4. And His satisfaction
therein Are opened and cleared in three Sermons, on Esaias, 53.11.

3 A Lifting up for the Cast-down, in case of 1. Great sin. 2. Weakness of
Grace. 3. Miscarriage of Duties 4. Want of Assurance. 5. Affliction 6.
Temptation. 7. Dissertion. 8. Unserviceableness. 9. Discouragements from the
Condition it self. Delivered in thirteen Sermons on Psalm, 42.11.

His Four Sermons concerning

1 Sin against the Holy Ghost.

2 Sins of Infirmities.

3 The False Apostle tried and Discovered

4 The Good and means of Establishment.

Francisci Tayleri, Capitula Patrum: Hebraice and Latin edita Una cum
Annotationibus sensum locorum difficilium Experimentibus.

Francisci Tayleri, Lamentationes Jeremiae vatis, Denuo e fontibus Hebraicis
translatae, cum Paraphrasi Chaldaica, Mafora magna and parva, and Commentariis
Rabbi Shelomoh, Jarchi and Aben Ezrae, e Buxtorfii Bibliis magnis excerptis.

These Books of Divinity will speedily be printed.
Mr. Buroughs, on 1 Cor. 5.7. and 18, 19.29. And fifty nine Sermons on
Matthew, 11.28, 29, 30.

Seventeen Books of Mr. Thomas Hooker, being the substance of many Sermons
preached in New England.

Mr. CULPEPER'S PHYSIC FOR THE POOR OR Common People.
The Beginning.
IN setting down of Physics that can easily be prepared, the best way is to
distribute such remedies as are sound out, into such a Method, that every one
may know readily how to bring forth the Matter which he must choose, to begin,
or to go forward with in the cure of a disease since therefore the remedy,
which has its indication from the cause of the disease, is found out last, but
must be first put in execution, and before al things, the cause must be taken
away, that so the disease may be over come. 7. Meth. Chap. 12. Those
Medicaments that are contrary to the causes of diseases, do deservedly
challenge the first place, and they are many, as the causes are many: For some
of them do impair, or weaken, and evacuate the Matter that offends; some again
increase that which is wanting; and others do correct the ill quality of it;
some do hinder disorderly motion, or else recall rest that is faulty, to its
natural Station; others do root out the causes that are Peccant, by their who^^
kind (as they say) against Nature and Substance.

We shall begin with such as evacuate, and the rather, because that poor people
by reason of ill diet, abound with more Excrements, than the rich do: and so
usually fall into diseases from ill humors, rather than from Plethory.

Physics that evacuate are diverse, for some do sensibly evacuate the Matter by
the Belly, by Vomit, by Urine, by Sweat, by Spittle, by the Palate, by the
Nostrills. Others do digest insensibly, and turn it into Vapors, and these take
place in the Cure only after sensible evacuations.

Physics that purge the Belly.
Some of these respect only the impurity of the first passages, nor do they
extend their forces beyond the neighbor region of the Mesentery, and these are
called Lenitives; others do purge the second and third Region of the Body, and
are called Catharticks and Purgatives.

The Belly is loosned by Physics taken at the Mouth, or cast in by Clysters,
or else by Suppositories.

Those that are taken at the Mouth, are of two sorts for some of them do
strongly purge the Belly, and bring forth the Excrements; others work more
weakly, which are principally to be used, to keep the Belly loos that the
Natural Excrements of the first Concoction may not too long be retained.

Strong Purgers in a Chollerick Cause.
Whey Clarified and so drank from three pound, to eight pound, within one hour
space: but it will be more effectual, if in the first Cup you dissolve one dram
of common Salt.

Un-huld Barley Water, drank within the time of half an hour, from two pound, to
six pounds; especially if it be boyld with Raisons and Prunes

The fresh Juice of the purple Violet, from one ounce to two ounces: with one
cup of Barley or fountain Water.

The Juice of Damask Roses, drank the same way.

The Juice of the Garden Gourd, gently boiled with a fourth part of Ho^ey, and
a little common Salt, drank from three ounces to five ounces.

All these must be corrected by steeping of Wormwood in them, if a weak stomach
chance to abound with choler.

The Juice of Succory clarified, from Three ounces to five or six ounces.

Common Oil that is made of ripe Olives, boyld with thrice as much Fountain
Water til the moisture be consumed, drank alone, from four ounces to six
ounces, especially in the pain of the Heart.

The fresh Flowers, of the Cherry Tree or the Peach Tree, one small handful,
eaten in a Sallet.

Musk Roses, in number, four. Eaten in a Sallet, especially if they be yet
moist with Dew.

Twelve sweet Prunes gently boiled in Honey Water.

You may also prepare from Prunes, a What Rob or Sapa is, and how to make
several sorts thereof and the several uses of them, you may easily learn in my
last edition of the London Dispensatory in English
Rob, like to Sapa, of small Charge, and very pleasant, such as here follows.

Take sweet Prunes, one pound, sweet Cods sliced three ounces, Fountain Water
or sweetish white Wine three pound, boil them at a gentle fire, til the Matter
grow thick, then strayn it through a Hair Sive, and then boil it again, to the
consistence of a Sapa, of which, for a Sufficient Purge, give one ounce and
half, either by it self, or with a small Cup of Water or Broth. you may boil it
thicker, like an Electuary, for such as will take it only in a Bolus, but you
must add a fourth part of Honey, that it may last some time uncorrupted, and
you may give one ounce of it, or one ounce and half.

Purgers in a Phlegmatic Cause.
Take red Sugar one ounce, in the broth of a Pullet, or Water of Coriander.

Also take fine Sugar, from one ounce and half to two ounces the same way.

Good Metheglin not boiled, taken from eight ounces to about one pound. But the
windinss of it must be corrected with seeds of Annis, Fennel or Coriander.

Sweet Wine with the third part of raw Honey from four ounces to nine ounces,
adding also the sweet Seeds, that it may not stretch out the Belly.

The decoction of Fenugreek with a fourth part of Honey, or else alone with
Salt, from four ounces to six ounces.

The Herb Mercury, eaten like Pot-hearbs, seasoned with Salt and Oil.

So also is the Decoction of it good from four to six ounces, adding Salt to it.

The powder of both Hysops, from two drams, to four drams, with Oxymel, or
about one measure of the Decoction of it given alone, or else with Oxymel.

The Powder of crude Tartar from half a dram to two drams drank in Cock-Broth,
or Honey and Water, or in the Decoction of Hysop or Poley.

Rosin of the Larch Tree unwashed from three drams to five, for those that are
in years; but give children about one dram in Bolus or Pills.

For this end may be provided a laxative Oxymel that is very effectual.

Take eared or femal Mercury two handfuls, common Wormwood one handful, Honey
one pound, Fountain Water three pound, let them boil at a gentle fire to the
consistence of Honey, then ad Hysop and Poley of each one handful, the best
Vinegar half a pound, boil them again to the consistence of Oxymel, and then
strain them, the dose is from three ounces to four ounces alone or in Broth.

Also there are Pills easy to get and of small cost, Made of washed Aloes, which
may be given from one scruple to two drams or thereabouts. And Garzias ab horto
writes that if the leaves of Aloes are cut and boiled with a little Salt, the
Decoction drank to about eight ounces will Loosen the Belly without any harm,
four or five times.

Purgers in a Melancholy Cause.
Take the powder of Fumitory dried in the shade, about three drams in Water and
Honey Or,

Take the fresh Juice of the same Herb, from two ounces and half, to four
ounces or there abouts, in Clarified Whey or Broth of a Pullet.

So the Decoction of one handful of it is good, especially with Raisons, and a
little Salt.

Tartar used as was said before.

The Cream of Tartar is given from one dram to three drams, in Broth, or some
other Liquor.

Of Tartar, and a little of the Leaves of Senna of Alexandria, to stimulate it:
a very effectual Powder is made, and it is very pleasant. It is thus made.

Take the best crude Tartar, one dram, or Cream of Tartar one dram and half,
Leaves of Senna one scruple, seeds, of annis, or fennel, or cinnamon half a
scruple, fine Sugar half a dram, mingle them and make a Powder for one Dose.

Medicaments that Soften the Belly.
We must use these remedies that do not Purge strongly, rather to hinder the
retention of the Excrements of the first Concoction, than for any other
necessary and quick Evacuations; and such are these.

Things that Molify the Belly in a Chollerick Cause.
These following Herbs boyld as Pot-hearbs, and their Decoctions are
profitable, namely, Sorrel, Atriplex, Blites, Lettice, al kind of Sorrel,
Mallows and the stalks thereof, Spinach.

These Herbs soften more, if they be boiled with Raisons, in fat Broth or
seasoned with Oil and a little Salt.

Sweet Cherries boiled, especially with their broth and sprinkled with Sugar.

Also Juice of Cherries thickened with Honey, from one spoonful to two
spoonfuls, either taken alone or with Broth.

Peaches byoled and sprinkled with Sugar.

Sweet Apples byold.

Corinths without stones, and al of that kind either taken alone or steeped in
Clarified Whey til they swel, or boiled in White Wine, or Broth and sprinkled
with Sugar, taken one ounce or two ounces at a time.

Sweet Prunes raw, their outward skin being pulled off or boiled in Wine, and
sprinkled with Sugar.

The Juice of Ptisan, especially made of husked Barley.

Barley Bread.

Oil of ripe Olives eaten largely at Meals.

The chief use of al these, as of those that follow, is at the first course or
when the Stomach is empty, about two hours before Meat.

Medicaments that loosen the Belly in a Phlegmatic cause.
The sprouts of Stone Sparagus boiled and seasoned with Salt and Oil.

Oat-meal in Meats or Gruel.

Colworts, chiefly those that are curled, being gently boiled, and seasoned
with Oil and Salt.

Also the first Broth of Colworts, well boiled and seasoned as before.

Likewise the Juice of Colworts pressed out and drank in Broth, from two to
four ounces.

Beets used in the same manner, the white Beet is held to be more effectual
then the Black or Red.

The Leaves of Marigolds Boyld, and seasoned with Oil and Salt.

The first Broth of Chich Pease, or Lintels with Oil and Salt.

The Broth of all Salt fish.

New Figs very ripe.

Dry Figs six or seven soaked in Milk or sweet Wine, until they swell.

Some also in the spring time strew fresh Damask Rose Leaves on Figs, which
Leaves they often change for the space of Fourteen days, and putting them,
pressed close together, into a Vessel, they lay them up for their use: and use
to Eat two or three of them before meat.

New Walnuts, or for the lack of them, dry Walnuts soked in Water, until they
be Soft, and then Eaten with Salt.

Branny Bread or that which is course, which is made more effectual with
Raisions and Senna of Alexandria.

Bran alone Boiled in Broth.

The Decoction of Sweet Cods.

Medicaments that soften the Belly, in a Melancholy cause.
Capers seasoned with Salt gently Boiled, are eaten in Sallets with Oil and
Vinegar.

The young sprouts of hops, that first come forth, Boyld and seasoned with Oil
and Salt; they loosen more effectually, if you Drink the Broth after them.

All kind of new sweet Grapes, but especially whilst the dew yet hangs on them,
they are not so effectual, when they are hanged up to be kept. Sweet Wine drank.

Sawces made of the Juice of Wine Sod, that is, new Wine Boiled a little.

To these may be referred prunes and Raisons, especially in adust Melancholy.

Vinegar is made to season Sallets and to keep the Belly Soluble, after this
fashion.

Take Crude Tartar one dram: or Cream Tartar half an ounce: Leaves of Senna
three drams, good Cinnamon, or Annis Seed one dram: the sharpest Vinegar one
pound: make infusion a natural day, and keep the Vinegar for use.

Also Vinegar of Currence in which Tartar has been insused a whole night, is
not uneffectual.

Lenitive Clysters.
Clysters are made presently at a very small rate, to purge the Belly: of one
pound, of Flesh Broth, Oil of Olives or Line Seed Oil, and the dregs of Sugar,
of each three ounces: Common Salt one dram: mingle them.

It will be Cheaper, and more clensing, if a Clyster be made of natural Salt
Seawater, or Mineral Water, one pound: common Oil three ounces: Or.

Take the Decoction of Mercury, Mallows, Beets, and Bran, one pound: Juice of
Colworts, or Honey, or Juice of Beets, two ounces: common Salt one dram: mingle
them for a Clyster.

If there be need of any great Loosning, Augment the Quantity of the Oil to
four or six ounces: or Omitting the Oil, increase the quantity, of the
Decoction made with a great deal of Mallows, Marsh Mallows, Brank-ursin, and
pressed out strongly.

If there need Cooling, the Leaves of blew Violets, Pellitory of the wall, and
Barley must be added to the Decoction.

If the what that is, see my translation of Riverius Practice of Physic in the
Physical Dictionary at the end of the aforesaid Book.
Expulsive faculty be weak you must double, or treble, the quantity of Salt.

Loosening Suppositories.
Suppositories, made of one ounce of Honey, or the dross of Sugar Boiled hard,
adding a little Salt to it; If the Expulsive faculty, be sluggish, do mildly
stir up the Belly to void out the excrements.

Also the Roots of Radish or Beets, Cut into form of Suppositories, and smeered
with Oil, or Butter, with or without Salt.

The same is done with the stem of the Colwort.

Also a Fig turned the out side inward, and made like a Suppository, anointed
with Oil and Salt.

So Suppositories are made of Spanish Soap, or with Lard, or a Candle, anointed
with Oil or Butter.

Purgers by the Belly.
Those Medicaments that draw forth the excrements, by the Belly, and are called
Purgatives and Catharticks, though they hardly drive forth the Humors single,
but mingled together, yet they take their Name from the Excrement that they
most effectually purge. For which reason they may be reduced to four ranks,
according to the diversity of Humors that they purge forth: Namely to
Purgatives of Choler, Phlegm, Mellancholy, and Watery, or Bloody Excrements.

We may again divide all these severally, to distinguish them the better, into
gentle purgatives, which purge Mildly without gripings, from the parts that are
about the Liver: into forcible Purgatives, which drive forth from the remote
parts, and from the hollow Vein, not without some trouble: and Violent
Purgatives or furious, which draw from the furthest parts, and if they be not
well Corrected, they do their work most vehemently, and weaken the Patient.
With this distinction it is an easy matter for any one to make choice of
Purgatives, according to the different Situation, and the part that is
affected, and for the greater or lesser resistance of the Humor that must be
purged, and for the strength or weakness of the Sick that must endure it.

When Choler Predominates, these Medicaments are Convenient for a gentle
Evacuation.
The wood of Amara Dulcis Boiled; from one ounce to two ounces, with a quantity
of Annis Seed or Fennel-Seed.

The Yellow rind of the Black Alder-Tree dried in the shade, and chiefly at the
beginning of the spring; taken to four scruples: it is corrected, with some
aromatical Seed, and the Black Rind that is out-most; and therefore it is
dried, Boiled and bruised al together.

Monks Rhu-barb, or the Herb Patience of Mathiolus, the powder of the dried
Root is given from one dram, to one dram and an half in warm Broth, with five
or six grains of Ginger or Hysop.

Blew Violets dried in the shade, are taken, from one dram to two drams: with
the Broth of Chich Pease, or garden Pease, Boiled Moderately.

The great Bind-weed of Mathiolus, Bovled; from one handful to two handfuls. It
is corrected with such things, as bind the Stomach, chiefly with the Myrtle
Berries, Rosemary, and wild Galinga.

These Purge Strongly.
The lesser Centaury, in a Decoction; from two drams to three drams, in eight
ounces of Water: till half be consumed, adding Liquoris or Raysons to correct
the bitterness; it is given in Powder to one dram, or thereabouts, in the
Decoction, of Prunes or Raysons, chiefly in Barley Water.

Gratiola dried, is administered in Powder, to one dram: in Wine or Broth,
altered with things that Corroborate the Stomach.

When it is green, it is Boiled, from one dram and an half to two drams: some
of the Succories, especially being Boiled with it.

Petty Spurge, in Powder about four scruples: drank in Honey Water, with a
little Vinegar.

These Purge Violently.
Dogs Cole, the Juice of it, whilst it is fresh, and the Herb first dried in
the shade.

The same thing does Scammony, but it is corrected with Quinses, or the Smoke
of Brimstone, which is a new Invention, and it makes the Medicament gentle
enough, and void of all taste; either of these being grossly poudered, is
spread upon a brown Paper, and poudered Brimstone is cast upon the Coals
underneath, so that the Paper over it may receive the smoke: so soon as the
matter begins to Melt, it is taken away and reserved for use: and so may
Scammony be safely given, from five grains to fifteen: but if it be prepared
with Quinses: ten grains are sufficient; it may be given in some convenient
Liquor, or made up in Pills, or Bolus.

Of these spoken of, diverse purging Medicaments, may presently be provided;
concerning which we must generally take notice, that the purgation will be made
more gentle, if purgatives be mixed with Lenitives of the same kind, which must
be understood proportionably, of all other purgatives, for Example.

A potion to purge Choler may presently be provided thus.

Take Raysons half an ounce, sweet Prunes eight, The Lesser Centaury two drams,
Fennel Seed half a dram, Barley or common Water eight ounces, make a Decoction
at a soft fire, til half be consumed, strain it, and give it to drink.

If you will have a Bolus.

Take the Roots of patience in powder one dram: the flowers of the Lesser
centaury, half a dram, the pulp of Raysons cleansed from their stones, or the
what Rob is, and how to make it, you may easily learn if you Read the
Translation of my London Dispensatory: under the Title Rob you shall find
twelve several sorts of Rob, by which (with diligence and care) you may make
any other sort, of Rob.
Rob of Prunes thickened, six drams: Ginger six grains: mingle them and make a
Bolus.

If you meet with a Patient, whose Stomach abhors all Physic, then make
purging Prunes, or Currence, or Figs, if you steep the said fruit in some of
these purging Decoctions, that purge Choler, so long that the fruit swel, and
then six Prunes or three or four Figs, or half an ounce of Currence unto one
ounce, will be sufficient for a purge.

So you may provide these fruit to purge any other Humors, only changing the
matter of the Purgative Liquors, that they are soaked in, according to the
matter of the disease, whether it be Blood, Melancholy or Phlegm.

These gently Purge Phlegm, when it is predominant.
Agarick infused all night, in Liquor, in which Ginger is first soaked, or
Hysop or Time, or some other like hot and sharp Herb, and then it is dried, As
they make Agarick in See the way of making, Thoches of any sort, in my
Translation, of the London, Dispensatory, of the las^ Edition.
Troches: it is given, beaten into Powder from half a dram to one dram, in
Pills, or Bolus, or drink of Oxymel: it is infused from four scruples: to three
drams: or thereabouts, especially, in Honey Water.

Asarum of Mathiolus, Purges every Part of it, but the Root most effectual; it
is given in Powder, from one dram to two drams, with Oxymel, or Water and Honey.

The pulp of the Seeds, of wild Saffron is given; from two drams to five drams
or thereabout; the Emulsion of them, is given in sweet Wine, strong Wine, or
Broth; it is corrected with such things as heat, and corroborate the Stomach,
as spike, wild Galingal, Rosemary, etc.

The Juice of the Berries of Buckthorn, or dying-thorn, wherewith the the
Book-binders do Color the Coverings of their Books Yellow, is given in
substance, from three drams to six drams: it is corrected with sweet Herbs,
Seeds or Spices, especially with Ginger.

The thicker Rind of the Elm Poudered; is given from two drams, to half an
ounce or thereabouts in Wine, or the Decoction of Hysop.

Radix cava, or the Root of Bulbus, Fumitory dried in the shade, is given in
substance poudered one dram, in some convenient Liquor.

Of the Buck-thorn, there is made a pleasing Syrup two ways, and to be kept for
the Poor. after this fashion.

Take the Juice of the Berries of dying Buck-thorn clarified two pound,
clarified Honey two pound and an half, Boil it at a soft fire, to the
consistence of a Syrup, straind through a wide Linen Cloth, after wards whilst
the strained Liquor is yet hot, cast in of the best Cinnamon in Powder three
drams: Ginger one dram and an half, mingle them and keep it for your use, Or.

Take of the said Juice strained, and Boiled by it self, til a fourth part be
consumed, one pound: clarif^ed Honey eight ounces: Boil them together, to the
consistence of a Syrup, when they are Boiled, and taken from the fire, cast in
two drams of good Cinnamon. Give either of these, from one ounce, to one ounce
and an half, in Wine or Broth of Flesh, or in the Decoction of Hysop, or Poley,
or Time.

Strong Purgatives.
Take the Root of Esula, the greater, or the less, which is commonly the more
effectual. The Root is used, first steeped in Rose Vinegar, or Vinegar of
Quinces, and then dried and kept for occasion. If these Vinegers be wanting,
common Vinegar is altered, with some Stomachicall Astringent, as with Roses,
Barberies, wild Pomgranat^ Flowers, or Quinces, the Tendrells of Vines, Flowrs
of the wild Vine, or Myrtle Berries, it is given in Powder, from six grains to
twenty grains, it is Infused, from one scruple to five scruples: or thereabout,
in Wine, or Metheglin.

The Rind of the Root Esula of Venice, is of the same nature, prepared and
given the same way.

Garden-Broom which they cal^ spanish Broom, the Leaves, and Seeds, are given in
substance, from one dram, to two drams: in Infusion, or Decoction; from two
drams to half an ounce. It is corrected with Aromatical Wine, or some
Odoriferous stomachical remedies.

All the parts of cornerd Broom do the same effects; exhibited the same way.

Common Hermodactils or Meddow Saffron of Dioscorides; the Roots of them dug
up before they flower, and especially before the Leaves come forth, endure no
boiling or infusion, the Powder is given from two scruples to two drams in
Pills, or Bolus, or Lozenges, or alone in drink, in Wine, or Broth. The force of
it must be sharpened with some tart thing, as with Ginger, Hysop, or Time, also
it were good to ad some Antidote to correct the Windiness of it; as, amongst
common antidotaries, are Rue, Goats Rue, or wild Angelica Root, and the
purgation will be the safer

The Root of the yellow, wild Daffodil is given in substance, from two drams to
half an ounce in Wine or Broth: it is corrected with odoriferous stomach
strengthners.

The dry Root of the black wild Vine of Mathiolus, is given in Decoction; from
one dram and an half, to three drams. In substance poudred from half a dram to
one dram and half, or thereabouts; it is corrected with the Pills, or seeds, of
Citrons, or Orenges or with spike.

These Purge Violently.
The young sprouts of Bryony, half a handful, Boiled as Pot Herbs, and taken,

The Juice of the young sprouts of the same, taken in Wine, or Broth, or the
Decoction of Hysop, Origanum, or Calamint, from one dram to two drams.

Little Cakes of Wormwood, fried in Oil, that is distilled from the sprouts of
Bryony, do the same.

The Root of Bryony dried, and Boiled from one dram to three drams, or
thereabout, or the substance from one scruple to one dram, or thereabouts, may
be taken in Wine, or Broth, being corrected with Wormwood, or some thing to
strengthen the Stomach.

The pulp of the wild Gourd is steeped, from five to twenty grains, decocted
from ten grains or thereabouts, to twenty four grains, it is corrected with
some Stomach strengthner, and that, by the slipperiness of it, can make the
Decoction sooner; as Mallows, Fe^^greek, and Citron Seeds, tops of Wormwood, or
Cinnamon.

To this belongs also strong Wine, as wormwood wine, that for one night has
been wasted in a hollow wild-Gourd.

The gourd that is Pear-fashion, does the same, but something weaker, and
therefore the Dose is all most double.

Chamelaea, especialy the Leaves of it, are Boiled from half a dram to one
dram: in substance they are taken from ten grains to one scruple, it is
corrected with Wormwood, and Barley.

Thymelaea does the same, the same way given.

Laureola the Male, which Mathiolus calls Chamaedaphne, and the Foemal, which he
calls Daphnoides, do the same, but not so strongly, it is Boiled from one dram
to three drams: but given in substance from fifteen grains to one scruple, or
to two scruples, and is corrected the same way.

All the Tithymals, except that with Broad Leaves, which does Vioently Purge
Watery Humors, are given many ways; the Milk of it is given from five to
twelve grains, the small Branches and Leaves, are given in substance, from half
a dram to four scruples, the Rind of the Root is given in substance, from one
scruple to one dram, but infused from four scruples, to three drams or
thereabout.

Of these sundry remedies may be compounded, and be used presently, or be
reserved for use. for Example.

A Drink.
Take prepared Agarick four scruples: infuse it in three ounces of the
Decoction of Hysop for ten hours, then strain it, and add Oxymel one ounce and
an half, mingle it for a draught, Or.

Take the Roots, of Esula prepared two drams, the Leaves of Laureola, being
fresh, one ounce, Leaves of Myrtles, and Hysop, of each one handful, Fragrant
White Wine, two pound and an half, Clarified Honey, one pound: Boiled all at a
gentle fire, to a mean consistence: then add Annis Seed one dram, Coriander
Seed prepared half a dram, Cinnamon one dram, Boil them again to a Syrup,
strain it, and keep it for use. The Dose is one ounce and an half to four
ounces.

A most pleasing Powder.
Take Hermodactills, cleansed from their outward Skin, one dram, Tartar, crude
or prepared one scruple, Ginger, six grains, fine Sugar half a dram; mingle
them, and make a Powder to be given in Wine.

what Bolus is, and the way of making them, you may see in my English
Dispensatory. Or the end of my Practice of Physic, in Folio.
A Bolus
Take agarick prepared two scruples, Tartar half a dram, Cinnamon five grains,
the pulp of Figs, or Raysons cleansed from their stones half an ounce; mingle
these for a Bolus.

Pills.
Take Hermodactils, and Agarick prepared, of each one scruple and half* Ginger
six grains: make a Powder, and with Honey, or Oxymel; form it into Pills.

When Melancholy predominates, these will Purge gently.
Dodder Boiled, from six drams to one ounce and an half, for one Dose, and it
is thus corrected with Wormwood.

Take Herb Dodder, one ounce, topps of common Wormwood two Pugils, or two
drams, common Water ten ounces: let al be Boiled to the consumption of half,
add to them about the end; Seeds of Annis, or Fennel, grossly bruised half a
dram: strain it for one draught; if you Boil under half an ounce, it opens
only, but purges not.

Epithyme of Greece, for there it grows naturally, may be used in substance, to
half an ounce, in clarified Whey, or Milk or some such cooler, in Decoction;
from six drams to one ounce and an half; but it must be Boiled moderately. The
slow purging quality it has, is corrected with tart things, as Pepper or
Ginger: In the place of it, Time may be used, which has the same force, and
must be so prepared: but in Europe the Black Time is most commonly used. That
which is white and grows in Syria, is more effectual, but it is better, in the
Decoction of it, to use other Melancholy purgatives, than to use it alone,
because it Purges slowly.

The Root of Polypode in substance, is given from one dram to four drams in
Cock-broth, or Cream of Barley; it is Boiled from six drams to ten drams; it is
corrected with such things as discuss Windiness, and such as are a little
astringent for the Stomach, as Citron Seeds, or Orange Seeds, or Corriander
Seeds, or Spik of Italy.

The great and small Leaves of Senna are used in substance, from one dram to two
drams; they are infused from two drams to six; but they endure not Boiling,
they are corrected with sweet Seeds, and other things that dispel Wind. By
infusion is made Senna Wine, of which half a Cup may be given, observing the
former proportion, for a just Purge: But if it be only to loosen the belly,
then every Dose of Wine must contain no more then one ounce of Senna infused
but one night.

These Purge strongly.
Consiligo of Mathiolus, which Tragus thinks to be Black Hellebore, and
Dodonaeus thinks that it is Buphthalmus, has the same virtue, but something
Weaker, as has Black Hellebore of the Apothecaries, and it must be prepared
the same way.

Foemale Sannicle of Fuchsius, the Root of it is of the same force, and needs
the same preparation.

These Purge Violently.
Purgative Antimony: and it is made so by being thrice Calcined with the double
weight of Salt Peeter, at a fire not too Violent, and stirring the matter
continually with an Iron that it burn not. It is given in substance for
Children, from four grains to nine grains, and to those that are of ripe years,
from six grains to twelve grains, and to them that are hardly purged, from
twelve to sixteen grains; give it in any Liquor, or in a spoonful of a
Panatella or Ptisan, it will work the more easily, if you add some Grains of
cremor Tartar.

The Root of Black Hellebore prepared: there are diverse preparations of it,
whereby this Medicament maybe made as gentle as Senna, commonly the rind of the
Root is infused in the strongest Vinegar, and then is dried in the shade for
use. It is given in substance from one scruple to about two scruples; in
Decoction from one dram to about two drams; in infusion from half a dram to
four scruples; it is corrected with sweet Seeds, chiefly of Daucus and Nymphya
which are the proper correcters of it.

If you would make it to Purge gently, and would use it instead of gentle
Purgatives, before you dry it for your use, let it Boil a while in Vinegar, for
so it loses much of the force, or when it is Boiled, or infused, as they
ordinarily prepare it, do but cast away the first Decoction or Infusion, and
Pour on new Liquor to the same Root, for the second Infusion, or Decoction to
be administered.

Moreover, of Hellebore they prepare a double extract, one more effectual then
the other.

First, Take Roots of Black hellebore, washed in white Wine, and cleansed from
their filth, one pound: slice them and infuse them twenty four hours in four
pound of the best white Wine, adding to it, Flowers of the Water Lillies one
handful, Daucus Seed two drams, or the Root of Daucus, half an ounce, about the
end, boil them gently, that the Roots may grow soft, and swel; then press them
in a press; let the Juice be strained, and purified, and thickened, sensibly, by
a gentle heat; and when it is as thick as Honey, add a fourth part of Mastick;
the dose is from half a scruple to one scruple; in Pills or Bolus.

The second is the more ordinary.

Take Roots of black Hellebore, be they green or dry, so much as you please,
boil them in eight times so much water, til a third part remains, then crush
out the Roots most forcibly: add the Expression to the Decoction, and pressing
both of them through a double strayner, thicken them together to the
consistence of Honey; adding an eight part of Mastick: when the Juice is thick,
you may give it from sixteen grains to half a dram: in Pills or Bolus.

Also, of Hellebore is made a purging Apple, if the small Roots preserved, and
dried, be stuck into an Apple, and that Apple be roasted, then pull out the
roots and let the Patient eat the Apple: or if the roots ly in the Apple, for
the space of a Natural day being stuck in, then cast away the roots and eat the
Apple raw.

Lastly, of Hellebore is made an Oximel, or any purging syrup, if the roots be
boiled in it, but they endure great boiling: there is almost the same purging
faculty in black Hellebore you buy in the shops, which Mathiolus cal's, black
Hellebore with a blew flower, and black Hellebore that has a greenish flower,
which Mathiolus calls bastard black Hellebore; but the first purges with less
trouble then the latter, which therefore wants the better preparation, and must
be given in less quantity.

Of the foresaid things, may be prepared a Syrup most profitable and pleasant
for poor people, to be kept to Purge the Melancholy Humors; thus,

Take Roots of Black Hellebore prepared three ounces, Borrage, Bugloss,
Fumitory and Dodder, of each one handful, Pome Citrons cut into pieces half a
pound, Fountain Water five pound; let them boil at a gentle fire to the wasting
of three pound, then cast away the Herbs; add Juice of sweet Apples half a
pound; Boil them again til half be consumed: then press all forth strongly,
strain them and clarify them; add purified Honey one pound, Boil all to the
consistence of a Syrup; the Dose is one or two ounces.

But, presently such Medicaments may be made, as for Example, a drink.

Take Leaves of Senna three drams, Seeds of Fennel or Annis one dram; infuse
them twelve hours in the Decoction of hops, four ounces, or the Decoction of
Raysons, and make it Boil once, and then strain it; add What Oxymel Simplex is,
and how made with the vertuet thereof, you may see in my Translation of the
London Dispensatory, of the last Edition.
Oxymel Simplex (namely to open the passages and to scour thick Humors) one
ounce, mingle them, make a Potion.

A Bolus may be made presently thus,

Take Leaves of Senna in powder one dram, Tartar, Annis Seed or Cinnamon, of
each one scruple; the pulp of Raisons purged from their Stones half an ounce;
mingle them and make a Bolus.

Pills may be made thus.

Take Leaves of Senna two scruples, Root of Black Hellebore half a scruple,
Seeds of Daucus and Cinnamon of each fix grains; powder them and with Oxymel
make Pills.

Such a powder may be made.

Take of Purging Antimony eight grains, Cream of Tartar one scruple, Cinnamon
and Sugar of each half a scruple; mingle them, make a powder to be given in
Wine or Broth. Or,

Take Leaves of Senna one dram, Tartar and fine Sugar and Cinnamon of each one
scruple; mingle them, and make a powder for one.

When Watery Humors prevail, these will Purge gently:
The Root of the white Thistle beaten to Powder, is taken from one dram in
Wormwood Wine, or Oxymel; or in Decoction from two drams to half an ounce, it
is corrected with sweet Seeds or Wormwood.

The Root of the wonderful Herb of Spain that carries a diverse colored flower
is taken any way to two drams.

Wild Mercury in a Decoction one handful and an half, or Boiled as Pot Herbs,
and seasoned with Oil and Salt and eaten.

Garden flowerdeluce, that bears a blew flower, the Juice of the Root newly
pressed forth, and purefied from two ounces to three ounces, or thickened from
two drams to half an ounce, chiefly in Wormwood Wine.

The Root of Anthora Scraped, from one scruple to two scruples, taken in Wine
or Broth: it needs no correcter.

The Root of wild Cucumber dried, given in substance from fifteen grains to
about half a dram, it is infused, beaten grossly from two scruples to about five
scruples, it is Boiled from two drams to half an ounce:

It is corrected with things that help the stomach. But the best way to give
it, is to infuse it a night in Wormwood Wine.

Four Sprouts of Dwarf-elder, that have four Leaves, Boiled in Wine or Broth,
and eaten as Pot Herbs.

The Root of the same steeped in Wine, from two drams to three drams.

The Juice of the flowers and fruit of the same is given from five drams to one
ounce, in strong Wine or Broth corrected with Wormwood.

The powder of the Seed of the same is given from half a dram to about one dram
in the same Liquor.

The Juice of the same thickened with Honey, to the consistence of a Syrup; is
given from half an ounce to one ounce, either alone, or in wine or Broth.

The Elder Tree does the same, prepared the same way, only there is a greater
purging Quality in the Rind of the Root then in other Parts.

The Juice of the wild Lettice, from three drams to about six drams, with Honey
or Oxymel or sweet Wine, corrected with wormwood.

The Husked Seed of the common Ricinus, the What Emulsions are, see my
Translation of Riverius in the Physical Dictionary at the end thereof.
Emulsion of it, is given from one dram to three drams with wine or fat Broth,
corrected with some Spice; or infused, or lightly bruised; from three drams to
six drams.

Soldanella or Sea Coal is given in Decoction of fat Broth, from one handful to
two handfuls, also the young shoots are eaten, as Pliny says, or the young
Tendrels, Boiled like Pot Herbs. They are corrected with stomach Corroboratiues.

Out of this plant may be made a plain extract to be kept for use, and it is
very pleasant, if the Juice of the Leaves be pressed out, Clarified, and
thickened, and be made into Pills with a fourth part of Mace and Mastick, or if
it be made thick with a fourth part of Honey, and an eight part of the Juice of
wormwood, the Dose will be from one dram, to two drams or thereabouts.

The Root of the white Vine which Mathiolus makes to be the third Kind of
Clematitis, Boiled from about half an ounce in wine mingled with Equal quantity
of water: it is corrected with temperate Stomachicall things; namely with
Coriander Seed or Myrtils. These Purge Vehemently.

Ricinus of America, it is taken from half a grain to a whole grain, or the
Seed is steeped all night in wine; or else drink the emulsion of the Seed in
Broth.

Granum Dende of Avicennae, which Mountebanks sell up and down for the Seed of
Ricinus of America, does the same effect as Ricinus of America does.

The Seeds of Cataputia, if they be great are given from seven to ten, but if
small, from eight to fifteen. Or else made into Pills or Bolus with Figs, or
taken in Emulsion, with Hydromel; they are very troublesome to the Stomach,
therefore you must drink after them, Broth altered with Wormwood, and Seeds of
Citrons or Orenges.

Tithymal with broad Leaves, given according to all the parts of it, in the
quantity, and manner aforesaid concerning the other Tithymals that Violently
Purge fleam.

Of the foresaid may be prepared a pleasant and profitable Syrup, to be kept
for use. As,

Take the Roots of ordinary Flowerde-luce fresh, six ounces, wild Cucumber
dried in the shade, two ounces, Roman wormwood and Origanum, of each one
handful, pleasant white Wine two pound and an half: make infusion for five
hours, then Boil them at a gentle fire to the Consumption of a third part,
strain it; then add clarified Honey one pound, Boil all again to the
consistence of a thin Syrup, add about the end, Cinnamon or Annis Seed two
drams.

The Dose of this Syrup will be from one ounce to two ounces at the most.

Presently compositions may be made thus;

For a Potion.

Take the Roots of wild Cucumber grossly bruised one dram, tops of Roman
wormwood one handful, Seeds of Annis, Fennel or Cinnamon one scruple, the best
Wine three ounces, infuse them all night, in the morning, strain them; to the
straind Liquor add Oxymel Simple one ounce; mingle them for a drink. You may
Leave out Oxymel if you please.

For a Bolus.

Take the Juice of Flower-de-luce thickened three drams; the tops of wormwood in
Powder half a dram, Annis Seed half a scruple, Figs half an ounce, mingle them
for a Bolus.

Pills.

Take Seeds of dwarf Elder two scruples, or the Roots of wild Cucumber one
scruple, Cinnamon half a scruple, Powder them, and make Pills of them with
Juice of wormwood what may Suffice.

Purging Clysters.
Purgatives that are given in Clysters are used for a two fold end, namely,
either to stir up the Faculty Expulsive that is very dull, as is used to be
done in the Sleepy Diseases are most excellently treated on in Riverius
Practice of Physic in English,
Sleepy Diseases; as the Palsy and Dotings, and they are therefore called Tart
Clysters; or else to draw the Excrements from the remote parts that are
ordained for Evacuation or for revulsion sake They are prepared the same way
and in the same quantity as we said already of lenitive Clysters. adding only
to the Decoction for a common Clyster some purging Herbs; as centaury the less,
or Gratiola in a Choleric cause; the sprouts of wild Saffron, broom Leaves,
the pulp of Coloquintida bound up in a wide Cloth, the Roots of Esula, or sow
Bread in a Phlegmatic Cause, the Roots of Black Hellebore in case of
Melancholy; the Leaves of Dwarf-Elder, or the Elder Tree in a watery Cause; but
that they may Purge, and supply the place of a Medicament to be taken at the
Mouth, they must not be cast in beyond the quantity of eight ounces; namely the
same quantity that may be also taken at the Mouth, and a Clyster to Purge the
Entralls, must go before, for so a Purgative Clyster may be held in many Hours,
and it is fitly actuated by the Heat of the Intestines. But the quantity of
Medicaments to be taken at the Mouth, must be doubled in Clysters; because they
are not so easily brought to action by the Intestines, as they are by the
Stomach. As for Example, to pull back and to Purge Phlegm, such a Clyster may be
made.

Take Leaves of Mallows, Beets, Origanum, Chamomel of each half an handful,
pulp of Coloquintida bound in a Skin half a dram, Seeds of Carthamus two drams,
Fountain water one pound, Boil them to the Consumption of half, to the straind
Liquor add of the dregs of Sugar or Honey two or three ounces; make a Clyster.

Sharp Suppositories.
Purging Suppositories, seem to have no purgative power of themselves, that is,
to have no drawing quality to fetch the Humors from the remote parts to the
Intestines, but only to stir up the Belly, when it is slow to expulsion; by
which stirring up, sometimes by accident it falls out as it does in purgatives;
that the excrements that ly in the Veins, and distant Parts, are thrust out by
the Belly, but not by the Medicament drawing them, but only by the Expulsive
Faculty awakened: Whereupon sometimes sharp Clysters supply the room of a
Purgative Medicine, and are more safely given to any that are weak, then
Clysters are.

Sharp Suppositories are made of Honey or the relics of Sugar boiled hard,
adding for every ounce of them from one grain to ten grains of Coloquintida,
Scammony, or of both Hellebors, or of the Milk of Tithymals, or Esula, and some
Sharp Salt, as Salt Armoniack or Salt Nitre, for Suppositories.

For Vomiting Medicaments.
There are two sorts of these also, for some only Purge the Stomach, being Void
of all attractive virtue, and these belong to the Rank of gentle Medicaments;
others again evacuate the superfluities they draw to the Stomach, and are
Purgatives. The former, of themselves hardly provoke one to Vomit, unless they
offend some Stomach that nauseats them very much, but they need some outward
help to stir them, as by putting the Finger or a Feather into the Throat; but
the latter provok Vomit without any outward help.

These move Vomit gently.
In a hot cause: Warm Water or Barley water, fat Broth, water and Oil, they are
all given lukewarm, from one pound to two pounds, to those that are of ripe
years, but to Children, from eight ounces to one pound.

In a cold cause, that is thin: the Decoction of Citron Seeds or Orange Seeds
in Broth, to one pound with two ounces of Oxymel.

The luke warm Decoction of bay Leaves, to one pound.

The Root of Daffodil Boiled and eaten, or the Decoction of it drunk in the
quantity aforesaid:

The Powder of the Root of bettony, from one dram to three drams with Broth and
Oxymel.

The Powder of the Pompion Root, from one scruple in the same Liquor.

The Decoction of Snails in hedges, in water or Broth.

In a cold cause and thick: the Juice of Radish from one ounce to two ounces
with Broth and Oxymel.

Nitre from one scruple to one dram with Metheglin or fat Broth.

Broth taken with Oxymel or Honey, with which mingle one scruple of Ginger,
Hysop or Pepper.

Purging Vomits.
All those things that Purge by Vomit, do also move the Belly, and therefore
they are then to be Chosen, when nature is more inclined to Purge upwards; they
may be brought to three ranks, as they were that Purge the Belly. Some are
gentle, that draw only from the Parts that lie round about the Stomach, and
with small trouble move the Stomach, others are strong, and draw more
effectually from the Remoter Parts, and trouble the Stomach something more.
Some are violent, which draw vehemently, and Evacuate matter that is very
thick, or such as is contained in the remotest Parts, and cause Vomit with
great forcing of the Stomach.

When Choler predominates, these are gentle: The Yellow rind of the Black
Alder, when it i^ fresh, Poyled in water or in Broth from two drams to four
drams.

The Seed of Garden Cresses Poudered, drank in water from three drams to six
drams.

Mountain dwarf-Cherry, of Gesner, which Tragus makes to be Sea-Purslain
swallowed down from five to eight Cherries, especially in water or warm Broth
drank after them.

The Root of Asarum draws all most equally, Choler and Phlegm; it is infused
from two drams to five drams; the substance in Powder is given from one dram to
two drams.

These are strong. The Juice of the Root of Mandragora from half a scruple to a
whole scruple in Honey Wine; and we must use it warily, for it is not without
danger.

Where Phlegm predominates, these Vomit gently: Agarick unprepared, from two
scruples to two drams in fat Broth or Oxymel.

The Seed of Bastard Senna with Bladders, is given in substance from one dram,
to two drams, and is infused from two drams to half an ounce; it is corrected
with spiced Wine.

The Seed of Bastard Senna with Scorpion Cods does the same.

The flowers of Garden Broom, and the green branches steeped, or Boiled; from
two drams to half an ounce in Broth.

The Seed of Spargula poudered, from two drams to four drams, in sweet Wine or
Broth with Oxymel.

These do strongly Void Phlegm that is predominant.

The Seeds of Staves-acre, about one dram and an half in Powder, with plenty of
sweet wine: you must drink fat Broth upon it, until you fall to Vomiting, least
if it stay too long, the Stomach should be inflamed.

The fresh Leaves of any of the Tithymals Boiled, with sweet Wine, from one
dram and an half to four drams.

The Juice of the Leaves of Tobacco from one dram to two drams in Broth, that
is altered with the Seeds of Citrons or Oranges.

White Vitriol from half a dram to one dram in Broth.

These Void Phlegm Violently.

The Seed of the Peascod-Tree poudered, from half a dram to one dram; the rind
of the same dried, and poudered does the same, but something more weakly.

Those Medicaments that are compounded of these, are almost of the same Kind,
as for Example.

For Choler:

Take Barley Water one pound, Oil of Olives that were sufficiently ripe two
ounces, Root of Asarum in powder one ounce; mingle them for a drink.

For Phlegm.

Take Broth that is altered with the Seed of Citrons or Oranges one pound,
Oxymel two ounces, Juice of Radish one ounce, crude Agarick two scruples;
mingle them for a drink.

If you please to make a syrup for a Vomit, it may be as this.

Take the green branches of Garden broom one ounce and an half; bay Leaves and
Tobacco Leaves of each one handful, Seeds of Citrons or Oranges Grosely poudred
two drams, Common Water two pounds, let them Boil until half be consumed;
strain them. In the strained Liquor, infuse for twelve hours, of the Roots of
Asarum and raw Agarick, of each three drams, strain them again, and clarify
it, and add to it of clarified Honey one pound, Boil all at a gentle fire to
the consistence of a Syrup; the Dose of it, is from half an ounce to one ounce
in Broth and warm water.

Of the same kind is this Electuary, which is very effectual.

Take the Roots of Asarum, and crude Agarick of each half an ounce, Roots of
Betony and Pompions of each two drams, Cinnamon one dram, Annis Seed half a
dram, Powder them to very fine Powder, and mix them with Honey clarified four
ounces, and make an Electuary, the Dose of it is from nine drams to almost
twelve drams, in any Liquor that is pleasant.

For Melancholy and black Choler that are predominant. None but strong and
Violent Medicaments are convenient; because the Humor being of its own nature
the most heavy, is something more hard to draw upwards than other Humors.

These cause Vomit strongly: prepared Antimony, the Flower, the Calx and the
Glass of Antimony are easily prepared: but the Tincture is something more
difficult, and so is the Oil, which being precipitated into cold water passes
into white Powder, not unlike to Flower. All these are given in substance from
three grains to six grains, in a Panatella, or Ptisan, or some
Stomach-Conserve, or Aromatic Wine, corrected with wormwood, Rosemary, and
other a little astringent Stomach-remedies, they are steeped from four grains
to ten grains, chiefly in strong Wine, or wormwood Wine. Of this is made a most
pleasing Syrup, Evacuating most easily both upwards and downwards, beyond all
other Antimonial Medicaments. thus,

Take the Flowers or the Glass of Antimony, one dram and an half, the best
white Wine one pound, infuse it for two days, natural: strain it, and add to
it, Honey clarified ten ounces; Boil them to a Syrup. The Dose is half an ounce
to one ounce and an half or thereabout, taken by it self, or in some pleasant
drink.

These work Violently: the prepared Root of white Hellebore, or the pith pulled
out, and the Root steeped in Rose Vinegar one day, and dried again in the shade
for use: in the place of Rose Vinegar, take Vinegar of Quince which is better,
or some other, that is altered with something that is a little astringent, and
cooling for the Stomach, it is given from half a scruple to one scruple, not in
substance, least the Mouth of the Stomach should suffer Convulsion, but, in
infusion, which is done two ways: the first is the way of the Ancients, who
did stick the small Roots of Hellebore into a Radish for one night, the next day
they crushed our the Juice of the Radish, and gave one ounce of the Juice in
Ptisan, or a thin Panatella may be used in the place of it, for to moisten the
Mouth of the Stomach, that it fall not into Convulsions.

The second is better and more pleasant than the first. As take half a scruple
of the Root; stick it into a piece of a Quince, and Boil it in the same, then
take out the Roots, and give that for a Bolus to eat; or the Juice pressed out
of the Quince may be put into Wine, or fat Broth, altered with the Seeds of
Citrons, and so drink it. White Hellebore is made far more gentle, if the Root
with the pith pulled out, after due infusion, be Boiled in Vinegar, and be then
dried and kept for use.

Where watery Humors are predominant; these are accounted gentle: the Juice of
the Root of Dwarf-Elder from one dram and an half to three drams in fat Broth,
altered with tops of Wormwood.

The Juice of the Root of the Elder-Tree does the same, taken in the same Dose.

The Berries of Water-Elder taken to two drams, drink fat Broth after them, as
we taught before.

Strong Vomiting Medicaments, the Leaves of Spurge pulled upwards, are given in
the same Broth from one dram, to one dram and an half.

Stronger.

Elaterium, by reason of the bitterness, taken in Pills or Bolus. It is
commonly mixed with some Aromatical Pills, it may be mixed with the pulp of a
Fig with a little Wormwood, which is done by expression.

The fruit o^ wild Cucumber, is given from three grains to ten grains, but that
which drops out of the fruit only pricked is given from two grains to six.

Medicaments, that Evacuate by Urin, by which not only the ways of the reins
and the Bladder, but also the whole body is purged, by the help of the Veins
and Arteries. They are made of Diuretic Medicaments, whereof some are properly
so, hot and dry, and sharp and of thin Parts; others improperly so, that have
but remiss heat, or enclining also to cold, but yet are of thin parts, which
are to be used chiefly in Fevers, or when the Reins or Liver are over heat;
unless perhaps there be present, some corrupt Venomous matter in the veins that
requires speedy Evacuations, which is better and sooner performed with proper
and hot Diuretics, the chief and the most Obvious in both kinds are these.

Proper what Diuretics are, see ^^y Translation of Riverius and the Dictionary
at the end thereof.
Diuretics; Asparagus, principally the Root, Smallage Seed, or the common
Sesely, the Root and the Seed of Carduus, the Root of Cucumbers and the seed,
common Seed, the Roots of al sorts of Eringos, the Roots and Seeds of Fennel,
the Seeds of both Rochets, the Leaves and berries of the Bay Tree, also the
Roots and the Rind, wild Mints, Turnep Seed, the Root of Prickly, Rest-Harrow,
Penniroyal, all the parts of common Parsley, the Roots of both kinds of Radish,
Madder Roots, the young sprouts of Kneeholme, the Tendrells, and the Roots,
Savory, wild Time; the Seeds are given in Powder, from half a dram to one dram,
(the same must be understood of Medicaments that are Diuretics improperly)
some are Boiled in Wine or Water, but best of all in Broth of Chich Pease: yet
the powder of the Roots is given also, especially of those that are of a woody
substance, as of Rest-Harrow, and the Bay Tree. Of these, some may be
Compounded presently.

This Powder is most effectual.

Take the Roots of Rest-Harrow two drams, the Seeds of Rochet and Bay Berries
of each one dram, Cinnamon half a dram, mingle them, make a Powder: give one
dram in Wine or warm Broth of Chich Pease.

It is more pleasant, if it be infused all night: then give it one Boil, and
strain it, cast away the Dregs, and then drink it. It will be made a more
effectual remedy yet, if you put in some drops of the Liquor which comes from
Salt put into a hole in a Radish, kept in a moist place til it melt.

To Anoint the Privities, such an Oil is made presently, which help the Voiding
of the Urin.

Take Bay Leaves, Hors-Mints, wild Time, Pennyroyal of each one handful,
Chamomel one handful and an half, Radish Roots half an ounce, Cummin Seed two
drams, common Oil one pound and an half, white Wine one pound, make an infusion
for four hours; then Boil all til the moisture be consumed, and then press all
out, and strain it again.

A Plaster also may be made of a Radish cut, and Boiled with Leaves of Parsley
and Smallage and Pennyroyal, then bruise them all and lay them to the Privities.

Improper Diuretics; Seeds of Gourds, Cucumbers, Citruls, and Melones (make
Emulsions of them,) of Mallows, Gromwel Seed, Alkekengi, Kernels of Cherries,
Stones of Medlers, Shells of Filbird Nuts, the Juice of ripe Lemmons, the Leaves
and stalks of Straw-Berries, Maiden Hair, the Roots of both kinds of Brambles,
of Grass, especially Reed Grass, of Liquoris, C^nkfoyl, and Radish the Rind
peeled off, also the Broth of red Chich Pease is profitably administered, with a
fourth part of Juice of Lemmons, this drink is held for a secret.

Take the Juice of Pellitory of the Wall three ounces, the Proth of Chich Pease
four ounces; mingle them for to drink.

This also is supposed to be of the same kind.

Take Liquoris half an ounce, common Water half a pound; Boil them at a gentle
fire til half be consumed; strain it and add to it Juice of Lemmons one ounce;
mingle them.

Also for a speedy remedy may be given with great profit, two ounces of the
Juice of Radish in strong Wine that is hot.

Outwardly may be laid a common and excellent Plaster of the Leaves of
Pellitory either alone, or pounded with a Radish, and so fried in a frying Pan
with Butter and Oil, and laid hot to the Privities, if you can get Oil of Dill
or Camomel it is better than common Oil.

Medicaments that Evacuate by sweat.
These also are of two sorts: some are properly to cause sweat, which Melt the
matter and turn it into Vapors; others are improperly so, which make the
matter easily convertible, and so by accident cause sweat, and these are very
convenient for the small Pox at the beginning, and for hot affects of the Skin,
and hot Fevers when the motion of Nature is outwardly inclined toward the Skin.

Proper for sweat, are the Decoction of Garlic, of Box Wood (with which the
French Pox is as easily cured as with Guaiacum,) of Germander, great Celondine,
Carduus Benedictus, Juniper Wood, and Bays, and of sweet Chervil: they are
given from four ounces to eight ounces or thereabouts, and they are made more
effectual being Boiled in Water and Honey and white Wine.

The same Decoction purified and thickened with a gentle heat afford plain
extracts; that may be given to one dram or thereabout, or else mingled with good
Wine, or the Decoction of some improper sweating Medicaments, or made into
Bolus, or Pills, and to drink after them three ounces or thereabouts, of the
Decoction. For example.

In the Diseases of the nerves and Joints from a cold Defluxion; make such a
Decoction.

Take Wood of the Bay Tree, and Box Tree of each one ounce and an half, cut
them small and infuse them one day in five pound of common water, add Leaves of
Betony, Germander and Ivy of each one handful; let them Boil at a gentle fire
til a third part be consumed; strain it to be drank at five Times.

Improper Medicaments to move sweat. The Decoction of Camomel, Chervil,
Fumitory, unhulled Barley, Millet, Lintils lightly BoyIed, Roots of Hops,
Cynkfoil, Tormentil, Leaves of common Pimpernel, Scabious, and Winter
Gelliflowers.

Of these is made a common Syrup, called the Syrup of St. Ambrose, of one part
Wine, and two parts of the Decoction of Millet.

Other Medicaments may be suddenly made, as for example; in a Cutaneous effect,
make such a Decoction.

Take the Leaves of Scabious and Fumitory dry, of each one handful, Roots of
Hops half an ounce, Barley Water one pound and an half, Boil all at a gentle
fire to the Consumption of almost the half, and strain it out for one draught.

When the small Pox appear:

Take Leaves of Pimpernel one handful, Scabious half a handful, of the first
Decoction of Lintels one pound, Boil them til a third part be consumed, strain
it out, to drink at one draught.

The Decoctions of these are given in greater quantity, than are the Decoctions
of those that are properly to cause sweat. Namely from about eight ounces to
two pound.

And you must know that sweat can hardly be procured by the help of these
Medicaments, unless the force of them be derived outwardly to the Skin by
attracting Medicaments; by the benefit whereof, the pores of the Skin also are
loosned and prepared for sweat: therefore about an hour and an half after the
taking of a potion to sweat, the Body must either be put into a dry Bath, or
some hot natural or artificial Bath; or else must be well covered with Garments;
or else hot Tiles must be applied to him, or vessels full of hot Water; or the
Skin must be gently rubbed, or Cupping Glasses without Scarification must be
applied on diverse Parts, as necessity shall most require.

Medicaments that Evacuate by Spittle.
Those things that unloose the Stuffing from the ways of breathing, are called,
from their office, Expectorating Medicaments, all which may be comprehended
under a tripple difference, for some are convenient for thick spittle, namely
incisers and scowrers; others are for thin and unsavory spittle, as dryers, and
a little thickning; others again are to temper Salt spittle, and to hinder the
corroding of it.

Therefore when the spittle is Moderately thick, a What Lohoch is, see the end
of Riverius Practice of Physic in English. And the Dispensatory in English.
Lohock is needful of water and Honey, or Oxymel, crude Honey, a Decoction of
Figs, Liquoris, sweet Cods, Raysins; adding a quantity of Colts Foot, Lungwort
or Sc^bious; for the Pouders of these Herbs may be mixed with the Oxymel, to
the consistence of a Lohoch, or a Soft Electuary, in which form the powder of
Iris, is used to good profit, mixed with Oxymel.

For Spittle that is very thick, these are proper: the Decoction of Oak of
Jerusalem, Elecampane, Hatchet-Fetch Hysop, Horehound, Savory, Time, long
Aristolochia, the Pouders of these are mixed profitably with Oxymel for a
Lohoch, or they are mingled with Honey in form of an Electuary. Or;

There is Compounded a sweet drink with Oxymel, and the Decoction of the said
Herbs, as also by the infusion of them, Hysop Wine is wont to be made, and Wine
of Elecampane; which the Ancients used Ordinarily.

The common people use to make a profitable Electuary of the Roots of
Elecampane Boiled in Water, (it were better to take Methegsin or sweet Wine)
and passed through a Hair sieve, and then mingled with twice as much of
clarified Honey, and Sod to a just consistence.

Besides these, the Powder of Brimstone does profit well, or the Flower mixed
and taken with a rear Egg. The Seed of Nettles mixed in Lohochs, or Aqua-vitae
with a third part of Sugar, made into a confection, or mixed with Oxymel. So the
Powder of the Lungs of a Fox taken from half a dram to one dram in Wine or
Metheglin, to be drunk, or mixed for a Lohoch.

Saffron drank in Wine from half a scruple to a whole scruple.

Sows Lice washed in Wine, and infused to one dram al night in white Wine; then
pressed forth and drank, the dregs being cast away.

The Rozin of the Larch or Firr Tree, licked or swallowed down in Bolus: for a
licking Medicament it must be dissolved in clarified Honey, for it will mingle
very well with Honey.

A most excellent Balsom may be made for this purpose.

Take Oil of ripe Olives (for the rich take Oil of sweet Almonds) that is not
rank, half a pound, sweet white Wine four ounces, let them Boil til the
moisture be consumed: then add Flower of Brimstone three ounces, stir them
continually and very Softly at a gentle fire; and when the Flowers are
dissolved: add Rozin of the Larch Tree or the Firr Tree, or if it can be had,
the Gum of the Firr Tree two ounces and an half, mingle them to perfection. It
may be put into Lohochs, or taken inwardly with the foresaid Decoctions or with
white Wine.

But that the spittle may come forth the more easily, least the Humor that is
thick, should grow dry with the use of these things, it is best always to add
some Emollients and loosners, such as are for Lambitives and internal uses,
the Root of Liquoris, the pulp of Raysons, Roots of Mallows and Marsh Mallows.

It is good to Anoint the Stomach outwardly with Butter, chiefly that which is
rank; either alone or mingled with the Mucilage of Mallows and Marsh Mallows.

An Application of a Colewort Leaf well anointed with Putter, and sprinkled
with Powder of Cummin Seed, and so laid hot to the breast is much spoken of.

When the spittle is thin and unsavory: the Decoction of round Aristolochia,
Iuiubes, wild Plumbs, Golden Rod, Penniwort, Veronica, the Juice of somewhat
sour Pomegranats, either by it self, or with a little Honey.

All sorts of licking Medicaments made of white starch, Gum Arabic, Tragant,
all Physical earth, with Honey or Oxymel, mixing a quantity of Brimstone or
Mirrh, or round Aristolochia, or the Cream of Ptisan with some white Starch.

For Salt spittle, the Decoction of Barley, Iuiubes, Liquoris, Raysons sweet
Prunes, are convenient, and chiefly in the Decoction of the Feet and Head of a
Calf, Kid or Lamb, also of Snails, and Snails of the woods.

Emulsons of sweet Almonds, and of the four lesser cold Seeds chiefly adding
the Flower of starch: the Cream of Ptisan, or a Panatella with the same
Emulsions, adding also the Emulsion of white Poppy Seed, when the Saltnes is
urgent: the Juice of sweet Prunes licked up.

Fresh Butter licked, as also added to the Meat we eat, and Anointed on the
Stomach outwardly.

If you please to make a Syrup for this use.

Take the Juice of sweet Prunes, the Juice or Decoction of Purslain, of each
half a pound: Clarify them, and add to them ten ounces of purified Honey: Let
them boil to the consistence of a Syrup. The use of it, is for a Lohoch, and
for Syrups.

Medecines that evacuate by the Pallat.
The Any that desire to know exactly the Diseases of the Head, and the cures
thereof, let them read Riverius Practice of Physics by me translated into
English.
Head is purged three ways: By the Mouth, by the means of the Channels of the
Pallat, namely, by Ma^^icatories, Cargarisms, and Anointings of the Palate.

For a Masticatory in a hot cause, a Paper is good, especially a brown Paper,
figs, bitter Almonds, or Peach Kernels, Raisons, a whole piece of a Pome Cicron,
the peel of an Orange.

In a cold Cause, are good, the Roots of Cyprus, Acorus, both Angelica's,
Gard^^ (...), Master-wort, Seeds of Fennel, Annis, Seseli, Siler montanum,
Grains of Juniper, Bay Berries, and the tender Leaves.

These are more violent, and are fit for extreme coldness; the Leaves of
Sciatica Cresses, Water Pepper of Hors-Rhadish, Garden Cresses, Savory,
Mountain Hysop, wild Penyroyal, wild Rue, Root of Pellitory, Country Mustard
seed, Mustard seed, Staves-acre; which, that they may the more easily be chewed
by the Teeth, they must be mingled with a little yellow Wax, and so made into
little Bals or Morsels.

For a Those that desire to know more fully what they are, and their use, let
them read Riverius Practice of Physic, and the Physical Dictionary at the end
thereof.
Gargarism, which is proper only in a cold cause, are convenient, the
Decoctions of Calaminth, Germander, Hysop, Bay Leaves, Lavender the greater,
Penyroyal, wild Time, Italian Spike, which are partly gargarised, and sometimes
held hot in the mouth.

The most violent Gargarisms are made of the Decoction of Herbs, that were set
down for the strongest Masticatories, and chiefly, if we put some Aqua vitae
in, or some of the Confection Diasinapi, which the Italians call Mostarda.

For to anoint the Palate, which Remedies have place also alone, in a cold
Cause; the said Decoctions are useful, with honey thickened to the consistence
of a Syrup.

Moreover, Aqua vitae, or common Mostards, or some soft Electuary made of the
foresaid things.

As for Example,

Take Bay Berries, and Juniper, of each two ounces: Mustard seed, and Leaves of
Savory, of each one handful: Seeds of Annis, and Fennel, of each one dram:
Roots of Acorus, and Master-wort, of each two drams, pounded and siefted:
Mingle all with two pound of clarified Honey. Make an Electuary.

Medicaments that evacuate by the Nostrils.
Of things that purge the Head by the Nostrils, some of them by their acrimony
cause one to sneeze; and these are very fit for a very thick Humor that is pact
close in, and where the Expulsive Faculty is dull. Some again provoke the Humor
without sneezing; amongst which, some may be safely used, even when the Head
enclineth to heat; others belong only to a cold humor, and head.

The Pouders of all the propounded Remedies for strong Masticatories, if they
be blown in, or snuffed up into the Nostrils, they cause one to sneeze.

The Decoction of Gith, or black Hellebore, the Juice also of the Root of
Sowbread, Briony, and Elaterium, dissolved in other liquid Nasals. The same is
performed, but something more gently, by the Root of Sowbread cut like a Tent,
and put into the Nostrils; and the Shel of an Orange candied.

Also without sneezing, the head that is over hot, may be evacuated with the
Decoction, or Juice of Mallows, or Blites, especially the white Blites; Leaves
of Betony, or Coleworts, and Barley, Roots of Beets put into the Nostrils,
especially if it be wet in warm Water; also anointing the Nostrils with fresh
Butter.

In a cold Cause, Decoctions are good, or the Juice of Pimpernel, Bettony,
Roots of white Beets, the great Celondine, Ivy of the wall, Garden Hysop, Root
of Flower-de-luce that is green, Marjoram, Sage, Tobacco.

The Indians also use to make Tents of a round fashion, of the Roots of
Sowbread, or Flower-de-luce, and to anoint them with Butter or Oil, and put
them up into their Nostrils, or else to steep them in water, when they will not
use them for sneezing.

Moreover, The Fume of the said Herbs, when they are dry, is very convenient,
especially of Marjoram, Hysop, Time, taken through a Cane; by which they take
the fume of Tobacco. Errhines also may be made of them. As for Example.

In a cold cause,

Take the Juice of the Root of Flower deluce made thick, the Juice of the
Flowers of Ivy made thick, of each two drams: the Powder of Marjoram, or Time,
one dram: Fresh Butter half an ounce: mingle them for a Liniment, and anoint a
Ten^ of Cotton to put into the Nostrils. Or,

Take the Juice of Blites clarified by filtring very well, four ounces: Agarick
grossly poudered one ounce: make infusion for one night, strain them the next
day, and draw it up warm into the Nostrils, and it will wonderfully purge the
Head without any great Commotion.

Medicaments that Evacuate Insensibly.
The matter these are made of is of a large extent. For all hot things by
rarefying and turning the Humors into air, do evacuate insensibly, so do all
dry things by restraining moisture, and all astringent things by pressing them
forth, may be reckoned in the number of these: but things that digest are
properly so called, which do by degrees turn the Humors into vapors: and those
that discuss and do it by heaps, that dissipate also gross Humors: and
blistering Medicaments that do both vehemently, and by violent heat remove the
matter that lies deep, that is not sufficiently attenuated, and draw it to the
Skin.

Digesters.
Amongst these the most obuious are: wormwood, Dill, al kinds of Smallage,
Chamomel, stinking Chamomel, Foenugreek, Roots of Reeds, white Lillies,
Lin-Seed, Honey, Melilot, Rosemary, Mallows, chiefly strong Wine; these may be
given in Decoction, Syrups or Electuaries.

Of the same may be made Oils, by descent, and Fomentations for use outwardly;
to which these that follow may be added, that are not to be given inwardly, as
the Roots or Sow-Bread, wild Cucumber, Daffodils, the Leaves of Dwarf-Elder,
Elder-Tree, Alum, Nitre, Vitriol, common Salt.

Also outwardly may be used alone to anoint with rank Butter, chiefly that
which is Salt, and Oil with Salt.

For Fomentations: the water of quick Lime, the water of hot Baths, sweet water
that is very hot, strong Ly, hot Lees of Wine, the mud of hot Baths, or the
holes in the Baths, hot Sand, hot Ashes with or without Bran, and Salt made up
in a Bag.

For Plasters: Snails bruised with their Shells.

Old Cheese, with the Decoction of Salt flesh, especially Hogs flesh, and
beaten together for a Plaster.

Bean Meal made up with Wine or the former Decoctions, adding if you please
Oil, Oxymel or Honey.

Privately to consume the Milk suddenly, and without danger, that it may not
clotter in the breasts: women hold these for secrets, which either will not or
cannot give suck: the green Leaves of wall-Nut Trees carried in their bosom.

A Liniment made of an equal portion of Honey and Rozin, laid on constantly
with a Linen Cloth.

A Cataplasm of Bean Meal and Oxymel, or the Decoction of Parsley, or Mallows
Boiled with Vinegar.

A Fomentation of equal parts of Parsley and Vinegar, adding a little Saffron
to it.

Discussives.
Amongst these the easiest to provide are: the Seeds and Flowers of Agnus
Castus (by the steeping whereof is made an Oil that is very Proper against the
Cholick) Garlic, the Root of Both Angelicas and the Seed, Annis Seed, Seeds of
Oranges and Citrons, and the Pills of them, also Calamint, especially of the
Mountains, Seeds of Cummin, Caraway, Daucus, Fennel, Hysop, Maisterwort Root,
the Berries and wood of Juniper, Lavender, the Leaves and Berries of Bays, that
are good for the Cholick and Pains of the Matrix, Lupins, Marjoram, dry Mints,
Bazil, Origanum, Poley, Pennyroyall, Rue, Savory, wild Time, Italian Spike,
Time, all which are given alone or mingled in form of a Decoction, Syrup,
Electuary, or the Powder of them to one dram, may be drank in Wine, or strewed
upon Meat.

Hitherto appertain Aqua-vitae, and Old Wine which the Ancients were wont to
give with Pepper grosely beaten.

You may prepare, at a Cheap Rate, a most effectual Tincture, whereof one or
two drops drank in Broth or Wine does powerfuly, discuss winds, and put into a
hollow Tooth that Aches from a cold cause, or but laid to it, presently takes
away the pain.

And this is it:

Take Black Pepper beaten grosely two ounces, the best Aqua vitae eight ounces;
put all into a Viol of a straight Neck, and keep it well stopped eight days in a
hot place, and you shall have a deep Red Tincture, to be kept in a Glass that
is stopped fast.

If you will make an Hippocras Wine, you may do it thus.

Take Seeds of Annis and Fennel of each two drams, Roots of Angelica, Acorus,
Master-wort of each half an ounce, Leaves of mountains Calamint, Lavender,
Marjoram, and dry Mints of each one handful, Bay Berries one ounce; Bruise them
all grosely and put them into a Cullender, and strain through it the best white
Wine, doing it so often, until the matter seem to have lost its sent and
Acrimony; drink one or two ounces of this Wine by it self, or with some other
Liquor.

Fomentations may be made outwardly of the Decoctions of the said Herbs; but
most effectual are the fumes of them, that rise by quenching a Firestone, or a
Mil-stone in the said Decoctions. But the Decoctions are made more strong in
the best Wine, or strong Ly, and natural brimstone waters.

Also a bag of Millet torrefied, is very good, with the Flowers of Chamomel,
and Cummin Seed, or the Leaves of Rue; by which the pains after Childbirth are
mightily assuaged.

Some extol the pulp of Coloquintida, with a third part of wormwood put into a
bag.

This is held for a secret, to dry up the water that puffs up the Belly: A
Plaster made of equal Parts of the Leaves of Rue and wormwood bruised, and
made with Honey, to a Cataplasm.

Also a fomentation of Quicklime quenched in brimstone water of the Baths, is
excellent.

For anoyntings: Remedies may be presently made, such as are the Oils made by
descent from the said Herbs. For example.

Take Bay Berries, one ounce: Leaves of Rue, one handful: Common Oil, half a
pound: the strongest Wine, three ounces. The Berries being grosely beaten, and
the Leaves chopped, make infusion for three hours; Boil them til the moisture be
consumed, then strain them.

To al these, add a large Cupping Glass, with a great Flame, and set it on the
part that is puffed up; to which, for the discussing of wind, Galen ascribes a
power, as it were an Enchantment.

Sometimes also without: discussing winds are drawn out of the Body by some
Instruments that Chirurgious use, that work suddenly. So the winds are drawn
forth that extend the great Intestines, thrusting in (after a Clyster given to
void the Excrements) a dry Syring, and drawing it downwards.

Hippocrates used Smiths Bellows.

By the same way the winds that fill the Matrix, by help of a Syring, with a
long thin Neck, may be drawn out.

Rubificatives.
They are called Rubificatives, because they make the Skin extreme Red. When we
have made use of digesters and discussers, and cannot prevail, then we must use
Rubificatives, as in an Old Hip-Gout, and as it often comes to pass in a
stubborn, heavy Headache: These are laid to the Skin, Bruised, and made like a
Cataplasm, either alone, or with hot Vinegar; and the most usual are these that
follow: Garlic, wake Robin, Blew flower, Flea-bean, water Pepper, Sciatica
Cresses, Hors-Radish, wild Pennyroyal, Mustard, Staves-acre, common Crowfoot.
Also a Plaster may be made by it self of Pigeons, or Gooss dung, or of dry
Pitch melted with a fourth part of some hot Oil, as of Rue, or Bays, and laid
often on the part, and then pulled off again, until the part first Waxes red,
then swells a little, and then sinks down again: for if it be let alone no
longer than whilst the part grows red; it is rather to be called a heating
remedy, and such as helps the member to nourishment, than that which Evacuats
insensibly. Wherefore on a cold, and dry Stomach, and Limbs that are wasted
with the Palsy, it is of excellent use, after due Evacuations of the Body.

Thus much for Medicaments that respect the matter peccant in quantity.

Medicines that augment necessary Matter, where it is deficient.
Sometimes good Humors are wanting, and some things that proceed from them; al
which are augmented of themselves, by the help of Nature changing good
Nutriment; but they are produced by accident, with the help of such Remedies as
remove the things that hinder Nutriment. Therefore al these Remedies that
strengthen heat, and that allay the distemper of the humors, and of the inward
parts by heating them, increase blood; the Catalogue of these must be sought
for amongst things that alter: and for this reason, those things that engender
Milk and Seed, the first whereof is necessary for the Nutriment of the Infant
that is born, the latter for Procreation, do properly belong to Nutriment,
because both of them proceed from blood; yet improperly those Medicaments may
be said to engender milk and seed, by the help whereof, the blood is more
easily and plentifully altered into the Nature of them both.

Medicaments that increase Milk.
Those Medicaments are said also to increase milk, that correct the impure
blood, make it run, and spread, drive it to the breasts, and draw it thither.

Those correct it, that purge naughty humors which pollute the blood, and
others that allay the excessive qualities of the blood.

Such are, in a hot distemper, Barley Water, and Broths altered with mallows,
green Knotgrass, and Sow-thistles.

The milky juice of Sow-thistles, and Dandelyon, mixed with Broth, and taken
from two, to three spoonfuls, is much approved.

Also the Powder of Natural Crystal is given with great profit, and is held for
a Secret, taken in any of the said Decoctions, from half a dram to a dram.

In a cold distemper, a Decoction is good, especially of the tops of dry Dill
in Broth, and of new Annis Seeds, or Garden Cresses, of Fennel, of fresh Poley,
or Leeks boiled in Water.

Broths altered with Dill, do spread, and by a certain propriety drive it to
the Breasts: So do Smallage, green Parsley, white Chiches, and all kinds of
milk Trefoyl, common milk-wort, and Perewinkle, used the same way.

Blood is drawn to the Paps by frequent sucking, gentle rubbing, and loosening
Fomentations: the best are made of hot white Wine. Also of the Decoction of
Chamomel, and Dill, that are green; as also of mallows, Lin-seed, Roots of
marshmallows, if they be boiled in Wine or Water.

If these profit not, Rubificatives must be applied until the Breasts wax red.

For this purpose amongst the Cretians, they were wont to strike and rub the
Breasts with the Leaves of green Nettles; by the frequent use whereof, the Dugs
were said to grow so great, that they would yield milk enough.

Amongst the cheapest Remedies, these are thought to engender much milk: Hens
Eggs, white Wine, Rice boiled in milk, Grewel made with fine Wheat Flower and
milk, or Pottage; also Pottage made with fine Wheat flower and white Wine,
adding thereto, yolks of Eggs, and Butter: But the meat is made more pleasant,
if you put Sugar in the place of the Flower.

Things that increase Sperm, or Seed.
Those Nutriments chiefly serve to augment Sperm, which by a Physical force,
move hot and thin Vapors, fit to cause erection of the Yard.

The cheap things are these: Flesh of Ducks and Geese, cooked especially with
Garlic; the Brains of Calves and Pigs seasoned with Pepper and Salt, Beef
Broth boiled with green Mints or Rochet, the Juice pressed out of the Lungs of
a Ram roasted, Swans Eggs fried with Butter, all kind of shell Fish seasoned
with Pepper, the Polypus, the Cuttle, and Crab seasoned the same way, Mushroms
also seasoned with Salt and Pepper.

Amongst Pulse, are the white Chich Pease, Beans, and Kidney Beans.

Of Fruit, are Hazel Nuts, Chest-nuts, mad Apples seasoned with Oil, Salt, and
Pepper, sweet Apples and Grapes hanged up for to be eaten.

Of Herbs, is Garlic, yet young and fresh, Artichoaks, Asparagus.

Young Onions, especially Scabious, Rochet, Clary, Turnips, Rape-roots,
Parsnips, and Alizander Roots, with Pepper and Salt.

These are thought to be more effectual; the thickest Root of all the
Satyriums, the Pizzle of a Bull, or Heart, Boars stones, and of Foxes, and a
Boar Pig that has engendered, washed in white Wine, and dried in an Oven. The
Powder of these may be drank mixed together, or else a part in white Wine to
one dram.

This Powder most easy to be provided, is most effectual:

Take the Pizzle of a Bull, and Borax of the Apothecaries, of each three drams:
the most substantial Root of Satyrion, two drams: Ginger, and Cinnamon, of each
one scruple: Saffron half a scruple: Mingle them, and make a very fine Powder;
give of it in the morning, and after Supper one dram, in a little of the best
Wine.

Medicaments that alter the Cause of the Disease.
The Cause of a Disease is peccant diverse ways; namely, by an open, and a
secret quality. This requires Preservatives against Poison, that is either
original, which is corrected by Medicaments that are cold, hot, moist, dry, or
derived from the original, as thick, thin, tough, hard: Hardness comes from
dryness and congelation; so does acrimony. To these are opposed such things as
make thin, such as thicken such things that cut, scour, soften, dissolve
clotted matter, and such as metigate: which things correct the first qualities,
and thickners, thinners, and toughness that proceed from them. They are wont to
be called Concocting and Preparative Remedies, because by the allaying of the
qualities that exceed, the humors are the more easily conquered by the Natural
heat; and if there be any of them wholly unfit to be concocted, they are thus
made fit to be driven out with more ease. Other Remedies that take away the
sharpness and hardness, do not only serve to prepare the humors, but to
mollify the parts that are exasperated and hardened. Also those that scour
away toughness, do very much serve for other uses, as for all foulness of the
Skin, and for filthy Sores, and therefore they are to be numbered apart, after
those things that prepare the humors.

Medicaments that prepare Choler.
If Choler be thin and hot, Barley is good, Lettice, Purslain, Water Lillies,
blew Violets; the Decoctions of these, from eight ounces, to one pound, or
thereabouts.

The more effectual are, the Juice of Barberries, sour Pomegranates, Bastard
Corinths, and the Juice of unripe Grapes well purified, which may be added to
the said Decoctions, from one to two ounces.

The last Remedy, is clarified Whey, with the Emulsion, of one dram, or
thereabouts, of white Poppy Seed, or Garden Nightshade, and great Housleek
added to the Decoctions.

In this case, we must forbear to give sweet Syrups.

If Choler be thick, either by adustion, or by the mixture of other Humors,
cold attenuative Medicines are good, or such as are temperate, as Sorrel, Juice
of Lemmons, Citrons, Oranges, that are ripe, Gum, Cichory, green Maidenhair,
Endive, Strawberries, Liverwort, Hawkweed, all the Sorrels, wild Endive,
Sow-thistle, Dandelyon, four Trefoils, Seeds of Melones, Citruls, Gourds, and
Cucumers; of which, Emulsions are made.

Of the said herbs, are made Decoctions with flesh Broth, or Water, to which
may be added about two ounces of the Emulsions of the said Seeds, or of the
Juice of Citrons, Lemmons or Oranges.

Also the Juice of Herbs clarified may be given, from one ounce to three
ounces, in Broth, especially in the winter Time, when fresh Herbs cannot be had.

Of these clarified Juyces, Syrups may be presenty provided, if an equal
quantity of clarified Honey be added to them, and so Boiled to the consistence
of a Syrup, it is mingled with the Decoctions from one ounce to two ounces.

Oxymel simple may supply the want of all these, about one ounce being put into
the Decoctions, and Syrups of them al are very useful for this Humor, if there
be no adustion, for which, the best thing is Clarified Whey to about two pound
with the Emulsion of the foresaid Seeds.

Preparatives for Phlegm.
All these heat and attenuate, and if the Phlegm be very clammy and thick, they
cut also and scour away: the same belong to Salt phlegm, it they be tempered
with those thing we mentioned to prepare Choler.

Therefore if phlegm exceed not in thickness and toughness, these are convenient.

For the Head, betony, Germander, Goats Rue, Marioram, Rosemary, Sage, Arabian
Stoechas, the Root of wild setwall.

For the Eyes, Celondine, Eyebright, Fennel, Vervain.

For the nerves and Joints, ground Pine, Juniper Berries, Hog Fennel, Primroses;

For the Breast, Figs, Liquoris, lungwort, Coltsfoot, Scabious.

For the Heart, Root of Angelica, holy Thistle, Caltrops, Herb Bennet,
Ground Ivy, Lavender, Pimpernel, Scordium, the Root of Swallow wort.

For the Stomach: Wormwood of all kinds, chiefly the common wormwood, pills of
Oranges and Citrons, Seeds or Mints.

For the Liver, wormwood, Agrimony.

For the Spleen, Ceterach, Epithime, Fumitory, the rind and Root of Capparis,
and Tamarisk.

For the Matrix, Mug-wort, Maidenhair, Calamint, Feaverfew, Pennyroyall, Savin.

For the Reins and Bladder: Smallage, Sparagus, Fennel, Parsley, Knee-holm.

For the whole Body, Cinquefoil, Tormentil, Oxymel, rich Metheglin.

Of these; Syrups may be made, or Decoctions in the Broth of a Pullet or sweet
Wine, to which it were good to add Oxymel from one ounce to two ounces.

Decoctions are unprofitable for the Stomach and Intestines, because they pass
so soon from the affected part.

Therefore Oxymel only is good, to two ounces; or a Syrup made of the foresaid
Herbs. To which may be added to discuss winds, an Emulsion of the Seeds of
Citrons, or Oranges, to two ounces, or thereabouts, in fresh Broth. Or after
the Custom of the Ancients, Oxymel may be given, wherein the tops of Wormwood
have been soaked all night.

If Phlegm be too thick and clammy, we must never leave out Oxymel, which must
be added to Decoctions convenient, wherein must be boiled some of these cutting
Herbs, and scouring, namely, Hysop, Horehound, Poley, Savory, wild Time, Time,
Goats Marjoram.

If you would make an Oxymel suddenly, which may be like Oxymel of Squils for
its cutting and scouring Faculties, it may be such a one to free the
Obstructions of the Bowels.

Take Leaves of Bettony, Agrimony, Wormwood, Fumitory, Cink foyl, of each one
handful: Hysop, Horehound, and Time, of each one handful and an half: Roots of
Sparagus, Fennel, Parsley, of each one ounce: Fountain Water four pound: Honey
two pound. Let them boil at a very soft fire til the Honey be clarified
perfectly; then strain them, and add of the best Vinegar one pound, Annis Seeds
two drams; Cinnamon and Ginger, of each one dram. Boil al at a gentle fire to a
Syrup; then strain al again through a wide Cloth.

Preparatives for Melancholy.
If Melancholy be not adust; Borrage, Bugloss, Dodder, stone fern, Maidenhair,
Liquoris, Hops, Balm, Fumitory, Hearts tongue, sweet Prunes, are convenient; and
to their Decoctions, Oxymel is profitably added, by reason of the Vinegar that
cuts the thickness of the Humors.

If the Humor be adust, things that prepare thick Choler are to be used, and
moreover the Juice of sweet Apples, which has a peculiar prerogative here.
Also it may be mixed from one, to two ounces, with the Decoctions of the said
Herbs.

Also a Syrup may be made of it, taking one part of clarified Honey, and two
parts of Juice of good Apples clarified, and so boil them to the consistence of
a Liquid Syrup, to the consumption of one third part.

Medicaments that allay Acrimony.
Those things allay Acrimony, which either temper it, with a pleasant moisture,
and water the matter; or else do anoint it with an Oily, clammy substance,
whereof there is excellent use in cutting the pains of the heart, and
bloody flux.

These water and temper it: Fountain Water, or River Water, sweet Almonds,
Emulsions of the four great cold Seeds husked, Barley Water, and the Cream of
Ptisan made thereof, Jujubes, Lettice, all Milk, especially of Heifers, and
Cows, Whey, Liquoris, sweet Prunes, and Apples, Water Lillies, Purslain,
Sow-thistles, the Fruit of Winter Cherries, Nightshade, both Housleeks, Venus
Navil.

Of the Herbs; Decoctions, or Syrups, are made which are made more sweet, and
fit to temper the Humor, if you take Wine in place of Honey, and boil it with
an equal part of the Juice of the Herbs, to a due consistence.

Of these also are compounded, Medicaments that are proper for some parts.

For pain of the Eyes, from sharp Defluxions, a Cataplasm of a sweet Apple
boiled in Milk, is good, and laid warm to the Eye.

For the heat of Urine, the Decoction of Liquoris is singular, either alone, or
with the Fruit of Winter Cherries, taken daily, six ounces in the first repast,
when the Stomach is empty.

For the Gripings of the Guts, the Decoction of great Housleek in Rain Water,
or two ounces of the Juice of it in the Broth of a Chicken.

To these, add Lead only for outward uses to anoint with, Oils being beaten in
a Mortar of Lead till they become thick.

The white and water also of an Egg, are very unctious: so is white Starch in
meats, new Butter, the fat Broth of the Entrals and the head of a Kid, Calf,
also of the feet of Hogs and Calves; old Oil, chiefly boiled with Fountain
Water till the moisture be consumed. Amongst Herbs, are Mallows, Marshmallows,
Roots of Borrage, and great Consound; for the Decoctions of these herbs are
mucilagenous.

It is held for a Secret for the heat of the Urine, to drink the white of an Eg
with the like quantity of Juice of Lemmons.

For the bloody flux, the Decoction of Marshmallows altogether.

Hitherto appertains the feet of Partridg broyled; the Powder whereof given to
one dram, in Water of Coriander, if a fever be present, or if there be no
fever, in black Wine, will cure an old Dysentery in three days.

For painful Ulcers, and Clouds that are joined with Ophthalmia, or redness of
the Eyes; the Balsom of Sugar dissolved in the white of an Eg that is hard
boiled, and it is made excellent after this fashion. Put poudered Sugar into a
glass that is first well washed with strong Vinegar: then boil it upon the
Embers to a perfect redness: after that dissolve it by Deliquium in an Egg
boiled hard, and the yolk taken out.

For outward Remedies; are profitably added, Goats and Deers Suet, fresh Hogs
Grease, Kids fat, (whereof with Apples, is made the common Pomatum) the Marrow
of four-footed Beasts, Wax, especially white Wax, and the Mucilages of
Lin-seed, Foenugreek, Flea-seed, Quinces, the Roots of Marsh mallows, Mallows;
of all which there is a peculiar use in healing the choppings of the skin: yet
the Mucilage of flea-seeds, and Quinces, is given inwardly, with inward
Medicaments for pains of the Heart.

Scouring Medicaments.
Scouring Remedies seem to be contrary to such as allay, and temper, because
they wipe away the clamminess, and what is fast to the Parts they scour off; of
which kind are all salt, nitrous, sharp, bitter things, which are good for all
foulness of the Skin, foul Ulcers, and Obstructions: But because the matter of
these, is manifold; to avoid all confusion in so great variety, we shall
principally lay down here, such scouring Medicaments as are proper for the
foulness of the Skin; and others that take away Obstructions, and purge Ulcers,
may be sought for in the Title of things that open obstructions, and breed
flesh in Wounds, of which afterward in the mustering up of Medicaments that
respect Diseases.

These cleanse the Skin weakly: Bitter Almonds, Peach Kernels, Juice of Lemmons
and Citrons, Butter, chiefly that which is salt, Antale, Mother of Pearl, Bean
flowers, husks, and meal, Foenugreek, Bran, unhulled Barley, Flowers and Roots
of white Lillies, Leaves and Berries of Bays, Dock, the wild and the sharp,
especially the Root of it, Milk, and the whey of it, Litharge, Mallows, Root of
Solomon's Seal, Scabious, al Natural Baths moderately hot.

Of the Herbs are made Decoctions for Lotions and Baths.

Of the rest are made diverse Remedies to beautify the face, and take away the
spots; as also for Scabs and Itch.

To wash the face, and to make the hands white, these are singular good: Bitter
Almonds, or Peach Kernels bruised, and with milk brought to the form of a
Cataplasm.

Also Bean meal wrought with whey or milk to the consistence of a liquid
Liniment.

Bread of Barley meal stamped with milk, boiled a little, and when it is hot,
rubbed on gently.

Also Lac Virginis is much commended, which is made of one part of Litharge,
and two parts of Vinegar, they are mingled and shaked together, and soaked for
three hours: afterward the Vinegar being filtered, Rain water is put in, or
Fountain water, in which a little Salt is dissolved.

The most excellent to beautify the Skin, is of this kind.

Take Antalia, Mother of Pearls, of each equal parts: Pound them grossly, then
lay them bed upon bed, with the Juice of Lemmons, and put them in a moist place
till they dissolve; and then use the Liquor as it is, or else distilled through
a Filter, or Balneo.

For Itch and Scabs, these are the best Unguents:

Take Litharge of Gold beaten and sifted, three ounces: Rose Water, and common
Oil, (Oil of Roses is better) of each four ounces. Drop in the water first by
little and little, stirring of it constantly in a Mortar, with a wooden Pestel,
till the Powder have drank up all the water, and be well mingled with it; then
add the Oil by little and little, stirring them always til they be well mixed.
Or,

Take fresh Butter two drams: the Root of the ditch Dock boiled and pulped
through a sieve: common Oil, and Juice of Lemmons, of each one ounce:
Bay Berries finely poudered and searced, two ounces. Mingle them, and make a
Liniment according to Art.

The Juice of Lemmons may be left out, and yet the Composition will be never the
worse.

These do moderately scour for Lotions and Baths: Salt water, Bath water, Sea
water, Nitrous water, Alum water, the Urin of a Boy that is sound, May-dew,
the Juice of sour Grapes, white Soap, the Decoction of Agarick, the Roots of
Canes, Ivy of the Walls, Lupines, the black Vine, and of Oleander.

For Ointments, serve all the Rozins, chiefly of the Larch, and Turpentine
Trees, Mirrh, the inward Rind of the Elder Tree, Goats-horn burnt, Cuttlebone
burnt, new Tobacco, the Powder of common Salt.

Of these, some Remedies are made, proved good by Experience, both for Scabs,
and Spots of the Face.

For the Scab,

Take the Leaves of Oleander, poudred and sifted, two drams: common Salt, one
dram; fresh Butter, one ounce and an half. Mix them for a Liniment. Or,

Take the Leaves of Tobacco, one handful; Oleander, and Bays, of each half a
handful, Butter, three ounces. Beat them in a Mortar, til they be al well
mixed; then Melt it over the Coals, and press it out strongly. Or,

Take Bay Berries, Ashes, Salt, of each one dram: common Oil, three ounces: Wax
two drams. Mix them for a Liniment. Or,

Take Rosin of the Larch, or Turpentine Tree, two ounces; fresh Butter, one
ounce: Oil of Bays, Juice of Lemmons, of each half a dram: burnt Cuttle-bone,
or Ceruss, or Litharge, one dram: common Salt two scruples. Mix them for a
Liniment. Or,

Take the middle Rind of the Elder Tree, Leaves of Tobacco, of each half a
handful: common Oil, three ounces. Boil them at a gentle fire until the
Moisture be consumed (a sign whereof is, If the Oil poured into the fire, flame
suddenly without Cracking) make expression, and strain it; then add most fine
Powder of Mirrh, two drams: Yellow Wax, one dram and an half. Mingle them, make
a Liniment.

Also this following Stone, if it be dissolved in some convenient Liquor, and
then wash the place affected, with it, it takes away both Scabs and Itch.

Take Roch-Alum, one ounce and an half: Litharge of Gold three ounces, Borax of
the shops, Sea Salt, and white Lead, of each one ounce; the best Vinegar one
pound: Rain Water, half a pound, the Ceruss, and the Litharge, must be poudered
and sifted: then Boil them in an unglazed Pot to the hardness of a Stone.

For Spots of the face.

Take May dew purified by filtring, two pound: Juice of Sour Grapes, or
Lemmons, or Oranges, one pound: Roots of white Lillies, and Solomon's Seal, of
each two ounces. Make infusion for two days, in Horsdung, the Vessel being
close stopped; then distill them by the heat of the same Dung, to make a Lotion
for the Face. Or,

Take white Soap dissolved into froth with May-Dew, or Vinegar, two ounces:
Meal of Lupins, half an ounce; mingle them and stir them diligently, and with
a soft fire Boil them to a mean consistence: after that, add to them, the Oil
of Peach Kernels, three ounces. mingle them and Boil them at a gentle heat to
the consistence of an Unguent; wherewith anoint the Face, and the Hands, before
you sleep; and in the morning wash them with a Decoction of Bran.

These do strongly cleanse for Baths, and Lotions; Brim-stone Baths, Barley,
the Decoctions of Briony Root, Black-Hellebore, Centaury the less, Sow wort,
Elecampane Root, especially if you add a little Salt, and Alum.

For an Epitheme, the Water of quick Lime.

For Ointments: Borax of the shops, Nitre, Brimstone, black Soap, Ashes of the
Vine Branches, Lime washed perfectly, the pulp of the Root of Elecampane, Oil
of Tartar.

Of these; remedies are compounded that are most profitable and proved by
Experience.

For a crusty Scab, and like to the Leprosy, Amatus Lusitanus says that this
Unguent removes it, like to an Enchantment:

Take Roots of Elecampane Boiled in Vinegar, and pulped through a Sieve, two
ounces: Salt Butter, Rosin of the Larch Tree, or Turpentine Tree of each half
an ounce: common Salt finely poudred, two scruples: Brimstone one ounce. Mingle
them for an Unguent. Or,

Take quick Brimstone, two drams: Ashes of Vine Branches, common Salt poudered,
of each one dram. Bind them in a fine Cloth and let them Boil, in common Oil,
four ounces; Vinegar, or Juice of Lemmons one ounce. Boil them til the moisture
be consumed, and with this matter, being hot, anoint the part that is Scabby.
Or,

Take quick Brimstone, half an ounce; common Oil, three ounces; Dissolve it:
then add, beaten Salt, and Ashes, finely sifted, of each one dram: a little
Wax: mingle them for a Liniment.

For a Lotion.

Take Roch-Alum, common Salt, and Brimstone poudered, of each one ounce: Black
Soap one ounce and an half: Barley one handful; white Vinegar, half a pound:
common water, six pound. Boil them til half be consumed; strain them, and keep
them for use.

For spots of the Skin.

Take Black Soap dissolved in a strong Ly, two ounces, Borax two drams: boil
them til they be thick. Then add, the husks of beans finely poudered, half an
ounce; Oil of Peach Kernels, three ounces. Mix them diligently til they be well
united, and make a kind of Soap.

In the place of the said Oil, you may use common Oil two ounces; Oil of
Tartar, one ounce. Mingle them, and anoint the place, morning and evening, and
wash the Skin with some of the said Decoctions.

Of this kind is the Soap that the Venetian Women use to deck their faces, Hair
and Hands. The composition is, this.

Take damask Soap, four ounces: dissolve it in Juice of Lemmons, what is
sufficient. Then add, Oil of sweet Almonds and of Tartar, of each two ounces,
let them stand in the Sun and be stirred every day, until they grow as thick as
an Unguent. The part is anointed with this; and then it is washed with the
Decoction of Barley or Bran.

Old spots and Morphew are taken off with the water of Quicklime made with
Whey; wherewith the discolored place must be often touched in them when the
Skin comes off; restore it again with Unguent of Litharge, described amongst
weak scouring remedies.

A man of great fame used this remedy for a high Secret, and so picked great
store of Money out of the Pockets of great Ladies.

Remedies to soften hard things.
Though the hardened Humor may seem to be corrected by softening only, yet every
hardness requires not Remedies of the same force: For cold and dry Humors that
are hardened by congealing, are melted with Heaters only, without any notable
drivers; which things are properly called Softeners. Yet Milk and Blood when
they are Clotterd, and congealed, seeing they fall to that by want of their
proper heat, they require things that heat exceedingly, or such as attenuate
and cut.

Lastly, Milk made like Cheese, requires cold and moist things, with some
Thinners of parts, because strong heat seperating the Whey from the thicker
part, turns it into Cheese.

Emollients, and proper remedies to Melt, are of two sorts: Some are fit for
Scirrhous Humors, which are somewhat stronger, and discuss the melted matter:
Some are gentler and are fit for hardened Humors, without any singular stuffing,
or plenty of matter: the use thereof must also precede in Scirrhous affects,
before strong Emollients, that what is congeled may be the more easily melted
and more safely discussed.

The gentle Emollients, are, Marshmallows, Borrage, Bugloss, Brank-Ursine,
Fenugreek, Liquoris, Lin-Seed, white Lillies, Mallows, Melilot, Raysins.

Of these may be made Decoctions, Syrups, Electuaries, for inward uses: Also
they serve to make outward Fomentations, Unguents, and Cataplasms, which are
chiefly prepared with Butter, fresh Tallow, but especially of Man's Fat, and of
the new Wax, the Marrow of four-footed Beasts, the Grease of Sheeps Wool,
common Oil of Olives well ripe, Suet, and the Mucilages of Marshmallows,
Mallows, Foenugreek, Lin-seed.

For Fomentations serve particularly, moist wool that is properly the washing
of wool, and water and oil warm.

Compounds that are easy to provide, are of this kind.

For an Ointment,

Take Roots of white Lillies, Mallows, Marshmallows, of each one ounce:
Chamomel, or Dill, of each one handful: white Wine four ounces: common Oil that
comes of ripe Olives, eight ounces. Boil them till the moisture be consumed,
then press and strain them. Or,

Take the mucilage of Lin-Seed and Roots of marshmallows, of each one ounce,
Ox marrow and fresh Butter of each one ounce, common Oil three ounces, new Wax
three drams: mingle them for an Unguent.

For a Cataplasm.

Take Roots of white Lillies one ounce, Leaves of mallows one handful, Boil
them gently, then melt two ounces of Butter with them, and make a Cataplasm. Or,

Take Roots of marshmallows Boiled and pulped through a Sieve two ounces, meal
of Lin-seed and Melilot, of each one ounce and an half, Roots of white Lillies
half an ounce: Ox marrow one ounce, common Oil three ounces, Decoction of
mallows, what will be sufficient, make a Cataplasm.

These are stronger that follow; for they are all used outwardly, except the
Saffron and the Root of sharp Bind-Weed, which it may be Agrees with Judian
Sarsa, both in kind and virtue: the rest are seldom given alone but mixed with
more gentle Emollients.

For Fomentations therefore, add Roots of bryony, Sow-bread, wild Cucumber, and
Flower-de-Luce fresh, with the Decoction of these; an effectual Fumigation may
be prepared by quenching a Fire-stone or a piece of a Millstone in it.
Bitumenous waters of Baths, serve of themselves for Baths and Fomentations.

For to anoint, Goose fat and Deers suet are good, so is Oil pressed out of
Nuts, the Lees of Oil, and Oil of Peter.

For Plasters, take the roots of Jacinths, Daffodil, fresh Leaves of Tobacco,
and the flowers of Flower-de-Luce.

By themselves, these serve instead of a Plaster: Bitumenous Dirt, Ox Dung,
chiefly mixed with Lees of Oil, and Old Cheese Kneaded with Broth of Salt flesh.

These Cerats they add: dry pith, Rosin, Colophonia, Bitumen, Jet, Ammoniacum,
which makes a Plaster it self if it be dissolved in sharp Vinegar.

Of these may diverse medicaments be presently compounded that are effectual
against Schirous Tumors. For example.

For an Ointment.

Take Sowbread and wild Cucumber of each half an ounce: white Lillies one
ounce: Chamomel and green Tobacco of each one handful, Leaves of Spurge, Laurel
half a handful, common Oil one pound, white Wine four ounces, Vinegar two
ounces, Boil them at a soft fire til half be consumed, then press them out.

A Cataplasm.

Take a whole Onion Boiled in Vinegar one ounce, flowers of Blew flower-de-luce
steeped in white Wine one Pugil, Goose grease half an ounce, beat them
altogether and make a Cataplasm.

Some make a Cerate of white Pitch only, which they call Burgundy Pitch, which
they hold for a secret and prefer it before Amoniacum.

These dissolve and hinder clotted Blood; Vinegar, Posca, Oxymel simple, the
Decoction of Round Aristolochia, Calamints, Savory, Time, the shells of green
Nuts.

Yet the Decoctions are made stronger with Posca, as the runnet of a hare drank
to one dram with Water and Vinegar.

A present and excellent remedy is made of a Ly of Vinegar, Salt and Honey,
after this fashion.

Take of Ly three ounces, Vinegar two ounces, clarified Honey half an ounce,
common Salt one scruple: mingle these at a soft fire, for to drink.

Also if Oxymel be prepared, boiling Honey with the first Wine that comes forth
without pressing, til all the scum be taken off, it will be a pleasant and
effectual remedy.

For curded Milk; gentle softners are convenient, mixed in Fomentations with
Garden Smallage, mountain Smallage, cummin, fresh Mint, and Rue, adding a
little quantity of Vinegar.

In Cataplasmes: Bean Meal, Lintels, with Oxymel or Mulsa, for Vinegar.

This following Fomentation is approved.

Take Leaves of Mallows, Roots of Marshmallows, Herbs, Garden Smallage,
Mountain Smallage, Roots of Fennel, of each one handful, Leaves of Bays,
Flowers of Chamomel, of each one Pugil, common Water six pound. Let them Boil
till a third part be consumed, to foment and wet the Breasts; of the rest, an
excellent Plaster may be made.

These that follow are proved remedies.

Take Turpentine often washed in white Wine three ounces, three whole Eggs,
Saffron one scruple, Yellow Wax two drams. Mingle them, and make a Cerate to be
Spread on a Linen Cloth, leaving a hole that the Paps may come forth to be
sucked. Or,

Take Bean Meal three ounces, common Oil two ounces, Turpentine one ounce, two
Yolks of Eggs, Saffron one scruple, with the Decoction of Mallows and Parsley,
made with Vinegar what is sufficient. Mingle them and make a Cataplasm.

Also fresh Butter washed very well in the Decoction of Mallows, and mingled
with the Powder of the Roots of Mallows or Marshmallows, to the consistence of
an Unguent, and laid on upon a Colewort leaf, is a most excellent remedy for
pained breasts and hardened by the Milk stopped in them.

This also is singular:

Take common Oil of ripe Olives, new Wax of each, a like quantity: mingle them,
then wash them well three times in Rose water, and lay them on with a Colewort
leaf.

The same remedies serve for clotterd Milk, tempered with cold and moist
ingredients, and with a greater quantity of Vinegar.

Yet A Plaster of Bran exceeds them, or of Barley Boiled with Vinegar, adding
thereto a little Saffron.

Also a Cataplasm of Bean Meal with the Decoction of Nightshade that bears
winter Cherries, made with Vinegar, which is made most effectual if you mix the
Runnet of a hare with it, and fresh Butter.

Hitherto we have spoken of remedies to correct the manifest quality of the
causes of Diseases: but the hidden quality, since it is venomous, and is in
those things that are faulty in substance, it requires remedies against
Malignity, which we shall set down afterward, amongst those remedies that are
opposite to the cause that is preternatural by the whole kind.

Remedies that move Preternatural Matter that lies still.
Want of motion in those things that by nature should move at certain times,
falls out principally when the courses are stopped, or in hard Labor in
Childbirth, or when the Secundine staieth behind, as also when the blind
Hemorrhoids are bread within; these are remedied by such things as procure the
courses, help Travel, drive out the Secundine, and the Child that is dead, and
also provoke the secret Piles.

Remedies that move the Courses.
Those things that properly move the Terms, do melt the Blood and open the
Orifices of the Veins: the matter whereof being it is of large extent, Galen
distinguishes it into three Ranks, Gentle, the use whereof is when the Terms
are diminished: Mean which are more fit for the Terms that are stopped; Forcible,
such as are used as the last remedies when other helps profit not; and these
are not given inwardly, but in Pessaries, or infusions.

The Chief and most Obvious amongst the gentle, are, Maidenhair, Red Chiches,
the first Broth of them, Catstails, of Walnut Trees, flowers of
Stockgelli-flowers, dried in the shade, white Lillies, flowers of Balm, common
Maidenhair, Cinkfoyl, of these are made Decoctions and Syrups, chiefly with
Aromatical white Wine.

These remedies are counted to be the most effectual of them.

Take maidenhair or common maidenhair half a handful, flowers of wallflowers
dried one ounce, sweet white Wine six ounces, make infusion for twelve hours,
then Boil them softly; till a third part be consumed strain it, add Saffron
three grains: mix all for to drink hot. Or,

Take Walnuts that are dry but not rank, half an ounce, Broth of red Chiches
four ounces, Odoriferous white Wine two ounces: Boil al to a third part, strain
them, and add Saffron three grains, or Cinnamon six grains. Mingle them for a
potion.

Also the frequent use of walnuts is held to move the courses by their
property, and therefore women make profitable Cakes and Puddings of Nuts, green
Parsley Leaves and Saffron.

To anoint the Hipogaustrium outwardly; is made an Oil of wall flowers, by
setting in the Sun, or else of Lillies: also presently an Oil is made by
descent, of the Roots of white Lillies, and the tops of Dill and Chamomel;

The Mean are; round Aristolochia, Mugwort, all spices, amongst which Cinnamon
and Saffron are preferred, Garden daisies, double-toung, calamint, chiefly of
the mountain, both the Dittanies, the Root of sword-flag, Featherfew, marioram,
Mercury, Horsemints, Bazil, Penniroyal, savin.

Of which are made, Decoctions, Syrups, Electuaries, or one dram of their
Powder is given in white Wine that is spiced.

To these: dry remedies, as Pouders, Bolus and Pills, borax of the shops is
profitably adjoined, or mirrh, flowers of brimstone, and Nettle Seed.

The Decoction of Garden Daisies dried, is held for a secret given in white
Wine spiced.

Also the Decoction of Nettle Seed one ounce in white Wine.

So is the Decoction of the Leaves of Garden Groundsel, plucked off downward,
in white Wine or Broth of red Chiches.

Also bastard Dictamni of Mathiolus, either in Decoction or in Powder, and
drank in white Wine.

Also one dram of the sowrest Leaven or thereabouts, dissolved in white Wine,
and drank without or with a little Saffron.

So is the Seed of Nigella one dram with one scruple of Cinnamon in white Wine.

Also this Powder is most effectual.

Take Borax of the shops one scruple, Cinnamon, Roots of round Aristochia,
Leaves of Savin and Dictamni of Crete, or Nigella seed half a scruple, fine
Sugar two scruples, mingle them, and make a fine Powder to take at once in the
Broth of red Chiches, or the best white Wine.

Also Physic Wine may be made, whereof four ounces drank hot in a morning for
some days together, before the usual time the Terms are wont to come down will
forciblly provoke them: and it is thus made.

Take Herbs; Mugwort, mountain Calamint, Penniroyal Savin of each one Pugil,
Cinnamon, Annis Seed of each one dram, Saffron one scruple, cut the Herbs and
bruise the Seeds and for twenty four hours infuse them in strong white Wine two
pound, then Boil them a little and strain them.

Outwardly the waters of hot brimstone Baths are convenient, also the
Decoctions of the foresaid Herbs, wherewith are provided Fomentations and
infusions for the matrix; also fumes are made which much be used on such as are
subject to fits of the Mother, burning under them such things as smell sweet,
which may be used indifferently for others, by mingling sweet and stinking
things together: for sweet smells do open the passage of the Matrix, and
stinking things do stir up the Expulsive Faculty to Vacuation.

For a sweet smell Spices are good, Bay Berries, grains of Juniper, Marioram,
Mirrh, Roots of Dog-Fennel, Savory, Time.

But for a stinking smell, serve Bitumen, Jeat, Rue, brimstone, and some
ordinary Gums, but chiefly Asa-foetida, and Sagapenum.

Lastly pessaries are singularly commended of Garlic Bruised with Oil of Spik,
also of the Juice of mercury, or the Juice of the Root of Dwarf-Elder made up
with Wool.

For a secret are held the Leaves of the greatest plants, put under the naked
foles of the Feet, and worn there.

Violent remedies which are mingled with other remedies, either pessaries or
internal Medicaments, are the Roots of Cuckoo-pint, and Dragons, of Briony,
Coloquintida, Sowbread, both Hellebores a Gal but chiefly of an Ox water
Pepper, and the Seed of Staves-Acre.

Helps for Delivery.
Those things that move the Terms do also help to deliver, but beside them,
these do singularly yield help, the Dung of a Hawk drank one dram in white Wine.

The Dung of a Falcon, the same Dose drank in white Wine.

The Testicles of a Horse that is gelded, cut into slices and washed in white
Wine, and then dried in the smoke, the Powder of it is given to one dram in
spiced Wine.

The Root of Horse-toung, the Herb Motherwort, the Powder of them is given a
whole spoonful, or the Juice in hot white Wine.

Fallopius holds it for a great secret, to take one scruple of Borax of the
shops in the Decoction of Featherfew, or Savin.

Also the Travail is made the more easy, if Women eat Snails in their meats
some days before their Delivery.

Also a Turtle Roasted, whose Belly is stuffed with Bay Berries, Juniper berries
and Cinnamon, being eaten every other day before the time of Childbirth.

But outwardly when the Throws are upon them the Eagle-stone bound to the
Thigh is a help, so is the Jasper, and the coral used the same way, and the
Lodestone held in the left hand.

Remedies to drive out the Secundine.
Those things that were now propounded to be taken inwardly to help Delivery,
do also help to drive forth the Secundine.

But particularly these are good, the Decoction of Sage in white Wine, the Root
of the Bay's of Alexandria, Seed of Hony-suckles, the Seeds or Root of Sesely
of Marcelles the Powder of them is given to one dram, in hot Wine or the
Decoction of Sage, also the Powder of Bay Berries is effectual to one dram,
taken in white Wine or water, or the Decoction of white Lillies.

Also this Powder is commended.

Take Roots of Round Aristolochia and Mirrh of each half a dram, Pepper one
scruple, make a Powder to be taken in a Decoction of equal parts of Maidenhair
and common Maidenhair.

Also these are held for approved, the Powder of dictamni drunk in some
convenient Liquor and the foresaid Powder of the Testicles of a Horse.

Remedies to open the Hemorroids.
If the Blind piles swel, they may be opened by rubbing them with the Leaves of
Borrage, of a Fig Tree, wild Cucumber and Briony; also the internal use of
Aloes helps, but if these do not profit you must set on the Leeches.

Remedies to force out the dead Child.
Those things that expel the Secundine, force out the dead Child also.

Especially, virtue is ascribed to Dittany, both in drink, and perfume.

Also the milk of the first litter of a Bitch being drank is very good in
particular.

Water Parsneps taken for a Pot-herb in meat.

The Juice of Scordium drank to half an ounce with Saffron.

The fume of Pigeons dung, of brimstone, of the cast Skin of a Serpent.

Also we must not neglest in this case such things as tied to the Thigh do ease
Childbirth.

Amongst the approved remedies these two are extolled.

Take mineral Chrisocolla two scruples, or Borax one dram, Cinnamon and Saffron
of each one scruple; mingle them, make a Powder to be given in white Wine or
the Decoction of Mugwort.

Also take Chrysocolla of the mines, or Borax half a dram, Dictamni one
scruple, Juice of Savin half an ounce, white Wine what is sufficient, or if
there be a Fever take the Decoction of common maidenhair, or maidenhair
three ounces; mingle them.

Remedies that quiet the Matter, that is Carried with a wrong Motion.
Such things as are moved preternaturally, are quieted by revulsion to the
opposite part: and those that repel from the part that receives, and such as
make a stop between the part that sends, and the part that receives, also by
things that thicken the matter that runs, and by such as bind up the passages,
by which the flux is conveied.

Those things intercept, which are set down to prepare thin Choler, and such
as by an unctious quality do assuage the acrimony.

All those things that bind up the passages do repel also, of which we shall
speak a little afterward, and besides those, all cold and moist things that by
thickening intercept, of which we spak before.

Those things make revulsion, namely such as are called Rubificatives, reckoned
amongst those things that Evacuate insensibly; also Vesicatories made of
Cantharides, in Cerats or Plasters, or of Crow-foot, or the Roots of the
lesser Crow-foot bruised alone, and laid on for a Cataplasm.

The Form of a Cerate:

Take Whole Cantharides half an ounce, Seeds of Ammeos three scruples and an
half, Rosin five drams, Wax two drams. Mingle them for a Cerate for four
Vesicatories fit for a Body that is of ripe years: for Children and softer
bodies half so much is sufficient.

For a Plaster for four Vesicatories:

Take three or four drams of Cantharides, (for a harder or softer constitution
of the Body) Mustard four scruples, Seeds of Ammeos one dram, the sowrest
Leaven one ounce and half, the sharpest Vinegar what is sufficient. Make a
Plaster.

The sharpest Vinegar, is Vinegar of Squils, and that which may be presently
made of the Decoction of Garlic, Wake-Robin, or red Onions: or the said
Cantharides are bruised and made up with crumbs of new bread, or with Figs; then
moisten the matter with the sharpest Vinegar and make a Plaster.

Also a Bladder may be presently raised, by dropping on scalding Oil or water,
but so that the matter may be sprinkled through a large hollow Cane, least it
should spread further than is fit: or else the Oil must be dropped on the part
that is fenced about with a Circle of Wax or such like, so large as you desire
to make the Blister large.

Remedies that Root out the Cause that is offensive in the whole substance.
Those Bodies offend in substance, and are Preternatural by the whole kind,
that stick in the wounded part; as Worms, Stones, Poisons, Corruption; for
these, are proper, such things as can draw them out, kill the Worms, break the
stone, Preservatives against Poisons, and such as can remove Corruption,

Remedies that draw out: These though they must hold proportion with the Bodies
that are fastened in, for which cause several remedies draw out several matters;
as the Lodestone draws Iron, Amber draws Chaff: and some are indifferent to
draw out any things contained in Wounds: namely Pimpernel, Roots of Canes, Root
of round Aristolochia, Dittany, the upper Root of Sword-flag, a Lizards Head,
Bee-Glew, the Root of stinking Gladdon, the middle rind of the Teil-Tree,
Bird-Lime; al which are put into Plasters, either bruised alone, or else are
applied with Wine to the wound.

Some do attribute a wonderful force to draw forth all things that are fastened
in, and that from the deepest parts of the body, to a Fox Tongue pulled forth in
the month of May and dried; and when you will use it, steep it in Wine until it
grow soft, and so lay it hot to the Wound.

Some again ascribe the same force to the fat and Skin of a Hare, prepared the
same way, but it differs something from things that draw out, by the manner of
application, for it draws not things fastened in toward it self, but drives
them from it; and therefore it is not laid on the mouth of the wound, but on
the part against it of the same member; as if a Blow being given to the
forepart of the Head, some thing sticks in it, they say it will be driven out
by laying the said matters to the Noddel.

Remedies for Worms.
Of these some do only kill them, and some kill them and drive them forth: of
remedies that kill them, some are most fit for broad worms; some for round
worms, and some for the bots. Other things there are that are contrary to all
kinds of Worms, and for their singular faculty by which they kill Worms may be
set down for the poisons of worms.

These kill broad worms; Garlic, Bay Berries, the Roots of foemal fern, the
great Turnsole, the Root of the Pomegranate, the rind of the Root of the
mulberry, nigella Seed, Walnuts, Tobacco, Vitriol; they are given in substance
to one dram, or in Decoction; chiefly in Vinegar or sweet Lixivium.

These things kill the round worms, and the Bots; Vinegar, Juice of Oranges,
Citrons, Lemmons, Cole-Seed, Roots of Bistort, Carduus Benedictus, Roots of
Grass, Bole-armoniac, Motherwort the Herb, Cross-wort the Root, Vervius, Juice
of Purslain, Root of Divels-bit, Terra Sigillata, Tormentil, Root of Swallow
wort.

These kill and drive them out; all kinds of Wormwood, Southernwood, bitter
Almonds, Salt Bath waters, Seeds of Citrons and Oranges, Germander, white
Dictamni, the Root of both Gentians, Lixivium, Lupins, Mirrh, Horehound, peach
Kernels, flowers and Leaves, Rue, Scordium, brimstone, nettle Seeds.

Of these; some remedies are suddenly made that are proved by experience.

For example in drink, thus:

Take the Emulsion of one dram of the Seeds of Citrons or Oranges prepared,
four ounces of sweet Lixivium, adding sweet Wine two ounces. Mingle them. Or,

Take Wormwood in Powder one scruple, Put it into an Orange that is moderately
dried, with a little Sugar and Vinegar; Boil it on hot Embers, then press it
out to drink.

These are accounted secrets; either the Tops of Eupatory of Auicenna, or of
Sea Wormwood that bears Seed, given from one scruple to one dram or
thereabouts, in Wine or milk or some such Liquor.

For external remedies: are presently provided, Epithems of Aloes and Mirrh,
bruised with Vinegar, or mingled with Ox Gaul; also Fomentations with wormwood,
made hot on a fire-hot Tile, and sprinkled with Vinegar, or with peach Leaves
stamped with hot Vinegar.

For to anoint: such an effectual Oil may be provided.

Take these Herbs: common Wormwood, Carduus Benedictus, Scordium, Tobacco, of
each one handful, Root of Sowbread half an ounce, Coloquintida two drams,
common Oil two pound, sharpest Vinegar half a pound: Boil all at a soft fire,
til the moisture be consumed, press it out; add to the strained matter, Mirrh
one ounce, in Powder: Boil them again at a gentle fire tll the Mirrh be
dissolved, then strain them.

But these are the very poisons of worms: Hearts horn, Hemp Seed, or Leaves or
Juice, Corallina, or Seamoss, the Juice of new Elecampane, the Powder of
Earthworms, Goats-rue, Quicksilver well cleansed.

Also common Mercury well prepared may be given, (I say well prepared) to one
scruple or thereabouts, made up into a Pill with leaf Gold.

Also Wine is effectual, wherein the said Mercury has been steeped al night or
well stirred with it: it is well purged for this end, and made without danger if
it be stirred well with the Juice of Rue in a Glass Vial til it be perfectly
white.

A pleasant and effectual Vinegar is provided; if in one pound of Vinegar,
there be steeped two days, Tops of St. John's Wort one Pugil, Rasped Harts-horne
half an ounce, broken Cinnamon one dram, then strain it for use: it is taken in
Sallets, or in a Spoon, with a little Sugar.

Remedies to Break the Stone.
Writers have set down, a great many more, than are approved to be good, unless
we may suppose this to proceed from the diversity of the stones: for some
Medicaments break Stones in the Kidneys, by which the stones of the Bladder is
not touched, nor can al those things that dissolve soft brittle stones, and
that are made of Sand, not yet compacted together, break in pieces hard stones
that are Glewd fast, and made of a clammy and dried matter: again, some
Medicaments break the small Stones and that are gravelly, and drive them out by
their ruggedness, which can work noe effect upon the greater Stones in the
Kidneys: therefore it is worth the labor to distinguish these remedies into a
threefold order: into those that dissolve a hard stone; into those that
dissolve a soft stone, and not yet fast compacted out of Sand, and into those
that drive out small stones and Gravel. Of all sorts these are the most Obvious
to be provided.

For small Stones and Gravel.

The shells of Wood-Nuts, the Seed of Yellow Mash-mallows, or Abutylon, the
Calx of the shells of Eggs, the stone of Spunges, the winter shells of Snails,
the bones of the Head of a Pike in Powder, the stone found in the Head of a
Snail, Crabs Eyes, stones of medlars, Mallows Seed, Golden Rod, these are given
in Powder, one dram in Broth of red Chiches,

For a stone that is yet soft and gravelly, Ammi, Roots of fullers Teasels, the
Bark of Bay-Trees, Eringo Roots, Root of an Ash, the Root and Rind of Broom,
the Seed of both Rochers of Mathiolus, the Seed of the lesser Burdock, wild
Mints, the Seeds of Nigella and Rose Corn, the Rind of Radish, in a Decoction.

They are given in Powder to one dram in the Broth of red Chiches, or some
Diuretic Decoction.

For a stone that is hardened and grown great. The Powder of a Bears Tooth, the
Ashes of a Calcined Grasshopper, the Kernells of Cherries, borax of the shops,
Maiden hair with a trembling tail, the Ashes, and the flesh, and the dried
Blood of an Old Cock, Cherritree Gum, the Ashes of young Swallows, the Juice of
Lemmons, the Ashes of a Hare burnt Skin and all, the Ashes of earth worms,
Sow-lice washed in white Wine, burnt and dried, Pimpernel, Saxifrage, the fruit
of Bladder Nightshade, or Alkekengi, the Root of Saxifrage, Goats Blood, also
hares Blood and Foxes Blood dried, the Ashes of Scorpions, land Calthrops,
Roots of Nettles, the Seeds of Blew Violets; these same do move powerfully,
drive out Sand, and are convenient for the soft stone.

Of compounds, easily to be provided: these are the most approved, and are held
for secrets.

Take Goats Blood, the Goats being first kept in Gardens of Saxifrage for a
Month, and the best Mirrh, of each half a dram, Broth of Red Chiches three
ounces, Juice of Lemmons one ounce. Mingle them to drink. Or,

Take the Blood of a Fox, taken from him when he is alive, and white Wine, of
each equal parts. Boil them at a gentle fire in a Glased Pot, to the form of a
Furmenty; give five ounces of it for eight days together. Or,

Take Sows-Lice prepared one dram, Aqua vitae half an ounce, Decoction of red
Chiches nine ounces. Pour the Aqua vitae into the Broth, whilst it is hot, and
take this warm six hours before meat for nine days together. Or,

Take Borax of the shops one dram, the Broth of Red Chiches four ounces, Aqua
vitae two drams. Mingle them to drink. Or,

Take Seeds of Blew Violets half an ounce, the Decoction or the Water of
Veronica or Golden Rod six ounces. Make an Emulsion to be given for seven days.

Also Take the Juice of Caltrops, chiefly, that on the land, six ounces. Drink
it warm by it self, or with Juice of Lemmons, so the Juice of Golden Rod drunk
for some days is held most effectual.

Remedies that move Corruption.
Although these do not immediately Root out matter that is preternatural by the
whole kind, but do rather yield assistance to Nature that labors to concoct
it: yet when the matter is concocted, that it may be more soon and safely
purged out, they do mediately concur also to this work.

Those things do by themselves move corruption, that do maintain the heat of
the part, either by the likeness of their temper, or by the influence of their
heat, hindering the stopping up of the pores:

Those things do move corruption by accident, which Repress the exceeding, of
the matter, and make the Blood that is mingled so pliable, that it is overcome
by innate heat.

For the parts and Constitutions that are over-hot; Boiled Onions, fat Figs,
Saffron, Fenugreek, Lin-Seed, the Root of white Lillies, Frank insence, are
convenient. And outwardly, Goose Grease, Goats Tallow, Leaven, and all kinds of
Rosins.

Plasters may be presently made thus:

Take dry Pitch melted in Oil what may suffice, make a Plaster. Or,

Take any kind of Rosin, Yellow Wax, of each equal parts. Mix them for a Cerat,
to which you may add a fourth part of Goose Grease, and so make an Unguent. Or,

Take Roots of white Lillies Boiled and stamped, two ounces, Meal of Lin-Seed
and Fenugreek of each one ounce, Saffron one scruple, common Oil one ounce and
an half, the Decoction of white Lilly Roots what is sufficient. make a
Cataplasm.

Leaven by it self kneaded with Goats Grease is most effectual.

For parts and constitutions that are temperate these are fit: Marshmallows,
Mallows, sweet Almonds, Butter, Yolks of Eggs: to which in outward Medicaments
may be added man's fat, Cocks fat, fat of Wool, Whey, Yellow Wax, Bees-glew,
Wine, Wheat Meal purged from the Bran, common Oil of ripe Grapes, that is not
too Old.

Some living creatures serve for Plasters, chiefly young Whelps.

Of the rest, Plasters may be made suddenly thus.

Take Wheat Meal or Crumbs of Bread moderately Leavened two ounces, common Oil
one ounce; hot Water what is sufficient. Make a Cataplasm. Or,

Take Leaves of Mallows one handful, Butter one ounce. Fry them together in a
frying Pan, then beat them for a Cataplasm. Or,

Take Roots of Marshmallows Boiled and passed through a hair sieve two ounces,
Meal of Fenugreek or Wheat one ounce, two Yolks of Eggs, common Oil one ounce
and an half; mingle them and make a Cataplasm.

This is an excellent Unguent to ripen corruption, and to break an Impostume.

Take the sharpest Leaven and Yolks of Eggs, of each equal parts, common Oil
and Saffron of each a little, make an Unguent, and lay it on with a Colewort
Leaf.

For parts and constitutions that are cold, these are convenient: hot water
powered on, water and Oil, Milk, Barley Meal, quinces Boiled in Milk, Leaves of
Blew Violets, and Bird-Lime of Apple Trees

A common Plaster is prepared of crumbs of bread with Milk and common Oil or
Oil of Roses. or.

Take Leaves of Mallows and Violets of each one handful, boil them and bruise
them, adding Barley Meal and common Oil or Oil of Roses, of each one ounce;
mingle them and make a Cataplasm.

If it fall out in respect of ill matter, that causes the tumor, that there is
need of such things as move corruption by accident, that is, of such things,
that must equal the excess of the peccant matter, which otherwise were
convenient for hotter constitutions, they will be convenient for colder tumors,
because they attenuate and heat the cold, thick matter; and such as are
convenient to colder constitutions, will be convenient for hotter
constitutions, because they restrain the heat of the matter.

Whence it is clear that those temperate remedies set down, will be most fit for all occasions, sometimes mixed with hot, and sometimes with cold ingredients, as
the affect that wants suppuration inclines most to heat or cold.

Remedies contrary to Poisons.
Such are properly Antidotes, that by the property of their substance, or by
their whole temperament, do oppose the force of Poisons.

Those Medicaments are called so improperly, which do vanquish Poisons by some
apparent exceeding quality: such are contemperating Medicaments, that are
opposite of Poisons in excess.

Coolers, that are opposite to Poisons that inflame; and heating cordials that
are contrary to Stupefying Poisons that extinguish heat.

Though there are proper Antidotes fit to be given for all Poisons, yet what is
truly a kind of Poison, can be known by no proper signs; whence it comes to
pass that we are always Ignorant of al Antidotes that are contrary to al
Poisons: the knowledge whereof may therefore seem sufficient both for the
prevention, and cure of Poisons.

To make the matter more clear, there may be assigned three ranks of Antidotes
against Poisons; some are chiefly opposite to Poisons that are bred in us;
either from some extraordinary putrefaction, or some other unspeakable
corruption, and those are especially useful in Malignant Fevers and the
Plague: others afford help when we have taken Poison: others do cure us when we
are Poisoned by Bitings, by wounds or by sight.

Antidotes for Malignant Fevers and the plague: those that are hot are
convenient for a cold Time and a cold constitution: but cold and temperate are
best in hot Time and for a hot constitution.

The hotter kinds are, holy Thistle, Star Thistle, the Pills and Seeds of
Citrons, the Root of white Dictamni, Mirrh, great Chervil, Scordium, Divelsbit,
Goats-Rue, Scorzonera, great Valerian, the Root of Swallow-wort.

The temperate are; the whole Citron, the Juice of it, as of Oranges also and
Lemmons, Borrage and Bugloss, Bistort, Bole-armoniack, both Blew-bottles,
Hartshorn, common Pimpernel, Cinkfoil, Scabious, Tormentil, Terra Sigillata.

Of these; some Medicaments may be made cheap enough, that are not inferior to
the most precious Bezoarticks brought from Foreign Lands.

First; this Syrup is most profitable, made of the whole Citron, which is
temperate enough, and fit for all constitutions.

Take a whole Pome-Citron sufficiently ripe and full of Sap, weighing one ounce;
and break it on a Grater, the Root of Scorz^nera one ounce, the Herb Scordium
one pugil, Seeds of holy Thistle two drams, Water distilled out of the Juice of
pleasant Apples and Sorrel of each two pound, spirit of Vitriol four scruples,
or in the place of it, Juice of Lemmons two ounces. Bruise what must be bruised
and make infusion for thirty hours, the Vessel being very well stopped; then
let them Boil gently to the consumption of one third part, afterward press
them out strongly; let the strained Liquor be clarified by degrees at a gentle
fire, infusing always some flowers of Oranges or Citrons til it be perfectly
clarified; then add fine Sugar one pound and an half: Boil it at a most soft
fire, to the consistence of a Liquid Syrup, the Dose is half an ounce to two
ounces.

Also an Oxymel that is something hotter is excellent.

Take holy Thistle, Goats Rue, Scabious, Bugloss, Sorrel, of each one handful,
Roots of Scorzonera, Tormentil and Swallow-wort of each one ounce, Fountain
Water four pound: make infusion for one day: then add, the best Honey one pound
and an half, Boil them at a soft fire til the Honey be well purified; having
made expression and well strained it, add of the best Vinegar, in which the
whole Citron bruised on a grater has been steeped and Boiled, ten ounces; Boil
al at a gentle fire to the consistence of an Oxymel.

Also an effectual Vinegar may be prepared, of which one or two spoonfuls may
be put in Broth that is altered, or taken with meats.

Take a whole Citron Rasped with a Rasper, prepared Hartshorn, Bole-Armoniack
of a Yellow Color, of each two drams, Roots of Bistort, Tormentil, of each one
ounce, Seeds of holy Thistle one dram, Leaves of Scordium one pugil. The best
Vinegar filtred, that it may cover al, about four Fingers high; bruise all the
ingredients grosely, and infuse them in the Vinegar, in a Vial very well stopped,
and let them stand in the Sun, or in some hot stove for some days; stirring the
matter daily, until the Color of the Vinegar do not seem to be changed any
more; then strain it, and keep it for use in a Glass Vessel stopped.

This powder is profitable for malignant Fevers

Take Yellow Bole-Armoniack, prepared Hartshorn, Roots of Bistort and
Tormentil, Seeds of holy Thistle, Sorrel, Citron Pills, of each one dram,
Camphir and Saffron five grains; mingle them for a Powder.

The Dose is half an ounce to one ounce, in Broth or Bolus made with Juice of
Citrons or Lemmons; it may also be put into a panada, or Ptisan: also the
Powder may be made up with a little Gum-Tragacanth dissolved in Rose Water or
Juice of Citrons, made into a hard Ball like to a Bezoarstone, which being
dried again will hold its virtue the longer.

Outwardly the foresaid Vinegar will be profitable, altered with a whole Citron
to smell to, and for Epithems for the heart; being added to waters or Decoctions
that are convenient.

Some say that Brimstone held constantly in the mouth, does preserve from the
Plague.

These things taken, are good for Poisons, besides those we mentioned before;
amongst things that are hot; Ammi, the Roots of both Angelicas, the Root of
Anthora, Annis Seed, round Aristolochia, all spices, Seeds of Colewort, Root of
white Thistle, flowers of Clove gelli-flowers, Root of Crosswort.

The flowers and Tops of heath, Root of Elecampane, Juniper Berries, Root and
Seed of Lovage, Turnep Seed, Wallnuts, Root of Pulemonia, Garden Rue, Root of
One-leaf.

The more temperate are: Water kept in a vessel of Serpentine stone, Jvory
dug up, Harts-Mushroms. The Decoctions of Acorns of the Oak Tree, Seed of
St. John's Wort, earth of Malta.

The Powder of those aforesaid, may be given to one ounce in the best Wine, or
in warm Vinegar, or both mixed together.

Compounds may be diversely provided as every man pleases.

It is a famous and Ancient Antidote, that is made of a Walnut, with three
Leaves of Rue, and a Fig taken every morning.

Also Theriaca Diatessaron is easily prepared for this purpose.

Take Roots of Gentian and Juneper berries, (but against Poison I should prefer
Bay Berries) Mirrh, Roots of round Aristolochia of each two ounces, clarified
Honey two pound, make an Electuary.

There are also famous Pouders against Poisons and the Plague, that are easily
made: as that which is called Griseus Caesaris, and Saxonicus, the descriptions
whereof are to be found in Wickerus Lib. 2. Antidot. Spec. Sect. 20.

This vinegar also is good against Poisons and the Plague.

Take Roots of wild Angelica dried in the shade, Juniper Berries of each one
ounce, mirrh half an ounce, Leaves of Rue one pugil, Cinnamon one dram; bruise
all grosely, and infuse them and digest them for eight days in the best
Vinegar, (Rose Vinegar is better) one pound and an half, then strain it, and
take every morning one spoonful fasting.

Outwardly they commend a Radish cut in pieces, and born under the Arme-pits,
provoking the Patient to sweat in the mean time.

These Oils are famous of the great Duke, of Scorpions of Mathiolus, in the
Room whereof, other Oils not so hard to make, and of as much virtue may be
compounded. As,

Take Oil of ripe Olives (the riper the better) three pound, white Wine spiced
one pound and an half, Roots of Gentian, Tormentil, Maister-wort, Swallow-wort
common Angelica, of each one ounce, tops of St. John's Wort, Leaves of Tobacco,
and Rue, of each one handful, grains of Juniper and Bayberries of each half an
ounce, make infusion according to art for spur days in a vessel very well
stopped, then let them Boil til the moisture be almost spent, press them out, and
strain them.

Against bitings and wounds that are venomous, inward Antidotes are convenient,
mixed with cordials.

But outwardly the same are good mingled with attractives, that draw the Poison
to the wounded part, and keep the wound open, til the venom be purged out; such
are all the hotter Agents and Rubificatives, of which we speak else where.

But properly Antidotes are, Ammi, Seed, long Aristolochia, Bdellium, both
Dictamni, the Roots of both sword-flags, the brains of Dunghil-Cocks, Origanum,
Pimpernel, Saxifrage, Root and Seed of the Clot-Bur, Goats-Rue, Goats-beard,
and the Leaves of all kinds of Scorzonera, and the Juice of the Roots; all
those are taken in hot white Wine.

The Antidotes that I set down against Poisons taken, do almost the same thing:
But this must be generally taken notice of, that the flesh of any Venomous
Creature laid to the biting or wound, that that creature made, does draw out
the venom: whence it comes to pass that the Powder of water Serpents, but
especially of Vipers is so famous, against the poison of al Serpents; and if we
may believe report, it is good to cure and to preserve also against al venoms,
so that if the powder be once taken to half a dram in spiced Wine; some
maintain that the body is made impregnable against al poisons for many days.

This powder is prepared three ways, and first thus.

Take the Heart, the Liver, and the three first back bones of a Viper or wood
Snake, dry all in an Oven, beat them into Powder, add the root of Maister-wort
an equal part and mingle them.

Secondly Vipers flesh, the entrals being taken out (except the Heart and the
Liver) must be cut, and seasoned eight days with Salt, then put al into a Sive
that is well guarded on every side, and underneath raise a sweet perfume, four
or five times a day constantly, casting on fire coals, the powder of Myrrh,
Bay Berries, grains of Juniper and Cloves, and when the flesh is found to smell
very well, put it into a glased pot, well covered with a cover of clay, and put
it into a Bakers oven, and let it stay there, until all the substance of the
flesh with the bones can be brought into a most fine powder: the new Physicians
ascribe more virtue to this powder than to the ancient confections of Theriac
or Mithridate.

Thirdly, Vipers flesh being excellent well washed in white Wine, saving the
Heart, and the Liver, must be gently dried that it may be beaten to powder, and
so used by it self.

Besides these, the poison of mad Creatures has certain Antidotes, with which,
being taken for forty days together, the wound in the mean while being kept
open, madness and fear of water is quite driven away. These are, Madwort, the
ashes of river Crabs, the root of the wild rose, and common Pimpernel. They are
given alone or mingled from one dram to two drams, in white Wine, they are
mingled profitably with the root of Gentian.

Galen provides his Antidote of one part of Frankincense, Gentian five parts,
and ten parts of river Crabs burnt.

Also some report, that this powder is proved by experience, to cure the fear
of water, given in white Wine from half a dram to two drams, daily three hours
before meat.

Take Leaves of Polypode, Rue, Vervin Sage, Plantain with narrow Leaves, Leaves
of common Wormwood, Mints, Mugwort, betony, Balm, St. Johnswort, Centaury the
less, of each equal parts, dry them in a paper and beat them to Powder.

Thus far concerning remedies that oppose the principal cause of the disease,
from the taking away whereof; the cure of material diseases must begin, unless
there be something else that is urgent and so draws the cure to it: for that
must be presenly taken care for, neglecting the cause and the disease for a
time, if that urgent thing gives no delay, but threatens the patient with
sudden death.

Now these things are said to urge immediately and by it self principally; the
weakners of the vital spirits, in all faintings and swounings; but mediately
and secondly all vehement pains, continual watchings, all immediate
Evacuations, from whence there is fear of the dissolutions of the spirits.

These things urging, such remedies as strengthen the spirits must be set
against them, such as ease pain, procure rest, stay fluxes; if the disease or
the principal cause, by reason of its violence, and the weakness of the sick,
do sometime come to be urgent; as feverish heat in an Old man, and the
thickness and clamminess of phlegm, in an exquisite quotidian Fever, they
require no other remedies than such as are of themselves contrary, concerning
which we have partly spoken, and we shall speak something afterward in the
number of remedies that alter diseases.

Remedies for Symptoms that are Urgent.
Those remedies that strengthen the spirits, do refresh them also, either by
accident, taking away the causes whereby they are dispersed, whereof we shall
not now speak; or of themselves, by affording matter out of which the spirits
may be soon ingendered, and by Corroborating the inbred heat of the heart.

The heart is strengthened with Cordials, concerning which we shall speak, when
we speak of Medicaments that are opposite to the disease in distemper.

They afford fit matter to be turned into spirits, as also Nutriments that are
of good Juice, and thin substance, amongst which are pleasant Wine and sweet
smells, because they yield thin vapors next to spirits, unto the heart.

In a hot cause, cold or temperate sents must be prepared, such as are made of
Vinegar, Roses, Camphir, Violets, Mirtils, the Pills of sweet Apples, and
Quinses that are grown Yellow.

Vinegar altered with these ingredients is the best, making infusion for some
hours, or gently Boiling them, also to alter the Air, water must be sprinkled
in the Chambers that is mingled with Vinegar, and it is good for sents to put
to the Nose.

In a cold cause, smells must be made of the flowers of Citrons, Oranges,
Lemmons, the Clove-gelli-flowers, Jesamin, Lillies of the Valleys, Roots of
Angelica, Ciperus, Carden setwal, Leaves of Calamint of the Mountain, Marjoram,
Balm, Mint, Rosemary, Spik, Lavender, Time, Citron Pills, Bayberries, Juniper
berries, and all kind of Spices;

The best is made of the best Vinegar, or Wine altered with the foresaid
ingredients.

Also the smell of roasted meat is excellent, stuck with Cloves and Cinnamon, as
also Bread that is hot, and sprinkled with Malligo or some principal Wine.

For the same purpose may Oils be provided with no great labor, from Spices,
and very cheap, to anoint the Nostrils and the heart, if there be made, with
clear common Oil without dregs, and the Powder of Cinnamon or Cloves, a matter
like to Liquid Pitch; which must stand some days in a close Vessel, and then be
put into a Press and pressed forth.

Such as ease pain are threefold: namely such as cure by taking away the cause
of pain; proper Anodynes, which letting the cause alone, yet assuage the sense
of the part; and stupefactives, that wholly take away the feeling of it, or else
cast the sick into a sleep.

Those that cure, belong not to this place, for they are as large in extent as
diseases and the causes of them, by which the continuity of the part may be
dissolved.

Proper Anodynes are, Marshmallows, sweet Almonds, warm water, Dill, green
Chamomel, Fenugreek, Linseed, Mallows, Melilot, Yolks of Eggs, fat Broth.

Besides these, for Fomentations outwardly, are convenient, living creatures
their entrals being taken out whilst they are hot, the Lungs and the kel, of
living creatures, water and Oil, greasy Wool, Sheeps Milk and Cows Milk hot,
wheaten Bread moderately baked and yet hot.

For Unguents, Hogs fat, Hens fat, Calves fat, Man's fat, Butter, Suet, Mucilage
of Lin-seed Mallows, Marshmallows, Fenugreek, and Oils made of the said Herbs
and Seeds Boiled in them.

But beside common anodines, there are some others that do properly belong to
some certain parts, which therefore may be called specifical anodines.

For the pain of the Head from what cause soever, this Oil is most effectual.

Take the Juice of Vervain very well purified two pound, simple Oil of Roses
one pound.

Distill it at a gentle fire of Embers, let the distilled Liquor be poured on
again, and distilled again, and so do three times; for the Juice will mingle
with the Oil inseparably, and in that, being warm, dip in a Linen Clout to lay
to the Forehead, and anoint the Sutures.

For pain of the Teeth. The Oil of Box distilled by desent is extolled.

For the pain of the Chollick, a sure remedy is, one dram of a Man's Skull
prepared, and taken with one scruple of Armis Seeds, in a cold cause: but with
Coriander Seed if the cause be hot.

Also the powder of the Testicles of a gelded Horse, taken to one dram, after
the same fashion.

This Oil is exceeding good for the pain of the Hemorroids.

Take Fig-wort four ounces, great Celondine two ounces, the Sponges that grow
on the sweet Eglantine, in number four, Seed of Agnus Castus two drams, common
Oil two pound. Cut the Roots, bruise the rest grossly, set them in the Sun for
a month, and keep them for use: Or infuse them for eight days in a hot place;
then Boil them til the moisture be consumed, and make expression, and after
that strain them.

For pain of the Breast, the Oil of Lin-seed drank two or three ounces is
singular.

For pain of the Joints this Fomentation is approved.

Take Leaves of Mallows, Dwarf-Elder and Plantain, of each one handful, Smiths
Water two pound. Boil them to the Consumption of a third part: press them out
and strain them, and dissolve in the Liquor, Salt-peeter purged with Brimstone
(which they call Salt of Prunella) half an ounce, and dip a Linen Cloth in it
and lay it hot to the part.

Narcoticks indeed laid to the part do stupefie, but being taken or smelt to,
or applied to the head, they cause sleep. They differ in the intension of their
quality, from properly called sleeping Medicaments, because these by their
moderate coldness and moisture procure sleep, but those by the excess of both
qualities bring out deep sleep, and if they be used too largely they cause
Carus and Apoplexy.

Yet there is some degrees of these Narcoticks, for some are more gentle; the
use thereof is not so dangerous; some are more violent, which must not be used
but upon very urgent pains and watchings.

The more gentle to be used inwardly, are white Poppy Seed, to about one dram;
but outwardly in Lotions, the Leaves of Garden Nightshade and Poppy.

The more violent, are Hemlock, white Henbane, Mandragora, Opium, round
Stramonium; Black Henbane, and long Stramonium, are best to be let alone, by
reason of the great hurt they do to the Bowels.

Of others, are made fit sents and Lotious for the Feet and the Head; but
inwardly, only Opium, and round Stramonium, may be used.

The Seed of Stramonium is given in substance from half a scruple to one
scruple, or thereabouts; but infused from one scruple to two scruples, it is
corrected with good Wine.

Opium is given from two grains to five, corrected with Saffron, or Popper, and
so made into a Pill, or infused in the best Wine. Oriental Opium is something
stronger than Opium of our Country; but because outlandish Opium is often
brought to us Sophisticated, and sometimes is sold very deer, it were better to
make it pure of our own Country; Poppy, after the way that Quercitanus has
taught us. Take what quantity you please of Garden Poppy Heads, that carries a
red flower, so soon as the first flowers appear displaied; bruise them in a
Stone Mortar with a wooden Pestle: put the matter into a spacious Glass, and
pour on so much of the best white Wine Vinegar, til the matter be very well wet,
and the Vinegar swim above al, two fingers breadth; let them digest for about
fifteen days, and when the Vinegar grows red intensively, put the matter into
a Linen Bag, and press it out strongly: what is expressed let it Evaporate at
a gentle fire to the consistence of Honey, and whilst it is yet hot, cast it
into cold water, that it may Coagulate; then take it out and wipe off the
moisture.

But of compounds there are two that are the best, and easiest to be provided
of all that are found in shops.

The first is of Guajnerus for outward use.

Take Opium, Juice of Henbane, Juice of Mandragora, of unripe Mulberries,
Lettice, and of Ivy Tree, of each one ounce. Dissolve the Opium in the Juyces,
when that is dissolved, wet a Sponge in it, and dry it again, at the Sun, for
fifteen days, when you would use it, dip your Sponge in warm water, and put it
to the Nose of the Patient, this Sponge will keep its virtue for some years.

The other serves for internal uses, namely Laudanum, which in two days time
may be made. Thus,

Take the extract of Saffron one scruple, the extract of the species of
Diamoschu two scruples, extract of Opium prepared four scruples. Mingle them,
and with three drops of distilled Oil of Cloves, soften it.

The Saffron and species are extracted with Aqua vitae, but the Opium with
distilled Vinegar.

Opium also is prepared, if it be cut thin, and dried at a gentle heat, so long
until it will fume no longer, and being rubbed between the Fingers, will
crumble to Powder: the Dose of this is from about one grain and an half, to
five grains; it eases pains, stops long Watchings, and stays immoderate and
sharp Fluxes.

Also Narcoticks provoke sleep, but far more vehemently than true sleeping
remedies do, by so much as deep sleep requires stronger means than sleep does:
whence it is, that when true sleeping Medicaments will not prevail, we are
forced to use Narcoticks or heavy sleeping remedies now mentioned.

True sleeping Remedies, are, sweet Almonds, and the Emulsions of them, all
sorts of Milk, Garden Lettice, fresh Moss of Trees, Water Lillies, great
Housleek, Blew Violets, Venus Navel, and small Wine mixed well with pure Water:
the Exhibition of these is several.

Flesh Broths are altered with Lettice and Violets.

An Emulsion of sweet Almonds is made with the Decoction of Lettice; Lettice is
eaten Boiled, seasoned with the Juice of Oranges, or Pome-citrons, or Lemmons.

Decoctions are made of Herbs for Lotions of the Head and Feet.

Also an unguent may be made to anoint the Nostrils and the temples, suddenly
with Oil. thus,

Take these Herbs, Lettice, Water Lillies, great Housleek, Garden Nightshade,
of each one handful: common Oil eight ounces. Boil them at a gentle fire, til
the moisture be consumed; press them out, and strain them.

The Oil of Violets and Water Lillies of the shops serve for the same use.

All those things serve to stop Fluxes, which stay the matter that is moved
with an ill motion; by repelling it, pulling it back, intercepting it, and
binds up the passages; therefore they belong not to this place.

Those things that are most proper to stay Fluxes, shall be mentioned in the
Catalogue of astringents.

There remains therefore, to number up those Medicaments that drive away
Diseases; the use whereof is most fit after the causes that are urgent are
taken away: now of Diseases there are three general Heads; Distemper, ill
Conformation, and Unity dissolved.

Medicaments that alter a Sick distemper of the whole Body, and of the Parts.
Though there be eight sickly kinds of distempers, four that are simple, and so
many Compound; yet it is not necessary to make eight sorts of altering
Medicaments.

First, Because Compound distempers are cured with simples that alter, being
mingled together, and so as need requires they make a Compound quality; then
because amongst simple qualities, moisture and dryness are commonly taken away
with hot or cold remedies for Excrementitious moisture is cured, both with hot
things that rarefie and consume, as also by cold things that press out, and by
dry things of both kinds that stay moisture.

But sickly dryness, being it presupposes a want of native moisture, which
cannot be restored with Physic, but with Nutriment, is better cured by good
Diet, and some heat restored in the part that is dried, by the benefit whereof
the blood may be drawn thither, and more easily digested. Therefore it will be
sufficient to set down Medicaments that heat the parts that are over cooled,
and such as cool the parts over heated: for both these being mingled together,
it will be an easy matter to Compound an active, temperate remedy, and which
is, amongst the passives, moist and dry, as necessity and the distemper that
must be removed, shall require.

Moreover, seeing there are two kinds of altering Medicaments, some are
certain, by which some certain parts seem to be most affected; others are
uncertain, which work indifferently upon the whole Body; it will be sufficient
to propound such altering Remedies that are certain; because the distemper of
the whole Body, follows the hurt of some Principal part, the Remedies whereof
bring help also to the whole Body.

Certain altering Remedies take their name from the part which they help:
Cephalicks, are for the Head, Ophthalmicks for the Eyes, Arthriticks for the
Joints, Neuroticks for the Nerves, Pneumonicks for the parts of Breathing,
Cordials for the Heart, Stomachicks for the Stomach, Hepaticks for the Liver,
Spleneticks for the Spleen, Nephriticks for the Reins, Histericks for the
Matrix.

Medicaments that alter the Head.
Hot Cephalicks, and such as are convenient for the Head that is over cooled,
the most Obvious are these: Southernwood, Betony, Box-Wood, Calamint,
Germander, Hysop, Bay Leaves and Berries, Lavender, Marjoram, Piony, Rosemary,
Garden Rue, and Water-Rue, Sage, Savory, wild Time, Stoechas, Time, Misleto of
the Oak, wild Setwal Root, Water of hot Baths of Brimstone drank in due order.

Of these may be made Decoctions, Electuaries, and Medicinal Wines, in the
place of Confections and Conserves of the shops.

For Example.

Take the Filing of Box Wood two ounces: Misleto of the Oak cut very small, one
ounce: common Water six pound. Make infusion for fiften hours, afterward add,
Leaves of Betony, Calamint, Marjoram, Sage, of each one handful: Root of Piony
half an ounce: Bay Berries two drams. Make Decoction at a gentle fire, til a
third part be consumed; then strain it, and give half a pound of it at once for
somedaies together.

The Ancients, in the cure of a distemper that was not very new, administered
their medicaments for about four days together, by whose example we do usually
proceed now.

Example of an Electuary.

Take Betony, Calamint, Germander, Marjoram, Rosemary, Sage, of each one
handful, Savory, Hysop; of each one pugil: Bay Berries and Frankincense, of
each two drams: clarified Honey four times as much: mingle them, and make an
Electuary.

Give about two drams of it for many days, either before you give the
decoction, or when you go to bed.

Medicinal Wines are more commended, made of the infusion of Rosemary and Sage.

Outwardly Lotions and droppings down, either of Brimstony bath waters, or of
the Decoctions of the Herbs before mentioned, chiefly prepared in a Lixivium,
to which you may ad roots of reed, leaves of Asarum, and Ivy of the wall.

Of the same Herbs, adding a quantity of Frankincense, may pouders be prepared
to strew on the futures.

Also fume of Time and Marjoram taken by a pipe, is good, the same way that men
take Tobacco.

Lastly, Oils may be made of the decoctions of the same herbs, to anoint the
Nostrills, the Temples, and the Sutures.

These cool what is over hot; Black-Cherries, the skul of man burnt, barley,
flowers of Privet, Purslain, Roses, flowers of Willows, the tendrells of Vines,
and al things that procuresleep, of which decoctions may be made.

The water of Iron baths rightly used is excellent.

Outwardly frontalls are made of Pasca, chiefly altered with Willow leaves,
Myrtills, Lettice, Violets, Nightshade.

Irrigations for the Head, are made of the same decoction or of warm Milk.

Oxyrhodina are made of Oil of Rofes, and Violets with a fourth part of Vinegar.

Sents are provided of Roses and Violets. Vinegar altered with these flowers is
most useful, adding a little Camphier.

Also Oil made by insolation, of the flowers of Willows, for to anoint the
Nostrills, and Temples, is commended.

Altering Remedies for the Eyes.
For Eyes that are overcooled, with, or without any defluxions of thick matter,
these things are convenient. Great Celondine, Eyebright, Fennel, Garden rue,
Vervain, whereof are made decoctions and Electuaries for necessary internal
uses.

The use of Wine altered with Eyebright is approved.

Fomentations to use outwardly are made of the said Decoctions, to which
Pimpernel may well be added, and Fenugreek well washed, also a little Saffron
and Aqua vitae.

So a Fomentation of Sea water is good with a little Saffron in it.

This following Collyrium is singular, to strengthen the Eyes, and to discuss
al clouds and suffusions confirmed, also for all cold defluxions, what affection
soever they have brought upon the Eyes.

Take Malligo Wine three pound, Wheat corns and Fennel seed, of each half a
handful, choice Cinnamon bruised two drams, Cloves beaten four scruples, Leaves
of Rue and tops of Bays half a Pugil; make infusion for a Natural day, then
boil them at a very soft fire til a fifth part be consumed, strayn it out, ad
two drams of Tutty prepared; mingle them, and when you would use it, shake the
Decoction and trouble it; if it be provided for a Cloud and a Pin and Web, set
it up in a brazen vessel, otherwise keep it in a Glass for your use.

For Eyes overheat, Cephalic remedies for internal uses are convenient.

For outward uses a Fomentation, and frequent dropping in of warm Milk is good,
wherein Frankincense set on fire is quenched.

If the flux be very sharp ad the fourth part of the white of an Egg.

When the pain is urgent and the defluxion very sharp, put in a little of the
emulsion of white Poppie seed, made of the same milk.

Also make a Cataplasm of a sweet Apple boiled in milk and bruised, which will
surely help.

So Fomentations of warm river water in which Frankincense has been quenched
sometimes, are good.

Arthritick Remedies.
For the Joints that are over cooled, these are convenient. Chamaepytis or
ground Pine, Juniper-wood and berries, Helichryson, Mastich-wood, al kind of
Rozins, chiefly of Turpentine, Sage, and the Root of pricking Bindweed.

Amongst Compound Medicaments two are excellent: the first is the use of
Turpentine for about fifteen days, mingled with Groundpine and made up into
Polus. Thus,

Take Ground pine two drams Turpentine two drams. Mingle these, and make a
Bolus to take at once.

If the Body be over moist, it will do well to mingle with them half a scruple
of Troches of Vipers, or some of the Pouders of Vipers Described; these Boles
are given alone, or about half an hour before the taking of some convenient
Decoction.

Another Decoction is made of the Wood of the Mastick Tree, to be taken for
many days, with a slender Diet, as necessity shall require, as for Example.

Take Mastick Wood two ounces, Juniper or Misleto of the Oak, one ounce,
Fountain Water six pound. Cut the Ingredients and infuse them for a natural
day: then add Leaves of Betony, Herb Jvy, Rosemary, of each one handful. Boil
them at a soft fire til a third part be consumed, then strain it, the Dose is
seven ounces at a time.

Outwardly are convenient, Baths and mud of hot Baths, of Brimstone and Alum.

Also Fomentations, of the best Red Wine altered with Herb Jvy, Dwarf-Elder,
Rosemary, Tobacco, and the Leaves of Mirtils, adding a little Salt and Alum.

Anointings also with Fox Grease.

Then to strengthen the Joints, the Mother of the Wine being hot, and rubbing
of them with Old Oil and a fourth part of Salt is approved.

The Turks with good succes do Burn their Joints, but it is with a gentle fire
not too troublesome, for they dip a Linen Cloth in Aqua vitae, which they set
on fire and lay it to the Joint, and so extinguish it.

It is approved, that the pains of the Joints though they be Old, are either
cured altogether by the use of the following Aqua vitae, or else are made far
more gentle, and less frequent.

Take the tops and Flowers of Rosemary two parts, Aqua vitae rectified three
parts. Make infusion in a Vessel very well stopped for fifty hours; then distill it
in Balneo, the Vessels being fast luted on all sides. Take one dram of this
Water, or one spoonful once every week, and every morning wash your face with
it and the Joint affected.

For the Joints that are over hot these are convenient inwardly; Men's Bones
Burnt, mingled with other coolers, to about one dram.

Also the Decoction of the Wood of Mastick Tree, with Roses and Mirtil Leaves
added to it.

Outwardly, Posca is good, chiefly with Rose Vinegar and rain water Steeled, or
with Smiths Water, altered with Roses, Vine Leaves, and Mirtils; to which with
profit may be added to discuss the Humor, a part of the stone Prunella.

For to anoint; the Oil of Roses, Mirtils and of Frogs is useful.

Also Remedies are presently made by Decoction, of the same Ingredients.

Such a Liniment will be very profitable to assuage pain proceeding from a hot
and sharp defluxion.

Take Oil of Roses and Mirtils of each one ounce, the Mucilage of the Seed of
Quinses, Flea-seed and Mallows, of each two drams, Wax washed often in Fountain
Water, half an ounce. Mingle them, and make a Liniment.

Remedies for the Nerves.
For the Nerves over cooled, especially these are profitable, Germander,
Castoreum, the Brain of a Hare roasted, lesser Centory, Root of St. John's Wort,
Lavender, Mirrh, Pine Kernels, Dog Fennel, Primrose, Italian Spik, Sage, and
Pitch-smelling-Trefoly.

Of these things, some are compounded most effectual; but especially a
Decoction, such as is, that described for the Joints, adding to it Germander,
and Primroses.

Also a Bolus of Turpentine, with about one dram of the roasted Brains of a
Hare, and about one scruple of Castoreum.

Outwardly these have singular use; Baths and Mud of hot Baths, that are
Bitumenous and of Brimstone.

Also Fomentations of strong Wine altered with the said Herbs, adding a little
Aqua vitae.

For Ointments, Oils are made of the Decoctions of the said Herbs, wherein some
quantity of Earthworms washed in white Wine, has been Boiled.

Two singular Liniments are made for the cold affects of the sinews, whereof
the one is excellent for the Cramp that comes of Repletion, the other for the
Palsy, astonishment and trembling.

The first is made of Stellions. Thus.

Take Stellions, five in number, or in the room of them green Lizards: infuse
them alive in Oil of Chamomel, eight ounces; and when they are dead, let them
Boil in it, til their flesh be consumed, then press all out, to which add the
third part of the dripping of a roasted Goose, that was filled with
Frankincense, Lard, Mirrh and a little Saffron.

Another is provided of Goose Grease thus.

Take Leaves of Germander, Herb Ivy, Sage, Primrose, Lavender, St. John's Wort,
of each one handful, grains of Juniper half an ounce, Mirrh and Frankincense of
each three drams, Castoreum one dram and an half, Saffron half a dram. Moisten
the Herbs with Aqua vitae, then buise them, and with all these make a stuffing,
to stuff the Goose full withal, and stick her with small sticks of Cinnamon,
then roast her on a Spit: gather the dripping up, and when no more will drop,
cut up the Goose, and Boil her in white Wine for an hour, take off all the fat
that swims on the top, and mingle with the former dripping.

Some ascribe so much to Oil of Earth Worms washed in strong Wine and then
distilled in the Sand; that they affirm a Palsy may be cured by this only.

To Sinews that are over heat the same things are convenient, that were set
down for the Joints, except only burnt Bones.

Remedies for the parts of Breathing.
These Remedies, both hot and cold, which bring forth the matter that sticks in
the passages of Respiration, were set down in the Catalogue of those things
that Evacuate the Breast by Spittle: for the same may be fitted to correst the
distempers of the Lungs, but besides those, some things are Peculiarly good to
heat and dry the Breast.

The Waters of hot Baths that proceed from Brimstone, Drunk.

Some Figs steeped in Aqua vitae, until they swel, Eaten when the Stomach is
empty, and as one goes to bed.

The Decoction of Enula Campanae, Coltsfoot, Hysop, Horehound, Lungwort,
Savory, Time.

The Decoction will be the better, if it be made with an Old Cock that is
stuffed with these Herbs: also full sweet Metheglin will be altered with the
same very fitly for ordinary drink, or else make an Oxymel with them, and take
two ounces every morning.

Also sweet Wine is excellent, if it be altered with Hysop or Time.

But the use of Brimstone exceeds them all, and of Turpentine, or some kind of
Rosin, but chiefly of the Larch, or the Firr Tree.

Give daily, one dram of Brimstone, but especially, that which is prepared, and
brought into fine Powder taken in a rear Egg.

Rosin is given to two drams, which is better if it be drank hot, dissolved in
two ounces of Oxymel.

Outwardly are convenient, Brimstony Baths, and to stay long about such Baths
of Brimstone, in an Air that is full of hot Vapors, and that have a drying
force.

Or lay Cataplasms to the breast, of Meal of Fenugreek, Melilot, Powder of
Hysop, Calamint, and some Brimstone mingled with Honey, and with white Wine and
Lin-seed Oil in a just quantity.

To a Breast that is over-heat; these do good, besides what was set down
before, to expectorate Salt phlegm, to drink Mineral Waters that proceed from
Copper and Vitriol, as also from Iron and Steel.

Use of Milk, unless some Distillation hinder, and the Decoction either of Red
Sanders, or Rose Wood, especially of the Root, to be drank for many days, with
a thin Diet enchning to cold, chiefly of Barley, and the four great cold Seeds,

The Decoction may be of this fashion.

Take REd Sanders, or Rose Wood, cut small, five ounces, Roots of Succory and
Barley, of each half an ounce, Fountain Water Steeled two pound. Make infusion
fifteen hours, then let them Boil til half be consumed, strain them to drink at
twice.

By the use of this Decoction; hot bodies that are subject to a Consumption may
be preserved from it, as also from Spitting of Blood that is like to follow.

Also the frequent use of Conserve of Roses at going to bed is commended, as
also taken in the morning on an empty Stomach, especially if some drops of tart
spirits of Brimstone be put to it.

For outward cooling, it is sufficient to anoint with Oil or Unguent, made of
Violets.

Cordials.
There are many Cordialls to be made of the Antidotes that are prescribed
against poisons that are taken, but all that I propounded were only
preservatives against Malignant Fevers and the Plague; but besides these,
there are some that are convenient for the heart that is over cooled, as Spices
of al sorts, Pills of Oranges, sweet Angelica, Mary-golds, Mountain Calamint,
Clove-gelli-flowers, the Herb Cardiaca, Herb Bennet, Lillies of the Valleys,
Ground Ivy, Lavender, Balm, Mints, all sorts of Bazil, Root of Butter Burr,
Rosemary, Spik of France, and Italy, Mead sweet.

Of these, Syrups may be made, Decoctions, Electuaries, also Pouders, and
Spices to be strewed on meats.

The best for this purpose are the Compounds set down before, for Poisons
taken, and such as are bred in the Body and bring a Malignant Fever.

Also hot Remedies to refresh the spirits that I also propounded.

So there may be a Physical Wine provided which is of it self a great friend to
the Heart, for example.

Take Herbs, Mount Calamint, Carduus Sanctus, Scordium, Goats Rue, Lavender,
Balm, Rosemary, of each one handful, Roots of Avens, white Dictamni,
Maister-wort, Orange Pills, of each one ounce, Mirrh, Cinnamon, Cloves, of each
half an ounce, Saffron one dram Beat them a part into Powder, then put them
into an Hippocras bag, and pour on the Powder, the most pleasant white Wine
six pound, five or six times: of this Wine you may give about two ounces at
once; if you pour on Aqua vitae so, the Remedy will be more effectual, and the
Dose will be to one spoonful.

For outward Remedies, prepare bags of the said Herbs, and Spices, to be worn
on the Region of the Heart.

Also Fomentations of Spiced Wines altered with the same things, always adding
some Saffron to make them penetrate the more.

Lastly, Unctions may be made with Oils made of the Decoctions of the same
simples, or Spiced Oils made the same way, and you shall find this in the Title
of those things that refresh the spirits.

For the Heart over heat, those things are convenient that are more temperate,
that were set down against Malignant Fevers, and besides those, Ivory, flowers
of Willows, Mother of Pearl prepared, Mirtils, Water Lillies, the Bone of a
Stags Heart, sweet Apples, Roses, Sanders, Violets

Of these you have some Compounds amongst the Antidotes against Pestilent
Fevers.

Also the use of Conserves of Violets or Roses will be most profitable, with
one scruple of the Salt of the Mother of Pearls, for one Dose.

The Salt is thus made, dissolve the Mother of Pearl Burnt, in hot Water of
Borrage; adding a part of Rose Vinegar, then distill them by filtring, and
lastly Coagulate them, making away all the moisture by Evaporating it.

Externally Epithems are made of the water of flowers of Willows, Roses, water
Lillies, adding the Juice of Citrons or Lemmons, or Rose Vinegar to make them
penetrate, and if Camphire can be had readily, put in four or five grains of
it. Instead of Water you may take the Decoctions of Borrage, Bistort, Blew
bottles, Water Lillies and Violets with the same Juice, with Rose Vinegar.

Stomach Remedies.
The chief heating Stomach Remedies, and easiest to be got are, all sorts of
Wormwood, but especially the common, and the Sea wormwood, the Pills of Oranges
and Citrons and the Seeds, bitter Almonds, Gentian the less, Mints, Origanum,
Rosemary, and all Spices, amongst which the best are Zedoary, Ginger, Galangal,
and Pepper.

Of Compounds, easy to procure, wormwood Wine and Oxymel of wormwood are
approved.

Aqua vitae altered by steeping wormwood in it that was dried in the shade,
adding some Spices if you please.

The best Wine (such as may be made, being poured through Spices, sweet Seeds,
or the foresaid simples bruised) to be taken the quantity of two drams for many
days, fasting; with one or two grains of Pepper grosely beaten.

Also it is good to drink the Water of hot Baths that come from Brimstone; such
an Oxymel is most profitable, if you give every day one spoonful, or some other.

Take Herbs, Wormwood, Calamint, Rosemary, Mints, of each one handful, Pills of
Oranges or Citrons, one ounce, Seeds of Annis and Cinnamon, of each one dram,
Honey, one pound, the best white Wine, half a pound. Boil all at a soft fire
til the Honey be well clarified: to the strained Liquor, add the best Vinegar
half a pound; Boil them to a Syrup; when it is cold, cast in Ginger finely
poudered two drams.

Also it it singular good to take every day in a rear Egg about one dram of
Mastich in Powder, with a little Ginger of Zedoary.

Outwardly, it is profitable to drop down the Water of Baths of Brimstone,
which, when those waters are wanting, may be prepared of Wine, especially the
best red Wine that is altered with the said Herbs; of which also may be made
Fomentations.

The common people use to make excellent Fomentations of common wormwood,
Mints, Origanum, Calamint, Lavender, of each one handful, tops of Rosemary,
half a handful, common Oil, and Spiced Wine, of each one pound, let them Boil
at a soft fire til the moisture be consumed, press them out, and strain them,
so keep them for use.

For the Stomach over heat these are good, the Juice of Oranges, sour Grapes,
Barberies, sharp Cherries, the fruit of Cornus, Quinses, the Juice of sour
Pomegranates, the flowers of the wild Vine, Hypocistis, sharp Apples, unripe
Mulberries, sharp Pears, wild Plums, and the Juice of them, bastard Corinths,
Roses, Services, the Juice of Rhus or Sumach, Sorrel, Trifoly, Gooseberries,
sharp Wine well mingled with water.

You may give the Juice or Decoctions of the said fruit and Herbs, with an
Emulsion of the four great cold Seeds.

Also it is very convenient to give Asses or Goats Milk tempered with about a
fixed part of some of the said Juyces, least it change into a burnt smell.

Moreover, to drink of Bath waters that proceed from Copper, or Vitriol, or
Iron, is well approved; such waters as are in Italy, are called Chalderianae,
Lucenses, Niceranae, and the Blessed Virgin in Mount Ortho.

Outwardly, Fomentations may be used, and Epithems, or the Decoction of Roses,
Myrtles, flowers of wild Pomegranates, Quinces, Pomegranate Rinds, Hypocistis,
the wild Vine, adding to them some Rose vinegar.

A most profitable Plaster may be made of the pulp of a Quince, boiled in
Rainwater, or steeled water, sprinkled with a little powder of mastich and red
Roses. Instead of Quinces, you may take sharp Apples.

Ointments may be made of Oil boiled with the said Herbs, til the moisture be
consumed, always adding a little wax, washed sometimes in Posca, that the force
of the Remedy may stick the longer to the place affected.

For a dried Stomach, where there is want of inbred heat, nothing is better
than milk taken for many days, about five or six hours before meat. You must
take it by degrees from four ounces to six ounces or thereabouts, new milked,
and with about a fourth part of Honey that it Wax not sour.

Outwardly, Fomentations are good made chiefly of Oils, that are not very hot,
or else received into moist Wool.

Also Pications are useful, made with Pitch melted with a little Oil of
Wormwood, and laid upon the part until it wax a little red; in the mean time
the Stomach must be cherished with a young Puppy, or your own hand, or a young
Maid lying upon it all the night.

Remedies that alter the Intestines.
The same Remedies almost are good for the Intrals, as are for the Stomach, by
reason of the Affinity of Parts, and Propriety of their Substance.

But for the Intestines over cooled, as it falls out often in the Colic,
especially these do profit: Cummin Seed, Bayberries, Rue, and the Pills of
Oranges; the Powder of them may be given to one dram in spiced Wine, or an
Emulsion of the Seed of Citrons, or Oranges.

The most commendable is, Wine that is made Physical with the long steeping of
Orange Pills, both to cure the pains of the Colic, and to preserve one from
it, if it be daily used.

Theriaca Diatessaron, is excellent for the same, as it is described amongst
the Antidotes; one dram of it given alone, or with spiced Wine.

The same things may be given in Clysters, in any of these forms; to which you
may very well add Oil of Nuts, the Decoction of Coloquintida, and Turpentine, or
Rozin of the Firtree, or Larch-tree, dissolved in Oil.

As for Example:

Take the Decoction of Chamomel, Bay Leaves, Colequintida bound up in a skin,
one pound: Oil of Bays, or Oil of Nuts, three ounces: Crude Honey, and
Turpentine, of each two drams: Common Salt two drams: mingle them for a Clyster.

Outwardly, Unctions of Oil of Bays, and Rue, are principal good; as also the
mud of Baths from Brimstone.

For the Intestines over heat, these things are profitable: All things that
cool the Stomach, and the Liver; but the chief are Bath-waters proceeding of
Copper, and Vitriol, and Iron, drank with an empty Stomach.

Milk added to Clysters, and often bathing the middle Abdomen with Posca, that
is something cold; with which Remedies the pains of the Intestines proceeding
from thin, and most sharp choler, are easily and soon abated.

For the Liver over cooled, these are convenient; Wormwood, Agrimony,
Germander, all the Gentians, Lavender, the wood and berries of Juniper, Poley,
French Spike, and Italian Spike, to which ad Spices, and the hotter Diuretics.

Amongst Compounds, strong Wines are most approved, made Physical with
wormwood, and Spices, such as were set down for the Stomach.

Also the Decoction of Juniper wood, is excellent, adding the tops of wormwood,
which will be more pleasant if you add a quantity of clarified Honey, chiefly if
it be boiled with the best wine to the consistence of a Syrup; for by this
means, diverse Decoctions may be made of hot Diuretics and Spices, always
adding wormwood to them.

Outwardly, Fomentations will be good, made of spiced wine, altered with the
foresaid Ingredients.

Also the mud of Baths that come from Brimstone.

Ointments are made with Oils compounded of the same Simples by Decoction, such
as were described for the Stomach.

Lastly, Little bags made of the same things put into a fine cloth, and worn
upon the Region of the Liver.

But for the Liver over heat, these are the best amongst Simples: Sorrel,
Succory, the pulp and seeds of Gourds, Citruls, Endive, Liver-wort, Hawkweed,
Barley, al sorts of Docks, Lettice, Milk (if there be no obstructions, nor a
Fever) chiefly that which is four; pulp and seeds of Apples, Purslain, wild
Endive, Sow-thistle, Dandelyon, Sorrel, Trefoyl, whey of milk alone, or with an
Emulsion of the four great cold Seeds.

Decoctions are made of Herbs in water or broth, or the Juyces are pressed out,
which are kept til winter, both clarified and thickened: they are mingled from
one ounce to two, with broth in winter time; but these from one or two drams,
are either mingled, or made up into Bolus, or else are dissolved in some Liquor.

Also Herbs are eaten, boiled after the manner of Pot herbs, in water, or
fleshbroth.

A Prisan is made of Barley, which is made the more pleasant, made white with
the Seed of Melones or Gourds: the use whereof is good also in a Panatella.

To al these, Natural Mineral waters may be added, that proceed from Copper,
Vitriol, or Iron, that were mentioned to temper the heat of the Stomach; for
there is nothing better to cool the Liver, than the orderly drinking of these
waters.

Outwardly Epithems are convenient, of Juyces, and the Decoctions, especially
of Cichory, and Sow-thistle, with an eight part of Rose Vinegar, or common
Vinegar, in which a little wormwood and Roses have boiled.

Also an Oil to anoint with, may be prepared of Violets and Roses, which would
be more effectual, made with the Decoction of the Herbs mentioned, with common
Oil, til the moisture be consumed.

But a bath of sweet water, is better than any Remedy, used for the whole body
after due Evacuations, unless a Fever hinder.

For the Spleen over cooled, these are proper Remedies; Seed of Agnus Castus,
borrage, bugloss, roots and rinds of Cappars, stone-fern, Dodder, root of Fern,
seed and bark of Ash-tree, Fumitory, the ripe berries of Ivy of the wall,
Hart's-tongue, the flower and root of Hops, root of water fern, Tamarisk, Time,
Teucrium. The Powder of these may be drank to one dram for forty days in
wormwood wine, or steeled wine, or Smiths water.

Of these may be made Decoctions suddenly, Physic wines, and Electuaries.

The Decoctions of Ash wood are excellent, and Tamarisk, Mountain Teucrium, and
Germander, especially made with water wherein new steel has been quenched, or
with Smiths water el^rified.

Some make these Decoctions with Vinegar, but chiefly wherein Raisins have been
steeped, to diminish the Spleen that is grown too great: if Vinegar of Squils
be at hand, it were good to mix it with the Decoctions, to half a spoonful.

Wines are prepared by the infusion of the same Herbs, and they will be better,
if you add steel that is prepared with Brimstone, which preparation may be made
suddenly, as for example.

Take Leaves of Germander, Dodder, wall Fern, Fumitory, Buglos, of each one
handful, Seeds of Ash, berries of Ivy of the Wall of each two drams, Time and
Wormwood of each one pugil, Steel prepared one ounce, the best white Wine three
pound. Make infusion in the Sun or some hot place for eight days, stirring the
matter always once and again; then strain the Wine and take every day four
ounces, four hours before meat, and before ordinary exercise.

Electuaries may be made of the same herbs, adding prepared Steel to them, or
Ammoniacum, and four times so much Clarified Honey.

Some there are that ascribe a wonderful effect to Ivy berries poudered and
mingled with honey to an Electuary, or drank in Wine or Broth of Chich Pease to
one dram for forty days.

Outwardly are convenient, Fomentations of the Decoctions of Emollient Herbs,
adding thereto the Roots of Briony and Sowbread, Ivy Leaves, and Tobacco, dwarf
Elder, and wormwood to corroborate the parts, with some quantity of white wine
and vinegar, in the end of the Decoction to make the better penetration.

The Fume of this Decoction received is good, by quenching in it a piece of a
sire-stone, or a mil-stone.

Also Fomentations made of Hemp Yarn boiled in a strong Lixivium, and being
laid hot and moist to the part, are exceeding profitable.

Also the mud of ^itumenous Baths used for fifteen or twenty days, is
commended.

After Fomentations, let the parts be anointed with Oils made suddenly, by
boiling together, or else apart, Sowbread, Priony, Cappars, flowers of Broom,
Tobacco, Ivy Leaves, Coloquintida, in common Oil with white wine and vinegar;
til the moisture be consumed, adding some wormwood, or bitter Almonds to
preserve the strength of the part.

After convenient use of Fomentations and Ointments, apply a Cerate to the
part, as that which is usual, made of Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar of
Squils, or provide something of the same faculty, of the pouders of the said
Simples, adding some little of the foresaid Oil, to a sufficient quantity of
the Pinetree Rozin, or white Pitch, and new Wax.

Also Bee-glew is commended that is yet swelling with Honey, bruised by it self
to the form of a Plaster, adding a little Mastich to help the strength of the
part.

To this place appertains a little bag, that is stuffed with equal parts of
wild Cucumer, pulp of Coloquintida and wormwood laid to the Spleen.

These cool the Spleen that is overhot, the same that were propounded for the
Liver; but there must be some temperate Attenuatives added to them; by reason
of the thick Juice the Spleen is nourished with.

Such are, Strawberries, Maidenhair, Hops, Sparagus, Trichomanes, vinegar,
Smiths water clarified; with which Decoctions are altered, Fomentations and
Epithems; not forgeting to add some wormwood to outward Remedies, to strengthen
the part.

The same things belong to the Reins and the Bladder, by reason of the
community of their office, and nearness of the parts.

Therefore, for these overcooled, all those hot Diuretics laid down in their
proper place, are profitable.

Also Betony, Chamomel, the Root of long Cyperus, added to the Decoctions and
Electuaries.

But these are judged to be better to heat the Urinary passages; water Baths
that proceed from Brimstone, drank, for many days together, fasting, to some
pound weights; putting in some small quantity of Annis Seed or Fennel or the
like Diuretic in Powder, for the first Cupp, or some Rosin of the Larch or
Firr Tree, to about two drams, taken in Bolus, either by it self, or with some
little Powder of some of the hotter Diuretics.

Also white Wine of the best, altered with some of the hotter Diuretics is
most convenient for this business.

Outwardly to sit in waters of Baths, that proceed from sulphur is an approved
Remedy.

Fomentations of the Decoction of hot Diuretics, with hot white Wine.

Ointments, with Oil of Bays, or some such like, prepared presently; you have
an example of it amongst the Diuretics.

Cataplasms are commended, made of Onions and Garlic Boiled with white Wine,
and bruised, and laid on by themselves, or sprinkled with the Powder of Cummin
Seed or the like.

Clysters made with the foresaid Oil are often to be given hot, and with Wine
altered with Chamomel, Bay Leaves, Penniroyal, wild Time, and such like heaters
that cause Urin.

Add to all these strong Motion, by riding, running, Walking; whereby the
Region of the Loins is heated.

But for the Reins over-heat, these things profit inwardly; Decoctions of the
fruit of Alkekengi, Marshmallows, Sorrel, Barley, Lettice, Mallows, water
Lillies, Purslain, Grass, Roots of Sowthistles, with the Emulsions of the four
great cold Seeds, or the Juice of Lemmons.

Moreover Clarified Whey, with the Emulsion of the four cold Seeds.

Also steeled Milk unless some obstruction of the Reins hinder it.

Drinking of sharp Mineral waters, of Copper, Vitriol or Iron, such are in
Italy the Lucenses, Noceranae, Chalderianae, and at Padua, of the blessed
Virgin.

Also to eat Strawberries, Lemmons Melons, Citruls, Gourds, Barley, Lettice.

Outwardly, does profit, a Bath, to sit in of sweet waters, chiefly altered
with Violets, Pellitory of the wal-Lettice, Mallows, the Decoctions whereof are
also profitably given in Clysters.

In the place of Baths, Epithems are good of warm Milk, either alone, or with
the Decoction of Mallows, or of the foresaid Herbs, adding Juice of Lemmons to
them to make them penetrate.

When heat is urgent; add the Leaves of Housleek, Garden nightshade, and
Alkekengi, and sometime of white Henbane, to the Decoction.

The most effectual is the Juice pressed out of the inward scrapings of the
gourd, either alone, or laid on with other things.

Also sudden Ointments may be prepared of Oils, wherein are Boiled, the slowers
or Leaves of water Lillies, Blew Violets, Damask Roses, green Frogs.

Upon urgent necessity, (which falls out in an exquisite Diabetes) the Seeds of
white Poppy, and white Henbane, out of which also Oils are made by expression,
very effectual for the purpose.

Apply to the Reins, and the parts about, fresh Leaves of water Lillies, when
the party goes to bed, and let him wear in the day time, in the place of them,
a thin plate of Lead, or a simple Cerate, made of Yellow Wax, often washed in
Rose water, or the said Decoctions and Oils, which must be often taken off,
least growing hot by the Clothes upon it, it may foster the heat of the Reins.

Remedies for the Matrix.
No cold things of themselves are kindly to the Matrix (because it is the place
of generation) yet if it shall stand in need of them, when it is over heat,
they are necessary for to help it, which are set sown to help the Reins and the
Liver; only with this caution that to outward Remedies, some things must be
added that cherish the natural heat of it, and foster its peculiar property.

But when it is over-cooled, these principally are convenient; amongst common
things, Mugwort, Angelica, Calamint, the Root of long Cyprus, Daucus, white
Dictamny, Nip, Leaves and Berries of bays, Lavender, Fetherfew, Marjoram, Balm,
Garden Mints, and wild Mints, and Greek Mints, Origanum, Poly, Penniroyal,
Rosemary, Rue Savory, Sage, wild Time, French and Italian Spik; sweet Tansey,
Time, and all Spices, amongst which the best are Cinnamon, Saffron, Galanga,
Mirrh, Mace and Nutmeg.

The Powder of these may be given, to one dram in Spiced Wine or Broth, or else
Electuaries may be made of them, adding thrice as much of Clarified Honey.

To this end serve all kind of Aromatical Spices, that may be had at cheap
rates, of which take one dram in Wine.

But Decoctions and Physical Wines are preferred before other Medicaments,
because by reason of their moisture they can more easily be conveyed to the
Matrix.

The best Decoctions are made of Pidgeon Broth, the Belly of the Pidgeon being
stuffed with the said simples, as for Example.

Take Herbs, Calamint, Penniroyal, Balm, Mints, of each one handful, tops of
Rosemary and Lavender, of each one pugil, Bay Berries, Nutmeg and Galanga, of
each one dram. Cut the Herbs and bruise the rest grossly, and put them together
within the belly of a Pidgeon; then boil them in water sufficient at a very
soft fire, until the flesh be perfectly boiled; then press all out strongly,
and strain it: give two ounces of it, or thereabouts, daily for many days.

Physic Wines are made by the Infusion of the said Ingredients, or by thrice
pouring the wine upon the said pouders put into a long bag.

Women use to provide Wines by Decoction, and that presently, but they are not
so effectual, because the thinner parts are evaporated.

Also to drink the water of Baths from Brimstone seasonably, does wonderfully
maintain and correct the heat of the Matrix.

Outwardly do profit, Insessions, Bath waters from Brimstone, or Baths altered
with the said Herbs, putting into the Matrix a hollow Pipe, that by that, the
force of the Medicament may come to it.

The same Liquors, as also Physical Wines are conveniently used, conveied by
injections to the secrets.

Also Fumigations of Spices and sweet Herbs are good.

Pessaries are commended, such as may be presently provided, Thus.

Take the Powder of Bay Berries and Rue, of each one dram, Mirrh half a dram,
Juice of Fetherfew or Peniroyal or Spiced Wine one ounce. Mingle them, and with
carded Wool or Cotton make a pessary. Or,

Take the best Honey one ounce, Juice of Mugwort half an ounce. Boil them to a
fit consistence, then add Powder of Galanga, or the Spices of vulgar Aromaticks
one dram: mingle them for a pessary.

Also Fomentations must be applied to the lower part of the Belly, with
Spounges, pressed out with mineral waters, or of the Decoctions of the foresaid
simples, chiefly in strong Wine.

But no Fomentation is better, than the mud of hot Baths applied to that part
for some days.

Anoint the same place with Oil of Spik, Bays, Rue, and other things made of
the Decoction of the said simples, as for example.

Take Herbs Calamint, Marjoram, Fetherfew, Mints, Lavender, of each one
handful, Bay Berries and Galanga, of each two drams. Pound what must be
pounded, and infuse all in one pound and an half of common Oil and half a pound
of Spiced Wine for six hours, then Boil them at a soft fire till the moisture
be consumed.

Some ascribe a peculiar virtue to strengthen the Matrix, to Santoline, which
Mathiolus makes to be Foemale Southernwood.

And these are the most common and ready Remedies to alter, whereby the
distemper of every part, and of the whole Body may be corrected.

Remedies of Diseases in ill Conformation.
Due Conformation, convenient Magnitude of the Similary parts, of which the
Organ consists, do make the Constitution of the Organ; also convenient and fit
number to which apt connection is referred: therefore we shall Recite four chief
heads of faulty composition, namely, a Disease in conformation, in Magnitude,
in number, in Situation.

There are four ill accidents that befall Conformation: namely, in figure, the
insensible passage, being open or shut, Cavity or sensible passage being
enlarged or streightened, and the superficies being smooth or rough.

A Disease in figure has no Remedies that are proper for it, but it is either
cured with the help of Surgery, or with Medicaments that respect other
Diseases, on which it depends. For it is made either by faulty Conformation
in the Womb, or violent motion in the birth, or the unskillful swathing by
Midwives, or walking when the Legs are weak, disjoyntings, and errors of the
Surgeon in curing Fractures and Luxations, which want the help of
Chyrurgery, but of those we do not speak in this place.

But the part brought again to its due Conformation is strengthened outwardly
with Fomentations and Cerates, which are made of Astringents, but chiefly those
that are hot, and shall be described very shortly.

Now if the figure be spoiled by too great Repletions, or extreme in any
Emptines, or by some inclinations of one part toward another, by reason of a
Palsy or Convulsion, as it falls out when the Nerves or the Tendons are cut, or
from some hard Cicatrice, or great swelling; it is cured by such Remedies as
empty, strengthen the Nerves, soften hardness, of which we spak already, also
with such as refresh the part that is too empty, and such as glue dissolved
unity, of which afterward.

Rarity, or the opening of the insensible passages which Men call Porosities,
which in great Joy poured forth, and Diaphoretical sweatings, is often the
cause of death, it is cured by Coolers, Astringents, and Emplasticks, or such
as draw up the pores.

Such things as are most obvious to be applied outwardly; are the sprinkling
with cold water and so much the more if it be cooled with Snow, or Ice, or
first altered with cold astringents, of which we will speak afterward.

Anointing of the Body with Oils that are actually cold, especially of unripe
Olives, or altered with cold astringents, as Roses, Quinces and the like,

Also the coldest Air is best, that with the cold of the Air, the pores may be
contracted.

If these things Suffice not, lay on Burnt Gip with cold water, as a crust upon
the Body.

If Rarity possess the part, as when by reason of rarity of the yard, the
spirits cannot be contained in the hollow Nerve, to cause strong erection,
those Astringents that shall be by and by propounded must be applied to the
place affected, especially hot, because so they strengthen the more.

For the Density or astriction of those passages, if it proceed from any matter
that is impacted, hot detergents are most convenient, and such as attenuate,
which shall be propounded to take away obstructions that come from thick matter
that is impacted.

If it proceed from cold and dryness, things that are moderately hot and that
attenuate without drying are needful, of which there is notable use to dispose
the Body to necessary sweating, and to make the Body transpirable, which is
procured to drive away the internal corruptions of Fevers, and to take off all
Cutaneous spots.

Such are Baths of warm water, Fomentations of water and Oil, or warm water,
chiefly altered with Dill, Chamomel, Marshmallows, Roots of white Lillies,
Lin-seed, the flowers of common Jasmin, and wall-flowers, Boiled, till half be
consumed.

Also Unction may be made with Oil very hot, first rubbing the part softly, or
let the Body be gently rubbed with the Palm of the Hand, dipped in the same Oil,
or some Spiced white Wine, adding one half of the Decoction of Violets and
Mallows, in common water, if there be a strong Fever present.

Also the rubbing it self with soft Cloths, takes away the thickness of the
Skin, and Cupping Glasses do it more effectually, with or without Scarification.

Also for the Amplitude, or Laxity and Dilatations of the Cavities or sensible
passages, astringents are convenient, which do so much the more forcibly
thicken them, as the passages are smaller.

The matter of astringents is of very long extent; they may be reduced to three
Ranks, where the choice of every one for use may be easily found.

Some do but a little bind, the use whereof principally is to corroborate the
parts, and they do bridle excretions, which are not altogether unprofitable,
yet by their quantity and continuance, they may weaken the strength.

Some do moderately bind, which have a principal force to repel all Fluxes from
the parts that receive them, and to stay all Fluxes that are hurtful.

Lastly, some astringents do compact the parts that are loosened, and are to be
used, when by the force of the defluxion, and vehemence of Evacuation, there is
imminent danger; as it falls out most commonly when the matter that flows is
very thin, and comes through passages that are very much loosened with the
continuance of the defluxion.

In a cold cause let such Remedies be made choice of, that bind with heat, or
without any manifest coldness.

But in a hot cause those things will help which work by cooling.

And of all kinds of astringents, these will be most easily provided for sudden
Remedies.

Upon a cold cause these bind a little; all kinds of Wormwood, but especially
Sea Wormwood, Egrimony, Betony, Coleworts well Boiled, Coriander Seed, Cummin
Seed torrefied, the Root of long English Galingal, the Hulls of Beans, Mastich
wood; and Leaves, Garden Mints dried, Mastick, Rice dried, Rosemary, Sage,
common Scabious, Frankincense, Rosin of the Larch-Tree or Firr-Tree Boiled
hard, sharp Wine, or any other Wine steelled.

The dry Pouders of those are given inwardly, by themselves in sharp Wine to
one dram or there abouts and something more.

Also Decoctions of Physic Wines, amongst which, the best is Wormwood Wine, or
made of Mastich wood, or Mastich, or Rosemary, or Sage.

Also ordinary drink is profitably altered with the Seed of Coriander and
Mastich, and the said Pouders are strewed upon meat.

For an inveterate Gonorrhea without any heat of Urine, the said Rosins Boiled
in Rain Water, or steeled water, taken for many days fasting, are profitable,
and made into Pills to one dram, with one scruple of dried Mints or the Seed of
Agnus castus.

Also one scruple of the Powder of Mastich taken for some days in a rear Egg
four hours before dinner, will stay the same.

The same Powder taken the same way, if you drink a draught of wormwood Wine
after it, stays an Hepatick flux properly so called, and Old fluxes of the
Belly, and vomiting also that proceeds from the weakness of the Stomach.

Outwardly Ointments may be made of common Oil of unripe Olives (they call it
Omphacinum) or of Oil of ripe Olives altered with wormwood, dry Mints,
Rosemary, or Mastick wood, or Mastick.

Or Liniments made presently, such as this following is.

Take Mastick in Powder one dram, common Oil one ounce, Yellow Wax, what is
sufficient. Mingle them and make a Liniment.

Little bags are made of Cummin Seed torrefied, and Rice dried at the fire.

Or moist Fomentations of sharp red Wine, that is altered with the said Herbs.

Or a Cataplasm of the shells of Beans, dried Rice, the Powder of Wormwood, Oil
and sharp Wine.

Of Mastick and Frankincense, Cerats are made, adding to them Oil of wormwood
and Rosin of the Pine Tree with Yellow Wax what is sufficient.

For long continuing defluxions of the Eyes. It is good to wash the Eyes often
with the best white Wine, in which Frankincense set on fire, has been thrice
quenched, adding a third part of River water, if the defluxion he sharp.

These bind Moderately, Bean meal heated at the fire, eaten in meats, Chestnuts,
Avens, Black Knapweed, the green shells of Wallnuts, Lintels well Boiled and
the Juice, the Roots of Water-fern.

Also the Powder of the Black Grape half ripe dried in an Oven, taken one dram
for many days in Wine that is a little sharp, is propounded by Septalius, as a
great secret to cure an Hepatick flux, also it cures the flux of Women, being
taken in Aromatical Wine made Physical with Rosemary, Sage, or Mints.

For the hot affections of the Jaws, this does profit singularly, the
Decoction, or the Juice of the green Rinds of Wallnuts for a Gargarism, for
which purpose a Syrup is made with Honey and the Juice Clarified.

The Juice of Lintells well Boiled, taken with a little of the Powder of
Galanga, or Nutmeg, in the morning, four hours before meat, cures vomitings
and scourings that proceed from the weakness of the Stomach.

Avens, and the Root of water Fern Boiled in Red wine, or bear into Powder, is
singular good against the falling out of the Intestines and the Matrix.

Ontwardly, Mill dust added to Plasters is good against Pissing of Blood.

Earth worms in Plasters are good for the Nerves that are wounded.

Salt and Roch Alum, put into Decoctions of Red wine, are for to corroborate
the parts.

Baths of Alum and Gip, (such as are in the Mountain of Grattas in the field
of Padua) are good to strengthen the Limbs that are distempered by long
defluxions.

The mother of the wine hot, is commended to corroborate the Joints.

The crum of bread tosted and sprinkled with strong wine, and with the Powder
of wormwood or Mints is good to fortify a weak Stomach.

These bind strongly, great Sanicle, Garden dropwort, especially the Root, all
the Cranes Bills. especially Pigeons Foot, Herb Robin, Mouse-ear.

The Decoction of these is given, or the Powder to one dram

Also the Powder of a Sponge burnt is most effectual, and the inward Skin of
Chestnuts.

Of the Juice of Herbs, and the Powder of Roots mingled, bread may be made,
baked so hard as Bisquet, which being beaten into Powder may be mingled with
meats, to be taken without loathing.

Outwardly Fomentations are prepared of the Decoctions of Herbs, with sharp
wine, adding some Alum to them.

The Juice of the fruit of Guajacum of Padua, when it is half ripe pressed
forth through a Linen Cloth, or received by a Sponge, stays the most
desperate flowing of the Hemorrhoids; therefore it may be thickened with Alum,
and be kept for use.

Also Goats-dung beaten with Vinegar and laid on, stops all fluxes of Blood.

The Leaves of common Nettles beaten til the Juice come forth, and put into the
Nostrills like a Tent, stays bleeding at the Nose be it never so Violent.

But in a hot cause these bind a little, Rain water, steeled water, water of
Mineralls of Iron, such as is the water of Padua, of the Mountain, Ortho.

Vinegar, Posca, Root of Succory, Leaves of the Cypress Tree, dried Strawberry
Leaves, Barley torrefied, of which a Ptisan may be made with steeled water,
steeled Milk, Tree Moss, Mirtills, Purslain, the Clot Burr, spotted Ars-mart,
Pear Tree of the Orchards, four Prunes, the Leaves of Sloes, Pond-weed, the
flowers of Roses, especially the red, the Seed, Down. Cups and Root, the
flowers and Leaves of Willows, Housleek, Mullen, the Leaves and Tendrells of
Vines, Venus Navil.

Of these may be provided chiefly Decoctions, amonst which against inveterate
defluxions the Decoction of the Roots of Roses in some of the foresaid waters
is excellent.

Also this drink, by certain experience stays in one day every hot
excrementitious Bloody Flux of the Belly.

Take the Juice of the greater housleek and spotted Ars-mart of each three
ounces. Boil them to the Consumption of a third part, and give it in drink.

Outwardly may be prepared Fomentations, Baths, Emplaisters, Epithems, and
other forms of Medicaments, as need requires.

These bind moderately, the Juice of Oranges, Citrons, Lemmons not ripe,
wilding Leaves, Leaves of wild Pomegranates, Barberries, Sheppards purse, the
inward Rinds of Chestnuts, Cistus, Dog Tree, and the fruit of it, the fruit of
the Cypress Tree green or not yet ripe, flower of the Sun, Acorns and their
Cups, Herb-trinity, Hypocistis, the flowers of the wild Vine, the flowers of
the purple water Willow, all the Sea Lavenders, the common Bloodstone, sour
Pomegranates, Quinces, Pomegranate Rinds, Nose-Bleed, unripe Mulberries, Leaves
of the Olive Tree, Adders Tongue, Plantain, wild Pear Tree, the fruit of the
bastard Corinths, the Leaves of Brambles, unripe Mulberries, Sow-wort,
Iron-wort, Yarrow, all Medicinal earths, the Elm, Golden Rod, and all these
almost may be found in most places.

The dry Pouders of these may be given to one dram, in Bolus, or drink, or some
convenient liquor.

Decoctions may be made of the Herbs, but the Juyces are more effectual, the
Dose whereof is from one ounce to two ounces.

These are held for secrets to stop all fluxes of Blood, the flowers of purple
Loose-strife to one dram, given several times in sharp Red Wine.

Also this Syrup; Take the Water of Knot Grassor Yarrow five ounces. Let the
Boodstone be so long in this Liquor, til the Liquor be of a color like
Blood, then add to it the Syrup of Quinces or Pomegranates one ounce, mingle
them for a drink; or in the place of a Syrup put a little Sugar, to make it
Penetrate, and some Juice of Lemmons, or sharp Pears, or some other that is of
a pleasant taste.

To stop the Laskes of the Belly and vomiting, make a great hollow in a Quince,
or some sour Garden fruit, (Apples of an Iron color are best) and fill it with
white Wax, put it into a Paper and roast it in the Embers, give a piece or two
of this strewed with the Powder of unripe Mulberries, a little before meat.

For to stay Pissing of Blood.

Take the Decoction of Golden-Rod in Rain or steeled water, four ounces, the
water of the whites of Eggs two ounces, Juice of Lemmons two ounces. Mingle
this to drink.

For outward Remedies, Oils are made suddenly of the Decoction of Quinces,
Cypress Nuts, and of the Pine Tree, and other Herbs, adding Posca to it: let
them be Boiled til the moisture be consumed; the use of these is for Ointments
or Unguents, with which, Litharge Boiled in Vinegar may well be mingled.

Epithems may be made with Posca and whites of Eggs.

Fomentations and Insessions of the Decoctions of Herbs.

Defensatives for wounds, are made of Bole-Armoniack, or any other Medicinable
Earth, and the common Bloodstone; being mingled and stirred with the whites of
Eggs to the consistence of a Liniment: the Sediment of a W^^et-Stone affords
matter for a Plaster to stay al fluxes.

Rulandus does frequently extol a Plaster of Potters Clay burnt, and Boiled
with Vinegar, laid hot to the part, to stop Blood that forcibly runs out of any
part.

For the Stomach a Plaster is profitable, made of a Quince, Boiled in four Red
Wine, or adding some Crumbs of bread to it softened in Vinegar.

These bind strongly, amongst the most common Remedies, Grape stones, the
Kernells of the Pomegranate dried, the flowers of purple flower-gentle, the
inward Skin of wood Nuts, Chervil and the Root, great Comfrey, middle Comfrey
or the great Daisey, Horstail, Galls especially unripe, Rupture-wort, the Root
of the Yellow wild Flower-de-Luce, the true Boodstone, common Hares-Foot,
wild Apples, unripe Medlars, the Rind of the Root of Mulberries, money wort,
Verjuyce, Juice of Sloes, Knot-grass, the Root and Leaves of the Oak, the Bark
that is between the Tree and the outward Rind, unripe Services Sumach, male
Sanicle, dead Nettles, Bloody-rod of Mathiolus or, female Dog Tree.

Of these, some are peculiarly commended for some fluxes, though all of them
may be used generally where there is need of great astriction.

For the overflowing of the Terms, these are accounted approved, the shel of
the Root of the Mulberry, the Root of the dead Nettle, Grape stones, and
Pomegranate Kernells, the Pouders of all these are given severally to one dram,
with Red Wine or some Liquor that is fit for it.

For Spitting of Blood, the Boodstone taken with Sugar of Roses to one dram,
or laid in astringent potions, til it look like the color of Blood, or put
into a Bag, and beat into very small Powder, and so strain Wine often through
it, or any other ordinary drink.

Against vomiting and any immoderate and inveterate fluxes of the Belly, these
two Electuaries are the principle. The first,

Take of the Roots of Yellow wild Flower-de-Luce, Boiled in Rain Water, and
passed through a Hair sive, two parts, Old Sugar of Roses one part. Make an
Electuary according to art: the Dose, is from half an ounce to one ounce. In
the palce of Sugar of Roses let the Poor take half so much Clarified Honey,
Boiled in rain water or steeled water, wherein the youngest Leaves of the Oak
have Boiled some time.

The other.

Take the Roots of great Comfrey Boiled in the Decoction of the Root of Garden
Dropwort, and passed through a Hair sive, two parts, Old Sugar of Roses one
part, or parts alike. Mingle them, make an Electuary, the Dose is the same with
the former.

If it be provided for Hepatick fluxes, (and it does very happily stay them)
you must add a fourth part of Comfrey, wormwood, or a twelfth part of wormwood,
Mastick.

For the same purpose the Decoction of the Root and Young Leaves of the Oak is
excellent, made with red Wine, adding a little wormwood to it, if it be drank
daily to two ounces or thereabout, five hours before meat.

Other Remedies may be made for other uses, as every one pleases.

Outwardly Crude Gip is convenient, mingled with Cerats and Plasters.

Also Hogs dung, and Asses dung, either fresh, or else in Powder: by either of
these, al immoderate fluxes of Blood are presently stopped, if it be laid on with
the white of an Egg, and blown in.

Guainerius says, that he used Asses dung inwardly, and Syrup of Sugar
prepared with the moisture of the fresh dung pressed out; as a chief Remedy to
stop immoderate fluxes of the Terms, and other extraordinary Eruptions of Blood.

Oil of the Dog-Tree, and the Root of the Oak made by descent, exceeds all the
rest by an astringent faculty.

Moreover, of the Decoctions of Herbs are made Fomentations and Baths.

Cataplasms are made of unripe fruits beaten with Posca, and moderately Boiled.

Also an Unguent may be prepared suddenly; but the Unguent of Chestnuts, and
Comitissa may supply the place thereof.

Take unripe Galls, Cypress Nuts, the Kernells of Red Grapes, Pomegranate
shells, the middle Rinds of Chestnuts, Mastick, of each half an ounce, Oil of
unripe Olives, or of Roses often washed in Alum Water, one pound, white Wax
three ounces. Let the dry Ingredients be beat into Powder, and steeped in the
Juice of Sloes, or unripe Services, or Verjuyce, or the Juice of astringent
Herbs, and let them be dried at a soft fire; adding thereto before they Wax
hard, the Oil and the Wax, mingling all gently by stirring it.

If you had rather have it for a Cerate: take Rosin three ounces, and Wax five
ounces, to the said quantity of Oil and the Pouders.

Streightness and Closeness of the Passages comes to pass five ways: by
obstruction, constipation, Compression, cleaving together, and by sinking down:
whence the differences of Diseases in streightness are taken; which, as they
differ by generation, and variety of their causes, so are they taken away by
diverse Remedies.

Obstruction is properly called so, that streightness of the Passages that
comes from things that are contained within contrary to nature, not that are
united and sticking to the passages; such are Vapors and Humors that abound
too much, or that are too thick and clammy, also corruption, Clotts of Blood,
and Milk, Thorns, and little Bones that stay in the Throat and hinder the
passage, Hares Stones, worms, dregs that stick to the Intestines.

Corruption shut up in Impostumes, is taken away by opening the Impostume;
which is done with Iron or actual fire, or by a potential Cautery; of which a
little after.

That which sticks to Ulcers is taken away with Sarcoticks, of which we shall
speak in the cure of Ulcers.

That which is poured forth into other Cavities, as into the sharp Artery, is
taken away with such things as cut and cleanse, Clots of Blood are to be
dissolved by Remedies that are elsewhere set down and are to be evacuated by
purging the Belly, also by Urin, Spittle, for the situation of the part
affected, by Purgations and Diuretics, and expectorating Medicaments set down
before.

Also such Remedies as dissolve Clotted Milk and discuss it, are evident by
those things that have been said.

Things that stick in the Gullet, if they can be seen, let them be drawn out
with Iron Instruments; if they remove the least from their place, by
Sternutation, Coughing, or vomit provoked by putting in the Finger, or a
Feather into the Throat; also by drinking plentifully, or by swallowing down
some solid Gobbet not much chewed and lastly by swallowing down a spounge,
first dipped in Rozin, that the thing may stick to it, and then drawn up again by
a long thread tied to it.

If Hairs and other things that come from without, appear, they must be taken
out with Chirurgions Instruments; if they be hid in the Stomach and Intestins,
they are driven out by vomit or purging, as the sick is inclined.

Concerning such things as Purge the Belly, and drive out the excrements, and
further concerning Remedies against stones and worms, and such as discuss
abundant and gross vapors, we spoke, amongst the Remedies that take away the
cause of the Disease.

Obstruction from fullness, or abundance of Blood, is taken away by a thin
diet, that is not of the best and much Juice; by strong exercise, and much
rubbing, as by Medicaments that dry the whole Body; and by sensible
Evacuations, namely opening the Veins, Scarifications, Cupping with scarifying,
Leeches.

Bad Humors that are many, thick and clammy, by which frequently the
Mesenterium, the Liver, Spleen, Matrix, Reins, and Veins and arteries of other
parts are stopped; require Medicaments, first that are cutting, attenuating,
and cleansing, lastly Purging.

Concerning Purging medicaments, we spoke abundantly at the beginning; those
are of another kind, that are set down for to prepare gross Humors, but because
these that unstop the passages are of larger extent than such as prepare the
Humors, and there is a very frequent use of them in the cure of Fevers,
Hypochondriacal Melancholy, the cure of the Spleen, Jaundice, the want of the
Terms; it will be worth our pains, to Reckon them up more distinctly, and to set
them down in three ranks, namely cold, temperate and hot, that so the choice of
them may be the more easy.

Cold Remedies that unstop, are convenient in the more acute Fevers, parts
that are hot, and obstructed by Humors thickened by adustion; amongst which the
most Obvious are, Sorrel, Juice of Citrons and Lemmons that are sufficiently
ripe, Succory, Endive, Straw-berries, Roots of Grass, Liver-wort, Hawkweed, the
Roots of all the Docks, Seeds of Melons, Pompions, Citruls, Cucumbers, gourds,
Sow-Thistle, Garden Endive, Dandelion, four Trifoyl.

Of these; are made Decoctions with water or Broth, for Syrups, which will be
the better; if you add an Emulsion of the four great cold Seeds.

Whey of Milk Clarified is effectual by it self, but it is made most effectual
by adding an Emulsion of the said Seeds, or if it be altered with opening Herbs.

The Clarified Juice of Herbs is mingled with Broth for a present Syrup, to two
or three ounces, the greatest use of the Juice of Citrons or Lemmons is in
meats and Medicaments, as also of the Emulsions of the Seeds of Melons and
Gourds, as also those more Liquid Panadoes, and Ptisans of Barley, as they are
commonly called.

For ordinary drink, the Decoction of sour Trifoyl is pleasant enough, of
Sorrel, Straw-berries, and Grass, which may be made more sharp, adding a
quantity of the Juice of Citrons or Lemmons.

But this is the thing that is most necessary, which sour Roots perform, to
deceive the sick withal, that one still calling for drink, that they make the
water sharp, and it may be made of the color of Red Wine.

Those that are most temperate, wherein there is no notable excess, of heat or
cold that can be observed, are most convenient for Chronical Fevers, from the
adustion of Humors, which is grown cold: also for Melancholic Doseases, namely
for Hypochondriacal Melancholy, and such as are grown hard: amongst simples,
such are, Maiden Hair, Waters of sour Mineralls, Hops, Liquoris, Trichomanes,
five Leave Grass, all which are added to the Decoctions of the other cold
Ingredients.

Many more Compounds may be made for every Man's desire: for cold things mingled
with those that are equally hot, in the same proportion, do make temperate.

For this end, sometime Clarified Whey is altered, with Egrimony, Roots of
Asarum, Dodder, with a little wormwood, than which, there is nothing more
profitable for the affects and Diseases of Melancholy.

The same way may be given the Juice of Succory thickened with the Juice of
Agrimony, and a little prepared steel, to be taken in Bolus before any opening
Decoction.

Also Honey and Sugar added to the Juyces and opening Decoctions of cold
things, make temperate Remedies.

For this purpose especially two common Syrups do serve, that are easy to be
prepared, namely Oxymel Simplex, and simple Syrup of vinegar, which consist of
one part of Vinegar, two parts of Honey or Sugar, and one fourth part of water.

But the three following Remedies of this rank are the best, and easy to be
made.

First Smiths Water Clarified for ordinary drink; with Water is made a weaker
Mulsum, adding half as much of Honey or Sugar.

The second: one scruple of Cremor Tartar to one dram, added to opening Broths.

Thirdly: prepared steel, without which, Schirrous hardness, and obstinate
obstructions will hardly be Removed.

The use of these is manifold, and so is the preparation: the most easy, and
the soonest made, and the best, is this.

Let steel be beaten into thin and long Rods, or little Plates: for by putting
to them a roll of Brimstone they will melt, and fall into the Water that is put
under them, and then they must be ground into a most fine Powder; this Powder
is given from half a scruple to two scruples or thereabouts, either in Bolus,
Electuary or Wine.

The fashion of a Bolus is this.

Take Juice of Egrimony, Borrage thickened, of each one ounce, Steel prepared
two scruples. Make them for two Boluses, to be taken a little before an opening
Decoction.

The Electuary is thus.

Take the Powder of Egrimony, Maidenhair, Stone-fern, Hearts Tongue, Roots of
Cinkfoyl, Eiquoris, steel prepared, Leaves of Senna, of each one ounce,
Cinnamon one dram and an half, the pulp of Raysins Boiled in white Wine, and
pulped through a Hair Sive, one pound, Syrup of Apples only, or for the Poor,
Oxymel simple, two pound. Mingle them for an Electuary according to art, to be
taken to about one ounce, four hours before Dinner.

It is given in Wine two ways, either drinking the fine Powder of steel
mingled with Wine, or preparing steeled Wine.

This will be an excellent Powder for one Dose.

Take prepared steel and Cremor Tartar of each one scruple, Cinnamon half a
scruple. Mingle them for a Powder.

Steeled Wine will be made, if in four pound of Fragrant white Wine; you put in
steel prepared and Leaves of Senna, of each one ounce, Cinnamon two drams,
opening Herbs, and proper for the part obstructed, three handfulls, let them
stand eight days in a hot place, and stir them often; strain them for your
use, and give two or three ounces to drink; also a most excellent steeled Syrup
may be prepared after this fashion.

Take prepared steel so much as you please, pour upon it the sharpest vinegar,
that it may swim above it four Fingers breadth, and let it stand in a hot
place, until it has drawn out the tincture of the steel: then by inclining the
Vessel, pour it from the grounds: and to this Sugar, or Honey Clarified, the
double proportion; moreover half an ounce of Raysins, and one pugil of the tops
of wormwood to every pound of Vinegar, Boil them at a genle fire to the
consistence of a Syrup, then strain them, the Dose is one ounce, with a
Deeoction that is proper for the part affected.

Those things that are applied outwardly must be mingled of softners and
discussers; such are the Fomentations of the Decoction of Mallows,
Marshmallows, Melilot, Foenugreek, Dill, Chamomel, and a quantity of wormwood,
to Corroborate the part; adding about the end of the Decoction, some white
Wine, and Vinegar to help the Penetration.

After the Fomentation; make an Ointment of Oil prepared by Decoction, of
things aforesaid, such as is described amonst those that soften hardness.

The hotter things that unstop, are convenient for a cold temper, and a cold
time, as also for long Agues; such are these common simples: wormwood,
Egrimony, Smallage, Mugwort, Asparagus, Betony, chiefly the Root of Capers, the
Rind, Stone-fern, Germander, Dodder, common wild Carrot Seed, Root of
Elecampane, Fennel, Rind of Ash, Fumitory, the common and the Yellow, Root of
Gentian, Hart's-tongue, Fetherfew, white Horehound, or wild Mints, Parsley,
Penniroyal, Madder, Knee-Holm, Tamarisk, Savory, in the use whereof, those must
always be chosen, that are proper for the parts affected, and are propounded
amongst the alteratives.

Also Syrups and Electuaries and Decoctions are made of those things we have
spoken of, as the occasion shall be.

The Decoctions are made the more effectual in the Broth of an old Cock or
Pidgeon, if you can procure it.

Also Physic Wines are supposed to be best, as wormwood Wine, when the
weakness of the Bowels is of long continuance; and of these Wines, adding half
the quantity of Clarified Honey, are made Syrups that are profitable and
pleasing; but the Wines are made most effectual, adding steel to them, as we
showed before.

A something full Mulsum will be the best to drink, if it be altered with the
Herbs propounded: as also al compound Oxymels made with the same for a Syrup,
such as is the ordinary Syrup of the Apothecaries, made with the five opening
Roots, Smallage, Asparagus, Fennel, Parlley, Butchers Broom.

Also the use of Vinegar of Squils is extolled, added to Syrups and Decoctions,
to half a Spoonful.

Some there are that prefer before all these, the use of the Root of
Cuckowpint, often infused in Wine, and still dried again, til it has lost
almost al its Tartness.

It may be also added to Electuaries, but the fine Powder of it is oftener used,
given with Wine or Broth. The fashion of it may be Thus.

Take preparedsteel and Wake-Robin prepared, of each half an ounce, Cinnamon
one dram and an half, Fennel Seed half a dram, fine Sugar one ounce. Mingle
them.

It is made more effectual by adding to it, one dram of Salt of wormwood: make
a very fine Powder, the Dose whereof is about one dram. Or,

Take Cuckowpint prepared one ounce, tops of common Wormwood (Salt of Wormwood
is far Better) one dram, Cinnamon one dram and an half, fine Sugar to the
weight of them all. Mingle them and make a Powder.

By themselves mineral Waters that come from Brimstone do open exceedingly, and
from Nitre, drank after that the whole Body has been purged: as also common
Turpentine given in Bolus, about one dram and an half, which also may be drank,
If it be stirred with a little of the Yolk of an Egg, and the Water of
Egrimony, or Wine be put to it, by little and a little to two or three ounces,
always stirring it, til it be perfectly white.

Outwardly Fomentations may be used of the Decoctions of digestives and
Emollients, adding about the end of the Decoction, white Wine and Vinegar, not
forgetting Herbs that are proper for the part affected, of which also Oils may
be made by Decoction, for Ointments.

Bucheting and droppings of Waters that proceed from Brimstone are the most
excellent, and such as proceed from Pitch, and the mud of the same, applied as
they ought to be.

Constipation of the Cavities, is properly called streightness that grows from
things that are bred within, and stick to the part, namely, from Tumors, Flesh,
a Callous, or dead Child.

Things that drive out the dead Child, were propounded amongst the Remedies of
the Cause that is peccant in substance.

We shall treat of Tumors amongst the Deseases of augmented Magnitude.

Flesh and a Callous, as they are not hard to be taken away with Instruments of
Iron, when they may be seen, so they are taken away only with Physics, and
that with much more difficulty, when they are hid within the Body: and since
Flesh is softer than a Callous is, it requires more mild Remedies that either
dry strongly, or heat very gently; but a Callous requries, either Corroders, or
such as putrefie.

Therefore for flesh these are convenient, round Aristolochia Roots, Antimony
Calcined, Roots of Black Hellebore, burnt Alum, burnt Galls, the Ashes of
burnt Honey, common Red Lead, Ashes of Roots of Gentian, Oyster Shells,
especially such as are burnt, Lead Calcined with Brimstone, the Ashes of burnt
Spunges; the Pouders of all these are mingled with Unguents, or infused in
Liquors.

The following Ointment is approved for excrescences of flesh; but first of
all, it takes away little flesh in the urinary passages, and that without pain,
if it be put on the end of a Candle, for it sticks very fast, and does not
excoriate the parts that are sound.

Take Honey burnt to Ashes, prepared Tutty, fresh butter washed, washed
Turpentine, Yellow Wax, of each half an ounce; burnt Alum half a dram. Mingle
them and make a Liniment according to Art.

This Powder also is excellent described by Mercatus, Lib. 2. de recto
Praesidior. usu. Cap. 7.

Take Verdigrease, Auripigment, Vitriol and Roch-Allum, of each equal parts.
Bray them with the sharpest Vinegar, and make them into fine Powder, and set
them in the Sun in the dog days; the Powder being dried, must again be made
fine with Vinegar poured on, and put into the Sun the second time, and this
must be done for the space of ten days; then:

Take Litharge of Gold, poudered and sifted, one part: Oil of Roses two parts.
Boil them to the consistence of a Plaster; take an equal part of this, and
mingle with the said Powder for your use.

Also this Powder takes away all Excrescences, by Certain proof.

Take the Shells of Walnuts, Spunges, Roots of round Aristolochia, of each
equal parts. Let them be dried together in a Pot put into an Oven, that they
may be beaten into Powder; and with this Powder strew over the part affected,
first anointed with Honey.

These take away Callous matter, amongst the most common Remedies, Orpiment,
Spanish Green, Quicklime, Lees of Wine burnt, Lees of Vinegar burnt, burnt
Vitriol, Oil of Brimstone and Vitriol. All these things in use, are tempered
with milder Remedies, sometimes in greater, some times in lesser quantity, as
need requires.

An Example of them in Infusion.

Take the Decoction of round Aristolochia, Black Hellebore, Marsh-mallow Roots,
half a pound, Oil of Brimstone or Vitriol half a scruple. Mingle it for an
Infusion.

For an Uncrion:

Take burnt Vitriol, and Alum burnt, of each one dram: fresh Butter very well
washed half an ounce. Mingle them.

If you add the Powder of white Poppy Seed, or Henbane, you make a Remedy
wholly without Pain.

The Powder of Mereatus used by it self is most effectual.

This is exceeding good that is more easy to provide. Work Quicklime with
Honey, like a past, and dry it in an Oven, that it may be beaten to Powder, to
be strewed upon any Callous or superfluous Flesh, first anointed with Honey.

Compression of the passages, since it comes from al things that press upon the
passages, and by any intervenient thrusting either of Heaviness or Extension,
or Violent impulsion, or astriction, it has no peculiar Remedies; for
heaviness and extension, proceed from the plenty of matter, and are taken away
with such Remedies as Evacuate sensibly, or insensibly; of which we spoke
before.

Extension from wind is removed with discussers.

Violent impulsion frequently follows Luxations, depressions, and fractures of
the Bones, which are cured by Surgery.

Violent Astriction, follows most commonly outward causes: as bands bound too
fast, which must be untied.

Growing together of the passages, is made by a mutual Glewing together of the
sides, when Nature fills up the wounds of them by the coming of good Blood
thither; and this is cured only by an incision Knife, or Iron Instrument that
can part the sides that are Glewed: but after separation, the sides must be
well fenced, that they may neither touch one the other, or grow together again;
therefore the growing together of the inward parts is incurable because they
cannot be cut.

The sinking down of the Cavity, if it fall out by reason of Evacuation of the
matter that should be contained within it, it is cured by Nutriment only to
re-generate necessary matter.

If it proceed by reason that the sides of the Cavities are contracted by
overmuch dryness, or fall down by overmuch Relaxation, it is cured by moisture,
or great driers, for moistning, the more gentle emollients are convenient, and
such as are properly called Anodines, propounded in their proper places; for
drying digestives and discussers are most fit, being mingled with astringents,
the most forcible that were set down before.

When the superficies is too plain it is taken away with Remedies that scour,
and then with driers.

Things that scour, are all such that were propounded for to prepare Phlegm.

To take away obstruction, by the stuffing in of gross and Clammy Humors, and
to scour the Skin, natural Salt waters have a kind of prerogative, and
artificial waters also, and Honey added to Decoctions which are principally
made of bitter things, as the Roots of Gentian, Elecampane, long Aristolochia,
and Centory the less.

For drying, things that Evacuate insensibly are most fit, being mingled with
the strongest astringents, of which before.

When the superficies is rough, it is cured with softners, and such as are
properly called Anodines, when it proceeds from dryness: but particularly the
roughness of the Throat, and the top of the sharp Artery, which falls out very
frequently, is cured by those things that Purge the breast by Spitting, which
are propounded for Salt matter.

But if it proceed from sharp Biting matter that lightly Rakes the superficies,
it is taken away by such Medicaments that temper sharp Humors, both by washing
them away, as also by suppling them with a tempering virtue; of which we spoke
amongst the Remedies that alter the cause of the Disease.

Remedies of Diseases in faulty Magnitude.
Natural Magnitude, is made faulty, either by excess or defect, when it is
augmented beyond its proportion, or else diminished. The kinds of Magnitude
diminished, are reckoned to be, Defect of Nourishment, or Leanness of all the
parts, and Marasmus, or a Consumption of the whole Body, following a Hectic
Fever, or wasting away; for Leanness of those that recover after sharp
Diseases, scarce deserves the name of a Disease, because it quickly goes away,
so soon as the Disease on which it depended, is removed.

Of Magnitude increased, which men call Tumors, all the differences are taken
from the cause, which in general is four fold.

The first is a solid Body according to substance, belonging to the soundness
of the Body, whence come grossness, from overmuch fat; Hypersarcosis, from some
excrescence of flesh, Ruptures of the Bowels, and the Caul, when the Guts or
the Caul fall down, which also makes a Disease in situation.

The second is a Humor, or some thing like to a Humor, whence comes that they
call Phlegm^ne, from Blood, Oedema from Fleam, Erysipelus from Choler,
Schirrus from Melancholy, a kind whereof is Tophus, and Struma, Cancer, from
Black choler, Carbuncle from burnt Blood; and from a watery matter like to a
Humor, Hydrocephalus, and the Dropsy of the Abdomen, and the Matrix.

The third is, that which comes Preternaturally from the Humors, as puffing up
from wind.

The fourth is, that which grows in the whole kind Preternaturally, from a
various and unspeakable corruption of the Humors, whence comes properly an
Impostume, or little Swelling with a little Bag, namely Meliceris, from a
matter like to Honey, Steatoma, from a fat matter like to Sewet, and Atheroma
from a matter like to Gruel.

A particular Consumption, such as falls upon those parts that are held with a
Palsy and Convulsions, requires first such Remedies as can Purge out the
foulness of the Body by the passages convenient: then Nourishments that can
make good Blood; lastly attractives that draw Blood to the part, and can stir
up the heat of it and strengthen it.

Gentle rubbings til the part wax red, and Swel a little, will perform all
these.

Also Baths of sweet water something hot, wherein Herbs are Boiled, proper for
the part, to be used til the part Swell a little.

Or Fomentations, and Wettings with water and Oil, Milk, sweet Waters, altered
with Mallows, Marshmallows, and Herbs that respect that part.

Last of all, the most prevalent Remedy is pication, til the part wax red and
swell: and these things are to be done, after concoction, before any more meat
be eaten.

In a Consumption of the Eyes, there remains no place for pications or
rubbings, but only, for Fomentations; the best whereof are made with Milk a
little Saffron, or of the same Boiled with Mallows, Violets, Marshmallows, and
Fennel, or with a sweet Apple, brought to the form of a soft Cataplasm, with a
little Saffron.

A hot Marasmus without a Consumption, which is curable, is chiefly overcome
with the use of Milk and Baths: Women's Milk sucked out of the Breasts, or Asses
Milk, or Goats Milk new milked drank with a little Honey or Sugar, taking by
degrees from three ounces, to seven or eight ounces; about five hours after the
drinking of Milk, a Bath of sweet Water is to be used, which must be kept
something hot til the time the sick come forth of it; and then is he to stay a
while til he is a little cold with it, for the uniting of heat, and retaining
of Nourishment; or presently after the Bath, the Body must be gently rubbed
with the Palm of the Hand, wet with Oil of Violets and sweet Almonds, something
cold. If there be a Consumption the Bath must be let alone, and the Body must
be rubbed only before meat, after the manner we now spoke of, and he must apply
himself to Milk, and he must use also such Remedies as concern the Ulcer of the
Lungs. If the use of Milk be forbidden by reason of the causes set down in the
5. Aph. 65. He must use instead thereof a Ptisan of Barley.

Some hold this Ptisan for a secret, which is presently provided, and must be
taken twice a day.

Take Barley Meal six parts, fine Sugar one part. Place them bed upon bed in a
Glased Earthen Pot, and the first and last bed must be Sugar: then making a
Cover of Past, put it into the Oven after the Bread is drawn forth. And it will
be baked sufficiently the third time, or putting of it into the Oven.

For a Ptisan.

Take of this baked Meal two ounces, Broth of wood Snails, or Snails four
ounces. Mingle them.

But for an Ulcer of the Lungs in particular this is commended. Take one dram
of the Powder of Yarrow, daily in Broth or some convenient Decoction.

Also a Cake of dried Folefoot taken daily made with Butter and Sewet of a Hog.

Some prefer Sugar of Roses with Bole-Armoniack, or some such Medicinal earth,
and the Boodstone used for some months together, above all other Remedies.

Gross Bodies are brought lean, after fit Evacuation of the Body.

First, with a thin diet, and many hot and frequent rubbings of their Body,
then by the daily use of some attenuating and drying Remedies, amongst which,
the most commended are, one dram of Ash Keys in Broth, with half an ounce of
the best Vinegar, or one Spoonful of Vinegar of Squills, in a good quantity of
Broth before meat; some ascribe the same virtue to Oxymel of Squils, or the
Troches of Squils.

Also the Seed of Ameos, or the Seed that is in Elder berries can do as much,
taken to half a dram, drank in the Decoction of the Ash.

But the greatest force lies in the Powder of Vipers to dry the Body, of which
we spoke amongst the Antidotes, if half a dram of it be taken in Broth or Wine,
four hours before meat, and so much the more if the Body be lustily exercised
after the taking of it.

To this place belong all things that provoke sweat and Urin.

Those Remedies take away excrescences of flesh, be they from a Callous or
flesh, that are Remedies of Constipation, of which we spoke before.

A Hernia of the Caul, can be taken away by no other means than by cutting,
which is full of danger, it can hardly be helped by straight Ligature. But a
Hernia of the Intestins is easily Glewed together in Children and Boys, with
outward use of astringents and fit Ligature. But in people that are of years,
if it be Old, it is held hitherto by Physicians to be incurable, without
Surgery: yet use, that is the best master of things, and Judge of Remedies,
has taught us not long since; that the Ruptures of men of years, and that very
great ones, and of long continuance, have grown together by the use of
Medicaments only, and a convenient course of diet, and that within threescore
days at the longest, in manly and in Old Age; but in forty days in Young men,
and at man's stature; by the help of which Remedies, Boys are cured within
twenty days: unless the falling of the Intestins into the Cods be very great,
and all most grown Habitual.

And these Remedies may be Ranked amongst those, that are easy to be prepared,
since they are compounded of a few things, and those, not fetched from foreign
Countries, only one excepted,

The first is this: Take one dram of the Herb Two-blade, in half a Cup of red
Wine, Boiled with the Leaves of the same Plant, every morning five hours before
dinner. And let the place affected, be daily anointed with Oil of four Olives,
wherein a whole land Hedg-Hog that is Old, has been Boiled, with his Skin and
al, til the flesh be consumed.

The second. Take for threescore days one Cup of strong red Wine, altered with
one ounce, of Rupture-wort (the whole Herb with the Roots must be taken, and
the tendrest can be got) first bruised, and during the said time, a Sponge must
be laid to the place affected; that is first dipped into the same red Wine, and
then pressed out.

The third. Take one dram of Powder, of equal portions, of Rupture wort,
Wall-Rue and Asparagus and Horse-Tail, in half a Cup of strong Red Wine, for
the time spoken of before; and let the place be anointed twice every day, with
common Oil or Oil of St. John's Wort, wherein live Lizards, by long standing of
it in the Sun, are consumed.

The fourth. Let a Cerate be laid on, made of equal parts of Bdellium and
poudered Aloes with the white of an Egg; and the same time let the sick take
one dram of the Powder following in half a Cup of the best Red Wine, five hours
before Dinner.

Take Roots of great Comfrey, Herb Bennet, common Hedg-Hysop, the less,
Two-Blade, Horse-Tayl, Coriander prepared, Juice of Roses, steel prepared with
Rose water, of each one ounce and an half. Mingle them, and make a fine Powder
of them all.

The preparing of the steel is this. That the filings of Steel or Iron, be
quenched in Rose Water, and then dried in the shade, and then again be set on
fire, and quenched a-fresh in the same Water, until it can be poudered very
fine.

But in the use of these Medicaments, this rule is generally to be observed:
that a Truss be constantly worn, and the sick must take care he hold not his
breath, nor use strong exercise, nor eat or drink, meats or drinks that are
windy.

Remedies for Tumors that proceed from Humors, are manifest by what has been
said, since they must be directed to the taking away of the cause, which must
be repulsed at the first: but in the augmentation, they must partly repel, and
partly digest; in the state, they must digest, or if it can be, bring to
suppuration: but a Tumor that is very hard, must first be acurately softened,
then digested and dissolved. Therefore some few things shall here be only
annexed, that are found to be proved for some Tumors, and are Remedies easy to
come by.

For an Erisipulas of any part whatsoever.

Take fine Wheat flower so much as you please, put it into a bag of thin
Weaving, and lay it to the part, at any time of the Defluxion.

For kibes that are Ulcerated: this is a most excellent Unguent.

Take Leaves of green Tobacco, the inward, Rind of the Elder, of each one
handful, Roots of the Male Daffodil sliced, one ounce, common Oil one pound;
Boil all at a gentle fire, til all the moisture be consumed, then press all out
strongly, and add Frankincense finely poudered half an ounce, Yellow Wax six
drams. Mingle them for a Liniment, and anoint the part affected within: then
for Fingers that are pained, let it be rubbed strongly on them til they grow
very red and hot.

This is also good for fowlness of the Skin and for Morphews.

Against the swelling of the Feet from weariness, long Disease or contusion.

Take the Meal of whole Wheat (that is not sifted) half a pound, powder of
wormwood half an ounce, Roses one ounce, sharp Red Wine what may be sufficient.
Make a Cataplasm at a soft fire: adding about the end, complete Oil of Roses
one ounce and an half. Mark an Unguent.

Lay it on twice a day.

For hard swellings not Ulcerated, a singular Remedy (...) purging of the Body:
give for four days together one dram of the Powder of common Gladiol, which
grows most frequently amongst Corn, and take it in Broth altered with the
Root of Pilewort, four hours before meat.

And lay upon the part, a Plaster of bruised new Wax, not yet purified from
the Bees and the Honey: but if you cannot have it, then lay this Cerate.

Take the Powder of Lizards dried in an Oven, one dram and an half, Juice of
Tobacco, Yellow Wax and Burgundy ^itch, of each half an ounce. Mingle them and
make a Cerate, in the place of Burgundy Pitch, which is rare in Italy, take
Colophonia.

For a Cancer not Ulcerated, that is not yet come to any notable Magnitude;
nothing is better than the long using of the Plaster of Aquapendente, after a
sufficient purging of the Body.

Take Meal of Millet one pound, Oil of R^ses (worked in a Mortar of Lead with a
Leaden Pestle, til it become of the color of Lead) sive ounces, sweet Wine
four ounces. Make them to a Plaster, with a sufficient quantity of the
Decoction of Garden Nightshade, Sowthistle, and Golden-Rod of each alike, made
in pure Water.

For watery and windy Tumors, Remedies propounded amongst things that discuss,
are proper.

An Impostume with a little bag, is not cured by Physical means only, but the
whole Bag must be drawn forth; or if that cannot be done, after the Tumor is
opened, it is to be consumed, partly with putrefying Remedies, partly with
eating Causticks; of which we have Spoken already.

Remedies for Diseases in Number.
Since that a Disease in number Wanting, is made to be according to the defect
of something belonging to the complement of the Living, a Disease in number
Augmented must properly be considered, according to the addition of some
natural thing, that is Redundant in number. Yet by use and abuse of names,
Stones, Worms; a Pin and Web are referred also to Diseases in number.

Remedies for Worms and Stones are to be found amongst these things, which
respect the cause from the whole substance.

For a Pin and Web, these amongst Remedies easy to come by, are the most
convenient, being applied Warm to the Eye, but especially by the help of an
Ocular Cupping Glass; that the Remedy may work longer and stronger.

Take Herbs, Celondine, Fennel, Vervain Rue, of each one handful; Honey of
Roses half a pound, of Rape Roots bruised two ounces. Stamp the Herbs and set
all mingled together in the Sun, and let them be stirred daily; after forty
days press out the Juice, to be kept for use in a Brazen Vessel, and drop it
into the Eye by it self, or mingle it with more gentle Eye-Salves.

Another. Take fine poudered Sugar, Boiled in a Glass Dish upon Ashes, til it
wax Red, likewise Vitriol purged from the dregs, and exposed to the Sun til it
Wax white, of each equal parts; with this Powder fill the hollow of an Egg
Boiled til it be hard, then binding both parts of the Egg fast together, steep
it four days in water of Eyebright, or white Wine that is something sweet;
wherein Eyebright has first been Boiled, or Seeds of Fennel or Siler
Montanum, keep the Liquor pressed out, in a Glass for your use.

Another. Take white Wine somewhat sweet very well purged and Clarified, one
pound, Fennel Seed three drams, Indian Cloves one dram and an half. Steep them
for twenty four hours, then strain them: to which add afterward Aqua vitae two
ounces, Antimony once melted, with an equal quantity of Salt Peeter, two drams;
then infuse them again for two days, then keep them for your use in a Glass
Vessel.

Another. Take the Juice of Onions, drop it in by it self, or else allaied with
a little sweet white Wine. It is a most excellent Eye Salve and which
wonderfully takes away the inflammation of the Eye, when there is any.

Also there is a singular Collyrium described amongst the Remedies for the
Eyes, which when need is, may be made m^^e effectual, by mingling some kind of
Gall with it, or of the second Collyrium that was propounded, or the Juice of a
white Onion lightly Boiled with Milk.

But a Disease that is properly in number augmented, which follows abundance
of matter, and the strength of the Plastic faculty is better cured by burning
and cutting, than by consuming Medicaments.

A Disease in number deficient, if it be natural, is altogether incurable,
because it proceeds from want of matter, and the weakness of the forming force,
also an accidental deficient, if it fall out in a Spermatical part, it is
incurable; but in a fleshy part sometime it admits of cure. It requires the same
Remedies that an hollow Ulcer does, or a Compound wound, because the part is
wanting by the same causes, namely, cutting, burning, Corroding, putrefaction,
and the like.

Remedies of Diseases in Situation and Connection.
A Disease in situation and Connection, is either Connatural, and it comes to
pass, when the matter is taken away in the time of forming, or it is
accidental, and falls out usually by reason of three kind of causes, from
Laxation, or disjoynting of the Continent parts, from solution of unity, and
Violent extension from too much Repletion, or drivers.

The fault of the Plastic quantity admits of no cure.

The other three causes require the same Remedies, that a Disease in figure
does, which does necessarily accompany a Disease in sctuation.

Remedies of Diseases in dissolved Unity.
Of dissolved unity there may be assigned two chief kinds, an Ulcer, and a
wound.

That comes from an eating cause, and so must necessarily have joined with it,
loss of substance.

A wound, is all other kinds of dissolved unity, without an eating cause;
whether it be a simple solution of unity, or with loss of substance, as in a
Compound wound.

And though for the diversity of parts, often times all these things are
changed (for an Ulcer in the bone is called rottenness, a wound fracture, when
the Nerves are brok, it is called convulsion, when they are pricked, Puncture,
and when the flesh is bruised, men call it contusion) yet still they hold the
same nature, so they differ not in generation; for whatsoever Ulcer proceeds
from a sharp and corroding matter, such as are the Humors, and sharp Bloody
matter, harsh Poisons, and Medicaments that are putrefactive, and causticks,
actual fire, corruption, moisture, into which the substance corrupted is
dissolved, as in a Gangrene: al other causes that dissolve the continnity, by
cutting, breaking, Knocking, Contusion, they make a wound only taken in a large
sense.

A simple wound, or solution of continuity without loss of substance; is cured
by Glutinative Medicaments, which by drying, Binding, Sticking, force the lips
of the wound together, and bind them fast: which Union cannot be made
immediately in the Bones, because of their hardness, but it is made by the
means of a Callous, the matter whereof, glewing nourishments afford.

But fractures are fastened and confirmed by the same glewing Remedies, of
which there are two ranks, such as are moderate, and such as are forcible:
those belong to a aprt and constitution that are moist, these belong to parts
and constitutions that are more dry, and to a Bloody wound.

Moderate Glutinatives; the most Obvious are: the white of an Egg, St.
Peters-wort, Tutsane, Yarrow, Shepheards-purse, the fruit of Creeping-Balsam,
new Cheese, and Glue made of it, Horse-Tail, Herb Bennet, Cistus, Flower of the
Sun, the Grass Ischaemon, Plum-Tree Gum, ground Ivy. The Herb Siciliana, Herb
Trinity, St John's Wort, Adders Tongue, Yarrow, Leaves of Medlars, Ophris,
Plantain, wild Pears, Damask Roses, the Bramble, the Male Sanicle, Germander,
Scabious, Veronica, Golden-Rod, Leaves of Elms

Of these, may be made vulnerary drinks: also they may be given inwardly in
other forms.

They are laid on outwardly either bruised, or strewed on in Pouders, or
pressed out and dropped in, or Boiled, chiefly in sharp Red Wine, and their
operation is helped by Ligature, by which the Lips of the wound united are held
together.

There are some other things, whereby wounds that are simple and new, are
presently joined together, applied by themselves and bound on; namely Rosin of
the Larch or the Firr-Tree, Pellitory of the Wall bruised the bruised Leaves of
Tobacco, dry Pitch, spotted Arsmart, beaten Oil made by insolation, or the
Leaves of Adders Tongue, or the fruit of the Balsam Apple.

But the chief of all, and like to a west Indian Balsam, (than which to knit
wounds together, there is nothing better) is the Oil that is drawn out of the
flowers of St. John's Wort, shut into a Glass, and made by heat of the Sun
beams, by descent. Also Earth Worms washed in Black Wine and beaten, are good:
also amongst easy to be provided, may be set down that they call Oleum
Hispanum, described in the five Books of Surgery of Aquapendente; by which
in twenty four hours time, wounds are said to be healed.

These Glue together Violently; Lions-Foot, the flowers of flower-gentle,
middle Comfrey, the less Comfrey, unripe Galls, all the Cranes Bills, but
chiefly Pigeons Foot, Hypocistis, Hares-Foot, Rinds of Pomegranates, Leaves of
the Olive, chiefly the wood Olive Tree, Mouse-ear, Knot-Grass, Juice of Sloes,
the tender Leaves of Oaks, Stone-Comfrey of Lobelius, Dog-berry Tree.

The way of dispensing of all these is the same with the former.

Outwardly, the flew of a hare burnt, Asses dung, burnt Spunges, and brought to
Powder, and Honey Suckles used what way soever.

But if the part be only contused, without any sensible solution:
corroboratives are convenient, mixed with digesters and anodines: of this kind
is Lead beaten with Wormwood, Wormwood heated on a Tile and sprinkled with
Vinegar, bean Meal with sweet Wine made into the form of a Cataplasm; also
Flower of Wheat together, with Black Wine, Powder of Roses, Wormwood and Oil of
Roses for a Cataplasm.

Arsmart bruised and sprinkled with hot Wine, Fomentations of hot Water,
especially Sea water altered with Wormwood.

Moreover this Liniment is the best of all to heal all contusions, which
wonderfully also asswageth the pain of the Swollen Hemroids, and takes away the
pain of the Teeth, being softly rubbed on the Gums.

Take common Oil one pound, the Marrow of an Ox Leg, Yellow Wax, Bosin of the
Firr-Tree, or Pitch (vulgarly called Rose,) of each three ounces: fresh Butter
four ounces.

Let them all melt at a soft fire, and when the Marrow is melted take them off.

An Ulcer is either superficial, or deeper.

That is, either actually so, when the top of the Skin is wanting, as the
frettings in Children; or is potential, that by the force of an external cause
quickly comes to be so, unless it be hindered, as is burning, which if it be
presently helped there follows no Ulcer.

A superficial Ulcer is cured with the more mild inducers of a Cicatrize:
burnings are cured with the same when the Bladders are broken.

But you may keep the part unhurt, if you lay on these things that follow, in
time: namely writing Ink, Liquid Vernish applied with a very soft cloth: a whole
Egg with Oil of Roses, or stirred together by it self; Oil made by Decoction of
the middle Rind of Elders; white of an Egg very well beaten with Vinegar,
adding a littie raw Alum to it.

These two following Uuguents are the most excellent; with the former, of which
the parts being anointed, you may handle fire without any harm.

Take the Juice pressed out of the Marshmallows, Roots, and all, six ounces:
Oil of Elder four ounces, Crude Roch Alum one ounce. Boil them at a gentle
fire to a mean consistence, add new Wax one ounce and an half, mingle them.

The second. Take common Oil, three ounces, new Wax one ounce and an half,
Yolks of Eggs roasted under the Ashes, in number two. Dissolve them and mingle
them, til they become like an Unguent, spread it on a Cloth, and renew it twice
a day.

Also an Unguent of Ising-Glass is much commended, and of Alum Plumbeum,
mingled with Vinegar in equal quantities.

Also Juice of Marsh mallows wrought with the white of an Egg.

A deep wound must first be filled with flesh, with Remedies called Sarcoticks,
which do scowr away the thick excrements of the part, and consume the thin;
then we must bring it to Cicatrize with Epuloticks, which by their great
drying, do not only consume the excrements, but the Blood also, and do harden
the upper Superficies of the Ulcer, and do as it were turn it into Skin.

Sarcoticks, or Remedies that fill up the Ulcer, are as large, as there be
differences of hollow Ulcers.

For an Ulcer that is very moist, requires Remedies that are very great driers,
so that such Remedies as are convenient to Skin a plain Ulcer, are necessary to
fill a hollow Ulcer that is over-moist, but an Ulcer that is very foul requires
strong cleansers.

But this is principally to be observed, that astringents be not mingled with
great driers and scourers, for they will fasten the excrement to the Ulcer, and
so make it more deep and spreading.

Therefore there may be set two degrees of Sarcoticks; the mean, that belong to
a soft part, and to an Ulcer that is not over-moist and foul: And the Violent,
which agree to a drier part, and are fit for an Ulcer, that is very moist and
foul.

Moreover there is no hopes to fill up an Ulcer by the help of Sarcoticks,
unless those Impediments be first taken away, which hinder the Regeneration of
the substance that was lost, as the Flux of any matter, that is ptenan in
overmuch plenty, or ill quality, the distemper of the Ulcerated part, a callous
bred in the Ulcer, or Rottenness of the Bone, corruption or destemper.

These things take away the Flux, namely such as evacuate; make revulsion,
repel, intercept, contemperate, and corroborate the parts affected, by the
faultiness whereof the excrements are renewed, of which we spoke before in the
Remedies of the causes, and Diseases of the similary parts.

The dictemper of the ulcerated part, is corrected by contraries, of which we
spoke also: but in a Gangreen there is so great Humidity of the part and
dissolution of the inbred heat, that there is need of an actual or a Potential
fire; but of the two, the first works quicker, and strengthens the part more.

For a Gangrene in beginning, or where there is danger thereof, as in great
blows from great Guns, there is nothing better than the following Balsom, if
Lint be dipped into it and laid to the wound, with which also all foul Ulcers, if
there be malignity in them, are happily cured.

Take flowers of Brimstone three ounces, complete Oil of Roses half a pound,
the best Red Wine four ounces. Let them infuse for eight days at a gentle
fire, always stirring it til the Wine be consumed, then strain it, and
dissolve therein two ounces of the best Turpentine. Mingle them, and keep it
for your use.

Also for Ulcers that proceed from thin Choler, as small Blisters, or such as
eat not deep, and for an Ulcerate Erisipelex, when the Humidity of the part
Joined with Acrimony causes great trouble in the cure; the following Unguent
of Elders profits exceedingly, for with it not only Ulcers of the similary
parts, but burnings of al kinds, and almost al foulness of the Skin are cured.

Take common Salt and the best Red Wine of each three ounces, dissolve the Salt
in the Wine, then add of the middle Rind of the Elder half a pound, infuse them
for two hours, then add complete Oil of Roses one pound and an half. Boil al at
a gentle fire, til the moisture be almost consumed: then to the residue of the
rind add further, compound Oil of Roses half a pound, Salt dissolved in Wine as
before, half an ounce. Boil them strongly til all the moisture be consumed, that
the rind become dry and crumble, with this Oil diligently presled out, Boil
Litharge of Gold prepared and sifted two ounces, to which being exactly.
Boiled, add the foresaid Oil, and let them Wax hot, last of all put in the
following ingredients pulped through a Hair five together, namely, of the best
Ceruss one ounce, Lead burnt with Brimstone and not washed seven ounces and an
half, Yellow Wax what is sufficient to make an Unguent.

A Callous is taken off most safely with a pair of Nippers, or with actual fire
where it may be done; if it cannot, then it may be taken on with corroding
Remedies, described amongst the means of thickning the Cavity: by the reason of
this Impediment there do often remain incurable Fistulaes, which cannot be cut,
nor handled fitly every way by occessary Medicaments; for these the following
Balsom is convenient, whereby the deep Fistulaes of the Anus and the Testicles
have been often cured.

It is thus easily prepared.

Take Cranes Bill, or Pigeons Foot cut, two ounces, Root of Flower de Luce
very well washed three drams, Root of Black Hellebore prepared two drams, Wheat
Corns one handful, bruise them grossly, and infuse them for one day, in one
pound of sharp Red Wine; then add Oil of St. Johnswort and Mirtills of each
three ounces. Let them Boil at a gentle fire til the moisture be consumed: make
expression and strain them, then add Bitumen, and Mirrh of each one dram and an
half, Let them stand at a soft heat til they be perfectly melted, then add of
Rosin of the Larch Tree and Firr Tree, (and if you can get it of occidental
Balsam) of each one ounce. Mingle them at an easy fire and make a Balsom to be
dropped into a Fistula, and to be put in with Tents.

To take away Spungy Flesh that abounds in an Ulcer, use the Remedies described
for a Disease in constipation by Flesh and a Callous.

Yet to these add the following Powder to make an Escar, whereby Malignant
Ulcers (as Malignant Scrophalous matter, and ulcerated Cancers) if they be
small, and new are happily cured.

Take the Root of great Serpentine, gathered in June, and cut in pieces and
dried in the shade, and of white Arsenick of each one ounce, Powder them, and
mingle them, and set them in the Sun til the beginning of October, in a great
Bellied Glass well stopped, and shake them often, then keep the Powder for this
use: namely wash the Ulcer often, and foment it with a wet Linen Cloth with
Water of Water Lillies, or the Decoction of the same; the next day after strew
on the Powder, making a defensative, for the same parts with some Cerate, least
the Powder spread further than it should, the escar will fall out of its own
accord in twelve days, and the cure must be accomplished with the strongest
Sarcoticks.

The Bone that is under the Ulcer being bare, must be corroborated by the
strowing on of Pouders, that Flesh may grow upon it.

And these are made of equal parts of the Root of Dog Fennel, round
Aristolochia Flower-de-Luce, Mirrh and Frankincense.

And if it have already contracted any Blackness, there is need of an Iron to
scrape it off, and of actual fire; then the Powder must be strewed on.

If the Bone be Rotten, it must be taken away by Instruments of Iron and an
actual Cautory.

Yet sometimes it falls out by reason of the narrowness of the Ulcer, and the
windings in it, that the Bone underneath cannot be touched by Iron Instruments,
or fire, and can hardly be perceived by the probe, in which case some sharp and
drying Remedy must be poured in for some days that the rottenness may be taken
away: of this sort easy to prepare, are the Decoctions of Aristolochia,
gentian, Wake-Robin, poured upon Calcined Tartar shut up in a Bag.

The Spirit of Tartar is more laborious which is chiefly commended for this
purpose, if it be tempered with some convenient Liquor. The impediments being
taken away, the use of Sarcoticks will be afterward profitable, or of such as
fill up the Ulcer, a Catalogue whereof now follows.

For an Ulcer that is not over moist and foul, and for a part that is very
soft; mean Sarcoticks are convenient; namely Salt and Nitrons Mineral Waters,
Betony, Gentian Root, Mints, flower-de-Luce, Honey suckles, Boiled Honey, the
Clot-Burr, al kind of Rosins, Scordium, Wheat, Frankincense.

Of Herbs, Decoctions may be made, for washings and infusion; also Unguents may
be made suddenly, making Oil first by Decoction, then adding a quantity of Wax,
and if you please some Honey also and Rosin, or Pouders, which are especially
provided of Roots and Frankincense.

Also a simple Powder of Herbs may be sirewed upon the Ulcer.

For outward Remedies, add Tobacco and the Lesser Centory.

The form of an outward Unguent may be of this kind.

Take Leaves of Betony one handful, Tobacco half a handful, common Oil four
ounces. Cut the Herbs and Boil them in Oil, til all the moisture be consumed:
then add common Rosin one ounce, new Wax half an ounce, Powder of the Root of
Flower-de-Luce or Frankincense two drams, mingle them and make an Unguent.

The more forcible, and such as are proper for a sordid Ulcer, and a part that
is more hard, these are convenient: round Aristolochia Roots, good Henry, Colus
Jovis, Horehound, Raw Honey, Mirrh, Root of Dog Fennel.

In outward Remedies, Chimney Soot, Blacking of Pitch, Lime very well washed,
dry Pitch, Liquid Pitch mingled with Honey, the shells of Periwinkles, and the
shells of al Sea Fish Burnt, and the Ashes of all Sarcotick Herbs.

These may be made of diverse forms, as in Liniments, Unguents, Pouders, Juyces
and Decoctions.

Also the Leaves of good Henry, and Colus Jovis lightly bruised, and laid on
with the Back side, cure al Ulcers that are hard to be cured.

To these belong the Balsam of Brimstone discribed, which wonderfully fills up
hollow Ulcers; Rulandus makes an Unguent of it, that is very much commended for
all rebellious Ulcers, As.

Take the Balsam of Brimstone three ounces, new Wax half an ounce, Colophonia
three drams, Mirrh, the wait of them all. Let the Mirrh finely poudered be
strewed in by degrees to all the rest when they are melted and well mingled: and
let them be Boiled at a soft fire, always stirring them with a Spatula, until
they are singular well mixed, which commonly falls out in a quarter of an hour:
then take it from the fire, and let them cool easily.

Yet the Plaster of Theophrastus gives place neither to this Remedy nor to any
other, and it is easy to be provided, whereby Old, rotten, stinking Ulcers,
that are very hollow and foul are wonderfully cured, and it may be laid to all
hollow Ulcers, if for Ulcers that are troubled with a sharp Defluxion, and very
tender, it be tempered with the Unguent of Elder discribed before for St.
Anthonies fire, adding a greater or lesser quantity, as the sense of the part
is more quick, and the necessity of regenerating Flesh be more or less.

The Plaster is this.

Take ten Yolks of Eggs, clear Turpentine half a pound. Mingle them with a
wooden Spatula to an oinment, in the same Vessel they must be Boiled, and this
will be done in half a quarter of an hour, then add Honey to the weight of them
al, stir them strongly and quickly that they clotter not: then Boil them at an
easy Coal fire, moving them constantly, then increasing the fire, til they
become of a brownish dark color, more like to Black, then Yellow or Reddish.

An Ulcer and a wound, that is filled up to make an equal superficies with the
sound part, is healed with Epuloticks, or such as cause it to Cicatrize,
whereof some are milder, and more convenient for soft parts, some are for parts
and constitutions that are harder.

The more violent, should they be made use of in a soft part they will make a
Cicatrize but so hard and Callous that it may hinder the motion of the Joint.

The meaner that are most Obvious are these: Potters Earth, or white Chalk,
Horse-Tail, the flowers of both Pomegranats, Ceruss, Cotton burnt, the Ashes of
Lint, Pennywort, Scuttle Bone, burnt Sponge, flew of a Hare burnt, Root of
Tormentil, al Medicinal Earth, Litharge, and al cold things that are moderately
astringent; also the cold Air of it self will make a Cicatrize; dry forms work
more strongly than the moist do, therefore Pouders applied with Lint are good.

But to avoid the inequality of a Cicatrize and hardners in a conspicuous part,
it suffices to use Liniments or Unguents.

The most excellent is the Unguent of Elder already propounded against Herpes
or the Wolf.

Other Remedies may suddenly be provided of Ceruss, or Litharge, with a fourth
part of Oil of Roses, or the like, and a little Wax: Mingle therewith the
Pouders that are more drying if need require.

The more Violent are all cold Remedies that dry forceably, propounded
elsewhere, to which you may add mineral Waters, of Alum and Gip, such as is
that of Padua, of the mountain of the Sick, the Calx of Antimony very well
washed, common Lime well washed, the Calx of Vitriol, Gip, the filings of Iron
often sprinkled with Rose Water or Plantain or the like, and dried that it may
be poudered: the Scales and dross of Iron washed, Lead burnt alone and washed,
the shells of any Creatures burnt and washed, all which (except Iron and other
astrinents propounded) are applied outwardly either in the form of a Powder, or
mingled with other more mild Unguents. Hot Baths serve for bathings and to sit
in.

And these are most of them Medicaments that are easy to provide, with which
in any part of the world, and without the help of Apothecaries, any kind of
Disease may be cured.

The way, where there is need, to mingle these things readily without great
provision of Instruments, is not dark to be understood, and collected out of
what has been said, and is scattered here and there through the whole Book.

FINIS.

