A SUMMONS FOR SVVEARERS, AND A Law for the Lips in reproving them: Wherein the
chief Disswasives from Swearing are proposed, the slight objections for
swearing answered, The strange judgments upon Swearers, Forswearers, Cursers,
That take Gods Name in vain, related.

Which may be a terror to the wicked for swearing, and a preservative for the
godly from Swearing.

With sundry Arguments to prove the verity of the Scriptures, and excellency
of the Decalogue, against all profane and Atheistical deniers thereof.

By WALTER POWELL, Preacher at Standish, near Gloucester.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons in Aldersg^^^ street. 1645.

An Exposition of the third COMMANDMENT: Being the sum and substance into
one Model, newly, briefly, properly collected out of that which by many
Authors has more anciently, largely, promiscuously been delivered.
Tending to banish the Devil from men's tongues, that they do not utter
oaths, and from men's ears that they do not hear them uttered, without
reproving them.

Librum ut Monitorem potius, quam Criminatorem, lege. Hierome.

Corpore stetisti, animo fugisti;
Fugisti, quia tacuisti;
Tacuisti, quia timuisti;
Nam fuga animae, timor est.
Histo. of Adam ex Augustino.
TO THE RIGHT Honorable the LORDS and Commons assembled in Parliament.
THE Copy of this Treatise (Right Honorable) having for a years space in
these times of danger, been buried in the ground, when other my books that lay
open, were plundered away, was secure, and by Gods providence, for some better
use, I hope, reserved.

If in the Prophet Ieremies time, Jer. 23.10.
the land did mourn because of oaths, why may not such a cause produce such an
effect now also? Hosea 4.1.


If in Hosea's time the Lord had a controversy with the inhabitants of the
land, because by swearing, etc. they brake forth, and blood touched blood: i.
bloody punishments, bloody sins; why may not this heaven-daring sin be a
special promover of the fury of Gods wrath, so hotly incensed against this
nation, at this time?

I know not any one sin more universally spread over Court, City, Country,
then this Laws-outfacing Gangren.

That Gods sword may be sheathed, man's must be drawn forth, out of the
scabbard of silence, connivence, by reprehension, by correction. It requires
the labor of most skillful Surgeons, to put to their helping hearts and
hands, to the healing of this festered wound, Ezekiel. 22.30.
to make up the hedge, to stand in the gap before the Lord, for the Land,
(which is as the Bush in Moses time, Exodus 3.2.
burnin, though not consumed) that he may not fully destroy it.

Such searchers of these soars have need of Eagles eyes, and Lions hearts, as
well as Ladies hands.

Knotty pieces require the more blows to break them, foul linen the more
water to cleanse them, Drossie silver the more refining, and dusty garments the
more brushing.

If this Epidemicall sin were more frequently, more fervently, preached
against by Ministers, I think it would not be so freely, so fully persisted in
by men, against the Lord.

The ensuing Summons for Swearers will discover how this sin of swearing has
been punished by God, by men, Christians, heathens.

Some Errata's you may meet with in the book, because while part of it was in
the press in the City, the Author was in pressure (and that (almost a thing
incredible) under the authority of the Parliament) in the country, by the
malice of malevolent, and malignant adversaries. The Devil is more delighted
with the quenching of the fire of zeal in the hearts of Peachers, then the
Pope is pleased by the sprinkling of holy water upon the faces of the people.

Your inflamed Resolutions against this, and other like sins, this Tract will
no whit retard, I hope, but rather animate, enliven, enlarge. Renowned,
indefatigable, reforming, eternizable Senators: consider God has done great
things by you, for you, that you may do more for him still.

You may be bold to trust God upon trial.

These are times of war, and who are to be accounted Soldiers, if you are
not? You may be as confident as the Soldier that Erasmus speaks of, who
being told of a numerous Army coming against, answered, Tanto plus gloriae
referemus, quanto sunt plures quos superabimus: The greater the opposition, the
more illustrious the conquest shall be to you, 2 Timothy 4.7.8.
considering all Christ's Soldiers shall have a crown, though sometimes
enforced to swim to the same in streams of blood. In Exodus 32. we read of
three sorts of fire; of the Israelites by sin, of God by judgments, of Moses
by zeal. The first made way for the second, the second for the third.

Hannibal by fire made a way over the Alps: so shall you by zeal over all
mountains of oppositions.

What powder is to bullets, a clapper to the Bell, fire to wood, wings to a
bird, wind to sails, sails to a ship, an edge to a razor, wine to the
spirits, metal to a horse, a soul to the body, vivacity to any creature, that
is zeal to a Christian, it acts his soul, it moves his affection.

It is often winter within, when it is Summer without: In the cold climate of
this country, let the fire of your zeal be seen more and more to unthaw this
icie corruption. Why should there not be in superiors a liberty of punishing,
as well as there is in inferiors a liberty of sinning? The frantic man returning
to his wits, thinks him his best friend, that bound and beat him most.

He that withstands a man in the prosecution of this or any other sin, though
he bears away frowns and heart-burnings for a time, yet when the offending
party comes to himself, he recompenseth his former dislike, with so much the
more love, and so many the more thanks. The Lord himself will for all eternity
speak of such a man, such a Parliament, as sometimes he did of Phinehas, This
man, Numb. 25.11.
this Parliament that was zealous for my glory, has turned away my wrath from
the children of Israel, from the people of England. This was the great Council
of England, that first successfully hindered the blaspheming, and effectually
furthered the sanctifying of my glorious Name; that was careful to banish
swearing, 1. out of their own hearts, 2. out their houses, 3. out of the Land,
before swearing had banished them out of all. By so doing your active spirits
may the rather expect your other works to be the more prosperous, your labor
be light, your sorrows easy, our wars hushed, our peace permanent, and
your own salvation certain: which has been, is, and shall be the prayer of

Your servant, Sufferer, Supplicant, WALTER POWELL.

I Have perused this Treatise entitled, A Summons for Swearers, I find it
fraughted with useful and delightful matter, so as omne tulit punctum, etc.
In general I observe solid Arguments therein to prove the divine authority of
the sacred Scripture; whereby much weight is added to the proof which thence he
produces. It does further set out the manifold excellencies of the word of
God, as in general, so in particular of the Moral Law therein contained. As
for the main point whereat the Author aims in this treatise, it is set out
with much variety. As a groundwork he has set down sundry distinctons of Gods
name, and discovered above an hundred inventions of taking it in vain. Before
he lays his Battery against the great sins of rash swearing, and false
swearing, he judiciously sets down the lawful and right use of swearing;
and therein answers the Anabaptists. Then he distinctly declares wherein
this sin of undue swearing lies, how heinous it is, and how many ways
committed; withal, he gives sound answers to the several vain Apologies that
are made for it, and adds sundry motives against it; for the better observing
whereof, he adds prudent directions: yea, and to strike the greater terror
into men's souls against this sin, fearful judgments of God upon false and
rash swearers: The like is done about cursing. This treatise affords such
sovereign remedies against those Epidemicall maladies, as it is worthy to be
published for all that stand in aw of Gods judgments to read it. It is a fit
Treatise to be commended not only to common swearers themselves, but also to
others, who may hereby be directed, how to prevent those sins in such as have
not been accustomed thereunto, and also to redress them in such as are too much
addicted to the same.

March 24. 1644. William Gouge.

I Have seen a Tract entitled, A Summons for Swearers, and a Law for the Lips
in reproving them. I think there is not any English Author extant, that
contains more plain, pithy, pertinent disswasives from this sin of swearing, or
more variety of examples of Gods judgments upon swearers, for swearers,
cursers; with rules of direction for the reprehension of such sinners, for the
matter, manner, time; with sundry arguments to prove the truth of the
Scriptures against all profane Atheistical deniers of the same; all easy for
capacity, and various for delight.

I wish the Book were countenanced by Authority, that every Parish, if not
Family, might enjoy one to be helpful to them, for their information and
reformation, necessary for these times wherein the Land mournes in respect of
this of swearing, as of any other sin. I believe the little expense in
procuring the Book, would be abundantly recompensed to the souls both of these
sinners, and to all such whose duty it is to reprove the same.

Edmund Calamy.

TO THE HONOrable Sir WILLIAM LENTHALL, Speaker of the House of COMMONS.
To the right Worshipful Sir Robert Harley, Sir Arthur Haselrigge, Sir John
Wild, Knights, Mr. Edmund Prideaux, Mr. Nathanael Stephens, Mr. Edward
Stephens, Mr. Edward Bainton, Esquires, Members of the House of Commons: Sir
Gyles Overbury, Knight, John Stevens, Edward Rich, Isaac Bromage, Anthony
Clifford, Esquires, Members of the Committee for Gloucester, Hereford, etc. W.
P. wishes sanctity in life, comfort in death, glory in Heaven.
GOOD Wine is not the worse for wanting, nor bad wine the better for having a
green bush before the Door. Custom claims by prescription, that such Books
as come under the Press to be made public, should be ushered with an Epistle:
which if it want, it calls into suspicion, that either the Author has no
friends of worth, or that the work is not worthy patronage. There are two
principal ends (Right Worshipful) of Dedication; either that the Patrons
should countenance the subject, or that the subject should work upon the
Patrons.

That I may be assured to be exempted from flattery, I exclude my self from
neither of these ends: Seeing swearing is a sin, whereunto both religious and
irreligious are too prone, the one by their common, rash, and wilful swearing,
the other by their careless, cold, cowardly reproving the same: therefore
cannot wholly be unfitting you, in which side soever you are to be ranked. The
subject being a sin so universally spread in Court, City, Country, it has
need find some that may countenance and patronize it from the biting tongues
of those, whose wounds it labors to discover and cure. I know very few who
need not to have the edge of their zeal sharpened by the whetstone of Gods
holy word, and men's daily remembrances, the Ministers of the Lord. In many
things we sin all, and in all things some: If you be free from this
Epidemicall disease, both in the active and passive part, bless God for it,
who has wrought this admirable cure upon you, seeing by nature every one is so
propine unto it, which occasioned God to bound this precept with so sharp
thorns and threats, says Musculus. In Loc.
If you are not yet fully free, the Author entreats the work may have leave to
do its best to make you free. Neither do I dedicate this Tract unto you,
only that you might shelter it (being a subject of this nature) from the many
storms of malevolent tongues: for I know it is sit, that whosoever publishes
any thing unfit, should bear the whole burden of his own fault; and whosoever
ventureth to appear in print, must expect the common lot of all Writers, to
be variously censured of various dispositions: Some (as Nebuzaradan burnt the
Temple, but kept the Gold) will be content to take the matter, yet blame the
Author.

Others will happily (or rather unhappily) read it, not out of conscience, to
make themselves good, but out of curiosity to censure others to be bad. In all
these I would never desire friends to defend, nor fear enemies to deprave me:
for what is good will defend it self; and to flatter others (fearing their
censure for what is bad) were rather impiety toward them, then policy toward
my self.

To fear any man's censure (in so censorious an age) were imbecility; and to
think so to speak or write as to please all, were to aim at an impossibility
and either to endeavor, were mere folly.

But your names in a selected sort I make bold to prefix, and that the rather,
seeing all of you by office and place, I know should be, and most of you by
affection and practice, I believe, are professed enemies to this soule-killing,
heaven-daring, land-loading, peace-disturbing, and hell-hastening sin.

If these poor and unexpected papers find such kind and expected
entertainment in your hearts, as the Author often has undeservedly found in many
of your houses, I doubt not but your public weekly practice in life, will be
as powerful as my pulpit Sabbath precepts by voice, to work upon your
Servingmen in houses, your Tenants and many other inferior inhabitants in your
Parishes, that have necessary recourse unto, and daily dependence on you.

Touching the Treatise it self, I confess my manner of handling things
therein, is like my self, plain and homely, without any gorgious garment of
Rhetorical Ornaments, because I hold it a Maxim (for my self ever to keep
unto) to desire rather to speak to the edification of the hearers and readers,
then for the ostentation of my self in speaking or writing: yet I dare promise
the matter to be like them from whom I received it, sound and good, fit to feed
all those Christians that desire rather to have their hungry souls fed with
the sincere milk of Gods word, then their itching ears tickled with the
enticing speech of man's wisdom.

I say no more concerning it, Deuteronomy. 25.13.
but Non sit in vobis nec mensura major, nec mensura minor, that is, as some
interpret it, and as I here apply it, substract not from this much, little,
old, new nothing, what is due unto it; nor ascribe unto it what it does not
deserve.

As God does, so men should esteem of the labors of Ministers, not according
to the event of the work, but according to the intent of the Author.

Thus fearing to make the windows or gates too wide, when the house and City
is but little, I commit you heartily to the Lords undeceivable direction, and
this Treatise humbly to your favorable construction, willing application,
needful protection, and do rest

Your Worships to be commanded, And By you to be relieved, WALTER POWELL.

TO THE READER; Especially the Inhabitants of Hardwick, Standish, Saul, and
Ranwicke, the Author desires sorrow for this sin, freedom from this
punishment, speedy and perfect obedience to this powerful COMMANDMENT.
TO the Reader, I say: both, Tibi, to thee that art ignorant, that thou may
be instructed;

And tibi, to thee that have knowledge, that thou may be confirmed.

Tibi, to thee that art great, that thou think not to be flattered, but that
thy greatness may be garnished with goodness;

And tibi, to thee that art poor, that thy soul by thy self be not
neglected, though thy body by others be not regarded.

Tibi, to thee that have zeal, that the same further may be sharpened;

And tibi, to thee that have not zeal, that presently it may be procured.

Tibi, to thee that art young, that thou may be restrained from swearing;

And Tibi, to thee that art old, that thou continue no longer in swearing.

Tibi, to thee that art curious, that thou expect not to be humoured, and yet
by brevity and variety to be kept from being cloyed;

And tibi, to thee that art a plain and a downright Reader, that thou may
be as well profited as pleased.

Tibi, to thee that art a Minister, that thou may inform, to make way for
the Magistrates sword;

And tibi, to thee that art a Magistrate, that thou may reform, to
countenance and confirm the Ministry of the word.

Tibi, to thee that art a Parent or Master, that thou practice thy duty in
reproof or punishment;

And tibi to thee that art a son, or servant, that thou learn thy duty in
submitting to the censure, and forfaking the sin.

Tibi, to thee that sleep, that thou may be awakened;

And tibi, to thee that watchest, that thou may rowse up him that sleeps.

Tibi, to thee that art sick of this sin, that thou may be healed;

And tibi, to thee that think not thy self sick, that thou may not die
in thy lethargy.

Tibi, to thee that weepest for this sin, that thou may be directed and
comforted;

And tibi, to thee that yet scornest this caveat, that thy conscience once may
be touched, or thy mouth for ever stopped.

Tibi, to thee that writest, that thy own direction may keep thee from
aberration, and thou fulfill in practice what thou do deliver in precept;

And tibi, to thee for whose sake it is written, that it may not be as a
sealed letter, or as a clasped book, Isai. 29.11. Isa. 29.11.


Tibi, to thee that look on, that thou may be encouraged;

And tibi, to thee that look off, that thou may be invited.

Tibi, to thee that sellest, that thou may have gain in thy purse;

And tibi, to thee that buyest, that thou may have gain in thy soul.

Tibi, to thee that have many books, that hereby thou may have occasion to
read and peruse them;

And tibi, to thee that wilt have few books, that hereby thy purse may be
eased, and thy larger pains spared.

Tibi, to thee that stoppedst thy ears in hearing, that thou may open thine
eyes in reading it;

And tibi, to thee that diligently attendedst with the out man of the ear,
that thou may as carefully apply it to the hid man of the heart.

Tibi, to thee that reprovest, that thou be not wearied in well doing;

And tibi to thee that art reproved, that thou repel not the salve from the
soar.

Tibi, to thee that art not converted by it, that thou blame thy self;

And tibi, to thee that art converted by it, that thou bless thy God.

Tibi, to thee that dwell far, that thou may construe all things
charitably;

And tibi, to thee that dwell nigh, that thou may quickly be resvoled in
thine ambiguities.

Tibi, to thee that swearest,

And tibi, to thee that hear swearing.

Tibi, to thee that fear,

And tibi, to thee that fear not an oath, in what place soever thou
inhabitest of this County, Kingdom, World, do I propose to be observed, etc.

Especially Vobis, to you the inahbitants of Lidney, Newnham, Elmore, Hasfield,
Ashelworth, and Chaselye, (by whom with diverse worldly favors I have been
encouraged, among whom for a little while since my return from the University,
I lived; and to whom by these spiritual admonitions, I do desire my
thankfulness to be acknowledged) do I propose to be observed, etc.

Also, vobis, to you the inhabitants of Saul and Randwick, who have by reason
of annexion, some relation to my charge, but in respect of distance of
dwelling, and proper provision, did not hear many of these things spoken to
the ears, yet now may see them all obvious to the eye, do I propose to be
observed, etc.

Lastly, and more especially, vobis, to you the Parishioners of Hardwick and
Standish (among whom I now inhabit, and to whom I often do speak) do I
propose to be observed, the cautions and councels in the ensuing Tract
contained: To you do I commit them printed, that heard them preached.

Quia, segnius irritant animos demissa per aures,
Quam, quae sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus.
Hearing for the present is more prositable: Reading for the future is more
permanent.

Vox audita perit, litera scripta manet.
Speaking is often thought ambiguous:
Writing to all is conspicuous:
In that another spoke to you,
In this you may speak to your selves.
That was in general, this will be in particular: that was with many
intermissions, this with one uniform connection: that was at the will of the
speaker, when to end, and this at will of the reader when to begin.

If in presence and speaking, the matter or man seemed base unto you, yet in
absence and writing, 1 Cor. 10.1.
let both be bold to warn you.

Now lest you should say that this is Furtivis nudata coloribus, Furtivis.
Horat.
and every bird having fetched her own feather, it will appear wholly naked
and white paper only: therefore have I annexed the names of the Authors
whereunto I have been beholding.

1. First, that I might not derogate from what has been invented by them.

2. That these things might have the more credit and respect (here briefly
touched) in regard of the good and great account of the Authors wherein the
points more fully are to be observed.

Some things here are, you shall know, that elsewhere are not to be found; and
many things here are, I acknowledge, that among others by search more largely
are to be seen.

Theirs it was in respect of matter, foundation, invention; mine it is in
respect of method, building, application.

That which some of them have written, Nildictum quod non fuit prius.
in respect of others, was not their own: That which I have written in respect
of them, is not mine: if they have not been blamed being beholding to others
before them, why should I fear censuring, selecting from them before me?

The flowers are not to be disliked, that are fetched from many gardens,
especially if the gardens be acknowledged whence they have been gathered. But
whether it be mine or theirs, sure I am, it shall be yours, if rightly you do
make use of it: if for uttering every tenth oath you will but read the twenty
several disswasives from swearing. If for hearing every tenth oath, you will
but read the many motives to the reproof of swearing. If you bestow but the
tenth part of your spiritual pains upon your selves, as some of you do the
twentieth part of your temporal profit upon me, I dare be bold confidently to
avouch, that you shall find more profit by the perusal and application, then I
expect credit by the publishing and dedication. Though many have written of
this subject, yet I believe, not in any one are so many several particulars,
Quibus aut non vacat propter alia negotiz, aut non valetis ratione linguae, vel
sumptuum in multis tam multa legere and cognoscere.
as herein touching this one point, are delivered.

And I know (to allude to Augustines phrase) that some of you want skill and
light to understand, some of you want time and leisure to search, many of you
want wills and minds to read, most of you want wealth and money to procure so
many several Authors (as here I have quoted and used) for the accumulating
from so many sundry places and persons, sufficient ample store of Cannonshot
for the battering in pieces, if it be possible, this mouth-desiling,
car-infecting, soul-killing, land-shaking sin.

And it may be when this comes unto you, it shall not find you such as it would,
2 Cor. 12.20.
that is, free from this sin; and when you come unto it, you shall find it such
as you would not, sharply censuring the same.

As for any carping critical Censurer, that is apt to condemn all, before he
hear or read the one half, I say no more but as the Poet, -- Si quid novisti
rectius istis, Candidus imperti; si non, his utere mecum.

If thou thy self can better make,
Impart, or else these friendly take.
Now in conclusion, to join tibi, mibi, vobis and vestris together: To thee, to
me, to you and yours, do I commit the whole, and every particular thereof: that
God that works all in all, may be in us all, that the unmeasurablenesse of his
mercies may cover all our miseries, the light of his truth inform our
understandings, the power of his Spirit bear sway in our affections, the line
of his law overruled all our actions, that so his word may be obeyed, his
Spirit not grieved, his blessings continued, his judgments diverted, his
Ministers encouraged, his Magistrates eased, our persons protected, our wars
ended, our peace procured, our consciences comforted, and our selves, bodies
and souls changed from Goats to Sheep, from Serpents to Doves, from Lions to
Lambs, from idle, rash, sinful prophaners, into due, sober, and reverent
sanctifiers of the great, glorious and fearful Name of the Lord our God. To
whose gracious goodness, that is able and ready to speak as powerfuly to the
heart, as man is to the ear, I commit and commend you all, the Author and the
work, that God alone may have the praise for what it has, and the Author your
prayers for what he wants; who ever remains yours in all Christian duties,

WALTER POWELL.
Read, consider, practice, and the Lord begin, go on, and end with you in all
things.

Accept in it what is good: Except against what is bad. Guide thou my Pen, O
Lord, and it shall publish thy praise.



A SUMMONS FOR SWEARERS.
EXODUS 20.7. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the
Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.
THE Word of God is honored with many Titles, that men with fear, love and
reverence might attend unto the same.

It is, the Acts and Statutes of the highest Parliament:

The Ark of truth: The Auchor of hope: The Antidote against poison: The Armor
of proof: The alarm to the loyterer: The Aqua vitae of the languishing: The
answer of all questions: The A. B. C. of Christians.
It is, The bane of the wicked: The bewrayer of vanities: The beauty of the
Spouse: The Bay-bush of blessedness: The Beacon of the Soul: A Bible for
Bishops: The Balm from Gilead: The breath of the holy Ghost: The check of
conscience: The conduit of comfort: The conduct to Canaan: The cubit of the
Sanctuary: The covenant of promise: Christ his Aphorisms: The Court-roll of
his fines and amerciaments: The Diadem of Princes: The Day Star of
righteousness: The Day-book for all our doings: The desire of the godly: The
downfall of doubting: The dolor of the Devil: The dread of the drunkard: The
doom of the damned.
It is, The Elephants river to swim in, the Foord for the Lamb to wade through:
The exercise of the mind to muse on: The eyebright of the understanding: The
eare-mark of Christ's sheep to be known by: The earnest of Salvation: The
Epistle of God to the world: The Evidence for heaven:
It is, The fullness of knowledge: The fire of the Sanctuary: The freedom for
captives: The fortress of Faith: The fountain of felicity: The food of the
hungry: The glass of our life: The glory of Israel: The great Goliahs
confusion: Gods covenant with man: The grave of all ungodliness: The garden of
all graces: The gate unto glory.
It is, The hammer of hypocrites: The haven of health: The hive of the
distressed: The hope of the heavy: The highway to happiness: The Jewel for
the ear: The Judge of controversies: The joy of Jerusalem: The key of the
Sheepfold: The keeper of conscience.
It is, The life of learning: The leader of the lame: The light of the blind:
The Lanthorn of Israel: The land-star of the faithful Pilgrim: The Library of
the holy Ghost: The Lambs book: The Lords Legacy: The Lords Treasury: The
lightning and thunder of the most-High.
It is, Man's mirth in his misery: The Mint of the Church: A main Mast for
Mariners: A make-peace for Magistrates: A meditation for mourners: A memento
for mortality: Milk for the weak: Meat for the strong: Music for the
melancholy: The Mystery of godliness: The mirror of Martyrs: The map of the
next world: The mouth of the Lord Jehovah: The nurse of virtue: The news from
Canaan: The non-such for the soul and body: The net to draw men's souls out of
the waters of wickedness.
It is, The Oracle of God: The oldest way of life and truth: The plea of the
poor; The pain of the rich: The physic of the sick: The preservative against
the plague: The privilege of Christians: The pearl without price: The Pilot
to piety: The pathway to Paradise: The pledge of Gods love: The promise of
perfection: The proof of professors: The Palace of Protestants: The prison of
Papists: The pull-down of Purgatory: The plat-forme for all pastime:
It is, The quiver of Gods arrows against Atheists: The quench-coale of lust:
The root of religion: The rock of Gods Church: The refuge of the righteous: The
rule of man's actions: The riches unperishable: The revealed will of God.
It is, The staff of the feeble: The sting of finne: The Sling of David: The
Spring of pleasure: The salve for the soar: The Sea-mans compass: The
spiritual Manna: The Sword of the Spirit: The Schoolmaster of Mankind: The
Seed of the new birth: The Sea of Gods mercies: The Signet of Gods right hand:
The Sampler of Saints sufferings: The Scepter of Christ's Kingdom: The search
for the sinner: The safety for the sorrowful: The solace of the soul: The
summons to judgment.
It is, The tidings of salvation: The treasure of gladness: The trial of
truth: The testimony of Gods favor: The touchstone of error: The two-edged
sword: The Testament and Tenure of our Freehold: The Tradesmans balance: The
young man's task: The Usurers hell: The wine for the wounded: The woe for the
worldling: The way for to walk in: The Ulysses (says Homer) caused himself to
be bound to the Mast of the ship, and every one of his fellows ears to be
stopped with wax, that they might not hearken to the songs of these Monsters,
the Sirens, and so be drowned in the Sea.
wax for the Sailers cars against the Sirens songs on the sea: The whetstone of
zeal: The watch-bell of Christians: The wisdom of the cross: The well of the
water of life.
And so from the Preface to provoke your attentions, I come to the Decalogues
division, and Texts explication, to inform your judgments.

Christ divided the Law into two Tables: The love of God, and the love of our
Neighbor.

Now the four first Commandments contain our duty to God; the fix last, to
our Neighbor.

Josephus divides and allots five unto the first, and five unto the last Table.

August. Quaest. 71. on Exodus says, there be three precepts contained in the
first table, and seven in the last, making the first and second commandment
but one, and the tenth two precepts.

But what is his Reason?

A childish reason, says Zanchius, that the mystery of the Trinity might
hereby be specified.

Him has Aquinas and the Schoolmen followed: So Luther, and those that follow
him.

This was brought to pass by the subtilty of the Devil, as the event it self
does sufficiently declare; seeing by little and little it came to pass, that
the second Precept was by the Papists blotted out; or if added, then either
joined with, or hid under the first, that it might not appear that God did
absolutely and of set purpose condemn Images, but such as whereby God himself
is represented; and to make up the number of ten, they divide the tenth into
two precepts, as a man having stolen one of ten baggs, divides the ninth into
two, that none of the number might be wanting.

This then you see, we rightly are to account the third precept belonging to
the first table.

And in it, at the first glimpse, you may discern, Two parts.
first, a Prohibition: secondly, a Reason to regard it.

First, the Prohibition, Thou shall not take, etc.

Secondly, the Provocation, or Reason to enforce it, For the Lord will not hold
him guiltless, etc.

This word Name, when it is referred to man, has these significations in
Scripture.

1. It is taken for that whereby his person is known and distinguished from
another, as Peter, Paul, etc. Thou shall call his name Jesus: He shall be
called John. Mat. 1.21 Luke 1.16.


2. The testimony or report which is given of any man; which if it be for good
things, and given to good men, then it is a good name, otherwise it is an evil
name. Pro. 22.1.
A good name is better then riches. This is that whereby we are made known unto
others, as men are by their names.

3. Our selves; Luke 10.20 Rev. 21. ult.
our own persons. Rejoice that your names are written in the book of life. That
yet are known and loved of God from everlasting.

4. Honor, Deuteronomy. 26.18. Job. 30.8.
renown, praise, or glory. To make thee high above all Nations in name. As vile
persons are said to be men without names.

5. Appearance, Rev. 3.1.
show, or seeming. Thou have a name to live.

6. Memory, Prove. 10.7.
mention. His name shall be put out.

7. The most noble and powerful creatures in heaven and earth. Act. 4.12. Ephesians.
1.21.
There is given no other name under heaven. Above all names.

The word Name, when it is referred to God, has these Acceptions.

1. It is taken for God himself. Psa. 116.13.


2. The properties and special attributes of God. Properties; as, Strong,
Almighty, Exodus 6.2, 3. and 15.3. Jealous, Exodus 34.14. Attributes; as,
Justice, Mercy, Power, Goodness, Truth.

3. Our affiance in God, Psalm. 44.5.

4. It is taken for his holy mysteries, as Word, and Sacraments, 1 Samuel 7.45.
Mic. 4.5.
Acts 9.15, 16.

5. For all the holy worship of God, and of Christ.

6. Gods holy Will and Commandments, Acts 21.13 Deuteronomy. 18.19. Psalm. 8.1.
1 Samuel 17.45.

7. For the glory of God, Psalm. 16.1.

By the word Name is here meant any title, as God, Jehovah; or Attribute of
God, as Mercy, Goodness, Truth, etc. whereby he is made known or discerned
from the creatures.

We cannot say properly, that God has a Name, because plurality (for which
names are used) falls not into the simple and undivided nature of God.

Thou] Whether King or Subject, Pastor or people, rich or poor, young or old.

Shall not take) A metaphor taken from precious vessels, which are not to be
touched without wariness and leave given; men are unworthy, yet they take this
name of God into their mouths without leave or reverence.

The Name] Taken for everything whereby God may be known, as men by their
names, viz. by his Titles, Word, Works, Judgments, Creatures.

Of the Lord thy God] Who by the greatness of of his power, has showed
himself Lord universally; and by the goodness of his mercy has showed
himself thy God particularly, by saving and delivering thee from troubles
without, and terrors within; from brick and bonds of the hands of men,
externally; from errors and fears by the motions of sin, and suggestions of
Satan, internally; from the punishment due to both, eternally.

In vain] By rash, common, sinful thinking on, speaking of, or swearing by,
any the forementioned names, titles, creatures, without any reverend regard of
Gods Majesty, before whom, or the manner how, or the end wherefore thou
think on them in heart, speak of them in word, or swearest by them in
oath.

For the Lord] Who is great in power, as in the first Commandment; jealous in
nature, as in the second commandment, is also just in rewarding the wicked, as
here.

Will not hold] He will not (though Parents, or Masters, or Magistrates do)
let such finners escape scot-free, live and die unpunished; but will surely
punish them. For the Hebrews express that by the negative, which we do by
the superlative.

Him guiltlesse] Whom the eye of the Magistrate cannot see, nor the hand of the
Magistrate will not touch, nor the tongue of the Minister dare not reach or
reprehend; him, whatsoever he be; Cedar, or Shrub; high, or low; Master, or
servant; noble, or ignoble; Court, City, Country, will the eye of the Lord
see, and hand of the Lord reach.

That takes his Name] Reiterating what before was named, to denotate the
grievousnesse of this sin; the abuse of his Name; and the certainty,
universality, severitie, and eternity of the punishment threatened to be
inflicted.

In vain] By abusing any of Gods creatures, judgments, works, word, either by
uttering rash, idle, hellish oaths, perjuries, cursings, with their lips; or
by hearing with the ear any such abuse, or cursed speeches, without wise,
zealous, constant reprehending; or, if within the compass of our calling,
punishing the faulty for the same. So much for the Exposition.

Let us not think that God (as some cockering Fathers and Magistrates do) does
with pithlesse words, or for a countenance only, fear his people; far be such
lightness from the terrible Majesty of God. Far also be it from us to think,
but that the threatenings of Gods wrath, shall also be as certain, as the
promises of his grace.

Gods Name, besides by swearing, forswearing, cursing, is also taken in vain
many ways. All which ways it had not been meet for the Lord in specialties to
express, lest he should have passed the mean of his Decalogue: And which I
will not endeavor so much to discourse of, as to point out.

Gods Name is taken in vain, By

1. Irreverent mention of his Titles and Attributes upon any occasion.

2. Levit. 22.32. 1 Timothy 6.1
Not walking as becomes the Gospel of Christ, and profession of Gods Name,
Romans 2.24. This is to play the Gentiles under the name of Christians: to
profess God in word, and to deny him in work. Tit. 1.16.

3. An unsanctified use of any of Gods creatures, or of any thing we do
without thankesgiving and prayer. A good servant will adventure on nothing but
what pleases his Master; we do not take any man's goods out of his house,
without asking him leave, neither do we return home any borrowed thing without
thanking our neighbor.

4. Heedlesse admiration; as, Phil. 2.10.
Good Lord! Oh Jesu! O mercy! God, etc.

5. Vain supplications; as, For Gods sake, not thinking on God.

6. Jangling or wrangling speech of any good thing, merely for contention,
ostentation, victory.

7. Using jestingly any phrase or place of Scripture, Jer. 23.34. 2 Pet. 3.4.
Mark. 4.6.
or misalledging or misapplying the same, Esaias 22.13.

8. Serving the Devils turn with any part of the Scriptures, in Spells and
Charms, thus making them, as it were, the Sacraments of the Devil.

9. Oppugning the truth, though it be through blindness or ignorance; but most
of all, if it be wittingly and wilfully.

10. Denying the truth, through fear or lucre, against ones conscience.

11. Maintaining, defending, disputing for, and gracing of falsehood.

12. A wicked scandalous mocking of them that profess Religion, Esaias 35.21, 25.

13. By persecuting any for rightcousnesse sake, Mat. 5. Psalm. 44.22.

14. Putting holiness or unholinesse, or necessity of religion in a thing
indifferent, which is superstition.

15. Defending there is no God, desiring constantly there were no God, inwardly
hating God, or exalting ones self above all that is called God.

16. Zeph. 1.12
Saying or thinking that God will do neither good nor evil. Esa. 29.15.23.

17. Job. 21.14.
Saying or thinking there is no profit in serving the Almighty.

18. 2 King. 6.33. and 7.2.
Saying or thinking that in affliction it is impossible to be delivered.

19. Job 33.13. Deuteronomy. 29. ult. Romans 9.20.
Nourishing inward boylings about such things as God shows not the reason of.

20. Conceiving rebellious thoughts about the decrees or providence of God.

21. Saying or thinking in adversity, Esaias 40.27, 28, 29. and 49.14, 15.
that God cares not for him, or has fortaken him.

22. Asking wherein God has loved us, Malach. 1.2.

23. Abusing Gods blessings, Hos. 10.1. and 11.2, 3, 4. and 4.7.

24. Not believing Gods promises, through neglect or despair, Psalm. 48.22.

25. Blessing our selves in our heart, against Gods threatenings, Deuteronomy. 29.19.

26. Scoffing at the signs of Gods mercies and goodness, Esaias 7.12, 13. hereby
wearying the Lord.

27. By sacrisicing to our own net, Hab. 1.16.

28. Attending our own pleasure, and disregarding Gods works, Esa. 5.12. Luk,
13.1, 2.

29. Limiting God, 2 King. 7.2
and speaking basely of his power, Psalm. 78.19. 2 Kings 7.2. alluding to Noah's
flood. If the Lord did rain corn now, as fast as he did water then, this could
not be so.

30. Not answering when God calls. Esaias 50.2.


31. Not performing what he promises in his sickness, adversities, and at the
Sacraments, Psalm. 50.14. and 56.12. and 60.13, 14. and 116.13, 14.

32. Falling away from the formerly professed truth, Matthew. 13. Rev. 2.4, 9, 10.

33. Job 1.9.
Fearing God either only for reward or for punishment, Hos. 3.5. and 5.15.
Psalm. 78.34.

34. Sinning because God suffers, or forbeareth to punish, Eccles. 8.11.
Psalm. 50.21.

35. Trusting in men, money, carnal helps and means, Jer. 17.5. Psalm. 20.7.

36. Rejoicing in the miseries, Psa. 35.25. and 137.7.
afflictions, and disgraces of Gods children, Esa. 57.1. Ezekiel. 25.6. Job.
31.29. as the Papists in these days do, against England, the Palatinate,
clapping their hands, Ezekiel. 25.6
stamping with their feet, and rejoicing in heart with all despite against
these Lands.

37. Rejoicing in baptism, 2 Chro. 29.6.7.
and caring not to perform our vow, or to come to the Church.

38. Offering the blind and lame for the maintenance of Gods service, Mal.
1.8.14.

39. Pro. 20.25.
Devouring things sanctified that should be employed for the furtherance of
Gods service.

40. Dissuading from Gods worship, upon pretense that it is either polluted,
Mat. 1.17. or vain, Mal. 3.14.

41. Serving God after the old manner of our Forefathers, Jer. 9.13. Amos 2.4.

42. Serving God after the precepts of men, rather then of God, Esaias 29.13.

43. Urging men's traditions, with opinion of necessity, and neglect of Gods
Law, as Matthew. 15.2, 3. worshipping God in vain, v. 9.

44. Urging the lesser things of the Law, neglecting the greater, Mat. 23.23.

45. Borrowing Rites and Observations from the professed enemies of God, to
add them as part of Gods worship, Deuteronomy. 12.4.13. 2 King. 17 33, 34.


46. Desiring to be taught vain things, that may rather tickle and please the
ear, then touch and profit the soul, Esaias 30.9, 10, 11.

47. Doing the work of a Minister and no Minister, upon pretense of necessity,
or devotion, 2 Chronicles. 26.16. as Midwives baptizing.

48. Conceiving of God in the likeness of any thing created, or worshipping
images, or God in them; as in the preceding precept.

49. Luke 9.62. Rev. 2.10.
Serving God without delight or reverence of his Majesty, or constancy to the
end of our life.

50. Hearing without attention, for custom, Ezekiel. 33.31. and without practice,
Jam. 1.22.26.

51. Praying not in his family, as well as in the Temple, Mat. 6.6. Jos. 24.15.
Acts 10.2. 1 Cor. 11.22. If men will have houses to eat in, then also should
they have houses to pray in.

52. Praying not with understanding, or power of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 14.15.

53. Regarding wickedness in his heart, Psa. 66.18 Pro. 21.17 1 Cor. 11.28.
when he prays against it with his lips.

54. Not preparing himself before receiving the Sacraments.

55. Giving power to the Sacraments to confer grace, or holding them
absolutely necessary to salvation; or giving them divine adoration, as the
Papists do.

56. Perverting them to such ends and uses as God has not appointed them; as
baptism to the consecration of bells, to drive away Devils, etc.

57. Thinking or speaking basely of any of Gods creatures, or discommending
them and their goodness.

58. Deriding Gods workmanship in any of Gods creatures, especially man or
woman, in regard of some natural deformity, or infirmity of body or mind.

59. Beholding any of Gods creatures without acknowledging Gods wisdom and
power appearing in them, Psalm. 19.1. and 139.14.

60. Stealing from others to enrich themselves, not depending on Gods
allowance, Prove. 30.9.

61. Praying for things not agreeable to Gods will, as for the dead, or to
spend it on our lusts, Jam. 4.3.

62. Using prayer to unlawful ends; as to sorceries, enchantments, etc.

63. Praising God when the Devil is to be praised. For the Devil made the
Pharisee not be as the Publican was, Luke 18.11. So Saul praised God for the
evil treason of the Ziphites 1 Samuel 23.21. So gamesters when they cosen and
rob one another unjustly of their money, without conscience or warrant; then in
all have God must be thanked for their thee very: I thank God I have spedwell;
I have had good luck.

64. Murmuring in affliction against the work of Gods providence, either
directly, Deuteronomy. 1.27. or under the name of Chance or Fortune.

65 Saying our prayers, or reading the word cursorily without fruit, not being
bettered by them in knowledge, faith, repentance, etc.

66. Abusing lots (an ordinance of God) casting them in light or trifling
matters, and in sport;

This is an nbusing of Gods Name.

67. Perverting these Lots to wrong ends: as to search our fortunes, or to know
what success.

68. Using them either ignorantly, without information of their nature; or
profanely, without any regard of Gods providence in disposing them; or with
chasing against the events manifested by them.

69. Using them in such things, when in nature no such things do need to be,
God already having put the matter out of controversy (as the case is in all
lotteries.) And surely God will not allow us to make a knot for him to untie.

70. Using them without praying to God, to use his power and wisdom in
ordering this casual accident for the ending of this present Controversy.

71. Saying or thinking we have no fin. 1 Jo. 1.8.


72. Not using Christ as our own and only Advocate, 1 Jo. 2.1.

73. Making often repetirion of the Lords Prayer, without the endeavoring to
practice what we pray for; calling him father, and not demeaning our selves
like children: Mal. 1.6.
saying, Hallowed be thy Name, and yet daily profaning and suffering it to be
profaned; Thy Will be done, and yet fretting and murmuring at every thing that
crosses our nature; and so throughout.

74. Esteeming Christ our Savior, and not obeying him as our Lord; when in the
Text it is, Lord thy God.

75. Harboring Christ in our heads, not in our hearts and houses, Mat. 25.
by clothing the naked, feeding the hungry, visiting the sick, etc.

76. Receiving the grace of God in vain, 2 Cor. 6.1. Tit. 2.11.
or turning it into wantonness, Jude 4.

77. B. Hooper. Bulla, as much as to say, Bubble; sitly so called, says
Bulling.
Prefixing holy and glorious Titles before lewd, lying and profane books, or
before wicked instruments: as before Popes* Bulls and sentence of condemnation
against Martyrs, was prefixed, In the name of God, Amen.

78. Wrong using of Gods creatures, Moon, Stars, etc. See Bishop Hooper in loc.
at large.
contrary to the right use of them; which was not to the reading of Fortunes, or
foretelling the things to come, Esa. 47.13. but to distinguish Nights, Days,
Months and Years, Genesis 1.14.

79. Rash or covetous intrusion, Muscul. in Loc.
or admission into the Ministry, Mal. 1.11. ad finem, Ps. 50.16. The roofs of
the churches (says Jerome) glister with Gold, the Temple shines with Marble,
but there is no choice made of the Ministers of Christ, whether they be Gold,
or whether they be Cray; whether worthy or unworthy. And (Theodor. Basil) in an
invective against Swearers observes that St August. affirms, That be is no
Priest that has no knowledge in the Law of God.

It is happy that Augustine is gone, and a Saint (quoth he*) For if he were now
alive, and a Bishop again, as he was in time past, and should go on visi^^tion
through the Diocese; I think surely he would depose a great sort of Priests,
as ^^n more fit for the Cart then for the Church; for he measured all
Priesthood by knowledge.

Ye offer unclean bread on my Altar, and so do not only despise, but profane
my name: ye also offer the blind for sacrifices; Mal. 1.6.7.8.11.13.
ye offer the lame and the sick. The Priests offered defiled bread in coming
unpreparedly and unworthily unto the Altar, in presuming by giving of gifts, in
evil bestowing the Word among the people, by honoring the mighty, and
despising the poor.

They offered blind sacrifices, setting unlearned men in the place and room of
the learned, and making them Masters, who were scarce able to be scholars.

They offered the halt and the lame, placing and promoting them that seek only
the riches of the earth, treading their feet two contrary ways, the one in
godly matters, the other in carnal causes.

They offered the weak and faint, when in stead of the Devout they placed the
Vicious, Bullinger.
in stead of the godly zealous, the cold and worldly minded Prelates.

80. Not reprehension of such as do break this Commandment by any means
whatsoever, Levit. 5.1. etc.

81. Not entertainment of, nor amendment by a reproof for this or any other
sins, but accounting such reprehension precise curiosity, and such oaths bare
affirmations,

82. Unprofitable using of the means which the Lord has given us, for our
conversion from evil, or confirmation in good.

83. Often receiving, seldom praising God for, his benefits, Luke 17.17.

84. Making vows of perpetual chastity, and of such things as are not in our
own power; and of wilful poverty, contrary to Gods Ordinance that there should
be no beggar in Israel. Deuteronomy. 15.4.


85. Giving feigned titles; as, servus servorum Dei, 2 These. 2.4.
when men exalt themselves above all things that is called God.

86. Committing wickedness under color of Religion; as the sons of Jacob,
when they slew the Seebemites, Genesis 34.13.15. The Scribes and Pharisees under
pretense of long Prayers, devoured widows houses, Mat. 23.14.

All which egregiously abuse Gods Name, making it a mask to cover such bloody
impieties, and earthly desires under.

87. Going to Conjurers, Witches, Sorceres, Destiny readers, to have their
children or cattle unbewitched, to know who has stolen their horse, or any way
hurted them; as Amaziah his messengers went to Baalzebub, 2 King. 1.5. They
manifest they desire acquaintance with the Devil, and say in their hearts,
there is no God in England.

Object. But many have been helped, and got health by such means?

Sol. That help or health that has been gotten by any means contrary to Gods
Word and Will, has been obtained from the Devil; now is he our friend or so?
will he ever do us any good, but to the end thereby to infer a greater plague?
temporal ease he is content to bestow upon us, that endless woe and misery he
may procure unto us.

Shall a Christian man or woman so hunt for health of body, or goods, that they
will lose for it body and soul eternally?

Satan never did us any good, but to the end to hurt us more by it, and the
breach of Gods commandment will ring our souls a passing peal from the face and
favor of the Lord.

88. Accounting some days luckie, and some unluckie; as Shipmen dare not put
out of their port, and begin their voyage on certain days: as upon Tuesdayes
or Fridayes: and therefore they are often careful to make choice of a luckie
day, even the Lords Day, that by breaking the Lords Sabbath, in the beginning,
they may have good luck in their whole voyage afterward.

89. By reading or singing any thing that is part of Gods Word, or appertaining
to his worship in an unknown tongue, Psa. 47.17.
so that it cannot be understood.

90. Psa. 58.10. Judge. 5.31.
Not magnifying Gods Justice in the punishment of the wicked.

91. Luke 13.3. Dan. 5.22.
Not being warned by Gods Justice and Judgment upon others.

92. Not being humbled or obedient under the cross, Jer. 5.3. Esa. 22.12.

93. Envying Gods Gifts and Graces upon others.

94. Pretending impossibility of performing the vow in Baptism, when it is
want of will and care.

95. Using delays in performing vows lawful, which argues unwillingness, Hag.
1.2.4.

96. Performing them by halfes, which argues doubling, as in Ananias and
Sapphira, Act. 3.2.

97 Calling themselves Christians, when men live like Atheists, Jer. 7.8.10.
making Gods House a de^ of thieves, Mat. 21.13.

For he takes upon him the name of a Christian in vain (says St. Augustine)
that follows not Christ.

98. Calling themselves Jesuits, when they serve Antichrist, and refuie the
direction of the word of Jesus.

99. Interposing Gods Name or Titles in our salu^ations, when it is not from
the heart: as, God give you good morrow, or, good night, etc.

100. Using kind salutations to wicked purposes; as Joab to Am^sa, 2 Samuel 20.9.

101. Graving the Name and Image of God in money, badges, and rings; which men
would never do (says Bullinger) if either they judged reverently nough, or not
superstitiously of the Name of God. The wise men of the Gentiles acknowledged
that men ought to judge more highly of God then to use his Name in every thing
and unadvisedly. Thence came that saying ^^ Pythagoras, No man ought to carry
about the Image of God in a ring.

102. Lastly, to stand upon repetition of no more (for to set down all the
ways, how Gods Name is taken in vain [saith the Author of the ^^ord against
swearing] were a work infinite,) Gods name is taken in vain,

By swearing, for swearing, cursing; for if the^ transgress Gods Precepts, that
by idle words only do take his name in vain, then do they more egregiously sin
that by wicked hellish oaths, perjuries and cursing do abuse the same. If
sinners in the former kinds are subject to punishment, then much more those
that offend by any of these ways. If the lesser are condemned, much more are
the greater intimated to be forbidden, and signified more severely to be
punished. If the father said unto his son, Look that thou ray not thy coat
with any spot, though it be never so small; it may easily be understood that it
may, and will be worse taken, if it be cast into the dirt and mire of the
streets; but yet it will be worst of all taken, if he tumble himself into a
most filthy sink, which his father cannot abide to be spotted with never so
little a wemb.

The lesser sins of taking Gods name in vain, are forbidden, to the intent we
should beware and abstain from the greater. Gods Name is then also taken in
vain by swearing either lightly, rashly, etc.

As wickedly to swear is to take Gods Name in vain; so rightly to swear is to
sanctify the same.

Before therefore we speak of the abuse in the negative, let us briefly touch
the lawful use of swearing in the affirmative part of this commandment.

Rightly to swear, is to sanctify Gods Name, Doctr. 1.
is plainly by God approved, and certainly by him shall be rewarded.

This swearing is a part of Gods worship as well as prayer, yea, such a part as
is put for the whole service of God, Psalm. 63.11. Esa. 48.1. For the full
knowledge of which conclusion let us consider, 1. The Definition of an Oath. 2.
The Ends of -- an Oath.


What an Oath is, we need not define, it is so well known and used (says
Musculus) that it needs no declaration.

An Oath is a speech confirming the truth by it self. Definition of an oath.
Greg.
Gregor. Or,

A saying void of strife with divine worship. So Aristot. Or, Aristot.


A calling of God to witness. So Aquinas. Aquin.


A solemn invocation of God, whereby we desire him, as the only seer of our
hearts, to witness the truth of our speech, and to punish us if we swear
falsely. Vrsin.


Where the testimony of men is wanting, we fly unto God as a witness by oath,
especially when that is to be averred which in the conscience lies concealed.

The reason of Oaths is grounded upon this point, that forasmuch as it is
presumed upon by all men, that they do believe that there is a God, unto whom
all secrets are open, and of whom faith and truth is well liked: And that on
the other side he is much offended with lies, and has so great regard of
justice, that he will inflict worthy punishment on such as forswear
themselves: It was received by a common consent and custom of all men, to use
and take the name of God (the God of all men) for witness, when we would have
men credit those things which we ascertaine and confirm by oath to be true;
and appoint God to be the revenger thereof, in case we do swear any thing
that is false.

Seeing all nations were accustomed to swear by the names of their Gods:
therefore the Israelites here were accustomed to swear by the glorious name of
the Lord their God.

The Ends of an Oath, are 1. That doubts may be cleared. 2. Good causes
furthered, and bad suppressed. 3. Authority obeyed, Divine and Humane. 4. Gods
glory in all, much promoted.


Such an Oath when we publicly take, Why men swear, laying hands on a book. 4.
Causes.
we do it by laying our hand upon the Bible, or Evangelists.

1. That the Swearer remembering the benefit of the redemption by Christ, might
be the more afraid to swear that which is false. This love of Christ should
constrain us to love him again, by speaking nothing but the truth.

2. That the Swearer might know the multitude of witnesses, Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, that abide beholders of his oath: and therefore his offense in
swearing falsely, to be so much the greater, by how many the more behold it.

3. That the swearer might deliberate what to speak, and might not afterward
say, that he was suddenly and unadvisedly taken, and urged to testify what he
did.

4. That as the Scriptures are true, so is what he swears free from falsehood.

1. Uses. 1.
For the justification of the godly from time to time, that have taken oaths;
and of the Laws of the Land herein, that do maintain the same, as lawful to
decide many controversies, which otherwise could not be decided, Heb. 6.16.

2. Use 2. Anabaptist
For confutation of the Anabaptists, which utterly condemn all kind of
swearing as utterly unlawful, because of Christ his words, Matthew. 5.34. Swear
not at all, but let your Yea, be Yea, and your Nay, Nay.

So the Manichees utterly rejected the old Testament, Manichees Deuteronomy. 6.13.
because it commanded to swear by the name of God, Deuteronomy. 6.13.

Yea, Jerome, Hieron. in Matthew.
a learned Father, held that the liberty of swearing by the Name of God, was
only granted unto the Jews, as unto little children, lest they should swear
by Devils; even as (says he) God would have sacrifices offered unto him rather
then to Idols, Homil. 7. in Matthew.

The error of the Anabaptists is so stiffly maintained, because of the ill
understanding of the forementioned words, Matthew. 5.34. Hereby they would make
Christ contrary to his Father, as though he had been sent down upon the earth
to abrogate the decree of his Father, Exo. 22.11
seeing his Father does not only permit, but also command an Oath.

But Christ affirms that He is one with the Father, affirming what he does;
and his Doctrine not his own: Joh. 10.18.30.
Now should God disallow what he once enjoined, and abrogate what at first he
absolutely commanded?

If we look into the text we shall perceive, that the purpose of our Savior
was not to restrain oaths, but only to purge the Law from the false Glosses of
the Scribes and Pharisees; not wholly condemning oaths, but such only as
transgress the rules of the Law.

It appears that the people then only feared and shunned Perjuries, when as the
Law did not only inhibit perjuries, but all idle, vain and superfluous oaths.
For Christ, the best expositor of the Law, informed and admonished them, that
not forswearing, but also vain swearing was a sin, and a breach of the Law.
Vain swearing, I say: For other Oaths by the Law commanded, or commended, he
leaves untouched, as safe and free.

Whereas they (the Anabaptists) dwell so unremoveably upon the word, Non
omnino, not at all, we must know, that it is not to be restrained unto the word
Swearing, but to the subjected forms of swearing by heaven, earth, etc. For
that was the error of the Jews, that they thought when they swear by heaven,
earth, or such like oaths, they took not Gods name in vain, nor transgressed
this third Precept, if they named not God in their oaths. Therefore our
Savior took away all color of excuse or objection; seeing when they swear
either by heaven, or earth, the light, Baptism [never naming the name of God]
they notwithstanding did indirectly take Gods name in vain, seeing all these
benefits are pledges of his liberality, and on every of them his name remains
engraven.

Not at all (says Aug. Augustine.
) not because to swear is a sin, but because to forswear is a great sin.

Christ's meaning then is, Swear not at all, that is, not at all by any
creature, upon what pretense soever; or not at all by God himself falsely or
unadvisedly, neither disorderly for affection, nor childishly for imitation,
nor desperately for custom, nor cunningly for deceit; Oher oaths which fail
not in the conditions required in Jer. Jerem. 4.2.
4.2. S. James mislikes not, Christ condemns not.

If Christ's meaning had been to allow of no swearing at all, why should that
addition be made, neither by heaven nor earth, etc? to have said, Swear not at
all, had been sufficient. And Christ himself, who was a pattern of perfection,
would not have sworn so often; neither his Apostles would so frequently have
assumed God as their witnesses, Romans 1.9. 2 Cor. 1.23. And the Apostle, Heb. 6
16. acknowledges an Oath to be the last remedy and means for the ending of
controversies. If it be lawful, it does not derogate from, but advance Gods
glory, as we see by the Prophets position, Jerem. 4.2.
Thou shall swear, The Lord lives in truth, judgment, and righteousness; and
the Nations shall bless and praise him.

How do the Nations praise the Lord? For that the Nations do swear by his
Name, they do praise him, (i.) they do make his Name glorious, when they do
give credit to them that do swear by it, and do find so great observance and
reverence thereof in the Swearer, that he does always perform the same which
he has sworn.

By the fore mentioned place of Heb. 6. it is clear, that an oath is not
evil; for as he that does begin strifes among other, or hinder their
atonement, is reputed anoysome enemy, a peacebreaker, Matthew. 5.9.
a child of the Devil, and therefore cursed: so that must needs be a
commodious matter, whereby contentions are suppressed, truth manifested, and
peace established.

In the place, Matthew. 5.34. Mat. 5.34.
so much insisted on by the Anabaptists, not the letter of the words, but the
meaning of the speaker is to be considered. For if the words were to be
enforced without weighing the sense, great errors would appear by that and
other places easily to ensue, Christ says in the same Chapter, Resist not
revill. Therefore Magistrates, Parents, Ministers, should not oppose sin.
Again, Luke 14.
If any man come to me, and forsake not father and mother, etc. Therefore the
precept of honoring father and mother, should be abrogated.

Again, touching the Scribes and Pharisees, Whatsoever they say unto you, do.
Matthew. 23.
Therefore according to the letter, their doctrine should of all men be
embraced, contrary to Matthew. 16.6. Mat. 16.6.
Beware of the leven of the Pharisees. Again, Christ says, Whosoever came
before me, Joh. 10.8.
were thieves and robbers, Joh. 10.8. Therefore the Prophets and John Baptist
were thieves and robbers, if the show of the words were to be taken. Again,
Paul says, I became all unto all men, 1 Cor. 10.33.23
therefore an idolater with idolaters. And, all things are lawful for me,
therefore whoredom and adultery not sinful for him.

Lastly, the Anabaptists reply out of Matthew. 5.37. Whatsoever is more then Yea,
Yea, Nay, Nay, comes of evil.

Whatsoever comes of evil, Syllogism
is unlawful.

But swearing being more then Yea and Nay, comes of evil.

Therefore it is unlawful.

The Major proposition we deny: Genesis 3.
For tillage is of evil, yet good, holy, and necessary. Physic is of evil, 1
Cor. 12.
yet by the Apostle commended, 1 Cor. 12.

Good Laws and Magistracy are of evil manners. Gualt.


The use of many things is pure and good, Marlorat. ex c.
the original whereof is corrupt and vicious.

So much for the second use of the first point.

For Caution, Use 3.
to be careful to swear in truth, in justice, in judgment. The copulation of
man and woman is good, Jer. 4.2.
as appointed by God; but so that it be in lawful wedlock, and it is not so,
if it be out of matrimony. It is good to sing, so it be to the Lord, but it is
not so in banquetings or wantonness, or in the Church for gain, when men sing
without understanding or devotion. Musculus.
An Oath likewise is good which is made by the Name of God, so that it be done
in Truth, Righteousness, Judgment; Jer. 4.2. expounded
it is otherwise if it be done perversely, rashly, customarily.

1. 1. In truth.
In truth; i. our mind must agree with our mouth, which confutes Papisticall
equivocations, and mental reservations. It is naught of it self to lie; but
this naughtiness is doubled by putting to an oath, says Musculus.

2. In justice; 2. In justice.
that what we promise by oath, be just and lawful: for those oaths are
laudably broken which are unlawfully made.

An example hereof we have in David, 1 Samuel 25.32.22.
who thanked God, and blessed Abigail and her advice, for that he had not
wickedly performed what inconsideratly he had sworn.

The contrary we see in Herod, who performed a wicked oath with greater
wickedness, in giving John Baptists head, which was more worth then all his
Kingdom, doing a work of supercrogation to merit Hell, seeing he promised to
keep his oath only to the losing of half his Kingdom.

3. In judgment; i. reverently, holily, deliberately, 3. In judgment.
sparingly, with a serious due consideration of Gods high Majesty before whom,
of his dreadly Name by which we swear, and of the cause for which we swear, that
it be not concerning things already out of doubt, and certain, as that it will
be day to morrow, etc. or to one that will believe a bare affirmation without
any oath at all, but that it be concerning such things that tend either to Gods
glory, or our neighbors good. For seeing an oath is not absolutely good, but
when necessarily it is required; therefore to swear rashly is upon no pretense
to be allowed; Which occasioned Pagnine to observe, that the Hebrew word for
swearing, is passive, and signifies to be sworn, rather then to swear: to
intimate that we are not to take an oath as voluntary Agents, but as enforced
Patients.

The Romans had an use that he that would swear by Hercules, should go forth
of the doors and be well advised, and take some pause before he swear: For
they held that Hercules did swear but once in all his life, and that was to the
son of King Augeas.

This deliberation in their Idolatrous oaths, should admonish Christians to be
well advised in swearing by the Name of God.

An oath was brought in among men for necessity, and at first to be laid on men
as a punishment, when one could not be believed by another upon his bare word;
yet now it is not restrained so much for it self, as for the evils that do
ensue thereby.

And so little shall suffice to have been spoken concerning the truth and use
of the first Doctrine: Rightly to swear, is to sanctify Gods name, and shall
by him certainly be rewarded; gathered out of the affirmative part of this
third Precept.

Now we are to consider this second Position (as the chief aim and end of my
meditations, opposing the bent of this sinful swearing age) that,

Sinful swearing, Doctr. 2.
though by man it be not, yet by God shall it severely be punished.

If profane, Pharisaicall, Hypocritical persons shall be punished, then also
shall swearers; but profane, etc. shall, etc. Ergo. Swearers are profane
persons, Eccles. 9.2. Pharisaicall persons, Matthew. Mat. 5.33. and 23.29.33.
5.34.20. which only shunned forswearing: Hypocritical persons; If any among
you seem to be religious, and refraineth not his tongue (as no rash swearer
does) that man deceives himself, and his Religion is in vain. Jam. 1.26.


Where there is such a beginning as sinful swearing, there cannot but follow
such a bitter conclusion, as shall severely be punished.

Now before it comes by God to be punished, it comes among men to be
questioned, what is sinful swearing, and what is not.

You have heard in the former Doctrine, what is not sinful swearing; to swear
in truth, righteousness, judgment. Jer. 4.2.

Now to swear sinfully, is to swear, either 1. Lightly, without color of
cause. 2. Rashly, without regard of the matter what, or the Majesty of God
before whom. 3. Falsely, in favor to another, or for profit to our selves,
without respect to truth; whereunto we should be most favorable, because this
alone in the end will prove to be most profitable. 4. Commonly, without
distinction of oaths from words. 5. Unlawfully, by either 1. Leaving Gods
Name. Jer. 5.7.
2. Joining another with it. Zeph. 1.5.

6. Slavishly, by the creatures, making them Lords which are but servants, Heb.
6.16. As, by this light, Sun, fire, bread, drink, heaven, earth, etc. 7.
Heathenishly, by the gods of the Gentiles, Deuteronomy. 6.14
which to name in oaths were forbidden. 8. Superstitiously, as, by the Rood,
Mass, Saint Mary, Saint Anne, etc. 9. Ridiculously, as by Lakin, Cock and Pie,
etc. 10. Hellishly, as by Gods Body, Blood, Heart, Soul, Wounds, Arms, Nails,
Fast, life, Jesus, Lord, Passion of God, etc.


The uses that we may make of this second doctrine, shall be: 1. For the
reproof of the offenders. 2. For the removal of the objections usually
alleged for swearing. 3. For direction, to use the means for the abandoning of
the same. 4. For incitation, to hearken to the motives for the abhorring this
sin. 5. For exhortation to Ministers and Magistrates, to oppose chiefly this
sin. 6. For imitation, to imitate God in the reproof and punishment thereof.


Of all these in order, with the change of the fourth into the place of the
third.

1. This may justly be for a reprehension of, Use 1.
and a commination against all such as offend in any the former kinds, without
any awful regard of Gods dreadful Majesty, in so much that if ever the land
did mourn in Jeremies time, Jer. 23.10.
then much more in ours, by reason of sinful swearing, Jer. 23.10. The earth
mourns for bearing of sinners, because man mourns not for broaching of sin.

If ever, in Hoseabs time the Lord had, then much more now has the Lord a
controversy with the inhabitants of the land, Hos. 4.1, 2, 3.
both for defects and for superfluities: defects of Truth, Mercy, Knowledge;
superfluities of swearing, lying, etc.

1. No truth; in heart or tongue. 2. No mercy; in hand or work. 3. No
knowledge; in head or will. Hesca 4.1.

Therefore they break forth for want of truth, by swearing and lying: For want
of mercy, by killing and stealing: For want of knowledge, by adultery: and one
bloody sin touches another.

The foundation of all these sins is want of truth, and the first head of
this monster of the body of sin that appears, is swearing. And this Serpent
having got in her head by swearing, the rest of the body will easily glide in
after.

Neither is there care of making and executing Laws, either publicly in the
land, Magistrates.
or privately in the family against this sin.

1. For fear the Householders, Masters, Parents, or Magistrates should make a
net to catch themselves.

2. Or for fear there are not enough innocent to punish the offenders: so
great is the multitude of them.

So far are the Magistrates from drawing the sword of justice and punishment
against swearers, that they scarce dare touch them with the scabbard of
reprehension.

Sanpaulinus but for reproving a man for swearing, Saupaulinus. D. Iackson ex
Fox Martyr. p. 904. Gentry.
was by the Papists suspected to be a Lutheran, and thereupon examined,
condemned, burned.

The Gentry also are much infected with this sin, and why?

1. It is a grace unto their speech.

They thus gracing themselves, to disgrace their creator, do glory in their
shame, and their end will be damnation.

2. Or it is an argument of their valor, Obj. Phil 3.19.
seeing they dare to provoke God himself, therefore men may dread them.

For indeed it falls out often, Sol.
that where solid magnanimity of heart is wanting, that it must be supplied by
the valor of the tongue. It will appear commonly by the least trial, that
under this hideous vizard, they hide their cowardice. If the Lion-like skin of
fury be once plucked off, they will appear to be Asses, only fit to bear
blows, and only valorous to leap out of the ^uburbs here, into the fire of hell
it self, there perpetually to remain the Devils bondslaves in torments
remedilesly.

If any of the Gentry, or serving-men do abstain from swearing, he is among
his outward equals, and daily associates, accounted a shallow fellow, a sober,
dry, plain, downright Civillian, an enemy to gallantry, a crosser of the
times, an unconformitant to the custom of great men, and in a word, as an Owl
among birds wondered at; look what an Ass is among a sort of Apes, the same is
he among his equals and fellows. They think that serving man not worthy to
wear a Livery, that cannot face out the matter with plenty and variety of
oaths: He that can soonest swear, and give the first blow, is thought fittest
to do the best service to a Gentleman.

Whereas there are three ways to confirm our speech, scil. Affirmation,
Asseveration, and an Oath; Men commonly make that the first, which the Lord
has appointed the last bound of speech, and resuge for upholding the truth.

I have known (says Musculus, Musculus.
then public Reader of Divinity in the City of Berna in Helvetia) some
Commonwealths so well ordered before these troublesome years, that if any of
the Citizens did offend through lightness of swearing, he should be chastened
by order of the laws made in that behalf. But now, says he, we see that all
laws of holy Discipline be broken amongst us, and all liberty given to
whoredom, adultery, drunkenness, usury, and rash swearing: coupling swearing
with usury, drunkenness, whoredom, the three most common banes of Commonwealths.
And yet men are punished sharply if they abuse the Majesty of Magistrates never
so lightly. Whith things well weighed (says he) we must look for the extreme
wrath of God to be kindled and fall upon our country ere long, which will be so
great, that it will especially plague noble and great personages (such as think
they stand upon a most sure and quiet ground) in that they have forsaken the
yoke of the Lord, in shifting off the anger and displeasure of that man whose
breath is in his nostrils, that they may sall into the wrath and displeasure of
God, by whose breath the whole world is shaken and crushed together.

So far Musculus in his tract of oaths.

As no person almost; so no place is free from Oaths.

Go into the Court, you would think you are come into a school of blasphemy.

Go into the City, you will imagine you are come among their scholars, who
having learned this lecture of impiety, are now repeating it over, that they
may grow more perfect.

Come into the Country, and you shall see the silliest are wise enough to this
evil, and that the rudest in speech can be eloquent in blasphemy: As though
howsoever they are excelled by Courtiers in bravery of apparel, and by
Citizens in abundance of wealth, yet they disdain they should surpass them in
bravery of swearing, and in variety of new fashioned oaths.

Thirdly, no time seems exempt from this hideous sin.

Are men merry? Oaths fly out as the music of their mirth. Are they earnest
in gaming, or in bargaining? Oaths are the period, if not the preface to their
speeches, and thesealers to every bargain; seeking to gain the world, and to
lose their souls. Are they purposed to perpetrate any wickedness? They confirm
their purpose with bloody oaths, as if God were a surety for their sin.

As by much labor the hand is hardened, that it has no sense of labor: so
much swearing causes such a brawny skin of senselessness to overspread the
memory, heart and conscience of the swearer, that he swears oft-times at
unawares; and having sworn, has no remembrance of his oath, much less
repentance for his sin.

Fourthly as there is universality, so also variety of new fashioned oaths.

As men take pride in strange kinds of apparel, so also of new fashioned
oaths. As some try their wits in the invention of newfangled attires; so many
limbs of Satan devise unheardof oaths, that by this variety they may take
away all saciety of swearing, and keep themselves unglutted with the common use
of the same oaths: Sometime swearing, and that commonly by the dreadful name
of God himself, by his life, soul, body, heart, wounds, blood: Sometime by
the Lord Jesus, by Christ, heaven, air, Sun, light, Mass, Rood, our Lady,
Saint Mary, Saint Anne: Sometime by my soul, this silver, cross of the coin,
by these ten bloody bones, hand, bread, drink, faith, troth: Sometime mincing
their oaths, at if God could not espy them, when as men may; as, by Dickins,
Maskins, s'lid, burlady, s'foot, by my fay, by St Tan, yea Mary, by yea and by
nay: Perkins.
A volume will scarce contain the multitude of their oaths, and therefore the
Lord has in store for them a whole volume of his plagues, Zach. 5.2.
the vials whereof being poured down upon them, in the end they shall be
enforced to confess, Psa. 56.11.
Doubtless there is a God that judges the earth. Swearing is now in the ear,
which before was in the blade: the regions being now white, and this sin grown
to be ripe and yellow, what remains, but that we look for the Angel of the
Lord shortly to thrust in his sickle?

Ministers they may take up the complaint of children in the marketplace, Luke
7.32. We have piped unto you, and ye have not daunced; we have mourned unto
you, and ye have not wept: the joyful promises have been proposed, whereby you
might be allured; the doleful threatenings have been delivered, whereby you
might be deterred from this sin, and yet all in vain.

And what then? Is the whole body of this Land full of sores and corruptions,
and shall we cease to use more and sharper corrasives to cure? Do men lie,
continue and delight in sleeping in this sin, and shall not we sound out the
trumpet of Gods threatenings the more loudly? shall we with the false Prophets,
speak pleasing things, sowing pillows under men's arm-holes, saying, Swearing is
no sin; or but a small one? no surely, for this is neither good for us, nor for
them; not for us, says St Paul, There is a woe to us, if we preach not the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16
1 Cor. 6.16. not for them, says the Lord, their hurt is not cured by sweet
words, Jer. 6.14. when the Prophets shall cry Peace, Peace, Jer. 6.14.
and there shall be no peace at all.

The calmest sunshine does less purify the air then the terriblest thunder
and lightening: the pleasantest potion does seldom purge so kindly, as the
bitterst pill: so words that to the ear are the sweetest, are not always to
the heart the wholsomest. Therefore every one of us that are Chirurgions of
souls, have need to cut and lance this festred sore of swearing: though
patients are impatient, and smart at the quick; and we our selves endure with
Moses murmuring, with Micaiah smiting, with Jeremy imprisoning, with John
Baptist beheading, even for the striking at the root of this sin, of many other
most heinous, of all other most common, as a general Leprosy, over-spreading
the whole body of this Nation from the Cedar to the Shrub, from the highest to
the lowest, from the richest to the poorest, from the mightiest to the meanest.

If the Cards run against them, they will be avenged, their tongues shall run
as fast against God: if they are crossed in drinking of healths, in dice, in
hawking, in hunting, or any other pleasures that are dearest to them, they will
curse God in his honor, which is dearest to him. What mind can but grieve to
conceive it? What heart but bleed to think upon it? What eye but weep to see
it? What ear but tingle to hear it?

But let them continue to set their tongues against heaven, heaven will send
down thunderbolts against them; if they often dash against Christ, and will
take no warning, at length Christ will fall upon them, Mat. 21.44
and grind them to powder.

If they escape the hands of men, the Lord surely will not hold them guiltless
that take his Name in vain. And, Hebr. 10.
it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of God.

Though the laws of men have but meanly provided against this transgression,
and do slowly punish it, men being scarce so much offended when Gods name is
abused, as when their own credit is questioned; Yet when the Lion has roared,
who will not fear? Amos 3.8. When the Lord has threatened certain vengeance,
who will not be terrified from this unpleasing, unprofitable sin; seeing though
other sinners grow bold on Gods patience, and their heart is fully set in them
to do evil, because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
Eccles. 8.11. yet their judgment sleeps not that offend in this kind, but
vengeance is against them on the way? The zeal of the Lord will hasten, and
bring this thing to pass.

1. That honor thereby may be given to God. 2. That the mouth of all
wickedness may be stopped. 3. That others might fear because of the
judgment; because by their cursed and hellish oaths they have been the
occasions of, 1. Great grief to the godly. 2. Great scandal to the weak. 3.
Great hardening to the wicked.

Therefore does he so severely threaten those that in this kind so
sacrilegiously rob him of his glory. Which he will perform though the wicked
dream otherwise: 1. Surely: For the mouth of the Lord has spoken it in thunder
and lightning, Exodus 19.16. 2. Swiftly: For he will be a swift witness against
all such impiety, Mal. 3.5. 3. Severely: for he will not spare in the day of
vengeance.


God will make his plagues wonderful against this sin: his curse shall
overtake the Swearer and Blasphemer in their souls, and in their bodies, in
their persons and posterity, Zach. 5.3.4.
in their goods, and in their houses; when he begins with them in vengeance, he
will not spare; when he begins he will also make an end, and he will do a
thing unto them, at which both the ears of them that hear, shall also tingle,
1 Samuel 3.11. as is verified, 1 Samuel 3.11.
1. In many examples contained in humane writings. 2. In many examples recorded
in the word. 3. In many examples obvious in the world.


But what has the swearer nothing to say for himself, why sentence of
condemnation should not pass against him? Let him speak for himself whether
guilty or not guilty.

The particulars of which justification, denial, or excuse, let us in the next
use hear, and see, whether laid in the balance of the Sanctuary, they prove
weighty enough to weigh down the force and solidity of this sentence
definitive, The Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

The second use then is to remove the light and slight objections all edged for
this sin; Use 2.
which if we seriously view, try, and weigh in the balance of Gods Sanctuary,
we shall find sandy and not solid, bark without body, bone without marrow,
shells without kernels, shadows without substance.

I swear that which is true. Object. 1. Sol. See Combis Compendium.


Swearing either by the body of God, which tempts to blasphemy; or by the
wounds of Christ, to irreverence; are mortal sins, though it be true which is
sworn.

We are commanded not only not to take up Gods name falsely, but not vainly,
idly, when the matter is not worth proving by oath. And he that usually
swears vainly, shall now and then swear falsely.

I forbear great oaths, Obj.
as by the name of God, or by the blood or wounds of Christ, I swear but
little oaths; by this light, by this bread, by mackins, by my troth, our Lady,
etc.

As the beggar is always peecing and mending his garments there where is the
greatest breach; Sol. 1.
so should the swearer, I acknowledge, be careful to cure first the most
dangerous oaths, to stop first the widest holes, to cast out first the greatest
Devils, to banish first the most pestilent enemies, to leave first the most
hurtful, fearful, and abominable oaths: yet as he that swears by the
Temple, swears by him that dwells therein: Matthew. 23.20.
So he that swears by the creatures, swears by him that created them, and
yet will not be heard to swear by the name of God, or Christ; as if a child
abhorring any bitter potion, or poison, should notwithstanding take the same
under a little sugar, or the pap of an apple.

He that uses to pilser small things, 2.
by Gods judgment will be brought to steal greater things: so he that
accustometh to utter small, will by Gods just judgment, be brought to broach
great, horrid, hellish oaths, that justly may cause the break-neck of his
soul.

Again, 3.
thy oaths are but little sins, thou say; then they are sins thou grantest,
and the wages of sin, Romans 6. ult
even of every sin, is no less then death, internal, external, eternal. If
thou allowest thy self in any one known sin, thou have no assurance of any
saving grace at all. Thou have not any good grace, if thou remainest obstinate
in any one of the least sins.

He that abuses Gods Saints, has not humility; he that refuses the manifest
truth of Gods revealed will, has not knowledge, as the blessing of God. He
has not zeal or desire of Gods glory, that blasphemeth Gods name, nor
Religion, that refraineth not his tongue, James 1.26. and 2.10.

A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump of pure dough; a little fire kindles
a great flame; a little Colloquintida spoileth a whole pot of pottage; little
wedges make way for great; small thieves enter to open doors for great; a
little leak unstopped, drowneth the whole Ship and passengers therein.

He that commonly swears small oaths, seldom makes conscience of greater
oaths.

I have been accustomed so long to swear, Object. 3.
that I cannot easily leave it.

Then every sin might be excused. Sol.


Any sin, the more common and continual it is, the more liable it is to
punishment. Guals.


Thou have been accustomed to it, its all one, as if a thief should desire to
be excused, because he has been accustomed to steal, and he cannot alter his
custom herein. Would an earthly Judge excuse such a shameless malefactor?

If thou can not alter thy custom by repentance, God can, and will alter it
by punishment.

Prescription is no plea against the King: much less can long customs plead
for vain swearing with the Lord, to whom a thousand years are but as yesterday.
Yea,

Time which pleads voluntarily for continuance of things lawful, will take no
fee to plead for an evil use. Has this custom lasted long? it is more then
time it were abrogated; age is an aggravation to sin. If it be once
gray headed, it deserves sharper opposition, and speedier expulsion. To say, I
will swear, because I have done so, is perilous and impious presumption;
Continuance can no more make swearing lawful, then the author of sin, no devil.

If thou have once sinned, it is too much; if often, woe be to thee, if the
iteration of thy offense cause boldness, and not rather sorrow, more
detestation; woe be to thee and thy sin, if thou be not the better because thou
have sinned.

I shall not be believed unless I swear; Object. 4.
therefore it is for the maintenance of my credit.

Will thou go to hell, and deprive thy self of heaven, Sol. 1.
to please men upon earth? Better undergo man's unjust supposition, then Gods
just damnation. Will thou get or keep thy credit with man by swearing, and lose
it with God by so offending? Whether is it better, with men for the present to
be believed, or with God for ever to be abhorred? It is much creditable with
men to abide a little denial, that by obedience to Gods commandment we may of
him for ever be believed.

Thou shall not be believed?

Because there is in thy tongue no trust, 2.
in thy talk no truth, thy words are but wind, and thy promises without
performance, therefore thou swearest, and art not believed.

If thou will be believed without an oath, observe the Apostles practice;
Endeavor to keep a good conscience toward God and man, Act. 24.16. Act. 24.16.


If we walk unblameable in our lives; if we so highly value truth, that we
sell it at no rate; if we keep touch, and observe promises, though to our
hinderance; our word, even in our weightiest bufinesse will be credited, and
need no superior confirmation: for it is not the oath which gives credit to
the man, but the man to the oath.

Use but a while to speak the truth without an oath, and thou shall find no
lack of thy oaths, for thy bare word shall be taken by it self; otherwise thou
art like an ill credited borrower, Licentia jurandi facit, ut jusjurandum
quoque vilescat, and fides rara sit: Gualt. Object. 5.
that ridest up and down the country with sureties, because thy own bond will
not be taken.

And surely such banckrupt security, rather disgraceth then helps thee: oaths
being the common sureties of the basest people, even the scum of highwayes,
Alehouses and Taverns.

I presently knock my breast and say, God forgive me to swear.

Oh blindness, worthy to be pityed, were it not wilfully affected!

Is this the mends thou make, hypocritically to smite thy breast for piercing
thy Savior? Is this a Prayer acceptable to God, or like to return with fruit
into thybosome, when thou ask forgiveness with a purpose still to offend?

Thou desire this pardon as a privilege, by verte whereof thou may
securely go on in thy sin. Is this repentance, to smite the breast, when in the
mean while the heart is not smitten? Then and there is true contrition for sin,
when and where there is steadfast resolution against, and speedy reformation
from the same.

I mean no mischief, Object. 6.
I think no harm in my ordinary swearing, and therefore I hope God will pardon me
for it.

There was sometimes a controversy betwixt Scotland and Ireland for a certain
Isle between them both, Sol. 1.
after much ado, they put the matter to the dermination of a wise Frenchman,
whose judgment was, that they should put a Snake into it, and if it lived, the
ground belonged to Scotland; if it died, it belonged to Ireland: I apply it
thus; If poisoned and venomous oaths do live in our heart, and crawle out of
our mouths, its a sign our heart, our body and soul appertain to that country
that these hellish oaths appertain unto.

Thou think no hurt thou say, yet thou do hurt in grieving Gods Spirit,
offending the godly, hardening the wicked, and kindling Gods wrath. Thou
denyest God, and servest Satan, and yet is no man hurt?

Thou undoest thy self, soul and body, house and posterity; and yet is no man
hurt?

How possibly can he be guiltless that is cause of his own condemnation?

Thy meaning is good thou say. Out of the abundance of the heart the mounth
speaks: Mat. 12.34
If thy words be profane, thy heart is polluted: if thy heart were a good
Treasury, thou would bring out of it good things, and not vent nothing but
dross and filth. If thy heart were a good tree, it would never bring forth
evil fruit. If it were a pure fountain, it would never bring forth such bitter
streams. If thou did bless God in thy heart, thou would never blaspheme him
in thy tongue, James 3.10.

When God comes to judge the world, he will pass the sentence not according
to our secret thoughts, but according to our words and works. By thy words thou
shall be justified, Mat. 12.37
and by thy words condemned, Mat. 12.37.

That excuse which would seem frivolous to a mortal man, will never go current
with the just Judge of heaven and earth. Now what Prince hearing himself abused
to his face by the reproachful words of his base subjects, would admit of such
an excuse, Whatsoever he spoke with his mouth, yet he thought no ill in his
heart? And will not God, think we, be as jealous of his glory, which is most
dear to him, as an earthly King? does not he say, He will not hold them
guiltless that takes his name in vain?

I do but as the most do, Object. 7.
its the common custom of all, some few excepted, who are more precise then
wise, and but too scrupulous about every trifle.

By this thou may excuse any sin, Sol.
seeing nothing is more common then to lie in sin: But God has forbidden to
follow a multitude in that which is evil, or to fashion our selves like to
this world, Exodus 23.2.
if at least we be spiritual inhabitants of the eternal heavenly Jerusalem.
Romans 10.2.


Common use in any sin does not extenuate, but aggravate Gods wrath, and
increase man's punishment: Broad is the way that leads to destruction; narrow
is the way that leads to life, and Christians may yet walk in it without
crowding, the company is so small.

After the doings of the land of Egypt, or after the doings of the land of
Canaan, ye shall not do. Be ye not as your forefathers, Zach. 1.4.

A custom without truth, says Cyprian, is an old error; therefore leaving
the error, let us follow the truth.

If Christ alone is to be heard, Mat. 16. we ought not to mark what any man
before us thought best to be done, but what Christ did first, who is before all
men.

When the truth, is once come to light, says St. Augustine, Let the custom
give place to the truth: for Peter also, who did circumcise, gave place to
Paul, preaching the truth.

Seeing then Christ is the truth, we ought rather to follow Christ, then the
custom and examples of others.

If thou laiest against me the custom of others, says St. Gregory, I lay
against thee Christ, who is the way, the truth, and the life, Joh. 14.

I confess it to be a sin, Object. 8.
only I am moved now and then thereto through anger, when I am thus and thus
crossed, offended, wronged, which would make a very Saint to swear?

Thou might better say a mad man, Sol.
or a fool to swear; for they, if they be stricken, stike their next fellows;
thou for wrongs received from men, do revenge thy self upon God: for the
least error in the Dice, or rub of the Bowl, shall God the Father, or Christ
the Son endure a stab; as if they were the cause of any disorder, disturbance,
wrong, real or imaginary?

If I do evil, thou say, the fault is theirs that do provoke me, I am but
the Instrument: their fault is the greater that have made me faulty. True, they
are in fault for provoking thee, yet in matters of offense, the accessory is
liable to offense and punishment as well as the principal. The Serpent was but
the Instrument, abused by Satan to deceive man, yet in the punishment the
Serpent has his doom as well as the devil.

If wicked men cross thy humor, do not thou in revenge set up the flag of
defiance against heaven; Suffer rather, oh suffer the fire of thy surious
passion to be quenched by the water of this godly meditation, saying thus with
thy self; Am I greater then Philip that mighty Macedonian? yet he was wronged
by the rongue of a Peasant, and would not take notice of it. Am I greater then
Augustus, who had the taxing of the whole world? yet he was content to winck at
the tongue that taxed him. Why should I be incensed with a few evil or idle
words? Many have pardoned their enemies, shall I not forgive these that may be
my friends?

If he be a youth, or an old man that has thus crossed or provoked me, his
age may excuse him; if a woman, her sex; if a stranger, his liberty; if a
familiar, his acquaintance may seem to privilege him. Has he thus once
offended? it may be he has often pleased: Has he thus often offended? we may
the more better endure that to which we have been long inured. Is he a friend?
he did that the would not; is he an enemy? he has done no more then we
might well expect. If he be wise, let me yield to him; if a fool, let me
pardon him; the very best are not without blemishes, none so faultless but may
fail; let me not do this great evil against my God, for a little imaginary
evil offered me by man.

If man have wronged me once, let me not wrong my self again; If man have
wronged me in my name, let me not wrong my self more by avenging on God, in
wronging him in his name, which is so precious, great and fearful: so should I
add sin to sin, my sin to the sin of mine adversary; so should I derogate from
Gods prerogative; Vengeance is mine, and I will repay; so should I disobey Gods
Precepts, Bless those that curse, pray for those that persecute, overcome evil
with goodness, sinfulness with suffering; so should I hasten mine own
destruction, in pulling down vialls of wrath upon mine own head, in stead of
lastening mine enemies salvation, by heaping coals of fire upon his head; so
shall I not only retain man to be mine enemy, who could do nothing without Gods
special permission, but purchase God also mine adversary, who is a consuming
fire, able to destroy body and foul, and cast both into destraction.

It Is a grace to my speech, Object. 9.
it seems more eloquent, and my self the greater gallant.

It is Pharasaicall to desire the praise of men more then the praise of God.
Sol.


That credit is dear bought that is gained in pawning thy soul unto the
Devil: It is sorry reputation that is gained by transgression.

Woe be to that eloquence which robs God of his glory and pre-eminence, it is
loathsome in his eyes, harsh in his cares, stinking in his nostrills.

It is a grace to thy speech to disgrace him that gave it? Thou manifestest thy
self to be no gallant, but a servant and slave to Satan the Prince of
darkness. By swearing thou set these things as Lords above thee, which God
has appointed as servants to thee, as the Sun, light, fire, bread, drink, etc.
For men swear by him that is greater then themselves, Heb. 6.16. Therefore
swearing by the creatures, thou inthrallest thy self to thy very servants.

Faith and troth likewise are the chiefest jewels of a Christian; thou
therefore swearing by these, do not hereby gain credit, but proclaimest thy
self a very bankrupt in grace, in laying thy best Jewel to pawn for every
trifle.

I find swearing enjoined by God himself as a part of his worship: [Thou shall
fear the Lord thy God, Obj. 10. Deuteronomy. 6.13. Psa. 63. ult.
and serve him, and swear by his Name: Every one that swears by him shall
glory.]

Hereby thou show thy self a gross hypocrit, Sol.
covering thy foul sin under the fair vizard of Scripture, whereas by
swearing in the Scripture mentioned in the Psalm, is meant the whole worship of
God; Thou swearing ordinarily do now and then swear falsely: Now it is there
added, That mouth that speaks lies shall be stopped, if not by man, yet
surely by God himself.

As for that in Deuteronomy. 6.13. the Text is no commandment to swear; for then they
that swear most, should be most holy and religious men (as many of the Jews
thought and taught by occasion of that place, as Willet on Exodus notes) but
loyuitur expermissione, by way of permission, that when one is to swear, Ex
Tostato
he may and must swear by the name of God only. The reason of which
permission Chrysostom unfoldeth thus:

When evil things, says he, began to increase in the world, when there was a
confusion in every place, when all faith was lost, and unfaithfulness reigned,
then began the Infidels (seeing one would not trust or believe another) in
matters of controversy to call upon their Gods for witnesses, protesting they
spoke the truth, seeing they called their Gods to witness in the matter (whom
to name they thought it not lawful, but in grave and weighty matters) and by
this means obtained they faith one of another.

Now for a smuch as God had selected the Israelites from the Gentiles, to be
his peculiar people, and would by no means that in any point they should follow
the wickedness of the Gentiles, he gave a commandment unto them, that in all
matters of controversy, and in such affairs as should make for his glory, they
should not call any of those false gods whom the Ethnicks worshipped, unto
witness, as to swear by their names: But to call him to witness, and to
swear by his name, and so every one to believe another for the reverence and
honor that they owe to his most great, fearful, holy, blessed, glorious name.

I swear by good things, Obj. 11.
as by God the creator of all, by Christ the Redeemer of Man: our Lady the
mother of the Messiah, Sun, the light of the world, Fire, Gods Angel, etc.

This makes thy sin the greater; Sol.
for the goodness of the thing does aggravate the offense in the abuse
thereof. As the sweetest wine proves the sowrest vinegar, being once corrupted.

I see others do worse, that are yet so precise, Obj. 12.
that they will not swear an oath.

Thou should not be so much glad that others are bad, Sol.
as grieved and sorrow that thy self art no better.

If others go to hell one way, it may not excuse thee to go to hell another
way: they must answer for their sin, and thou for thine. Ezech. 18.
That soul that sins, shall die.

It should be a small encouragement unto thee to leap into the fire or water,
because thou see another burnt or drowned before thy face. Their and thy sin
must be forsaken, before their or thy soul can be saved.

Thus have you heard and seen the many several objections and excuses for the
maintaining or extenuating of rash and ordinary swearing, and the same also
taken away, that the ship of thy soul may not be splitted by falling upon any
of the former rocks.

Now to the end thou may wholly be won, and prevailed withal to the
loathing in thy heart, and the leaving in thy lips, this no more common then
dangerous and damnable vice of swearing; suffer, oh suffer, these ensuing
arguments and motives not only to swim in the shallowness of thy ears, but
also to dive into the depth and bottom of thy heart; that they may not be as
water spilt upon the ground, or as stones cast against the wind; but may effect
that to which they are sent, preached and printed, to wit, the informing of thy
judgment, and the recovering and pulling thy soul out of the fire of this
fearful threatening, The Lord will not (by any man, money, means, be persuaded
to) hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain; assuring thy self that
if thou will not suffer them to further thy conversion to thy comfort, they
will (whether thou will or no) hasten the greater measure, and heavier loads of
the vials of Gods wrath for thy final subversion to thy remediless torment; A
quo libera nos, Domine.

To persuade by motives to hate and eschew this sin of swearing. Use 3.


1. Motive
The Devil is the author of it: Whatsoever is more then yea and nay, comes
of evil, that is, Mat. 5.37.
of the Devil. Now he is our friend or foe, did any ever receive any good from
him the enemy of mankind?

We agree with the Pharisees and are hypocrites: Mot. 2.
The Pharisees forbid not swearing by smaller oaths, Matthew. 5.33.

Again, If any man among you seem to be religious, (as many seem which are not)
and refraineth not his tongue (as I am sure no vain swearer does) he deceives
his own heart, Jam. 1.2.
and his religion is in vain. Now shall we hate the names of Pharisees and
hypocrites in our profession, and practice their deeds in conversation? Absit.

3. It is an argument of a profane person. Mot. 3. Eccles. 9.2.
As is the good, so is the sinner, and he that swears, as he that fears an
oath.

It is a great indignity offered to Gods Majesty, Mot. 4.
to call him to witness for every triffing matter: no man will offer the same
to his familiar friend, less to his Landlord, least of all to his Prince,
Exodus 18.22.
presuming to appeal to him in every slight business, which any under-officer
may decide.

Nay, herein we deal worse with God, then with a good suit of apparel, which
we will not wear every day, but precious garments we will reserve to be used
on high days; Theodoret.
much more should Gods great and precious name be reserved to be used in great
and special matters.

Tiberius brought up this custom of speaking to the Prince by writing, to the
end that nothing might escape the mouth that were not well considered of before
in the mind.

It was accounted and punished as sacrilege for any man to anoint himself
with the holy oil appointed for the Tabernacle: And can they hope to escape
scot-free that sacrilegiously meddle with the sacred name of God?

The Jews had the name of God in such reverence, Willet on Exodus Buxtorf. Heb.
Lex. verb. Jehovah.
that they held it lawful for the high Priest only to pronounce the same, and
that only in the Temple, and then only when he blessed the people.

Yea, among them the name of God was so reverenced, that being written in
plates, it was lawful for none to carry it but the high Priest: But now as a
thing most common, Chrysest.
we every where carry about the name of God.

It was an use among the heathen to keep secret such names as they would have
in reverence. There was a hidden and secret name of the City of Rome, which is
not now known, which they say by the decree of the gods is kept secret, and one
Marenus Soracius for naming the same but once, was adjudged to death.

The name Demogorgon, which the Gentiles held to be the first God, was not
uttered; they thought when he was named, the earth would tremble. And Lucan
writes how Erito the Sorceresse would thus adjure the Furies, that if they
would not consent, she would name Demogorgon.

Thus the name of the true God among the Jews, the names of false Gods among
the Gentiles, were highly reverenced: And if the Gentiles were thus curious in
not profaning the names of their Idols, it teaches that it is a shame among
Christians irreverently to name and swear by the name of the great God of
heaven and earth.

Mercurius Trismegistus was in such respect among the Egyptians, that in
reverence of him it was not lawful to pronounce his name commonly or rashly.

Augustus the Emperor gave charge to the Praetors of Rome, Sueton. in Vit.
that they would not suffer his name (obsole fieri) to be worn threed-bare.

Haro, Duke of Normandy, would have his name so terrible, that at the very
hearing of it, men should crouch.

Now if the names of sinful men have been had in such respect and reverence,
what reverence may we think due to the name of God, which is, as one says, a
name to be feared for power, admired for wisdom, praised for goodness: For
this is a great God, and therefore to be feared; a wise God, and therefore
wonderful; a good God, and therefore praiseworthy.

It was death among the Egyptians, in case that any person swore by the health
of Pharaoh; and how can he be reputed guiltless that swears by the heart,
life, blood of God?

It was a forsaking of the true God to swear by any other. Mot. 5.
How shall I pardon thee for this? (arguing not any impossibility in God to
remit, but a difficulty in man to repent for this sin) thy children have
forsaken me, Jerem. 5.7.
and sworn by them that are no Gods. Now, is the Rood, Mass, our Lady, Faith
and Troth, a God? Shall we go under the name of Protestants, and yet by such
swearing proclaim our selves Papists? Shall we wear King James his livery on
our backs, and the Popes badge upon our bosoms?

He can be no true subject to the King on earth, that is a Traitor to the King
of heaven.

They that swear by the sin of Samaria, Amos 8.14
(by the sin of Rome and Spain) they shall fall and never rise again: A
fearful doom against swearing by the Mass, Rood, etc. For, Qui jurat, aut
veneratur aut diligit eum, per quem jurat, Aquinas.
says Thomas Aquinas, either we worship, or love that by which we swear.

I will cut off the remnant of those that swear by the Lord, and that swear by
Malcham; and them that are turned back from the Lord: Intimating, that they
that swear by any other but by God only, do more offend then they that swear
by God; and that swearing by another, they do forsake the Lord, and make
Mass, Lady, Light, Fire, Gods instead of him.

It is to play the Traitors not only against Christ, Mot. 6.
but also the Kingdom and Nation wherein we live, when as by swearing, or by
connivence against it, we pull down Gods judgments upon the same. Hos. 4.2.
Jer. 23.10.
By swearing men break forth, therefore shall the land mourn.

It is in vain to make laws for the punishing of foraine foes, when in the
mean time we hatch, harbor, and leave unpunished these homebred Traitors.
These secretly, though insensibly, are powerful blasts to blow up
Parliament-houses, are sharp swords to pierce the bodies of Prince and people.
Shelomiths son, Levit. 24.11. is said by his blasphemies to pierce through
the name of God: So Rabshakeh, Esaias 37.23.

If it be in the common law treason to counterfeit the Kings seal, Henry 8.
Anno 33.
and to abuse his name to the prejudice of his Laws; then to counterfeit the
privy Seal of the King of Kings, and abuse his name to countenancing of a
lie, is surely treason against the King of heaven, making herein also our own
tongue, either as an Herald to proclaim this treason, or a Doctor to teach it,
or a Proctor to plead for it.

It is an argument, we are bastards, Mot. 7.
and not the true sons of God.

The Author of Destructorium vitiorum tells of an Harlot who had three sons,
Part. 4. cap. 7.
and told her husband that only one of them was his; whereupon at his death he
bequeathed his estate to him who should be found out to be his natural son;
the sons fell at contention, the Judges to decide it, commanded that their
fathers dead body should be set against a tree, and he that could shoot
nearest his heart should be his heir; The two bastards shot, the third refused
it, and was much offended with the other for doing it. By which natural love,
they concluded him the natural son, and gave him the Inheritance. Those
wretches that pierce and wound the name, yea, the heart of God, and tear him
in pieces with oaths, and stab him, as it were, with arrows, that cry with the
Harlot, Divide him, 1 King. 3.26.
divide him, are not sons, but bastards; not Sheep, but Goats; not servants of
God, but slaves of Satan; not heirs of heaven, but firebrarnds of hell.

It is an argument of great ingratitude against the Lord our God: Mot. 8.
who having powered down his multitude of blessings upon thee, thou spuest forth
multitude of blasphemies against him. Hos. 4.7.
As Gods blessings were increased, so thyblasphemies were increased: For great
men, that seem most to partake of Gods blessings, commonly do most abound in
this sin; Therefore will I change their glory into shame, their health into
sickness, liberty into thraldom, plenty into penury, mirth into mourning;
sinning in tongue, into suffering in tongue. The tongues of such mighty men
shall mightily be tormented, and with Dives scorched in that fiery lake of
brimstone, that were in their life set on fire of hell it self, Jam. 3.6.
by their often, eager wilful, and despitefull blaspheming of the glorious name
of God.

The rich man in hell torments, complained most of the torments of his tongue;
he was clothed gorgeously, Luke 16.24.
and fed diliciously, and that every day, but these things are not so much
noted to be recompensed, as his little (All in all) unruly tongue, as if hell
flames were most fiery against that, and that most sure to endure the same.

He equalizeth the Devil, and in some respect exceeds him; Mot. 9.
for the devils believe and tremble at this fearful name of God, but swearers
do not so.

In this respect the swearer offers as great injury to God, as the Devil
himself, because he commits Idolatry against God, and adultery with the soul of
man, and hereby endeavors to make a divorce betwixt God and her maker.

He that forsakes the Lord by swearing by those that are not Gods, commits
adultery and Idolary against the Lord: But the swearer forsakes the Lord,
swearing by those that are not Gods; Rhoods, Mass, Mary, Faith, Troth, etc.
Therefore he commits adultery and Idolatry against the Lord, Jer. 5.7.
Jer. 5.7.

He that turns from the Lord, and worshippeth the host of heaven in stead of
worshipping the Lord, commits adultery and Idolatry: But the swearer
worshippeth the host of heaven, swearing by St. Mary, Peter, Paul, Sun, Light,
Star, Fire: Therefore he forsakes the Lord, and commits adultery and Idolatry
against the Lord. Zeph. 1.5.6.


For in swearing, either Gods holy name is polluted by the fleshly tongue of a
profane, carnal and sensual man; or if some other thing it sets in stead
thereof to swear by, it is spiritual Idolatry.

Now Adultery is known to be spiritual Idolatry, Hos. 1.2. and adultery is
known to make adivorce between God and the soul of man, yea, Hos. 2.2, 3.10.13.
between God and the nations.

Swearing then can be no friend to the soul of man, making such enmity between
her and her maker.

He offers by swearing great wrong to his best friend, as also to himself.
Mot. 10.


To his friend. I prove it thus: Reas. 1.
He that gives cause to the world to believe that his friend will not believe
him in trifles without an oath, Arg. 1.
does greatly wrong his dearest friend: But the swearer that often swears to
his friend in trifles, gives cause to the world to believe that his friend will
not believe him without an oath: Therefore he swearing in trifles, does greatly
wrong his best friend.

We know there is no greater scandal to friendship, then want of trust, yet
by swearing this scandal unhappily lights upon the swearers sworn-brother.

Here it may be the swearer flies in the face of the minor or younger
proposition by a strong denial, Object.
that he swears not, because he distrusts his friends belief, but to procure
grace to his words in the ear of his friend.

A filthy grace, Sol. 1.
and a beastly friend in whom such a grace hopes for entertainment.

Howsoever his friend may take it,

He that needlessly puts his friend to a great deal of pains, Arg. 2.
without any profit procured to himself, does greatly wrong his friend: But the
swearer puts an honest man to a great deal of pains, of grief, and reproof
without any profit procured to himself.

But an honest man is in the middle proposition, and the swearers friend in the
major proposition, which will not be one in the conclusion; if therefore the
swearers friend were an honest man, it might happily save the life of the
Syllogism, and the swearer too.

He greatly wrongs himself,

A lier; 1. Lier.
for if thou may be believed, why do thou swear? and if thou can not be
believed (which thy swearing imports) then thou go for a common liar.

A rotten tree must have a leaning post, and a lying man must be kept up in
credit and belief by swearing; Thou must then leave thy swearing, that thou
may be thought to have left thy lying; For if thou art not an ordinary lier,
thou have no reason to be a common swearer.

A fool he proclaims himself to be: 2. A Fool. Arg. 1.
1. He is a special fool that falls into the company of friends that are met
together for honest society and comfort, and throws stones, cups, or
candlesticks in the midst of the company, he is surely thought to be a mad man
or a fool: But the Swearer is such a one, striking not so much the head as the
heart of a Religious man. And surely it is no point of wisdom to bring vexation
to them, and hatred from them upon himself. 2. He is a fool that speaks before
there is need, Arg. 2.
or more then is needful; but the Swearer does so: therefore he is no wise man.


Swearing is for confirmation of things doubtful, Heb. 6.16. But our ordinary
Swearer is commonly employed about things plain and frivolous, wherein can be
no doubt at all; as often times about what a clock it is, or that he drunk so
many under board, or that he was at such a play, such a Whore-house, etc. Now
what greater foolishness, then for a man to bumbast his speeches continually
with unnecessary, impertinent, superfluous, very sparable words, and for which
a man may chance to be damned? unless thou leavest such words, such oaths, thou
unavoidably proclaimest thy self a fool to the whole world.

It is punished with many other sins; as lying, Mot. 11.
drinking, filthy talking, quarrelling, murder, neglect of Prayer, and many
other religious duties, yea, most commonly insensiblness of all sin. Therefore,
Hos. 4.2. we read that lying and swearing, and many other sins are yoked
together; and indeed swearing and lying for the most part are inmates, they
dwell both under one roof, and walk hand in hand, like the thief and the
receiver, or as the Usurer and the Broker.

It Is to be feared that a common swearer is a liar; he that fears not the
one, fears not the other; he that will dishonor God, will deceive his
neighbor; he that will make no conscience of the first, will make no
conscience of the second Tatble. Mot. 12.


God forbidding it after a special manner, The Lord will not hold him
guiltless, etc. Let your yea be yea, nay, nay, for whatsoever is more comes of
evil, Mat 5.37. But I say unto you, swear not at all, verse. 34. Above all
things swear not, lest ye fall into condemnation, Jam. 5.12.

Thus it is prohibited by God the Father in the Law, Christ the Son in the
Gospel, the Holy Ghost the sanctifier in the Epistle. By the first it was
inacted, by the second ratified, by the third renewed: Swear not at all, lest
swearing beget facility, Mot. 13.
facility coustome, custom perjury.

Because we can name no sinners whom we do not outstrip by swearing; Judas
betrayed Christ for thirty pieces of silver, but swearers without any
inducement of credit, pleasure, profit.

The soldiers sinned grievously in parting the garments of Christ; these
divide his glorious and indivisible person, his manhood from his Godhead, his
soul from his body, and all his members one from another.

Many think it no great offense if they take the name of God in vain, Rabbi
Aben Ezrain Dec.
but surely this sin is more grievous then the breach of any of the
Commandments that follow. The murderer and adulterer cannot sin always,
because they are in fear; but the customable Swearer utters an hundred
oaths, and perceives not when he swears; being reproved he swears he did
not swear.

They sin no less that blaspheme Christ reigning in heaven, Argum.
then they which crucified him walking upon earth.

1. The Jews sinned of ignorance, not knowing Christ to be the promised
Messiah: these of knowledge, after they have confessed Christ the Savior of
mankind. 2. They called upon Pilate to have Christ crucified: these crucify
him themselves. 3. They with cross and nails: these rend him in pieces between
their teeth. 4. They committed this sin but once: these every month in the
year, every week in the month, every day in the week, every hour in the day.
5. They sinned against him in the state of humiliation, being in form of a
servant: these in his exaltation, sitting as Judge of heaven and earth. 6. Many
of them did rend their garments when they heard Gods name blasphemed; which if
we should do in our days, we should seldom go in whole apparel; yea, the
wealth of the land were scarce enough to cloth the people; the rich would want
clothing for their backs more then the poor do now want bread for their
bellies. 7. Many of them were pricked in conscience, and repented at the
hearing of one Sermon: Act 2.37.
these have no feeling or remorse, though enjoyed means of conversion for many
years together.
As therefore the Swearers pass them in sin, so shall they in puuishment: and
as it shall be easier for Tire and Sidon, Sodom and Gomorrah, at the day of
judgment then for the Jews; so shall it be easier for the Jews at that day,
then for blasphemers.

The Sodomites and Gomorrians finned against nature, and therefore were they
punished, consumed with fire and brimstone from heaven: Swearers sin against
the God of nature; and is it to be thought that they shall escape unpunished?
If they that commit the less sin be punished, how can they then escape that
offend in the greatest?

It is much discreditable to Christian profession; Mot. 14.
for a Christians speech should be po^dered with salt, Col. 4.6.
and not with oaths; it should not be unsavory, much less stinking and noisome;
it should minister grace unto the hearers, and not like a contagious Leprosy
infect the weak; or like thorns and swords, vex and grieve the strong.

God has given thee the use of thy tongue, without whose gift and help thou
could not move hand or foot, tongue or finger: Now will thou make this which
should be the trumpet of Gods praise, the trumpet of Satan, to proclaim war
against heaven, God and all goodness? God, heaven, and all good men dissuade
thee from such ingratitude.

It is an argument of want of faith, Mot. 15.
or trust in Christ. For how can we believe that Christ his body was crucified
for us, which we so often and despitefully crucify afresh; or that his blood
should wash away our sins, which by impious swearing we have so often trampled
under our feet as an unholy thing?

It overthrows our affiance in him as our Savior, whom we daily despite, as
though he were our enemy. How can we with assurance hold up our heads at the
Tribunal of Christ, when our conscience shall tell us, we seldom remember him
but to blaspheme him, and have more often named him in our oaths then in our
prayers?

If you do believe in God, why do you so dishonor the glory of his name? If
you do not believe in God why would you have me to believe in you, when you
swear by that God in whom your self do not believe?

It is a forerunner of perjury: Mot. 16.
He that often swears, often forsweareth; because custom of swearing takes
away all reverence of an oath, and so follows forgetfulness, and by
consequence perjury.

Saul being the greatest we read of in the Scripture, made as little account
of perjury, as is exemplified, 1 Samuel 19.6.10.11, 15.

The very occasion of perjury is to be shunned: fear an oath we must, though
we may justly take it; for, put out the fire, there can be no flame; Take away
the sword, there can be no murder, so swear not at all, there can be no
perjury.

Perjury, (says Augustine in Jam. 5.) is a dangerous pit, he that swears is
nigh to it, he that swears not, is far from it.

As Solomon speaks concerning suretiship, Prove. 11.
Prove. 11.5. Suretiship for any is dangerous, suretiship for strangers sharp
and cutting, suretiship for none is safe and sure: so may we say, concerning
swearing; any swearing is dangerous, forswearing damnable, no swearing secure.

As wine is to be used warily, not for that it is evil, but because being used
it procures drunkenness; so the frequent use of an oath is not good, because
it makes way for perjury.

It is altogether unprofitable; Mot. 17.
other sins have their several baits to allure us, some of profit, some of
pleasure, some of honor: This sin of vain swearing is destitute of all, and
being no profit, but loss, even the loss of Gods favor, of a good conscience,
the assurance of salvation, and of our reputation among the faithful: shame
and utter destruction shall attend all those, who either through custom,
wantonness, or maliciousnness fall into this sin, having no reason, in respect
of credit, pleasure, profit, to persuade them thereunto, according to the
Prayer of the Psalmist, Psalm. 25.3.
Let them be confounded that sin without a cause.

Were it not for fear of humane Laws, they would as easily commit adultery,
theft, or any other sin, when the baits of pleasure, profit, or preferment
did provoke it: For he that will not stick to offend God gratis, and for no
benefit, will much more do it when he is hired with pleasure or profit. He
that will sin for nothing, will sin for something.

It is severely threatened in the Word: Mot. 18.
The second and third commandment above all other, have severe threats
subjoyned unto them, to manifest how great the sins of idolatry and swearing
are in Gods ^^ght above all other sins. This Text shows how in a special
manner the Lord sets himslfe against the same.

In the 5. of Matthew, the 5. of James, the 5. of Jeremy, and the 5. of
Zachary, as in a clear glass we may behold the fiery face, and fierce wrath
of God against this custom of vain swearing. The beginning of it is from the
Devil, Mat. 5.37. The end of it is damnation, Jam. 5.12. Jer. 5.7. How shall I
pardon thee for this? Zach. 5.2.3. Though our oaths, which being registered,
Zach. 5.2, 3, 4. expounded.
would fill a volume, by the Swearer and Magistrate, are buried as soon as
broached, yet by God are they registered in a book.

In which place the Prophet describing the punnishment laid up for Swearers,
sers down, 1. The nature of it; it is a Curse; Deuteronomy. 29.19.
and the Swearers being liable to Gods curse, they do enjoy but small benefit
by the Devils blessing. 2. The trueness of it; it is recorded in a book; one
tittle of which truth shall not be left unacaccomplished, but as certainly
performed as if it were already inflicted. 3. The neernesse of it; it is in a
flying book; oaths fly up to heaven, and the Swearers souls with posting
speed have toward hell. 4. The greatness of the punishment; filling a book of
twenty cubits long, and ten cubits broad; this book being as fully fraught with
their. woes, as the world is with their oaths. 5. The universality of it; it
goes over the face of the whole earth: every one (without respect to any one)
that swears, shall be cut off according to it. 6. The invincibility or
irresistibleness of it; it is brought forth, immediately, very often, even by
the Lord of Hosts himself. 7. The perpetuity or durablenesse of it; it takes
possession of the midst of his house, with resolution to abide, as having
commanding authority; and enters not into remote rooms or corners of the
house, as a forrainer, or stranger, quickly to be gone. 8. The severitie of it;
it shall consume it, and every part of it, with the timber and stones thereof,
to signify the greatness of the sin, and grievousnes of the punishment due to
the same, seeing the very house that harbored, the timber that sheltered, the
stones that heard the hideous Swearer, shall also partake of Gods judgments,
because they did not presently take up arms and fly about the ears of the
Swearer: Ribera in Zach. 5.2. Ex Chrysostom. hom. 15.19. Ad pop. Antiochen.
or (as Ribera well observes) the timber and stones shall be consumed, that
the memory of the punishment may not be blotted out, but whosoever passes by
that house, and sees the ruins thereof, may be admonished how greatly God
hates this sin of swearing, and how certainly, suddenly, severely, he does
punish the same.


If thou will not fear this glorious and fearful name, The Lord thy God,
Deuteronomy. 28.58.
(as no vain Swearer does fear it) then the Lord will make thy plagues
wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, even great plagues, and of long
continuance, and sore sicknesses, and of long continuance.

Accustom not thy mouth to swearing, for in it are many falls, neither take up
for a custom the naming of the holy One, for thou shall not be unpunished for
such things. For as a servant that is often punished, cannot be without some
scarre: so he that swears, and names God continually, shall not be
faultlesse. A man that uses much swearing, shall be filled with wickedness,
and the plague shall never go from his house; when he shall offend, his fault
shall he upon him; and if he acknowledge not his sin, he makes a double
offense; and if he swear in vain, he shall not be innocent, but his house
shall be full of plagues. Ecclus. 23.9, 10, 11.

Many are of opinion, (which judge without discretion) that it is evil to do
any thing for fear of punishment, but all for love; and if we abstain from any
evil for fear, we are in a wrong course; But we see here in this Text, and
in lam. 5.12. the Lord is content to use this as a reason good and strong, and
will be beholding to us, if we fear to swear because of his wrath and our
condemnation. Hear what Augustine says, Fac, fac, veltimore poenae, si nondum
potes amore justitiae; leave 'this sin, if not for love of obedience,
(enjoined in the first part) yet for fear of punishment (threatened in the
latter part of this precept.)

Love of obedience indeed does allure the best, but fear of punishment does
compel the most.

We know that fire will burn, and because we know it, by no means almost can
be brought to put our finger in the fire; and doubtless, if we were persuaded
that finne would burn as a fire, we would not so easily act it with our hands,
utter it with our tongues, or hatch it in our hearts.

The discourse between Esops Fox and Goat will inform us, that it is easy to
fall into sin, but hard to come out; The Fox persuaded and prevailed with the
Goat to go down with him into a pit to drink; having done, the Fox by the help
and height of the Goats back, got out again: The Goat requiring help to come
up, the Fox replied, If thou had as much wit in thy head, as thou have hair
on thy beard, thou would have looked not only how to go in, but also
beforehand how to come out.

Let the dungeon of darkness cause us to walk and talk as the children of
light.

The great account to be made by swearers at the day of judgment. Mot. 19.


Although he seem to live, yet is he dead already, having received his deadly
wound as soon as he has uttered a sinful oath. As he that takes an halter
before he goes out of the City, and comes unto the place of execution,
having the Hangman following him, is dead so soon as he goes out of the place
of judgment: So likewise the Sweaeer, the oath is no sooner gone out of his
mouth, but he is come to the place of judgment, he is condemned
straight-wayes unto eternal condemnation, wearing the halter ready to be
hanged.

Though he be freed from Gods plagues, as the thief is till he comes to the
gallows, yet he may be as sure to endure them, as if already they were
inflicted. And the longer their punishment is deferred, the sorer will it be
when they come to be judged.

Swearers think, seeing they take no notice of God, that God will take no
notice of them. But I say unto you, that every idle word they shall speak,
Matthew. 12.36.
they shall give account thereof at the day of Judgment. If of every idle
word, then much more of every idle, horrid, abominable oath.

As they have dishonored Gods name on earth, so will he glorify it again in
the fearful punishment of swearers at the day of judgment.

But if the punishment, say they, be forborne so long, we do not so greatly
care, therefore consider lastly,

The present punishment of Swearers even in this life: God taking them in the
manner, Mot. 20.
as it were, in the very act of their sin, which might be examples to other
offenders, and an entrance and a full assurance of the eternity of the
punishments hereafter to be endured.

Charilaus the Ethnic or Pagan, being asked, why the Images of the the Gods in
Lacedemonia were armed: To the end, says he, that men might fear to
blaspheme the gods, knowing that they are armed to take vengeance.

Swearing has been punished by men; by God. By men, heathen and Christians.

It was punished of the Romans with throwing down from the rock Tarpeius:
Therefore when they did swear, they held a stone in their hand and protested;
If I lie or swear ought but truth, cast me down from the hill violently, as I
fling this stone from me.

Of he Egyptians with loss of head, of the Grecians with loss of ears, of the
Scythians with loss of goods, of the Turks with no admission of government, of
Maximilian the Emperor with forfeiture of money, of Justinian the Emperor
with putting to death, of Lewis King of France with searing the lips, of Henry
the first King of England, with a payment to the poor for every oath vainly
uttered, who caused within his Palace a Duke to pay 40. shillings, a Lord 20.
shillings, a Knight or Gentleman ten shillings, a yeoman three shillings four
pence, a Page or Servant to be scourged. A good Law to banish oaths out of a
Land, Court, City, Country, lest oaths banish men out of all.

Josephus counsels, that the Blasphemer should be stoned, and then hanged up
one whole day, afterward being taken down he should be thrown into a pit,
without any solemn burial.

And our late King James, the first of that name (and for ever to be eternized)
for learning and liberality) confirmed the Parliament Act against this sin,
though under the mulct of a small purse penalty, yet questionless with great
effect, if the same were as rightly executed as it was religiously enacted;
especially if Ministers would more frequently and fervently by their
exhortations labor to inflame the Magistrates zeal unto a punctual imposing
the said penalty upon the parties delinquent.

Thus by men has swearing been punished, so also by God has it been punished.
And this our little Island has not been barren of examples in this kind.

Fox in his Acts and Monuments makes mention of one John Peter, that being an
horrible swearer and blasphemer, usually was wont to say, If it be not true, I
pray God I may rot ere I die: which though it was not an oath, yet was it
taking Gods name in vain, and so directly comes within compass of this Text.
Thus, I say, commonly he took Gods name in vain, and yet not in vain, his
wish was not frustrate; for he rotted away indeed, and so died in misery. A
fearful caution to such that by wishing pull down Gods judgments, which by
wishing they cannot remove again.

In the time of King Edward the 6th. a young Gentleman of Cornwall, who in the
company of other Gentlemen, began to use ribald talk; being reproved for it,
he swears more, and rages worse and worse; unto whom one of the company
answered with gentle words, he should one day give an account for that: the
yonker taking snuff thereat, Why, said he, take thou thought for me? take
thought for thy winding sheet. Well, quoth the other, amend, for death gives
no warning; as soon comes a Lambs skin to the Market as an old Sheeps. Gods
wounds (said he) care not thou for me; still raging on this manner, worse and
worse, till at last, passing on their journey, they came riding over a Bridge,
(transporting over an arm of the Sea) upon which this Gentleman-swearer
spurred his horse in such sort, that he sprang clean over with the man on his
back, who as he was going, cried, Horse and man, and all to the Devil.

This terrible History Bishop Ridley preached at Paul's Cross, and one Haines a
Minister in Cornwall, the reprehender of this Swearer, was the reporter of it
to Mr. Fox, who records it in his Acts and Monuments, whence others have
extracted it.

Perkins in the government of the tongue tells of a serving-man in Lincolnshire,
who for every trifle had an use to swear no less oath, then Gods precious
blood; He would not be warned by his friends to leave it; at last he was
visited with grievous sickness, in the time whereof he would not be persuaded
to repent thereof, but hearing the Bell to toll, he did very hardly, in the
anguish of death, Stubs Anatomy.
start up in his bed, and swore by his former oath, That Bell tolled for him,
or, (as others relate it) Gods wounds he shall not have me yet; whereupon the
blood abundantly from all the joints of his body (as it were in streams) did
issue out most fearfully, from mouth, nose, wrests, knees, heels and toes, with
all other joints, not one left free, and so dyed.

Oh consider these fearful examples, ye Gentlemen, serving men, and all men
that heretofore have, and still do, offend in this kind; consider them, I say,
and learn by them to forsake your sinful swearing, lest God (that will not
hold you guiltless) suddenly and severely tear you in pieces, and there be
none to deliver you. Psa. 50.22.


Let these be examples to you, lest you be examples to others.

Thus you have heard how swearing has been punished here in this life, and it
shall be punished also in the life to come. There is no middle between these
two extremes; they that will not amend their swearing by persuasion, God will
end it and them by destruction: their judgment was here threatened in thunder
and lightening, and will be inflicted there with fire and brimstone.

If Railers and Revilers of men shall be excluded heaven, 1 Cor. 6.10. then
much more swearers and blasphemers of God. The Devil that set them on work,
will hereafter pay them their wages; howling and cursing shall be their chief
ease in hell, to whom blasphemy was a special recteation on earth: Gall and
Wormwood shall be their meat and drink; as swearers like these dishes, so let
them feed on, wallowing in their sordid sin, which will be seconded with sowrer
sauce.

He that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: and he only
that sows to the spirit, (as no common swearer does) shall of the spirit reap
life everlasting. Gal. 6.8.


As their tongues while they lived were set on fire of hell it self, so being
dead, they shall be for ever tormented in that flame that first inflamed them,
James 3.6. Jude 23.
the least finger of them (whose helping hands they refused to pull them as
brands out of the fire of this their sin) shall not be procured for one time to
be dipped in water to cool their tormented tongue, Luke 16.14.
for the least intermission of time from being scorched in this fire which ever
burns, and never will be consumed.

Thus with many Motives we may be dissuaded (if we be reclaimable) from this
horrid, hideous, heaven-daring sin of swearing; considering that, 1. It
defiles Gods Name, which we must honor. 2. It diminishes Gods reverence
which we must increase. 3. It obscureth Gods glory, which above all things we
must advance. 4. It breaks faith and credit with men, which we must maintain.
5. It increases infidelity, and makes way to perjury, which we must abhor. 6.
It is wholly unprofitable, and never did good unto any, which we must do unto
all. 7. It is the work of the Devil, which Christ came to destroy. 8. It
deprives of salvation, which in our whole life we should study to attain. 9. It
discrediteth our profession, which we should sdorn. 10. It increases Satan's
kingdom, which we should extenuate. 11. It makes us accord with the Pharisees
and Hypocrites, whose deeds we say we allow not of. 12. It proclaims us
propha^^ which we are loath to be called. 13. It Is a (...) of the true God, whom
we have vo^^ (...) Baptism constantly to serve. 14. It arg^^^ (...) traitors
and bastards, which we see^ (...) count the greatest danger and disgrace. 15.
It shows our ingratitude to God for the great gift and blessing of the tongue,
with which we should labor most to publish our thanks and Gods praise. 16. It
equalizeth the Swea^^^ with, and exceeds the (...) of the Jews, yea, of the
Devil himself, which we do seem to hate and defy. 17. It Is an offering of
great wrong to our best friends, and to our selves, all whose welfare we say
we labor daily to provide. 18. It proclaims us liars and fools to all wise men
in the world, which we shun they should see to bring us to shame. 19. It Is
punished with many other sins, the least whereof deserves death. 20. It Is
forbidden, and threatened in a special manner, that we might chiefly avoid it.
21. It Is punished severely both here and hereafter, the least part of which
punishment will be more then we can endure. With all which Motives, he that will
not be dissuaded from this unpleasing, unprofitable, dangerous, damnable sin of
swearing, to him a thousand arguments more will be insufficient.


And so much be spoken concerning the third Use containing the twenty several
Motives to dissuade from ^^earing.

The fourth Use containing the means to be used for the avoiding of this (...)
follows to be briefly prosecuted.

For Direction: Use 4.
(...) that means to use, whereby this poison may be expelled, this traitor
beheaded, this disease cured, and thereby this commandment obeyed.

1. Means 1
Pray often against this vice: for, Eccl. 9.2. he is noted to fear an oath,
that uses to sacrifice (i.) to pray. And Psalm. 141.3. Set a wach before my
mouth, keep the door of my lips.

2. Hear and meditate much on Gods Word, a preservative as against all sin in
general, so against this sin of swearing in special. Psalm. 119.11. 2 Cor. 7.11


3. Be avenged on our selves for oaths, by abstaining even from speech in such
company and cases wherein we have been so much overseen.

4. Be ready to admonish one another of this sin, if we would be thought to
show any love to our neighbor offending: The Swearer has the Devil in his
tongue, Levit. 19.17.
the non-reprover in his ear.

If we see our neighbors sheep straying, we tell him of it; and shall we see
his soul ready to drop into hell, and not admonish and bring and pull him (as a
brand) out of the fire? Heb. 3.13. Ju. 23.

5. Fear the glorious and fearful name of the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 28.58. and
6.13. Fear it so, that you name it not, or think of it but with reverence.

6. Be sparing in the use of asseverations: for these are the hedges and utmost
fences, as it were, of Gods name from being profaned.

For as it is good policy, not only to avoid the plague, but to eschew every
little rag that might seem to carry the plague with it: so it is heavenly
policy, not only to avoid gross oaths, but also all such vain asseverations
and vain protestations, that through custom would easily draw on swearing.

Asseverations are the brink of the water, as it were, and swearing a deep pit
to swallow us in it; now if we be still leaping and dancing carelessly upon
the brink, it is a thousand to one we shall slip in and perish also, unless we
recover our selves by speedy repentance.

7. Avoid the company of Swearers, because our corrupt nature is easily
infected.

If we do but breath in the contagious air of Pharaohs sinful Court, we may
be infected with Joseph: If we inure our selves to the company of those
Edomites, we shall quickly leave off to speak the pure language of Canaan.
There is little hope that we shall stand in such slippery places, but that we
shall fall either by swearing our selves, or not reprehending others: The
tinder of our corruption is easily set on fire with the touch of the least
spark of an evil president, if it be not moistened by the water of Gods holy
Spirit.

Meditate often on those threatenings recorded in the word, and denounced
against Swearers, that these thunderbolts may restrain thee from setting a flag
of defiance against heaven.

9. Let custom of swearing be broke with contrary custom; Let us, if we
cannot break it off at once, bring it into a consumption by disinuring our
tongues from the use thereof.

10. Take away the causes thereof, as,

1. Impatiency or anger, revenging our selves on God for injuries done by man.

2. Pride or vainglory, making men undervalue their oaths, lest they should be
undervalued themselves.

3. Greedy covetousness; men not depending on Gods allowance, but thinking by
lying and swearing to buy or put off their wares at cheaper or dearer rates:
imitating commonly in their tradings Lysander, that fraudulent treacherous
Greek, whose saying was, That if the Lions skin would not serve, the Foxes must
be sowed to it: and that children were to be cousened with trifles, as Dice and
Cockalls, and men with oaths.

So covetous worldlings think if strength of words will not, then slives of
oaths shall prevail with the buyers: children will be deceived with smooth
words, but old men must have deep oaths.

Yet that Fox Lysander was taken in the trap, for all his force by sword, or
fraud by oaths, and was slain at the foot of the Theban walls: so these
swearers with their wares sell away their souls, the Devil catching them in
that whereby they catch others.

Coverousness the cause being taken away, swearing the effect will not ensue.

4. Breach of promise, which men will endeavor to make up with swearing,
thinking to pay debt with oaths.

Pull up these four roots of swearing, so shall swearing it self be pulled up
by the roots: 1. If in thine anger thou sinnest not by being avenged on God. 2.
If humility attend on all thy actions. 3. If thou dependest on Gods allowance.
4. If thou be thy words master, perform by hand what thou promisest by tongue.


Apply particularly to thy self, Mot. 11.
the punishments from time to time inflicted on other sinners in general, and
on swearers in particular.

Many have been taken tripping in their wickedness; Baltashar in his mirth;
Herod in his pride; the Philistims in their banqueting; the men of Ziglag in
their feasting; the Israelites in their rioting with Manna and Quails in their
mouths; Jobs children in their drunkenness; the Sodomites in their filthiness;
the old world in their marrying; the Steward in his security, and the Churl in
his plenty: judgment receiving them where sin left them: and many wretched
swearers have bin surprised with the sleep of death, when they were rock't
asleep in the cradle of their sin.

Socrates in his Ecclesiastical History relates concerning Michael a Jewish
Rabbin, who brake his neck as he was swearing and blaspheming the name of
Jesus. Three soldiers passing through a wood in the Country of Samartia;
there arose a tempest of thunder and lightning, which, though commonly it
makes the greatest Atheist to tremble, yet one of them to show his contempt of
God and his judgments, burst forth into blasphemy and despightings of God:
But the Lord soon tamed his unruly and rebellious tongue; for he caused the
wind to blow up by the root a huge tree that fell upon him and crushed him to
pieces, the other escaping to testify unto the world of his destruction.

At a Village called Benavides in Spain, two young men being together in a
field, there suddenly arose a terrible rempest, and withal so violent a
whirlwind, that it amazed those that beheld it; The two young men seeing the
fury thereof coming amain toward them, to avoid the danger, ran as fast away
as possibly they might, but make what have they could, it overtooke them; who
fearing lest the same should swing them up into the air, fell flat down on the
earth, where the whirlwind whisking round about them a pretty while, and then
passing forth, the one of them arose so altered and changed, and in such an
agony, that he was scarce able to stand on his feet; the other liyng still, and
not stirring, some others afar off that stood under an hedge, went to see how
he did, and found him to be stark dead; for all his bones were so crushed,
that the pipes and joints of his arms and legs were as easy to be turned the
one way as the other, as though his body had been made of Moss: and besides,
(which is principally to be noted) his tongue was pulled out by the roots,
which could not by any means be found, though they sought for it diligently;
and this was the miserable end of this wretched man, who was noted to be a
great outrageous swearer and blasphemer of Gods most holy Name: The Lord chose
him out, says the writer Anthonio de Torquemeda, to make him an example to the
world, of his justice against Swearers.

I my self knew two most notorious Swearers (whose names I conceal in
reverence to the living) that brake their necks as the common fame filled all
men's ears; the one from a pair of stairs, the other from off his horse:
Their lives were sinful, their deaths fearful, and their now present estate,
as only known unto God, I leave as doubtful.

The author of the Arraignment of an unruly Tongue, relates of a swearing
Courtier at Mansfield, who in the midst of his blasphemous oaths was taken up,
and carried away by the Devil.

Philip Stubs tells us of one whom he knew for a dozen (for that is his own
word) or sixteen years together, whose usual and common oath was to swear by
Gods Arms; In the end his arm being hurt by a knife, could never be healed by
any means, but still wrankled and festred from day to day, and at last so
rotted, that it fell away peece-meale, and he himself through anguish and pain
thereof died. As he offended by swearing by Gods arms, so the Lord plagued him
in his arm also.

The German histories tell us, that at Tabinga, a desperate boy devised new
oaths as were not common in use; but the Lord sent a Canker, or some worse
disease, that ate out his tongue, even the very instrument wherewith he
blasphemed God.

Think thou, as Christ spoke concerning those Galileans and Silonions ( Luke
13.) that these punished were greater swearers then thou thy self? I tell thee
nay, etc. If thou marchest with them in their sins, how can thou but smart
in their punishments? Happy art thou if their falls cause thee by repentance to
rise from this sin of swearing.

The last, though not the least means to be used against swearing, for the
prevention and expulsion of the same, is, Ministers to use the spiritual, and
Magistrates the temporal sword for the striking at the root of this sin, so
common, so hurtful.

In an universal and contagious sickness, a wise Physician would leave the
study of all other diseases to find out the cure of the present raging evil:
no sin so common as swearing and drunkenness; Magistrates and Ministers
should join hand in hand for the cutting down of these predominant sins, and
that the rather, because herein they resemble and imitate God, who in a
special manner threatens to punish and not suffer to escape scot-free, those
that take his Name in vain: which is the fifth use against common swearing.

Of exhortation, Use 5.
for Magistrates and Ministers, to set themselves against this sin, because
God does in a special manner; and seeing it is grown to such strength, that it
will not in have be repressed by both.

Magistrates are not to judge for man, but for the Lord, and as the Lord, with
whom is no iniquity, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts, 2 Chronicles. 19.6.

They are the Ministers for the good of his people, and the punishment of evil
doers; and therefore if they oppose not this and other sins, they bear the
sword in vain, Romans 13.4.

1. Ministers are Gods spiritual watchmen, who must lift up their voices like
Trumpets, Isai. 58.1. they must be severe in preaching against it, that the
commonnesse of preaching it, may overcome the practice of it.

The wisdom of these watchmen must be, not only to foresee enemies, but also
to discern which are most strong, nearest approaching, most dangerous, and first
to be encountered.

2. They are Stewards of Gods family, who must not only have liberty, but also
discretion to give to every one his portion in fit time, and see that they that
have most need, be first relieved.

3. They are Gods Gardiners, whose knowledge must be not only to discern weeds
from flowers, but also to pluck up those that are most noy some and
over-spreading, with the first care and great (...).

4. They are Gods Orators and Ambassadors, who are not only to be furnished
with wise instructions, but also with judgment and circumspection to deliver
them, with respect to time, person occasion and place.

5. They are Bonaerges, sons of thunder, whose properties must be not only to
bruise and batter stony hearts by denouncing Gods fearful judgments, but also
by applying them to such sins, as the people and present auditors are most
infected with.

For if chiefly among the covetous we should reprehend prodigality, or pride
among the sorddious, or superstition among profane and irreligious swearers,
this were not to reprove, but to backbite sin, to fight valiantly in the
absence of an enemy, with a strong arm to beat the air, and to contend
against a shadow, which may sprain a joint, and for reward move scornful
laughter, rather then admiration of any true valor, or expectation of victory.

That Shepherd that does not rebuke those that offend, without doubt, he
slays them by holding his peace; we do put to death so many as we see go to
death and are silent.

Chrysostom whiles he was at Antioch, spent most of his Sermons or Homilies
against swearing, that if not the fear of God, yet his importunity might make
them weary of the sin: the report of whose practice in preaching, has
encouraged me to insist the longer about this sin of swearing, especially
seeing the bent of this swearing Age has, and still does invite me to make it
the bent of my preaching against this hideous monster, and never to (...)
reprove it, till in some of the members thereof it may be so mangled and
wounded, that at length for fear, or shame, or importunity; fear of the
punishments, shame of the unprofitablenesse, or importunity of Gods
Ambassadors; it may so langui^^ (...) consume, till it has breathed its last
breath.

But alas! some cannot preach against this or any other sin, some do not,
some dare not, some though they can, d^e, and dare, yet do all to no purpose
at all.

1. Some cannot, because they want skill.

2. Some do not, because they want will.

3. Some dare not, because they want courage.

4. Some do to no purpose, because they want carriage, endeavoring to reform
others, but are not reformed; they speak, but they do not; teach others, but
not themselves, Romans 2.

Making their hearers thin^ ^^ere is some great mystery of Atheism, (...)
ever yet imparted unto them, seeing they (...) your to dissuade others from
that which the^ (...) themselves; or that something did over-slip them in the
Pulpit, which now by their corrupt swearing they do retra^^*

Poisoning the peck of their holy admonition with the infectious leaven of
their swearing and corrupt communication; like Ponelope, weave and unweave in
the night of their hellish oaths as much as they wove in the day of their
golden words; they say and unsay, do and undo again.

They are like him that carried Triacle in the one hand to resist death, and
poison in the other hand to take away life; or like a painted fire without
heat; or like a fair vizard put on a deformed face; or like an Idiot, standing
by the Sea side, and seeing strangers pass (...) danger of the tide, cries out
unto them, Away, away, the tide comes; who looking back, and seeing thee fool
stand still, begin to say one to another, Surely this fellow does but jest, if
it were so dangerous as he faith, he would certainly make more have away
himself.

They are as the Bells that call others to the place, where they come not
themselves; or as the whetston, sharpening other things, it self continuing
blunt; or as Soap, whitening other things, it self remaining black and foul;
or the stalk bearing flowers, it self continuing unsavory.

Like Spittle (...), skillful in the ways they never went, or (...) go.

Like Heralds (...), or dering others to fight, themselves not (...) a stroke.

Like to the statues of Mercury by high ways, pointing to others which way to
travel, themselves rotting away.

Like to ragged files, smoothing other things, themselves remaining rough and
unchanged.

Like to Scribes and Pharisees, laying heavy burdens on other men's shoulders,
they themselves not touching the same with their least finger.

Like Noah's Ship-wrights, that made the Ark, but themselves were not saved in
it.

But oh! Tell it not in Gath, lest the uncircumcised rejoice, 1 Samuel 1. r. 20.
Esa. 58.1.
etc. They should indeed not only lift up their voices, but also lift them up
like trumpets, Esa. 58.1. Now the mouths of the trumpets are not only blown
into by the mouth of the Trumpeter; but also lifted up with his hand: So should
Gods Orators do themselves, what they persuade others to; yet if they do not,
suffer, oh suffer thou their voices to draw thee to thy duty: the Whetstone of
their reprehension to sharpen thine affection, the Soap of their admonition to
scowre off the filth of thy pollution, the point of their tongues to show thee
the right in many cross ways.

Take the comforts of their flower-like exhortations to thy self, and leave the
stalk of infectious swearing and filthy communication to remain, wither, or
fall to themselves.

Refuse thou not their good and timely direction to keep thee from aberration,
though they be creeples and stir not themselves, take their counsel, and go
thy ways.

Thus having with the Cock clapped my wings upon mine own breast, that so more
boldly I might crow toward, cry and call upon you, even upon you that are
either Magistrates over subjects, Masters over servants, Governors over
families, Parents over children, and in all these respects, as Gods over his
people and inheritance: Suffer, O suffer the words of exhortation, and work of
imitation; imitate God in your duty, whom you do imitate indignity.

Swearing is a sin of such insolent growth, that it scorns to be queld by the
tongue, or slain by the pen, but like the Princes of Midian, it calls for a
Gideon himself, the power of the Magistrate to fall upon it.

If ever then, I would to God that in this time, and in this point, my voice
were like the voice of some thundering Pericles, my sides brass, and my tongue
as the pen of a ready writer, that my words were tipped with an Adamant, to make
deep impressions in your souls, touching this point.

Oh that I had the silven Trumpet of Hilarie, the golden mouth of Chrysostom,
the mellifluous speech of Origin, that my prayers might be powerful, and
words effectull to persuade and prevail with you, that this duty of oppressing
the growth of swearing, might not only float upon the fugitive streams of the
ear, but also be landed upon the solid shore of your hearts.

Suppose there could not be found any other sin in the land, suppose swearing
had not any other sin to bear it company, suppose there were not any
foreign enemy in the world to invade us, yet the frequent use of this
infernal language of the Devil would prove an Engine strong enough to batter
our walls, a sword keen enough to martyr our flesh, an arrow swift enough to
drink up our blood, a plague overspreading enough to make a flaw in our State,
a breach in our peace, a scar in our Church, a hot Fever, a shaking ague, sure
enough to shake our land from one end to another, and make all to quiver and
tremble from the lowest Shrub to the tallest Cedar.

Do you therefore that have conscience and calling, in your several persons
and places, resist, oppose, suppress this proud sin, that scorns to quarrel
with any under God; this stout sin, that is always heaving at the foundation
and strength of our Lord: Oh suffer not this crafty Sinon to be lodged and
succored within the cabinet of your own souls, to sit at your boards, to jet
in your streets, to dwell in your houses, to nestle in your ears without any
check or control: why should this above all other sins submit it self to no
censure or sharp reproof?

If common Swearers (says Bishop Hooper) be suffered to sin without
punishment, the sin is so abominable, that surely the Magistrates and whole
commonwealth are like in time to smart for it.

The gangrene hereof not cut off in the Toe, it spreads forwards till it
putrify the whole body.

The Persians made them slaves that could not be rulers of their own tongues.

Philip, King of France, ordained, that whosoever by swearing blasphemed God,
yea, if in a Tavern, he should be drowned straightwayes. Turneb. in Ja.


Maximilian the Emperor decreed, that whosoever should be deprehended for a
vain swearer, should pay 13. shillings four pence; which money whosoever refused
to pay, and repented not of the wickedness, should lose his head.

Henry the first of this land, appointed the payment of forty, twenty, ten,
three shillings four pence, according to the degrees of the swearers, to be
employed for the poor.

The Romans, Egyptians, Grecians, Scythians, Turks, Justinian the Emperor,
Lewis of France, appointed and inflicted several punishments (as you heard
before) upon the heads, ears, lips, goods, bodies, lives of Swearers.

And now after so many dehortations from this sin, and several judgments
upon the sinners, what cause or reason have our rash, fearful Ruffian-like
swearers, to expect freedom from the like punishment from the hands of men,
seeing they deserve greater at the hands of God, then either with the Roman
Swearers to be thrown down from an high rock, that have endeavored by their
continual cursed swearing for every trifle, to pull down God from the height
of heaven.

Or with the Grecian Swearers to lose their ears, since by their swearing they
have infected the ears of others.

Or with the French Swearers to be scared in their lips, that have not been a
bridle to their words.

Or with the Egyptian swearers to lose their heads, because it harbored such
bloody Traitors against God and man, heaven and earth.

Or with the Scythian swearers, to be punished with loss of goods, because often
by their swearing they have wronged others in their estates.

Or with the Turkish swearers, to have no admission to the government of
others, that could not guide their own unruly tongues.

Or with the Persian swearers to be made slaves to other, because they could
not be masters over themselves and their sayings.

Or with Philip of France his swearers, to be drowned in water, because by
their sin they have caused the fish to be destroyed in the Sea:

Or with Maximilian and King Henry the first their swearers, to be punished in
purse for the good of the poor, because for their swearing the land has not
yielded like food and aliment for their bellies, or clothing and indument for
their backs, as otherwise it would.

Or with Justinian his swearers, to be put to death, because they have assayed
afresh to crucify the Lord and giver of life.

Or with the English King his servant-swearers, to be whipped in their body,
for making it a cage of unclean birds, a stie of filthy hogs, and a den of
Hellish thieves which should have been preserved as first it was created, an
Habitation for God, a member of Christ, and a Temple of the holy Ghost, 1 Job.
4.15. 1 Cor. 6.15.19.

Oh that some good Phineas, who is zealous of the name of God, would break us
the ice, and take in hand to purchase and procure from our Senate, the now
assembled Court of Parliament, some sharp and cutting Statute, if purse penalty
only, (to preserve the poor from perjury, and rich from impiety) that might
snap the growth, and stanch the bloody issue of this heinous sin, the taking
of Gods name in vain: Verily, God would say of such a man as he did of Phineas,
This good man that was zealous for my glory, Numb. 25.11.
has turned away my anger from you.

Surely, happy should be that day, immortal should be that memory, and
renowned ever should be the name of that man, by whose zealous endeavor so good
a work should be effected; his memory should never perish, but wheresoever
there should be mention of his name, there also should the good work that he
had done, be spoken of for a memorial of him, and every man would say: Oh that
was the man that first hindered the blaspheming, and furthered the sanctifying
of Gods glorious name, that was careful to banish swearing, first out of his
own heart; secondly, out of his house; thirdly, out of the country, before
swearing banished him out of all.

Oh that we were so happy as once to see that day, that so our ways might be
prosperous, our sorrow easy, our comforts many, our life holy, our peace
permanent, and our salvation certain.

That this may be so, all ye that desire to rest with David in Gods
Tabernacle, aim to attain to his courage and resolution, He that tells lies,
and blasphemeth Gods name, shall not tarry in my sight, Psalm. 101.7.
or dwell in my house; I will hasten soon to be rid of all such wicked persons,
lest they should bring Gods judgments upon mine house, and plagues upon the
whole land, whose wrath already seems to be incensed against the same; the
coals whereof no otherwise can be quenched, then by having courage and
resolution against this and other sins, and by making our hearts springs, our
heads fountains, and our eyes rivers of tears; nay, let us turn our fountain
of tears into a stream, our stream into a flood, and that flood into an
ocean, and let that ocean be bottomless, and that spring boundless, that God
may be pleased to forgive all our sins, and remove all his fearful
judgments which he has threatened, and crown us with those Myriads of
blessings which he has promised to all those that love him, and leave their
sins, and sanctify the great, holy, and glorious Name of God, in giving laud,
honor, and praise to the same for ever.

So much be spoken of the fifth use.

The sixth and last follows, scil. of imitation, God holds not swearers
guiltilesse; Use 6. For imitation. Psa. 39.1.
So must not we.

I will keep my mouth with a bridle, I will take beed unto my way, that I off
end not in my tongue, says the sweet Singer of Israel: which one lesson
Pambus, a famous professor in the primitive Church, plying hard nineteen whole
years together, (as Socrates in his Ecclesiastical history speaks out of his
own mouth) yet could not learn it so perfectly, as to take out anew; which the
author imputes not so much to the dullness of the scholar, as to the
difficulty of the lesson, insomuch that if there be any man that offends not
in his tongue, the same is a perfect man, and able to bridle his own body. But
because this difficulty of bridling this little-great unruly member, is so
great, and the danger breaking forth by neglect, so manifold, therefore am I
willing, and as it were, enforced to stand the longer, and with Pambus, to
bestow the greater pains about the same.

God will not hold them guiltless that take his name in vain, says the Text.
Therefore we imitating God, after whose image we were created, must oppose this
sin to the uttermost of our power, by setting our selves against the sin of
them that set themselves against God himself.

The wicked fact of Jezabel, covering bloody impiety in proclaiming a Fast,
when she would have Naboth slain for blasphemy, 1 King. 21.9, 10.
shows the custom of those times was both to punish and have public
humiliation for such sins, lest the wrath of God should come upon the land for
the same.

And when good King Hezekiah heard the blasphemy which Rabshakeh uttered
against the Lord, he fell to his prayers, and to humble himself before God.
Shall this good King do this for another man's blasphemy, and shall not we do
the like for our own, but continue in swearing, and suffer others to continue
therein, without any redress of others, and remorse for our own sins?

We must resemble God in our zeal here, or else not reign with him in glory
hereafter.

God, 1. Reproves and punishes swearing. 2. Is himself pure from it. 3.
Absents himself from the company of such.
We must be holy, as he is holy; pure, as he is pure; just, as he is just.

In the application of this last use. I will propose and prosecute these
particulars: 1. The matter what we must do. 2. The men whom we must reprove.
3. The time when. 4. The manner how. 5. The motives why.


And when I have run through these particular passages, you may expect a period
to this discourse of swearing, and reproving the same.

1. The matter what: We must reprove and punish this sin of swearing, 1 The
matter what.
if ever we expect the suppression thereof.

Reprove and punish, for I join them both together, because reproof is a
verbal punishment, and punishment a real reproof: herein following the method
of Mr. Perkins, that judicious Divine, who on Mat. 7.5. confounds reproof and
correction together.

And to some it appertains to reprove only according to their conscience and
calling, and to others both to reprove and punish: such are Magistrates in
respect of subjects, Masters in respect of servants, Tutors in respect of
scholars, Parents in respect of children, and householders in respect of their
families.

For every King or mighty Monarch, is but Magnus Paterfamilias, a great
householder, and every householder is parvus Rex, a little King in his family:
And therefore if Kings may, and ought to make laws for the suppressing of this
Gangren-like disease, that has fearfully already overspread Court, City,
Country, Kingdom; then also may and ought every Magistrate, Parent, Master,
Householder, make some laws, and take some sharp course, that this horrid,
hellish sin may at length be banished from our lips, ears, and land.

Some sharp course, I say, some having power and authority to deal herein more
sharply then others, that so private men privately in their own families, may in
time effect that which by a more public law and sharp punishment were to be
wished to be enacted for the whole land.

Till some such sharp course and general law by some godly Phineas be
procured, let us in our several callings go so far as Gods word does
enjoin, and man's law permit for the suppressing this sin, which being so
directly and immediately practiced against God himself, cannot be too much
preached against by his ministers.

For if you say to me, Why do you harp so long upon this string?

I say to you, Why do you continue so long in this sin? Your practice, your
practice, which has been evil, has occasioned my preaching, which then has
been good, if by this great pains and long labor, you are at length brought to
the sight of the greatness of this your sin, and the severity of Gods
judgments against the same, that so you may endeavor to perform for the good
of others also, which I endeavor now to persuade you unto; namely, to reprove
and punish swearers.

Reprove, I say, and punish; for I told you ere-while, that in this discourse I
confound both together, and you in the application may be pleased to take them
asunder.

You who are Masters, Parents, Governors, whose calling is to punish, when I
name reprove understand you punish: And you whose calling is to reprove only,
when I name punish, understand you reprove; that so my speech may not be
misapplied that is rightly intended, but that the fish of your souls may be
caught by one of those baits, you performing one of these duties; reproving, or
punishing swearers.

And so relying upon Gods good blessing for success, I lanch into the deep,
entreating you to suffer this net of Gods word, not to swim in the shallowness
of your ears alone, but also to sink into the depth of your hearts, that so at
length you may have true cause to say and sing with Zacheus, O God I thank
thee, this day is salvation come into my house. I that before blasphemed thy
name by my vain, rash, hellish oaths, now am persuaded, resolved, to endeavor
to sanctify thy name by reproving, punishing others that do blaspheme the
same, that so hereby my repentance to others may be manifested their conversion
to themselves assured, the former negligence of either by the future diligence
of both requited and countervalued.

And so from the wide gates, I make haste into the little City, for fear you
should imagine my gates to be greater then the City, the windows then the
house, the circumstance then the substance of this ensuing discourse.

That this duty of reproving and punishing swearers, is to be performed, is
proved by the Prophet, the only means to divert Gods vengeance from a land, is
to hinder sin, that men break not forth by swearing, lying, whoring,
stealing, etc. For these sins breaking forth, Gods judgments break in.

But how shall I hinder either judgments or sin? Quest.


Verse 4. is added a cause why men break forth into this sin, Answ.
because they are not reproved; Yet let no man strive nor rebuke one another:
intimating that the means that will hinder the breaking forth into this sin,
is striving against, by reproving and punishing the swearer. For this people
are as they that strive with the Priest; sh^wing that Satan strives by the
sin of the swearer, to overcome the admonitions of God in the mouth of the
Minister: And should not the Minister and every Reprover strive as much for the
enlargement of the Lords Kingdom, as the Swearer does for the enlargement of
the Devils?

There must be striving you see between the Swearer and the Reprover: Think
not (says our Savior) that I am come to send peace; Matthew. 10.34.
I came not to send peace, but war. We must have war with sinners, before we
can have peace with God, or our own souls.

If by our timely admonitions we plead not for Christ, by our dumb silence we
really plead against Christ.

He that gathers not with me, scatters abroad. If God be God, let us cleave
to him: but if Baal be God, and the sons of Belial true saints, let us say
nothing against, but cleave unto them.

Ye cannot serve two masters, Gog and Magog, Christ and Antichrist; your
delight cannot be in the Saints, and those that do excel in virtue, and your
ears sheathes for those that break forth with swearing.

Therefore there must be no silence, but striving, contending.

And why should we refuse the combat, and doubt of the victory? Swearers have
the world on their side, we have the word; They custom, we conscience; They
men, we God; They darkness, we light; They error, we truth, which is strongest
of all. Through Gods mercy, and the might of Christ, we shall be more then
Conquerours.

But if we refuse to strive for the Lord of Hosts, then has he a
controversy, and will strive against us. Therefore shall thou fall in the day,
and the Prophet also shall fall in the night, both the swearer and the
sufferer; scil. the non-reprover of him.

And will the Lord strive, plead, Job. 12. 1 Samuel 15.22. Levit. 26.24. Psalm.
18.26.
and have a controversy with us? If he come to wrestle with man, though with
the stoutest of men, the commander of heaven and earth with dust and ashes, it
cannot but prove impar congressus, an unmeet match, as the wrestling of a Giant
with a Dwarf. We can make no match with him who powers contempt upon Princes
if they contemn him.

Now look how severe the Cedar would be toward the Shrub resisting him, the
mighty toward the meanest; ten thousand times more will the Lord be in
opposing and striving against those that oppose and strive against him.

Does he in any wise command thou shall rebuke thy neighbor? Levit. 19.17. And
shall I see and hear him swear, and not open my mouth to sanctify when his is
open to pollute the glorious name of the Lord; knowing herein what God
commands, and what I my self practice? Shall I not herein profess my self an
enemy to God, by rejecting his word, by hating his soul, whose body I seem to
love?

Does God command, Ephesians. 5.12.
Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather
reprove them? And shall I sit with the swearer, and drink with the drunkard,
plead not a word for God, when others spue forth many oaths against him;
knowing herein what God commands, and I my self practice? Shall I not herein
profess my self a striver against the Lord himself, a hearer of his name
taken in vain, and therefore not to be held guiltless; a lover of darkness,
and therefore not a child of light, Ephesians. 5.12.
seeing I approve in not reproving the works of darkness? which is the means
the Apostle professes for the frustrating this, and all other works of
darkness.

When the Ark was present, Dagon fell down, they could not both stand together:
When the Ark of Reprehension comes in place, the Dagon of darkness will fall
down.

Have no fellowship of needless, long, and daily familiarity with them, by
sitting, lodging, dwelling with such unfruitful works, i. workers of darkness,
by approving, defending, countenancing, extenuating their finfull swearing, but
rather reprove them for it: as God the Fatther here does, Christ the Son,
Matthew. 5. God the holy Ghost, Jam. 5.12. Above all things, etc.

Shall that which S. James above all things commands to be regarded, least and
last of all things be heeded, remembered, and observed?

Or was it needful in his time, and is it not in ours?

We are they that live in the last and worst days, wherein it seems to be a
lesser offense to swear ordinarily, rashly, falsely, then to reprove men for
their so swearing.

The first thing that our Savior teaches us to pray, is, that Gods name may
be hallowed; and shall it be our last care, or rather no care at all, to
reprove such as do dishonor the same?

Thus out of the Prophet and Apostle, we have heard what we must do, scil.
reprove, punish swearers, by all means possible, striving against this sin that
causes God to strive against a whole land.

Secondly, the men whom we must reprove: 2. The men whom
The object is Swearers; the extent is all Swearers. The Lord will not hold him
guiltless.

The greatness of the Oak, the tallness of the Cedar, the smoothness of the
Popler, the greenness of the Laurel, or the lowness of the Shrub, shall not
exempt themselves from the blast and fierceness of this censure. The
greatness of the wealthy, the meannesse of the poor, the ignorance of the
simple, the knowledge of the learned, the passions of the angry, the mincing of
oaths, the unpunishing by the Magistrates, shall not be placcards to defend
men from this definitive sentence: The Lord will not hold him guiltless that
takes his name in vain.

With him there is no respect of persons, Acts 10.
neither must it be with us.

The soul that sins must die: Ezekiel. 18.
Therefore that man that sins by swearing, must be reproved, that he may
live.

Sin is sin wheresoever it is; the bodies of great and rich men shall
become the like preyes to worms and rottenness; and their souls shall
undergo like strict examination, as the bodies and souls of the meanest
persons: When this great game at Chesse is here ended, they must with others be
laid up together in the common bag of nature, and then there shall be no
difference between their dust, and that of the poor beggar. They all proceed
from the same lamp, and they all without envying either the other, shall be
content to lodge in the same Inn.

Great men may need admonition, and why should not they have it, if they need
it? For else were they more miserable then common men; and Solomon's woe were
especially upon them, because when they fall, there is none to help them up
again, Eccles. 4.10.

It being granted that they may fall, and that falling they are to be raised by
reprehension and admonition, if they are so fast rocked asleep, that a soft
speech of admonition will not, they are then to be roused by the thundering
trumpet of louder reprehension.

The matter of admonition it is to be fitted to the fault, but the manner is to
be framed to the best advantage of prevailing, with a regard to the dignity of
his person, and the remainder of his virtues.

Let it appear that, that which speaks is love, and that for which it speaks,
salvation. And how can any heart shut it self against love, bringing with it
salvation?

Miror, si aliqu is rectorum potest salvari, It is a wonder if any great man be
saved (says Chrysostom) alleged by Bishop Latimer before King Edward: The
reason is ready, because there are so few to tell and admonish them of their
faults, the greatness of the one much daunteth the goodness and courage of
the other, that it dares not so freely and fully reprove their saults.

If Swearers be so great that Ministers dare not reprove, or that the
Magistrates will not lay hold on them; or so cunningly mince their oaths, that
the Law cannot reach them; yet then, and there will Gods Law begin, when and
where man's law does leave and end: where Ministers and others dare not speak
vocally, there God dares and will speak really. Though they dazzle the eye, stop
and seal the lips, and manicle the hands of men, yet of God they cannot; and
the less they feel at the hands of men, the heavier shall they feel the hand
of God, either in their estates, or in their bodies, or in their souls, or in
their posterities, or in all.

Though before men they refuse to come to shame, by submitting themselves to
reproof, yet God will not forget them, but bring them to it, either in this
life to their conversion, or in the world to come to their full and final
confusion.

David, Hezekiah, Jehosophat, Peter, were reproved; therefore great men, if
sinners, if swearers, may, must be reproved; yea be they otherwise good and
wise, Prove. 9.9. Rich garments require brushing, fine linen washing, pleasant
gardens watring.

All men will grant that a child or servant ought willingly to be reprehended
of a father or master, but few will in practice grant that a father or master
should listen to the reprehension of a son or servant: Job therefore may be
a good president to all such, either masters or fathers: He durst not open his
mouth, as himself witnesses of himself, to contemn the judgment of his
servant, or maid, when they did contend with him; because in a duty of piety,
we must look to them, not as servants, but as brethren, not to the speakers so
much, who in respect of calling may be our inferiors, as to the things spoken
in the ordinance of God, unto whom every man is an inferior, and with whom
there is no respect of persons.

As great and good men, so kindred and friends as well as strangers and foes,
must be reproved, if by their swearing they presume to take Gods Name in vain.

Many offend against this rule, who will never rebuke this or any other sin,
until God revenge it from heaven. But such are not properly friends, because
whereas they might by admonition in time prevent the judgment of God upon them
(whom they in show, and not in substance, in tongue, and not in truth love most
dearly) they do not admonish them. But what sin, whether swearing or the like,
they do mislike in strangers, or neighbors, the same sin they do allow and
not mislike by reproving, when it comes to kindred, wife, children, parents, as
though the diversity of subjects could make that to be sin in some, which is
not sin in other some. But to end this point, let not the glittering beams
of any outward respect either of great men or kindred, so dazzle or blind our
eyes, as that we shall not epsy sin in either to reprove it. He loves most
naturally, that has loves most spiritually; and he in goodness comes nearest
to God, that has no respect of persons with men in matter of sin, Psalm. 82.2.
1 Timothy 5.21.

3. The time when we must reprove Swearers; 3. The time when.
as it must be universally without exception, so presently without delay,
whiles this sin is tender, a plant of little growth, and most easily to be
plucked up, whiles it is shamefast, whiles it has blood with blushing in the
face.

David wounded the Philistine in the forehead, 1 Samuel 17. We must endeavor to
kill this Serpent in the egg: this sin, not come to full ripeness, is easier
cut down, then in its height: Words spoken in due season, are like apples of
gold with pictures of silver, Prove. 25.11.

When timely opportunity is neglected, facility in dispatch is seldom
attained unto.

When thou perceivest the Devil by oaths to roll upon the tip of the tongue of
the Swearer, he thereby endeavoring to enter into the heart through the wicket
of the ear of thee the hearer, let oaths no sooner drop into the ears, but
let them as soon drop out of thy mouth by reproving the swearer.

Be thou impatient till thou be delivered of them, as a woman great with child,
or as a stomach that is full of wind.

As soon as occasion and opportunity is offered, as soon as reason and religion
does require, let us endeavor to apply the salve to the soar, the wine of
reprehension or correction to the wound of sin and transgression; Correction,
I say, if we be parents, and have children, or masters and have servants; Let
us, to show our detestation of this sin, and our love to their souls,
endeavor to banish oaths from them, or (to show the fear of Gods judgments)
themselves from us and our habitation, and that speedily. 2 Reas. for spe d.


1. For general uniformity in one family. 2. Because of delays inutility.
1. For do thou thy self sanctify Gods name, and shall thy sons or
servants blaspheme it? What communion should righteousness and
unrighteousness have? What fellowship light and darkness? What concord Christ
and Belial? 2 Cor. 6.

Shall thy house be of diverse dispositions, as Hamibals Army was of diverse
Nations? Shall thy household, which should be as the Church of God, be like a
Motley cloth, or a Medly color, some of thy house of one die, and some of
another?

God will have all his family wear one and the same Livery; herein must thou
imitate God, let all thy family be uniforme and suitable, that all agreeing and
according together, they may all look, walk, and draw in the service of God
their maker, and thee their master.

How then should my business be performed, Quest.
if I should have no such sinful swearing servants in my family?

And how can Gods service be performed by thee, or them, if thou keep such?
Answ.


Turpius ejicitur quam non admittitur -- It is less shame not to admit, then
to cast out such a servant; but it is as true, Tutius ejicitur, like a raw
morsel that sits ill in the stomach, he is more safely cast out, then
retained; or if he be a retainer, yet not to dwell under thy roof, he should
not setup his rest there.

If David will not have a lier tarry in his sight, ( Psalm. 101.) then much
less a swearer sit, sup, lodge, year and day with him: He will not have his
family a mingle-mangle to confist pell-mell of men of all sorts and conditions.

If men know that any have been in that place where the plague reigns, and
would come into their houses, they presently bar the gates against him, they
shut him out, by no means will they suffer him to enter; and why? verily
because they would not have the plague brought in amongst them, lest they
should be infected and die. But alas! why should not the death of the soul be
much more feared? Why should not masters banish out of their services and
families, such pestiferous caitiffes, which through their assiduous and
abominable swearing, infect all their household, not only their bodies, but
also their souls, on which alone and wholly depends the woe and weal of their
bodies?

Awake therefore ye Knights, Gentlemen, Yeomen, all men; suffer, oh suffer no
swearers in your houses, eschew them more then a venomous serpent; entertain a
Dragon sooner in your houses, then any such one that has pleasure in swearing:
the former only hurt the body, the other destroy both body and soul of such as
are infected by them. Maintain none of them that shall bring the plague of God
upon your houses.

Suffer not the tender breasts of your children to be poisoned in their youth,
with the pestilent communication of these abominable Sweaters.

If you cannot always prevent the entrance, yet prevent their continuance.
Search them out, (for they will not easily manifest themselves) and being
manifested, reprehended, and not amended, cast them out. A bird may light upon,
or fly into a man's house, but he may choose whether he nestle and breed there.
If their seeming sanctity drew servants into thy house and service, yet let
their impiety, daily blasphemy, drive them out again.

Nay, if sons be disobedient to parents, Deuteronomy. 21.18. and 13.6.
the parents themselves are to bring them out to the Judges, and the people to
stone them.

Nay, a brother, a daughter, a wife offending, in some cases are not to be
spared.

Nay, Asa King of Judah is commended for his uprightness in this respect,
that, when Maacha his own mother committed idolatry, 1 King. 15.13.
would not spare her, but deposed her from her Regency: And is not continual
swearing a great sin, breaking this great commandment of our great God?

Henry the fourth of that name, King of England, when his eldest son the
Prince was by the Lord chief Justice for some great misdemeanour commanded and
committed to prison, he thanked God that he had a son of that obedience, and
a Judge of such unpartiall and undaunted courage. For indeed, Religion or
Justice, Non novit patrem, non novit matrem, veritatem novit, neither knows
father or mother, but only the truth. Jer. 22.24.
Though Coniah were as the Signet of Gods finger, yet would he pluck him
thence.

Governors, Masters, Householders, as they communicate with God in his name;
Psa. 82.
I said ye are Gods: so should they in his nature, who judges without respect
of persons, 1 Pet. 1.17. not bolding any guiltless that takes his name in
vain.

2. Reas. 2.
Delays inutility: Delays in other things are not good, but in this of
reprehension and punishment, stark naught.

1. Evils ensuing are 3.
Because the Swearer not presently reproved, does against another time his next
swearing, get the examples of others swearing in his company for his
protection, as favorers and actors of this sin, and so consequently makes
them the means of evasion.

2. Because petty oaths (if a man may call any little that are committed
against the great God) by our silence, and not punishment, grow to hellish
oaths. A little fire which at first might have been put out with a spoonful
of water, being let to burn, in short time turns Towns and Cities into ashes.

Reproofs and punishments are like medicines, which being kept too long, hazard
the patient, and lose their virtue.

Magistrates, Parents, Masters, must not let this disease go too long, lest by
suffering, that proves incurable, which might have been helped by timely
administering. The ulcer is to be lanced betime, before it grow to a Gangrene;
the Tetter to be killed, before it spread to be a Ringworme.

God commands Fathers, if they love their children, l to. 1 3.24
to correct them betimes, and to chastise them while there is hope.

Artaxerxes said to Ezra, Ezra 7.26.
Whesoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the Law of the King, let
judgment be executed speedily upon him, etc. And the reason is given, Eccles.
8.11. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the heart of the sons of men, is fully set in them to do evil.

3. Because he that should reprove, many times in tract of time proves colder
in his zeal of reproof and punishment: for if thou will not adventure to
pass through at low water, how will thou do at full sea? If thou durst not
pull up a twig, how will thou do when it comes to a tree? If thou fear the
skirmish with a single, how will thou endure to encounter with an host of
hellish enemies? If thou art silent at the hearing of one, how will thou be
emboldened to reprove many horrid oaths?

Thus you see the spurs for speediness in reproving Swearers.

1. For general uniformity. 2. Because of delays inutility: as, 1. The
examples of others will be alleged. 2. The Swearers sins increased. 3. The
edge of our zeal abated.

If David had good cause to destroy all the wicked in the land early, Ps.
101.8. then have we no color to rebuke or correct black-mouthed swearers,
lately: yet let there be no more have then good speed; If thou in the company
of Swearers art an inferior, and there be other superiors, thou art a
private, and other are public persons, Magistrates or Ministers, then expect
one of them to perform the duty of reprehension, that so from the gravitie or
greatness of the person reproving, the reproof it self may the more
piercingly work, and ungainsayably be entertained in respect of the authority,
calling, and estimation of the person whence it proceeds: as a man suddenly
falling sick, rather takes the prescription of an experienced Physician there
present in the company, then of an ordinary meaner person standing by. But if
such a Physician be careless in prescribing a remedy, better it is for any to
put to his helping hand, then the suddenly sick Patient to sink away in a
swound.

If thou perceivest such superiors, Magistrates or Ministers; to be slack, (as
very few are forward enough in this duty) then others coldness must put an
edge to thy zeal, their silence untie the strings of thy tongue, to stand for
the honor of thy God, endeavoring by thy due admonition to remove the Devil
from possessing the heart and tongue of the swearer, and to raise his siege
from assaulting the heart and ear of the hearer, which otherwise for want of
wise reproof might endanger the body and soul of either: And so Satan should
with Caesar triumphantly say with change of one of his three words, veni, dixi,
vici, I came to the heart and lips of the Swearer, I spoke to the ear and
heart of the non-reprover, and without any opposition have in an instant
obtained the victory against one and the other.

When thou perceivest this office of admonition to be slighted by those which
for place and ability might in better manner, more fitly and to better purpose
perform it, be not overmannerly by straining courtesy who shall begin first:
for some one must strike, some must strive, how else can there be a combat, how
else a conquest? The Devil himself first making the assault, some one must as
speedily counterpoyse his assault: That our celeritie may answer his
sedulitie, and the Lord beholding our zeal for him, may assist us in the
combat, and crown us with the victory; so shall such as are as strong as we, by
our pious examples be confirmed; such as are as yet colder, shall be
encouraged; we our selves shall have more heart to resist Satan, and he less
power to assault us.

Being, I hope, by this time animated to perform this biparted duty of
reprehension, or correction of Swearers, let us listen to the direction in the
fourth particular, to wit, the manner how we must perform it.

4. part, the manner how. 4. The manner how.


1. By our works toward them. 2. By our words with them. 3. By our departure
from them.
1. Reprove swearing and Swearers we must, by our deeds, our own purity, and
freedom from the sin.

As we must be holy, because God is holy, so we must be pure, as he is pure, 1 John, 3.9.

That thou may have the more comfortable success in banishing this sin
from thy Family, thou must be sure that thou banish it first from thine own
heart. Thou being a Magistrate, Minister, Father, Master, must cause thy
practice to be as powerful as thy naked precept. For if thou practice thy
self what thou reprovest in another, thou hereby bluntest the edge of thy
reprehension, and emboldenest him in his sin and tansgression.

Lesser Planets look to those that be greater, Regis ad exemplum totus
componitur or bis. A bove majoridiscit arare miner.
and the meaner sort look to those that be higher, from whom there is great
force to draw inferiors either to good or evil. Great men are like to great
stones in the wall, if they stand, the wall stands; if they fall, many of the
little stones soon clatter after.

They are like to a garden full of sweet Flowers, if they be well ordered,
Labans sheep conceived according to the rods laid before their eyes, Genesis 30,
37, etc.
their examples yield much good savor, prosperity, counsel, comfort,
encouragement to inferiors beholding them; but they are like dunghils, if they
be ill ordered, they be contagious and noisome to such as are about them,
their poison is strong, and their infection dangerous.

Men desire to find occasion whereupon to refuse the means ordained for their
good. If they can espy any fault in those that reprove or admonish them, then
they presently imagine, that such should neither reprove nor punish, repelling
all their sayings with the proverb, Medice, cura teipsum, heal first thy self.

And to say the truth, we can have no countenance to reprove, or courage to
punish swearing in others, when we our selves make no conscience to commit the
same.

The Pharisees lost their authority, because they taught and did not.

He that will have others do what he commands, Judge. 9.
must speak in the style of Abimeleeh, What thou have seen me do, make haste,
and do like me.

I and my house, (says Josuah, 24.15.) will serve the Lord; I first, then my
house; not first my house, and then I.

A small fault in Magistrates, Ministers, Parents, Masters, is as a Wart or
Mole, in the midst of the face, which cannot be hid. It is as a spot on a
Ruff, or a Beacon on the top of an hill.

If the eye be dark, how great will that darkness be? Matthew. 6.23.

Men most greedily gaze on the Sun when it is eclipsed; so the multitude and
inferiors more willingly discourse of the imperfections and vices of their
governors and superiors, then of their virtues, thereby hoping to justify
themselves, and so to escape unpunished, uncontrolled.

The best rule then, to have this law against swearing well executed, is, for
Superiors first to keep it themselves in their own persons, it being the
nature of man rather to be led by reason and example, then by precept,
penalty, or force of Law; the lives of their superiors being by them esteemed
the fairest and safest copy they can rule their actions by.

They do more good by their godly practice, then by their virtuous precepts;
and more harm by their bad example, then by their sin; because being swearers
themselves, they convey the poison of their corruption into the bowels of the
beholders.

Amend it in thy self, or else endeavor it not in others.

2. 2. By words.
Reprove Swearers we must by our words. It is the most thanklesse office in the
world, to be a man's Pandar unto sin; In other wrongs one man is a wolf to
another, in this a Devil.

And though at first this damnable service carry away a reward, yet in
conclusion it is requited with hatred and curses; For the Conscience once
soundly detesting sin, loathes the means that induced him to commit it: As
Amnons love was not so great to his sister Thamar before the Incest, 2 Samuel
13.15.
as his hatred was after it was committed. Contrariwise, he that withstands a
man in the prosecution of this or any other sin, bears away frowns and
heart-burnings for a time, but when the offending party comes to himself and
to his right reason, he recompenseth his former dislike with so much more love,
and so many more thanks.

The frantic man returning to his wits, Greenh:
thinks him his best friend that bear and bound him most.

Let us learn this as a Rule of our life, never to trust him, that will
promise to conceal a sin in us.

If thou do the best to cross any man in his sin; if thou have not thanks of
him, yet of thine own Conscience thou shall. For if where there is matter
given, there reproof should be denied, this were to encourage diseases, and to
forbid Physic, to discover a sore, and apply no salve.

Why should there not be as well a liberty, as a necessity of reproving?

Yet there is a wisdom as well as a liberty, and it were to be wished that
they that have this wisdom, would also make use of this liberty, and if take
the liberty, then to take this wisdom with it. The wise manner of reproving,
oftentimes makes the reproof it self effectual.

Mr. Greeneham, whose body quietly endured much launcing at the hand of the
temporal Surgeon, and therein manifested himself a Mirror of patience,
and who himself in the curing of the wounds of men's souls was an expert
Surgeon, gives this Advice: Page 101. As it falls out (says he) in soars,
so it comes to pass in sins; We cannot away to have our wounds often launced
and grated on the quick, but to be fed with healing salves, bathed in the
mercies of God, and plaistered over with sweet promises rather then ripped up
to the bottom; whereas it is far safer before incarnative and healing
medicines, to use corrasive and mundifying waters, without which, though some
soars may seem to close and skin apace, yet they prove worse, being rotten
still at the coare, and having above a thin skin, and beneath nothing but dead
flesh.

It is more sound Surgery (says he) to prick and pierce the Conscience with
the burning Iron of the Law, and to cleanse the wounds of our souls by the
sharp threatenings thereof, least the skin pulled over the Conscience for a
while, we leave the rotten corruption uncured underneath. Much more see at
large in the same Author, in Page 106.

Yet (with submission to the judgment of the learned) in this particular of
reproving Swearers, who are so hardened and wilful in this fearful sin, I
account it better to deal with them mildly at the first in reproving them,
till we find some show of contrition, and afterward endeavor by sharp
threats to humble them, to work a through reformation in them. For so in
another place of his Works, (to wit, Page 631.) I find the same Author
advising thus; In admonition (whether of Swearers, or any other sinners) we
must use discretion and degrees; as good Physicians, we must not at the first
urge the most forcible medicines, but use them in their degree and place, when
and where more favorable means prevail not: not applying too strong
purgations at the first with Rehoboam, lest our impatient patients be notable
to bear them; especially seeing man by nature is unwilling to receive any
reprehension, notwithstanding it be gentle: When a spot is showed to be in our
garment, we are ready to take up mire, and to cast it on his coat that
poynted at our spot; or seeing somewhat in our face by a glass, we are ready
to break the glass that first showed us our blemish.

Those admonitions are most commendable and effectual, which aim at the good
of the reproved, and not those which fit most with the humor of the Reprover.

If they be splenatick and over-eager, they harden those affections which they
pretend to soften.

And in his 28. Page, we must rather win men with a loving admonition, then
goare them with a sharp reprehension: Considering (says he) how you must put
on you the person of the offender, that as you spare not his sin, because of
the zeal of Gods glory, so you press it not too far, because of compassion to
a brother.

In curing therefore this soar and sin of Swearing, 3. Properties of a
Surgeon.
thou must be careful to have the properties of a wise Surgeon: to wit, 1.
An Eagles eye. 2. A Ladies hand. 3. A Lions heart.


1. An Eagles eye; to discern afar off the nature of a wound, whether fresh
or inveterate, 1. An Eagles eye.
whether of weakness or of wilfulness, whether a Thorn or a Nettle: There
must not be one uniforme proceeding with all men in the reprehension of this
sin; but that must vary according to the disposition and condition of the
reproved.

The Apostle, Heb. 10.24. commands every Christian to observe his brother;
Observe first, the circumstance of the time, 1 Samuel 25.36.
so did Abigail toward churlish Nabal, suffering the sheep-shearing first to
be ended, and the wine to be gone out of his head.

When men are so drunk that they cannot see, and therefore blind; so drunk that
they cannot stand, therefore lame; so drunk that they cannot speak, therefore
unless it be to spue forth blasphemy against the Lord, it is no fit time to
bestow any great pains to reclaim them from this sin. I think, to endeavor much
with them at such times, is to cast Pearls amongst Swine, and holy things
amongst Dogs.

Observe secondly, whether an Elder or Novice; The Apostle bids Timothy, Exhort
an Elder, 1 Timothy 5.1. If the party be an Elder, though reproof be not
unlawful, yet it is not so fit as exhortation.

Observe thirdly, by this quick, judicious Eagles eye, before thou take any
Swearer in hand, to discern whether he be a Thorn or a Nettle, seeing some
Swearers as thorns, which easily touched, hurt not, do not much gainsay; but
if hard and unwarily, fetch blood of the hand; others as Nettles, which if they
be nicely handled, sting and prick; but if they be roughly handled, and
pressed, are pulled up without any harm.

Secondly, 2. A Ladies hand.
a Ladies hand: most commonly it is best to deal gently at the first, as I
showed before: For David requested his Captains to deal gently, and entreat
Absalom kindly (though a traitor) for his sake, 2. Sam. 18.5. So deal
courteously with them at first, for our own sakes, remembering our selves, what
we were in our sins, till God opened our eyes, and touched our hearts.

Perhaps he offends in frailty, ignorance, and custom only, then the Apostles
precept must be our practice; Gal. 6.1.
Ye which are spiritual, restore such a one with the spirit of meekness:
borrowing the phrase from Chyrurgions, who handling Ladies hands, being to
deal with a broken joint, handle the same tenderly. Nathan seems to do so,
when first in a parable he reproved David, till he brought him to condemn
and pass sentence against himself, and then he knew he might the more
boldly and succesfully reiterate what he had sentenced, 2 Samuel 12.1, 2, etc.

And Paul reproving the Corinthians, includes himself and Apollos in the same
reproof, 1 Cor. 4.6. as though he had been guilty of the same crime.

On some have compassion, putting a difference, says Jude, verse. 22.

Use the greater mildness in the work of restoration, says the Apostle, Gal.
6.1.
Considering your selves, that ye may fall into the like temptation and
offense.

Even as having a wheale on the hand, be it never so little, we will not suffer
another to let it out, but are willing to do it our selves: So when we deal
with men for sins committed by ignorance and infirmity, let us do it with
great tenderness, lest they desire rather to admonish themselves, then to be
admonished by us.

Catch these birds, the Souls of the Swearers, with the nets of gentleness,
rather then drive them away with the noise of thundering judgments at the first
a ssault.

Iron is first heated red-hot in the fire, and after beaten and hardened with
cold water.

Thus must thou deal with an offending friend, first heat him with the praise
of his deserved virtue, (you are very conscionable in your dealings toward
man, and careful for avoiding other sins against God) and then beat upon him
with the hammer of reprehension, (and why should you not be as careful to obey
God herein also?) being first prepared with praise.

Good Nurses when their children are fallen, first take them up and speak them
fair, afterward chide them.

Gentle speech is a good preparative to rigor; Let the building of reproofs for
faults, be framed on the foundation of praise for virtues, that men may see
that thou love him by thy aprobation, and that thou love not his fault by
thy reprehension.

If he love himself, he will love those that mislike his vices; and if he love
not himself, it makes no matter whether he love thee or no.

A true friend will resemble honey, the sweetest of all liquors, nothing so
sweet to the taste, nothing more sharp and cleansing when it mien with an
exulcerated soar.

As I will be sweet in the praises and encouragements of friends, so also
sharp in their censure: either let them abide me no friend to their faults, or
no friend to themselves, says elegant Hall.

If thou desire by thy reprehension to do good, thou must be endued with
Courage, Fidelity, Discretion, Patience.

1. Fidelity, not to bear with, 2. Courage, to reprove them. 3. Discretion, to
reprove them well. 4. Patience to endure the leisure of amendment, making much
of good beginnings, putting up many repulses, taunts, raylings, disgraces, and
bearing with many weaknesses, as knowing that they that have been long used to
fetters, cannot but halt a while when they are taken off.
Still hoping, I say, still soliciting, still waiting with patience; for
conversion (much less perfection) is not the fruit of a moment; we must having
often told them of this sin with patience, expect, proving if God at any time
will work repentance and reformation in them.

Many fail and offend herein; if men be not presently reclaimed from this
sinful custom of Swearing with one or two admonitions, they leave admonishing
further, and break forth into sury and despite against them, as if they were
appointed to be Authors of men's salvation, and not waiters on God for his rich
blessings upon their poor pains of admonishing: Thinking when they have
spoken, it must be done; when as it shall not be done, till God speaks.

If God will have the Swearer called at the twelfth hour, think him not a
castaway if he be not converted at the ninth hour.

We must not give over, notwithstanding the little seeming success of this
duty; perhaps we sinned in the manner of reproving for want of wisdom, or
we would too much have gloried in our selves if we had done good, or we did
convince Judgment generally, and not apply things to their circumstances
particularly, or we did all without love, or without prayer, and so though we
plant and sow, God denies the first and the latter rain to bless our labors:
or lastly, we are to be comforted and encouraged under hope of God in time to
come.

For experience proves that some at the first, receiving of an admonition most
hardly, have afterward much profited by it: And others receiving an admonition
very gently, have lost the fruits of it afterward very negligently.

For many courteous natures are as soft wax, sooner able to receive the
impression of an admonition, but less able to retain it. Again, a more heroical
nature is as harder wax, not so soon admitting, as keeping the print being made.

As a furious or phreneticall brain can by no means away with him that shall
lay hands on him, though it were for his profit; so, so long as we are in
impatience, we perhaps may suffer no man to speak unto us, though it be for our
good; but the lethargy of our mind being cured, we marvel at our former
impatience, and are ready to show our selves thankful to him that would have a
care to draw us out of such a sin.

Therefore we ought not to faint or be weary of well speaking, though success
be not answerable to our present expectation.

Man's pleasure presently is not to be satisfied; but Gods pleasure patiently to
be attended, 2 Timothy 2.25. In which place as the Apostle persuades to patience
toward opposers, so also to instruct those whom we reprove for sin.

Be sure thy admonition be backed with Doctrine and Instruction. I charge thee
before God, to reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. delivering the admonitions in the name of God, and not in thine
own, that the reproved may have occasion to say, he is reproved of God himself
rather then of man, and so the reproof shall never fall to the ground.

Now when these two general means, scil. Purity from it in life, and
Reprehension of it by word, and these two special means of the second
general, 1. An Eagles eye, 2. A Ladies had, i, all meek, loving, wise, patient
courses, with the opportunity of the season, and advantages of circumstances,
have been accordingly used, and nothing yet will prevail; a shame and curse
must needs light on that man, who being thus friendly sought by love to be
reclaimed from his sinful swearing, does return hatred for the good will and
love of his friend. Most commonly to such a one belongs the speech of the
Prophet to Amaziah: I know that the Lord will destroy thee, because thou have
refused my counsel; 2 Chro. 25 16.
which is the 3. particular means of this second general, to wit, in reproving
of swearers to have a Lions heart.

When Swearers are wilfully bent, and will not be reclaimed by the spirit of
meekness; 3. A Lions heart. Gal. 6.1.
then thou art not to be discouraged by their fearful oaths, and taunting
disgraces, but ought to be bold as a Lion, Prove. 28.1. Pro. 28.1.
lifting up thy voice as a Trumpet, which must be held forth with the hand, as
well as blown into with the mouth.

If Swearers souls will not be caught with the net of gentle admonition, yet
endeavor to kill their sin with the thunderbolt and piercing Cannon of Gods
judgments, that so their souls (if by no other means) may violently be taken
as brands out of the fire, Jude 23.

Saint James his method of admonition is an excellent pattern for our
imitation; Iam. 5.12.
Brethren, above all things swear not, but let your yea, be yea, nay, nay,
lest ye fall into condemnation.

1. He does, captare benevolentiam, endeavoring to win them, by giving them a
loving title, Brethren.

2. He does inform the judgment what to speak, But let your yea be yea, your
nay, nay; brief for memory, plain for capacity, and doubled for the greater
certainty.

3. Then he rounds them in the ear with the downfall of damnation, thereby to
prevail, if by no other means he could, because the whole counsel of God is
to be delivered. Act. 20.27.


He is first a Barnabas, a son of consolation, before a Boanerges, a son of
thunder; the first assayes to allure by love, before he restrain or compel by
fear.

He first informs the mind with the matter what, before he works upon the
affection with the motive why?

Being first tied unto him, with the title of Love, they will be the more
fearful of the downfall of damnation.

For should we instantly at first fly into the Swearers face with the cudgel
of damnation, he would think we assaulted him with the weapon of malice, or
revenge, and that would make him stand upon his guard, and fall to the defense
of his sin.

It is a more charitable, and probably prevailing course to deal with him upon
confessed grounds, and on those to build that which is not confessed, as,

1. Tell the Swearer at first, Instances.
Gods law must be the rule of our lives; he presently contesseth this; by
obeying it, we are made the sons of God the Father, the brethren of Christ,
the Temples of God the holy Ghost; Why should you then by this one base
subtility of Satan, be so much wanting to your self, as to endeavor the
losing of these dignities (that you by Christ are made capable of) by breaking
so needlessly the Law of your maker?

2. Above all things swear not; shall we above all things forget that which
above all things we are commanded to remember, and that not by men, but by the
holy Ghost himself?

This above all sins is primarily prohibited, and shall this by us most
freqently be committed? This were to give Christ vinegar and gall, in stead of
wine and oil; to forget what we should remember, and to remember what we
should forget; to make choice of the cursed language of Edom, in stead of the
pure language of Canaan; to desire stones in stead of bread, Serpents in stead
of fish, rough husks in stead of sweet nuts, the Devils flesh-pot in Egypt
rather then Gods Manna in the wilderness, or durable dainties in the land that
flows with milk and honey.

Again, Mat. 5.31.
Christ tells you, what must be the manner of your speech, Let your yea be
yea, nay, nay. The words are plain, you cannot but understand them; short, you
cannot forget them; delivered by the pattern of perfection, the Way, the Trutb,
the Life, you cannot doubt of the certainty of them.

Will you be seduced in the labyrinth of errout, when you may walk in the
plain way of truth? Deuteronomy. 30.19.
Will you choose death by rash swearing, when you may gain life by sober
speaking? This direction comes from Christ our fast friend, the other
suggestion from Satan our professed enemy: O hate this oathing, a work of the
flesh, for the Authors sake the Prince of darkness.

4. Lest you fall into condemnation: Look into hell before you leap into it; is
it a sport to be damned for ever?

Be not deceived, Gal. 6.8.
God is not mocked, as a man sows, so shall be reap; he that sows to the
flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption.

He that sets you on work, (unless you repent, unless you renounce his
service) will pay you your wages: you cannot work a foes desert, and yet expect
a friends reward.

The Grapes and Figs of Come ye blessed, are not to be expected from the
Thorns and Thistles of swearing by Gods Soul, Blood, Mass, etc.

By your words you shall be justified, Matthew. 12.
and by your words you shall be condemned.

The Lord reproved Gain for his wrath, and by his sad countenance, before he
slew his brother, Genesis 4.6. But Caein not yielding to the Lords reproof, came
unto the grievous sin of murder it self.

I must needs tell you, by this your customary cursed speaking, you are in the
very suburbs of hell, look unto it, consider of it, Psa. 4.
Stand in aw and sin not, lest you plunge your self into the gulf of hell
it self; for, qualis vita, finis ita; as men live, so most commonly they die.

Having so great a journey to travel, as from earth to heaven, will you go
quite out of the way all the former and greater part of the day, your life, and
yet in the last and least part thereof, at the hour of your death, hope,
imagine, or presume to return into the way, and attain unto an happy end of
your journey?

Do you desire happiness in the end, and not seek after holiness in the way?

Will you in an instant press and leap in at the narrow gate, that leads to
heaven, and through the general course of your life, with posting speed run in
the broad way that leads to hell and destruction?

Be not deceived, Grace must go befote Glory; God never gives Glory, but first
he gives Grace.

He that will be blessed must be holy, he must be partaker in the first
resurrection, on whom the second death shall have no power. Rev. 20.6.

He must be a Priest of Christ that will reign with him a thousand years: He
must crucisie the deeds of the flesh, banish rotten words, and hellish oaths,
and offer up sweet smelling sacrifices, words powdered with salt, yea, yea, nay,
nay, that may administer grace; and not by wounds, Blood, Saint Mary, Light,
etc. that pierce the soul, and bring grief unto the heart: Without holiness
no man shall see the Lord to his comfort, Hebr. 12.14. No unclean thing shall
enter there; without shall be Dogs, Rev. 21.17. and 22.15.

A King will not suffer Dogs to enter into his privy Chamber; or to have any
abode in his dining room; and shall cursed Swearers that tear Gods name with
their teeth (as Dogs do flesh from the bones) that do, notwithstanding all
gentle admonitions and sharp objurgations, still with the Dogreturn to their
vomit, to lick up afresh the same ghastly oaths which before they vomited
forth, as it were some sweet morsel and desirable dainty; that do with the
Sow, seeming once to be washed, return unto their wallowing in the mire of
ear-infecting and soul-killing swearing; shall these have entrance and
admission into the privy Chamber of God, the mansion of Christ, and all the
host of Saints? God first must cease to be true, and Satan the author of a lie.

Do we expect to see God face to face? Every man that has this hope,
purifieth himself even as he is pure, 1 John 3.3

Thus in the discharge of your duty, must you admonish him of his finne,
whether he amend thereby, or no.

If thou have leisure and opportunity to bestow some pains and time with thy
friend privately, for the casting out of this long-lodged Inmate from his soul;
(for it may be this evil spirit has so long possessed him, that it will not
be driven out with a breath, but requires grrater pains, Prayer, Fasting) then
be sure not to forget Jerem. 5. Zach. 5. Mat. 5. and Jam. 5.12. the method that
Christ, the Apostles, the Prophet, use for the removing this Devil from the
soul of man.

Among all, let these two cautions or mementoes, be firmly treasured up in thy
memory for the Swearers profit.

First, be sure to work upon his judgment,

2. Be sure to insist upon that sin alone,

Good occasions of reformation have been lost, because too many faults together
have been brought to amendment.

I account it much better to reclaim from one effectually, then to glance at
one promiscuously.

Thus endeavor thou (by all these forementioned ways of information and
reprehension, lovingly, discreetly, boldly, patiently) to become with Paul, all
unto all, that thou may win some, 1 Cor. 9.22.
and pull them as brands out of the fire of this quick burning sin.

Be careful to observe all advantages, opportunities, and circumstances of
person, time, place, manner, that thou may find the more speedy and
desirable success; but yet bear this in thy bosom, that it is far better to
offend in some one of these three last mentioned circumstances, then in the
substance, and not reprove at all.

Now when after such due manner we have exercised this faithfulness,
gentleness, wisdom, boldness, figured out unto us by an Eagles eye, a
Ladies hand, and Lions heart, in reproving this vain, finfull, sensual
swearing. When all is done, yet nothing is done toward the expelling this
poison, toward the beheading this Traitor, toward the curing this disease,
unless we be mindful to pray for the Lords blessing upon our pains, that he
that gives the word of wisdom, love and boldness to the mouth of the
speaker, will vouchsafe to give a willing inclination, and resolute reformation
to the heart of the hearer.

Lord persuade Iaphet, Genesis 3.25.
prayed Noab, for he knew his speaking to the ear was in vain, unless the
Lord spoke also unto the heart.

Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, yet both in vain, unless the Lord give
the increase.

Except the Lord build the house, Psalm. 127.102.
they labor in vain that build it; Except the Lord keep the City, the
watchman waketh but in vain. It is in vain to rise up early in thy
reprehensions, to sit up late in thy exhortations, to eat the bread of sorrows
in they expectation of success, unless the Lord say the word Ephphatha.

If Paul preach unto Lydia, as long as he did to Eutychus, Acts 20.7. even till
midnight, Acts 16.4.
yet all is nothing till the Lord opens the heart.

If Peter fish all night, Luke 5.
yet shall he catch nothing, till Christ bring him to the place of speeding.

The Minister, or private Reprover, speaks but to the ear; he that speaks
to the heart, his Chair and Pulpit is in heaven.

Close therefore up thy counsel to the Swearers ear, with this short secret
Centurions prayer, in thine own heart, Lord, speak thou the word only, Matthew.
8.8.
and this thy servant shall be bealed.

3. The 3d manner how to reprove swearers, 3. By departure from their company.
is by our departure from their company and society, if by our words and
works, our purity from, and our reprehension of it, we cannot prevail.

The first way or means was by purity of life, freedom from this sin, and
this is a secret reproving.

The second way was by reprehension in our speech, and this is a private
reproving.

The third way is by departure from the company and society of Swearers;

The first is Real, the second verbal, the third Intimated, or intentionall.

If none of the other two can prevail, yet this may.

If the two former will do the Swearer no good, yet this third will keep thee
from much hurt; if by them the Swearers soul is not bettered, yet by this thy
own duty is discharged, and thy conscience settled.

Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians. 5.11.
but rather reprove them. As rash, idle, common swearing, does plainly discover
it self to be a work of darkness, and altogether unfruitful, as was showed
before, so this is the last way to reprove it, by departing from the society of
such as are delighted with it.

When thou perceivest them to be obstinate against reproves, and can do no
good by admonition upon them; then be thou sure to have no further fellowship
with them, entertain them not in thy house, nor countenance them in thy
company; for these ensuing hazards thou art likely to incur by their society:
1. Suspicion. 2. Infection. 3. Malediction.


The first, of suspicion from others.

The second, of infection in our selves.

The third, of malediction from God.

1. Hazard of Suspicion from others, inasmuch as we commonly ghess at a man's
inclination, by the disposition of his company: Birds of a feather, most
commonly will flock together. Noscitur ex alin, qui non cognoscitur ex se. The
Lacedaemonians enquiring after the behavior of their children, demanded very
wisely, with what playfellowes they were linked; not doubting, but that they
would be like to such whose fellowship they fancied.

Amicitiae ut pares quaerunt, ita and faciunt: Friendship as it seeks, so it
makes men alike in conditions. The Apostlewilleth us, to Abstain from all
appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Wherefore this is one certainly, and that
not a little one, when daily, familiarly, delightfully, we converse with
notorious swearers, without any mind, heart, conscience, to reprove them.

The second hazard is of Infection,

Commisti sunt inter gentes, they were mingled amongst the heathen, says David
of the people of God: and what was the issue? They learned their works.

If we be companions of Ostriches, we shall favor of their wildness, as they
who sleep with Dogs, shall swarm with Fleas.

One Corah did but kindle the fire of conspiracy, and presently two hundred
and fifty Captains brought sticks to increase it: so venomous is wickedness,
that one dram of it is able to corrupt the whole lump of Israel.

Sin among men, like the rot among sheep, is of a catching and infectious
quality; many have fallen into the fashion of swearing out of the ill practice
of Swearers.

It is an hard matter for the Soul not to fall into those vices, unto which
the eyes and ears are invited.

Swallows would not fly within Thebes, because their walls were so often
besieged: Let not men put on wings to fly into the company of those men whose
manners are corrupted, for fear both of corruption and destruction.

The reason why our Savior would not give that Disciple leave to go bury his
dead Father, was, (as some judge) lest his unbeleeving kindred, who would be
present at his Fathers funeral, should corrupt him again, and so he should die
with them.

Bad men keep others from goodness, as those dead carcasses did the Raven from
Noabs Ark.

From these let us run, as Moses did from his Rod turned into a Serpent.

For if with the Israelites we join our selves to Baal-Peor, Numb. 25.2, 3.
to the company of swaggering Swearers, we will eat the offerings of the dead,
and bow down to their gods.

It is written of Mezentius the Tyrant, Corpora corporibus jungebat mortua
vivis, he bound the dead and the living together; but the dead did not revive
by the living, the living putrefied rather by reason of the dead.

The fresh waters running into the Sea, do not sweeten it, but are made
brackish by the same.

Even in Paradise the woman, whom God himself gave to man, being infected by
the Serpent, infects the man, and that at the first assault; And shall any man
now, being shut out of Paradise, and stripped of those supernatural helps and
graces wherewith Adam was invested, think himself more able to resist then
he? No, no, 1 Cor. 15.
Evil words corrupt good manners, much more do blasphemous horrid oaths.

The long playing of the Cannon, batters the Wall, and a continual dropping
pierces the stone. Peter by standing long by a fires side in Caiaphas Hall, is
dangerously infected. Joseph living in Pharaobs Court, is at length taught and
brought to swear by the life of Pharaob Children hearing their Parents to
swear so often, learn to be perfect in swearing, before they can go upright; and
take Gods name in vain, before they can rightly tell, or pronounce their own.

The Physicians rule touching persons infected with the plague, is good to be
observed toward persons presumptuously remaining in this sin, Cito, long,
tarde: 1. Speedily fly from their company. 2. Fly far away. 3. Return
slowly to their company again.


Now the plague is not more contagious then the Swearers are; the plague does
not more infect the air, then the wicked Swearers the persons and places among
whom they live.

Therefore if we regard our health, we should be careful when we perceive
them resolute in their sin.

1. Speedily to fly from them. 2. Fly far away from them. 3. See them amend
before we return to them.
The third hazard is of Malediction: Paul for his sake, Act. 27. Genesis 39.5.
and upon Potiphars house for Joseph's sake; so the plague and justice of God
sometimes pursues a whole company for one man's offense, as it did all that
sailed with Jonah for his rebellion; Jonah 1.7. Ios. 7.27.
and the whole host of the Isaaelites for Achans theft; and the house, walls,
Zach. 5.3
and timber, (senseless creatures) much more are the persons and inhabitants in
the house for the Swearers sake, as the Prophet averreth.

Saint John could not abide under the same roof with Ebion and Cerinthus, for
fear it should fall upon him.

And touching Babylon he heard a voice, Rev. 18.4.
Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues: for her sins have reached unto heaven: And does not
the swearers sins reach to heaven, when so nearly they touch God himself?
will he then forget or pass by them? Number. 26.23.


God commanded Moses to speak to the Congregation of Israel, saying, Get you up
from about the Tabernacle of Corah, Dathan and Abiram; and Moses did speak,
Verse. 26.
Depart, I pray you, from the tabernacle of those wicked men, and touch nothing
of theirs, lest ye be consumed in their siunes. The commandment was no sooner
obeyed by their departure, and Moses his speech ended, but the punishment was
presently inflicted. Verse. 31.
The earth clave asunder that was under them, and swallowed them up, their
houses, goods, and all that appertained to them. Verse 34.
And what did the rest of the Israelites do? And they that were round about
them, fled at the cry of them; for they said, Let us be gone quickly, lest the
earth swallow us up also. Surely they made a good application, lest God seeing
their connivence at their sins, by their abode in the place, should have made
them also to have shared in the like punishments.

Seeing many horrible blasphemers have been taken away (as the Coruwall
Gentleman, the Lincolnshire Serving-man) in the midst of their swearing; the
one crying, Horse and man and all to the Devil, the blood of the other
breaking out of all his members, as he swore by Gods blood; Michael the Jewish
Rabbine breaking his neck, even in the act of his blasphemy; and the Courtier
at Mansfeild carried away by the Devil in the midst of his oaths; (as before
was showed) why may not we fear the like judgments upon such, that are like
swearers, and lighting upon them (we approving their curses by our silence at
their swearing, and delighting in their company) may justly fear to share in
some part of their punishment, if not in soul, yet in body; if not in the next
life to our destruction, yet in this life for other men's admonition.

See ( Numb. 16.3.13.) what the sin of Korah, Numb. 16.3.13.
Dathan, and Abiram was, and then compare the sin of our swaggering swearers,
and contemners of reproof for their swearing, and mark what difference there
is between them. Ye take too much upon you, (said they) seeing all the
Congregation are holy every one of them, verse. 3. So say our ruffian-like
swearers, You take too much upon you, all are as holy as you your self; Will thou make thy self altogether a Prince, and a Ruler over us? ver. 13. The
sayings of these in contempt of admonishing, besides their swearing, are very
fearful, sinful.

Their company then cannot be so profitable, should not be pleasing. For it is
not injustice in God, if we encourage or countenance swearers, by our presence,
silence, approbation, (though we swear not with them) to wrap us up in the
same vengeance. A qua libera nos, Domine.

Yet such as are delighted in the company of such finfull swearers, have I
think somewhat to say for themselves, why they have so much delight in, and so
little have out of their company.

1. Objectio^s to continue in obstinate Swearers company, answered.
Objection. We see in our judgments no such danger in the company of swearers.

Sol. A Master seeing his servant playing at dice, may put out the Candle. God
justly may put out the light of your judgments in this particular, because you
have abused your judgments in many other generals: And seeing you have more
delighted in the favor of sinful swearers, then in the favor of God your
heavenly Creator, it is just with him to punish sin with sin, sins of practice
with sins of opinion; to have eyes, and not to see; ears, and not to hear;
hearts, and not to understand with them.

The Sun may equally shine upon all men, and yet those that are blind, see
nothing by the light thereof.

The light of the Word is clear against this sin, Mat. 5. Exodus 20. yet
carnal purblinde men, will not benefit by this open universal light.

The natural man perceives not the things that are of God, neither indeed can
he, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14
1 Cor. 2.14.

Men (though of much reading, and filled with a loud sound of general
knowledge) are as empty barrells floating on the Sea, close shut, there is
water enough if they could open themselves; Their judgments might easily see
the danger in sinful swearers company if they would, or rather if God were
pleased to boar a hole in their close caskes with the whimblet of his Word,
and pierce them through by the power of his grace and Spirit.

Objection 2. I should be thought to be singular, if I should absent my self
unmannerly from their company.

Sol. It is better to be thought to be singular, then to be known to be
sinful.

It is a commendable piety to affect fingularitie among those that are vicious.

It is better to do, or think well alone, then to follow a mublitude in that
which is evil. Exodus 23.


Objection 3. It is hard for a man to leave the company of all such his ancient
familiar acquaintance.

Sol. All our old garments may willingly be cast away, when better are given in
the room of them.

Lot was better pleased with his new associates, Angels, Messengers from God,
then with his old acquaintance the Inhabitants of Sodom, rebels against
Heaven.

His wife had a longing after, though mercifully pulled from them, therefore
she is turned into a pillar of Salt, for to season us and our carnal
affections. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness; our
own flesh and blood is not to be followed, but Gods commandment to be obeyed.

It is better having one eye to go to life, Mat. 18.9.
then having two to be cast into hellfire. Better have the conduct of God, and
a good Conscience, to cheer us in our journey to heaven, then to have a
multitude of old companions, the sons of Belial, to ring a passing peale to
our souls, and have us to hell.

Objection 4. I find their company much profitable; I sin not against the
Apostles rule, Ephesians. 5. Ephesians. 5.


Sol. He means there, such workers and actors of darkness, are no whit
profitable to thy soul, how soever they may seem to be to thy body. Now thy
souls profit thou chiefly art to aim at, seeing the welfare of the body
wholly depends thereon.

If thou by their company do gain in the flesh, I am sure thou losest in the
Spirit. How can thou account that gain, which is had with the loss of
Faith, God, and a good Conscience?

How can thou rejoice in the bargain, when thou give pearls, and
receivest pebbles; gold, and receivest dung; buyest earth, which is transitory,
and sellest heaven, which is eternal? This is Glaucus his change, Copper for
gold; Esaus purchase, pottage for a birthright.

I had rather hunger (says one) then willingly dip my hand in a wicked man's
dish.

Objection 5. Being in the company of swearers, if rashly I should rush out of
their company, I should be much hated and spoken of by them.

Sol. If evil men like thee, its because they spy some evil quality in thee
like their own. If they saw nothing but goodness in thee, they could not love
thee, and be bad themselves.

When the people praised Phocion, he doubted somewhat, and said, What evil
have I done? Strive to deserve ill of none, but not deserving ill, let it not
grieve thee to hear evil of those that are evil themselves.

There is no greater Argument of goodness, then the hatred and dispraise of a
wicked man.

Objection 6. I keep my tongue from swearing with them, though for society I
sit in their company, my heart and my soul are kept pure from such pollutions,
they shall not defile me.

Sol. Then thou art as pure as Christ Jesus himself, in whose Spirit alone
there was found no guile; All other Saints had an inclination to evil, and
many of them by evil company dangerously foiled.

If such tall Cedars, as Joseph, Job, Sampson, Solomen, Peter, have been
shaken, which had so fast footing, what will be thy estate, that stand upon
such slippery ground, having more aptitude to fall, more provocation to sin?

Thou prayest, to be delivered from temptation, Mat. 6.
and yet do thou run into temptation by thy willing associating thy self to
the company of sinful swearers? This is not to stay till the Devil find
thee, but a seeking of him, because the Devil should not lose thee.

It is but a madness for a man to presume upon an Antidote in going to the
Pesthouse, when he may keep himself from it.

It is indeed the property of oil, being powered into other Liquors, to swim
on the top, and keep it self unmixt: And of the Salamander, to lie in the
fire, and not be burnt; And of the fishes, to retain their fresh taste, and
yet live in the salt waters; But these qualities are rare, and not easily
matched, seeing every thing else participates of the nature of the place
wherein it abides.

Waters vary their savours, with the veins of the soil through which they
slide. Brute creatures also (many of them) altering their region, do alter also
their condition. Men are as apt to be altered by the corrupt manners of men,
with whom they converse, breeding in them an insensible inclination to evil,
and working in them, if not an approbation, yet a less dislike of those sins
to which their eyes and ears are so much inured. Thou may have a bad
acquaintance, but never have thou a wicked companion, but such a one as may
teach thee somewhat, or learn somewhat of thee.

If thou can not stop his mouth from speaking of evil, and uttering of
oaths, yet either open thy mouth to reprove them, or stop thy ears from
hearing of them, that so he may see by turning thy back, that they have no
room in thy heart.

Object. Me thinks something yet may be said against the departure from
swearers company.

Sol. They that dwell near to the River Nilus, wheresoever they are from it,
yet they think they still hear the noise thereof in their ears: So thou have
so long been inured to their company, which have seemed to be so pleasing or
profitable to flesh and blood, and so long wedded to the examples and fashions
of others, upon whose sleeve thou art almost resolved to pin thy salvation or
damnation; The noise, I say, of these Nilusses, profit, pleasure, custom,
company, practice, example, do sound so lowdly, so strongly in thy ears, that
thou think thou should not be from their company at all.

Therefore let us hear this thy somewhat, or rather nothing that thou will
further object.

Objection 7. Many great and learned men would neither swear so often, or
reprehend other so seldom for swearing, if either the one or the other were so
sinful.

Sol. But what says the Scripture herein? 1 Cor. 1.20.
Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where is the disputer of this world?
has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? Ye see your calling,
brethren, Ver. 26.
how that not many wise after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are
called. Ver. 30.
But of him ye are in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom,
righteousness, etc. Intimating unto us that they have no true wisdom that are
not taught by Christ Jesus: Now Christ his wisdom was, Mat. 5. Mat. 5.34.
But I say unto you, swear not at all.

Si Christum discis, nihil est, sicaetera nescis:

Si Christum nescis, est, si eatera discis.

If an Angel from heaven speak any other doctrine Gal. 1.8.
which is contrary to Christ, let him be accursed.

Many have great light in respect of Controversies, School Divinity, etc. and
yet too little in respect of sanctity and devotion.

No one man porfectly discovers all things.

To the Law, Isa. 8.20.
to the testimany; if they speak not according to this Word, it is because
there is no light in them. Jer. 2.13.
They do commit two evils: they do forsake Gods Word, the fountain of
living waters, and do dig unto themselves broken pits that will hold no water,
in preferring men's practice before Gods precepts.

This is my beloved Soune, Mat. 17.5.
bear ye him. The Word alone it is that must approve, or reprove our courses.

Touching all such great Clerks, we may say with Aristotle, (...), etc. Plato
is my friend, and so is Socrates, but Truth is my dearest friend. I like this
Doctor and that Preacher, but Christ speaking I like best of all.

Now if some such great ones be as maimed Creeples, sometimes lame in their
feet or tongue, yet pointing out which way thou shall walk, take their
direction in what is good, and leave it in the bad; respect their sayings in
the maine, and leave both their sayings or doings in the bye.

Objection 8. I my self am book-learned, therefore I know what to do in
things appeartaining to my soul, without your direction.

Sol. But -- Aliquandobonus dormitat Homerus. Bernardus non videt omnia, Even
Bernard sees not all things. The seeming sweetness of the swearers company
perchance makes thee purblind in that, wherein thou should be Eagleeyed.

The children of this world are wiser in their generation, then the children of
light. The Physician, whose Art has been healthful to others, being himself
fallen into sickness, contents not himself with his own knowledge: The
skillful Lawyer having commendably handled the causes and controversies of many
Clients, will not in his own Purchase and proper case, trust to his own
practice, but will take advice of the best experienced: And shall we in the
great sickness of the soul, and purchase of salvation, think our own
mother-wit is good enough, that heaven can be got with ease, and sin soon
plaistered, that since swearing is so exceeding sinful, yet the company of
swearers is very little dangerons?

Objection 9. I have heard even such as are accounted godly, that have
sometimes reproved others, yet now and then to swear themselves.

Sol. Have such lofty Cedars been moved? then may thou scorning their
sanctity, fear to be overwhelmed in the blast of Gods displeasure, through
the violence of Satan's assault in the daily breach of this Commandment of thy
Creator.

They have been very cold, I think, in reproving others, if in the same sin
they have been, and often still are overtaken themselves.

But tell me, whether they hate or look big to be reproved, or thankfully
rather receive reprehension. Our ordinary swearers swear at every word, and
think those that reprove them to be in far greater fault then themselves, that
so free-quently and fearfully have sinned, and given the occasion of reproof:
But the godly overslipping, thank the^ for telling them, and will not easily,
or speedily be brought to swear again.

A man having sold an house, may come into it again, but he is as a stranger,
not as the owner or dweller in the house, So such as have promised to renounce
this sin, do and may sometime fall into it again (as they that have been
long used to carry heavy fetters, may halt for a while after) yet they excuse
not, they defend not themselves in this sin.

As the Serpent cut in pieces, has but certain relics of poison in the
mangled members thereof: So this sin of the godly penitent person once maimed
by resolution against it, has not the like violence, as when it was whole, and
right membred in them, or as it has still in the wicked, in whom it has daily
and sole regiment, primary and perfect Monarchy.

Objection 10. I must then depart the world, if I will have no society with
sinners, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.10
1 Cor. 5.10.

Sol. It is one thing to lodge a stranger, as in an Inn for a night, and
another thing to let him lodge, eat, drink, dwell, year and day with thee,
as if he were the owner of the house.

Having a lawful calling to converse with swearers, and reproving them for it,
the oath passes away, as a stranger, as a traveller, slideth in at one ear
and out at the other, as water through a seive; It hastes as a rebel through
thy ears, and reigns not as a Prince in thy heart. It is one thing to fall
into their company, as travelers drink at an Inn together, and another thing
to dwell and delight in their company: It is one thing to speak with them, and
another thing to approve of their sin.

The Apostles meaning is, that sometimes we shall have a lawful occasion to
converse and commerce with wicked persons, but that must only be, when a
lawful calling does warrant us, and then must we shine as lights in the midst
of a crooked generation, that we by our silence be not infected with them, but
they by our dislike of their sin reclaimed from the same.

Sparing society there must be with them, when by our admonition we find no
amendment, and others that are not so offensive and vexatious in their
communication, must be resorted unto, Psalm. 16.3.
that so all our delight may be in the Saints, and those that excel in virtue,
Psalm. 16.3. If all our delight must be in the Saints then must we all labor
to be Saints, and never have any settled delight in the society of any
obstinate, fearful, heaven-daring, and hell-hastening swearers, that always
stop their ears, and hate to be reformed, charm the charmer never so wisely,
never so daily. And so much for answer to those several Objections, why men
are loath to depart the company of such resolute and notorious swearers.

Now though I have so earnestly persuaded to the avoiding the daily society
and familiarity with those swearers, because of infection, suspicion,
malediction, and have endeavored to repel what might seem to be alleged to
the contrary; yet do I wish, deem, and desire, that they be not quickly and
willingly neglected by us, and left in this their sin, and the danger thereof,
eternal condemnation, but that (before we depart and wholly abandon their
company) we use all possible means of and for their conversion, considering
that such were some of us, though now by Christ's blood we are washed, cleansed.

Let us leave no course unassayed, whether of reprehension or correction,
according to our calling and conscience, which is the fifth and last particular
of this sixth and last use of Imitation, the motives why we must be so
careful and constant to imitate God in due reproving and sharp punishing of
this sin. And when hereunto your zeal has been heated, and the edge of your
affections somewhat sharpened, I shall be ready to take my work from off the
Loome, turn my pinnace into the harbor, by making a conclusion of this my
second observation.

Sinful swearing, though by man it be not, yet by God shall severely be
punished.

Therefore, Let man see by the light of this Sun, and light his Candle at the
largeness of this fire, endeavoring to reprove and punish this sin, because
God our heavenly Father has commanded us as dear children to be followers of
him.

We are to reprove sinners, all sinners in general, and (in our calling
punish them) therefore swearers also in particular. For many will acknowledge
sin in the bunch to be reproved, but not in the berry.

Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, Levit. 19.17.
but in my wise rebuke him, and not suffer sin upon his soul.

Will thou with Joab, kiss with thy mouth, and in the same instant stab thy
brother to the heart? Will thou hold him up in his rotten words, and railing
oaths, approving the same by thy silence, and so be ready to cut the throat of
his soul? Will thou pretend such great kindness to him superficially, and
practice so little effectually? or seem to regard his body, and in the mean
time suffer the Millstone of sin lying heavy on his soul?

Will thou show greater respect to the hair, then to the head; to the bone,
then to the marrow; to the bark, then to the tree; to the shell, then to the
fish; to the house, then to the inhabitant; to the body that is subject to
vanity, then to the soul that is to continue to eternity?

By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, Joh. 13.35
if ye love one another. Now what does manifest our love? Not inviting to
board, not speaking smoothly to the face; but a studious endeavor to consider
what is profitable to our neighbors soul, that so when he falls, he may be
raised up by the tongue of Admonition, or hand of correction.

Admonish, or exhort, one another daily, Heb. 3.13.
lest any of you at any time be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.
For the heart of man through the cold climate of custom, through the want of
zeal and devotion, through sins deceitfulness and Satan's subtilty, will
quickly deeply be frozen, and through hardened, if the like heat of daily
admonition do not thaw the same.

The water beginning to freeze, will scarcely bear a penny weight, afterward
it will bear a shilling, then a man, at length horse and man, cart, load and
all: Perhaps the swearer at first, through tenderness of conscience, or Gods
restraining power, will utter and broach but petty oaths, as by my fay, our
Lady, Cock and Pie, etc. after through custom and evil society, slavish
oaths, as by this Light, Bread, Drink, fire, cross of coin, etc. At last, if
the Devil has long sat in the chair of his heart, it will be so deeply
frozen, that he will make no bones of the greatest hellish oaths, Wounds,
Nails, Blood, Heart, Life, Soul of God, etc.

Let therefore opportune admonition, at least the hammer of correction, break
the Ice, dissolve the hardness, dislodge Satan, and dash this custom into
shivers.

Save such friends, as brands out of the fire, Jude 23. and look not doubtfully
upon them, staying till other men come to help thee pull them out; For so,
being in the fire, they may be burned before they be delivered, because this is
wild fire, yea hell fire, James 3.6.
set on fire of Hell it self, James 3.6.

And in Chap. 5.12. He speaks of a sudden falling into condemnation: --
Facilis descensus Averni.

All sin in general we are invited to reprove, in respect 1. Of precept, 1.
In the Law, Leviticus 19.17. 2. In the Gospel, Mat. 7.5. and 18.17. 3. By the
Apostle, Col. 4.17. 1 Timothy 5.20.
2. Of practice, 1. By God the Father, Genesis 4.6. 2. By Christ the Son, Mat.
4.7. Io. 8.44 3. By God the holy Ghost, Io. 16.8, 9. 4. By the Apostles, Luke
3.7. Gal. 2.11
3. Of praise: We should pull out a moat, Mat. 7.5.
and so preserve the whole body. He shall hide a multitude of sins, and save
a soul from death, Iam. 5.20. by removing the millstone of sin, that lay so
fast upon the heart of his soul, Levit. 19.17. When as he that neglects this
duty, discovers himself; First, to be an hypocrite; secondly, to murder
souls, even of neighbors, whom they would be thought to love, Prove. 11.9. 4.
Of profit, both the good of the Admonished, Admonisher.



1. The good and profit that comes to the reproved. David accounted it a
special Balm on his head, Psalm. 141.5. a great kindness. Ps. 141.5.
Nature does teach us, it is better justly to be reproved of an enemy, then
unjustly praised of a friend. Open rebuke is better then secret love, Pro. 27.5.
Prove. 27.5. Friendly wounds, endeavoring to convert the soul, argue great
faithfulness in such a reprover; but the smiling kisses of him that winkes at
our faults, and is silent at our sins, argues him to be both deceitful, Pro.
27.6.
and a deadly enemy, Pro. 27.6. It is better to hear the reproof of a wise
man, then the song of a fool. Eccles. 7.5
It may be the song of a fool will more delight, but sure it is the rebuke of
the wise will more profit us.

2. The good and profit that comes to the reprover: He shall have by this his
reproving, 1. Credit on earth. 2. Comfort at death. 3. A Crown in heaven.


And is this man's labor like to be in vain, which is n and for the Lord? 1 Cor
15. 1 Cor. 15. last. Pro. 15.4.
last.

1. Credit, because he is a wealthy, a wise, a merry, and a healthful man.

1. verse 6.
In this Dispersers house is much Treasure. 2. verse 7.
He is wise, as knowing when to disperse knowledge. 3. verse 15.
He is merry, because his heart is so settled in the discharge of his duty. 4.
He is healthful, his cheerful countenance does proclaim, verse. 13.15
because fed with the feast of a good conscience.
2. Comfort at death: because he being a righteous person, Pro. 10.21
his lips fed many. Therefore also he shall have hope (when it is most needful
and available, Prove. 14.32.
even) in his death, Prove. 14.32. so that it shall not be the haler to hell,
but the very gate to make entrance into glory; he is without distraction or
distrust, confidently assured, that that God, whose glory and name he advanced
in life, will also support, comfort, and confirm him in death, against all
dread of it, Sin, Romans 8.1.
Satan, Hell, Damnation.

He by reproving sin, confessed God to be his Father; God by the evidence of
his Spirit, Job 13.15.
will assure him to be his Son.

A Crown in heaven, spoke a word of reprehension, in due time. Prove. 15.23, 24.
How good is such a word spoken in such a time? surely so good, that it
delivers from hell heneath, and promotes unto the way and life that is above:
there shining as stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3.
because they turned many to righteousness.

Not withstanding all which great and matchless provocations, of credit,
comfort, glory, many are still of Cains condition: Am I my brothers keeper?
Yes, that thou art, Genesis 4.9. Prove. 12.9. Jam. 5.20. Tit. 3.11. Prove. 10.17.
and 15.10.23.
or else thou art his killer. And he that refuses to be kept, instructed,
admonished, he condemns and murders his own soul.

The mouth of the righteous brings forth wisdom, therefore surely his
tongue shall be preserved, and soul saved, Prove. 10.31.
but the mouth of the froward rejects wisdom, therefore surely their tongues
shall be cut out, and souls destroyed; Verse. 14.
Fools shall he destroyed, but such obstinate scorners are fools.

First, because they make it a sport to commit sin.

Secondly, because they forsake the Lord, and take part with the Devil.

Thirdly, because to retain a customary, short, unprofitable sin, they put
over their bodies and souls, to suffer a severe, certain, eternal punishment.

As Dogs and Swine were excluded the Lords Tabernacle and congregation under
the Law; so such are to be debarred from the Word and Sacraments under the
Gospel; because living and dying in such swinish conditions, and doggish
properties, all to rending the reprovers, trampling the pearls of their
admonition under their feet Matthew. 7. Ma. 7.6. 2 Pet. 2. ult. Rev. 21.27 and
22.15.
and returning to their old vomit, and wallowing in the mire again; they shall
never have admission into the beauty of the Lord, but shall find Paradise shut
against them.

If our brothers body is to be regarded, that it perish not for want of
sustenance, then much more his soul, Deuteronomy. 15.8.
that it perish not for want of admonition.

The life of the beast is not to be neglected; much less the soul of our
neighbor, Prove. 12.10.
our brother. There is scarce any but is glad, if he has preserved his
neighbors sheep, or his Ox that it die not in a pit; how much more glad should
we be, if we can preserve his soul from dropping into, from damning in hell?

Thus, touching the reproving of all sins in general, and the prvocations
thereto.

Now, as we are to reprove; and (if that stand within the compass of our
calling) punish all fins in general, so also by consequence, swearing in
particular.

The Motives then that may sharpen and put an edge to our zeal herein, may be
drawn: 1. From our Calling. 4. Motives to reprove and punish sweaters. 1. From
our Call.
2. From Caution. 3. From Discredit. 4. From Danger.


The first motive to animate us to perform this two branched duty of reproof
and punishment, is from our calling and duty so to do.

If God denounce war against any man, all the creatures are ready to serve him
in their course.

When he fought against the Amorites, Jos. 10.10.
the Sun took his part:

When he fought against Idolatrs, Dan. 3.
the Lions took his part:

When against mockers, 2 Kin. 2.24
the Bears took his part:

When against the Sodomites, Genesis 16.
the fire took his part:

When against the Egyptians, Exodus 14.
the water took his part:

When against the murmurers, Numb. 26.
the earth took his part:

When against the blasphemers, Deuteronomy.
the stones took his part:

When he fights against the Swearers, the stones, wood, earth, air, Sea,
fish, foul, Zach. 5.3. Hos. 4.3.
with the beasts of the field, all are strongly united to take his part.

How therefore caust thou expect comfort that thou art Gods servant, if thou
stand not to thy Masters quarrel?

How can thou taste the fruit of that Vine, which thou never plantedst?

How can thou look to come to the reaping, that wast, not at the sowing?

Or, to the prize, that rannedst not in the race? Or, to the victory, that wast
not at the battle? Or, to the kernel, that brakedst not the shel? Or, to the
conquest, that foughtest not in the combat?
Those that the Lord proclaims war against, as rebels; Hos. 4.1, 2, 3.
as here he does against Swearers, the least that we can do (if we would show
our selves good and faithful Subjects) is to profess that we may not, we must
not suffer them unreproved; or, if it be in our power, unpunished: in as much
as to lodge a known Traitor in our house, or to give him countenance, or to
converse familiarly with him, and then to give out, that we carry as sound and
loyal a heart to our Sovereign as the best, is a matter that rather deserves
laughter then belief.

2. 2. Motive from Caution.
From Caution; Parents, Masters, Magistrates, punishing or reproving, some of
their children, servants, subjects, for their lewd and rash swearing, others
thereby are advised carefully to endeavor the sanctifying of the glorious name
of God.

As the Thunderbolt falls with the danger of few, but with the fear of all:
So, poena ad paucos, metus ad omnes, the shame and punishment reaches but to a
few, but the fear of the shame and punishment unto all: Etsi meliores allicit
amor, plure; tamen cogit timor.


For the better are directed by love, the greater are corrected by shame or
fear.

A man that stands by and sees another seared, launced, beheaded, hanged, is
thereby made more careful of his own health and life.

The men addicted to swearing, seeing others smart by punishment, or ashamed by
reprehension, are made more wary how they blaspheme the great, fearful, and
glorious name of God.

3. The third motive is from Discredit. Motive 3. From the Discredit.
It is a shrewd sign that a man is addicted to swearing himself, when he
gives way to others without check or control. And it is a general rule, He
that hears the swearer quietly where he may reprove him, he is become guilty
of the same offense. To swear, or to listen to swearing, which of these two is
the worst, cannot easily be defined; the one having the Devil in his tongue,
the other in his ear: and that quickly enters in at the ear, that cleaves as
fast to the soul as skin and bones together.

It is the receiver that makes the thief, and a fair countenance, and open
ear to swearing, that makes and maintains the swearer.

The ground hereof is, Romans 1. last verse: Rom 1. last verse.
Not only they which commit such things, are worthy of death; but they also
that do consent to them that do them.

Now consent is direct or indirect; direct by advising and enticing to do a
thing, or by defending or delighting in it being done: indirect, when a man
reproves or resists it not, being in his power so to do.

Wherefore, would thou be free from heating reproof, and so from bearing of
shame? let thy little unruly tongue be bridled, and set a watch before the
door of thy lips, Disce non libenter dieere, quod non vis libenter audire:
speak not that wickedly, which thou will not hear reproved willingly: for he
that speaks what he should not, must hear that he would not, and good
reason: for else the hearer to please him, should discredit himself, and
dishonor his maker by his silence.

The fourth motive from the Danger: 4. Motive from the Danger.
The swearer not reproved, or punished, his sin is made the sin of those
that should reprove or punish the same. Perk. makes 8. particular ways how
men do communicate with other men's sins. See cases of Conscience, l. 1 p. 1.
By coun. sell. 2. By commandment. 3. Consent. 4 Provocation. 5. Silence. 6.
Slighting. 7. Flattery 8. Defending.


They by and for neglect thereof, do draw down the wrath of God upon a whole
land: God seeing none reprove, or by sharp courses strive against this sin,
comes down himself to take the matter into his own hands, by having a just
and sharp controversy with the inhabitants of the land, the beasts of the
field, and fishes of the sea.

And why with the inhabitants of the land? Because qui non vetat peccare cum
potest, jubet: he that does not restrain a man (when it is his duty, and lies
in his power) does command him to sin; he that hinders not, does further him
to sin. Judex damnatur dum nocens absolvitur; loosing the guilty, he ties
fast himself.

I may invert the Apostles words, 1 Timothy 5. Lay hands suddenly one no man,
neither be partaker with other men's sins, lay suddenly the words of
admonition to oaths transgression, lest thou be partaker of their sins, lest
by thy secret silence, thou be partaker of their open sinfulness, lest by thy
not reproving, thou be as though thou had sworn. Though their sin through
swiftness has taken flight into the ear, yet let it not by connivence take
footing in the heart. Apply soule-saving reproof as often to his oaths, as
he does soule-killing oaths to thy ear, that so preventing his sins
infection, thou may escape his sins malediction. He that says to the
wicked, Pro. 24.24.
Thou art righteous, him shall the people curse, Prove. 24.24.

They then that hearing Gods name blasphemed by swearing, his creatures abused
by drinking, his Sabbaths profaned by dancing, his word contemned by peoples
absenting, his poor starved by not relieving them, and has his mouth muzled,
lips sealed, tongue tied, do in a manner by their silence say they are
righteous, and do approve their courses; Pro. 17.15.
and so by justifying them in their sins, are an abomination to the Lord, Prove.
17. whereas by their connivencie they seek and think to have credit and love
with men, they make themselves odious both to God and man.

Thus you see many several motives why the swearer must be reproved; because
of our Calling, Caution; as also the Diseredit and Danger that is consequently
to ensue, do call all upon us for the performing this duty.

Now thou that hear or read these provocations, suffer, oh suffer them
not to be as water spilt upon the ground, or stones cast against the wind; but
being free thy self from this sin, by the means proposed in the fourth use,
labor to make others under thy roof and regiment, to be free by the motives
alleged in this fifth and last use, that thou may be wise, not for thy
self alone, but for others also. For be thou well assured, it is in vain for
thee being a Parent, a Master, or an Householder, to abstain from swearing,
unless others under thee abstain also: The goodness of a Master, Parent, or
Ruler, profits not so much in the right institution of a Family, as the
wickedness of a swearer destroys. It is well when one planteth and another
waters; but it is evil when one planteth and another plucketh up.

Yet (notwithstanding all that has or may be spoken) our people still practice
what the Prophet prophesied, Hos. 4.4.
Hosea 4.4. Let no man strive or reprove one another, Objections alleged why
men reprove not, or punish swearers.
no, though it be his brother: For this heaven-daring sin, to a man of this
humor, to range him into order, it is as burning coals cast upon flax, it sets
on fire within or without, his heart being kindled within, that breaks forth
into some of these several flames at his mouth.

Who made you a Judge or Controller? Object. 1.
as an Israelite spoke to meek Moses reproving him, Exodus 2.14. God I hope will
not be so severe in punishing, as you are severe and frequent in reprehending;
for he is patient and full of compassion.

There is nothing so cold as lead, Sol.
nothing so scalding, if it be heated; nothing so blunt as Iron, nothing so
piercing, if it be sharpened; nothing so calm as the Sea, in a boisterous
weather, nothing so tempestuous; nothing so mild as the Elephant, nothing so
cruel, if once intaged; nothing so merciful as God, and if still provoked
nothing so terrible to sinful swearers, that continue to take his name in
vain, he will not hold them guiltless. Now will God not spare, but certainly
punish such persons; and shall man that was created after his Image in
righteousness and true holiness, and must be just, holy and pure, as God is,
1 John 3.9. 1 John 3.9.
Shall a man, I say, refuse to reprehend with tongue, whom God will severely
punish with hands? God forbid. If we are afraid to touch them with the scabbard
of reprehension, we would be much more a fraid to smite them with the sword of
punishment, the sharp edge of correction.

If we confess God before men, we shall be confessed before him at the last
day; but if we deny him here, we shall be denied before him there, Matthew. 10,
32, 33. Mat. 10.32, 33.
Parents would not take it well at their children, if they should hear them
abused, and evil spoken of by other slanderous persons, and would not open
their lips to reprehend the slanderer, and stand in the defense of the credit
and name of their wronged Father. When Croesus (as Herodotus relates) was
assaulted in the sight of his dumb Son, they say, the force of nature wrought
so forcibly with him, that it loosed the strings of his tongue, and he cried
out, Homo ne perdas Croesum, O man, kill not Croesus. The story I leave to be
defended by the Author: this is certain, no outward action more cleares our
inward grace of adoption, arguing us indeed to be the sons of God, then when
we are truly sensible of dishonor offered to our heavenly Fathers name, we
imbark our selves in his quarrels: Do not I hate them that hate thee? and am
not I grieved with them that rise up against thee? yea, I hate them with a
perfect hatred, Psalm. 139.21.
as though they were mine enemies, Psalm. 139.21.

How many have vainly spilt their blood, for the defense of their Mistresses
beauty, or their own imaginary reputation? which had they done in the defense
of God and his Religion, against blasphemous swearers, and hellish cursers,
they had undoubtedly purchased both the renown and the reward of martyrdom.

I find this duty of reprehending Swearers but rawly performed, Object. 2.
therefore I forbear also.

If one Judge in one Circuit has spared the hanging of a malefactor, Sol.
must another Judge in the next Circuit therefore forbear to punish him? Shine
thou as a light in the midst of a crooked and dark nation; If thou refuse to do
it also, then thou increasest the number of wicked and crooked persons.

By Precepts we are to be directed which are good, and not by examples which
are bad. Perform it thy self, then shall thou cause others to imitate thee,
and so make many where none were sincerely zealous before. We say the Gardner
is the cause that weeds do grow, because he lets them grow: and so it may be
said in Church and Commonwealth, of them that will not rebuke sin, because they
will not be medlers; but if we do but stand by, Act. 7.5, 8. and 8.1.
and look on, as Saul did, we are made allowers of the fact. When thou saw
a thief thou consentedst, Psalm. 50.18. Peter makes the Jews murderers, Psalm.
50.18. Acts 4.
because they were allowers of it.

I find such ill success, when I do reprove, Object. 3.
as that few have been bettered or amended thereby.

Though it be said of the belly, Sol. Psalm. 58.4.
Venture non habet aures; yet it may be as truly said of the tongue of the
Swearer, Lingua non habet aures, the tongue has no ears; for as the Swearer
does imitate the poison of the Adder in his tongue; so he the deafness of the
Adder in his ear, stopping his earelike the Adder, and will not hearken to the
voice of the charmer; yet discharge thou thy duty, and leave the success to
God.

No man does cast away (as it were) and spend in vain, so much as the Lord
does; how many Sermons spends he in vain? how many promises in vain? how many
threatenings in vain? how many things commands and forbids he in vain? men
nothing esteeming them, and yet he cease not; Shall we herein expect to fare
better then the Lord? Shall we not as good children of so good a Father, still
labor in discharging our duty; though by our admonition, or correction we find
little amendment? considering, we shall receive a reward, not according to our
success, but according to our labor. 1 Cor. 15.


Thou by Gods blessing, many times shall find such good success, even beyond
hope and expectation, as that thou will have just cause to rejoice in the
performing of thy duty, and to praise God for his blessing upon it.

Natural motions gather strength in moving: do thou begin this duty, whether
of reprehension or punishment (as thy calling and conscience shall round thee
in the ear) and then see whether, though thou find some rubs, oppositions and
gain-sayings at the first, yet the further thou wadest in this duty, the more
easy thou shall find the passage, and the means more ready to compass thy
intended purpose.

Thou shall have greater comfort in thy conscience, more respect to thy person,
more power in thy words (by Gods blessing) to prevail with them, and they less
power in their actions, and their courses to gainsay thee.

They by this thy diligence may be converted, and thou shine gloriously in
heaven; thou without this, can not have thy duty discharged, or ever live
comfortably on earth.

I believe, Object. 4.
that they in their ordinary swearing mean no ill, do it but in jest, and for
fashion; I should but seem to shame them, and seek my own glory in reproving
them.

If they are not ashamed to utter ill oaths, will they be ashamed to hear
good words? Sol.


If it be discredit to wander out of the way, is it not a credit to return into
the right way again?

It is wonder, that the imputation of a common swearer should be so odious, and
the practice so frequent amongst men, wherefore either seem to be as thou art,
or else to be as thou would seem: either make care and conscience, that thou
rashly utter not oaths, or else be content that a man call a Spade a Spade, a
Swearer a Swearer.

When Thespis the first Stage Player was asked, if he were not ashamed to utter
so many untruths in so worthy an audience, he answered, he did it in sport. To
whom wise Solon replied, if we approve and commend this sport, we shall find
it in earnest in our contracts and affairs: Even so, if we swear in our
ordinary speeches and communications jestingly, we shall get an habit of
swearing in all our dealings: if we usually swear for nothing, then are we apt
to swear for somtehing.

Whereas thou say, thou shall be thought to seek their shame and thy own
praise and glory in reproving swearers: Be thou therefore sure that thy
reproves be in sincerity, and not in bravery; Do not think to grace thy
self by disgracing of others, or to make thy self white by showing their
blackness. Go not about to purchase thee eredit and opinion of religion in
the world, by raising it out of the dunghill of thy neighbors corruptions, but
do it with all sobriety and inward compassion of spirit, that thy love first
appearing, thy labor may not be lost.

Thou then (howsoever thou be censured by men) may be assured in thy own
conscience, (that will speak more for thee then the whole world can do against
thee) that thou seek not the praise which is of men, which vanishes, but
that which is of God, which abides for ever.

He is a great person, and I may displease him by my reproof, Object. 5.
and shall do little good upon him.

Plato indeed could say, Sol.
that the Commonwealth is like a fish, that perishes first at the head, and
like a Coney-skin, that strips off easy until it come to the head, and there
it stays. Reformation from this sin is hardest always at the head, at
great persons, which commonly scorn reproof. Yet none should think that his
greatness may be any placard to defend wickedness. Whereas thou think,
thou may offend such a great person, I answer, though he be a great person,
and may be displeased, God is a greater, and will certainly be offended by thy
silence. It is but perbaps in the one, and without all peradventure in the
other. Will thou fear a doubtful dislike, to incur a certain damnation?

Nay, it commonly proves true, that he who reproves (not out of vain
affectation and singularity, Prove. 27.6.
but out of conscience and in sincerity) shall find more favor certainly, more
comfort at the last, then he who flattered with his lips, making the swearer
once truly touched for his sin, to say, Surely his words were not as arrows,
but as a precious balm, Psalm. 141. James 5.
that has not broken but refreshed my head: his timely admonition and sharp
reproof has saved my soul, and pulled it as a brand out of the fire, Jude
23. Jude 23.
I have often found says Bernard, that those which by godly reproof have
recovered themselves, have more firmly loved me, then those that needed no such
medicine at all.

If I use to reprove men, Object. 6.
I shall be hated of them.

If thou use not to reprove sinful swearers, Sol.
thou shall be abhorred of God.

To hate those that hate us, is heathenish;

To hate those that are harmless, is brutish;

But to hate those that love us, by telling us the truth, is Devilish.

If thou should not fear the hatred of the Devil, then not of Devilish men.

Am I therefore become your enemy, Gal. 4.16.
because I tell you the truth, says Paul? Gal. 4.16.

Seeking his profit, it is no great matter if thou offend his pleasure.

And why should he be like the borse and mule that have no understanding? Yet
if he be like them, fret not, faint not, but expect his curing: The horse and
mule bite with the teeth, and strike with the heels, yet the Farrier refuses
not to dress their soars, and procure their health. The swearer spares not
to offend God, why should thou spare to offend him?

He is against the truth, thou art against error: he resists light, thou
darkness. The strife makes you equal, but the cause does not.

He is, inimicus medico, tu morbo: ille diligentiae tuae, tu pestilentiae
illius. He opposes thy painfulnesse, thou his his sinfulness; God fights
for theel, thou needst not fear the victory. Muse not so much that thou art
hated, as for what cause thou art hated. If justly thou art hated, thou have
nocause to complain, thou have deserved it; if unjustly, thou have less cause,
because thou art not hurt by it. As the Philosopher replied to the woman that
wept for the death of her husband that was hanged, saying, that if be had
justly suffered such a death, it would not so much have grieved her. Thou have
less cause to grieve now he has suffered such a death undeservedly; then if
he had deservedly suffered the same. If thou know that thou have not justly
deserved any hatred, reproaches, taunts, scoffs, scorns, the more they are,
the less they hurt thee, and the more the Agents. They prove to be but so many
several pearls set on thy glorious garment of patience. Blessed are ye when
men shall revile you, and persecute you, and speak all manner of evil against
you falsely for my sake: rejoice and be glad: for great is your reward in
beaven. It is beyond all comparison better to be hated for that which is good,
then to be loved for that which is evil. 1 King. 21.20.


Ahab said to Eliah, Have thou found me, O thou mine enemy? 1 Kings 21.20. yet
this enemy of his, was that at last brought him to an outward and seeming
repentance, at least and consequently, to the turning away of Gods wrath in his
days.

David, a man after Gods own heart, was so far from hating Nathan for telling
him the truth, that he honored and loved him the better all his life time
after: 1 King. 1.^ 33, 34.
for afterward he appointed him a Commissioner for the naming of his
successors, 1 Kings 1.33.34.

This is one of the three bad daughters born of three good mothers: Idleness
of Peace, Contempt of Familiarity, and Hatred of Truth: Men hating others
indeed, because they think others hate them in words, by reproving them for
their sins, whereas the reprover, though he hates sin, yet he loves the person
still.

As we are not to love the vice for the man's sake, so neither are we to hate
the man for the vice sake; we hate the manners, but love the man; we hate the
action, but love the person.

God made man righteous, but they have found out many inventions to make
themselves crooked, Eccles. 7.29.
Eccles. 7.29.

Love that in him which God made, but hate that in him which he himself has
made. And thou hating his sin, and loving his person, if thou again art bated
of him, then consider, that as the curse that is causlesse shall not come nigh
thee, Prove. 26.2.
Prove. 26.2. so the hatred that is for thy love, shall not hurt thee.

God being able and ready (thou pleasing him by standing for the defense of his
glory, and sanctifying of his name) to make thy deadliest enemies to be at
peace with thee, if it be for thy good, and his glory.

As it is better to obey God then man, and to be beloved of God then man: So it
is better to undergo man's unjust hatred, then Gods just condemnation.

Fear not the hatred of him that can but hurt the body, but endeavor to keep
his love, who in his wrath is able to destroy body and soul eternally, Mar.
10.28
Marth. 10.28.

The love of God, and of such an unreclaimeable sinful swearer, thou can not
keep together, ponder which is most likely to be most profitable, whether that
which is transitory, or that which is for ever durable; whether that which
stands on a sandy, or that which stands on a rocky foundation, and then
choose which thou will.

O but who can endure to be delighted in such strict punishment as you have
rehearsed, to have been inflicted upon some swearers, Object. 7.
in the third and fourth uses, or who could endure to see, to show much less,
severity upon our friends, familiars, neighbors, and kindred?

The punisher of sin, whether Magistrate, Master, Sol.
or Parent, delights not so much to see the swearer punished, as to see
justice duly executed, Gods wrath appeased, and his word obeyed.

Justitia non novit patrem, non matrem, sed veritatem novit. Justice has no
respect of father or mother, but of the truth. Disobedient children were to be
brought by the parents themselves to the Judges, and to be stoned of the
people, Deu. 21.18. Deuteronomy. 21.18.
Are children to be punished that are disobedient to earthly parents, and must
they escape scot-free that set themselves so obstinarecly, audaciously,
impiously against God our heavenly father? By man they may unjustly be spared,
by God they shall justly be condemned.

Saul was punished with the loss of his Kingdom, for not punishing Agag with
death, 1 Samuel 15.
1 Samuel 1.15. The blasphemer, according to the Law, was to be punished, even
ftoned to death, Levit. 24.16. Ahab for sparing Benbadad, Lev. 24.16. 1 Kings
20.
had a sharp greeting sent him, 1 Kings 20. Because thou have let go out of
thy hand, a man whom I appointed to die, thy life shall go for his life, and
thy people for his people. And indeed the swearer and drunkard not severly
punished, prove to be the bane of the land where they live. As the Canaanites
not cast out by the Israelites (as God commanded) became by Gods just
judgment, a snare and destruction unto them, Judge. 2.3. Jos. 23.13.
a whip on their sides, and a thorn in their eyes.

The swearer not punished, his own soul is endangered, his neighbor infected,
Gods name abused, Christ's death contemned, Gods Spirit grieved, and many other
wicked associates in their sins hardened: Many evil streams flow from this
one fountain, neglect of punishment of the common rash obstinate swearer;
foolish pity marres the City: which gave occasion to that saying of Domitius,
that he had rather seem cruel in punishing, then dissolute in sparing: Cursed
be he that keeps back his sword from blood, Jer. 48.10.
Jer. 48.10.

Bloody sins must have bloody prinishments; but swearing is, Hos. 14.2.
styled a bloody sin, therefore severely to be punished.

An house being on fire, if it may be quenched, it is best to use water only;
but if it be like to endanger, and set on fire the houses round about it, it is
best to pull down the house quickly. If swearing may be quenched with the water
of reprehension, only use water, and let the house stand still: but if fire
continue fearsully to burn out on every side, then pull down the house with
the town-hook of sharp correction.

When the Viper still will be a Viper, and retain his poison, though the
Charmer charm never so wisely, the Apothecary takes him and makes Triacle of
him to expel poison out of others. If the swearer will not be admonished or
reclaimed, make Triacle of him, that he that would not take heed of others, may
be made a preservative for others to beware of him: Qui non corrigit seipsum,
alii carrigent se per ipsum: If evil cannot be taken away from one in Israel,
then take away evil from all Israel. Ense rescindendum, etc. If we must needs
see somewhat dead, it is better to see a dead arm then a dead body. Melius ut
pereat unus, quam unitas: he that spares one bad, endangers many good. Though
therefore thou may not rejoice in beholding severity inflicted, yet may
thou, Justinian.
and must thou rejoice in seeing justice without partiality executed.

I shall be accounted singular, Obj. 8.
more precise then wise in so doing.

It is the Ministers office to tell men of their sins in the pulpit; Obj. 9.
he must advise in matters concerning the soul.

Every tub must stand upon his own bottom, every man must answer for his own
sin. Obj. 10.
That particular soul that sins, shall die: and he is acquainted with, and
can discourse of the words of God (with must be the rule of all our actions) as
well as any other can inform him, and therefore knowing his fathers will, and
not doing it, he shall be beaten with many stripes: With many other slight and
frivolous objections, which I might remember unto you, if they were worth the
answering, that flesh and blood cast as bars in the way, why they will neither
punish really, nor reprove sincerely this sin of swearing. But whatsoever they
do, or might allege, I know they are but mere put-offs, doubts, difficulties,
devices, Satan-sleights, and humane evasions, which prove as weak and uncertain
as the brain wherein they are forged, and therefore little to be regarded. When
once thou art persuaded in conscience, and thy heart tells thee, that
swearing is a sin, and the action of reprehending is good, just, necessary and
profitable, and the chiefest means appointed by God, to preserve the hearer
from sin, and to recover the speaker out of the suburbs of hell to make him
first see his sin, that afterward he may loath it, and at last leave it; Let
not the throng and thickness of any, or all such Objections and Difficulties
daunt or discourage thee from imitating God, in discharging thy duty, but
rather make thee the more stoutly to pluck up thy spirits, and buckle thee to
this business; which by how much the more obstacle it shall find amongst men,
so much the more encouragement shall it receive from, and acceptance with the
Lord, that thy labor, though it always prove not for the welfare of the
swearer, for whom it was intended, yet it shall turn ever to the glory of God
that first set thee on work, whose Name (as it is by vain swearers daily
abused) so among all that call on the same, let it be more and more hallowed,
now and ever, Amen.

Gods Judgments upon Forswearers.
VAin swearing in this Commandment is forbidden, much more false, and
forswearing; False swearing is, False swearing. Zach. 5.4. An oath is
assertory. Joh. 8.44. For swearing. Perkins. Mat. 5.33 Doct. 3.
when we call God to witness a lie, making him herein like the Devil, Zach.
5.4. Job. 8.44. Forswearing is, when a man performs not what deliberately he
swears: even of old it has bin said, Thou shall not forswear thy self, but
shall perform unto the Lord thy oaths.

Forswearers, because they take Gods Name in vain, shall not by God be left
unpunished. In one and the self-same breath you hear the truth and doctrine,
with the Reason and confirmation thereof.

The Doctrine, Reason.
that forswearers shall be punished.

The Reason, because they take Gods Name in vain.

Let us come presently to the Use in the Application, Use.
and suffer that to be pressed on our affections, which at the first hearing,
we conceive in our apprehensions.

By all that has already been spoken against ordinary and rash swearing, I
shall be eased of the labor to speak much of false and forswearing; for if the
Motives be so many against rash swearing, and the puishments so fearful on the
same, much more are the same to be thought powerful against false or
forsswearing, which are more egregiously finfull in the fight of God, and more
fearful in the ears of men.

Let us then be diswaded from this sin, by the censideration of these two
several Motives and iton arguments: 1. The greatness of the sin. 2. The
greatness of the punishment on the sinners.


First, the greatness of the sin, because hereby, 1. Mot. Greatness of the
sin.


1. Gods Name is polluted and profaned, it being made a Sanctuary to shrewd
liars and deceitful persons.

2. Gods Majesty is abused, being brought as a witness to confirm a known lie,
and as a surety for their sinful fact, they daring avouch that to be true,
which they know to be false, and that to be false which they know to be true,
in either calling upon God, as a just Judge and Avenger of falsehood, do in a
manner contemn Gods allseeing knowledge, justice, power, anger, threatenings,
herein desperately making trial, whether God can or will, according to his
power, punish their sin: herein like bandogs, flying in Gods face, and daring
him to do his worst in the execution of his vengeance.

3. The Devil himself herein is outstripped; for we never read or heard that
he ever came to that desperate audaciousnesse, that he durst presume to
confirm his lies by oath, or often to abuse Gods Name for the patronizing and
countenancing his untruths.

4. The Lords great Seal and Scepter of his Kingdom, whereby he rules
amongst men, hereby are overthrown, Truth and Justice, the perjurers using Gods
forces against himself for the maintaining those hellish pieces of falsehood,
and injustice, 5. The Word reekons it amongst great sins. Jer. 7.9. 6. Hateful
to men. 1. To Christians. 2 To Heathens.
which he so much abhors.

5. The word reckons that amongst the greatest crimes, Theft, Murder,
Adultery, Idolatry, and to be abominable to God, Zach. 8.17.

6. It is most hateful to men.

First, to Christians: the false swearers losing the reputation of Religion,
and the fear of God; yea, of civility and common honesty.

Secondly, to Heathens, and Turks, and Pagans, accounting it worthy of the
severest punishment.

Amurath the Turk spared none of the army of Vladiflaus, Amurathes against
Vladistaus.
King of Hungaria, who had broken his oath concerning Articles of truce
concluded between them.

The Egyptians reputed perjury so capital a crime, Egyptians punish it with
death The Romans had a Temple dedicated to Faith. Attilius Regulus against the
Carthaginians.
that whosoever was convinced thereof was punished with death.

The Romans so highly esteemed of Faith in all their public affairs, that in
their City they had a Temple dedicated to it, and did (for more reverence sake)
offer sacrifices to the Image of Faith.

Hence it was, that Attilius Regulus, chief Captain of the Roman army against
the Carthaginians, was so highly commended of all men, because, when he was
overcome, taken prisoner, and sent to Rome, he did only for his oath sake
which he had sworn, return to his enemy, albeit he knew what grievous torments
were provided for him at his return.

Others also that came with him, though they were entreated, and by their
parents, wives, allies instantly urged, not to return to Hannibals camp, could
in no wise be moved thereunto: but because the Romans their friends did not
accord to their proffered conditions, therefore they would perform their oaths
to the Carthaginians their enemies.

But two of the ten (for so many were they) falsified their oath, and did not
return, yet were they among all men accounted and condemned for cowards, and
faint-hearted traitors, in so much, that the Censors noted them with infamy for
the fact: whereat they took such grief and inward sorrow, that being weary of
their lives, they slew themselves. Thus the Heathen not only teach by precept,
( Cicero lib. 1. Offic.) but also performed by practice ( lib. 3. Offic.) that
an oath is so sacred, that it is to be kept with our greatest enemies, and most
wicked people.

The Gibeonites, though they were so execrable a people, The Gibeonites.
that they might well be esteemed for Heretics, yet the Princes of Israel
would not retract the oath made with them (albeit they were deceived by them)
for fear of incurring the wrath of God, that suffers not perjury unpunished.

7. The use and end of lawful oaths, 7. The end of lawful oaths destroyed.
which are to put an end to all strife, are by perjury destroyed, causing the
Jury to give a false verdict, and the Judge an unjust sentence, whereby
innocence is suppressed, falsehood maintained, the oppressor strengthened in his
malicious courses, humane society baned, suspicious jealousy discovered, and
contention nourished; and the whole course of justice, the Pillar of the
commonwealth, and bond of humane society utterly dissolved and subverted; yea
sometimes with one and the same false oath the perjurer puts a true man's neck
into the halter and his own soul into hell.

8. 8. The conscience of the perjurer tormented.
The conscience of the Perjurer daily is tormented with restless fears and
affrighting terrors, and the same hardly recured, unless his sin with Pater be
bewailed with bitter reares, and the balm of Christ's precious blood truly
applied by the hand of a lively faith.

9. 9. God of his glory is robbed.
The innocent is not only robbed of his right, but God also of his glory, when
to gain credit to a lie, man call the true God to witness, this is even to
make him a false witness like our selves, and in as much as in us lies, to
set the Devil himself, the father of lies, in the room and stead of God the
author of truth.

10. 10. An utter enemy to himself.
He is an utter enemy to himself, and the instrument violently hastening his own
destruction, praying for a curse upon himself, wishing God to revenge if he
swear falsely; and therefore cries and calls upon God by his false swearing,
to take and cast body and soul into hell fire; when he reaches out his hand
to the book, he reaches it out to the Devil, when he kisseth the book he
kisseth the Devil, when he brings water or drink to his mouth, with that
hand he feeds the Devil, nay, rather remains a devil incarnate: So much
of the first Motive.

Secondly, Mot. 2. Grievousness of the punishment.
we are to be dissuaded from this sin, by the greatness of the punishment
inflicted on the same.

It is punished with, 1. Eternal Punishment. 2. Spiritual Punishment. 3.
Corporal Punishment.


Perjury is punished with

1. Eternal punishment, though yet in the last place and time, shall be
inflicted, to wit, Extrusion from heaven, and Intrusion into hell, Psalm. 15.4.
Rev. 21.8. and 22.15.
proved by Psalm. 15.4. Rev. 21.8. and 22.15.

2. Spiritual punishment, to wit, Infamy amongst men, terror in his
conscience, and a reprobate sense, most commonly, to commit all sin and
wickedness.

3. With corporal and temporal punishment, which amongst men is chiefly
feared: the house, timber and stones of the false swearer are threatened to be
consumed. Zach. 5.4.


Zedechias, the last King of Judah, for breaking his oath with Nebuchadnezzar,
had his kingdom spoiled, his sons before his face slaughtered, his own eyes
boared out, and afterward in chains carried into Babylon.

Osee, the last King of Israel, 2 Chro. 36
for breach of his faith plighted to Salmaneser, King of Ashur, was taken,
imprisoned, and carried with his whole nation captives to Assyria. 2 King. 17.
Thus both the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah, were for falsifying their oaths,
quite razed and extinguished.

Ponfinus, in his Hungarian history, records a notable example of the
punishment of perjury, in Vladislaus and his army destroyed by the Turks, as
before was briefly touched.

This Vladislaus behaved himself so valiantly against the Turks, that Anurath
was glad upon unequal conditions to conclude a peace with him, which league
being made, and the Articles thereof engrossed in both languages, with a solemn
oath taken on both parties for the confirmation of the same; the Cardinal of
Florence (according to the accustomed pofition of the Papists, No oath to be
kept with Heretics) by letters disfwaded Vladistius from keeping their new
accorded peace. Cardinal Julian the Popes Legate in Hungaria helped forward
this project and practice: both which wrought so effectually with the King,
that he falsifying his oath, broke the peace, sent to Constantinople to
denounce war afresh, and set forward his army toward the Turks with all
expedition. Thus the Turks secure and misdoubting nothing, were unawares set
upon by the King; yet putting themselves in defense, there grew a long and
sharp battle; till Amurath perceiving his soldiers to decline, and almost to
be overcome, palled out of his bosom the Articles of the aforesaid concluded
peace, and lifting up his eyes to heaven, uttered these speeches: O Jesus
Christ, these are the leagues that thy Christians have made, and confirmed by
swearing by thy Name, and yet have broken them again; if thou be a God, as
they say thou art, revenge this injury that is offered both to thee and me, and
punish Truce-breaking Varlets. He had scarce ended his speech; but the
Christians battle and courage began to abate, Vladislaus himself was slain
by the Janisaries, his whole Army discomfited, and put to the Sword.

Pausanias notes this to be one of the chief causes why Philip King of
Maccdon, with all his progeny, so quickly came to destruction; because he made
no reckoning of keeping his oaths, but swear and unsware them at his pleasure,
and for his commodity.

Gregory Tours makes mention of a wicked varlet in France (among the people
called Averns) that forswearing himself in an unjust cause, had his tongue
presently so tied, that he could not speak, but roar, and so continued till
by his earnest inward prayer and repentance, the Lord restored to him the use
of that unruly member.

Alberius Duke, of Franconia, having slain Conrade, brother to Lewis the
fourth, then Emperor, and finding the Emperors wrath incensed against him,
betcoke himself to a strong Castle at Bramberge, from whence the Emperor
neither by force nor fraud, could remove him for seven years space, until
Atto Bishop of Mentz delivered him into his hands.

This Atto under show of friendship repaired to the Castle, and gave his faith
to Albertus, that if he would come down to parley with the Emperor, he should
safely return into his hold. The Duke mistrusting no fraud, went out of the
Castle gates with the Bishop toward the Emperor; but Atto (as it were
suddenly remembering himself, when as indeed it was his devised plot) desired
to return back again and dine ere he went, because it was somewhat late; so
they dine and return. Now the Duke was no sooner come to the Emperor, but he
caused him to be put to death, notwithstanding he alleged the Bishops promise
and oath for his safe return.

For it was answered, his oath was quit by returning back to dine, as he had
promised. Thus the Duke was wickedly betrayed, though justly punished.

As for Atto the perjured traitor, within a while after he was stricken with a
thunderbolt, and as some say, carried into mount Aema, with this noise, ( sie
peccata lues atque ruenas rues:

Thus did thou sin in breaking thy oath,

Thus shall thou suffer in soul and body both.

The History concerning the three false accusers of the Bishop of Jerusalem, is
no less fearful then common, they accused him of unchastity, and bound their
accusations with oaths and curses on this wise:

The first said, If I lie, I pray God I may perish with fire.

The second said, If I speak ought but the truth, I pray God I may be consumed
by some filthy and cruel disease.

The third said, If I accuse him falsely, I pray God I may be deprived of my
sight, and become blind.

The honesty of the Bishop was so well known, that they believed none of their
oaths; yet he partly for grief, partly for ease from worldly affairs,
forfook his Bishopric, and lived in the desert for many years.

The first, his house, being on fire, perished with his family and progeny.

The second languished with a fearful disease, that bespread his body all over:

The third seeing Gods judgments on his companions, confessed all their
villainy, lamented his crime and case so long weeping for the same, till both
his eyes were put out.

Thus God plagued them for their perjury, sent upon them their wishes, and
thereby cleared his servant from shame and opprobry.

Thesdor Beza records what happened upon a perjurer that forsware himself to
the end to hurt and prejudice another thereby: He had no sooner made an end of
his false oath, but a grievous Apoplexy assailed him: so that without speaking
any word, he died within few days after.

Anno Dom. 925. when King Ethelstane, alias Adelstane, reigned here in England,
there was one Elfred a Noble man who with a faction of seditious persons,
conspired against the King, and at Winchester went about to put out his eyes;
but by Gods providence the King was perserved, and Elfred being accused
thereof, fled to Rome, to the end to purge himself of the crime by oath before
the Pope, who being brought to the Church of Saint Peter, and there swearing,
or rather forswearing himself to be clear, when indeed he was guilty, behold
the Lords hand upon him suddenly; as soon as his oath was pronounced, he fell
down in a strange sickness: and from thence being brought to the English house
in Rome, within three days after departed this life.

Anno Dom. 1055. Goodwin Earl of Kent, sitting at Table with King Edward, it
happened that one of the Cup-bearers stumbled, and yet sell not; whereat
Goodwin laughing, said, that if one brother had not helped the other (meaning
his legs) all the wine had been spilt: with which words the King calling to
mind his brother which was slain by Goodwin, answered, So should my brother
Alfred have helped me, had not Goodwin been; who fearing the Kings new kindled
displeasure, excused himself with many words, and at last eating a morsel of
bread, wished it might choke him, if he were not guiltless of his brothers
blood. But he was forthwith choked in the presence of the King, ere he
stirred one foot from the place, though some say, that he recovered life again.

In the reign of Queen Elizabeth, one Annis Averies, in the City of London,
widow, forswore her self for a little money which she should have paid for
six pounds of Tow at a shop in Woodstrest: for which cause being suddenly
surprised with the justice of God, she fell down speech less forthwith, and
cast that matter upwards, which should by nature have been voided downwards;
and so died to the terror of all perjured and forsworn wretches that take
Gods name in vain.

In Saxony a young maid that was very rich, promised marriage to a proper young
man, but poor. He foreseeing that wealth and inconstancy might alter this
maids resolution, freely opened his mind unto her about it. Whereupon she made
a thousand imprecations to the contrary, and among the rest, this that ensues:
If ever I marry another, let the Devil take me away on the wedding day.
Afterward the fickle wench was betrothed and married to another. At dinner on
the wedding day, 2 men on horseback came and lighted at the house where the
feast was kept, who were presently entertained at the Feast. And after dinner,
when they fell to dancing, one of them (as the manner of the country is, to
honor strangers which happen to be at such Feasts) was desired to lead the
Bride a dance. He took her by the hand, and walked her a turn or two: Then in
presence of all her kinsfolks and friends, he caught her crying out for help,
and went out at the gate, where he hoysed her up into the air, and vanished
away with his companion and horses. Her sorrowful friends having sought her
all that day, and continuing so next morning, hoping to find her where she had
fallen some where or other, to the end they might have buried her body, met the
two Cavaliers, which restored to them the maidens wedding apparel, and all
her jewels, saying, that God had given them power over her, but not over her
apparel, and so vanished away. Read this story in the Sword against Swearers.

It would be too long to repeat the history of an Inne-keeper in the town of
Rutlinguen, who receiving a budget of money from a passenger to keep for him,
forswore the same before the Judge, giving himself to the Devil if he swore
falsely, and was (by two that testified against him, which indeed were two
Fiends of Hell) presently in the presence of the Judge, hoysted up into the
air, where he vanished with them, and was never found more.

Or to relate the large history of Burghard, Archbishop of Magdeburg, who
thrice broke his promise and oath with his own Citizens, the Senate and people
of Magdeburg; and being twice delivered out of prison, notwithstanding his
perfidy: and being the third time caught and imprisoned, whilst his friends
sought means to redeem him, the Jailer beat him to death with a door bar, or
as some say, with an Iron rod taken out of a window.

Or to speak largely of the judgment of God upon Radulph, King of Suevia, who
after he had sworn Fealty to the Emperor Henry the fourth, was by the Pope
persuaded to take the Empire, and to oppose the Emperor by Arms, even in four
unjust battles. In the last whereof he lost his right hand; and being ready to
die, one bringing to him his hand cut off in the battle, he in detestation of
the Popesvillany, burst forth into these terms, many Bishops standing by,
Behold here the hand wherewith I swore fealty to the Emperor, this will be an
argument of breach of faith before God, and of your impulsion thereto. Justly
punished even by his own confession, for perjury.

Or of Cleomenes, King of Lacedemonia, who making truce with the Argives for
seven days, oppressed them in the third night at unawares, thinking thereby to
avoid perjury: But the Argive women (their husbands being slain) took up Arms
(like the Amazons) and repelled Cleomenes; who afterward was banished into
Egypt, and there miserably and desperately slew himself.

Most of which examples, and many more, more largely the Reader may at his Just
and leisure peruse in the Theater of Gods judgments, Fox his Acts and
Monuments, and Camerorius his Library; all storehouses of this treasure,
necessary to be collected, because all have not money to procure the said
Authors, or not minds to peruse them if procured.

This one ensuing shall suffice for all other at this time for me to be
selected. One hearing perjury condemned by a learned Preacher, and how it never
escaped unpunished, said in a bravery, I have often forsworn my self, and yet
my right hand is not a whit shorter then my left: Which words he had scarce
uttered, when such an inflammation arose in that hand, that he was constrained
to go to the Surgeon and cut it off, left it should infect his whole body;
and so his right hand became shorter then his left in recompense of his
perjury, which he so lightly esteemed of.

By all which examples (because examples most move in every matter) we have
seen and may learn to believe how greatly God does detest, how severely and
suddenly he does punish all those who by this fearful sin of perjury, do take
Gods name in vain, swearing that to be true which they know to be false, and
hellishly breaking their vow and promise, whereto so holily they bound
themselves by oath.

King Edmund made this Law, that they that were once proved false forsworn,
should for ever be separated from Gods Congregation, whether they were of the
Spiritualty or Temporalty: yet the world in these dangerous and evil days, is
full of such that make no care to forswear themselves, so it bring never so
little advantage to their purses or posterity, who nothing care what shall
become of their souls, so as they may have profit here, and leave their
children rich behind them. But what profit does it prove in the end? The son is
counted a Gentleman before the world, for the goods sake, and the Father is
reckoned before God and his holy Angels, a firebrand in hell. The son is
Lord of many possessions, the father is a wretch and has nothing. The son is
replenished with dainties, joy and pleasure, the father is filled full of
bitter sorrows and intolerable torments. The son sings, plays, danceth,
and makes merry, the father weepeth, sorroweth, and wishes himself never to
have been born. Behold how Dame Perjury rewards her servants at the later end.

Mark what Claudianus the heathen Poet concludes touching perjury: In prolem
dilata ruunt perjuria patris,
Et poenam merito filius ore luit:
Et quas fallacis collegit lingua parentis,
Has eadem nati lingua refudit opes.
The perjuries of the Father escaping punishment in this world, fall upon the
son, and look what riches the tongue of the deceitful father has gathered
together, even the very same has the tongue of the son paid home again, and
wast fully spent.

The Jurers or witnesses (through rashness and want of admonition by the
Magistrate) are suddenly brought to this fearful sin of perjuty, for want of
sober advice and mature deliberation through have, and in affection to the one
party, are prone to slide into this dangerons pit. Whereas (at the taking of
their oath) they should be exhorted so uncorruptly to look upon the matter, to
deal so truly and uprightly, and to give so just a verdict, even as though it
should be presented and offered up to the high and everlasting Judge Jesus
Christ.

Magistrates likewise, that promise with a solemn oath, to do all things
accordingly to equity and justice, and to accept no person in judgment, but to
maintain the good, and punish the evil, to exalt virtue and to punish vice, if
contrary to their oath, they deal unrighteously, oppress the succourlesse,
judge for favor, condemn the good, save the evil, persecute the favorers of
Gods word, maintain the Papists, they are then forsworn, and shall not uscape
the punishment of perjury.

Bishops and Pastors, that promise faithfulness to be earnest preachers, to set
forth Gods word, and live according to the same; if they do not labor in the
harvest of Gods word, do not lead an honest and virtuous life, they are
forsworn, and shall not be held guiltless.

The man and wife that promise faith and troth to each other, that they will in
all estates and extremities, lean each to other, the man to love his wife as
himself, and hold himself contented with her; the woman reverently to fear
and obey her husband in the Lord; if they break this promise, and one delight
not in another; but each seek after strange flesh, they are then forsworn, and
shall not escape the punishment of perjury.

The subjects that promise obedience and willing service to their Rulers, if
they break their promise, and resist high Powers, are forsworn, and shall not
escape the plagues of perjury.

As for all Knights of the Post, false and forswearers, who (like Putiphars
wife) do only show the garments of honest men to prove their dishonest cause,
I wish them no other punishment then that which Philip of Macedon inflicted
upon two of his subjects, in whom he saw no hope of grace. Vnum a Macedonia
fugere, alterum persequi jussit: he made the one of them to run out of
Macedonia, and the other to drive him. A fair riddance of them both, (as is in
the proverb) without a Sessions.

Isocrates the Orator, gives an excellent caution to all those who for the
least advantage adventure to take an oath. Take an oath (says he) that is put
unto thee for two causes, either that thou may deliver thy self from a
filthy crime, or that thou may preserve thy friends that are in peril and
danger: but for money see thou swear by no God, although thou swear
righteously: For to some thou shall seem to forswear thy self, and to some to
be desirous of money. Surely a divine saying of an heathen man, and worthy to
be written in Marble and brass, yea in the hearts of men.

Wherefore if the thought of the shame before men, will not yet let thee fear,
and danger of the punishment from God, restrain us from this so dreadful and
damnable a sin; Foelices faciant si aliena pericula cautos, It is well for us
if the sufferings of others keep us from sinning.

Let no man think that God will leave that unpunished in us, which he has not
pardoned in other, that had not so many examples of punishment before them, as
are before us. Let us fear to partake in their sins, lest that we share also
in their punishments: for where sinneis framed in the Antecedent, there
punishment is inferred in the Consequent, unless Gods mercy and man's penitency
make a separation between the cause and the effect, the beginnning and end.

And so I pass to the last of the ways that at first I proposed, whereby Gods
name is taken in vain, to wit, by cursing, wherein I dare pass my word, I
will be very brief, lest this discourse, that at first was intended but a
narrow entrance to be passed through in the space of an hour, should swell
into a wide Ocean, even not to be sailed over in the length of a Summers day.

Gods name is taken in vain by cursing. There is a certain multiplicity, Doct.
4.
severity of punishment attending all those that by cursing do take Gods name
in vain.

Because they transgress against the precept of God in the Law, Reason. Exo.
22.28 Mat. 5.44. Romans 12.14. Use 1.
Levit. 19.14. and the precepts of Christ in the Gospel.

Let us then (men and brethren) be exhorted to suffer the consideration of
this truth, not only to swim in our brains, but also to sink into our hearts,
that we be careful to prevent this hideous sin, this uncharitable sin,
that so directly aims at man's hurt, and at Gods prerogative Royal, Vengeance
is mine, Deuteronomy. 32.35.
and I will repay it, Deuteronomy. 32.35.

The main motives that may preserve us from falling into, and recover us from
sinking in this sin, are these two.

1, The greatness of the sin. Two motives,
2. The grievousnesse of the punishment, due to, and waiting on the same.
The greatness of the sin appears, because

1. The curser breaks the first Table touching God, in taking his name in vain;
1 The greatness of the sin.
he has no love or fear of God in him, seeing he makes God the executioner
of his lust and revenge, Levit. 19.14. Lev. 19.14.


2. The curser breaks the second Table, touching man, Jam. 3.9.
seeing he discovers the inward malice of his heart, by the outward pollution
of his hell-hatched words, in defiring his ruin, whose welfare (as bearing the
image of God) he should aim at.

The grievousnesse of the punishment attending upon cursers, we needs must
acknowledge, 2. The grievousnes. of the punishment. 1. Threatened in the Word.
Psalm. 109.17.
seeing it is known to be, 1. Threatened in the word, As he loved cursing, so
let it come unto him, as be delighted not in blessing, so let it be far from
him, prophesied by one that was (if ever any) inspired with the holy Ghost,
because a man after Gods own heart.

As the arrow shot against a brazon wall, rebounds upon the shooter, so the
curse cast agaiust the godly, recoyls back upon the head of the curser himself.
Continuing in this sin, he is liable to most of those curses desired by
Satan, deserved by the sinner, revealed by God, recorded by Moses, pronounced
by the Levits, and confirmed by the people, Deuteronomy. 27.15.
Deuteronomy. 27.15.

1. Image set up in his heart, with the greatest love and fervency bowing
hereunto.

2. sets light by the precepts of God his Father in heaven, or of the Church
his Mother on earth; all the people must confess that he is cursed.

3. removes his neighbors Land-marke, which is, to do unto another as he
would be done unto: now he likes not that others should curse him.

4. makes the blind to go out of the way, in driving him to desparation, when
as he was in the way of salvation.

5. perverteth the judgment of the stranger, father less and widows; in
judging and denouncing those evil that are good, in calling light darkness,
and darkness light.

6. uncovereth the skirt of his Father, and Sister, and Mother-in-law, laying
open their nakedness and infirmities, which he should cover, and hastening
their judgments, which he should endeavor to avert.

7. Beasts that have no understanding, in cursing those that curse him; beasts
do no more: yea many times in cursing those that bless him; beasts do not so
much.

8. He smites his neighbor secretly,

9. He takes reward of Satan, his neighbor, his known friend, and innocent
person that minded no hurt.

10. He confirms not, all things that are written: For then he should not
take Gods name in vain, Esa. 42.8. Romans 12.19.
he should not take his office of vengeance out of his hand: he should bless
those that curse him, and not curse those those that bless him, Matthew. 5.44.
Mat. 5.44. Romans 12.14. Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Romans 12.14.

And therefore he is subject to that last mentioned curse, Deuteronomy. 27.26, etc.
Look but into the subsequent chapter, Deuteronomy. 28.16, 17, 18, 19, etc. we may
behold the several curses that this curser is subject unto, as not continuing
in all things that are written in the Law to do them.

1. Cursed shall he be in the City and in the field, privately and publicly.

2. Cursed shall he be in his basket and his store: i. whether he has much or
little, the one as in a basket, the other as in a storehouse.

3. Cursed shall he be in the fruit of his body, children, and in the fruit of
the land, corn or cattle.

4. Cursed shall he be (in his name and person) at his going out and his
coming in; when he comes abroad, men shall wish him at home; when at home, men
shall wish him abroad. Thus seeing he loved cursing, it shall come upon him,
Psalm 109.17. Psalm. 109.17.
Curse upon curse. He set them abroad abundantly, and so they return abundantly
with use, not ten for one hundred, but an hundred for ten, no place nor time
shall be exempted from them.

If an hypocrite is subject to cursing and judgment, then also is the curser.
Mat. 23.
But an hypocrite is, therefore a curser also: For a curser is an hypocrite,
because he continucth not in all things that are written; 8 Woes.
but curses those whom he should bless, Matthew. 5. Because out of one and the
selfsame fountain be sends forth bitter water and sweet, Jam. 3.11. Jam.
3.21.
With one and the same tongue blessing God the Father, and cursing men which
are made after the similitude of God; out of the same mouth proceeds blessing
and cursing. My brethren, says James, these things ought not to be so, Jam.
3.9.10. unless we be content to be censured, and to have the reward of
hypocrites. For if any man seems to be religious, and refraineth not his
tongue, (as the curser does not) he deceives his own heart, and this man's
religion is in vain. Jam. 1.26. 2. Inflicted upon cursers in this world.


The former judgments you find threatened in the word; these ensuing have been
known to be inflicted in this world, upon such as have abused Gods Name,
Justice, Patience, making him to be a speedy executioner of their lust and
revenge, when they call for the pox, plague, murraine, death, Devil, all
servants unto God, and means and instruments for the execution of his will in
the world; and therefore vainly and uniustly taking them in their mouths, men
thereby take Gods name in vain.

Luther (on 1 Corinthians. 15.) reports of one in Germany of a most wicked life,
Luther of one in Germany carried away with the Devil.
who at every word he spoke, almost, the Devil was at one end. It happened on
a time, as he was passing over a bridge, that he fell down, and in his fall
gave these speeches, Hoist up with an bundred Devils: which he had no sooner
spoken, but the Devil whom he called for so often, was at his elbow to strangle
and carry him away with him.

The same Luther has left recorded unto us a notable example shown upon a
Popish Priest, that was once a professor of the sincere religion, and after
fell away voluntarily unto Papisme, whereof Adam Budissina was the reporter to
Luther.

This man thundered out most bitter curses against Luther in the Pulpit, at a
place called Buthnerwald; and among the rest, wished that if Luthers doctrine
were true, a Thunderbolt might strike him to death. Now three days after,
there arose a mighty tempest with thunder and lightning, whereat the cursing
Priest, bearing in himself, a guilty conscience for that which he had untruly
and maliciously spoken, ran hastily to the Church, and there fell to his
prayers before the Altar most devoutly: but the vengeance of God found him out
and his hypocrisy, so that he was stricken dead with the lightning. And albeit
they recovered life in him again, yet as they lead him homewards, through the
Churchyard, another flash so set upon him, that it burnt him from the crown of
the head to the sole of the foot, as black as a shoe, so that he died with a
manifest mark of Gods vengeance upon him.

Wierus reports, concerning an Host in Manchia, a country of Almaigne, who
being questioned before the Magistrate for detaining certain money which a
traveller, a Soldier, delivered to his Hostess to keep, impudently (against
his own knowledge) denied the same, wishing the Devil might take him if he
had it. Then the Devil there pleading in the habit of a subtle Lawyer, in a
blew cap, in the behalf of the Soldier, and reckoning up every circumstance
in the action; yea the very place where they had hid the money: hearing (I say)
those words, (let the Devil take me) looking for no other advantage, lest
pleading, and fell to lay hold on the Host, and carried him out of the Sessions
house; hoisted him into the air so high, that he was never after seen, or
heard of to be seen.

Thus was Gods judgments fully manifested upon the forsworn and cursing Host,
to the astonishment of all the beholders, and the Soldiers innocence cleared
(for he by the Host was accused and imprisoned for assaulting to break and rob
his house) and so strangely from the execution of the law delivered.

The same author reports what happened in Megalapole near to Voildstat, in the
time of the celebration of the Feast of Pentecost, Anno 1051. The people being
set on drinking and carrowsing, a woman in the company commonly named the
Devil in her oaths, till the Devil being so often called upon carried her
through the gate aloft into the air before them all, and hanging a while in
the air, they found her fallen dead upon the ground without the town.

About the year 1551. there lived in a City of Savoy, one that was a monstrous
swearer and curser, who put many good men to much fruitless pains, not so much
as listening to their admonitions, much less reforming his manners. It fell out
that the pestilence being in the City, he was infected with it, and therefore
withdrew himself with his wife and a kinswoman, into a Garden which he had;
neither yet in this extremity did the Ministers forsake him, but continually
exhorted him to repent, and laid before his eyes his faults and offenses, to
the end to bring him into the right way. But he was so far from being touched
and moved with these godly admonitions, that he strove to harden himself more
and more in his sins. Therefore on a day, hastening forward his own mishap,
as he was swearing, denying God, and giving himself to the Devil, and
calling for him with vehemency, behold even the Devil himself snatched him
up suddenly, and heaved him up into the air, his wife and kinswoman looking
on, and seeing him fly over their heads. Being thus swiftly transported, his
cap tumbled from his head, and was found at Rosne, but himself no man
couldever after set eye upon. The Magistrate advertised hereof, came to the
place whence he was taken, to be better informed of the truth, taking witness
of the two women touching that which they had seen.

Such judgments doubtless are made manifest to strike a fear and terror into
the heart of every curser, that are so inspired with Satan, that they cannot
speak but they must name him, even him that is an enemy both to God and man,
and like a roaring Lion runs to and fro, seeking nothing but man's destruction.
Yet too too many in any disquietnesse of mind, or anger of body, call upon him
for aid, when it were needful to call upon God, having both a commandment so
to do, and a promise adjoined, that he will help us in our extremities, if by
true repentance and hearty prayer we approach unto him.

Theodor Beza reports unto us in his 26. Homily of the Passion, a notable
history of his own knowledge, of the severity of Gods judgments upon a curser.

I knew (says he) in France a man of good parts, well instructed in religion,
and a master of a family, who in his anger cursing, and bidding the Devil take
one of his children, had presently his wish: for the child was possessed
immediately with a spirit; from which, though by the fervent and continual
prayer of the Church, he was at length released, yet ere he had fully
recovered his health, he died.

In the year 1557. the day before good Friday, at Forchenum, a City in the
Bishopric of Bamburg, there was a certain crooked Priest, both in mind and
body, through age and evil conditions, that could not go but upon crutches,
yet would needs be lifted up into the Pulpit to make a Sermon, his Text was out
of the first of the Corinthians, the eleventh chapter, touching the Lords
Supper; whereat taking occasion to commend the Papisticall errors, and the
Mass, he used these and such like blasphemous speeches, O Paul, Paul, if thy
doctrine touching the receiving of the Sacraments in both kinds, be true, and
if it be a wicked thing to receive it otherwise, then would the Devil might
take me. And (turning himself to the people) if the Popes doctrine concerning
this point be false, than I am the Davils boud-slave, neither do I fear to
pawn my soul upon it. These and many other blasphemous speeches he used, till
the Devil came indeed, transformed into the shape of a tall man, black and
terrible, sending before him such a fearful noise, and roaring wind, that the
people supposed that the Church would have fallen on their heads. But he not
able to hurt the rest, took away the old Priest, being his devoted bond slave,
and carried him so far, that he was never after heard of.

At another time after, the like noise was heard in the same Church, whiles
they were baptizing an infant; and all this for the abominable cursing and
blasphemy of the profane Popish Priest.

The same Author Fincelius, in his second book of Miracles, reports of a
certain man living in Helvetia, Anno 1556. who earned his living by making
clean rough and foul linen against the Sun, who entered into a Tavern,
tasted so much the grapes, that his wits were drowned, and his tongue so
inspired, that he vomited out terrible curses against himself and others;
amongst the rest, he wished that if ever he went into the field to his old
occupation, the Devil might come and break his neck. But when sleep had
conquered drink, and sobriety restored his senses, he went again to his trade,
remembering indeed his late words, but regarding them not. Howbeit the Devil,
to show his double diligence, attended on him at his appointed hour in the
fields, in the likeness of a big swarthy man, and asked him if he remembered
his promise and vow which he had made the day before, and if it were not
lawful for him to break his neck, and withal struck the poor man (trembling
for fear) over the shoulders, that his feet and his hands presently dried up,
so that he lay there not able to stir, till by the help of men he was carried
home, the Lord not giving the Devil so much power over him, as he wished
himself, but yet permitted him to plague him on this sort, for his amendment
and our example.

The three that falsely accused Narcissus the Bishop, wishing that if their
sayings and swearings were not true, they might the one consume with some
fearful disease, the other that he might be burned, the third that he might
be blind, had their wishes, according to their deserts and desires, as before
touching perjurers, you have heard.

Henry Earl Schwarthurg, through a corrupt custom, used commonly to wish,
that he might be drowned in a privy. And as he wished, so it happened unto
him, he was so served, and murdered at S. Peter's Monastery in Erford, Anno
1148.

The like befell a young Courtier at Mansfield, whose custom was in any
earnest asseveration, to say, The Devil take me, if it be not true, or if it
be not so. The Devil indeed took him while he slept, and threw him out of an
high window, where, albeit by the good providence of God, he took no hurt that
was great, yet he learned by experience to bridle his tongue from all such
cursed speeches: this being but a taste of Gods wrath that is to fall upon such
wretches that live and die in their sins.

At Oster a village in the Duchy of Megalapole, there happened a most strange
and fearful example upon a woman, that gave her self to the Devil both body
and soul, and used most horrible cursings and oaths, both against her self
and others; which detestable manner of behavior, as at many other times, so
especially she showed it at a marriage at the foresaid village on S. John
Baptists day, the whole people exhorting her to leave off her accustomed
impiety: But she nothing bettered, continued her course til all the company
were set at dinner, and very merry: Then lo the Devil having got full
possession of her, came in person, and transported her into the air before
them all, with most horrible outcries and roarings, and in that sort carried
her round about the town, that the inhabitants were ready to die with fear;
and by and by tore her in four pieces, leaving in four several high ways a
quarter, that all that came by, might be witnesses of her punishment, and then
returning to the marriage, threw her bowels upon the Table, before the Major of
the Town, with these words: Behold these dishes of meat belong to thee, whom
the like destruction waits for, if thou do not amend thy wicked life.

The reporters of this history were John Herman, the Minister of the said town,
with the Major himself, and the whole inhabitants, being desirous to have it
made known unto the world for example sake.

In Luthers conferences we read, that diverse noble men, striving together at a
horse-race, cried in their course, The Devil take the last. Now the last was a
horse that brake loose, whom the Devil hoisted into the air, and took clean
away.

Fincelius records concerning a man not far from Gorlitz, that provided a
sumptuous feast, a supper, and invited many guests unto it; who at the time
appointed refusing to come, he in an anger and chafe cried, Then let all the
Devils in bell come: neither was his wish frivolous, for a number of these
hellish Fiends came forthwith, whom he not discerning from men, came to
welcome and entertain; and perceiving in stead of fingers, claws, all
dismayed, he ran out of thedoores with his wife, and left none in the house,
but an infant, with a fool sitting by the fire, whom the Devil had no power to
hurt, neither any man else, but the goodly supper which they quickly made away
withal, and so departed.

It is generally known at Oundell, a Town in Northamptonshire, amongst all
that were acquainted. with the party, namely, William Hacket, how he used in
his earnest talk, to curse himself on this manner, If it be not true, then let
God send a visible confusion upon me. Now he wanted not his wish: for he came
to a visible confusion, being (for calling himself Christ, and Judge of the
earth) hanged on a Gibbet in Cheapside, 33, of Elizabeth.

These and such like speeches are too common in the mouths of many people, The
Devil take thee for thy labor. If I do this, or his, God consume me body and
soul: the plague or the pox take or rot thee, etc.

At Wittenberg, before Martin Luther, and diverse other learned men, a woman
whose daughter was possessed with a spirit, confessed that by her curse that
plague was fallen upon her: for being angry at a time, she bade the Devil take
her; and she had no sooner spoke the word, but he took her indeed, and
possessed her after a strange sort.

At Neoburg in Germany, another woman in her anger cursed her son, saying and
praying she might never see him return alive: And the same day the young man
bathing himself in water, was drowned, and never returned to his mother alive,
according to her wicked wish.

At the City of Astorga, another woman desired the Devil in hell to fetch her
son out of her presence. The boy at last through fear, about ten of the
clock the same night, went out into a little court behind the house; from which
he was suddenly hoisted up into the air, by men in show of grim countenance,
great stature, and loathsome gesture, but indeed cruel Fiends of Hell, and
that with such swiftness, as he himself after confessed, that it was not
possible to his seeming, for any bird in the world to fly so fast: And
lighting down among certain mountains of bushes and briers, was trailed
through the thickest of them, and so torn and rent in his clothes, hands,
face, feet, and almost in all his body. At last the boy remembering God, and
beseeching him for help and assistance, the cruel Fiends brought him back
again through the air, and put him in at a little window into a chamber of his
fathers house, where after much search and grief for him, he was found in that
pitiful plight, and almost besides himself. And thus though they had not
power to deprive him of life, as they had done the former, yet God suffered
them to afflict the parents in the son, for the good both of parents and
son, if they belonged unto the Lord.

But above all this, is most strange which happened in a town in Misnia, the
eleventh of September 1552. where a choleric father seeing his son slack
about his business, wished he might never stir from that place. It was no
sooner said but done; his son stuck fast in the place, neither by any means
possible could be removed, no not so much as to set or bend his body, till by
the prayers of the faithful, his pains were somewhat mitigated, though not
remitted; three years he continued standing with a post at his back for his
ease, and four years sitting, at the end whereof he died, nothing weakened in
his understanding, but professing the faith, and not doubting of his salvation
in Christ Jesus. When he was demanded at any time how he did, he answered
most usually, that he was fastened of God, and that it was not in man, but in
Gods mercy for him to be released.

The strangeness of the example should not discredit the truth hereof, seeing
we read how Lots wife was turned into a pillar of salt, Genesis 19. Genesis 19.
And Corah with his company swallowed up into the earth, Numb. 16. Numb. 16.
Happy are we if the punishments inflicted upon others, do make us repent, and
leave our own known fins, and all such bitter cursings, and fearful
imprecations against our selves and others, such as are these, I pray God I may
never stir; or, I may rot alive; or, my eyes may drop out of my bead, I would
I might never speak more if it be not true; or, I may sink into the earth; or,
that these hands may never open again; or, the Devil then take me, if I do
this; or, I pray God this bread or drink may be my poison; or, I may never
enjoy good by any penny that ever I shall have; or being offended with others,
The pox take thee, the plague consume thee, a murraine on thee, the Devil
fetch thee alive; or, would to God thou never had been born, or seen the
Sun; or, I pray God I may never see thee again, with a world of such
fearful, sinful, direful wishes.

But we read of some that wished such dangerous wishes to themselves, Object.
and many fearful curses upon others.

If David, Sol.
Job, Jeremy, through violent passions, and distempered perturbations, were
overtaken with any such sinful wishes and imprecations, yet they are no
warrant for us to do the like. They are not set as land-markes to lead us to
the shore of safety and imitation; but as floating Boys to cause us to avoid
the rocks of like sins and inperfections.

David we see in that doleful Ditty upon the death of his dear darling
Absalom, discovered much passion, and too much natural affection, both blind
and sinful, in these words, Would to God I had died for thee, O Absalom, etc.
If he had died for him, he should have died the death that he died withal. Now
should it have been requisite that a faithful King should have died for a
rebellious subject, so loving a father for so unnatural a son, a blessed
father of all Israel, for a cursed son of Belial? Then would and might the
Damsel singers have turned their joyful melodies, Saul has slain his
thousand, and David his ten thousand, into mournful Elegies, Saul was slain by
the sword on his heart, and David was slain by the hair of his head, hanging
by the boughs of an Oak, as a recompense of his haughty ambition, in the air
between heaven and earth, as unworthy to live, either with God above, or with
men beneath; that being the cause of his destruction, which he had made the
cause of his exultation; that should have proved his grief and shame at his
death, which he accounted his glory and delight in the time of his life. See
how many inconveniences and reproaches both to David in particular, and to the
Israel of God in general, would have ensued, if his sinful wish had been
granted unto him.

The occasion of Jobs and Jeremies distempered wishes, you may read Job. 2.13.
Jerem. 12.15. and 20. and 14. and then easily untie the knot of ambiguity.

But David boasted of the hatred he bare to some persons which he wished not
well unto: Object.
Do not I hate them that hate thee? Psalm 139.

This hatred was bred in David of the exceeding love of God, Sol.
and not properly of the love of himself, or the hatred of others.

He that loves himself earnestly, does surely hate his enemies, but not the
enemies of God.

Touching Moses and Paul's wishings, Moses and Paul. Exodus 32.32. Romans 9.3.
though some think them to be sinful, as Calvin does Moseses, yet most deem
otherwise. Some think their speeches to be parabolicall, to show the intention
of their desire, such as was Rachels, Give me children, or else I die, Genesis
30.1. Genesis 30.1.
Some taking the wishes to be conditional (if it be possible,) or (if it
please God.) Calvin.
Some thinking they preferred the safety of the people before their own souls.
But this is against the rule of Charity: for though other men's souls should be
dearer unto us then our own bodily life, yet my soul should be dearer unto me,
then all other men's souls in the world. Yea, Tostatus further adds, if all
the souls of the Saints, yea of the Virgin Mary, should perish unless my soul
perish, Citius eligcre deberem, omnes ill as perire, quam animam meam: I ought
rather to make this choice, that all their souls should, then my own soul
should perish. But the meaning of Moses in that wish, was to prefer Gods
glory above all things, his own name to be blotted out, rather then his enemies
should have occasion to cast forth blasphemy against the Lord. He rather aimed
at Gods glory, then at his own salvation to be preferred. The salvation of our
souls is precious, but the glory of God ought to be more precious unto us,
says Simlerus.

So Paul's meaning (in wishing to be accursed) was, Romans 9.3.
rather then Gods glory should be diminished, or blemished by the scandalous
imputation of the Gentiles in the rejection of the Jews his chosen people, to
whom pertained the promises, the covenants, the services, adoption and glory of
God.

Any other dreadful wishes or imprecations that we read of by the Saints of
God in the Scriptures, seeming to wish hurt or ruin to the persons against
whom they are powered out, they are all either indefinite or prophetical.
Indefinite, without naming any particular person; or if definite, naming some
particular person, then are they conditional, intending in the first place, if
God have so ordained it, conversion; if not, in the second, confusion; or if
they be both definite and absolute, then are they prophetical, Non tam vota,
quam vaticinia, speeches of men inspired, not so much wishing what they
foretell, as certainly foreseeing and foretelling that of themselves they wish
not, Vt in verbis quasi male optantis intelligamus praedict a prophetantis,
says Saint Augustine: or if they wish it, it is because they know by
revelation, it is the will of God, or that it makes for the glory of God.

When David and Paul prayed for the destruction of their enemies, Psalm. 109.
from the sixth verse to the 21. or for false teachers to be accursed, Gal.
1.8, 9. and the wicked that trouble the godly, to be cut off, in the 2.
Corinthians, they are predictions rather then maledictions: they wished
destruction not as revengers upon them, but rather that their wickedness might
end thereby. They prayed not as private persons, wishing revenge on their
enemies; but as public persons, desiring Gods justice to be showed: which
prayers are not unlawful, yet very cauteously to be followed.

If we at any time pray for Gods plagues upon incorrigible sinners, it must be
in the general supposition of their uncurable, unreclaimable impiety, saying
indefinitely with Paul, 1 Cor. 16.22.
If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be accursed. But it must not be in
particular application, unless God reveal (which he does seldom) their final
obstinacy unto us.

Wherefore (that I may at length put a period to this unpleasing discourse,) as
we desire (blessed brethren) Gods blessing upon our selves, persons and
posterity, goods, cattle, servants, so let us labor to be far from desiring
and wishing Gods plagues, pox, murrain, death, damnation upon our selves,
sons, servants, or upon our neighbors persons, goods, cattle, considering
how unseeming it is for us, how pleasing to the Devil, and how unacceptable to
the Lord.

1. Inducements. Iam. 3.9, 10, 11. 1 Pet. 3.9.
It is unbeseeming for us to curse, seeing we are heirs of blessings, 1 Pet.
3.9.

2. It is most pleasing to Satan, as hereby proclaiming we hasten to his
kingdom: Whence the Ancients have observed, that when God gave the Devil leave
to afflict Jobs body, he spared his tongue, that feeling his pain, he might
easily rail and curse: Job. 3.1.
so pleasing were Jobs curses, as his virtues were vexatious unto the Devil.

3. It is very unacceptable unto God, because this belongs to God and not to
man. He says to Abraham, Genesis 12.3.
Genesis 12.3. I will curse them that curse thee. This prerogative he will reserve
to himself, because he knows how to do it without passion and inequality,
this his glory he denies to give unto another. Esa. 42.8.


We for our parts in special (if we will suffer the example of Michael the
Archangel to prevail with us) may not curse any, no not the Devil, though the
Devil deserves to be cursed, yet it must not go out of the Archangels mouth
against him, Iuds 9.
Jude 9. Thine enemies deserve to be cursed, yet such speaking becomes not thy
mouth: for surely it cannot be but the sign of a wretch, to use such
hell-hatched language.

It may be some Goliath, some uncircumcised Philistine accustomes himself to
such grievous fearful curses, but the tongues of the children of God drop no
such gall and poison, but honey and oil, words and prayers of blessing, powdered
with salt, ministering grace unto the hearers, and glory to the speakers, and
not (as cursing) grief to the one, and damnation to the other.

How can we our selves think to be free from the plague, pox, and vengeance of
God, when we cease not to wish these to others? For as the bird taking her
flight from her nest, fetcher a compass, and by and by returns thither again:
so curses come in where they go out, and return on our heads, as stones hurled
against the wind.

As a man that takes up an Adder in his hand, or fire, to throw against his
enemy, hurts himself most; so is it with those that curse their enemies, the
danger is certain to the Agents, but uncertain to the patients: Will thou
plunge thy self over head and ears in the waters of Gods plagues and
judgments, that thou may thrust another up to the knees in the same? Will thou pluck out both thine own eyes, scil. body and soul, that thou may but
endeavor to pluck out one of thine enemies, scil. in calling for Gods
vengeance to light upon his body, goods or house?

Leave off to use such cursed proverbiall diabolical speeches against others,
or else be content, and expect that the same recoyle back upon thine own
head, which thou desire should have fallen upon them: For how expectest thou
to be exempt from punishment, seeing thou do continue to take Gods name in
vain?

In vain first, because by naming it, thou thoughtest to bring Gods curse upon
another, and it was far from him.

In vain secondly, because by praying to it, thou thoughtest to procure Gods
blessing upon thy self, yet it was far from thee.

Questions touching swearing and forswearing, With the Answers annexed.
What is an Oath? Question Answer.


It is a necessary confirmation of things doubtful, by calling upon God to be
a witness of truth, and a revenger of Falsehood.

A necessary confirmation I say, because an oath is never to be used in way of
confirmation, but only in case of mere necessity, Heb. 6.16. For when all
other humane proofs do fail, then is it lawful to fetch testimony from
heaven, and to make God himself our witness. In this case alone, Perk Case
page, 222.
and never else it is lawful to use an oath.

In which God is called upon as a witness of the truth. By this clause an oath
is distinguished from other kinds of confirmation, as the Affirmation, the
Asseveration, and the Obtestation; because in this we call upon God to give
witness to the things avouched, but in the other three we do not.

What be the particular parts in every oath? Quest. 2.


1. Asseveration of the truth avouched. Answer. Four parts in every oath.


2. Confession of the omnipotent wisdom, justice, and truth of God, searching
the heart.

3. Prayer and invocation, whereby God is alled upon to witness that he
speaks the truth.

4. Imprecation, binding and devoting himself to Gods punishment if he swear
salsly.

Now though these four be the distinct parts of an oath, yet all of them are
not expressed in the form of every oath, but sometime one, sometime two of the
principal, as in Ier. 4.2. is expressed only confession, and in Ruths to
Naomi only an imprecation. So in Gods, Heb. 3.11. If they enter into my rest
let me then be no God, but ^ deceiver. And in 2 Cor. 1.23. Invocation with
imprecation only is uttered with words.

Now though some one or more of these parts are concealed, yet all the parts in
the mind of the swearer are to be understood, otherwise the oath is not
formal and entire.

Whether all oaths are to be performed? Quest. 3. Answer.


They are, if lawful and possible. If absolutely they be lawful in respect of
us, so that with a good conscience enlightened with Gods word, we may perform
them: And withal, if they be possible, and in our power, so that we can
fulfill them: Whosoever swears an oath, het shall do according to all that
proceeds out of his mouth, Numb. 30.3. Matthew. Psalm 15.

But sinful oaths are not to be performed: for it was a sin in making them,
and a double sin in keeping them. David did break, Herod kept his sinful oath:
But David did well in breaking, Herod did ill in keeping his oath: for in all
oaths there is a secret exception of the higher powers, and our former oaths
to God: God is greater then men, and we have first bound our selves to him;
therefore no oath is to be performed that is against God or godliness.

Whether he be forsworn that swears according to the letter, Quest. 4.
and not the meaning?

He is, Answer.
because not in truth, Ier. 4.2. but in equivocation and fraud. Therefore
Cleomenes swear fraudulently, that having made a truce with his enemies for 7
days, set upon them in the night. And the woman that swear she was with child
by Eustochius of Antioch, which was not the Bishop, but another common person of
the City of the same name. And the Captain in war that having taken away
prisoners, should bind himself by oath to the enemies, to deliver half the
captives upon such a sum delivered for their ransom; having received the
price, according to the covenant, should in stead of half the number (as the
other understood him) send half the bodies of the whole number, as he in his
oath guilefully intended. This cunning does not lessen and extenuate the
perjury in Gods sight, but rather much aggravate and increase the same, seeing
thereunto is added fraud and deceit. And he that swears fraudulently, makes
a sport of sin: he that swears falsely, believes either that God knows
not the truth, or believes a lie.

Whether he be forsworn that performs not his oaths to his enemies, or
thieves. Quest. 5.


He is: as a man swearing to a thiese to pay him such a sum of money, and to
be filent, Answer.
that his life may be saved, it is necessary for the innocent party to keep his
oath.

Object. But thieves escaping unpunished, the Commonwealth is thereby
damnified.

Sol. This hurt is not to be redeemed with the losseof a man's life.

It is greater good to the Commonwealth, that the life of every honest and
sound member should be preserved, then that a wicked and rotten member should
be cut off. Vrsine and Willet are thus conjoined in judgment, and Downam, page
60. and 161. does at large confirm the same: Yet Perkins (on Matthew. 5.33.)
affirms, that a man is not bound to fulfill his oath in concealing of a
thief. And in his Cases of Conscience, page 231. he leaves the question in
suspense, rather inclining to his foresaid opinion.

If the oath were touching treason against our Prince and country, it were not
to be kept, because the preservation of them is more highly to be valued, then
the preservation of our own lives.

Whether oaths made to any manner of person, be to be performed. Quest. 6.


They are, Answer.
though the Papists affirm, that no oaths made with heretics are to be kept.

This (were it generally allowed to be practiced) would overthrow all
Contracts between Nation and Nation, and frustrate all covenants and
conclusions of peace and truce; public scandal in causing others to abhor
our Religion should be incurred, and Gods name (which is called upon to
countenance falsehood) should be dishonored and abused.

Remember before to this purpose, the forementioned judgment of God upon
Vladislaus, King of Hungaria, for falsifying his oath with Amurath the Turk.

Whether oaths made through error, Quest. 7.
do bind the conscience.

They do, Answer.
if they be made of things lawful, and in our power.

Iosuab and the Princes of Israel, performed their oath made to the Gibeonites;
which oath being afterward by Saul violated, it was severely punished by a
grievous famine, and the destruction of seven of Saul's posterity.

Whether an oath made by custom does bind or no. Quest. 8.


The Papists say no, Answer.
putting this example, If two men going out at a door, or over a bridge, the
one swearing by God that he will not go first, the other swearing likewise, yet
at last after contention, one of them goes first: In this case, say the
Papists, the oath binds not. But we say, that that custom cannot make that
which is sin, to be no sin; or perjury to be no perjury, but rather
doubleth the sin, and makes it the more vile and abominable: and it is no
marvel, that they which addict themselves to this customary swearing, become
oftentimes guilty of flat perjury.

When does a man commit perjury?

1. When a man swears that which he knows to be false. Quest. 9. Answer.


2. When he swears that which he means not to do.

3. When he swears to do a thing which he means also to do, but
afterward does it not.

Whether a man by lending his money, Qu. 10.
being often deceived, vowing and swearing that he will lend no more money to any
man, be bound to keep his oath.

Such anoath is not to be kept, seeing it is taken against the love of our
neighbor, Answer.
and Doctrine of Christ, Lend, looking for nothing again, if there be not
ability to pay.

Whether an oath made by an inferior, without or against the consent of
superiors, Qu. 11.
is to be kept.

No, if it be made by those that are not at their own liberty, it is to be
accounted void. Answer.
Sons and daughters binding themselves in contract of marriage without their
parents consent, that contract ought to be of no force; but if once married,
not afterward to be dissolved, Numb. 38.

Whether we are bound to swear often. Qu. 12.


The Jews thought they did well to sweat often, induced to this opinion,
Answer.
and practiced by them, Dent. 6.18. But they are confuted by our Savior,
Matthew. 5. and by the Prophet, Jerem. 4.2.

Whether swearing vainly, Qu. 13.
it be greater abuse to swear by the Name of God, or of Jesus.

By the name of Jesits, Answer.
because

1. God has exalted the name of Jesus above all names, in respect of his great
humiliation and obedience, even to the death of the Cross, Phil. 2.

2. There is no other name whereby we are to be saved, Acts 3.

3. The name of God shows him to be our creator: the name of Jesus shows him
to be both our creator and redeemer.

And that name which describes God with more perfections, is the most
honorable name. See more in Willet on Exodus page 3, 4, 5.

Whether it be lawful to swear by the Saints. Qu. 14.


No: Qu. 14.
1. Because God has commanded us to swear only by his name, Deur. 6.13.

2. Because God reproves those that swear by any other but by him, Zeph. 1.5.

3. Invocation belongs only to God: but the taking of an oath is a kind of
invocation, it is a service due only to God, Psalm 50.

4. In an oath we call God to be a witness to our soul: but God only, not
Angels or Saints, knows the secrets of our hearts, and therefore God only to
be sworn by.

5. He that swears, gives him power to punish him, if he swear falsely. But
God only it able to punish the soul, Matthew. 10.28. therefore we ought to
swear only by him.

Read Willet his answer to what is objected to the contrary, page 35.1. on the
3d Com answering Matthew. 23.21. with Matthew. 5.34.

Whether it be lawful to swear by the creatures. Qu. 15.


If the creatures be placed in the room and place of God, it is lawful,
Answer.
say all Papists, and some Protestants. If the oath he directed to God in the
mind of the swearer, under the name of the creature, it is taken for lawful
among the Papists, and many Protestants: But Mr. Perkins on Matthew. 5.34.
finds no Scripture to warrant this kind of swearing by the creatures with
directions to God in the mind of him that swears, induced by Deuteronomy. 6.13.
Heb. 6.16.

If a man might swear by the creatures, and conceal the name of God, it would
diminish his Majesty and Authority, and much deceit might beused: for the
swearer might say, that he swear not by God, but only used an obtestation by
the creatures.

Read Perkins his answers to the objections on Matthew. 5. and in Cases of
Conscience, where this question somewhat largely is by him disenssed.

Whether an oath made by Creatures, Idols, Qu. 16.
or false Gods, is to be performed.

It is: Hence Augustine says, Answer.
He that swears falsely by a stone, is perjured. Though that be not holy by
which he swears, yet the Lord is holy before whom he swears. Though the
stone hears him not speak, yet God will punish him if he deceive.

Though it be not lawful to swear by false gods, or Idols, yet whosoever has
sworn by them, as by true Gods, he is bound to perform his promise; not for
the Idols sake, but for Gods sake before whom he swears; not because they are
true Gods indeed, but because they are so in the swearers opinion. Therefore
the Turk swearing by Mabomet, is perjured if he do not perform his promise. So
are the Papists, swearing by the Idol of the Mass, if they do not perform
their promise.

When Jacob made a promise and covenant with Laban, and Laban swore by the
Idols of Nabor, Jacob accepted of the oath, though tendered unto him in the
name of a false God, which he would not have done, had it been no oath at all.

A poor man being in extreme want, borrows of the usurer upon interest: it
is sin in the usurer to take it, but it is not so in the poort man, who is
compelled by the usurer to give it. Thus the poor man does use well the
iniquity of the usurer. So is it in an oath, a godly man may well use and take
benefit by the wicked oaths of Idolaters, so far forth as they shall serve
for the ratifying and confirming of lawful covenants.

Doubtless it is a lesser offense to swear by the false God truly, then to
swear by the true God falsely: it is a sin to lie, a double sin to swear and
lie.

Whether he that voluntarily by oath before a Magistrate, Qu. 17.
discovers some secret offense of his brother, does sin.

He does: for though his oath be just, Answer.
yet he swears not justly, because not urged by the Magistrate so to swear.
See more in Willet on Exodus

Whether a man is bound always to perform whatsoever was lawfully by oath
promised. Qu. 18.


No: for some oaths may be lawful in promising, Answer.
which may fall out to be unlawful in performing. As if a man bind himself to
assist his friend, and he afterward prove an enemy and traitor to his
country: Therefore in taking such an oath, he should swear conditionally, to
follow his friend only usque ad aras, so far to aid him, as he shall have
the warrant of Gods word for his works.

Of what things is not a man to take his oath? Qu. 19.


(Of five things

1. Of things that are false: Answer.
for he that so swears, makes God the witness of a lie.

2. Of things doubtful: for this is presumption.

3. Of things unlawful: for so they make God contrary to himself, in
approving what he has forbidden.

4. Of things impossible, and which are not in our power: for this were to
mock God, when he offers to swear that which he knows he cannot do.

5. Of things light and frivolous: for hereby he gives not the due reverence
that belongs to God.

Whether it be lawful to impose an oath on him whom we think will forswear
himself. Qu. 20.


It is unlawful for a private man to impose such an oath for his own private
respect and gain: Answer.
for we ought rather to lose any worldly benefit, then by such an oath to
suffer God to be dishonored, and our neighbor to lose himself.

Augustine accounts such a person worse then a murderer, because the
murderer kills but the body, this the soul, yea, two souls at once, his
whom he provokes to swear, and his own.

Do thou know that to be true which thou affirmest, and that false which
thou avouchest, and yet urgest him to swear? Bohold, he swears, for
swears, and perishes; and what have thou found hereby? yea, thou have lost
thy self, who would no otherwise be satisfied, but by his destruction.

Yet the Magistrate, if the execution of law and justice do so require, may put
such a one to his oath: for better it is that a private person should perish,
then the public administration of justice should be hindered.

Yet all other means for the finding out of the truth, are first to be used,
and the party that is to swear, gravely to be admonished of the weightinesse of
an oath, the heynonsnesse of perjury, and the fearfulness of the punishment at
tending thereon, and so leave the party to himself and the event to God.

Such light persons, that seem by their evil courses, to be void of all truth,
and the fear of God, if they have sworn, yet I think the Judge is to give
little credit unto them; If the case did concern himself he would not much
credit them. Whence pithy Parens upon those words of Paul, Romans 9.2. [I speak
the truth in Christ Jesus, I lie not, my conscience also bearing witnesse] has
this observation: Take his oath that has a good conscience. As a profane man
makes no more account of his oaths then of a straw, so ought the Judge to
account of them, and never to urge such to swear; for they will swear any
thing.

Whether an oath made to the Creator, Qu. 21.
may be dispensable by the Creature.

It may not: For in every lawful oath there is not only a bond between man
and man, Answer.
of one man to another, but also of man to God. Indeed if in the oath taken,
man were only obliged to man, it might be dispensed by man; but seeing the
swearer is bound immediately to God himself, he cannot have release from the
Pope, or any other inferior Bishop, or creature. Thou shall perform thy
oaths. To whom? To the Lord, Matthew. 5.33.

That which God binds, no creature can unloofe, Matthew. 19.6. When the Pope
shows himself Antichrist, in that he challenges power to dispense with a
lawful oath, made without error or deceit, of things honest and possible.

Now that I may at length draw this work off the Loome, and conclude, what
lets, but that the sinner should surcease by swearing, forswearing, and
cursing, to take Gods Name in vain? considering the threats denounced in the
Word, are so many, and plentiful, and the judgments inflicted upon them in
the world, have been so vilible and fearful. What is the cause they should any
longer stop their ears against these verbal and real charms, and hate to
be reformed? I cannot imagine what they can allege, why sentence presently be
not executed upon them, unless they conceit, either that God will be more
merciful unto them then Ministers promise, by the many threats against these
their vain, vile, and abominable impieties proclaimed; or that these threats
are not the words of God, but the politic traditions of men, to hold men in
aw in regard of humane societies, and worldly affairs.

Indeed if these threats in the Scripture, and the whole Scripture it self, be
not the word of God, there is some color for them to continue in their sins:
But if the Scriptures be the word of God, there is weighty cause why by the
threats recorded in the same, they should instantly resolve, now, even now,
while it is called to day, not to harden their hearts any longer, but to
hearken to the voice of the Lord, and suffer his word to reclaim them from
these horrid, hellish, dangerous, damnable sins of sweaing, forswearing,
cursing.

For the first of these their last and lewd objections, concerning Gods
mercifulness, mark what the Lord speaks ( Deuteronomy. 29.19.) touching such
presumptuous persons, whose root bears nothing but gall and wormwood, If it
come to pass when such a sinner hears the words of this curse, that he
blesses himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in
the imagination of my heart, thus adding drunkenness to thirst, the Lord will
not spare him, but the Anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against
that man, and all the curses written in this book shall lie upon him, and the
Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven: certain to believe, fearful
to hear, insupportable to feel and endure.

Which being to all (save to Atheistical persons) so true and fearful, these
swearers, cursers, and perjured persons, are so imboldned by long custom in
their sins, that (when they hear their threats so many and grievous recorded
in the Law) they blush not to call in question the truth of the Scriptures
themselves, saying, Who can tell whether these sayings and sentences be the
words of God, or no?

Wherefore to convince them of this their Atheistical conceit, that so if it
be possible, they may be converted from these three vain and unprofitable sins;
let them but resolve but to suffer these ensuing arguments to have passage into
the innermost closets of their hearts and meditations, that so as I began with
the Titles of the Word, to procure reverence and attention, I may end with the
truth of the Word, to persuade to faith and obedience; especially seeing it
does but a little precede my Text, and is the preface to all these ten
precepts; God (himself) spoke all these words, saying, Thou shall not take the
name of the Lord thy God in vain. For the preface, (says Alstedius, a learned
Writer) is to have relation unto, and prefixion before every one of the
several precepts.

That the Scriptures are the very word of God, these reasons do show.

1. The event answering the prophesies from time to time, though the
intermission of many hundred of years interceded between the one and the other.

2. The purity of it forbidding all vice, and commanding all virtue. The Law is
holy, inst, and good, Romans 7.12.

3. The wonderful agreement of the Word, notwithstanding it intrears of so
many, and almost infinite particulars, yet no contradiction found in the same,
which in men's laws usually is found.

4. Gods Spirit witnessing with the spirit of man. The things of God knows no
man, but the Spirit of God. This Spirit of God we have received, that we might
know the things that are freely given us of God: for by his Spirit God has
revealed them unto us, 1 Cor, 2.10, 11, 12.

5. The constant death of Martyrs for it: For Iohuibe Divine was in
tribulation, in the patience of Christ, in banishment in the I Will Patmos, and
all this for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ. I was
periwaded constantly to suffer, because I knew the word comforting me, to be
the word of God, and that to be most true which it testified concerning Christ
Jesus, That the Scholar is not greater then his Master, That he that will
reign with Christ, must suffer with Christ. And Rev. 6.9. the Saints slain
for the word of God, Rev. 6.9. Rev. 12.11
they loved not their lives to the death, because of the Word, whereby they
overcame the Devil, Rev. 12.11.

6. The supernatural mysteries, Arg. 6.
and wonderful matters revealed in it, Psalm. 119.18. 1 Cor. 2.9. such things
as the Angels themselves desire to look into, 1 Pet. 1.12.

7. The consent of the Churches in all ages to receive it, Peter that wrote it,
Arg. 7.
and the Saints to whom he wrote, did well to take beed unto this most sure
word, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the
day star arise in their hearts, and all this because they knew that this
Word, this Voice, came down from heaven, 2 Pet. 1.19.18.

8. The Antiquity of it, Arg. 8.
being in its being (though not in delivery) as ancient as God himself. In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, John 1.1. None ever had any
light that spoke not according to this Word, Esaias 8.20.

9. The inward change it suddenly makes in men, Arg. 9.
nothing being able to cure the wounded heart, but the Word alone: this being a
plaster broad enough for any wound, Psalm. 119.96. This being sweeter then
honey, and restraining men from every evil way, Psa. 119.103.128. which effect the
sayings of the deepest politician are not able to effect for soul and body:
This fire being able to pierce, Jer. 23.29
this hammer to break the strongest rock of man's heart into pieces.

The great power of it to cast down all the strong holds of sin and Satan,
Arg. 10.
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4.
which man's law cannot obtain from man, but Gods alone, which is sharper then
any two edged sword (cutting both ways, killing and curing again) and
discerning the very thoughts and intents of the bearts, Heb. 4.12.

Satan's persuasion unto us, that it is not the word of God, Arg. 11.
strongly proves the truth of it: for he is a lier, and the father of lien,
Job. 8.44. If it were forged he would contend for maintenance of it.

The practicer of it most wise and holy, Arg. 12.
the neglecter of it most foolish and profane: David by this word being made
wiser then his enemies, Ancients, Teachers, Psalm 119.11, 98, 99, 100.

The miraculous preservation of it in all ages, Arg. 13.
though Satan and his agents have labored to suppress it, it being burnt by
Iehudi, Ier. 6.23. It was written more largely by Ieremiab and Baruch, verse
32. If it had been of men, it would have come to naught, but being of God, it
could not be overthrown, Acts 5.38.

The meeting with all new sins, Arg. 14.
though written many hundred years ago, and containing answers to whatsoever
the carnal heart of man can object to the contrary.

The constant abiding of it in our hearts (when other knowledge vanishes) at
the hour of death to comfort our souls, and instruct others: Arg. 15.
with this at that time Jacob comforted himself, Genesis 48.3, 4. with this at
that time David instructed his son Solomon, 1 Kings 2.3, 4.

The confirmation of it by many miracles from heaven by the hand of God
himself, Arg. 16.
as by raising the widow of Sarephaths son, whereby she confessed that the
word of the Lord in the prophets mouth was truth, 1 King. 17.24.
Ier. 5.36. Heb. 2.3, 4.

The delivery of it by mean and unlearned men, and not by Rulers of the world,
Arg. 17.
who seek their own glory.

Moses a Shepherd, Exodus 4. Amos a Heardsman, Amos 7. the Apostles Fishermen,
Acts 10.

The aiming at man's ho linesse in this world, Arg. 18.
and at his eternal happiness in the next, and not at terrene things, as
those writings do that come from men.

The end of the Commandment is Charity, Purity, Faith, and a good Conscience,
1 Timothy 1.5.

All Scripture is surely given by inspiration from God, because it is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
all good works, 2 Timothy 3.16.17.

The Scripture brings not only learning, Arg. 19.
but patience, comfort, hope, Romans 13.4. yea heaven and salvation, Romans 1.16.

So that most certainly the Word is not from men, Arg. 20.
for oun nature is contrary to it; nor from Satan, seeing he raises up
instruments against it: therefore it is from God himself.

These reasons of the truth of the word, may convince the Atheist, and the
threats contained in this word, should, may, (and shall, by Gods grace) convert
the swearer, forswearer, curser; especially seeing the judgments included in
this letter of the Law, is so plain, so peremptory, and free from partiality.

Which Decalogue, or ten words (though the whole Scriptures be equally holy,
yet) do in a principal manner challenge and call for reverence and obedience,
and that

1. In respect of the Soverainty of this Decalogue, given immediately by God.

2. The antiquity, the fountain of all other laws.

3. The generality, binding all men, high and low, which humane laws do not.

4. Immutability, admitting no dispensation, or exception.

5. The utility, presupposing and promising all sorts of blessings, Dent. 28.

6. The solemnity, delivered with the sound of Thunder and Trumpet, Exodus
19.18. In the very hearing and sight of the Israelites.

7. The brevity and order of it, looking to God on the right hand in the first
Table, and to man on the left hand in the second Table. Vide hac fusius in
Alstedio, page 171. A part of which law are the words of this Text, The Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain, which in the
beginning, middle, end, cry and call for no more, nor less, then reverence,
regard, faith, obedience, that so the pains of the Writer may not be
misapplied, nor the time of the Reader misimployed, but the duty of both
discharged, and the glory of God by both promoted.

Deo Vnico laus summa*
A Prayer.
OLord and heavenly Father, who art incomprehensible in Majesty, great in
power, fearful in judgments, holy in works, rich in mercy, true in promise,
who have commanded us to ask and we shall have, to seek and we shall find, to
knock, and it shall be opened unto us: In confident assurance of which
gracious promise to be performed, and in dutiful obedience to which powerful
commandment to be obeyed, we thy poor dust-creeping-creatures, wormesmeat
rather then men, are emboldned to approach unto thy throne of grace,
acknowledgeing that we are not worthy to name thy Name with our lips, or to
call upon it in our prayers, or to expect help from it in our need and
distress, considering that we have so often blasphemed this thy great,
fearful, and glorious name, by our thoughts that have been vain, by our words
that have been unprofitable, and by our works that have been abominable, by
rash, common, sinful thinking on, speaking of, and swearing by thy Name,
Titles, Attributes, Creatures, without any reverent regard of thy Majesty,
before whom, or the manner how, or the end wherefore we think on them in heart,
speak of them in word, or swear by them in oath. We often use, but as often
abuse thy glorious Name, by not walking as becomes thy name and Gospel, by
unsanctified use of thy good creatures, without looking to thee from whom they
came, by heedlesse admiration, vain supplication, opposing thy truth through
blindness, denying it through fear, scoffing at, and persecuting those that
profess the same, by saying or thinking, that thou will neither do good nor
evil, that there is no profit in thy service, that in adversity thou carest
not for us, or have not power or will to deliver us: By sacrificing to our net,
abusing thy blessings, blessing our hearts against thy threatenings, not
believing but neglecting the pretiousnesse of thy promises, by not performing
what we vow and promise in sickness, adversity, and at the Sacraments; by
sinning because thou forbearest to punish, rejoicing in the miseries and
disgraces of thy children, offering the blind and lame for thy service,
trusting more in men, money, carnal helps and means, then in the strong Tower,
the glorious Name of thee our Lord and God. But especially and most frequently,
and fearfully do we abuse thy Name by swearing lightly, commonly, rashly,
heathenishly, superstitiously, slavishly, without any cause moving us, or
regard to thy Majesty: sometimes by leaving thy Name, sometimes by adjoining
others with it, sometimes swearing by thy Creatures, making them to be our
Lords which thou have appointed our servants only; yea, without any
distinction at all of our words from our oaths: By which one sin of
swearing, much more by all other our sins, (more in number then the hairs of
our heads, grass in the fields, stars in the Firmament, or sands on the Sea
shore) adjoined thereto, we have transgressed thy Law, abused thy patience,
grieved thy Spirit, discredited our profession, offended the godly, hardened
the wicked, wounded our souls, and made our selves liable to the certainty,
severity, eternity of thy judgments; seeing the wages of every sin is death in
it self, and in thy Law thou have so plainly proposed, Thou will not hold them
guiltless that take thy Name in vain. Such sinners, though the eye of the
Magistrate cannot see, nor the hand of Master will not touch, nor the tongue of
the Minister dare not reach or reprehend; yet every such a one whatsoever he
be, Cedar or Shrub, high or low, Master or servant, noble or ignoble: Thou, O
Lord, with whom at this time we have to do, that art all eye, ear, hand, foot,
in every place to hear, see and punish all sin, wilt not suffer to escape
scot-free, live and die unpunished: for this sin of swearing thou have
threatened to have a controversy with the inhabitants of land, and that it
shall mourn, and every one that dwell therein, with the beasts of the field,
and fowls of heaven, and fishes of the Sea; yea, the very timber and stones of
the houses of the swearer, are threatened to be consumed by the certain and
severe universal curse recorded in thy long, broad, and flying book.

Yet such, O Lord, has been the ignorance in our understanding, the hardness
of our hearts, the contempt of thy Word, and the neglect of thy threatenings,
that we have not suffered thy precepts so to inform us, or thy menaces so to
awaken us, as that we have been reclaimed from this vain, unprofitable,
hell-hatched, heaven-daring, soule-killing, land-shaking impiety: Insomuch that
it is thy mere mercy that we are not every moment for this very sin
consumed, since many such sinners have tasted of the certainty of thy
judgments, even in this life, thou visibly causing thy plagues to fall down
upon them even in the instant when their blasphemies have been powered out
against thee.

We partaking (with them) in their sinful premises, how can we but expect
sharing with them in their fearful conclusions? True Lord, if in justice thou
deal with us; but with thee there is mercy that thou may be feared, much
more to be beloved: Therefore behold us, we humbly beseech thee, not with the
eyes of rigor and severity, but of pity and favor; pardon all other, pardon,
O pardon this our daily impiety of abusing thy Name by swearing, of careless,
cold reproving the abuse of the same: open our eyes good Father, that we may
every day more and more clearly see the greatness of this sin, and the
grievousnesse of the punishment attending thereon. Let us be persuaded the
rather to loath this sin in our hearts, and leave it out in the speeches of
our lips, seeing the Devil our adversary is the author of it, we proclaim
our selves hypocritical and profane persons; yea, rebels and traitors, not
only against thy sacred Majesty, but also against the Kingdom and Nation
wherein we live, our hellish oaths being secretly, though insensibly powerful
blasts to blow up Parliament Houses, and sharp swords to pierce the bodies of
Prince and people, we making our own tongues either Heralds to proclaim, or
Doctors to teach, or Proctors to plead for this treason: Strengthen us, O thou
that art the alone light of our eyes, and strength of our souls, that by thy
holy Spirits, and heavenly power, we may be resolved to be avenged on our
selves for this sin of swearing, by abstaining even from speech in such
company and cases wherein we have been so often overseen: And because he is
said to fear an oath, that uses often to sacrifice, teach us to pray daily
against this vice, that thou (which shuttest and no man or Devil can open)
may be pleased to set a watch before our mouths, and to keep the door of
our lips, give us grace that we may meditate often on thy Word, that alone
preservative against all sin.

Le us be sparing in the use of asseverations, as being the hedges and outmost
bounds of keeping thy Name from being profaned, as we would be fearful not
only of a deep pit, but also of dancing nigh the brink thereof; not only
eschewing the plague, but also every ragge that may seem to carry the plague
with it: Let us be careful to avoid the company of such incorrigible sinners;
because the tinder of our corruption is so easily set on fire by the least
spark of their evil presidents and lewd company. Subdue and mortify in us
anger, pride, covetousness, and breach of promise, which usually are the
occasions of swearing, that the causes and roots being removed, the vanity of
customary swearing may be pulled up by the roots. The several punishments that
in thy justice (O Lord) thou have inflicted upon many that have in this kind
provoked thy wrath, record in our memories, that we may recall to our
meditations, and learn by their punishments, to refrain this little great
unruly member of our tongue, that their falls may cause us to rise by
repentance, lest marching with them in their sins, we also smart with them
in their punishment, either in this life to our amendment, or in the next to
our confusion. And sithence in thy Word thou have so strictly and severely set
thy self against this sin, that in so palpable a manner sets it self
against thee, inform, stir up, and encourage the hearts, tongues, hands of
all thy Ministers and Magistrates that are in thy room and stead, to see virtue
maintained, and sin suppressed, that they in their several places may have
care, conscience and courage to ioyn hand in hand for the suppressing this
universal contagious sickness, this most common sin of swearing.

And forasmuch as it is grown to such strength, as that it will not easily be
subdued, either by the pen of the writer, the tongue of the Minister, or the
sword of the Magistrate, Paul planting, and Apollos watering both in vain,
unless thou give the increase, they can but speak to the ear, and touch the
body, thou alone must speak to the heart, and reform the tongue:

Bless and prosper the endeavor of one and other, that the sin of swearing
may have less power to affront them, and they more and more skill and courage
to oppose and suppress it; that so thy great and bloody controversy with the
inhabitants of the land, speedily may be ended, and they to thy Maty graciously
reconciled, all thy judgments, especially of Popery touching the soul, war
and penury touching the body, may from this land be averted, all thy
blessings, especially of piety and peace, of preaching and professing thy
Gospel in more power and purity in the same, may be reduced; our King, the
breath of our nostrils; the Princely progeny, and the much opposed yet
undaunted Parliament, may have their precious souls preserved from the
infection of Popery, their sacred persons protected from the danger of
treachery, all their governments and hoped for work of reformation prospered,
their days prolonged, the Nobles may be honored, the Magistrates blessed, the
Ministers comforted, the Commons defended, (thy name by each one of us being
sanctified) their bodies and souls at the great day may be saved, being
brought unto thy celestial kingdom, where they shall enjoy truth without
error, day without night, peace without perturbation, plenty without penury,
joy without grief, health without sickness, content without change, eternity
without end, because they enjoy thee that art All in All; and all this in, by,
and through the merits of thy Son Christ Jesus, our blessed Savior, to whom
with thee and thy holy Spirit be privately and publicly ascribed and rendered
all worship and service, honor and glory, power and praise, might and majesty,
dignity and dominion, from this time forth for all eternity, Amen, Amen.

Lord, speak thou the word only, and these sinners, if thy servants, shall be
healed, Matthew. 8.8.

GREENHAM concerning Reproof.
IF we think we may speak, we will speak too soon: If we think we may keep
silence, we will hold our peace too long: when we much love the persons to
whom we speak, we slack our zeal in reproving of sin: If we be zealous
against sin, we slack our love to the person.

By admonition we win and save souls, and for want of admonition we lose and
destroy souls.

If then by admonition you would not lose, observe carefully these Rules.

1. Look that you have a good ground out of the Word for reproving.

2. Look if it stand with your calling to reprove.

3. Afterward consider, if any other man might do it more profitably then you.

4. Look before whom you reprove, lest you hinder the credit of the party with
his friends, and increase his discredit with his foes.

5. When you see your lawful calling to reprove this or any other sin, then
consider that you must put on you the person of the offender, that as you spare
not his sin, because of the zeal of Gods glory, so you press it not too
far, because of compassion to a brother.

6. Then look that your heart be right in zeal and love, and so call for Gods
assistance before you speak, his grace in speaking, and his blessing after your
speaking.

7. If you remember any thing left out that might have been profitable, please
not your self in it, but be humbled for it.

8. If you find that some infirmities have been in you, yet shall they not do
so much hurt, as Gods blessing on his ordinance shall do good. For though the
party admonished do many times either deny the thing, or quarrel with the
affection of the speaker, yet when he has chafed with his own shadow, and
disputed with his own reason, it will come to pass that he will speak
reverently of him behind his back, whom he much gainsaid before his face.

Sundry dehortations out of Scripture against swearing.
THeem that sin rebuke openly, that the rest may fear, 1 Timothy 5.20. Rebuke
not an Elder, but exhort him as a Father, and the younger men as brethren, 1 Timothy 5.1. Swear not at all, Matthew. 5.34. Thou shall not forswear thy self,
Matthew. 5.33. Bless and curse not, Romans 12.14. He that hears cursing, and
bewrays it not, hates his own soul, Prove. 29.24. As the Swallow and Sparrow
by flying escape, so the curse that is causlesse, shall not come, Prove. 26.2.
How shall I curse where the Lord has not cursed? Numb. 23.8. Thou shall not
hate thy brother in thine heart: thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor,
and not suffer sin upon him, Levit. 19.17. FINIS.
An Abstract or Epitome of the Contents handled in this Tract.
1. THe Titles wherewith the word of God is honered, to allure men's affections
to attend with love and reverence unto it, as a Preface or introduction to the
Text, page 1, etc. 2. The Decalogues division, and Texts explication, to
inform the judgment, p. 6. etc. 3. The several acceptions of the word Name,
p. 7. etc. 4. Gods Name (besides swearing, forswearing, cursing) is taken in
vain 102. ways, p. 22, etc. Doct. Rightly to swear is to sanctify Gods Name,
wherein are handled, 1. The definition of on oath, 2. The ends of an oath,
four. 3. Causes why men swearing lay their hands on a book, four. Uses. 1.
Justification of the lawfulness of swearing, 2. Confutation of Anabaptists, p.
23, etc. 3. Caution in respect of the Rules, in Truth, Justice, Judgment, p.
30. Doct. 2. Sinful swearing, though by man it be not, yet by God shall
severely be punished, page 33. Ten ways how men swear sinfully, 33 Uses. 1.
Reprehension and commination, p. 34, etc. where sundry objections are resolved.
2. Removal of the twelve common objections for swearing p. 43, etc. 3.
Excitation by twenty motives to hate and eschiew ibis sin p. 36 etc. Where is
showed how it has been punished by God, by men, by the Romans, Egyptians,
Turks, French, Scythians, Persians; By Kings, Heathen, Christian, from p. 56.
ad p. 80. Twenty several in conveniences ensuing by swearing, p. 80. Use 4.
Direction what means to use whereby this poison may be expelled, this traitor
beheaded, this disease cured, this Commandment obeyed, page 82. where twelve
means are prescribed. 5. Exhortation for Magistrates, for Ministers, to set
themselves against this sin, p. 88 6. Imitation, God bolds not such sinners
guiltless; so must not we, p. 99. seen by punishing, by reproving it; where
the Rules are, 1. the matter what: 2. the men whom we must reprove: 3. the time
when: 4. the manner how: 5. the motives why, p. 101 1. For general uniformity,
2. because of delays, inutility, p. 117. In reproving them we must have, 1. an
Eagles eye, 2. a Ladies hand, 3. a Liens heart, p. 125 Hereunto are required 4.
graces, as most needful, 1. Fidelity, 2. Courage, 3. Discretion, 4. Patience.
p. 28 If we can do no good, then depart from their company inregard of the
danger of, 1. Suspicion, 2. Infection. 3. Malediction. Where ten objections to
continue in swearers company, are answered, 146 An edge may be put to our zeal
herein by Arguments drawn 1. from our Calling, 2. from Caution, 3. from
Discredit, 4. from Danger. 163 Ten objections alleged, (and the same answered)
why men do not reprove or punish swearers, 268 to 282. Doct. 3. Forswearers,
because they take Gods name in vain shall not by God be left unpunished. 282.
Uses. Where the Motives to dissuade from this sin in regard of 1. the
greatness of the sin, 2. the grievousnesse of the punishment: 1. eternal:
2. spiritual: 3. corporal, exemplified by Gods many visible judgments, is
manifested in ten particulars. 282. 287 Doct. 4. There is a certain
multiplicity, severity of punishment attending all those that by Cursing take
Gods name in vain. 300 Use 1. Dehorts from this sin, because of 1. its
greatness in regard of the breach of Gods Commandment. 1. The Curser breaking
the first, 2. the second Table. 301 2. The greatness of the punishment: 1.
Threatened in the Word. 2. Inflicted in the world. 301. to 315
Where objections from the examples, Of some mentioned in the Scriptures, that
wished dangerous wishes to themselves, are answered. 315 21. Cases and
questions touching swearing and forswearing, are answered from page 322. to 334
Lastly, the swearers, forswearers, cursers common refuge touching Gods mercy to
be expected by them, or the threats in the word proposed, doubted of by them,
are briefly answered. Where, to convince the profane and Atheistical sinners,
twenty arguments are revealed to prove the Scriptures to be the word of God,
and therefore the threats therein mentioned to be feared, to work repentance in
those sinners, and faith and obedience to this commandment. 336 Which
Decalogue (or Commandments) do in a special manner call for reverence and
obedience in regard of 1. The sovereignty, 2. Antiquity, 3. Generality, 4.
Immutability, 5. Vtility, 6. Solemnity, 7. Brevity of it. 340 A Prayer
containing the sum of the whole Sermons. 343 Greenhams Rules concerning
Reproof. 351 The fearful end of him who drank a health to the Devil.
The names of such Authors that I have read, and whence I have selected much of
the ensuing subject.
AVgust. in Epist. Muscul, in Mat. Gualt. in Hos. and in Mat. Turneb. in Iam.
Perk. Aur. caten. and in Mat. and in government of tongues. Downam in Hoseans,
and four Treatises. Elt. in Loc. Whateley. Bishop Hooper. Bifield. Mayer.
Destructor: vitiorum. Coopers Anatomy. Arraignment of unruly tongue. Doctor
Hall. Greenham. Covenant between God and Man. Ribera in min. Prophet. Gorr in
Mat. Morla. in Mat. Erasm. in Decal. Rous discases of time. Masons Essays.
Musculus Com. Loc. Latimer. Sermon. before K. Ed. Gorr. in Epist. Zanch. in
Decal. and in Hos. Gibs. Lands mourning. Down. Abstr. and Sum. Divin. Bishop
Babington. Vrsin. Calvin. Dod. Nider in Decal. Stubs Anatomy. Histor. of Adam.
Doctor Huckwel. Theater of Gods judgments. Polyanthea. Life-of-Religion.
Gualt. in Prophet. Min. Dialog. Graecolat. Will. in Exodus Sword against
swearing.
Cum. multis aliis quos nunc perseribere longum est.

The fearful end of him, who drank a Health to the Devil.
THat you may not doubt of the truth and severity of the forementioned
judgments of God upon Swearers and Cursers, even in this life, may be added
and remembered (if there be any truth in common report) the example of that
which lately was known to be executed in Salisbury, upon a rude Ruffian
companion in a Tavern there, a health-out drinking, or a life-out healthing
wretch, who in the midst of his healthing and carrowsing, would attempt to
drink a health to the Devil; and if the Devil would not come and pledge him,
he would not (he said) believe there was any God or Devil. At which heaven
daring blasphemy, and hellhastening impious attempt, the rest of his companions
(and it was high time) hasted out of the room; and presently after hearing a
hideous noise, and smelling a stinking savor, the Vintner ran up into the
chamber, as knowing that such a guest was there: But coming in, he missed his
guest, and found the window to be broken, and the bar in the same to be
bowed, with blood on the said batre. I heard this from the mouths of many men,
since this Tract was printed. I leave it by all drunken, swearing, and
Devill-desiring wretches, to themselves to be applied.

Errata.
PAge 1. line 7. for Ark read Arch. p. 17. l. 3. for n busing r. abusing. p.
84. l. 22. for slives r. sliness p. 83. add in marg. Mea. 8. p. 85. l. 12. for
Mot. r. Mea. p. 88. l. 13. add in Marg. Mea. 12. p. 126. l. 1. put out
therefore. p. 12^. l. 1. for handling read having. p. 131. l. 12. for had r.
hand. p. 137. l. 26. for one read many. p. 141. l. 2. for wherefore r. whereof.
p. 145. l. 15 for curses r. courses. p. 153. l. 24. for scorning r.
nothwithstanding. p. 269. l. 30. for perdas r. perimas. p. 273. l. 14. put e
before t p. 281. l. 6. for which r. why. p. 281. l. 27. read more opposition p.
318. l. 13. read Simlerus. p. 319. l. 12. read they are predictions. p. 321. l.
24. for out read one. p 333. l. 32 for when Pope r. wherein. p. 347. l. 23 dele
s.

The misquotations of the Texts of Scripture (if any) the Author had not time
to peruse. Therefore desires the Readers pains of perusal, or pardon in the
same.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, and are to be sold by Benjamin Allen, at
the sign of the Crown in Pope's Head Alley, 1645.


