A RELATION OF THE Execution of JAMES GRAHAM late Marquess of Montrosse, At
Edinburgh, On Tuesday the 21 of May instant.

With his last Speech, carriage, and most remarkable passages upon the Scaffold.

ALSO, A Letter out of Ireland, more fully concerning the taking of Clonmell.

LONDON, Printed by E. Griffin in the Old Bailey.

May 28. 1650.

A Relation of the Execution of JAMES GRAHAM late Marquess of Montrosse at
Edinburgh on Tuesday the 21 of May instant.
SIR,
NOtwithstanding the great hubbub this place is in at the beheading of
Montrosse, I shall give you a short account of affairs. On Saturday last
Montrosse came hither, he was received at the end of the Town by the
Bayliffes, and set upon an high Cart, and tied with a Rope, his Hat being
before taken off by the Hangman, and the Hangman riding upon the Filly-horse
with his Bonnet on, and a staff in his hand, and thus he was brought up
through the Town* Several persons have been with him and upon discourse he
told them, that for personal offenses he has deserved all this, but
justifies his cause; He caused a new Suite to be made for himself, and came
yesterday into the Parliament House with a Scarlet Rocket, and a suit of pure
Cloth all laid with rich Lace, a Bever, and a rich Hatband, and Scarlet
silke-stockings: the Chancellor made a large speech to him, discovering how
much formerly he was for the Covenant, and how he has since broke it: he
desired to know whether he might be free to answer, and being admitted, he told
them his cause was good, and that he had not only a Commission, but particular
Orders for what he had done, from His Majesty, which he was engaged to be a
servant to, and they also had professed to comply with; and upon that account
however they dealt with him, yet he would own them to be a true Parliament.
And he further told them, that if they would take away his life, the world knew
he regarded it not, it was a debt that must once be paid, and that he was
willing and did much rejoice that he must go the same way his Majesty did,
and it was the joy of his heart, not only to do but to suffer for him. His
sentence was, to be hanged upon a Galhouse 30 foot high three hours, at
Edenburghcrosse, to have his head stricken off and hanged upon Edinburgh
Towlebooth, and his arms and legs to be hanged up in other public towns in
the Kingdom, as Glasco, etc. and his body to be buried, at the common burying
place, in case his Excommunication from the Kirk were taken off, or else to be
buried where those are buried that are hanged. All the time while sentence was
giving, and also when he was executed, he seemed no way to be altered, or his
spirit moved, but his speech was full of composure, and his carriage as sweet
as ever I saw a man in all my days. When they bid him kneel, he told them
he would, he was willing to observe any posture that might manifest his
obedience, especially to them who were so near conjunction with his Majesty.
It is absolutely beleved that he has gained more by his death then ever he
did in his life. The Scots are listing Forces here, and have named their
Officers, they intend to make up their Army 25000, they are much startled at
the marching of the English Army Northwards. By the next you shall hear
further from

Edinburgh, May 21. 1650. Your Servant, H. P.

Further by another Express from Edinburgh of the same date, thus:
YEsterday after the sentence was pronounced against Montrosse, he said, That
though he was cri^d out against for a bloody man, yet he never committed any
act of cruelty, nor took away any man's life, but in an hostile way.

After he came to the place of Execution, having been so used as before, he
spoke to this purpose, to one that was near him, You see what complements they
put upon me, but I never took more delight in all my life in riding in a Coach,
then I did in this manner of passage to this place.

His late Declaration, and the History of his transactions were tied at his
back when he was hanged, but he would have nothing to do with the Ministers
who stood at the end of the Scaffold.

The places where Montrosses Quarters are to be set up, are, Glascoe,
Sterlinge, Perth alias S. Johnson, and Aberdeene.

A Letter out of Ireland, more fully concerning the taking of Clonmell.
SIR,
THis day we entered Clonmell, which was quit by the Enemy the last night about
nine of the clock, after a teadious storm, which continned four hours. Our
men kept close to the breach which they had entered all the time, save only
one accidental Retreat in the storm. We lost in this service Col. Cullum, and
some other Officers, with diverse private Soldiers, and some others wounded.
The enemy had made many great preparations within, by a traverse or cross
work, and so beat our men off, as they entered, but afterward many of them
stole out of the Town, and left some few with the inhabitants to make
conditions. In the morning our Forces pursued and killed all they could light
upon. The Town is a very strong place, and I hope the getting of this Garrison
will be of good use for the gaining of others which depended upon this. The
English under Ormond and Inchequeen are come in, and as many as desired had
passes to go beyond Seas, and the rest have leave to live quiet at home. I am

Your affectionate friend. W. A.
Clonmel, May 10. 1650.
FINIS.

