THE DECLARATION AND SPEECH OF Colonel John Poyer IMMEDIATELY Before his
Execution in Covent Garden near Westminster, on Wednesday, being the 25. of
this instant April, 1649. With the manner of his deportment, and his Proposals
to the people of ENGLAND.

Whereunto is annexed, A Representation from the Kingdom of Scotland,
discovering three great Designs against the Parliament of ENGLAND.

London Printed for R. W. and are to be fold at the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, April 26. 1649.

A DECLARATION Of Colonel POYER Communicated to the Representatives of
England, Immediately before the time of his execution in Covent Garden near
Westminster.
Colonel John Poyer being sentenced by the Court Marshall at White Hall to
suffet death (notwithstanding his Lot for execution) implored the mercy of
Parliament for his remission, and the rather, because of his great and eminent
services formerly done for this Common wealth, which he thus represented and
declared, viz. That he was one of the first that declared in Arms for the
Parliament in Southwales, that he had took several ships bound for the relief
of the Rebels in Ireland, that he had fortified many strong Holds and Castles
against the Common Enemy of this Nation, That he had furnished the protestants
in Dublin with great quantities of Corn and Victuals to the value of 500. l.
whereof as yet he never received but 200. l. from the Parliament, That he had
often engaged his life in many services, to the great hazard of his person, and
therefore humbly desired, That for these, and many other public Engagements,
his life might be spared, the Sentence omitted, and that his blood might not be
violently spilt and cast upon the ground.

But it could not be granted, the Lot falling so equally unto him: So that
according to the Sentence denounced against him, and for the putting the same
into execution the time and place was appointed, and ordered that he be
guarded to the Covent Garden near Westminster, on Wednesday the 25. of April,
there to receive the dismal tokens of Death, by the Representation of a Volley
from a File of Musqueriers.

And to the end, that he might the better fit himself for that great work, he
was acquainted with the hour designed for his execution, who upon the delivery
of that dreadful message, he seemed to give a favorable constructin in
reference to his submission there^^^, declaring, That he had but one life to
lose, and in ^^^^isicing of it in this World, he hoped to have a blessed and
joyful restoration thereof in the world to come, desiring God to forgive
them, who were the causers of it, and that for his part he freely forgave them,
being in peace with all men.

He was very penitent, to his last hour, and uttered many condoling speeches,
in relation to the bleeding and dying condition of this poor, cistressed and
languishing Nation, desiring that his death might close up the breach of the
people, and that his blood might be the last that should issue forth in
streams within the Bowels of this Commonwealth.

And (according to the Sentence denounced against him) he was upon the 25 of
this instant April being Wednesday, guarded from White Hall in a Coach, to the
place of execution, as aforesaid, by Col. Hews^ns Regiment of Foot, where he
made a short speech to the people, saying, That he desired the prayers of all
good people for his present wading through the veil of misery; that he was
willing to sacrifice his life; that He freely forgave all men; that he ever
acted for the liberty and freedom of the subject; that he was an unfeigned and
cordial lover of the peace of England; that he died a true protestant according
to the Discipline of the Church of England, and that he desired a speedy period
might be put to the present distractions between prince and people, etc.

Having ended his speech, he went to prayers, and immediately rising up again,
called the men designed for his execution to him, which were six in number, and
giving them the sign when they should give fire, which was by holding up both
his hands, they observed his motion; who after some few expressions to his
friends about him, prepared an embracement for death, and casting his eyes to
Heaven, with both hands lifted up, the Executioners (with their Fire locks) did
their Office who at one voleybereav'd him of his life, his corp^ being taken up
was carried away in a Coach, and the Soldiery remanded back again to
White Hall.

SIR,
THe Prince of Wales has had several conferences and disputations with his
grand Councillors at the Hague; they press hard for his going into Ireland,
but he seems very unwilling to give his assent thereto, and has delivered
several Reasons at the Council table (in the presence of the Lord Cottington,
and others) wherein he remonstrates the apparent danger that may befall his
Royal person, if once he should set footing in that Kingdom, by reason of the
falling off of his Subjects of Scotland, who are determined to act upon new
principles, if once he appears in the head of that Army.

And therefore, he was resolved to make that place his chiefest Center for some
certain time, having alienated his affections either from England, Scotland, or
Ireland, till he saw an opportunity, for the playing of his Game with more
facility and surety.

Montrosse (during this respite of time) seriously minding the dissenting
expressions of the Prince, arose from the table, and with an austeer
countenance, said, That if his Majesty (for so is he called at the Court) would
not hearken to the good Council now attending his Royal person, in all
probability, he might become the most deplorable Prince in Christendom, and in
stead of the enjoyment of the prerogative and felicity of three Kingdoms be
forced to contain himself within the bounds and limits of the Territories of
one Naiton.

The Prince replied, That one Bird in the hand were better then two in the
Bush, and that one Crown firmly and universally set upon his head, might
produce greater tranquillity and felicity to himself, and the rest of the Royal
Off spring, than three that should stand in a tottering and unstable motion,
etc: So that in all probability it is conjectured, that he will decline his
Center both from England and Ireland, and wholly cast himself upon the Kingdom
of Scotland; for he has declared, That he will cast off the Earl of
Montrosse, and all those who are conceived Enemies to peace and truth, and
apply himself to those particulars propounded from the Estates of Scotland,
which are conceived to be the voice of the people, and the advice of that
Kingdom.

He seems to make little preparation against England, in reference to Warlike
affairs, rather taking his late Fathers advice and admonition, to gain it by
the way of reconciliation and treaty, then by the power of the blood thirsty
Sword.

But yet notwithstanding he is much pressed to the contrary, and the two
Extraordinary Ambassadors from the King of Denmark, and the Queen of
Swethland, has saluted his Highness, and at a conference condoled the death of
his late Father, intimating that they would use their utmost endeavors for the
reinvesting of him in his just Rights and Dignities, and restoring of him to
his Royal prerogative and Birth right; and to that end, have delivered their
Representation and Invitation to the most high and mighty Lords, the States of
the United Provinces, to join with them to assist, the said King to obtain his
Birthright; but it is said they have declared their resolution, to be offensive
nor defensive against either parties: So that it is verily believed, that the
States will act as Neutralists, and neither meddle with one side, nor the
other. For they have declared, that nothing shall be wanting in them for the
preservation of a right understanding with the parliament of England, and that
they will endeavor the union and peace thereof against all opposition
whatsoever.

Brill 20. April, 1649.

A Representation from the Kingdom of Scotland.

Sir, Our dependence here is, what his gracious Majesty will do, all desire his
coming hither, but the professed downright Royalists would have him come with
a force for the re instituting him in his Right; the other party, such as real
for Presbytery, would also have him come with a new heart. We hear that the
King is declining to put away the great Courtier the Earl of Montrosse, but
has given no positive Answer to our Commissioners, as yet, seeming as if he
would wait a little longer to see how matters will go here, the vulgar sort of
people do cry him up exceedingly, and say they must and will have a King,
though it cost them never so much: here are daily risings in several parts of
the Country, the Marquess of Huntleys Son is again in arms with 2000. Gourdons
to revenge his Fathers death, they have declared for Charles the second, and
have set forth their Invitation, for all pers^ns to come in to their
assistance. Col. Car, and diverse other English Officers, are likewise very
active in raising of Forces, and have sent Letters of invitation into
Northumberland, Cumberland, and Westmerland, for others to come to them,
promising great matters of preferment, but it is more then they are able to
perform, for the well affected party are both vigilant and active in
suppressing of them.

Edinburgh 19 April, 1649.
FINIS.

