SOME FEW AND SHORT Considerations On the present Distempers; By J. P.
THe tie which I have as an honest man, and the right which I have as a free
man, of speaking what I think conducible to the weal public, has invited me
in the crowd of others who blot paper, Commodare vocem, commodare operam, et si
nihil profuturam forsan, conaturam tamen prodesse, Seneca.
and in the Exigents which now press us, to commend to all men, specially to
the wisdom of our great Council, these few particulars.

First, we having at present a Commonwealth, in which, as Tully said, Nihil
mali est, nihil adversi, quod non boni metuunt improbi expectant, and matters
being now reduced to that extreme article of time, on which depends misery or
prosperity, that they would be pleased with one eye to look up to His Majesty's
gracious inclinations, his readiness for, may his desire of any honorable
transaction, his pretentions to no greater latitude nor altitude of
Prerogative, then what his Ancestors (as he conceives) enjoyed actually or
virtually; with the other to look down to the ground they stand on, the depth
of that precipice, on the skirt of which they (and in them the Commonwealth)
are, to remember that of an Ancient; Prudent.


-- Scissura domestica turbat
Rempopuli, titubatque foris quod dissidet intus.
Though the Propositions be not in every circumstance as they wish, (...), (a
thing expedient, and suitable, not to policy only, but Christianity, Romans 12.
11.) especially to weigh well that of the same Cicero, Omnis pax bello civili
utilior.

Secondly, what probability or rather possibility there is of recovering
Ireland, if the time to be employed in the restitution of it be expended in the
composing of our own distractions, the moneys for that Countries relief be
exhausted in the protraction of civil discord, and the persons who should quell
Rebellion abroad, be ministers in a war at home here. And if that Kingdom
should be lost, in what state this would be, in how desperate, how deplorable a
condition, how unable long to defend it self.

Thirdly, if the Votes of whatsoever they pass, though in a complete body,
without His Majesty's ratification, be doubted whether efficacious and
obligatory, how much rather then, when that body (as at present) is so mutilate
and defective, as not to want the head, but so many Members too. What some
Books have, Quod major pars curiae effecit, pro eo habetur ac si omnes egerint,
I confess is true, but (among other restrictions it receives) is to be
understood of a full Assembly, or where who are not present, are absent
Reipublicae causa, (a thing held ever equivalent to appearance personal) or by
reason of some other casualties and emergents, not where there is a deliberate
separation out of a dislike, a contrariety of sense, a Schism (as here too
visibly) and of persons in quality and number so considerable.

Fourthly, what has reference to Hull, that they would vouchsafe to have in
mind, that the Axe is now laid to the root of the tree, (a tree in the forest
of this Island not the least considerable:) squeezed and extorted things in the
commerce of life are not welcome to us: what willingly we accept of, must come
willingly; how much better then to leave that place rather upon demand, then by
violence, to make the restitution of it a work of election, then of necessity,
especially having those inducements, His Majesty's formerly being seized of it,
and his present full pardon to all within it.

Fifthly, for the Commissions of Array on His Majesty's part, and the Militia on
theirs, they being in the Theory (in a well-ordered state) inconsistent, but in
the practique part (the wretched condition we now are in) to a Commonwealth
utterly destructive, his Majesty (at least what concerns the safety of the
time present, the thing which in these imminent calamities chiefly is to be
looked at) has shown a ready way to end that controversy, by declaring that he
will lay his preparations of War aside, if they please to do so. If this be
assented to, the only thing disputable in this main particular, is, who should
first begin; which, whether it become him or them to do, as for matter of fact
to their will and wisdom, so for matter of (...) is left to every prudent man
to consider of.

Sixthly, for the Navy; if his Majesty (as I hope no Subject will doubt) be
Lord of the Seas circumjacent, it might follow (and by no stretched inference)
that he is Lord also of the Ships that walk on them. By Lord here, is
understood, not he who has directum, but utile dominium, a power in public
occasions to command, and to dispose of them. By Ships, not only his own, (a
thing before these rimes never controverted) are meant, but those of any of his
Subjects. Solo (as some speak) superficies cedit, a building, though of another
man's, on my ground, passes into my propriety. And though the solidity of earth
being so contrary as it is to the instability of that other element, the
authority may to some seem not so fitly alleged, by way of Analogy however
it is appliable, and by an argument a fortiori, we may make use of it; for here
no Subjects Ships, but the Kings own are treated of, the vessels not which any
common stock built, but His private Treasury, and consequently seem no less
his then the cloak he wears.

Seventhly, what concerns these present preparations which carry a face of war
with them, (no man entertaining such purposes, but he sits down first, and
consulteth whether he be able with 10 thousand men, to meet him that comes
against him with 20 thousand) that they would likewise vouchsafe, seriously to
consider whether competent and equal forces can be levied.

Eighthly, If leavyed, what assurance there is that they will be as valiant in
the field, as in the Pallace-Yard at Westminster; as constant in a pitched
Battle, as in the Streets of London. A smooth and eloquent Oration may convert
them. Friends, Covntreymen, fellow subjects, and such loving Compellations, may
work strange changes in them; so mutable things always having been multitudes:
reflecting on their inst^^^ may stir up a quicker sense in them then before
they had, make them enter into a nearer disquisition of the justness of that
they stand for, and of the legality of that cause they appear in. Passages of
these kinds are in Story frequent: And though none of these; when they shall
see their undoubted and undaunted Sovereign in the head of an adverse Army,
shooting forth Rays of Majesty, and thundering out a Durum est contra stimulos
calcitrare, what man can promise that they will not be appalled, dazzled,
blinded? That their hearts will not fayl, and their weapons fall, both in one
instant? Their hands which were expected to fight, not be held up for pardon,
and those knees in the strength Robur in genibus.
of which it was thought they would have marched forward, will not tremble, not
knock each other, and bow for mercy?

Ninthly, If God in his unscrutable providence, and uncontrollable counsels,
should deliver this Kingdom up unto such extremities, how miserable that War
would be, which would make us a spectacle to men and Angels, a prey to our
selves at home, an obloquie to those about us; and where who ever remains
Victor, must of necessity want that honor which Antiquity did so triumph in, I
mean, that which commonly it styled, Observatos cives. By the memory of that
blessed peace maker who rests in Paradise, by seventeen continued years of his
Sons Reign, spotted with no act of Tyranny, By the numerous and remarkable
deliverances God has heaped upon this our Island, By the strength and vigor
of the love they bear to the safety of their own persons, the tenderness they
justly have over those near pledges, their wives and children (who all in the
common Fate will be involved inevitably) suffer themselves, that honorable and
great Council, to be in some measure conjured to convert their designs of War
into the delights of peace, not to cut asunder this Gordian knot of our
distempers with the sword, but to undo it by milder counsels, and in stead of
that universal desolation which like a Meteor hangs over us, to conserve us in
our ancient possessions of security and of serenity.

Lastly, For the intervall which has divided his Majesty from them (and in
them from all of us) so unhappily, so continuedly, though it have not been (God
be thanked) like the gulf in the Gospel, so great, that they who would pass
from hence thither, could not, nor they pass to us, that would come from
thence; yet during this distance of his, this resentment, we live in a kind of
twilight, a cloudy and foggie clime of sadness and uncertainty, in which (if
in no other) regard, whatsoever may induce him to draw nearer; O let us embrace
with cheerfulnes, and pursue with industry. His Majesty, like a Royal Dove, in
a former return of his from the North parts of his Dominions brought us back an
Olive Branch, a token of peace with our Neighbors, and their reconcilement to
us; an assurance that the Torrent which had swollen high, was fallen and dried
up; if readily and humbly he be complied within his now-proposalls, his next
return hither will bring better tidings, That the waters of his own displeasure
are abated, a deluge more formidable then that other, to loyal and obedient
hearts (such as we all profess to have) it being more dreadful to suffer
under the indignation of their own Sovereign, then to perish by the inundation
of hostility; this (I say) this only Consideration (like a parched soil for
rain) should make us all thirst for his return to us: but there is more besides
in it; for had we the warmth again of that Sun to bask in, that we should
have Gods blessing concomitant, we need not doubt. God in the riches of his
goodness confer this on us, that after this sad rupture, both sides into one
body united, may choke (like a massy gobbet) any adversary who shall attempt to
swallow them, and as a peec'd arrow (now made the stronger) they may fly
against a common enemy more effectually.

Such is the weak, but hearty and most humble assistance, which in stead of
Plate, Money and Horses, is presented, if not from the head of an able man,
from the heart (at least) of an honest man, one whom no apprehensions of
possible private losses (regard had to the mediocrity of that condition wherein
God has placed him, he having as little to part with as has any man) no
by-respect of advancing his peculiar interest, nor adulation of Monarchique
power has moved in this way to speak himself, (it having been still his
course, and he resolving it shall ever be, Inter abruptam contumaciam et
deforme obsequium iter pergere, and never by Tacit.
sinister and indirect means to gain either the least or the greatest
preferments) but a lively and deep sense of the common danger, a foul laboring
with Anxiety from the just and too certain estimate of impendent ruin. If what
he offers, as to the general, so in particular to the consideration of that
High Assembly seem to be tendered by an obscure hand, he humbly desires them to
remember that when a wrack is imminent even the poorest contribution of help is
not deprived, and for the quenching of a beginning fire, even the vilest hands
are not thought unuseful. If lamely and in an unpolished way it have fallen
from him, it may by a favorable construction be esteemed therefore the more
cordial, and in that regard only find acceptance. Endeavors of speech in
infants, and their inarticulate sounds, are commonly more operative, on the
parent then the language of his elder children, stir up his affections more
powerfully, vehemently, efficaciously, and leave an impression in him above all
eloquence. And our devotions are most dear to God, most accepted, not when
they are patient of words and admit vocalitie, but when the spirit makes
intercession with groans that are unexpressable. The God of peace and concord
make their meetings Apostolical, that they may not only be in one place but
with one accord, restore them in a blessed union to their Head, our Sovertig^e,
the Vine whose branches they are, and in whom while they are fast rooted, the
fruit of their consultations will be truly pleasant, join them (and speedily)
to that corner Stone, to which while they are close cemented, not this, nor His
other Dominions shall fear (by Gods holy assistance) foreign or Domestique
Enemy. By the former as a wall of brass, be impenetrable by the latter, as a
continued rock e unmineable.

FINIS.

