GREAT BRITAINS time of Triumph.

OR, The Solid Subjects observation, Showing in what a magnificent manner, the
Citizens of London entertained the Kings most excellent majesty, and how the
honorable Lord Mayor of London, with the warlike Artillery men in their
glittering armor, gave his Majesty a Martiall-like welcome; also how they
presented to his grace a most rich and costly gift, in token of their loyalty
to their Sovereign.

Afterward how they solemnized a stately feast, to the which came both the
Kings majesty, his gracious Queen Mary, and his Royal Son, Charles our
Honorable Prince of Wales, whom God preserve: and lastly how the Drums beat,
Trumpets sound, Muskets Rattle, Cannons Roar, Flags displayed, Bonfires
blasing, Bells Ringing, with all the melody that might possible be made for loy
of the Kings Majesty's safe return to England.

Written in English prose by Lawrence Price.

LONDON, Printed for R. Burton and are to be sold at the horse-shooe in
Smith-field. 1641.

Great Britains time of triumph.
NO Sooner had our gracious King Charles his excellence established an united
peace, between his loyal countrymen of Scotland, and us his loving Subjects of
England, but he prepared himself, being accompanied with many of the
Nobility, to see his Princely Court of England, whereas four months absence
had caused a general mourning Vesture to be worn, throughout the whole Realm
of England, every faithful hearted Englishman can witness this my saying to
be true: Amongst which numberless number of solitary mourners I beseech you to
take notice of that Pearls Paragon, our gracious and grieved Queen Mary.

Who like unto the Turtle Dove, refused to be comforted in the time of the
absence of her thrice renowned and Princely companion: her bed the bed of
carfulness, her bread the bread of sorrow, and her drink often mingled with
brinish tears; but because I have matters of Joy in hand to speak of, I will
here omit these sorrowful Elegies, and put you in mind of such a Triumphant
day of melody, which may ravish each man's heart with merriment, which hears
the report of the same; first to speak of the noble and honorable assemblies
in Parliament from the highest to the meanest: their hearts were all filled
with the comfor^ble tidings of the unparalleld news of their sovereigns
approach.

Then secondly, the Honorable L. Mayor of London and his followers with all
diligence, prepared themselves in all their warlik abiliments, as if Mars
himself the God of Battle had been their conducter: whereby what with the
sounding of Trumpets, bouncing of Muskets, and Rattling of Drums, the very air
azure seemed to rejoice, adding Echoes to their felicity.

Then in ample manner marched the Citizens, with their companies in order,
being placed as follows: first the 12. leaders of the 12. chiefest companies
appeared in their gorgeous accoutrements.

Here follows a list of the Companies, which presented themselves, before the
Kings Majesty, on Thursday, being the 25. of November.

Forty of every several company mounted on Horseback with each one a Chain
of Gold about his neck; and two men a piece for their attendance, with their
standers borne before them most bravely, the Flags and streamers were of sundry
colors according to their callings.

The first the worthy company of Mercers, the second Grosers, the third
Drapers, the fourth Fish-mongers, the fifth Goldsmiths, the sixth Skinners, the
seventh Merchant Tailors, the eight Haberdashers, the ninth Salters, the tenth
Ironmongers, the eleventh Vinteners, the twelfth Cloth workers.

These Gentlemen Citizens, with thousands more, which are too tedious to be
named, rode triumphantly out of the City of London, to give an humble
Salutation to this Princely guest, and his noble followers, where after they
had upon bended knees, presented to the Kings most excellent majesty, a rich
and costly gift as a Token of their devoted love to his grace, they seemed
every one heartily to rejoice in that his Majesty did so lovingly accept of
their gift, and there withal both rich and poor both high and low, old and
young, men women and children at once shouted forth as if it were in a solemn
passion with these words, the Lord preserve our dread Sovereign King Charles.

After that the Lord Meyor, and the rest of the Aldermen of London attended on
by Marsses warlike sons, the Artillery men, and also the forenamed twelve
companies, of which every master had two men, to attend him in Livery Coats,
they invited both the King, Queen and Prince, to such a sumptuous Banquet,
that by report, the oldest man now living never knew the like.

This sumptuous Banquet was kept in Guild Hall, where was plenty of all
delicates, that befitted such a worthy Company; there was eating without
grudging, drinking, without surfeiting, Joy witkout sorrowing, love without
dissimulation, mirth without mourning, the poor relieved, the widows
comforted, the Orphans cherished, and every one contented.

This stately feast being ended, and the night nearely approaching, the K.
Quern and Prince were conducted to his majesty's palace princely, at white Hall
in Westminster; by the honorable Lord Mayor of London, together with the
Sheriffs and Aldermen, and multitudes of other Officers and people, with
Links, Tapers, and Torches, while the Bells Ring forth their melodies the
Silver Trumpet sounded forth piercing Echoes, the Bon-fiers blazing on high,
but yet the voice of the Kings loyal Subjects far exceeded all the rest of
the music; for still the general cry was, the Lord preserve King Charles.

Not only the voice of earthly people, graced our gracious King and Queen;
but the very fixed stars of the firmament seemed as it were to dance for Joy;
as if that Tytan and Cynthia had made a perfect agreement, to unite a second
Nuptial, and so to Join these Royal personages together, presently after the
which the Lord Mayor of London and the rest of his stately attendance, departed
with much honored Joy, where now I leave them all in general, continuing my
hearty Prayers for King Charles, Queen Mary, the Prince of Wales, and all
their well wishers. Amen, Amen.

FINJS.

