A PRECIOUS APPLE PROCEEDING from the Tree of Life, OR A sweet and seasonable
word, dropping from the lips of the Righteous.
Being an effectual means to preserve the lives of men, sincerely applying it
from generation, to generation. Presented to the view of that terrible Army,
who under God have been a defense unto us from the monsterous, wild, ravenning
and vennemous Beasts of the howling Wilderness.
AS the Saints on earth have both Spirits souls and bodies, 1 These. 5.23. so
they are to use (according to the example of other Saints) not only spiritual
weapons against their enemies, who molest them after a spiritual manner,
Ephesians. 6.12. but also outward means (as well offensive as defensive) against
those who do outwardly assault them; yet always with this caveat, that as they
are to use the world, as though they used it not, so those things where with
they defend themselves, and offend their enemies, ought to be used by the
Saints for mere necessity; and with all, we are to mind that they are the
weapons of Antichrist, whose own sword shall cut off his own head, as Goliahs
sword did his.

And as the Kingdom of God consists not in meat and drink, Romans 14.17. no
more does it in outward warfare, or defense of themselves, from the hands of
those who do outwardly assault them (according to their usual manner) yet as
the Saints of God have need of meat and drink for the nourishment of their
bodies, Mat. 25.42, 43, 45. that so their outward man perish not for want of
food, least they be disabled to serve God.

And as Christ preferrs the life and body before food, and raiment, Mat. 6.25.
so they have need of outward helps to defend their bodies and lives, in case
they be in imminent danger to be molested and assaulted by their enemies, and
the Saints of God are bound to take one another part, in such acase, Est.
9.1.2.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18.

Thus Moses, though he had not received his outward calling (which he had at
the Bush) to go immediately and deliver Israel, yet did he after a wise and
wary manner rescue an Isralite out of the hands of an Egiptian; Exodus 2.
11.12. So Deborah did accompany Barack to destroy the enemies of God, Judge.
4.10. which kept them in bondage, verse 4.

And because the Inhabitants of Meroz did not come to help the Lord against
the mighty enemies (though with worldly weapons) they were accursed with a
bitter curse, and that by the Angel of the Lord, Judge. 5.23.

But Iael for wounding of Sissera (though it was with a workmans hammer, and a
nail of the Tent) she was not condemned, but commended and blessed above other
women, ver. 24, 25, 26, 27. And Sampson when God gi him bodily strength,
defended himself therewith against the Philistims, Cap. 15.15. and that unto
the day of his death, Cap. 16.30.

So the workmen of Nehemia, who builded the walls of Jerusalem, had their
swords, spears, and bows to desend themselves, and offend their enemies, Neh.
4.13. in case they should assault them; and the one part of the people were set
to defend the other part, and the buildiers of the wall had swords girded by
their sides and so builded, ver. 17.18.

By these clear Texts of Scripture, with the example of diverse other holy
Saints of God, it is evident that all the Saints on earth have sufficient
ground and warrant to use all outward helps they can, to preserve their
bodies, as well as inward for the preservation of their souls; For as God has
ordained spiritual means for the prefervation of the soul, so has he
afforded outward helps for the defense and preservation of the body; And
Christ commanded him that had no sword, to sell his garment and buy one, Luke
22.36.

And the Holy Ghost in the Revelation does express the punishment, which
should be inflicted upon the wicked, and not only describes the persons who
are to execute the same, but also prescribes both the manner and the measure
thereof, Rev. 18.6.7. The executioners are the Saints; the manner of punishment
is to reward her as she has rewarded them, and the measure is, that they shall
double it, and in the same cup which she has filled, they shall fill unto her
the double.

Antichrist must be punished twofold, Spiritually and corporally; Spiritually,
by the sword of the Spirit which proceeds out of the mouth of Christ, 2 These.
2.8. Corporally, punishments inflicted upon their bodies; even as Antichrist
has not only murdered souls (by leading them into the way of destruction)
Rev. 18.13. but bodies also, ver. 13. yea and the bodies of the Saints, they
have killed many ways, as Satan and his instruments devised; Antichrist has
done unto others, so shall it be done unto him.

And as his Kingdom was built and has been upholden by blood, so shall it be
ruinated and destroyed by blood; for he that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall
his blood be shed, Chap. 16.5.6. and because the members of Antichrist have
shed the blood of the Saints and Prophets, God has given and will give them
blood to drink, because they are worthy of it, and they shall have it duly and
truly paid them after the same manner, though it be also in a double measure;
and the Saints in doing this, do a work of mercy, and those who hinder it, do
a work of cruelty, Pro. 10.11.12. for mercy to the bad, is cruelty to the good.

FINIS.

