A pretty well dressed Dish of Petites, cooked at Westminster, with great charge
at the cost of three Kingdoms: Also here are other Delicates, which may be
well tasted and digested in the Pallats and P^nches of Royalists and Loyalists.
Pretty Parliament, has it voted?
Pretty Preachers have you throated,
Charles (...) ^wne.
We hope e're long the time w^ (...)
Your Donships shall receive your doom,
And the Devil his own.
Pretty Ashburnham and Barkley,
If fame (of you) tell not a stark lie,
You make one Traitor
Betwixt you at least, and have out done;
The Devil and the Devils son
The Agitator.
Pretty Synod, does it sit,
Void of grace as well of wit?
And make no Cannons;
But such as Ordinance are called,
Which has the very souls enthralld
of every Manon's.
Now from black Tom, and blacker Noll,
That kill and slay without control,
Thereby to end us
Those. Iolley Esqr. F. S. A.

From the Synods nonsense, and their Treason,
And from their Catechistick reason,
Good Heaven defend us.
Thanks to the Right Honorable, the Earl of Northumberland, for his late
Vote in behalf of his MAJESTY.
ALL Hail (brave Percy) once Great Admiral!
We thought thee a fixed star till thou did fall;
And (...)
^
Or dire revenge did through thee from thy Sphere.
And) of an Angel) make a Lucifer,
Till thou to bleating Warwick did resign
Thy Trident, thou were the Oceans God, and mine;
For till that time my (...) thoughts with thee
Committed serious Idolatry,
And my esteem of thee, was then as high
As were thy merits, or thy dignity;
But thou wast Mortal Percy, and we find
Tall Ceadars often borne down by populer wind
Thus (hurried with the crowd) thou did withdraw,
(As the most did) thy Fealty, and Awe
From thy dear^ Ma^ter, who to thine and thee
Showed always more of Love then Majesty:
Which does improove thy guilt, and makes it far
More legible, in too great a Character;
But if thy conscience has given thee the cheeck,
And Israel has conquered Amalec;
If God will not, thou should be carried on,
IN the common nutry of damnation;
Welcome Blessed Convert to thy King, and God!
Thy pardon's signed, if thou wilt but kiss the Rod,
Take these impressions then (my Lord) let none
Betray the Honor twice of Algernone:
Care not what poyson-whispering Say suggests,
Who (for his ends) both Law and Scripture wrests:
Who plays a most religious Devils part;
A Saint in speech, a Satan in his heart:
An Hipocrite in grain, makes ill seem well,
To whom old Nick, surnamed Machiavell,
Achitophell, or cursed Iscariot,
These (paralleld with him) were each a sot,
Be deaf to that Damcc'd Siron, here permit
Him to your secrets, or souls Cabinet;
Be not afraid of that confused Yell,
Which belches out Rebellion, as Hell
Does Surphurs: Nor dread the usurped power
Can vote 3 Kingdoms ruin in one hour;
Care not for what they do, or what they say
What Pembrooke, or your Brother Sarum Bray,
That fine wise Aker, who does value more
His Akers then his honor, does adore
Mammon for's God, or's King, though it is well known
What the Cecillians owe to Englands Crown.
Be true to thy own Charles, and by this feate
Make good thy true descent from Charles the Great;
Put on thy Loyal Robes, and we will Saint thee,
A Loyal Percy is not each days dainty.
The State of England, or Lilburnes Parliament.
WHEREIN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS ARE THE SVPREAME POWER.
THey the supreamest power (O how good John!)
Whence sprung this pretty new Dominion?
From revelation or from ecstasy,
This upstart mushrom foyst Supreamacie.
Call in the Heralds (John) for ere we part,
I will rip up the bowels of their Art;
But I will know how, and when those Dawes,
Grew Masters of our King, our Lives, our Laws.
Are they not English, Yes: Not Subjects, No?
Nay then I leave 'em Gentiles, yet not so.
Can a hoarse Cobbler, or a Weavers Votes
Create you Kings? do Crowns grow in their throats?
(I wish they would in my purse) can they carry't
Upon the strength of Roast Biefe, and burnt Claret*
If these two be the ingredients of a King,
He eat him all my self, or Marriot bring.
A salutation to the Londoners.
THe City Lantern, quickly; I Would feign see,
Where is the Kings or Subjects Liberty;
The one in care, in Caresborough captived,
The other tonguetide, manacled, and gyv'de
In sundry Prisons. O most rare and base!
This is the Parliaments especial Grace.
Free men of London, it is a lie; you are slaves
To Westminster, and (worse) to your own knaves,
Which in the mother Saxon signifies
A Servant; so you all are Gregory's:
And like to be so still, unless the fear
Of plunder (more then God) your souls do rear
Into a posture of defense; and rowse
Your craft-falne spirits; and cast off the drowze
And lethargy has seized you; O is night
So heavy on you, and this weight so light?
Do ye hug your fetters, and court slaverie?
Then take them for your pains: it is fit that ye
Should Still be pleased, the Cooks 'oth Parliament
Know well your Diet; both what you resent
And what you like, but see they serve not in
(For the last dish) Damnation for your sin.
Has God (to pay your base and groundless fears)
Made Idols of you, not Idollaters?
You stand like statues all; you gape and mope,
As if you begged massacre, or the rope:
Which you (poor souls) had reason long to fear,
(Know you one Tompkins? and one Challoner?)
But is it not prodigious that one man
Should strike and drag this great Leviathan?
Speed him to Green-land quickly, or he will spoil
The Towns whole store, both of the Ribs, and Oil:
Thou bought'st thy slavery with thy coin and plate,
And shall beg slavish bread from gate to gate,
Except thou stand up bravely and prevent it,
You and your Heirs forever will repent it;
You shall be common Rogues, and know no King
That might protect you from a ruining;
You have been Parliament all Hackney Naggs,
Treason has been supported by your baggs,
Knaves, Fools, and Mad men, that so swift did run
To mischief, and desired to be undone;
Yet for all this take courage, now is the time,
Alleagiance expiates all former crime,
Be wise and Loyal now, or else thy doom
Is fixd in Heaven, this thy day is come.
Shelton Junior, or the second part of Collin Cloute, a warning piece to the
City of London.
O Cives, Cives, look well to your Wives,
And to your God Mammon,
Or he that rules Hammond
And all England to boot,
Will shortly put you to it,
And for all you great brags
He will crumble your baggs,
And for all your great hopes
Will plunder your shops,
And make a new fair
Of pure London ware,
And of the Religion
Will make a mere Widgion;
Then poor Jack Presbyter
Must fall with the Miter:
And in the conclusion
Cry welcome confusion.
A Prophecy.
When Mounseir Noll, that Pass Partout
Shall mount his Pass Vent,
Attended with his Rebel Rout,
Then London shall be shent.
A Prayer for all Lay Elders.
LET them be grave, and sollid, as are blocks,
And let them take Nonsense for Orthodox;
Let jealousies possess them day and night,
Let them be heavy, and their Wives be light;
O let there always Sects and brabling be
To Vex and trouble the Presbytery:
Let all their sons (at one and twenty years)
Prove arrant fools, and have extended ears,
As large as Ceres ever gave to Corns,
And be more noted then their Fathers horns;
O let no spark of modesty be scene
In any of their Daughters at foreteene;
But let the threshold of their Fathers door
Be evermore bestriden with a Whore,
And least (there should want Vice) to correct all,
Let all their Families to lewdness fall
And let them all appear before the King
Receive their sentence, face about and swing.
A Prayer for our Friends at Westminster.
YOU Mountebanks of State, long may you live
To take such Physic as your selves did give;
May you have war, and may the sword destroy
Your Families, and may you never enjoy
The benefits of Peace; ma' ye feel the Rod
And till y' have peace with'e King, have none with God.
FINIS.

