Gods Working AND BRITAINS WONDER.

A SERMON CONGRATULATING The Most Happy Establishment of His Sacred MAJESTY
CHARLES the II. On His THRONE. Presented to the Kings most Excellent Majtie. By
a Person of Honor.

By WILL. PRICE B. D. late Preacher of Covent Garden, now to the Reformed
English Church in Amsterdam.

The stone which the builders refused is become the Head-stone of the Corner.
Psalm. 118.22.

There was no King in Israel, and every man did what seemed good in his own
eyes. Judge. 17.6.

Yea let him take all, Since my Lord the King is returned in peace. 2 Samuel
19.30.

The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are glad. Psalm. 126.6.

London, Printed by W. Godbid for Peter Dring at the Sun in the Poultrey, next
door to the Rose Tavern. 1660.

CAROLO Secundo, nemini secundo. TO CHARLES the II. second to none.
Primum laetitiae signum clamare, secundum
Plaudere; vox ego sum, carmina bina manus.
Triumphant joy cries, and applause demands:
I am the voice; these verses my two hands.

To the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY.
May it please your Majesty,
I Am so much a Christian, that I could not distrust those precious divine
promises, that like filings of Gold, or dust of Diamonds, are scattered in Holy
writ; those sovereign cordials against fainting fits of unbelief, (namely, that
the patient expectation of the righteous shall not perish for ever, Psalm. 9.18.
Prove. 10.28. and the rest:) yet I durst not hope to live to see those promises
thus miraculously accomplished, to the amazement of all the world, and to the
unspeakable joy of your MAJESTY'S Loyal Subjects, among whom I have been
ambitious to be reckoned, in the worst of times. Who would ever dis-believe
that great and good God, whose words are deeds, whose promises are
performances? Silence, admiration, astonishment, I confess are the best
Rhetoric to express these ravishing providential dispensations; yet vouchsafe
(Great Sir) to condescend so far below your Royal Self, as to accept this
lisping, stammering, but unfaigned congratulating acclamation from a lame
Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 19.26.
who wishes he were able personally to attend our David, to present on his
knee this Ave Caesar. My first thoughts designed for your MAJESTY an Art of
memory, which lies ready by me, composed during my weakness, that the variety
and novelty might divert or allay my pain, and the sad impressions, that the
late Dogdays of Anarchy and confusion in the public wrought on me; but my
second thoughts prompted to me, that an Art of Forgetfulness is now more
seasonable then an Art of memory, your Majesty being graciously pleased to
offer an Act of Amnesty. And surely if any people under heaven need it, we are
they, though we least deserve it; So that your unmerited mercy may well be
styled the kindness of God, (since men use not to show such) as David asked
after the survivors of Readiness household, 2 Samuel 9.3.
that he might show them the kindness of God. May your Crown, Royal Sir, that
like your Saviors has alas, too long been lined with thorns, flourish on
your head, and may your Scepter, like Aarons rod, bloome and blossom in Peace,
Piety, and Righteousness, is, and shall be the daily Prayer of

Your Majesty's most humble Subject WILLIAM PRICE.

Proverbs 24.21, 22. My Son, fear thou the Lord, and the King; and meddle not
with them that are given to change.

For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?

Ezekiel 21.27. I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no
more, till he come, whose right it is, and I will give it him.

Micah 7.8. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy, though I fall, I shall rise
again.

Zechariah 1.15, 16. I was a little displeased, and they helped forward the
affliction.

Therefore, thus says the Lord, I am returned to Jerusalem with mercies.

Psalm 118.23. This is the Lords doing, it is mavelous in our eyes.

OUr good God, knowing our collapsed nature liable to be poisoned by a vain
song, and an unhappy proverb, (beside many counterpoysons) has by his gracious
providence, raised David, and Solomon to pen heavenly Psalms, and holy
Proverbs, as antidotes against such malignity.

The Psalms are like the High Priests breast plate, rich both in words and
matter; pregnant with divinity, morality, history, mystery.

And such is the context that lies before us, Ver. 22.23.
The stone, which the builders refused, is become the head stone of the corner;
This is the Lords doing, it is mavelous in our eyes.



I need no other Preface to invite attention, then the close of the Text; since
we all love to view wonders.

of our Text in a short Paraphrase, and then endeavor to improve it in
seasonable Observations, and Applications.

May the Text prove as profitable, as it is seasonable.

This] is the Lords doings. [This? that? Indeed what not? but [this] in an
eminent sense. What [this] is, the foregoing verse informs us; The stone, which
the builders refused, ver. 22.
is become the head of the corner. Which words are historically mystical, and
mystically historical.

The History was verified in the Kingly Prophet David.

The Mystery was accomplished in David's Son and Lord, our King, Priest, and
Prophet Jesus Christ; to whom they are applied by S. Acts 4.11.
Peter in his Sermon; This (says he) is the stone, that ye builders refused.

Let us briefly see how these words fit King David.

History David.
He was a select, The stone. 2 Samuel 7.8. Homo quadratus.
a precious, a firm stone, in Gods building; a square stone in all estates,
which way soever he was cast, he fell right: a stone trampled on by Sons of
Belial; and he killed Goliath with a stone.

Refused.
Refused this stone was, as not fit to head, or bed well in the building, as
architects use to speak, we have no part in David, cried a mutinous, rebellious
malecontent.

This stone was hewn, 2 Samuel 20.1.
and cut by homebred, and other foes, by Saul, Absalon, Achitophel, and many
others, 1 Samuel 29.4. 2 Samuel 16.10.
many ways; yet under all was he patient, as a stone, though not senseless, or
stupid.

Builders.
By builders was he refused, that is, those that were esteemed, and thought
themselves state-builders, though they by refusing this stone, took the next
way to demolish all; as he that but loofens a foundation stone, endangers the
whole fabric.

This very rejected stone David, in Gods due time, Psa. 78.70.71
which is ever the best time, became the head stone of the corner.

The Head stone.
The head of Gods own, and only people; the head, whence under God, they
derived civil life, sense, and motion; He being the light of their eyes the
breath of their nostrils; as the Scripture speaks. 2 Samuel 5.1, 2, 3.
The head is the glory; the guide of the whole body. To this headship Abigail
prophesied he should arrive. 1 Samuel 15.17 Esa. 7.4.
1 Samuel 25.29, 30. All Authors style the supreme governor, head, The head
stone, that covers, and protects from storms, or what ever might rot, loosen,
or weaken the building.

The head, and the foundation also; (...)
the greek name for K. asilu, imports the foundation of the People.

Of the corner.
The head stone of the (corner) a corner stone, uniting and strengthening the
double wall of Church and State: He being custos utriusque tabulae, the keeper
of both tables of Gods law. Psalm. 115.9.10.
Therefore the fifth commandment stands as the center of the Decalogue, Psa.
135.9.10.
being as the joint combining the duties Godward, and Manward.

This is the History so remarkable in David's, the work to which God is so
peculiarly entitled; striking the world with admiration

The Mystery is fulfilled in David's Son, and Lord,

The Mystery.
The stone. Den. 2.34. Heb. 7.3.
The stone, cut out without hands, prophesied of by Daniel; without hands; for
as man, he had no father; as God, no mother. He is the stone, the rock, whence
all comforts flow. 1 Cor. 10.1, 4. The rock, whereon the Church is so firmly
founded, that the gates, Matthew. 16.18.
(the power and the policy of Hell) shall not totally, or finally prevail
against it. A stone laid by God himself, Esa. 28.15, 16.
the Master Builder, in Sion. A living stone, 1 Pet. 2.5.
and an enlivening stone. A stone whereon a Moses may rest his hands at prayer;
and a Jacob, his head in the greatest distresses. Though a stone of offense to
some through their own unbelief and disobedience.

Refused.
This stone was refused, and rejected, misused, cut, mangled, bruiz'd, broken,
hewn, nailed, hanged, so mis-handled, that the vale of the Temple rent, the
earth trembled, Zech. 3.9. Matthew. 27.29. John 18.40. Psa. 53.3. 1 Pet. 2, 4.
the Sun hid himself at it. He was contemtibly cast aside, wretches cried, we
will not have this man to reign over us; not him, but Barrabas: So refused he
was, that a theif, a murderer was preferred before him. And refused by those
then went for [Builders] Builders. John 7.48. and 11.49.50.
by a Disciple, the High Priest, other rulers; which of the rulers value him?
On a farfetch'd politic conceit of saving their nation by this feat, they
utterly ruined it. They lopped of that branch, whereon they stood. They brought
the guilt of that sacred invaluable blood on their own head, and their
childrens, which lies heavy to this day.

This is the stone, that was buried in a grave of stone: and a stone was rouled
against it;

Yet this stone, maugre the malice of men, and devils, Psa. 1.6.
is become the head stone of the corner.

Yet, yet, (that is, notwithstanding the Peoples rage, and the Grandees
combination against him, and the builders spiteful rejection of him) yet (says
God) I have set him on my holy hill of Sion. ver. 6.


Head.
He is become the head stone; the Head in all things to his body, the Church
especially; Ephesians. 1. end.
She deriving from him spiritual life, sense, and motion, light, and influence.
Besides he is head, and Lord of all; Col. 1.18.
all is subdued under him, Men, Angels, Devils, Law, 1 Cor. 15.27.
Death; his Jurisdiction is unlimited.

Of the corner.
Head of the Corner he is; uniting the second wall of male and female: of bond
and free; of Grecian, and Barbarian, of Jew and Gentile, of dead and living.
Ephesians. 2.14.20, 21. Col. 3.11.


And all this is said to happen in David's days, to denote the infallible
certainty of Scripture promises. Indeed David and Esaias, deserved the names of
Evangelists, as Prophets; and their writings are Gospels, as well as Prophecies.

The Lords doing.
This, this] is said here to be The Lords doing, or from the Lord, as the
Hebrew has it.

Supremus actus.
The Lord of Lords is all action, ever doing, the father hitherto works. S.
John 5.17. but in this he showed himself an all-wise, all able artificer.
Herein he manifested not only his finger, but his hand, ver. 15.
his right hand, his arm.

All is from the Lord, both good, Jam. 1.17. Amos 3.6. 1 Kin. 12.24.
and vindictive penal evil; even the rending of Solomon's Kingdom in two; but
this here was the issue not only of his Almighty power, but also of his
unspeakable mercy.

Acti Egimus. Isai. 10.5, 15.
What ever were the instruments, they were acted by the Lord; He was the doer;
they were but axes, rods, staves, pens in his hand.

In our Eyes.
This work in the History, David and others lived to see, as in the mystery he
by faith foresaw it.

Wonderful.
They saw it with admiration; it being indeed a wonder; David owns it for such
here, and else where and gratefully acknowledges it; 2 Samuel 7.18.
He celebrates it in this song, and registers it for posterity, that it might
never be buried in the grave of oblivion, but survive a lasting monument of
Gods miraculous operation, and a fartherer, and quickner of our faith, hope,
joy, comfort, and instruction. That we may so improve it, we shall gather these
flowers, as it were, into nosegays, in a few observations, which I shall open,
and prove generally, but apply jointly, because I study brevity.

Observations sprouting hence. Observe, That
1.

Such namely, wherein more of God, and less of the creature appears, Exodus
8.19.
then in the crowd of common Occurrences; so that Pharaoh, a Nebuchadnezzer can
see, and say, oh the finger of God. Digitus Del. Dan. 2.47. and 3, 29.


1. When occurrences fall out above, or against the course of nature; as that
fire shall descend from heaven; That it should rain brimstone, hell out of
heaven, Gehennam de Coelo.
as Salvian speaks. That a Virgin should bear a child. Esa. 7.14. That he that
is the eternal word should become an infant, not able to speak a word, This is
the Lords doing. Genesis 19.24. Luke 5.26. Romans 1.16. Acts 2.41.
Not to insist on Christ's miracles.

2. When events puzzle, and put reason to a stand; as that a frail man's
preaching shall convert souls, 3000 at a Sermon; That baptismal water, and
Sacramental bread, and wine shall, nourish to eternal life: That a noise of
Rams horns shall lay Jericho walls flat. This is the Lords doing. Josh. 6.20.
Such works the Scripture calls new creations. Psalm. 104.30. Jer. 32.22.


3. When matters happen beyond all humane hopes, and Expectation; Zech. 4.6.
Psalm. 126.2. Ezekiel. 37.3, 4, 5.
as Judah's return from the Babylonish captivity. It was as a dream: It was
prefigured by the enlivening of dead dry bones. Such are called sensible tokens
that confound men. Psalm. 86.17. Things above belief. Act. 13.41.

4. When against the stream of humane and devilish designs and endeavors, that
is effected, that they studiously avoided: the will of God being fulfilled by
the fierce opposers of it. Thus Joseph's unnatural brethren intending to lay him
low as the dust, Genesis 50.20. 1 Cor. 15.56. Heb. 2.14. 1 John 3.8.
unwittingly raised him to the highest pitch of honor: Satan, by hurrying
Christ to death, paved a path to deaths death, and to his own greater
confusion. This is, and can be no other, then the Lords doing.

These, and many more are Magnalia Dei, the great things of God, wherein he is
pleased to make bare his arm, that is sometime covered from our eyes by the
interposition of outward means. Such works wherein God may be even seen, and
felt; Romans 1.20.
that extort confessions from very enemies, Acts 17.27. Psalm. 64.9.72.18.109.27.
that the Lord alone has done them; they being advanced above the sphere, and
reach of nature or reason.

Observe, That
2. in his providential disposal of Kings, and Kingdoms. The book of Samuel,
Dan. 4.32.
the Kings, and Chronicles, besides other historical monuments extant of the
miraculous turns, and changes in States, is a large commentary on, and an
undeniable proof of this great truth. It were too long to trace this Labyrinth
or maze, Dan. 6.26. and 7.24, 25, 26, etc.
in the Jewish, Assyrian, Median, Persian, Grecian, Roman, British Monarchies.

God is the King of Kings; His Son is a King; Kings are his Vicegerents on
earth: Prove. 8.23.
By him Kings reign; Them he is pleased to make master-wheel in religion and
policy; and to order that his mercy or justice, should signally appear toward
nations through them.

Observe
3. cum dignus vindice nodus; when a knot is worth untying. Because of the
oppressed, now will I rise, says the Lord. Man's extremity is his opportunity.
Psalm. 12.5.
Out of the mouths even of Babes and Sucklings will he create strength, because
of the enemy, Psalm. 8.2.
and avenger. He is a refuge for the oppressed. Psalm. 9. v. 9.12.13.18.
When he makes inquisition for blood, he forgets not the cry of the humble. He
lifts us from the gates of death. He is known by his judgments. The poor
sufferer shall not always be forgotten. Psa. 10.14, 18.
Thou beholdest mischief and spite, to requite it. Thou judge the fatherless,
and the oppressed, that the man of the earth may no more oppress. The Psalms are
full of such passages. Holy Scripture, and all Story largely exemplifies this
comfortable truth.

Observe
4. The lower just men are brought by men, Percusse surgo.
the harder cast to the earth, the higher it rebounds. David was cast aside as
unfit for any place in the building; and God mounts him to the highest place.
The lower the foundation, the higher the fabric, ever. God brought Joseph from
the bottom of a pit to be second man in Egypt. Psalm. 105.17, 18, 21. Phil.
2.7, 8, 9. 1 Samuel 2.8, 9. Haud facile emergunt.
Because Jesus Christ was debased to the lowest, therefore God exalted him to
the highest; giving him a name above every name. It is God-like to do thus; for
man uses to tread down the hedge, where it is lowest; to add misery to
affliction; to wound the wounded; to push at the declining.

Observe
5. Though all Gods works are remarkable, Behemoth, and Leviathan. Job 40.15.
and 41.1, 2.
There are miranda and miracula; wonders, and miracles. Satan, and his slaves,
(though he seem sometimes to be commanded by them, the more to infatuate them)
may work wonders, through Gods permission, but those are but Legerdemain, 1
These. 2.9.
juggling tricks compared with miracles, called by S. Paul, lying wonders. The
Devil is Gods Ape, and Pharaohs Magicians Moses his Apes in some strange
things, (...). Nazian.
but they were but juglers; and confined and outdone by Moses in the miracle of
lice. Exodus 8.18.
Every wretch can refuse a stone, but to make it the head of the corner, is the
Lords doing.

Observe
6. David's, men after Gods own heart curiously observe, gratefully own, and
duly admire Gods doings, and adore him in them. They cry, as if they would have
heaven and earth echo them, this is the Lords doing. The works of the Lord are
great, sought out by all them, who have pleasure in them. Psalm. 111.2. Psalm.
118.1. to 5.14, 15.21, etc. 27, 28, 29. Read Psalm. 18. and 104. and 105. and
106. and 136. and 143.
He that with an observing eye peruseth this golden book of Psalms, may find
now studiously and exactly the Psalmist surveys Gods great and gracious
dispensations toward him, and others: how he varies his style; how he with
orient colors celebrates them to the height. He summons all ranks of
creatures, to make the Music full. He cites nature and art to assist.
Sometimes he sits down by this banckless and bottomless sea, and admires, As
Psalm. 139.17, 18. O how great and numberless, are thy thoughts to me-ward!
Psalm. 116.12
they nonplus Arithmetic. What shall I render to the Lord? The like temper we
find in other Saints, as Moses, Hannah, Asaph, Simeon, Zachary, and the blessed
Virgin, in their heavenly compositions, in their songs memoriz'd in Holy
Scripture.

But I detain my self and others too long from the Application.

Application.
1. Paul speaks) those whom God exalts. They count those, Heb. 11.38.
as not worthy to live in the world, of whom the world is not worthy.

2. It follows by the rule of contraries, 2 Samuel 24.1.
I say distresses Kings; yet this is his strange work; but to restore them is
his genuine work, Isai. 11.4. Suum alienum.
wherein he delights, and glories. Misericors de suo, savus de nostro, says
Tertullian. His mercy is innate, issuing out of himself naturally, but severity
he borrows of us; as the Be makes honey naturally, and stings only, when
provoked. I have found (says God exulting, as if he had found a treasure) I
have found David my servant, and anointed him; none shall harm him. God rayses
readily, Hag. 2.22, 23.
debases as it were with regret.

3. How unlike are they to David,

Isai. 5.12.
so taken up they are with worldly vanities.

Nil admirari prope res unica. Juven.


If it be taken ill to despise the day of small Zach. 4.10.
things; it is unsufferable to slight the day of great things.

Or who Sacrilegiously ascribe Occurrences, Austin repented that he had named
so often.)

Or to nature, Natura naturans, naturata.
which is but Gods handmaid.

Or to reason, which is but a ray, or beam of his.

Or to fate, as if God were limited, or tied.

Or to second causes, to the wit, policy, counsels power of men.

Or to their own prudence, Hab. 1.15, 16.
art, or industry; called sacrificing to our own nets.

Or who forget, with Israel, Gods mavelous works; Psa. 78.11.12.
writing mercies in Sand or water.

Such are, (which is the worst that can be said of men) ungrateful. Si ingratum
dixeris omnia dixeris Sen. Mal. 2.2.
Besides they dam up all sluices and inlets of mercy toward themselves.
Ingratitude is is a drying, scorching wind; that blasts all enjoyments, and
curses blessings, and brings them to a dead low ebb. God will not sow in such
barren, thorny, unthankful grounds.

David.





Ezekiel. 1.16.
a wheel in a wheel.



It is true, that the Lord is infinitely above all praises. All Libanon cannot
yield wood enough, nor are the cattle on a thousand hills sufficient for one
sacrifice worthy him; yet since this is an angelical, and evangelical, and all
the tribute that we poor wretches can return; Psalm. 50.23.
and such as God is pleased to accept, if tendered in his Sons name, from a
humble, upright soul, O let us not withhold this his due from him.

We have seen, O Lord, Psalm. 68.24.
thy goings in thy Sanctuary.

We may daily see the prints, and footsteps of his miraculous providence; and
if ever, this day. Let us echo David, this is the Lords doing, it is
mavelous in our eyes; it dazles us; this is the day that the Lord has made,
and stamped for his own. verse. 24.
Let us cry, grace, grace unto it; Zech. 4.7.8.
Grace is all the tenure we hold by. Let gratitude ascend, that grace may still
descend. Ascendat gratia, ut descendat gratia.
This is like pouring water into a pump, that brings up more.

But I cannot stand now to let my discourse loose, to launch into this Sea of
thankfulness, All treatises are full of it, only our hearts and lives, alas,
are too too empty of it. The hardest wall gratefully reflects back the
Sunbeams; Eccles. 1.8.
The echo returns us our voice again; The rivers pay tribute to the Sea; The
most stubborn ground makes some return to the sower; Only man is stupidly
ungrateful, a sin to be bewailed with tears of blood.

But I must not dwell on generals.

Particular application.
My discourse hastens to the due celebration of the Lords mavelous acting in
the fulfilling of this Text in our eyes and ears this day.

Triumphant arches, Obelisks, Pyramids, are too mean expressions of this
unparalled mercy to Great Britain.

Were an Angel to undertake the task of the deciphering to the height this
happy change, perhaps he would call for a supply of tongues.

The precious stone, our Gracious Sovereign, whom they, that would have been
called builders of Church and Commonwealth, Haba. 2.12.
refused, disdained, shut out -- But I will not stain our joy with that sad
relation. Let the guilty be sure that their sin will find them out.

This stone is now become by actual fruition, as he was before by undoubted
right, the head stone of the corner, the supreme Head under Christ Jesus of the
three corners of England, Scotland, and Ireland. All Sexes, Ages, qualities,
embrace and welcome him with the highest joy, and humblest civil veneration.
All true-hearted English longed to see this day long; but the Sons of Zerviah
were too mighty. This is the Lords doing, if ever work was, to stir up a
precious remnant of worthy Patriots, to join as own man to cast of that
unsufferable yoke of confused Anarchy that we groaned under; and to recall the
best of governments, Monarchy, and the best of Monarchs to his unquestionable
right.

That Lord of Lords, the heart-maker, and heartmover touched the hearts of all
ranks to wish, to call for, and to endeavor his Majesty's restoration, and to
clip the wings of those bastard English, and other Apocryphal Christians, that
being levend for the most part with unsound Principles in religion, (to say
nothing of their malice implacable, and insatiable thirst after power and
possessions, usurped, and invaded by illegal shifts, and force) banded together
against the Lord, and against his Anointed, against the King, and Kingly
Government; As Jeroboam, and his apostate crew, fell at once from their God,
and King.

The Lord, (for ever magnified be his name) has infatuated those Matchivillian
Achitophels, and broken the snare that some unworthy Divines, Lawyers, Statists
had hypocritically woven, to hold us entangled in a perpetual bondage.

This is the Lords doing; let him have all the glory though those, whom he
honored to be instrumental to him in this Godlike work, merit from us honor,
and lasting love.

Now the blessing of him, who dwelt in the bush, and kept our burning bush from
utter consuming, dwell on them and theirs, and recompense their religious,
loyal endeavors, manifold into their bosoms.

But yet as the wisemen of the East, Matthew. 2.
though they gladly used the guidance of the star, yet they reserved their
gold, and worship for the babe Jesus; so let us so reverence those worthies, as
to adore the Lord who has wrought this for us.

It is a blessing to live to see this day; and it is mavelous in our eyes.

Pity it should be sullied by such a Pen as mine, it deserving a quil plucked
from an Angels wing. My admiration obstructs my expression. This serves but to
awake better Pens to celebrate it. I can but with those in my Text, stand and
admire.

And is it not admirable, that so sinful a nation should, even in a moment,
when all hopes were well nigh dead, and buried, recover their King, their
peace, their happiness, and that without effusion of blood?

A bone is soon broken, but not soon set again.

One Erostratus could fire, and destroy the Temple of Ephesus, that many ages
could not rebuild; But we who have made made a hard shift to undo our selves in
many years, are miraculously restored in the twinkling of an eye. Momento
turbinis Par.
What story can parallel ours? All Rhetoric is at a stand that would describe
it. The tongue of men and Angels will find it a task to characterize it.

No foreign aid invited, or accepted by his Majesty to imbroil us in a new
war. God will not seem to be beholding to Kings or States, and, which adds to
the wonder, when they that do wrong never forget; he who has suffered it, is
ready to forgive, and forget all.

Let his Majesty, and his Dominions excuse this expression, I think it is an
exaltation of his, and our joy and happiness, that we have some years suffered
an eclipse.

Never was King so passionately desired, or so welcome; as showers to the mowen
grass, or chapped ground. After a dead low ebb follow the highest spring tides.
Spring is doubly welcome after a long hard winter. In northern climates some
worship the returning Sun. That rain that makes flowers droop and hang their
heads, when Sunbeams come, increases their vernancy, color, and sent.

Yet let not our admiration stupifie us, but raise us to the highest pitch of
love to our God, of faith in him for the future; (experience breeds hope,)
Psalm. 116.1. 2 Cor. 1 10. Romans 5.4.
of cordial, oral, real gratitude to him, who has done for us above what we
could ask, or think; mavelous mercy should beget mavelous returns.

Our zeal now for God, and his truth; our loyalty toward our dear and dread
Sovereign, our confidence in our gracious never failing God, our piety, our
charity, our studiousness of public and christ an unity and peace, our love of
right and equity should be now more then ordinary; that they that admire at our
state, may be also amazed at our admirable reformation, and glorify God for
us. Ezra 9.13, 14.
After thou have crowned us, (O Lord) with such a deliverance as this, should
we again return to our old Sins? To our images, or imaginations, to hypocrisy,
to formality, to lukewarmness, to carnal security, to bestial excess, to
brutish lusts, to self-confidence, Englands sins.
to neglect or despising of Gods ordinances and his ministers, to profanation
of his name and his day, to discords, and heart-burning, to intestine mutinies,
to ^eedless uncharitable jealousies and censures, to turning justice into
wormwood by illegal judgments and proceedings, or into vinegar by unnecessary
delays? God forbid, If a bone be broken, it may be so set, that it may prove
stronger then it was, Romans 12.1.
but beware a second breaking. I beseech my Countrymen, by ^he mercies of God,
that we may henceforth offer our selves a living sacrifice, holy, and
acceptable in a ^easonable service of him. And it is but reason. O ^et us not
turn grace into wantonness. Let us not fight against God with his own weapons,
peace and plenty. We owe our selves to God before by many obligations, he lays
now a new tie upon us. To repay evil with evil, is carnal, to repay good with
good, is humane, to repay evil with good, is divine; to repay good with evil is
devilish. Happy we, if we improve this day of grace; but the most unhappy
nation under the sun, if we neglect, or abuse so great salvation. Let us now
only contend to outgo each other in a holy thankfulness, and a religious
conversation. Psalm. 145.1.2, 3, 4, 7.
Let us extol our God and bless his name for ever; Let us daily praise him, and
declare his mighty acts from generation to generation; Psalm. 147.2 Psalm. 48.14.
let us abundantly utter the memory of his goodness, and sing of his
righteousness. It is pleasant and comely to praise him, Ephesians. 20.21.
who builds up Jerusalem, and gathers together the the outcoasts of Israel. Let
us praise him in the heights, who exalts the horn of his people.

Now unto him, who is able to do, (and has done) exceeding abundantly above
all that we ask or think, to him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus,
throughout all ages, world without end. Amen.

Le cose di ciel^ sol colui vede,
Chi serra gl' occhi, e creed.
The works of heaven he best descries,
Who does believe, and shuts his eyes.

FINIS.

