A REMONSTRANCE OR DECLARATION, Of the names of the Knights and Gentlemen that
take part with Sir Ralph Hopton, and other Delinquents, in Devonshire, and
Cornwall with the number of their Forces.

Also the names of the Knights and Gentlemen that stand well affected to the
Parliament.

The names of those which stand for the King. Sir Charles Wray, Sir Robert
Raynton, Mr. Pollard. Mr. Ingleby, Sir John Venner, Mr. Fortescue, Mr Drake,
and others,
in the North part of the County. Mr. Berry, Mr. Ackland,
And others, opposers of these Malignants. Sir John Banlet, Mr. Ash,
Jn the East part* opposed by Sir George Chudleigh, Capt. Gifford,
And diverse other well affected Gentlemen, which stand for the King and
Parliament.

London, Printed by THO. FAUCET October. 29. 1642.

decorative strip with a central French fleur-de-lys flanked by two alternating
Tudor roses and Scottish thistles
A Remonstrance of the Knights, and Gentlemen, that takes part with Sir Ralph
Hopton and other Delinquents in Cornwall and Devon, as also the manner of the
well affected to the PARLIAMENT.
MOst worthy Sir,
having so fit an opportunity by this Post,s J embolden my self to present you
those few lines, humbly entreating you to pardon my boldness, There may be
diverse rumors and flying reports of the condition of our County, J will not
make repetition of words, nor write more then what is needful, for the
troubles we endure at this present, J am sure you are sencible of, and it is
apparently known; to end which, God in his goodness grant an happy
conclusion, and to let you understand the state and condition thereof, J will
relate it in brief;

There has been no little combustion since the Earl of Bath and his
Chaplains apprehending, the County is greatly divided amongst themselves, and
great combustions between these several Gentlemen, viz.

Sir Charles Wray, Sir John Venner, Sir Robert Raynton, Mr. Pollard, Mr.
Fortescue, Mr. Drake, Mr. Jngleby and others, who stands for the King alone in
the North part of the shire.

Master Berry, Mr. Ackland and others, opposers of these Gentlemen.

Sir John Banlet, Mr. Ash and others, for the East and Southams for the King.

Sir George Chudleigh, and his Son in law Captain Gifford and other
Gentlemen for the PARLIAMENT in that part, so that you see there is a great
bead sprung up and gotten together, and they have divided themselves into three
parts, which is about 5000. Two thousand of which are drawn to Jlfarcome,
expecting aid of the Welsh from the Lord Marquis of Hartford or the Lord
Herbert, but we hear Marquis Hartford is come to his Majesty; other three
Thousand toward Plimonth and Dartmouth, expecting aid from Holland, if not
according to expectation, that then to march into Cornwall where there is a
great party.

Master Arundell has the greatest Forces there and is able to raise more men
then half the Gentlemen in that shire, and he alone was the first that began
the Rebellion there, next under him is Sir Richard Vive, Sir Christopher Wray,
and Mr. Cooles, as for Sir Nicholas Slaning, J believe he is greatly abused,
for having little or no resistance, he was constrained to yield to Sir Ralph
Hoptons request; for it seemed so by the story, for he manfully resisted him
and lost seven Men before Sir Ralph Hopton entered his Castle.

J can no ways disparage Sir Raph Hoptons actions, for he carries himself
nobly without doing any mischief or great spoil, But Sir Bevill Greenevile
has been a Tyrant, especially to his Tennants, threatening them to thrust them
out of house and home, if they will not assist him and his confederates; J may
boldly speak it to my grief, that he is the only persecutor of these parts.
We have looked long for assistance and daily expect it till which time we shall
live in misery. The Earl of Bedfords Forces billitted up and down, are but
few in number, so that little service is expected till a grenter supply be
raised.

There was on Thursday last at Minmoore-heath 4. troops of horse, and a
Regiment of foot, under the command of Master Arrundell, and Sir Bevile
Geenevile, exercised without any resistance; and there was no little daring of
Master Carmenowe, Sir John Speccott, Sir Gyles North, and Master Trefuses to
meet them, so many, for so many; at last marching out of the Field Master
Trelany one of the Deputies Lievtenants with his Regiment of foot took Sir
Bevile Greenevile his Cornet, and Captain Spicer and his Lieutenant Prisoners,
and are at this present at Bodnam Goal, Sir Bevile took some of his company
which are Yeoman of worth, and detaines them likewise.

The Lord Mohone does no great spoil, but his greatest malice is at the Lord
Roberts house at Truro.

There has been lately landed in some Creek in that County 10. or more
Seminary Priests which is newly come out of Flanders, and harbored at Master
Arrundell his house, they are merciless creatures, and endeavors by many
means to the Papists in that County to use a speedy dispatch for the voting
out of the Protestants there and there is great way laid for the apprehending
of them. Sir Raph Hopton has sent to the Governor of the Jsle of Silley for
some therein, but they stand upon their guard being men with stones able to
contend with the whole world, and feign would Sir Ralph and his Cavaliers set
footing there, but Master Stukeley the Governor thereof who is both wise and
politic, durst not trust or entertain his motion, we have nothing more to
say but only this, our Country is very weak for want of Arms, and those few
we have are very defective. There has been more substantial Armor found in
Master Chichesters house at Arlington, and at Master Courtney his house, both
Recusants, then in all our whole County, (the Gentry excepted) at the searching
of these Gentlemen's houses, there were many wounded.

Thus desiring your answer of his Majesty's affairs in the North, J leave you
to Gods protection and rest your assured friend and kinsman,

GYLES PRESCOT.
From Plymouth, the 21. of October, 1642.
FINIS.

