Here Is Jack in a Box, That will Conjure the Fox.

Here be your new Fashions Mistress.


Here Is black B^gs, Ribons, Copper Laces.
Paintings, and beauty spots for faces.
Masks, and Fans you here may have
Taffity Gowns and Sca^fes most brave
Curled hair, and crisped Locks,
Aporns white, and Holland Smocks:
All sorts of powders here are sold
To please all People young and old
Then come my Customers touch and tey,
Be hold and see, draw forth and buy
Here be your new Fashions Mistress.


Here Is Jack in a Box, That will Conjure the Fox.

OR, A new List of the new Fashions now used in London.

Come who buys Jack in a Box,
That will Cunjure the Fox,
And move them to delight;
It may serve as I may say,
For to pass the time away,
In the long Winter nights,
To sit by a good fire,
When the Season does require,
Your Body to keep warm:
This Book of merriment,
Will yield you sweet content,
And do you no harm.
This new merry Book was newly Jnvented, But never before this time Jmprinted.

Written by Laurence Price, in the Month of October. 1656.

Entered according to Order.

London, Printed for Tho. Vere at the Angel without Newgate. 1657.



Here Is Jack in a Box That will conjure the Fox, Come along my new merry
disposed Customers, here are all sorts of new fashioned wares to be sold, the
like was never seen in England before this present time.
IF there be any young upstart Gallant, that is newly dropped out of the Beggars
basket; if he have either got Money or Credit, I have a Jack-in-a-box that will
fit him with a Beaver hat, a Golden band, a great plumm of Feathers, Dublet and
Hose of ye new fashion, with a hundred and fifty knots of Ribons down ye
Codpiece; with fancies of several colors so high as the pocket holes, set all
round the Breeches? he shall also have his choice of Coats suitable to the
same, laid down with Gold lace, Silver lace, or Cooper lace, according as his
Money will hold out to pay for? and being thus trimmed up in his Gallantry, he
will be taken to be for no less then he is, as he goes along the streets.

Prouder then a Peacock along he will pass
Finer then an Ape and wiser then an Ass
IN the next place if there be any Conntrey Royster, whether he be Farmer,
Grazier, Yeoman; or Gentleman: that has got a great deal of Money, and but
little Wit? If he be willing to be rid of that, he shall have my Jack-in-a-box
that will afford all sorts of new Fashions whatsoever be would have: if he
desires to have a gay coat all with Gold buttons, and a Suit agreeable to the
same; here it is to be had: if he will have his demy-Caster, his Golden Belt,
his Silver Rapier, with new fashion Boots, and imbroidered Spurs, I am ready to
furnish him; if he will have Silk stocking with white Boot-hose-tops, hanging
downwards toward his feet, as if the tail of his Shirt hanged out at the
knees of his Breeches, my Jack can fit him with that also which is known to be
the newest Fashion, of that is now in use.

But at the last, what ever does befall,
The Country bumpkin he must pay for all.
COme who buys my new Fashioned Periwigs, if there be any manner of single man,
Widdower, or Bachelor that thinks his own natural Hair not good enough for
him, here is Jack in a box will fit him to a hair, with all sorts of Periwigs,
and all sorts of colors and fashions, both long Hair, or short Hair, Flaxen
hair, or yellow hair, black, blew, red, tawny, brown, or Abraham color,
that is half Nits, and half Lice; or if any bauld pated fellow amongst you
that have lost his hair off from his head, with going too often into
Smock-ally, I have a Periwig for him of goodly long Hair, that will hang down
and cover all his shoulders, and that may serve to cover all his Knavery: or if
any younger Brothers that desires to have their natural hair that grows upon
their heads Dyed of another color? here are all sorts of powders; of several
clours, and Fashions, that will do the trick gallantly,

Those bouncing Bil-bow-blades in all their bravery
Must each one have a trick to hide his knavery.
COme who buys my new fashion powders, if there be any boon companion, whose
wits runs a wooll-grthering, that feign would be taken to be Gentlemen, before
there time come, my Jack in a box have a new fashioned powder that was made of
several compounds, namely the Eyes of a Cockatrice, the flying of a Swallw,
the blood of a Batt, and the brains of a Woodcock; which powder being strowed,
upon the Hair of many young Men, it will make them gray before they are good,
and proud beford they are honest Beside all this: this sort of powder is of such
an excellent Virtue that if your Cloaks and Clothes be black it will make them
seem of a changeable color.

Where is the fool that will refuse to buy,
Such priming powder when he comes ^t nigh
Thus having pleased the Men, I mean to do
My best good will and please the Women to
Such rare new fashions I have here in store,
To fit all sorts of Women, rcih or poor
The like whereof was never known before,
Nor when the world is done, will be no more.
Therefore give care, and hearken to me well
And you shall know what wares I have to sell.
IF there be any sort of supposed she Creature that would fain be accounted for
a Gentle woman, or a Lady at ye least, my Jack in a box will afford them such
gallant choice of new fashion Goods; or Apparel, which will make them seem
to be like that they never have been, nor will be.

Come along Gentlewomen
buy my new fashion ware
Jle fell good pen worths
so sure as you go there.
IF there be any foul Faces, that are not willing to be seen of modest and
civil People in the day time, my Jack in a box will fit them with black Bags,
French masks, Jtalian Scarfes, and Spanish Frontlets, so that there will be
never a good bit to be seen of their Faces, for they shall be covered with a
black Veil from the head to the lower parts of their Body? and so she may be
taken for some Bloomesbury Lady, or Turnmillstreet Gentlewoman,

Yet more strange fashions here is to be sold,
That will please Women, be they young or old
IF there be any wanton Wag-tailes, that can speak French, although they were
never out of England, which have been three times bathed in Cornelius his Lub,
and five times under the Surgeons hands to be cured of the Morbur Gallicus, my
Jack in a box will afford her if she have money to buy and pay for a new Silken
gown of the new Fashion, with Petticoats laced with Silver and Gold lace most
gallantly, with sumptuous trimming, for before and behind, with costly rich
Gorgets; and Dressings, the like whereof are not to be seen, at the Exchang
except it be at some times after the Daylight is shut in.

And then the wanton Wagtails by owlight,
Will pick up Dicks and Cullyes in the night
COme see what yea lack or buby Gentlewomen, here are choice of other new
fashions, if there be any of you that would be seen to be more then Women, my
Jack in a box will fit you in that quality to choose: For here is brave painting
for your faces, which came from beyond Jamaica, and Ethiopia, all Venis cannot
afford the like, and how it must be used it is as follows.

You must for three nights one after another, anoint your eyes with fasting
spittle when you go to Bed, and every morning when you rise you must wash your
face in Puppy dog water; and then lay on the painting; and last of all put
black Beauty spots upon your foreheads, your cheeks and your Chin, and
afterward being mounted in a Coach, you will be taken to be as Beautiful as
Cleopatria, as light as Diana. and as honest as Venis.

When such light Creatures, are in Coaches carried,
Woe be to them to whomn they must be married.
But stay a while my comely Customers, my Jack in a box have another rare
commodity in store for you, that was never spoken of yet.

Here are gallant fine white Holland Smocks, and Aporns white, whosoever wears
of those Aprons, will be taken for some loose bodyed Gentlewoman, so she can
but gather up her Coats and Aporn as high as her knees that folks may see her
white smock, as she goes along the street? this indeed is an old fashion newly
taken up; it was hatched in Naples, brought forth at Rome, taken up by a Nun,
and made use of by a Friar: and now is come to be a common Fashion worn by some
of them that use the common Trade here in England.

A Woman's inward Virtue you may know,
By her Apparel, and her gallant show.
THe next brave business that I have to present unto you, is choice and variety
of several rare compounded powders, which my Jack in a box call by six several
names, and is to be taken on six several days in the week, the first is
called a working powder, which is to be taken a quantity on Monday morning
betimes; and it is to be taken by all manner of Men that are counted good
Fellows, as Weavers, Tailors, Glovers, Shoomakers, Black-smiths, Carpenters;
Feltmakers, Coopers, Cobblers, Broom-men, and all other Tradesmen whatsoever:
which if they fail of taking a reasonable portion of this working powder on
the Monday morning, and so fall a drinking, it is ten to one but they loose the
greatest part of their weeks work, and so want money on Saturday to buy meat
for their dinners on Sunday.

Good fellows all take heed of Jack in box
For he will cunjure them that catch the Fox
THe next powder that I present to you is called playing-powder, and that is to
be taken one Tuesday; but this powder yields more proffit to Ale-wives then it
will to good fellows, for if a good fellow take a portion of this forenamed
playing powder on Tuesday morning, though it be but as big as a Bees knee? and
afterward drink hard upon it, it is a three fold wonder if he do not pawn or
fell his Hat; his Coat, or his Shirt, before night for money to pay the
Alehouse scores.

Sometimes good fellows work, and take great pains,
And sometimes Ale-wives eat up all the gains.
COme here is another powder also for Wednesday, and that is called good Huswives
powder, this powder if a Woman take a good quantity of it in ye morning, it may
chance to save her bonee from being broke ere night? for suppose that her
Husband have been in rebellion two days together, and come home drunk on the
third day, Vaporing, Swaggering, Swearing, and Domineering, and ready to fight
at every word, the Woman having taken a dram of this good Huswives powder, she
will with such discretion and civillity order and temper her words, that her
Husband shall have no power at all to do her any harm? and perhaps she may
persuade him to be a good Husband all the week after.

Good words did never put any one to cost
In giving good words there is nothing lost.
THe powder for Thursday is called Love powder, and that chiefly belongs for
Maids and Widows to take; if any Maid what ever she be, shall take a portion
of this Love powder, modestly, temperately, and honestly, it may be the better
for her all the days of her life? and thereby she may gain and keep the Love
and good will of her sweetheart, and at last be made a happy Wife? but she
that takes of this Love powder too hastily and greedily, may chance to surfeit
therewith before she be made a married Wife, as many have done in former times,
and if thereby she should chance to have a sweelling in her Belly, she may at
the last be forced to sing the old tone to her young Son.

Balloo my boy, lie still, lie still and sleep,
Thy Father's gond from me, which makes me weep
THe powder for Friday is called doting powder; if a lusty young Batchlor be
he never so poor, take a valiable quantity of the said doting powder, and
come into the house where a very rich Widow owelleth: though before he came to
her? she made a vow never to marry with any Man whilst she lived, yet if he
bestirr himself, and send for two or three cups of nappy Ale, and then grate a
merry Nutmeg, and mix with it some of the doting powder, and then drink a
loving Health to his Widow, and withal give her the better part of a thousand
honey sweet Kisses? Oh how it will make the Widow give down her milk, and
also turn up the white of the Eye, amongst all the rest he sure that you
forget not the Proverb.

How he that will a fair Maid woo,
must speak fine words and statter,
And he that will a rich Widow woo,
must kiss when he comes at her,
THe last powder of all is Satturdayes powder, and that is called merry powder
it savors; much like unto the Monday powder, for they that have been good
Husbands and followed their business closely all the week, may on Satturday
at night send for a pot or two of the best soft Ale, or Blessed lull, and spice
it well with a parcel of the merry powder, and so they and their Friends,
their Wives and their Children, may rejoice and be merry altogether in good
sort, for doubtless he that followed labor all the week will be sure to have
money to serve his need on Silver Satturday.

This merry powder's known to be best,
And far excels any of the rest.
And thus my noble Friends for your content
My merry Jack in box I here present,
In hope that you which now are standers nigh,
Will straight draw forth your money for to buy
Come along my honest Customers buy my new merry Books; pence a piece in
London, and two pence a piece in the Country.

FINIS.

