NEWS FROM The King's Bath Reporting nothing but an Honest means whereby to
establish an happy and much desired Peace, in all His Majesty's Kingdoms
Generally.

Psalm. 122. 6. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem; they shall prosper that love
thee. Prove. 24. 21. My son, fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not
with them that are given unto change. 22 For their Calamity shall rise
suddenly: and who knows the ruin of them both? Eccles. 8. 2. I counsel thee
to keep the Kings Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of God. 3 Be not
hasty to go out of his sight: stand not in an evil thing, for he does
whatsoever pleases him. 4 Where the word of a King is, there is power: and who
may say unto him, What do thou? 5 Whos^ keeps the Commandment shall feel
no evil thing, and a wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment.
BRISTOLL, Printed at the Authors Charge: 1645.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
THou Royal Cross, with Age and
Honor crowned,
That stand'st in the midst of the
Kings Bath, renowned
Both far and near, such Cures thy Bath has wrought,
As thousands unto thee for help have sought,
Who by thy warming Waters healed were,
Whose Stilts there left thereof do witness bear,
And to thy Honor, on thy top are placed,
To show with what great virtue thou art graced:
Near to thy Springs my agitating Muse,
Has made a Book which does report some News
As from thy self: Her Book craves at thy hand
It under thy renowned name may stand.
And I the Author choose to make my moan
Uuto thy self. For why? As senseless stone
Most hearts are now become. Therefore from thee
An equal good may well expected be,
Through devious ways and sundry sudden fears
My Pilgrimage in this sad vale of tears
Has past, In Schools, Camp, and Court, poor I
Have seen the change of times variety;
And learned to know worlds best prosperity
Is but a state of wretched misery.
I then began my thoughts for to remove,
From things beneath unto those things above
And then my heart all sweetning comfort borrows.
From him who was a man of woe and sorrows
In this base world, which then I did forsake,
And once again unto my books betake
My self, God then of his free grace did call
Me to that War which is spiritual,
And lawfully by Church Authority,
I was admitted to the Ministry;
And being thus by Gods great mercy brought
Unto his work, I have his Battles fought,
Full forty years, and never yet did cease,
Next to the Faith, for to preserve the Peace
Of holy Church, as did become a Son;
All her commads by me were justly done:
And yet the heaps of followers did me wrong,
I could not mend't but all the way along,
In the whole course of my poor Ministry,
I was acquainted with adversity.
And did at last all means of living loose,
That hope failed me which I to trust did choose;
The Letters from, and Orders of that Court
Of High Commission shall of me report
No thing but well, who please to see them may,
And hear on my behalf what truths they will say:
But once grown poor from England then I went
To Ireland, where I might with good content,
Have lived but that Rebellious fatal curse
Drove me from thence, to a Rebellion worse,
And now poor man in this thy City Bath,
I am alive as buried in my grave;
With grief I see the woeful misery
Of honest, poor, despised Poverty.
The Prophet of his time did hit it right,
That every one was found an Hypocrite.
Yea, now that Hell-born sin does wound and stain.
The greatest number, who as yet remain
Professed Christians without Charity:
In such I Am sure there is most Hypocrisy:
And for this cause that Book does swiftly fly,
Which lamentation, mourning, woe does cry
To every Soul. This Truth though seen, and kown,
The greatest part from ill to worse are grown.
And seeing this, I have the world forsook,
A help from thence it is in vain to look:
Yet went I on with my well-meaning Book,
From first to last with hardship undertook.
And though the means appears dispis'd and weak,
And men may think it does but vainly speak,
To stop Rebelious course that is grown so strong
Joshua. 6. 4. Seven Trumpets of Rams-Hornes. Judges 7. 16. G^deons 300. broken
Pit hers. 1 Samuel 17. 49. Young, little, and unarmed David with a Stone and a
Slinge to overcome and slay the triple armed Giant great Goliath.
By weaker means God has destroyed the throng,
Of stronger Enemies as you may see,
In holy Writ recorded there to be.
My self, my Book poor and dispis'd though thought
Yet by such means the mighty God has brought
Great things to pass, yea, works of wondrous fame.
That glory might be given to his great name,
A happy Peace that precious Pearl to gain.
My Book with Gods assistance may obtain,
Or further the Obtainment and not hinder,
What may a Peace to King and Kingdom render.
Kind Cross, I pray thou would accept it then,
For thou art kind unto all sorts of men.
To Poor, and Rich, to the Lesser, and the Great,
To all thou do afford a warming Seat
As is thy self, my Booke's a Bath for Health,
To heal the Aches of the Commonwealth,
If some therein to bathe will wisely try,
It would them heal of Treasons Leprosy,
And thus (kind Cross) I humbly take my leave
Thou will not me of any hope bereave.
And what thou art, I must resolve to bear,
My proper Cross is unto me my share,
Which I Will take up, and joyfully will kiss,
So following Christ to my eternal bliss.
R. P.

The Definition of a Roundhead.
My Muse, at first desires to give a full and satisfactory Answer unto all
those who do so often ask the Question What is a Roundhead?
Answer. A Roundhead is a proud Rebel, and a most Rebellious Unsound-head,
Roundly, and thoroughly, that is, in all things thorowout proudly rebelling
against our good King Charles His Royal Person, Princely Progeny, Crown and
Dignity, and Kingdom generally; and against all the Laws and Statutes both
Divine, and Humane in such Case made and provided.

Behold this is a Roundhead, but not a Sound-head: and Roundnesse without
Soundness is nothing else but stinking Putrefaction, and Rottenness: and
such, and no better are all the Actions done by those who are Roundheads, but
no Sound-heads.

Me thinks then every good Subject should be ashamed to be such an
Vnsound-head, as justly to deserve the name of a Roundhead.

What now does follow, take it as it falls.
As spoken to the Roundheads Generals.
To them my Muse some several Songs does sing,
Expressing love unto Our Worthiest King.
THE FIRST SONG. SX.
THat Noble name Time past, and present viewing
Thy Fathers tells, and what will be thy Ruin.
His Fall I mourned, and from the dust did raise,
His cast-down Honor with deserved praise,
Yet for thy sake His fault I Will briefly touch,
That thou thereby may see thy Danger's much.
The course He steered was to be over strong
For his good Queen, and those that did Him wrong
To have removed. For this he did devize
Both Queen, and Court on sudden to surprise.
No thought He had His Queen to hurt at all,
But at Her Royal feet on's knees to fall,
Present His wrongs, and humbly crave redress:
Resolved yet, by force the Queen to press,
And thus His Gracious Mistress would compel
To do what He thought Good. This was not well:
Beho^d the Fault his Honor did commit
And Law adjudged Him to death for it.
My Noble Lord, on this but think a while,
And let your Judgment not your self beguile,
Can Subjects seek their Prince to overawe,
And not offend Divine, and Humane Law?
All Subjects know the Kings Supremacy:
He must command and not commanded be.
No Subjects Laws can make Kings to command:
And if by Force such thing they take in hand,
It is Rebellion, All the Learned know:
All Laws of God, and Man have styled it so.
Since Reign of Henry, of that name the first,
This now Rebellion is of all the worst.*
Worse luck, my Lord, that in this war of all
You should become Rebellions General:
And lead an Army even in open sight,
Against so good a King as ours to fight*
But if your Lordship say in this I lie;
I would I did; your Honor cleared thereby.
My Noble Lord, our good King Charles, you know^
His Royal Person in the field does show;
So do Prince Charles, and Princely Duke of York;
Both with the King by your rebellious work
Are seen in War, by force themselves defending:
The Subject fatal violence against them intending.
And though you see the Royal Standert pitched,
Yet like a Madman, or one that is bewitched,
You draw your Army forth all in Array,
You beat Your Drums, and Colors do display,
And then your Horse, your Foot most strongly guarding
With Trumpets sound Rebellion still enlarging,
You beat the Alarm, and sound a Charge* let fly,
Like raging Fiends against Sovereign Majesty:
Against His Person, Crown and Dignity:
And Princes of His blessed Posterity:
Against Laws and Statutes Humane and Divine.
To higher pitch can Prides Rebellion climb?
To root out all! What Barbarism is this,
Thy self know, Essex, See thine own amiss.
When Subjects against their King such force do try,
Who says, It is Rebellion, does not lie.
And in such work Rebellions General,
Must hear Truth in her style Maj^sticall:
In holy Job (my Lord) the words are found:
And there Gods Spirit does your sentence sound.
"His head though reaching Heaven in men's account, Job. 20. 6, 7.

"And though his Excellence does clouds surmount,
"Yet shall he perish, even as his own doung:
Thus speaks the Spirit in the Scriptures tongue.
Then Moble Earl, Be to thy self a friend:
This way cannot hold prosperous to the end.
But you will say, You bear your Arms against those
The Kings bad Counselors, our Countries foes,
Them to remove, and from our King expel
Is that you seek; and think it wondrous well
Such course to take. Your error to refell,
Our Cronicle a story will you tell.
Earl Lancaster In the Reign of Edw. 2.
without his Kings consent
Did raise an Army for the same intent,
Which you pretend; and bravely on did go;
Takes Gaveston that King and Countries foe
Commands his death. For which unlawful fact
When once arraigned, to justify his act,
He for himself did plead your own pretense,
This lessened not the ill of his offense.
Because as you do now, even so he did,
And doing so, most justly lost his head.
A Prince he was, and of the Royal Blood:
Five Earledoms then in his possession stood.
Yet He, and all the Lords that with him sided;
The Law for them as for himself provided.
"Then (Noble Essex) know they happy are,
"Whom others fatal harms make to beware.
And let me once more work upon this heat,
Whilst I the fellow-story do repeat.
Proud Lester 41. H. 3. In the time of that mad Parliament at Oxford, called,
The Assembly of Rebels. This King H^n. 3. Reigned 56. years, and saw the fall
of all his Enemies: And his Son Edw. 1. Reigned wondrous happily: and by his
Subjects was supplied most bountifully and never contradicted by any Parliam.
So may it be with our K. Charles, Amen.
that Lawgiver to his King,
At Evesham ask what did become of him.
His naked body on the ground did lie,
His Head struck off, Face upward laid thereby:
His privy parts were from his body cut,
And they on either side his Nose were put
A spectacle of shame, and infamy
In him was left to all Posterity.
As if that sight unto the world should tell
Such Noses might like shameful dangers smell.
The Waterman that he may forward row
With safer speed, looks strictly backward: So*
If by your Lordship this be rightly done,
Your Noble self* may future dangers shun.
But yet me thinks some nearer president
May w^ll be made your Lordships document,
To show your ways against God himself are bent,
Whi^'st you against Gods Anointed are intent:
That God the Cause into his hand has took,
And bids your Lordship on your self to look.
When he himself the blow did strike, which then
Did rowze your Honor from your warlike Den,
'Twas when that you in Camp well formed did lie
Besieged by his Royal Majesty:
Whose Royal Person though your self beheld;
Yet scorning unto Him your self to yield,
You manned each Trench cast up with warlike skill,
Proceeding stoutly in Rebellion still.
Indeed (my Lord) you were encamped so strong,
As if your works to Pirrhus did belong.
Your Rampires you so strongly up did raise
Had it not been against your King, your praise
Might have advanced the Honor of your name:
But being as it was, therein your shame
Appears; and shows it was a shameful thing
When done against the Person of Your King.
You trusted to the strength of your defense,
Your Sconces, Forts, Mounts, Bulworks, and from thence
Your Cannon Bullets, and Case-shot let fly
Against the Forces of His Majesty.
Indeed you were right strongly fortified,
And Roman-like with all things well supplied:
And well you might, for all the Kingdoms wealth,
Y' had taken from the King by open stealth.
At Sea not yours, but your Kings Ships did tend,
Upon your Army, ready still to send
Unto your Honor all things you should want,
When you in this your power your self did vaunt,
Behold the mighty work of God, how he
Did check your Greatness, and did make you see
Him make his Winds a constant gale to blow,
And keep from you provisions which (you know)
You sorely wanted: This you had in view:
But God would have you know 'twas not for you*
The Ships that rode in sight could not enjoy,
One blast for them into the River Foy;
Nor up that stream convey supplies expected:
Our Gracious God had so your hopes rejected,
Your Honor then as one amazed stands
To see your Camp, and all your Armed Bands
Left desolate; your Soldiers hunger-sterved;
And nothing but despair for you reserved.
In this distress Wars Counsel you do call
And there resolve your Infantry should fall
To some good Composition with the King,
And so their persons out of danger bring:
Though Rebels, yet their blood to him was dear,
As by his mercy showed did appear.
He but dis-arms them; and does give them leave
To march away. That none might them bereave
Of what they had; nor offer violence
Unto their persons, but might safely thence
Unto their Rebell-Garrison repair,
A Convoy granted is, which brings them there.
But first (my Lord) of you I needs must say,
That down the River Foy you ran away,
Like to a brave, and Noble General,
And left your men to th'worst might them befall,
O my good Lord, full time enough you had
And might a way unto your Peace have made,
Not by your running from, but running to
Your good King Charles, and something so to do,
As might befit a Subject, low submission,
And so have made your Peace on good Condition.
But neither God, nor your good King could move you,
To do so as your God and King might love you.
But out you run in your mis-leading way
And so you do in your Rebellion stay.
What is it (my Lord) you, and your Armies crave?
Would you our good King Charles your Prisoner have?
Now God forbid. Two Kings Edward the 2. Imprisoned in Berkley Castle, and
there cruelly murdered: and Richard the second Imprisoned in Pontefract
Castle, and there murdered. Both these Kings were deposed by unlawful
Assemblies which were not rightly to be called Parliaments.
so once were kept
And both of life, and Kingdoms were bereft
To King, and Kingdoms woe; when Subjects shall
Upon their King in terms imperious fall,
Sir, if you will not with our will complye,
We will thereto enforce your Majesty.
Your words have sounded to the like effect;
And thereof do your deeds your selves detect.
We then must grant Our Sovereign justly stands
Upon his Guard, to keep out of your hands
His Royal Person. What! must Kings submit
Unto their Subjects? Can we think it fit,
That Subjects should their Sovereign's Judges be
Out fall their eyes that this desire to see.
There is a Court where Christ the Judge does sit,
Before whose Judgment Seat we all must meet.
"It Is he that says, By me Kings rule, and Reign,
"It Is He will then the Right of Kings maintain:
"Against those he will his powerful Justice arm
Who His Anointed Touch, and Prophets harm.
Good David did confess he sinned that day
When he the lap of Saul's Coa^ cut away.
Is It not a greater sin when Subjects take,
All things from their good King; and Shipwreck make
Of all belonging to his Royal State,
And so their King, and Kingdom ruinate?
Before the Lord our God, of Kings the King
When Subjects come to answer such a thing,
Unto what help can they themselves betake,
But to repent, and restitution make?
It Is long before that Judge will come some say,
Judge Conscience (know) his Cour keeps every day,
If Conscience thee condemn, thou ought to know
Heavens Judge is greater, giving Judgments blow.
The rule by which he judges is his Word,
This does a most un-erring Truth afford.
If by this blessed Rule thou will be led,
By it, not me, be thou thus counseled.
My Noble Lord, Your Royal King behold,
And then your self in Faiths obedience fold:
Ask but his Pardon, it is a Noble thing,
A Noble Subject yields unto his King;
And such a King whose mercy does transcend,
The faults wherein his subjects can offend:
Then love your King; His Pardon once obtained,
The love of God, and King you then have gained.
So shall you then a Noble Subject be,
And all good Subjects will rejoice to see
When to your King you reconciled are,
And seek for Peace, and stop the course of war,
This is the thing for which we humbly pray,
And will rejoice to see that happy day.
Then Noble Peer thy fellow-Peers persuade,
That Peace 'twixt King and People may be made,
So shall we all most heartily rejoice,
And praise our Gracious God with heart, and voice.
The Second Song.
My M^se a ^ace to Manchester does hye
As hearing there are Irish Wares to buy.
R^ugh Irish Ruggs* and hor^ed Beasts full many
Of Irish breed, which are the worst of any,
My Muse a while does go to look on those,
And see how there amongst them the Market goes.
EArl Manchester, what an infectious stir
Is made by thee? what rage does make the spur
That drives thee on in Actions to proceed,
Whereby thou make thy Native Country bleed?
The Scab, the Botch, the Murrain, and the Byle
Of Egypt was as thine not half so vile,
That only did on the Egyptians fall:
Gods people were therewith not hurt at all.
But now Reb^llion aided by thy hand,
Does with a Plague fill all thy Native Land,
And like a Lepros^e infecteth so,
As all the Kingdom sensible of woe
Mourns to behold the Ruin that is brought
Upon her self; by her own Children wrought.
And here at thee I wonder more, the rather
Because the S^nne of such a Noble Father;
That Noble Root whence thou a Branch art grown,
Was to his King a faithful Subject known,
For Forty years I all his ways observed,
And for my part I never found he swerved
From Rules of Justice, but did think that he
Might wash his hands as from Corruption free;
What others have laid to his charge of late
For me to question now, it is out of date,
Because he is gone away to his last home,
And long before this time has known his doom.
The time was when a Parliament could do it
Which question's greatest men, and makes them rue it
When guilty found: That Court does over awe
The greatest Peers that sin against the Law,
And calls them to account: Thus Subjects all
Unto that High Court's Censure stand or fall.
Their power reaches over every Soul,
Except the King: He Is free from their control:
For they but Subjects are; He is their King
And must obeyed be in every thing,
If not in active yet in passive ways;
This ever was the Christian Subjects praise;
Who rather would his de^rest blood expend
By suffering, then their God and Prince offend
By damned Reb^llion. Noble Earl, what shame,
What great dishonor have thou brought thy name
Unto? I do not know the like was done
By any of thy house before to run
In such Rebellious courses: none has stained
Thy race that way; none unto it has gained
The name of Rebel. Thou, I must confess,
A younger brother have, who runs no less,
Yet in another way: He takes Romes part,
And therein thou like him a Rebel art.
He runs from his obedience to his King:
And so do thou the very self same thing.
Romes Sovereign Power thou seem to deny
Yet grantest not our Kings Supremacy.
If good King Charles Supreme in all things be
Why then do thou from thy obedience flee?
because therein thou would with Rome agree;
For shame (my Lord) for shame this error see.
Thou had an Uncle by thy Fathers side,
A noble Reverend Prelate that did ride
In Honors Chariot for his virtuous life;
Who made Gods House his most endeared wife.
Bath Church will ever sound his honored praise;
Out of the Dust he did her beauty raise.
And she does there unto the world present
His blessed memory in his Monument,
I Am su^e that he withstood Romes Popery,
And did maintain Truths written verity.
What makes thee then thus to degenerate,
The Churches Cause? Yes, yes, so some do prate.
In Church Religion pure to keep, is it that
Has made thee do indeed thou know not what?
A Proud, perverse, and peevish Puritan,
Does want no ill that can be in a Man,
And yet he will Religious seem to be:
O horrible! it is more then shame to see,
That they should dare a seeming show to make,
As if they did all for Religions sake!
When true Religion never yet durst take
Up Arms against Gods anointed, and forsake
The word of truth, Religions only stay,
Which does command all Subjects to obey
Their King. And rules he ill, or well,
They must not dare against Him to Rebel,
When Heathen Kings the Christian world did sway,
For them the Christians did most humbly pray,
And low obedience to their Thrones did yield;
And herein they Religions Law fulfilled.
The Apostate Julian had his Armies; He
Of Christians there might many thousands see,
Of force sufficient him to have deposed:
Obedience yet their Christian hearts enclosed.
To datelesse shame he makes himself a debtor,
Rebelling against a Christian King none better.
But Christians now unto Religions shame,
Rebellion shroud under Religions Name.
And do by this their foul, and vile transgression,
Most foully wrong the Protestants profession.
Shall Protestants, such as be of thy Faction
Against holy truth maintain each Popish Action?
Have thou a Bull sent from the Roman Sea,
That makes thee bold to plead Rebellions plea?
Is this the way to keep out Popery?
Accursed is all your foul Hypocrisy:
A door most wide to let Romes Popery in
Is opened by thy Hands. The more's thy sin,
Both Church and Commonwealth to overthrow:
No other fruit forth from thy Root can grow
Thy factious Teachers in thy mind have bred
That error which has thee so much misled.
Yes, without doubt; for of them there is a swarm,
Whose stinging does both King, and Kingdom harm,
A faithful Minister as Christ should Preach:
And not repugn what Christ himself does teach*
Give unto God that which is Gods: do this:
And unto Caesar give what Cesar's is
Christ King of Kings, in him it is Gods Command.
Who are they then that dare against him stand?
Whos'ever shall against his mandates speak,
With Rod of Iron he will them in pieces break.
To give to God what is Gods they vainly try,
Who what is Cesar's Caesar does deny.
For God, and for my King good Subjects say.
And so indeed good Subject should obey.
And with this truth our Humane laws comply;
Against God, our King, his Crown, and Dignity:
Offenders sin, Enditements framed are so,
The Guilty found from Bar to Gallows go.
And whether then think you should they be sent,
Who with full purpose of their wills intent,
Rob God himself when they his Churches spoil,
And against their King keep a Rebellious coil?
In Robbing him of all his proper own
By Sea, and Land, Ships, Castles, Towns, all known
Unto his Crown most justly to belong:
Offenders when endited for such wrong,
Must they not needs thereof be guilty found?
In this le^ Law the following sentence sound.
The Danger such what is it that hope does bring,
But only this the mercy of their King.
Our King so good, and merciful to see,
Shall he without all mercy used be
By Subjects? ^Tis a work so merciless,
No Tongue, nor pen can to the full express;
And use Religions name for their excuse,
No heathen story can the like produce.
Now sure that man does make his shot the worse,
Which makes Religion but his stalking Horse.
Earl Manchester, will thou a gunning go
Among those gunners workers of our woe?
What folly, nay, what fury makes thee then,
To rank thy self among the worst of men?
Whose foul dishonor Trump of Fame has whirld,
With shames report even round about the world.
Although some Lords their lost Estates when viewing,
Will raise themselves upon their Countries ruin,
It Is not thy cause: an Earls Estate thou have,
And never did thy substance vainly waste
By any loose, or riotous expense;
No, no, thy breeding ba^^es thee that offense:
Yet now thou do a fouler sin commit,
And do thy God, thy King, and self forget,
When impiously thou fully do intend,
In this bad War thy whole Estate to spend.
Did thou but spend on wanton vanity,
Thou then should be but thine own Enemy;
But spending it upon Rebellions part,
To King, and Country Enemy thou art.
But see thy self; consult with thy own mind,
Who will not see, then such there is none more blind.
Search the Records, and truth of History,
And learn to know, (and that for certainty)
What show so'ere may varnish thy intent,
Thy actions are with high Rebellion bent
Against thy King* and thou shall find them then
To be against the Laws of God, and Men.
If so thou do thy judgment then advance
And be not led by impure Puritants.
Now though I know they Calvin do allege,
And on their part his reputation pledge,
I will make bold in that which I have read,
To show his words to no such sense will lead.
His Institutions, Fourth Book, near the end,
Last Section saving one his words are penned.
Whose entrance Orthodox divinely sings
The Sovereign power of anointed Kings,
His Song in Magistracies name he sets,
And willingly the name of Kings forgets,
Democracy against Monarchy does stand,
Geneva so misled their Calvin's hand.
As man might Calvin into error fall;
The Proverb is, wise Bernard sees not all.
And Calvin to himself has got this gain,
His virtues pride, and Avarice did stain.
But when to change his note he does begin,
A peradventure brings his matter in.
And of the power of three estates he speaks,
And thereby all the Laws divine he breaks.
For this I Am sure, he can no warrant bring,
That Subjects may bear Arms against their King,
For any cause what is ever they pretend;
As private ones may not therein offend;
So no Authority of Subjects must,
Or can allowed be their King to thrust
From lawful Rights belonging to his Crown:
Kings do not grant a power to throw down
Themselves* nor raise they any Court so high,
Themselves of Kings to make no Kings thereby.
The power of Kings though Calvin's fourth Book speaks;
In The former part, yet in the last he breaks*
What he before with weighty reasons taught*
And they who have by him occasion ^ought
To make his words with force and power be bent,
Against present state of Englands Government,
To King, and State they proudly offer wrong;
A question then may stay their clamorous tongue;
Where is the King that rules by Tyranny,
That down does trample his poor Comminalty?
Our good King Charles his Commons to content,
Has given them a Trienniall Parliament,
A Royal favor, never given before;
Should we not therefore love our King the more?
And those last Acts made with our Kings consent,
Are powerful Objections to prevent,
And show his Subjects that in Royal love
He would from them all grievances remove;
The Commons, and those trusted by them then
May find just cause to rest contented men.
And Calvin's words, not spoken to his praise,
Can give no cause Commotions up to raise*
To make such Laws our King is well content,
As may consist with Monarchs Government.
And now (my Lord) our noble mind to move
With fervency desired Peace to love,
Your Honor may be pleased your self t'advise
By thinking on precedent Prophecies*
Sixth Henry sure in this a Prophet was
And did forese^ what things would come to pass;
Whom when confined by Imprisonment,
King Edward Fourth oth' name to visit went;
With Gl^s^^^^ Duke, and Richmonds, all in state,
(...) two did Henry ru^na^e)
When those four Princes in one Basin washed
Successively, a smile from Henry past,
Which Edward spies, and thereupon would know,
The reason that did move him thereunto:
The unhappy King as he yet smiling stands,
It Is strange, quoth he, four Kings should wash their hands
Thus in one Basin. Edward presses on
To know his meaning: Henry thereupon
Does thus express himself; I was; Thou art:
And Gloucester will be: But for Richmonds part
He shall be: speaking thus as in despite*
Of all that should withstand great Richmonds might.
What shall be, shall be; none shall it oppose,
This force the words do in themselves enclose.
And so it was; by Conquest Richmond won
The Crown of England, and by him was done
A glorious work; He did in one unite
Those fragrant Flowers, the Red-Rose, and the White;
And so did cease that deadly bleeding War
'Twixt those two Houses, York, and Lancaster.
That King renowned did in his judgment see
Another union which in time might be;
When Monarchs two should so in one be met,
As that one Monarch over both should set
A Crowned King: England and Scotland, both
Their peoples should be made by sacred Oath
One King to serve; and that one to obey,
Whose Royal Scepter should both Kingdoms sway.
What Henry 7. foresaw to pass is brought;
The union, as you see, is firmly wrought:
The Laws of God, and Nations do confirm it,
Woe then to them who seek to overturn it,
Our good King Charles from Henry 7 descended,
Of all the Kings no one King more commended,
For all the virtues that a King adorn,
His Royal Head by Right the Crown has worn,
And Rightfully it does to Him belong,
This to deny, none dares do such a wrong.
Shall then the Subjects of his Kingdoms bend
Their strength His Kingdoms from his Crown to rend?
With England Scotland joined in full consent,
Shall each from other be in pieces rent?
God made the marriage; and it is a wonder
What God has joined that man should dare to sunder.
Great Britain now by her great union is
A Lady Crowned with everlasting bliss,
If that her King and people could agree
But to uphold her peaceful unity.
And this to do is our good Kings desire,
It is the thing which he does most require:
His profer'd love is by his Subjects slighted,
And his desires of Peace with War requited.
Division now the union dis-uniting,
Sets both the Kingdoms against each other fighting.
And both of them against their Monarchall King
Do join their Forces, and their Armies bring
Into the Field. Can Heathen stories tell
A work that may such mischiefs parallel?
Then (Noble Earl) be touched with some remorse.
And now no longer do thy self enforce
By civil War ^o spoil thy Countries Peace,
But rather cause all bloody broiles to cease:
Remember Richmond shall be, Henry said,
So Richmond was. Now then his Offspring aid,
And boldly say, our good King Charles shall be
In spite of Foes, Our Royal King: And he
Shall Rule and Reign; and all his Subjects they
With faith's Allegiance shall their King obey.
Promote but this, Great Britains joy shall then
In union stand confirmed, Amen, Amen.
Renounce Rebellion, it is thy Honors stain;
He runs far that never turns again:
Turn to thy King, and he will turn to thee
With mercy more then can deserved be.
Lead on the Army under thy Command
No more against, but with thy King to stand.
Thy Christian love, and loyalty express,
In working thus our Kingdoms happiness:
Thus what Charles Ancestors did once foresee
Shall be established to Eternity.
Thou shall by such endeavors (never fear it)
The love of God, and all good men inherit.
But if thou shall this war continue, then
Thou shall abhorred be of God and Men;
For such a wastefull cruel war needs must
In the issue lay this Kingdom in her durst;
And therein will Gods worship be interred;
And best of civil Government lie buried.
Of this Great Isle the Old Inhabitants*
Did paint themselves to make their countenance
Seem to beholders ghastly, grimme, and fierce;
Such Caesar* found us: But we now are worse,
We then were Salvages, now Christians are;
And this Rebellion makes us worse by far
Then rude Barbarians; such ways, we know,
Do worst beseem such as for Christians go.
America when first discovered;
Her People though by Heathens governed,
Yet to their King were most obedient.
And amongst them was such form of Government
As all could well what was their own enjoy,
Themselves did not as we our selves destroy:
O mourning Times for every honest man,
Men-eaters like to those of Magellan,
Who Viper-like no whit at all will spare,
Their Mothers Womb quite out to rend, and tear,
Will thou be one of that base viperous brood?
And is to thee thy Countries spoil thy food?
Thou do thy self a Christian write: why then
Will thou in sin outstrip those Heathen men?
Who served their King, and durst not him offend:
Will thou thy evils unto that height extend?
Even Heathens shall against thee in judgment rise
Unless some better course thou do devise
In time: For what by War can mended be?
In War we can but our confusion see.
In presence of our God conjure I thee
That thou thy King, and native Country free
From their sad fate: So that Religion true
May stand established to the worlds wide view;
And that fair Englands people as in times
Of Yore may all sit underneath their vines,
And peacefully enjoy what is their own,
That King, and Kingdoms bliss may still be known,
And bear aloft the honor of their name,
Cleared from Rebellion Christians stain, and shame.
This to atchieve do from Rebellion cease,
And Nobly wor^el^y King and Countries Peace.
Thus shall thou make a mends for what is a miss,
And to thine Honor gain eternal bliss.
The third Song.
My Muse is now upon an Errand sent
To view a Wall that gives no good content.
Of such bad Wallers there is too many now,
And one of them my Muse will show to you.
MY Muse does now Sir William Waller see,
Who loves to sight where Walls and Hedges be
Twixt him and them he is to fight withal;
For then he will show himself a Soldier tall.
O could his wit but handsomely contrive
Before him always Woods and Hills to drive,
Then would he with a Soldiers threatening looks
Amaze his Foes, and burn up watery Brooks.
But on plain ground if he be brought to fight,
He knows full soon to save himself by slight.
For after-ages this remember will,
How fast he ran away at Roundway-Hill.
Yet notwithstanding that his overthrow
My mind to me can sundry Actions show
That it is in War a very Common-thing,
One day to loose, another day to win^e.
The Proves bids us to remember this, Ipsa dies matter quandoque noverca est

One day a Mother, and a Step-dame is.
But yet me thinks that erring Knight should see
The hand of God, his providence to be
The working cause that made him then to fly;
Even when he thought to have gained the victory.
For into Bristoll news there Posting flies,
That he by Conquest had driven to Devise
His old Comrade, a Noble General:
On whom a sudden Accident did fall,
That to Devise did cause him to retire;
Which made Sir William's Pride such height aspire,
That he presumed, and so his braggs did make
In three days space the Town Devise to take;
And unto Bristoll as a Prisoner bring
That Noble Knight proved faithful to his King,
But in the ruff of that his swelling pride,
God did for him in Justice so provide,
That he which did conceited Conquest boast,
Was conquer^d and compelled away to post,
As fast as he upon his Horse could fly;
And to his Troops Ride, Ride, alo^d did cry.
And well he might, for then he did behold
That brave Prince Maurice coming on so bold;
One which deserves that Character to have
Which Homer once ^^to Achilles gave,
He wisely knew an Army to command,
And to a fight would stoutly valiant stand.
He first took notice of Sir William's fear;
And bids fall on they are running in the Rear.
And then that Knight though hurt before by chance
Does from Devise into the field advance
And marches on against them who proudly said
He shall no more King Charles his party aid.
And yet he did: The Noble Prince, and He
The spoil of their proud Enemies did see.
Though Wallers Horse had saved themselves by flight,
Yet all his Foot amazed at the sight
Stood in a Body; knew not how to fight.
And those that did, resistance being vain,
Were almost all on heaps together slain:
But few escaped that were not Prisoners took;
God then that pack of Rebels had forsook:
Their Colors, Ordnance, Carriages were lost
And Cornets thrown from some that well were Horst,
Sir William's Camp was then Camp'd under Feet;
Such just reward was for Rebellion meet:
And he like a right beaten Soldier sent
To Bristoll, there his sad fate to lament.
Sir William Waller, think upon this thing,
My Muse her lines unto thy self does bring,
That so thy wisdom might perceive Gods hand
To be the strength which did thee then withstand:
And sure it was to thee in mercy done,
That thou no more a Rebels course should run,
Then time was given unto thee to repent;
But thou that time have to this time misspent,
It was thy Pride, and Pride foreruns a fall:
Remember this Rebellions General.
The Royal Person of thy King lay not
That thou do love, when in Rebellions plot
Thou runn^st on, and in thy Sovereigns sight
Thou da^'st against his Royal Person fight;
Whose virtues do deserve a better love,
Then that thou should thine hand against him move.
I do not know that e're I saw thine eye;
I know thine Image in Bath Church does lie,
Which I full many a time have looked upon,
And seen as much as could be seen in stone.
One thing I Am sure of viewing thee enshrin'de,
I often with the good Duke Humphrey din'de,
There Souldier-like in Arms complete thou art,
To show thou can discharge a Soldiers part,
With such a valiant wise dexterity,
As may some great Commander dignifie.
Now when my Muse did think upon thee thus,
My thoughts did then their pressing griefs discuss;
That such an one as thou, so worthy a Knight
Should against thy King so like a Rebel fight.
Whereby thou can expect unto thy name
No Honor, but an everlasting shame.
My thoughts then me unto a wondering led,
That one of thy good parts, a Scholar bred,
Should so much blindness to the world bewray,
As not to see what is clearer then the day.
Thou needst must know the cause by thee defended,
Does stand by Law of God, and man condemned.
Have Oaths, and Vows of reason thee bereft?
Such Oaths, and Vows are better broke then kept,
Thus in Bath-Church of thee my thoughts have talked,
When with a sorrowing soul I there have walked:
These were my thoughts, which now I do disclose
Unto thy self. Thy Anger, I suppose,
I shall not to my self procure thereby,
And if so be I do, yet what ca^e I;
I Am poor enough, already made a scorn
My Age by proud ones being overborn
My Youth, I Am sure, could soon the means have wrought
Which them more wit, and manners might have taught.
From those that are indu'd with Noble mind,
I cannot but expect respect to find.
I Soldiers love; and must: A Soldier I
Was of the Queens of blessed memory.
In thee Sir William I do nothing hate,
But that thou do thy Country ^uinate.
And against thy King and Country bear Arms,
Working thereby thy Kings and Countries harms.
And though I know my lines no praise can merit,
As being penned with a distracted spirit:
Yet seeing I have heard thou learned art,
In hidden words I will my mind impart
Hows'ever liked, this Truth be understood,
I truly wish my King and Couuntries good.
The Moon, we know, has but a borrowed Light,
She put betwixt the Sun and human sight
Makes Suns Eclipse, as now we see it made,
Which clouds the Kingdom in a darkened shade.
^rather wish the Moons Eclipse to see,
Than by the Moon the Sun Eclipsed should be,
That of the Moon does Mortals little trouble,
That of the Sun does Morrals horror double.
Moons body put twixt us, and Suns great light,
The beams of Majesty which should shine bright
Are so Eclipsed as that a pitch-black night
So dark'ned has fair Englands Hemisphere
As nothing but prodigious flames appear,
And Clouds of smoke, whose inside lined with Thunder,
Our Kingdom muffles both aloft, and under:
And in this storm of Subjects foul revolt,
Thy self is made a tearing Thunderbolt;
Although thou know, and that unto thy cost
That twice thou have thy Thundering Pieces lost;
Yet fire remains involved in thy cloud,
Whose breaking forth bespeaketh ruin loud:
And some fierce flames of lightning thou make fly,
Which may endanger Sovereign Majesty.
O! what a Torrent has our Peace uprent
With bloods expense most prodigally spent,
By thee increased, who like a Blazing Star
Portendest naught but ruin by this War^e.
A burning Comet does not ever last:
Thy flame has burned too long in time forepast.
It seems thy wrath into thy mind had sent
A massy wad of sl^my stuff not spent
In three years burning. What, is it thy desire
As Phaeton to set the world on fire?
Quench in thy self the flame thy self have kindled;
R^pentant Tears with Faith, and Love when mingled
Will do the deed, and cause thee wisely then
To help to quench like fire in other men
Behold thy mournful King in sorrows share
So deep, none found amongst all his Subjects are:
Yet all good Subjects have enough to make
Their stouter hears to quake, if not to ache,
Yea, break in pieces, 'cause they all foresee
The doleful State of Englands misery.
By this accursed Rebellion: The whole Nation
With speed now Posting unto desolation.
If thou good Subject be, remove those fears,
That make the Land power out such bleeding tears;
It Is more then time this fearful storm to cease;
And nothing can ^ffect it but a Peace,
A happy Peace will both Ecclipses clear,
And Sun and Moon in glory shall appear,
Each brightly shining in their proper sphere
And then they will a glorious Peace uprear,
When Cynthia as a Servant unto Sol
With one consent a happy union shall
Twixt King and Subjects make, and clouds disperse
That be or shall be to our Peace averse.
This to effect, Sir William reach thy hand,
And for thy King with resolution stand
For Peace, for Peace our Gracious King does call,
Peace is that precious Pearl will please us all.
It Is that will make both Church and State to flourish,
Blessed be each Soul the means thereto does cherish.
And blessed art thou (Sir William Waller) when
With heart, and mind to this thou say Amen,
Amen, Amen to this Amen say I,
Amen say all that love His Majesty.
The Fourth Song.
My Muse does now make have into the North,
To taste a Mess of Scottish ill made Broth:
And dine her self with Plummery and Keale
Although she makes a very hungry meal.
And sooth to say, and not at all to jest,
She Will tell you whom she finds at that feast.
BRave Limping Lesley Rebels welcome Guest.
Thy rough and boistrous blast blows North North East
A Wind that is good for neither Man, nor Beast:
And yet enclosed in Concave of thy breast,
Like Eolus thou send'st it forth from thence,
And make thereby a raging violence,
Which does produce a fearful bleeding work;
All to uphold thy factious Scottish Kirk,
And bring a proud and up-start Presbytrie,
To Rule and sway in Englands Monarchy.
And in this work to further thy int^nt,
A Factious Force from England there is sent.
So that the Factious in both Kingdoms are
Against their King met in Rebellious War,
Working ther^ by, each Kingdoms fatal fall
And this to do thou art made a General.
Does Scotlands Kyrk thy actions look upon,
Allowing Ill, that Good may come thereon?
Gods word then sure is not the Rule whereby
They order all their seeming Sanctity.
All of thy Kyrk condemn I must not dare,
Among them sure some Learned Divines there are;
Some that are just, and good, and holy men;
With all my heart I love, and reverence them.
But for the most, the Swing of their intent
Is unto Schism, and Faction chiefly bent.
The Brethren of the Parity are they
Which in Rebellions War do bear most sway;
And for a true religious work allow it;
None of the Faction dare to dis-avow it.
Thou of that Brotherhood a Brother art,
And stand'st, though halting, strongly on their part.
Say not thou art a true Religious man
Thy best is but a Rebel-Puritan;
Thou giv'st a mocking taunt to Purity,
And art but pure Religions Enemy.
Who plainly show by thy Rebellious Course
Thou have no more Religion then a Horse.
Did ever Pure Religion teach this thing
That Subjects might raise War against their King,
For any Cause or seeming good pretense?
No true Religion unto such offense
Does warrant give: That false one does of Rome,
Unto whole Tenent thou do closely come:
Thus as the Devil to the Collyer cried
Like unto Like; So thou with Rome do side.
I care not though thou take my words in Snuff,
I will not fear to give thy Pride a Cuffe.
Thy self, thy words, thy works all rude and rough
Are Bastard-like, base, mis-begotten stuff.
But in the wisdom of thine own conceit,
If thou do think praise on thy Actions wait,
Then must I tell thee out of Wisdoms School,
That thou art left more hopeless then a Fool.
The wisest King that ever Scotland bred
Whose judgment was with understanding fed
In things Divine to clear each rais'd-up doubt
There was like him in all the world through out
Not any King. It was his full intent
To state both Kingdoms in one Government.
That Scholar like King, and King of Scholars He
The English and the Scottish Church did see
Both of one Faith: and that they might agree
In Discipline with fuller unity,
Considering our English Form was found
More pure then that of Scotland, and more sound,
His whole endeavors he did then incline
That Scots might use the English Discipline.
And to that end our Service Book he sent
To them that they therewith might be content:
Which if with Ours it did not full agree,
Upon Complaint it should amended be.
And rightly judging that Episcopy
Was b^st agreeing unto Manarchy,
He labored that Scotlands Church might have
Their learned Bishops, godly, wise, and grave.
By this one Form of Discipline he knew
Both Churches should be one, though they were two
And might appear full strong in their defense,
When in them both there was no difference.
But that blessed work most proudly was withstood
By those that were the Factious Brotherhood,
Whose malice did mischievously contrive
Their Bishops all at once away to drive;
And in despite our Service book they throw
Out of their Church: A better yet I trow,
Nay more, I dare against any undertake
Those Factious Fools could not, can ever make
Scarce one so good. Of one thing I am sure
The Scriptures Test it will throughout endure.
Here now begins Rebellion forth to break,
And Rebels mouths most lavishly do speak
Against Gods Anointed, and belch out this lie,
That he did mean to bring in Popery;
A thing which never came into his thought,
As knowing well what works proud Rome has wrought.
Yet now he finds his factious Subjects all
Are in their works Rome-like, Tyrannical.
And thou (proud General) a man accursed,
If not the worst of all, yet next the worst,
Do as a Chief in their Society
Uphold this work of damned Impiety;
And with thee join our English Schismatics,
The bratts of Hagar, full of mocking tricks.
Our Mother Church you all most proudly scorn,
As Hagar Sarah, and each Isaac born
Of her blessed womb, each child of promise must
With you as Off-scummes out of door be thrust.
None are a Church but those of your new faction;
Lo, how you join with Rome in this your action,
And this your monstrous bui^ding up to rear
Against your King, you proudly Arms do bear;
For why? such sons of Desperation
Can give themselves a Dispensation.
Two famous Kingdoms thus confounded are
By Civil, most uncivil barbarous war.
The secret plot which did this work contrive
Got life long since, though then not seen alive.
To Luds great Town was sent from Edens land,
The Contract which fast joined hand in hand
This factious Crew, by Vow, and Oath to make
This rue-full war, which dangerously does shake
Of either Kingdom their most strong foundation,
And threatens both with direful desolation.
For now ye see the Scottish Covenanter
His Covenant dares to English Lords prefer;
And thereby Englands Subjects sworn must be
Against their King. O matchless Villainy!
Who takes that Oath are perjured every one;
From Faith and Truth they desperately are gone,
No age before produced so vile a thing
That Subjects should be sworn against their King.
One thing there is our Rebels stand upon,
Which does in their Rebellion lead them on;
The King his Oath, and Oath of Subjects all
Are both alike, say they, reciprocal;
And so they are; both must indeed be kept,
But know they have a different respect;
The King his Oath does take with reverend fear
To God alone: But Subjects, they do swear
To God, and to their King. If Kings offend,
It Is God alone that must with them contend,
A power above them; That which is below,
I mean, Those that their Subjects be, must know
They cannot move in any other sphere
Then of Subjection. Whence it is most clear,
As God alone has power 'ore the King,
So Subjects must submit in every thing
Unto their lawful Prince; who power has
To punish Subjects for their breach of Faith.
Let Subjects know it is not in their part,
To say unto their King, Thou wicked art.
Who dares speak so? but such as speak not well,
And proudly dare against their King Rebel,
And most unjustly when they but surmise
The King does against his Oath some plots devise
Which he never minded: Then if Subjects all,
On such suspect shall from obedience fall
And run into Rebellion presently,
All Government is quite destroyed thereby.
If Husbands chance to break their Marriage Vow,
Shall wives against Husbands straight Rebel think you?
And then again much more especially
When wives are moved by cause-lesse Jealousy?
Yet Subjects of our King so moved are
To take up Arms in this Rebellious War.
And thou (proud Lesley) makes thy self a chief,
In working of thy King and Countries grief.
And this must still be for Religions sake,
That makes the Rebels such a coil to make.
The Turk were he to choose Religion now.
He would not be Religious like to you,
Scotch General then go gang thy way along,
Help to uphold the Turkish Alchoran.
At Meca there do thou a Champion set,
And fight thou there for their great Mahomet,
And then by that thy valiant enterprise
Thou may command the Great Turks Janissaries,
Or General be of his Timariot Force,
And so command three hundred thousand Horse;
And rise to be of some great Bashaw's might,
Or Beglebeg, a Lord of Lords in sight.
Here Is Honor for thy high Ambition fit,
Who may make choice of thy Religion yet.
Then stay not here great Britains Isle to spoil,
By mischief of thy proud Rebellions broile.
Thy Scottish Covenant keep among the Scots;
Our English Church and Commonwealth it blots
With Treason against our King uprightly just,
Who gave himself into his Subjects trust:
And that so generally as none before
Was known to do so in the days of Yore.
Shall Subjects then their Sovereigns trust betray,
And against their King foul parts of Treason play?
The Proverb thou do know, it loudly rings,
And tells the world that Scotland bears no Kings.
Would thou of such condition England make?
And spoil her honor with thy Scottish rake?
May judgment first upon thee strongly seize,
And King and Kingdom of that sickness ease.
A work's begun which with infection strong
Infects both Kingdoms by Rebellions wrong.
And can thou Lesley find within thy heart
Such works to do, and take such workers part?
O strange to see! for I have heard thy name
With Honor praised, whereof if true the Fame,
Thou art a Soldier, and with warlike skill
Can in a Battle all thy ranges fill;
And valiantly command an Army so,
As where thou marchest Honor there may go
And so it might in War when Honorable:
Rebellions praise is most abominable.
Quit then thy Honor from dishonours stain;
And march no longer in Rebellions train.
It Is much, too much thou have already done;
Thy self but conquer, there is a Conquest won
Shall make thee great: Great glory shall they win
Who can like Conquerers overcome their sin.
Our good King Charles, Prince Charles, and Noble Duke
Set them before thee, and upon them look
With heart of love: The King deserves no less;
And those sweet Princes do such grace express,
As not an heart unless of Steel or Stone,
But would be moved to love them every one.
Against them all to fight, Offenses such
Do with a mischief Gods Anointed touch.
And yet the Actors, they themselves will style
His Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, while
They Are nothing less: Their actions foul and vile
Do justly them from Subjects name exile.
To see in this how Subjects do proceed;
May justly make the stoniest heart to bleed.
Great Britains Self her self does bite and sting;
Our sins, our sins on us these judgments bring.
What? are the English now of Mad-mans Tribe
To let the Scots to them a Form prescribe
Of Government in Church, and Commonwealths?
And to enforce't for King and Kingdom healths?
No Lesley, no* wise England will not brook
What thy base Faction now has undertook.
Feed then no longer thy deluding hope,
Nor vainly give unto thy fancy scope;
For if thou do, thou will but fool thy self.
And lay thy hopes upon a broken Shelf.
New Covenanters, Ours, and You, Crafty Scots
All base Projectors, full of cosening Plots,
Shall all in Gods good time from England pack,
And work no more our Kings and Countries wrack.
To Englands Rule if Scotland please to yield,
Great Britains Union shall be then upheld.
Renowned King Charles shall from that very day,
With joy the Scepters of both Kingdoms sway.
Gods true Religion then shall firmly stand;
And Britains Isle shall be a glorious Land.
No clouds shall then Eclipse her glorious shine
Among the Nations round about her clime.
Her Peace shall then her safety fortify,
As City built in glorious unity.
Lesley behold a wished for happiness
Which to accomplish thou thy mind address,
If thou indeed religious rightly art,
Religion bids thee take thy Sovereigns part,
And be content in Scotland to abide,
And take what there God does for thee provide;
And never henceforth any inrode make
Into this Land, in Hostile way to take
From Englands King and English Subjects what
To thee, or any of thine belongs not:
Which yet I Would have thee know thou could not do,
Did not our Bastard-English help thereto.
I know it is natural for man to err
But know that Beast-like it is to persevere
In error. Then retract; To King submit
And do what best a Subject may befit.
Strive now for Peace, to Peace thy self betake,
And let an happy Peace thy Period make.
In Peace to live, and so in Peace to dye
Will bring to thee a Peace eternally.
And scorn not him whose pen these lines did write,
His Youth could well in warlike Battle fight,
The Accidence of Arms long since he knew,
And all the Grammar Rules of War did view:
And can dispute the learning of that Art
Even with thy self, were we both set a part.
But now let us both to shield our selves from evil
Fight against our sins, the World, the Flesh, the Devil
My Muse will him a Christian subject sing,
That Fears God, and honors the King.
The fifth Song.
Now that my Muse into the North is come,
She seeks about, as hearing there are some
Who side with Lesley in this shameful War,
Which honest men should from their heart abhor.
My Muse in seeking, one she has found out,
Does tell his name, and so resolves the doubt.
FAirfax, Far fetched, deer bought is good, men say,
For Ladies: yet not if they strain to pay
Too deer a price for all the things they buy;
Such Chap-men turn to Bank-rupts suddenly.
Bank-rupt of Grace it seems that now thou art
Against thy King to take Rebellions part,
And such a King as England never had,
Who did delight to make his Subjects glad
By granting what they justly should desire;
What more could Subjects of their King require?
What fury then inflames Rebellions fire,
And causes Rebels proudly to aspire
To such an height, their Sovereign to compel
To do but what themselves should say is well:
Although it be at once to overthrow
Both King, and Kingdom; which the Powder-blow
Intended: And what that would then have wrought
This now Rebellion to effect has brought
Fair England, which advanced in glory stood,
Is now thrown down into a Sea of blood.
A Jesuit, and Schismatic in evil,
Are both alike the Children of the Devil.
Thou Fairfax art the last, and do so walk;
That future Ages thus of thee will talk;
He hated Rome, and yet made way to bring
A Roman-like Rebellion against her King.
In such a War will thou with Lesley join
And set Religion's Stamp upon thy Coin?
False Coin to make by Law is Treason held,
And such a work thou brought into the field.
A Princely General in's William of Nassaw: Pro Deo, Pro Rege, pro Grege, pro
Lege.
Colors had this clause
For God, for King, for Country, for the Laws,
For these to fight it is a Soldiers praise;
And who so fight their Honors name shall rai^e
In future Ages unto such an height,
As Honor shall on their Memorial wait.
But those that dye in foul Rebellions plot
Their memory, their name shall stinck and rot.
And so shall thine if still thou bear Arms
To work thereby thy Kings, and Countries harms:
And all good Laws to trample under Feet
Is this a work for Noble Subjects meet?
Ignobly sure with shames reproach run they
Who will run on in proud Rebellions way.
I wonder, Fairfax, what it is makes thee fight?
What Bugbear stands in thy judgments sight?
Thy King has promised by Oath and Vow
Against Kingdoms Laws no one thing to allow.
You say His Protestations Verbal are:
'Twere well for all you not so real were;
Then would you not so really intend
Your Gracious King unjustly to offend
For whatsoere our King his word has past
Should be performed from the first to the last,
If Subjects but a Legal way would take
They might be sure he wholesome Laws would make,
And by their Execution give them life,
And so prevent whatsoere should move to strife.
What moves thee then thy Armies on to bring
In Hostile manner against so good a King?
A woeful thing with Lucan 'twas to spy,
Against Roman Eagle, Roman Eagle fly.
Unto our woe our eyes are now descrying
Against Englands Red-crosse, Englands Red-crosse flying.
And Andrew's Cross to fill their Scottish Gorge
Comes flying in against our Englands George.
And English hands with strong Rebellions might
Must Andrew help against themselves to fight.
'Ware England, 'ware: help not the Scots too much.
Lest that mad work produce a danger, such
As may effect that Anchorets Prophecy,
Which Polychronicon does testify. See Heylins Geography, of British Isles.
page 510. English men for that they wonneth them to drunkenness, to Treason,
and to rechlesnesse of Gods house, first by Danes, and then by Normans, and the
third time by Scots, whom they holden least worth of all, they shallen be
overcome. Then the world shall be unstable, and so diverse and variable, that
the unstablenesse of thoughts shall be betokened by many manner diversity of
Clothing.

Both Kingdoms Forces firmly joined may
With boldness to the world most stoutly say
Deal as thou would be dealt with: We not care
To bid our proudest foes do what they dare
Our Force by Sea about the Island round
Was strength enough to keep the Inland sound.
By Sea and Land we now our selves destroy:
Which into Mourning changes all our Joy.
We through the World our Honor might have born,
But now to the world have made our selves a scorn.
And among our selves we have a spo^le begun,
Which all the World against us could not have done.
And yet the workers of our mischief still
Do all run on most desperately in ill.
I^ Fairfax mad or drunk? what dulls thy sense,
Thou can not see the ill of thine offense?
Who eats a Hemlock-root in Parsneps stead,
Is thereby into fits of Madness led.
What Cup of Lethe does thy sense beguile,
And makes thee sleeping dye, and dying smile?
Awake thy self; rowze thy distracted senses:
Rebellion, Treason, are such vile offenses,
As throws thee down into an horrid State,
That God and all Good men thy Actions hate.
As Alexander once was heard to say
To wise Calisthenes, the same I may
Speak unto thee, That wiseman I do hate,
That does not wisely for his own estate. Odi Sophistam qui sibi non sapit.

Wise to thy self learn thou in time to be,
That thou thy straying ways may wisely see.
The fear of God best wisdom does begin;
It will thee reach to see, and know thy sin.
In thine amiss do thou thy self not cherish,
Thy Judge does say thou must repent, or pe^ish.
The Prodigal comes to himself again,
Shows they are mad that do in sin remain.
The Christians Faith not with Repentance joined,
Does argue name of Christian falsely coined:
Believe, Confess, Repent, and sin forsake,
These Graces do a Christian rightly make.
Those men are truly mad which do suppose
Themselves true Christians, whilst they do enclose
Themselves in worst of sins: such Monsters are,
And so art thou in this Rebellious war.
If thou wilt be led by sacred Wisdoms lore,
It will thee then unto thy wits restore.
Thou shall no more in fits of madness run,
Thy madness hurt enough, too much has done
Already: it is time those fits should stay,
Which to thy self, and Country brings decay.
Two Kingdoms will but make a sad conclusion,
When both of them have wrought their own confusion,
Me thinks Jerusalem may cause suspicion,
That we our selves will bring to her condition.
None but seditious Brethren amongst us are
The causers of this most destructive war.
Will valiant Fairfax chief Commander be
In such a War? And where himself may see
His Countries Ruin joined with his own?
O let so vile a thing no more be known:
A danger when foreseen is soon prevented,
It may at last untimely be lamented.
This foul Rebellion not in time withstood
It Is vain to think of Kings and Countries good.
Thy warlike Hands have thou to sin so sold
As by them still Rebellion to uphold?
Is this the way bright Honors Fame to win,
By thy persisting in so damned a sin?
That Honor purchased is at dearest cost,
When Soul and Body both thereby are lost.
Not Honor then, but foul Dishonours shame
Shall wait upon the memory of thy Name
When thou art dead. Do therefore whilst alive
Thy better thoughts within thy self revive.
Each Kingdom in it self divided is,
And each against other. Now the Lord of Bliss,
Even Truth it self has spoken to us all,
No Kingdom in such case can stand but fall.
What have thou done? what is it thou do then?
No b^tter actions then the worst of men.
Such actions do as may thy self commend,
Against King and Country do no more offend.
Thy Country now which thou have made to bleed,
To stanch her blood thy helping hand does need.
Some healing Balm unto thy Country bring,
The Scorpions Oil does heal the Scorpions sting.
Now then resolve with all thy greatest force,
To stop and stay Rebellions wounding course:
Join thou with those that with our King do join,
Religion then no counterfeited Coin
Shall make to pass, but lawful money then
Shall only pass amongst us English men:
King Charles his Image Coin shall lawful make,
And that for current shall his Subjects take;
Though now we are enforced by lawless might
Some things to do as if in Laws despite;
And that by those who should our Laws protect,
Though now they do both King and Laws reject.
The King amongst them does but a Cipher stand;
Their Will's a Law, and unto their Command
Both King and fellow subjects must submit:
O monstrous shame, for Heathens most unfit.
Yet to maintain such Actions most unjust
They take up Arms, and in their Swords do trust.
Against God and King when such Rebellion's raised,
Cursed be those tongues by whom it shall be praised.
To call ill good is an accursed thing,
A Curse it will at last most surely bring.
Who unto Peace do bend their heart, and mind,
Shall out of doubt from God a blessing find.
Then Fairfax, if thou truly valiant art,
Strike in for Peace, and take thy Sovereigns part.
One of thy name long since in Arms I knew
At Groning-Leaguer: and indeed it is true
He was a valiant Captain; Art thou so?
No more against the Lords Anointed go.
No^ fight again against His Majesty,
Nor Actor be in Englands Tragedy.
The Peace of Charles our Sovereign Lord the King,
His Crown, and Dignity, yea, that is the thing
Which honest Subjects strongly should uphold,
And so in Arms of Peace their Country fold.
Fight thou for this, and therein valiant be,
So Honor shall attend, and follow thee.
Know Fairfax that I wish thy happiness,
As thou thy self do unto Peace address.
Peace, Glory, Honor, these shall Crown thee then,
This Peace God grant unto us all, Amen.
The sixth Song.
Amongst Oxen now my Muse desendeth down,
From Hob, to Lob; and so cries Whoo to Brown.
BRown-Bread, and Onions with a Garlike-head
Is Carters meat, So Coridons are fed;
By which strong food, they thereon feeding well,
Their breath is made to have a stinking smell.
So ( Brown) has thine, what Onion (is it I think)
Thou feed'st upon which makes thy breath to stink?
Is It a Scotch Onion which Englands house withstood,
Though now they serve it even in Broaths of Blood?
It seems it is an Onion sharp, and sour,
Which causes many a thousand eyes to power
Forth tears with many a sad and grieved thought
To see what sour effects are thereby wrought.
But ( Brown) art thou of that proud Browns descent Brownists.

Whose Schism at first our Peace in pieces rent?
And of whose name the Brownists have their style, Greenway. Barrow Penry.
Penry flies to Scotland.

Whose foolish Sect can none but Fools beguile:
Yet of such Force, as it has been a terror
To those who love to please themselves in error.
Those Greenway, Barrow, first did break the Ice;
Then Vdall did with Penry join advice.
Three first were hanged: to Scotland Penry fled,
And there abroad his Schism he proudly spread.
The Brethren of the Scottish Parity
Did join with him in all his Knavery.
So that each Kingdom to their trouble felt
The share which Schism and Faction freely dealt
Amongst them; And the holy Br^thren, they
Grew up together; walked in one way,
By vow, and Oath in League and Covenant knit,
To serve each others turn when time should fit.
Now Brownisme, though it was by Law suppressed;
In Corners yet it was too much professed.
And those though silenced would not silence keep;
But Preach at midnight (when 'twas time to sleep)
In Woods, in Cock-lofts, Sellars, Gravel-pits,
(For some such place such Brethren best befits)
There would they pray, and there full often Preach,
And to their Brotherhood Rebellion teach,
And say, They will have Kings unto them subjected.
In cause Ecclesiastical
The King himself can have no power at all.
The Church is governed by her Ministry,
And herein they renounce his Majesty.
The King himself he must a member be,
Of some one Congregation: and He
Must Subject be unto their Church-Divine,
And must submit unto their Discipline.
So Preach the Brethren of the Parity;
And what is this but downright Popery?
But David, Kings Supremacy.
Solomon, each following King
In holy writ sufficient warrant bring,
That every King in his own Kingdom is
Next unto Christ Supreme: And things amiss
In Church or Commonwealth, they all should be
By Him reformed. Without him you may see
No thing is done: His Warrant, His Consent
Is that enables Subjects to Convent,
And ratifies what they conclude upon:
So that without him nothing can go on
Priests, Highpriests are by Kings preferred: They can
At pleasure place, and displace any man.
Kings hold their Crown from God* He that is King
Does in his Kingdom rule in every thing.
Such is His Dignity and Royal State,
All powers else are but subordinate
To Him: And Subjects ranged in their List,
The powers which are of God must not resist,
For if they do, against God themselves they set:
And shall thereby his high displeasure get
Kings take their place next under-neath their God,
To Him alone they must be left. His Rod
Is only that which over-aweth them,
And not the Words, nor Rodds, nor Swords of men,
Who being Subjects only must obey:
These no Commission have to over-sway
Their King. If Brown against this his reasons bring,
He Will reason like a Traitor to his King.
And those his Priests who against this truth do Preach,
Do Treason and Rebellion plainly teach.
Amongst them too sorts of Brownists may be found, Two sorts of Brownists.

Both building on the one and self same ground.
And both alike uphold Rebellion's Action:
Uprais'd by Schism, and by seditious faction.
The first, The first sort.
least dangerous, do separate
Themselves from this our Church, and dare to prate
Against this their Mother Nation, and deny
That here the being of a Church does lie.
To build their Church to Amsterdam they run,
But lose their labor when they thither come:
For why? The States will not allow them there
The honorable name of Church to bear.
They an Asse-sembly are: not named Holy:
So well discerned is their Factions folly.
Some years there spent, at last from thence they go,
As wise, as Walthams Calf; for we must know
They hither come, into blind Corners creep:
And there is their Church; There they like Cocks-combs keep.
And Ignorant of sound Divinity,
They rail against our Churches Ministry.
And on our Church this foul aspersion put They Rule against our Church.

That she is of the Popish Roman cut.
Nay, more then this; for thus they lay it on,
They call our Church the Whore of Babylon.
They learning hate; an Ancient Fathers name
Must not be used by them, the more's their shame.
Yet amongst themselves they reverend Fathers have
Of wisdom great, Their Reverend Fathers.
of carriage finely grave.
First Father Cromp the Cobbler he shall stand,
As being always on the mending hand.
And Father Wills the Weaver cries down theft,
Although to steal the Yarn he has not left.
Then Father Talk the Patcher he will try
To Preach, though quite besides the needles eye
He put his thread: He Will overcast his Text,
And prating speak what to his Tongue comes next.
His Flock of Ge^se for good his gaggling take,
Though Botcher-like he marres what he does make.
And Father Axe the Butcher has a vain,
That Is very killing: All the Calves lie slain
As at his Feet; so powerful is his preaching,
And Fools so love his Kill-Calf kind of Teaching.
But Father Thunder, that is a man of zeal,
Can eat a well-siz'd Pigge even at a meal:
He with his Thundering voice would Babel shake,
When yet himself does but a Babel make,
The Ass though fold^d in a Lions Skin,
Yet when to bray he does but once begin,
He proves himself a Long-card-Asse to be
And brayeth forth his Asse-like fool^ry.
Then Father Bear, that swinish grunting grub,
A ^reacher strange, O how he will thump a Tub.
And Tr^sh the T^nker, in he fiercely comes,
The Drummer of those rattling Kettle-Drummes;
Among them all a noise they make as good,
As do the Cataracts of Nilus flood;
Of which experience for a truth does tell
They Are all made deaf who near their noise do dwell.
In that same Nilus Cro^adiles do breed
Who love themselves upon mankind to feed.
And so those Preachers spoken of before,
Make lean their flock to fat themselves the more.
And then forsooth Fine simpering Mistrisse Pegge
Who likes her best must have the Capons Leg. Their zealous Prayers.

And all of them have wondrous gifts in Prayer:
Petitions such as strongly pierce the Air.
The same Petition they will often repeat,
And bring themselves and Hearers to a sweat.
With voice, and gesture strangely violent
Against King, Church, State, they show their discontent.
They backward, forward, to and again do trace,
As if they running were the Wild-Goose chase:
Their zeal so drives themselves they know not whither:
And praying thus, they will pray four hours together.
These by their powerful zeal, and zealous power,
To Widows Houses creep, and them devour.
All men of Spirit, Holy Fathers named,
Who have our Church and true Religion shamed.
And these proud Fools they dare their King control,
For Church upholders these their names enroll.
This is good stuff, like Popish Friety,
Fit to uphold the Churches Dignity.
All Brownists, those without, and they within
Our Church* are equal in Rebellions sin.
These Brownists do our Bishops next oppose, They rail against Bishops.

And in their zealous pride affi^m of those,
That Limbs of Roman Antichrist they be,
By which the world their Ignorance may see
And laugh thereat: The singular piety of Roman Bishops in the first 300. years.
For plainly it appears
That Rome her self in first three hundred years
Had Ruling Bishops numbered thirty two,
Who only had in their own See to do.
And most of them who did not in their bed,
For Christ's his Cause to Martyrdom were led;
For whom to dye they were exceeding g'ad,
This Honor they, Bishop's Subject to the Em^perour.
those Ruling Bishops had.
And yet when Constant^^e was pleased to call
First Nicene Councel^ truly General*
Then under him, and his ^mperiall Sea^
There came together in that Council Great
Three Hundred Eighteen Bishops, And all these
Were Ruling Bishops in the^ several Sees*
That Blessed Council to the Church gave Peace
And did her bloody Persecutions cease.
And after that were Bishops thirty three,
Which sa^e Succ^ssively in the Roman See
Over them the Emperor was Sovereign Lord
Unto whose Ruling power with one accord
They all did humbly yield themselves* And they
Next under God did His command obey.
Unto the year six hundred ^ive it is clear,
Full fifty five Romes Bishops did appear,
Who were to the Emperor true Subjects ^ound, Boniface the Pope the first
Roman Bishop that exa^^d himself above all other Bishops.

The word of Truth had laid no other ground.
But in the year six hundred, near the end
The Roman Bishop sixty six no friend
Was found to God, or Church: For then by name
Came Boniface the third, past Grace, and shame;
He first the style of Universal took,
And proudly did all Bishops over look:
That Time, and person, if observed well,
Does unto us a special secret tell,
The Year six hundred, Bishops sixty six,
The learned do the Beasts name rightly fix The number of the Beast 666. made
up in him.

On him for Antichrist so long foretold
In Holy Scripture where it stands enrolled*
How Universal Priest he came to be,
The story of the Church does let us see.
When Ph^cas had the Emperor Maurice slain,
Unto himself the Empire then to gain* How Boniface came to be Universal
Bishop by Phocas.

He prays that Boniface would then comply
With him in that his Treasons Villainy.
And Vows if he but once the Empire get;
That Boniface in Church Supreme shall set*
Be Universal Bishop: only he
In Christian world the highest Lord should be,
By whose command all Bishops might be pressed
To yield obedience to his Lordly Hest:
This was the match. The Empire Phocas had,
And Boniface the Highest Priest was made.
Thus Treason unto him conception gave;
And Murder then the Mid-wifes part would have:
Ambition was his Nurse; The Milk him fed
An Emperors blood by Phocas murdered.
So that the Legs whereon he proudly stood
Were these, Ambition, Treason, Murder, Blood.
Since on such grounds Romes Papacy does stand:
What good is to be looked for at their hand?
Yet will I not condemn all Papists: Many Papists good Su^jects.
Nor
Can think it a blessed work, (which I abhor)
To kill those that amongst us do remain:
For some we have, free from the Jesuits strain;
Who, if the Pope himself in Arms should bring
An Army against the Kingdom, and our King,
To King and Country would their love express,
And boldly fight against his Holiness.
Though many Papists have been much misled,
This is the mind of those not Jesuited. The Auth^rs disaffection to Popery.

And for my speaking thus let no man doubt,
But still I wish to keep Romes Popery out.
And though you say you saw it very plain,
That Popery was coming in a main, Our Laws of Force to keep out Popery.

Laws ready made, not one of them repealed:
They justly would that mischief soon have healed
Without Rebellions help. O bloody deed!
Against all Laws like Tyrants to proceed!
Browns Brownists then in this Rebellion, who
Are now the Rebels? Papists? No, but you.
The false Scandal of Bishops bringing in Popery.
And though you think that now our Bishops are
Most Popish: yet they never once did War
Against our King, as you do at this day;
And y^^ of them you are not ashamed to say
That in th'intention of their Policy
They sought again to bring in Popery:
When they but thought in one conformity
To state the Church, her Peace to dignifie.
If Bishops all the self same thing had minded,
It had been well, as now too late we find it;
Next to the Faith the Churches Peace to keep,
Which broken now makes thousand eyes to weep.
Faiths Doctrine when it is kept uprightly sound
Should outward Form the Churches Peace confound?
Our God, you know, the God of Order is,
Each Christian King had always power in this,
In his own Kingdom to determine so,
As all the Church might in one Order go
In outward Form of Church-like Government.
His Majesty unjustly Scandalized for intending to bring in Popery.
To which because our King his purpose bent,
Must your Rebellious Tongues with one Consent,
Say that it was his Majesty's intent
Again, for sooth, to bring in Popery?
In plain Terms truth to speak, Rebels ye lie.
Though the late Roman Bishops have erred from the Truth: yet the Bishops of
the Church of England have stoutly defended the Truth.
Though Roman Bishops now are found to swerve
From Rule of Truth, must Bishops all deserve
To be accounted Popes? What have they don
Since Reformation in our Church begun?
Our Princes have stood for it. King Edward.
King Edward and His Bishops they drove out
Romes Popery: and with resolution stout
Withstood proud R^mes usurpt Suprema^i^,
And did our Churches evils remedy. Queen Elizabeth.

Our Queen Eliza with the full consent
Of Englands then most happy Parliament,
Where all her Reverend Bishops jointly met,
(For they in Parliament have always set)
King Edwards Laws confirmed, and did scorn
By Papal power to be overborn.
King James with his grave Bishops did comply King James.

To write against Rome, and that most learnedly;
And in despite of Rome and Romes disdain
Our Englands Church did in her Peace maintain;
And would not suffer any factious brain
The honor of her settled Peace to stain.
And our King Charles, King Charles.
and all his Bishops, they
Do hold their course even in the self same way.
Our good King, and his Bishops now condemned,
Should rather for their care be much commended.
Old Rome at first with pious Bishops filled, Ol^^ Romes Religion, and our
now-Religion all (...).

Our now-Religion was by them upheld.
Their Bishops all for first six hundred years,
As ours now are, they were, as it appears
When Bishop Iewel's Challenge could not gain
One Romish Bishop able to maintain
Romes now-Religion, in those points we fall
Away from that which we do Popery call
Why are our Bishops then so much despized?
No new Religion is by them devised.
The old Religion is by them revived:
Who never yet so vil^^ thing contrived
As you have done* when for Religions sa^e
You do most vile Rebellion lawful make.
Of Bishops Protestants I know this thing,
None ever proved a Traitor to his King.
Let Brownists then our Bishops let alone,
And know themselves for Rebels every one.
For what though some defects there might be found
In some of them? Yet firmly stands this ground,
A personal defect never takes away
The Lawfulness of Place, but still that may
Be kept: For this the Rule has always bin,
Uphold the place but take away the sin.
But now the place must quite unlawful be
When some defects we do in persons see.
Way given to this, what Place can firmly stand?
Behold what course the Factious take in hand.
But (which is strange) as Bishops they defy,
So they against our Churches Prayers do cry, Brownists except against the
Churches, set Forms of Prayer.

And say the Church of Christ is much abused,
When those good Prayers of our Church are used.
The Church to give set forms of Prayer! Now fic,
Where Is then the Spirit, which immediately
Inspires the Church, and all her Ministry
To pray to God, and that effectually?
Know, And are answered.
Moses did set forms of Prayer prescribe
To Isreal's people, even to every Tribe
Which should be used when they in hand did take
Their ^ourney with Gods Holy Arc to make, Number. 10. 25. ^0.

Both at the taking up when they began
Their daily March and when at even they came
Unto their Resting Place. Like holy form
By those by whom the Glorious Arc was born
Was used in Prayer. Number. 6. 22, to 27.
These Form^ Moses gave
Unto the Church: Does he deserve to have
It said, Fie on Him, for his doing so?
What God allows who dare to it say no?
Gods word a form of blessing does express
And wills his Church in blessing so to bless.
Then fie on those who cannot now ab^de
Set forms of Prayer, but do them deride.
Know, holy David Songs of Prayer and Praise
Did form and pen, that thereby he might raise
The hearts of all Gods People up on high
To pray unto, and praise the Majesty
Of our great God, with Prayers and Praises fit,
Which might in them an holy zeal beget:
And then those Psalms unto the Church he sent,
Which there unto our God he did present.
Was then (think you) the Church of God abused
By them by whom those holy forms were used?
Our holy Common Prayer Book first penned
By those who did for Christ their blood expend, The compilers of our
Common Prayer Book.

Should not I think) be as it is, depraved
By wilful Fools, who will a Masse-book have it.
Those that compiled it Romes Mass did hate,
And Englands Church in true Religion state.
Those then by whom that Book is now refused,
By them God and his Church is most abused.
And yet at this we need not wonder much;
For why? Brownists despise the Lords Prayer. Barrow.
their pride and arrogance is such,
As even that Prayer which Christ himself did make
They most blas^h^ mously in scorn do take.
When Barrow stood at Tyburn in a Cart,
Under the Gallows, praying in his heart,
The lookers on to him did humbly say,
In the Lords ^rayer, Sir, let us hear you pray:
He shal't his head; and did refuse to do it,
And so was hanged: Their pride may bring them to it.
But yet there do some other things remain
Which (they account) do so Religion stain, Brownist^ against wholesome
Ceremonies

As those to use they highly do disdain.
And would all others should with them refrain
To touch such trash, or near them once to come,
As being Relics of the Church of Rome.
In outward things who do Religion place,
To true Religion do a foul disgrace.
But what things are they that their Conscience scare?
O, Monstrous things! Such as most fearful are,
I Will show you them: and so you will clearly see.
What terrible, and fearful things they be.
Our harmless Ceremonies do them fright;
Our Gesture, Habit; each of them a Spright,
And scares them. Now by this you may descrie
The strangeness of their fearful foolerie.
Should things indifferent Divisions make? They ought not to separate from the
Church for things indifferent.

When Truth commands that for Christ his sake,
To every Ordinance of man, not bent
Against the Faith, we be obedient.
The Conscience should be ruled by Rule of faith:
And what I say I Am sure the Scripture says.
But factious Fools to give themselves content
Have worse then Roman Soldiers basely rent
The unscam'd Coat of Christ in pieces: and
To justify their work, in Arms they stand.
So that our Brown with Brownists now consents
Even to dispute with cutting Arguments.
Brown, no less fearful seems thy Cocks-comb head,
Then Lion Rampant in Cake Ginger bread.
But stay (my Muse) thy mark thou take amiss,
For Brown will say that he no Brownist is:
No? Is he not? He is as bad, or worse,
As now appears by his Rebellious course.
Though Brownists from our Church do separate,
They cannot thereof overthrow the state
So dangerously as those amongst us staying, The second sort of Brownists.
Burton. Bastwick. Prynne. Great undertakers.

Who still appear our Churches Peace betraying.
Here the Triumviri which first begin
To lead the way unto Rebellions sin
Are Burton, Bastwick, and their brother Prynne
The stinking Sink of honored Lincolnes-Inne.
These three the Church and Commonwealth would sway,
All men of greatest Understanding. They
Would seem to see all dangers imminent,
And seeming ones with mischief to prevent;
These lay their Plot upon which ground now stands
The Armies of Rebellions armed hands.
I know them all, Rebellion upon mere Iealousies.
and for them have been sad
To see that they no more discretion had.
In every thing that counsel is not just
Which thus prescribes, To be sure, mistrust.
Moved by mere jealousies (the more's their guilt)
They throw down Outworks where no Fort is built.
For what they saw they should not so have spoken, The Princ's Care to keep out
Popery.

The Lion sleeps when yet his eyes are open.
There was a care Romes Popery to withstand,
Even in those things which then were tool in hand^
Yet they cry out, Sail not too near Romes Gates
Lest Popery prevail: thus talked these Mates.
Those that would in the way of Truth prevail,
Must sailing unto Heaven by Hells Gates sa^^e.
And yet their course in all things wisely steer,
As Rocks, and Shelves, and Sands they never fear.
The Churches Ship in this worlds Sea thus sailing,
Against Rocks, and Shelves, and Sands shall be prevailing.
And those that thus in sailing wisely strive,
At last in Heavens fair Haven shall arrive
But they so ill a course (like wise-ones) took,
As on a Dangerous Rock the Ship is struck:
And must into a general shipwreck fall,
If this Rebellious War continue shall.
In which thou ( Brown) a great Commander art,
And Brownist art in taking of their part.
But all this while I cannot but admire
What things they are these Rebels do require: The upholding of true Religion
pretended by the Rebels; but truly performed by King Charles.

Is it the true Religion to uphold?
This to defend, our King is wondrous bold.
His Royal person into th'Field to bring,
And to his Subjects say, Behold your King
Complete in Arms Religion to defend,
And for the same his dearest blood to spend.
And in this Cause Prince Charles with valiant spirit
Does nobly seek true Honors fame to merit:
And in th'atchievement of this glorious work,
We may behold the Princely Duke of York.
This sight but seen should make Rebellion cease,
And move all Subjects to embrace a Peace
So often offered by his Royal Grace:
Why should not this in every Heart take place?
If in this war the Royal blood be spilt,
Can England ever wash away the guilt? The Rebels intent to root out Papists.

What is your aim? All Papists out to root?
Is this the mark whereat your minds do shoot?
This but suspected, Papists on their Guard
Would stand: and so your Market might be marred.
They do not want the best Intelligence:
There Is not a Kingdom, but they hear from thence.
And whatsoere against them is debated,
Is by some speedy means to them related.
And sure it is, that they did understand
Three Kingdoms Schismatics joined hand in hand
A strong Rebellion by degrees to raise, The Schismatics of all three Kingdoms
join to make up this Rebellion.

Whose first beginning should be Scotlands praise.
And in that work, although most closely arted,
The Papists knew they chiefly should have smarted:
Have been destroyed every Mothers Child;
At best should be perpetually exiled.
This Mine perceived, a Counter Mine was wrought,
Which to effect in Ireland first was brought. Scotland must begin it.

Not Papists there, they Schismatics did call;
As here not Schismatics were Papists all.
First Irelands Mine did spring; and up were blown
The Protestants of English Nation. Rebellion in Ireland.

Thus did this bloody War take its beginning,
From Web of woe our Schismatics were spinning
For Papists. The Moneys gathered for suppressing the Rebels in Ireland
converted to maintain Rebellion in England.
Now when Ireland thus br^ke forth,
Resolved to go on by Vow, and Oath,
Our Parliament was trusted to address
Some present means Rebellion to suppress.
And Moneys raised were to this intent,
That presently an Army should be sent
To Ireland: but then suddenly did break
Rebellion forth here amongst our selves to speak
The Truth) contrived long before:
Rebellion here increasing more, and more,
By Moneys here for Irelands cause collected,
An homebred sad Rebellion was protected.
Which spares no man's livelihood, nor life,
But strikes at all: and still does grow more ri^e.
Wherein our good King Charles has saddest share.
His sorrows being deep beyond compare,
His Royal Heart from grief to grief proceeding,
To see that all his Kingdoms lie a bleeding.
Herewith when as my mourning Muse had met,
Teers from my eyes my blotted Papers wet.
The more, because Our King still offered Peace:
Yet Rebels would not from Rebellion cease.
What hearts have they? whence do they draw their might?
Against King so good can any subject fight?
But next unto pretens'd Religions cause,
They say they fight for to maintain the Laws
Of Englands Kingdom, The Rebels pretend maintaining the Laws a cause of taking
up Arms.
and the Subjects Right:
For these they bring their Armies forth to fight.
O shameless boldness, that dares this aver!
When all the Kingdoms Laws by this their War
They overthrow, so much as in them lies:
T'uphold the Kingdoms Laws, His Majesty's
Great Care is known: he nothing more desires;
The Magna Charta's that which he requires
Should stand in force, of Englands Laws the ground.
And in that Magna Charta there is found
A solemn Curse which does most sharply speak
Against those who shall our Laws foundation break,
Though not pronounced at our Great Courts down setting,
Yet still it speaks, a Curse on those begetting
Who shall our Kingdoms National Laws destroy:
And Childrens Children may that Curse enjoy.
But this Rebellion Subjects Right does seek
As it the former does: The Subjects Right destroyed by this Rebellion.
for both alike
Are over-thrown by it. The Laws maintain
The Subjects Right: by Law the Subjects gain
Their just propriety in every thing:
This to uphold our just and righteousse King
Commands his Judges: wherein if they fail,
The Law does then against themselves prevail.
Feign would the King at White Hall Palace be,
That thence he might his Reverend Judges see
In Order each unto their Courts to pass:
O what a singular blessed sight it was.
For Christ himself does say, Kings reign by me,
I Judges make my Justice to decree.
The King and Judges out of this way kept,
The Kingdom is of her just Laws bereft,
Who are they then that Subjects Right debar?
The King, or those that against the King make War
Admit some wrongs against Law the Subjects grieved,
Were they not by our Gracious King relieved
In those last Statutes which he pleased to make.
But now for making Laws new ways we take.
The Subject dares against his Sovereigns will
Make Laws, what Age can president such ill?
That lawless man the Antichrist of Rome
Within the bounds of Law will never come:
Divine, and Humane Laws, he breaks them all:
And Rules by a power Tyrannical:
He standing on high terms does proudly say
That he will never any King obey.
His will is that which for a Law shall stand.
The greatest King must yield to his Command.
That Court whose pride unto such height is Tric't
Is sure therein a very Antichrist:
And every one of Antichrist a Limb
Who hoyseth Sails, and does his Tacklings trim
(Like men of War) such Actions to defend
As do against his King and Country bend.
Your Preachers, your seditious Preachers are
The Whelps that cry up this Rebellious War:
"And say, if the Kings party overcome,
"Woe to us all, Seditious Ministers, the sum of their Sermons.
the Kingdom is undone.
"And Popery then the upper-hand shall have:
"This, this, (deer Br^thren) all the Papists crave.
"Withstand them then: prevent our misery
"Which will be wrought by Papal Tyranny.
"Our Laws will all be then quite overturned:
"And Christ's deer Flock with fire, and Faggot burned.
"Let all good Christians then (as Scripture says)
"With might and main strive to defend the Faith:
"Religions Cause is that we have in hand:
"This to defend against King and Ke^sar, stand.
"Gods word does warrant that in Cases such
"We cannot show our love and zeal too much.
Such lies they do with monstrous zeal express,
And nonsense words, and that in great exc^sse:
They box their Desks, and Pulpits bottom stamp,
Are drawn awry as with Convulsions Cramp.
If loud and fast their lying Tales they tell,
They (...) Church men, Pr^^^h most monstrous well.
These are the zealous men, for so they are called,
That have (...) so dangerou^^y ^enthrali'd;
These and th^^ followers full of zeal Igrant:
But all true ^nowledge and discretion want.
And hence it is they in their zeal desire
To set, and see the Kingdom all on fire.
Yet some thing else Rebellion goes about, This Rebellion would root out the
honorable that the common people might rule.

Which is to root our Kingdoms Honor out:
The many headed Beast sole Rule would have;
Our Honor then lies buried in that Grave.
A Noble people once the English were;
And did aloft their Honor Nobly bear:
And shall we now dishonourably choose
New shame to get, and Ancient Honor loose?
From best to worst, from Monarchy to fall
To Oligarchy, bafest Rule of all?
Brave Noble minds in England Nobly bred
Over us to Rule: Let not that Hydra's head
King Charles advance, to's Honors him restore;
And state this Kingdom as it was before,
With this let all most wisely be content;
And strive no more for change of Government.
Their seeking so the thing for which they sought
Has a most miserable ruin brought
Upon this Land; The Kingdom rent and torn,
Is like a City ruined, and forlorn.
Those things which did her Glory best adorn
Rebellion spoils, and makes of them a scorn.
Those two most famous Universities
Fair Englands Beauty, and her Starre-bright eyes,
From whence there did such glorious Lights arise,
As that the splendor of their glorious shine,
Did spread it self through every Zone, and Clime
In all the world, Is It not a wondrous sight
To see, as now, that Sunne-like shining light
To be Eclips't whose once most heavenly rays
Was honored with such deserved praise?
Those goodly Halls, and Stately Colleges
The Seed-plots of the liberal Sciences,
The fountain-heads of every pleasant spring
About whose Banks did all the Muses sing,
Where Scholars lived, and some so wondrous rare,
As might for learning with the world compare;
From whence was wont into the Church to flow
Those blessed means which made her glory grow,
And bring forth fruit of greatest dignity,
A Reverend, Grave, and Learned Ministry.
Who being Orthodox with Spirit bold,
The Truth against Romes false Doctrines did uphold.
But now our Church whosoever but looks upon her,
Shall see her robbed of all her pristine Honor:
And Scholars are enforced to lay aside
Their learned Books, and for themselves provide
As Soldiers furnished in complete Arms,
To shield themselves from present threatened harms,
And save their lives, and all their Colledge-Lands,
Out of the reach of Rebels spoiling hands.
No Heathens yet would once dare to deface
Their Idol-Gods, nor to the ground to raze
Their Pagan Temples: But we now far worse
Then they, have robbed our God* and brought a curse
Upon us all, which may cradicate
Our Kingdoms Glory, and so leave her state
As wholly ruined, waste, and desolate.
And this to do Rebel on does not stay,
But runs on, even in the ready way.
For next the Church what did our Kingdom grace
They seek to spoil, and utterly deface,
The Innes of Chan^^ry, and Innes of Court
Where Englands Gentry used to resort
And study there, that they might wisely learn
All points of Law with Judgment to discern;
Those Houses where the Ancients ruled so
As all did in a comely order go;
And able were a King to entertain
With Honors due unto his Royal train:
These all our Honor greatly did augment
They did in them a kind of state present,
Which did the glory of our Land advance,
Now spoiled by Obnoxious Ignorance;
Laws Divine, Humane, Civil, Common, all
Are trodden down by force Tyrannical
It Is then high time, we should our sins repent
For they are cause of all our punnishment
But now because a present bloody broyle
The Peace of England does destroy and spoil,
What may be done a Peace for to restore
To King and Kingdom? What is to be done to restore Peace.
nothing wished for more,
Why, This to do I nothing will invent
But what I learn by actual president.
Romes self it seems does now desire a Peace;
And that all Wars in Christian world may cease
Since Gregory the first, Surnamed the Great;
Urban the 8th who sat in Romes high seat
Of all their Bishops was the very best, Pope Urban the 8.

His like was never found among the rest.
And this I think of him, that su^e he would
Have been a Protestant, if that he could.
He doubtless loved a Protestant in's heart,
And would not against them take the Papists part.
In Germane Wars he nothing would decree
On either part; but wished they might agree.
For whilst they strived each other to confound,
No Peace could grow out of so bad a ground.
Experience taught Romes Church this Truth to know;
When as their Priests did seeds of Treason sow,
And thereby spoiled the Protestant Estate,
And did Reformed Churches ruinate.
The Plots whereby they kept so great a coil
Themselves thereby at last did chiefly spoil.
A Peaceful way Romes Bishop then intended, Protestants and Papists to live
lovingly together. The French Cardinal.

Which was of all the best to be commended.
In outward form the Papists well may stand
With Protestants, affording friendships hand
Each unto other. That French Cardinal
Who sought a Peace most wisely to enstall
In that French Kingdoms Royal Government,
About that work he with such wisdom went
As that by him the Protestants protected,
Their Faiths Allegiance never was suspected:
For they themselves did as good Subjects bear
Unto their King: He had no cause to fear
Them any whit at all; For, as was meet,
They ready were down at their Sovereigns Feet
To lay their lives their Countries Peace to gain;
For this they would themselves to the utmost strain.
There now when Protestants and Papists meet,
They do most lovingly each other greet.
If such a course amongst us were wisely taken,
The Sword of War should be no longer shaken
Against our Peace. Our King should Papists find
As Protestants in France to bear like mind.
Then Protestants and Papists surely would
Our King, and Kingdoms Peace alike uphold.
And those that did attempt this way to try,
They did not deal therein unfaithfully,
Shall I for this a Papist judged be?
And one that would uphold Romes Popery? Romes Church was as ours now is.

'Twixt Roman Church and Poperies rule therein
I know not but a difference may be seen.
Romes Church had once no Universal Power,
But was in Faith and Truth a Church like our,
Romes being of a Church not quite distruct,
Rome still a true Church is, though much corrupt.
From Rome as she is a Church we do not sever.
But where she is corrupt, in that we leave her.
The Scripture has to us this truth revealed,
We Babylon would heal, she would not be healed.
Come out of her Corruptions then with haste,
Lest staying in them we her judgments taste,
Romes Church that was we must thereof allow;
We only shun those vile corruptions now.
Which are in Rome, and do that Church deface:
We dare not for our Souls such stuff embrace.
With Papists yet in outward things we may
Hold such a Peace as does not Truth gainsay.
This Truth Saint Paul does by his Doctrine reach,
And so indeed does his example preach,
To Jews a Jew, to Greeks a Grecian Paul
Would show himself, becoming all to all,
That he might by his sacred Ministry
Gain some to Christ. And why then may not I,
In imitation of so holy a Saint,
My self with those of Roman stamp acquaint?
When Paul himself does thus the Church advise,
Have Peace with all as much as in you lies.
This may be done Faith kept uprightly sound,
For we our Faith upon Gods word do ground.
The sacred certain grounds of our Salvation
Our Church will hold without an alteration;
Those Fundamentals are, and must be kept:
Romes newer Creed by us to Rome is left.
But to disturb the Peace of God and King,
For what is but a Circumstantiall thing,
A Ceremony, we, in sober sadness,
Do utterly abhor such factious madness.
Who for such things themselves in Faction suit,
A Bride-well School may best with them dispute.
And still the better honest minds to stay,
And drive from them all jealous fears away,
Let no man fear in Christian world to see
The Papal Monarchy advanced to be.
Free Kings and Princes now so wise are grown,
As under Christ they know to hold their own;
And not admit Romes Papal Jurisdiction
Which to the world has wrought such great affliction.
Shall it again a work of praise be counted,
To mount up him by whom themselves dismounted
Have been so shamefully? Kings will nor be
The Stirrop-holders to Romes Papacy:
The Pope, His Ass, the Emperor shall be
No more brought on the stage to make up three:
Romes Triple-Crowned Prince shall at no rate
With what is theirs, nor they with his estate
Once meddle; He his Oar shall never thrust
Into another boat, for that is unjust,
And so will prove when Judgment once comes thither,
When He, and Rome in flames shall burn together.
Christ's Church to have an Universal Head
Besides himself, must not be seen, nor said.
Pope Gregory the Great shot not beside
The mark, who called it Antichristian pride.
Deer Protestants then let your hopes not quail,
For of great power is truth, and will prevail.
All Protestants in truth who tightly are
Let them the Peace of God, and King prefer.
Gods Spirit which into all Truth does lead,
In Scripture for the Churches Peace does plead:
And does beseech to mark with diligence
The causers of all Schism, and difference;
And to avoid them. For indeed such are
The causers, raisers of Rebellious War.
I would to God each Brownist, Seperatist,
Each Anabaptist, and each Familist
The brats of strife, and workers of Division,
Whose Tenets Sound Divines have in Derision,
Were either banished out of Englands ground,
Or here to punish them some course were found.
Laws ready made, if executed well,
Have Force enough their Factions to refell.
These have a new Division made, most strange,
Which has in Subjects wrought a dangerous change.
The Person of the King they set a side;
And to the Laws His Royal Power divide.
A strange Division whereby Subjects may
Rebel against their King, yet Laws obey.
When as the Laws do in the King subsist;
His Royal Person gives to them their list
If Laws be none of his, whose are they then?
The Laws of Subjects given to other men
Who, as themselves, are Subjects, and no more.
This is a strain of wit not known before.
A Constable with power is heard to say,
I charge you in the Kings name to obey:
His Laws then in his Person do subsist:
And those who them, His Person do resist,
His Crown, and Dignity, and every thing
Which does adorn the Person of a King.
These are the Sophisters whose slye dispute
Enwrapt the Kingdom in a Mourning Su^e.
Had five of them at first been put away:
It had been happy for us at this day.
Westminster builded was a Monument
Of Regal State, and power Magnificent.
Westminster now a Monument has built,
Which stains her Glory with Rebellions guilt.
That Cloud dispers't, a Sun will shine upon her;
And her restore unto her Ancient Honor.
The Kings, and Countries Peace from her shall flow,
And make them both in glory up to grow.
That man, or woman is too much to blame,
Whose heart and mind does not desire the same.
If Protestants would all in one agree
That true Religion might upholden be,
And as d^er Children of our holy Mother
The Church of Christ in England love each other,
And keep the truth of Faith with full consent,
Submitting to our Churches Government,
We then might Peace enjoy; and every one
Be both true Christian, and good Subject known.
And let not Fools though they Divisions see,
Think that amongst us no Church of Christ can be;
The Spouse, though black, yet like the tents of Keder
She comely is; and on the mounts of Bether That is to say, Divisions.

Her glorious Husband Jesus Christ is found
As Roe, or Heart about that Hilly ground
In Christ his Church offenses will fall out,
But woe to those by whom they are brought about: know
Christ knows his own; they him their Shep heard
This Church of Christ no power can overthrow.
In England Christ has his beloved choice;
And those are they who hearken to his voice,
And follow him unto their last of breath,
And he will pr^serve them both in life and death.
His Church as Tirzah does appear in sight
Most beautiful, her glory shining bright:
And as an Army terrible is she
With Banners spread: Her foes will fear to see
The Majesty of Her well ordered form,
Which threatens them with a most fearful storm.
The Captain of Iehovahs Host does lead
The Battle on: He for his Church will plead:
And those who will not his commands obey,
He all of them will in his presence slay.
This Church is Solomon's delightful Bed,
For whose defense His Warr^ers expert bred
About it stands, and will defend it well,
As valiants for his chosen Israel.
In Arms they watch their Armor shining bright,
Because of fears which may be in the night,
There Legions of Angels pitch their Tents;
Right glorious is the strength of that defense
Which keeps the Church: In it Divisions bred
Shall never divide the Body from her Head.
There is a time in which her Wars shall cease;
The unity of Spirit in bond of Peace
Shall then be kept, when Subjects, and their King
Unto their God shall thankful Praises sing.
And would thou ( Brown) be of that Heavenly Quire?
A better spirit must thy soul inspire,
Then that thou now do breathe with: For above
(Know) that there is no room for such as love,
And live in ways of Blood, and Rebels are
To God, and his Anointed: Such are far
Out of the way to Heaven. I must thee tell
It is thy Case; thy ways lead swift to Hell:
Thy soul is sick unto the death: O take
Some course that may thy Soul right healthy make.
I once will be thy Doctor, and will give
Thee a Receipt, which used will make thee live
Ith'state of Grace a Christian sound, and right
To Godward and thy King: That when the night
Of death shall come, thou shall thy Savior see
Unto thy endless joys embracing thee.
And here because the Trade thou best do know
Is that of Wood-monger, I will thee show
To make a Faggot which shall do the deed,
And work a perfect cure in thee with speed:
A Faggot of full length, and equal size,
It shall be, and beyond all wordly prize.
"Take thou Repentance, Faith, Hope, Love: with these
"Take Peace; these to the purpose will thee please,
Faith joins with Truth; Hope will not them forsake;
Loves joins the sticks, and Peace the bond does make
Which binds the Faggot strongly up together.
Such Faggots make for London: send them thither;
Lud's people move of thee to buy their wood,
Wood-mongers Wharf has none that is hall so good.
Full sure I am, were it their hearts desire
Of Faggots of this kind to make their Fire,
It would their cold and frozen joints refresh,
And make them new, and hearty joys express;
Their Gates they would open, and their Bells would ring,
And Bonefires make to entertain their King:
And curse the day that they seduced were
Against their King and Country to appear
In Arms: They then would learn to hate
That Factious Crew which has abused the state;
Yea, they would deeply then abhor themselves,
Because they have been such ungracious Elves
To forward this Rebellion; Such a Crime,
Each circumstance considered, no time
Before did yield the like. Then out of hand
Knock off, and do not like a Rebel stand
Against a King thou know right gracious is,
A King so prompt to pardon thine amiss,
He for his Peoples good so deerly loves
The thing called Peace, that every stone he moves
To gain it. Then unto thy King coms in,
And let Rebellion be no more thy sin.
Peace is a Lady beautiful and sweet;
Who wooes her, winnes her, and does blessings meet
Which Crown the Christian heart: for she does bring
That which will make us here, and eversing.
And therefo^^ let all Christians undertake
To follow Peace, for Jesus Christ his sake.
The seventh Song.
Say, not to whom, for that is already said,
By him to say who will not be afraid.
LOrd Say how well thy own bru'de Ale does taste;
And thou shall find it sharp and sour at last,
When thou thy General and thy Colonel Fines,
Do reap the guerdon of black Treasons lines.
Say, Say no more nor of Religion bost
A Rebel Schismatic thou art at the most,
For true Religion never yet durst take
Up Arms against Gods Anointed, and to make
Rebellion seem to be a Lawful thing,
For Subjects to rebel against their King,
Was th^s the Roundnesse of your Roundheads plot,
Roundly among Rebbels to cast in their lot*
The Brooks whose streams your blotted hopes did nourish.
One Muskets shot spoiled all that painted flourish;
And showed the fall of those whose foul intents,
Are masked up in Gospel Ornaments,
As Satan shining in an Angels light,
Such is the glory of an Hypocrite;
And such is thine, thy base Hypocrisy,
Will close thy name in endless infamy,
Woe, woe be to thee thou have brought a shame,
On thy Religion and Professions name.
Then what thou do there is no more shameful thing,
Then let it shame and shames confusion bring;
As recompense upon the heads of those
Rebels, who are our Kings and Countries foes.
To what is said, who more can any say,
How to prevent the coming of that day.
When all the Says shall say and saying think,
The sowrest dreggs of their own Ale to drink.
It true repentance could possess the mind,
Then Gods Anointed they should su^rly find
As God himself, most ready to forgive
Say so, so do, and in so doing live,
Or else run on in Treasons villainy
And dye a death, that dies eternally.
FINIS.

