THE Shepherds Prognostication, Foretelling, The sad and strange Eclipse of
the Sun, which will happen on the 29. of March this present year 1652.

WHICH Eclipse will begin about eight of the clock in the fore-noon, and so
continue till past the hour of eleven, which will be the dismallest day that
ever was known since the year 33. when our Savior Christ suffered on the Cross
for the sins of Mankind.

At which time, the Seas did roar, the earth did quake, the graves did open,
the temple rent from the top to the bottom, Luke 23.45. And there was a
darkness over all the Land.

This Prediction also fore-tells of many strange Presages and Passages which
will follow after that horrible Eclipse of the Sun, and what will ensue.

With a perfect way whereby to avoid the ensuing danger.

By L. P.

London Printed for Fra. Grove on Snow-hill.

THE Preface to the Readers, and Hearers.
Beloved Friends and Countrymen,
I Have caused this little book to be Printed, which I call the Shepherds
Prognostication, and to be sent abroad into the several parts of England,
Wales, and Scotland, whereby to give all men forewarning of many strange and
wonderful alterations that will come to pass this present year 1652. and of
the great and terrible Eclipse of the Sun, also predicting what will after
come to pass: Mark, peruse, and note it well, it may through Gods assistance
be both for your public and private good. It is no fable, for whosoever lives
to see the 29. of March shall surely find the matter here written too true,
except the world be brought to an end before that day comes, Mat. 24.29. and
immediately after the tribulation of those days, shall the Sun be darkened, and
the Moon shall not give her light. Our Savior Jesus Christ in the 24. chapter,
verse 6, 7 concerning the end of the world, says thus, there shall be Ways,
and rumors of wars, Nation shall rise against Nation, the Father shall rise
against the Son, and the Son against the Father, and the like, verse 33. when
you shall see all these things come to pass know that the Kingdom of God is
near, even at your doors. And now to go on forwards.

Concerning these sayings, let us proceed further, and also consider what has
been seen and known amongst us which are called Christians, in these our late
and sinful times has not the Father and the Son, the Mother and the
Daughter, yea, and the Husbands and Wives, been, and fallen to great discords,
about matters of Religion, they being of diverse and several opinions. And has
not the Lord for our unrepented sins? sent many plagues and afflictions amongst
us, and poured down his heavy judgments even upon the chiefest of ten
thousands?

Have we not had the terrible Plague of Pestilence, both in England, Scotland,
Wales and Ireland, rageing and devouring our people? and have we not heard
and felt of Wars, and rumors of Wars, with much blood shed and slaughters,
which would never have come to pass, if we had never ofended God.

Are not all these forerunners which I have named, sufficient tokens and
evidences to prove that the Lord is angry with us, for our sinful living, and
that the end of the world is near at hand; then I pray you consider what
follows, and make good use of your time while yet you remain alive.

Here follows a brief Description of that dreadful and horrible Eclipse of
the Sun, which will happen upon Monday, being the 29th. day of March this
present year 1652.
Showing also By examples of fore-past times what will ensue before and after
this prodigious ECLIPSE.
THE Eclipse of the Sun which is here spoken of will be on Monday March 29.
1652. beginning forty eight minites after eight of the clock in the forenoone,
and ending seventeene minutes after eleven, in which time the Sun, which is
the eye and light of the world, will suffer such a black Eclipse, that it will
almost be overcome with darkness, which Eclipse signifies and betokens the
fatal overthrow of some great Kings and Princes and men in Authority, within
the limits of Christian Dominions, with many other troubles and sad disasters
that will happen this year in our Cities, and Countries, as cruel dealings
amongst Neighbors, hatred, envy, and malice, Wars, and bloodshed,
house-burnings, great Robberyes by Land and Sea, violent and forcible deaths to
many, Famine, Plagues, and other strange sicknesses: It also threatens a mighty
disturbance betwixt the inferior people and their Governors, together with
slaughter and captivity of many great persons, the ransaking and sacking of
many great Cities and Towns: Moreover, this Eclipse signifies alteration of
Opinions, changes of Magistrates, new Religions, and a great madness raging
and terrifying thousands of people.

Furthermore, it foreshews that there will follow unseasonable weathers with
strange and prodigeous sights to be seen in the air, with horrible tempests
of thunders and lightnings, and blusterous Winds, which will destroy the ships
at Sea, and overthrow many buildings on the Land, the Corn will be blasted on
the ground and the Cattle of the field will dye of strange diseases

And thus loving Friends have I with much diligence and carfulness, plainly
and publikly laid open unto you the manner how this Eclipse of the Sun shall
be, the time and day when, the length of its continuance, whilst it is
eclipsed, and the strange and sad effects that will follow after according to
the Scripture and the sense of Astrology.

Now will I with Gods leave also show you a way and means, whereby to avoid
those dangerous evils which is like to fall upon the chiefest parts of all
Europe, of which England is the first to be spoken of.

Here follows the Authors directions, being the readiest way of all ways to
escape Gods anger and keep our selves out of danger in the proceeding perilous
times, and thus it follows.
IT is an old saying and worthy of observation how that God governes the
stars, and the stars govern men, but this is a certain thing, that God both
can and will govern both stars and men, as you may read in the book of Joshua
10.13. How that the Lord God caused the Sun and the Moon to stand still,
until such time that the people of God had avenged themselves of their enemies,
whereby we may well understand and know that God has a greater power, then the
Earth, and the Sea, the Air, and the Firmament; the Planets, and the Stars,
the Sun and the Moon, and in a moment of time can the Lord cause them all to
alter their properties, and to do whatsoever he pleases to have done.

Look again in the book of Isaiah how Hezekiah was sick, and how the
Prophet of the Lord came unto him, and bad him set his house in good order, and
therwithall told him that he should dye and not live: then Hezekiah turned his
face to the wall, and prayed to the Lord and wept bitterly, and behold the
messenger of the Lord returned unto Hezekiah again and said, the Lord has
heard thy prayers, and seen thy tears, and behold he will add unto thy
days, and thou shall live yet fifteen years longer; and this shall be a sign
from the Lord, I will bring again the shadow of the Sun ten degrees backward
whereby it is gone down. So the Sun returned ten degrees, as the Lord God had
promised it should do, Isaiah 28. verse. 8.

By this we see that the power of the Lord far exceeds all other powers
whatsoever they be or can be. Now let us draw into consideration, why and for
what cause the Lord made the Sun and the Moon to stand still in the time of
Joshua, and at another time, that the Sun should go back ten degrees, in the
time of Hezekiah: Surely the reason was this, Joshua, was a righteous man, one
that served, and obeyed the Lord in whatsoever he was commanded to do:
moreover Joshua was a Warrior, and had promised to fight the Lords battle
which he performed with much diligence wherefore the Lord showed him this
wonderful token of his love and care that he had over Joshua and his
followers by examples of the standing still of the Sun and Moon.

And as for Hezekiah he lamented, he wept, and he prayed unto the Lord, in so
much that the Lord God took pity and compassion upon him, and withal
prolonged his life and restored him to his former health, so that the plague of
Pestilence nor any other sicknesses with which his Country was annoyed, had no
more power over him.

Now here follows on the Direction.
LEt us strive to accompany Joshua in his faithfulness, and with all true
obedience keep our promise with God and endeavor our selves to please his
divine Majesty that the Lord may assist us in whatsoever we take in hand and
let us with good Hezekiah, be sure to set our houses in order for we have no
lease of our lives: Let us I say call upon the Lord, and pray unto his holy
name, that those extreme calamities and dreadful destinyes which are like
suddenly to come upon us, may be through the mercifulness of our good God
turned away from our sinful Nation and let every man and every woman be sorry
for our time misspent, since we all have done amiss.

And so to conclude, let us with speed seek to amend our lives, and that I
hold to be the ready way to preserve us alive: It is but a little while, and
therefore I pray you to look to it in time. And so the Lord be merciful unto
us all, Amen.

FINIS.

