Die Veneris 26. Novembris 1646.

IT is this day ordered by the LORDS in Parliament assembled, That this House
gives thanks to Mr. Price, one of the Assembly of Divines, for his great pains
taken in his Sermon preached on the last Fast day before the Lords of
Parliament, in the Abbey Church Westminster: And he is hereby desired to print
and publish the same; which is to be printed only by authority under his own
hand.

John Brown Cleric. Parliament.

I appoint Richard Whitaker to print this Sermon.

William Price.

Man's Delinquencie Attended by DIVINE JUSTICE Intermixed with MERCY.

Displayed in a Sermon to the Right Honorable the House of LORDS Assembled in
Parliament, in the Abbey Church at Westminster, November. 25. 1646. being the
solemn day of their monthly Fast.

By William Price, B.D. Pastor of Waltam-Abby; and one of the Assembly of
Divines.

Non erubescat poenitentiam agere, qui non erubuit poenitenda committere. Aug.
Let not him blush to repent, who has not blushed to commit that that is to be
repented of. LONDON, Printed by R. R. for Richard Whitaker, at the sign of the
Kings Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

To the Right Honorable the House of PEERS assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable,
IT was enough to impose that piece of penance on your selves, to give this
unpolished Sermon the hearing; but it is much you should put your eyes to
further expense of patience. But since you are pleased to desire (which to me
is a command) my hand against my self, by testifying my weaknesses in the
exposing this mean discourse to public view, I obey. But then give him, whom
you have so far emboldned, leave to mind you, that the Sermons your Lordships
have heard, or should have heard, are to be reckoned in the inventorie of your
receipts from your God. Au^istis, laudastis, verba recepistis verba
reddidistis; Deo gratias, at haec folia sunt, modo fi^ctus quae^i^ur. Aug.
To hear, and to read, is but to carry in; you are also to bring forth; not
only the leaves, or the ^^ossomes of good words, or resolutions; (...) fruit:
Those of your sphere enter the lists of comparison with vines and olives, Jud.
9 8, 9, 10.
the choicest of trees in Jothams parable: and if a vine be fruitless, Ezekiel.
15.23.
it is worthless, and will not yield a pin to hang an hat on. You are fixed in
an higher orb, and attract all eyes unto you: You, as a snail, or the (...) in
the sea, leave a shining track (...): Your example has a potent (...) that
stand on the lower grou^^; (...) multiply imitaters, as one (...) a stone in
the water, Non qua (...), sed qua itur. Sen.
begets an hundred. Inferiors love to go the way Superiors use to go, rather
then the way they should go; and care not much though they perish, so it be on
such credit. Besides, the greatness of the personage greaters the guilt; Omne
animi vitium tanto conspectins. Juv.
the height of the exalted heightens their sin. As we say in Arithmetic,
(...), in the first and lowest place is but one, in the second place 10, in the
third 100; and so higher, and higher. And as the whitest ivory makes the
blackest coal; the most generous wine the sharpest vinegar; as the shrewdest
tempests come often out of the warmest corners, so the greatest injustice, and
most unworthy demeanor we fear from Nobility and potency degenerated.
Governors actions are like Jeremie's figs, or Origen's Works; if bad, very
bad. Greatness dis-joyn'd from Goodness is rather a swelling excrescence,
then a true, real magnitude: You are to give account at the great Audit-day,
not only as Christians; but as Nobles, as Judges, as Senators, as Magistrates.
'Twere good you contemplated with an holy emulation the presidents of untainted
Religion, unswayed integrity, incorrupt justice, inconquerable patience, facile
moderation, surpassing temperance, that the sacred Scripture and other Stories
are sertile in.

When you read that Manlius Torquatus took off his own sons head for
irregular running before a command, though his intents were fair, and his
design successful; think with your selves, that it is not fit to suffer your
Deputies to be occentrick, arbitrary, unlimited in their proceedings, where no
Order or Ordinance of yours enables them. When you read that Quintus Cincenius
was taken from the plough, and made Dictator of Rome; and when he had done his
Country the utmost service he conceived he could arrive to, he returned to
his former meannesse; it will quench soaring ambition in you. When you find in
Story, that Lucius Valerius, a Roman Consul, and so dying, having long the
custody of the Treasury of Rome, was yet so poor at his death, that the
Commonwealth was fain to defray the charges of his Funeral; you will, Exodus
18.21.
like Jethro's Justicers, hate that ignoble dry drunkenness, covetousness.
When you meet it storied of Fabritius, and testified by his enemy, that the Sun
could sooner be justled out of his Orb, then he out of the Orb of Justice;
you cannot but be dispassionate, unprepostest, unprejudiced Judges. Instice is
painted with scales in her hand, not to weigh gold, but right. When a woman
kneeld to Francis I of France for Justice; Stand up (said he) woman, Justice I
owe thee; if thou beg any thing, ask mercy. When you read that Alphonsus King
of Arragon read over the Bible with Commentaries fourteen times, you will study
the Scripture more. Oh let not purblind Heathens, that had no better conduct
then the glowwormes twilight of divine Nature, and unrenewed Reason; Let not
blindfolded Papists cast you behind them, and rise in judgment against you.
God expects you should outvie and outdoe the most advanced Moralists: Your
helps Heavenward are more and mightier then theirs, your light cleerer, your
obligations to God more, and greater: God has honored you above others, who
are but of the same mold with others, as the ground of the Rainbow is but a
common exhalation, only the Sun it is that gilds and enamells it with such
various colors. ^^dete quod in (...) est hanc ^oriam ad illum far, a quo
est, (...) vul^is e^^ ^rdere, aut certe ^rdi ab ea. Ber. ^. p. 207 ^^^minium
non ^cipere, sed da^e dignitati. ^ustin. l. 6.
Study as much as in you lies, to return honor to him from whom you had your
honor, if you would not lose your honor, or at least be lost by it.
Epaminondas so carried his honor, that he seemed rather to contribute luster
to, then to borrow it from his honor. It will be worthy you to be a dignity to
your dignity: An undeserving Person honored, is but as a dwarf, set him on
Ossa or Olympuc, he is but a dwarf still; A worthy person honored is a
Colossus, great, though in the bottom of a pit. Your honor it a Talent with
which God betrusts you, which if you embase, he that gave it can recall it.
Dignity, like oil is airy, and slippery. Henry the 4. the Emperor, who fought
two and fifty pitched battles, was compelled by poverrie to Petition for a
Prebends place at Spyre to maintain him in his old age. And Comminez says,
that he saw the Duke of Excester, who married King Edward the fourths sister,
begging barefoot in the Low Countries: But I forget my self; and should crave
pardon, and Apologize for the length both of my Sermon and Dedication, but that
would but make me the longer. May you live and die full of Honor: May you be
Instruments of Gods Glory here, and Vessels of eternal glory hereafter, is,
and shall be the Prayer of

Your Lordships most humbly levoted servant in the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
WILLIAM PRICE.

A SERMON before the House of LORDS on the last Monthly Fast Day.
EZRA 9.6, 7, 8. VER. 6. And I said, O my God, I am ashamed, Diverse
Translation.
and blush (or, I am confounded and ashamed) to lift up my face (or, my eyes)
unto thee, my God: for our iniquities are increased over our head, and our
trespass is grown up unto the heavens.

V. 7. Since (or, from) the days of our fathers have we been in a great
trespass even unto this day: And for our iniquities have we, our Kings, and
our Priests been delivered into the hands of the Kings of the lands, to the
sword, to captivity, and to the spotle, and to confusion of face, as it is (or,
appears) this day.

V. 8. And now for a little space (or, a moment) grace has been showed from
the Lord our God, to leave us (or, in causing) a remnant to escape; and to give
(or, in giving us) a nail in his holy place, that our God may lighten our eyes,
and give us a little reviving in our bondage (or, servitude.)


THis is a gloomy day of public humiliation; Context.
and the argument of this Chapter (on a branch whereof my lot is now fallen) is
drooping, and heavines. Ver. 5.
The people indeed, we find trembling (in the next Chapter) for the immoderate
rain; Chap. 10.9.
for it seems the clouds then dispensed their treasures too fast, as now they
do: But a dunghilly worldling can howl on his bed under a loss or cross: But
our Ezra mourns more for the blackness, then the burning of the coal of sin.
A formalist may sometime feel a legal fit, a pang of sorrow for his own sins:
but Ezra laments the mis-carriages of others; the people of Israel, the
Priests, the Levits, the Princes and Rulers, ^^er. 1.2.
who were all imbarqued in that delinquency that he deplores. Ezra's
humiliation began within, but ended not there: His sorrow-prest heart finds a
vent in all the solemn dress, and equipage that grief uses to assume, and put
on; laceration of garments, ^er. 3.4, 5.
plucking the hair from his head, and beard, pensively sitting down with
silence, stupefaction, astonishment until the evening. And lest his passion
should be interpreted an immasculating, sullen stupidity, and amazed dullness,
rather then an active repentance, (which ought to be a fruit-bearing-tree, and
not a dead log) he raises and rowses himself, and betakes himself to his
knees, and spreads out his hands heavenward (the usual visible demonstrations
of the height of devotion) and offers the fruit of his lips, pouring out his
soul, clothing his sad apprehensions withaery, but solid and melting
expressions, breathing forth his complaints to him who only could relieve him,
in a prayer that here is memorized and conveyed to posterity, distilling from
his own pen. It is recorded of him, Chap. 7.6.
that he was a prompt Scribe: His tongue was as the pen of a ready writer when
he commenced, and presented this suit at the throne of grace; and his pen is as
a tongue to report it to succeeding generations as an exemplary model, or
platform to steer us in putting up our petitions on semblable emergent
occasions. And I said, O my God, etc. And thus is the Text allied to the
Context.

If you now please (Right Honorable, Text.
and the rest beloved in our Savior) to see how the words that lie before us
shine with their own native, without borrowed luster, Sum, Epitomie.
They are considerable under the notion of a prayer; an ordinance, that if duly
managed, can open and shut heaven, bind and loosen the hands of the
Omnipotent, blast designs, countermine mines, command, countermand men, tie up
devils, throw Rome into Tiber: a duty that sanctifies fasting, as fasting
quickens and imps the wings of it.

In which prayer the Petitioner draws himself and his people with a black
coal, ver. 6.7. Anatomis. Parts.
but limns his God with orient colors, ver. 8. vilifying, nullifying man; or
if any diminutive can be added below abasement it self: but magnifying God.

1. He decries himself and Israel, discovering his sorrow by the impression of
his shame, and the expression of their National misery.

1. The impression of his shame, ver. 6. O my God, I am confounded, etc.

2. The expression of his and Isreal's misery, in a self-arraignment, and a
self-condemnation.

1. His self-arraignment appears in drawing up a large indictment made up of an
ingenuous confession, and an heightning aggravation.

1. A confession of their sin under the varied and reiterated language of
iniquities, and trespasses; emphaticall and comprehensive titles.

2. The aggravation of those transgressions, By

1. The dimensions of them; height and depth.

The continued quantity, the magnitude, great, greatned.

The discrete quantity, or multitude; increast, multiplied.

2. The customary inveteratenesse; From the days of our fathers to this day.

3. The Epidemicalnesse, and spreading universality; the guilt of Kings and
Priests is mentioned here, ver. 7. And if we cast our eyes back to the first,
and second verses, we shall find Levits, People and Rulers all put into this
bill of attainder.

Yet he contents not himself with this self-arraignment; but erects a Tribunal
within his own breast, and thence he passes an impartial judgment on himself,
and the rest involved and engulft in this blame: For our iniquities have we
been delivered up.

Delivered; To whom? To what?

1. To whom? Homo homini lupus.
To men; and one man is naturally a wolf to another; and those men potent,
Kings; and those many; and they ethnicks, heathenish, the Kings of the nations.

2. To what delivered? To sword, to captivity, to spoil, to confusion of face;
and that not imminent, but incumbent; not feared, but felt; all too apparent;
As it is (or appears) this day. So different translations have it.

2. Having thus deprest man, Root.
he exalts God in his most magnetic, Grace; amplified by the fruit growing on
that root; Fruit.
rescue, preservation; causing a remnant to escape: And settlement; And these
favors receiving their grace and gloss from those comfortable ends that God
levelled at; End.
the lightning their eyes, and reviving their hearts in their servitude.

This is the Anatomy, these the lineaments of the Text. Which by this time you
may perceive, corresponds and may aptly entitle it self to the times, and the
time; to this day, and audience, being composed of Rulers, and people; the
parties mentioned in this Chapter. May the Text prove as profitable, as it is
seasonable.

Here is a large Vintage; I cannot stand to pluck every grape; I must present
them to you by clusters: and (like our Geographers) set down a line for a
River, and a spot for a whole Country; here being such an ocean, a continent of
matter under my hands.

1. I take my rise from Ezra's decrying, and vilifying himself, and Israel: and
therein from the impression of his shame; And I said, O my God, I am ashamed,
Shame.
and blush (or as other Translations render it, I am confounded, and ashamed)
to lift up mine eyes to thee, my God.

Both are agreeable to the Original, (...)
that uses two words, importing shame, blushing, confusion of face, or eyes,
the seat of shame.

Shame is sometimes a vice, sometimes a punishment, sometimes a virtue: A vice,
Rubor quo se contra pudorem muniebat. In Agric. Epist. 11.
as Tacitus writes of Domitians blushing, it was a shame, whereby he fortified
himself against shame. As Seneca says of Sylla, He was never more to be
dreaded, then when he blushed. Sometimes shame is a punishment; as at the end of
the seventh verse. But here in Ezra it is a virtue; a shame whereof he needed
not be ashamed.

Shame has its sourse within, caused either by self-consciousnesse, ^cita
sudant ^ecordia culpa. ^ven.
when a guilty soul sweats with reflecting on it self: Or, from a piercing
apprehension of others unworthiness, which was Ezra's motive in the Text; he
was ashamed, because Israel was not ashamed of their mungrill matches. ^er. 1.
This shame was not his accuser, but compurgatour: He enters a caveat against
them by the coloring of his cheek.

The badge of shame or modesty is blushing, ^^ushing. (...), ^iog. Laert.
the trans-fusion of a vermilion through the face: which sally of the blood into
the cheeks we call the color of virtue. Though it be often an infirmity; yet
oftener an index of ingenuity, as thistles speak the ground fertile that bears
them.

Confusion (which in some Translations is inserted here) is the meridian,
^onfusion of ^ce.
zenith, vertical point of shame, it can mount no higher; As shame tied up the
peoples tongues when they were argued of halting between two opinions, (...)
King. 18.21.
they answered not a word; and Joshuah's tongue when Israel was foiled at Ai,
What shall I say? ^os. 7.8.
this is that confusion here spoken of; and this possesses Ezra too: O my God,
(says he) I am confounded, at a stand, filled with astonishment, that Israel
should so degenerate and degrade themselves. So planet-strook he was, that he
could not, durst not lift up his eyes. His looks were demisse, his eyes staked
to the ground, Luke 18.13.
as the Publicans, that would not lift up so much as his eyes to heaven.

And yet this shame of Ezra delivers him not over to despondency, or despair;
for twice for failing in a breath he bespeaks God his; O my God, O my God.
Genesis 3.8, 10.
Adams shame drove him from God; Ezra's drives him to God: it fastens his hold,
so that he applies God the closer to him, O my God.

Which president commends this note to us; the pearl, the point lies above
ground, That

They that are at ods with sin because it is sin, 1. Observation.
will blush even at other men's sins. Ezra shared not in this particular crime,
that thus fills his heart with grief, and his face with shame. As in the
Prophecy, Isa. 24 23.
the silver Moon is said to be confounded, and the spotless Sun to be ashamed.
And stars of the cleerest beam, and first magnitude in the Church of God have
been, and ought to be thus modest. Jer. 50.12.
Your mother (says God) shall be sorely confounded, she that bare you shall
be ashamed. Christians apostasy is said to put Christ to open shame. Were he on
earth, Heb. 6.6.
or now receptive of this passion, the sins of men would put him to it. But
mere men have more reason to blush for men: Reasons.
Whether because sin is so shameful in its own nature, Simon Peter might prove
a Simon Magus; a Saint a Devil; every one of us a Saul, a Balaam, a Judas, a
witch, a traitor to our Savior. These recoyling thoughts draw the color into
our cheeks. Ezra in my Text: (such a scandal is not to be expiated with tears
of blood.) As the Duke of Urbins Painter being blamed for limning S. Peter and
S. Paul high colored, since fasting, mortification, labors, and watchings had
discolored and paled their cheeks, wittily and tartly replied, That those
Apostles were wan indeed while they lived, but they now blush to see those that
pretend themselves to be their successors, to succeed them no otherwise then as
a disease does health, or night day. All these Reasons justify this blushing
we speak of.

But oh, Application. 1. Conviction.
How many degrees distant from this temper of Ezra's are those, who are so far
from a modest resentment of others sins, that they never ch^nge color when
they are convicted of their own! That can tear Gods sacred Name, dismember his
Son between their teethes, outface the Sun, Magistrate, Minister in swinish
drunkenness, goatish lust, savage oppressions, and what not, that would infect
the air but to name? And yet are frontlesse: Like the contriver of the golden
Legend; on whom a Papist could pass this verdict, Isa. 8.4. Jer. 3.3 Jer. 5.3.
That he had a leaden heart, and a brazen face. We read of a brew of brass;
of a whores forehead; of faces harder then rock; we have whole quarries of
them; those impudent wretches died not without issue. Among all stations and
ranks of persons that expostulation is not impertinent, Were they ashamed, when
they had committed abominations? Jer. 8.12.
Nay, they were not ashamed, neither could they blush.

Nay, we are fallen on an age, into which those monsters have transmitted by a
kind of transmigration, their spirits, contemporaries to S. Austine, of whom he
thus complains, Quid dignum'^ vituperie nifi vitium? Ego n^ vituperarer,
vitiosior fiebarn. Conf.
Though nothing be blamable but sin, I, lest I should be blamed, was fain to be
more sinful; and I belied my self, that I was guilty of what I never
committed, lest the more innocent I was, the more despicable I might appear. We
are ashamed not to be shameless: At least, ashamed of what we should count
our crown, religion, profession. We are ashamed of our glory, Phil. 3.18.19.
and glory in our shame, as heirs to those prostitutes that extorted tears from
S. Paul's eyes but to name. We have swarms of those that will with triumph,
trumpet forth how many they have plundered, oppressed, ground to powder, ruined by
their power; having no better plea then that of the wolf to the lamb, Thou
have a better cause, but I have better teeth: boasting how many unwary onus
they have over-reacht by flight of brain; with that hell-bred Proverb in their
mouths, Plain dealing is a jewel, but he that uses it shall die a beggar
(and yet it is a wonder, there should be so many beggars, and so few plain
dealing men): Bragging how many pliant souls, laden with sin, led a way captive
by lust, they have ensnared, and subdued by their blandishments. Which
impudence is to let out sin to use, to wind it up to the highest peg; and it is
a link of the chain of sin fastened next to the gates of hell. And it is as
irrational, as if a felon should boast of his fetters, a dog of his vomit, an
infected person of his plague sore, or a possessed demoniack of his devil.

Deer Christians, ^unsell.
I trust we shall rather take part with Ezra in the Text, blushing for others
sins, then thus insolently proclaim our own (like Sodom).

1. ^bortation. ^m. 1.16.
Let us not be ashamed of owning God: I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ
(says Paul). Nay, he points to his chain, Tim. 1.16.
that he bore for Christ's cause, as children point where they are fine.
^edecorosum ^aro ruenti se ^bducere.
The Celtes in Damascene thought it a disgrace to withdraw themselves from a
falling wall: Let us be ashamed to flinch from God, though all the world should
disclaim him. Our Lord and Master will at the last day be ashamed of them that
are now ashamed of him, Mar. 8.38. Let us not blush in a good cause, where
justice, or mercy challenges our relief, though justice, Exhortation.
dishonest, scurrilous, subdolous, unworthy words, and actions: Then shals
remember thy ways, Ezekiel. 16.61.
and be ashamed, says God to Israel. Motives.


What is past cannot be recalled; blamelesnesse; we may the turtles of
penitency, our two eyes filled with shame and sorrow.

We are ashamed of bodily defects, of a summetry, Number. 12.14.
As God argues to Moses about his sister Miriam; If her father had spit in her
face, should she not have been ashamed seven days? and now she is a leper,
let her be shut out seven days. So it holds by rules of equivalence; if we be
ashamed of what we are merely passive in from our heavenly Father; why not
much more for our sin, wherein we have been culpably active?

Even Nature (says Tertullian) has cast a shamefastness on all sinful
evil. Omne malum p^ door perfudit: (...) malefici gestiun latere, devitan^
apparere, trepidant deprehensinegant accusatine torti quide^ facile aut sempe
confitentur certe damnati maeren^ vel fato vel a stris imputant; nolunt suum
esse quid malum ag^ noscunt. In Apolog.
Malefactors delight to sculk, refuse to appear. They that are drunk, are drunk
in the night: it was so in S. Paul's time, 1 Thessalonians. 5.7. They tremble, and blush
when apprehended; deny, when accused; when tortured, they seldom, or hardly
confess; condemned, they bemoan themselves; and impute all, either to the
malevolent aspect of conjunction of Stars; or to the unresistablenesse of
fate; they will not have guilt lie at their door, because it is guilt, and
opprobrious. Let but nature work, it will prompt us to this modesty.

But grace, I hope, will be more expressive on us. I have seen Ephraim (says
God) smiting on his thigh; I have heard his moaning: and acknowledging himself
ashamed. It was melody in Gods ears, that confession; and that smiting a lovely
prospect in his eye, as appears by Gods melting, passionate language about him
in the next verse. Ephraim is my deer son, my pleasant child, I remember him
still; my bowels are troubled for him; I will surely have mercy on him. And
when the soule-wounded Publican durst not look up to heaven, ^clinavit ocu^,
inclinavit ^lum.
heaven looked down to him; he declined his own eyes, and inclined Gods.

In a word: Austin) if in our faces there should be such a distance between our
forehead and tongue, ^rum, si in fa^ tamum inter^llum inter ^ntem, and lin^am
ut frons ^n comprimat ^guam. Cont. ^l. Pel l. ^. ^ 1.
that shame should not suppress and stifle a bold tongue. If Diodorus the
Logician fell down dead for shame, that he could not resolve an Argument
propounded to him: methinks if we were truly apprehensive of the multitude and
horridness of our sins; and the venom naturally inter woven with our souls,
and our unkind abuse of so gracious a God; we should blush even to death; and
be ready to creep into the grave, or hell it self: we having too much cause to
take Ezra's words out of his mouth, and to appropriate them to our selves. For
our iniquities are increast over our head, etc.

I am fallen from the impression of his shame, Indictment.
In which bill, his ingenuous confession comes first to hand; Confession.
displaying their sins under the varied terms of iniquities and trespasses.

Iniquity in our English Idiome sounds injustice, Iniquity.
inequality. Indeed what is more unjust then sin? especially the sin of those
within the bosom of the Church: who are favored and ennobled with so many
mercies and privileges? Are not my ways equal? and are not your ways
unequal? Ezekiel. 18.25.
As God expostulates with his people.

Trespasses is the other title Ezra gives their sins: Trespass.
which imports breaking bounds, and due limits, and invading another right.

Another piece of the character of sin: It leaps all hedges and ditches, breaks
through all fences of relations or duties; and spares nor God, nor man.

But the Hebrew words run higher. The roots whence they are borrowed, imply
crookedness, perverseness, ignominious baseness to be exploded and hist at;
as the meanly versed in that tongue know.

The Jews were a crooked and perverse generation; as Steven stigmatizes them
with it; Act. 7.51.
offending against the cleerest Revelation, and most remarkable dispensations
of Divine providence.

Truth is, all sin is crookedness, it being a deflection from a straight Rule:
But there is more crookedness and perverseness in some sins and sinners, then
in others.

For perverseness, we are generally like Children, that because they cannot
have what they will, throw away what they have, slight what they may have: And
will endure a world of hardship and redoubled blows, rather then bend a knee,
or give a word. There is a steely obstinacy, a twisted contrariety in our
Nature. Abraham's children turned to stones, Matthew. 3.9.
to thwart John Baptist that speaks of stones turned to children.

And for crookedness, we so affect winding Meanders, and turning Labyrinths in
our ways, Esaias 59.8.
that it may be said to us, as it was in the apologue to the Serpent; that
having his deaths wound, stretched out himself straight. You should have lived
so; you have lead a crooked life, (...) oportuit sic ^xisse. ^um. 23.10.
and now you would die right and straight, and go strait to Heaven, like Baliam
in his wish. But as the Tree falls, so it lies; if Death leave it crooked, such
will Judgment find it.

But I spend but a word on words; Aggravation.
here Ezra goes on to aggravate Isreal's sins.

From the dimensions of them first uncharacterized in four or five expressions.
Great; There is their continued quantity, their magnitude. 2. Increast, ^
Multiplied; There is their discrete quantity, their multitude. 3. Over our
heads. 4. Up to Heaven: There is their extension, as before their intension. And
all these are of distinct consideration: for that may be great that multiplies
not; and that may grow, which yet amounts not above our heads; and that may get
above our heads, that yet ascends not to Heaven. Their sins were all this.

1. Great; Whether we eye that individual, particular sin, Great.
whence Ezra took the hint of his Lamentation; the people of God matching with
Idolatrous wives, which stole and ravished Solomon's heart from his God: ^ King.
11.
so stupifying and infatuating him, that, like a Bowl, he began to slugge
toward the end of the Alley, near his death, wracking even in the sight of the
Haven. 2 Cor. 6.15.16
A sin which Paul calls unequal yoaking, importing as great an asustatous
inconsistency, as between light and darkness, righteousness and
unrighteousness, Christ and Belial.

Or whether we contemplate their sin in general, it was great.

All sin is great, being an offense of a great, an infinite God. But yet sins
are of different magnitudes. It is a Stoicall fancy that they are equal. Nay,
the same fins are greater or smaller in several persons. If S. Peter had had
S. Paul's malice, and S. Paul had had S. Peter's knowledge they had both
committed the sin against the holy Ghost. I shall but touch upon the
ingredients that make up a great sin: because I have far to go, and not much
time to spend.

Sins are accounted great in Gods Geometry, Joh. 15.22.
so heinous they are, that in comparison Christ accounts other sins none. A
servant may unwarily rush on his master in the dark; but to tread on his foot,
and to look him in the face, is insufferable. Great knowledge greatens sins: for
knowledge is like the Unicornes horn, that does well in a wise and good man's
hand, but ill on a beasts head.

Sins also against eminent mercies are great: Augustine) Do you requite God
thus ye foolish people? faith Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Gratiam nesciri maluit Deus,
quam negligi. Aug.
To requite good for good is but humane; in requite evil for evil is carnal;
to requite good for evil is God-like; but to requite evil for good is
diabolical.

And sins masked with a coverture of holiness; Ezck. 33.3^.
And they are thence denominated an hypocritical Nation in one place. Such sins
are of a scarlet dye. There is no sin to that of under a pretext of Religion; 1 Samuel
as David said of Goliah's sword wrapped up in the linen Ephod, there is none to
that. Hypocrisy we call double iniquity; and therefore the punishment of the
Hypocrite in hell is made the exemplar of the torment of the greatest sinners:
they shall have their portion with hypocrites. Mat.


We had need to solicit God then, Use.
that though this Jebusite sin will continue in our coasts, our breasts; that
yet he would guard us from sins, that lay waste the Conscience: Vastare
conscientiam. Psalm. 19.13.
Keep thy servant (prays David) from presumptuous sins, so shall I be innocent
from the great transgression. It is now a great commendation to a man, if it
may be said of him (as Tacitus speaks) that he is without crying vices, Magis
extra vitia, quam intra virtutes.
though not within virtue; and he that does the least mischief, is a Saint. But
I cannot insist.

The second expression is, Isa. 1.4.
that they revolted more and more.

First for the continued quantity; Point.
Sin will greaten, and wax, and grow; like drops to a torrent, a slip to a
wood, a spark to a flame: The measure fills a pace. We read of the fullness of
the Amorites sins. In good we are as conscionable as children; we care not
how little we have for our money; we give God gold hard weight; a little
religion on a knives point serves our turns; but we never set a period to the
bulk of sin. Jam. 1.14.15.
Lust (says S. James) having conceived, brings forth sin, and so proceeds to
finishing. Sin has its conception, that is delight; and the formation, that is
design; and the birth, that is the acting; and custom is the education of this
brat; then follows a reprobate sense; and the next step is Hell. None declines
to the worst at first, but gradually step by step; Nemo fit rep^^ turpissim^^.
Juven.
As Mariners setting sail, first lose sight of the shore, then of the houses,
then of the steeples; then of mountains, and land. And as those that are
waylaid by a consumption, first lose vigor, and then stomach, and then color.

Then the discrete quantity must not be omitted: Our iniquities are increast
and multiplied, So the Hebrew gives it: multiplied even above Arithmetic; as
sparks out of the Ovens mouth.

Sins you see never go alone, Observation.
but like the waves of the Sea, the end of the one is the beginning of another.
David is a sad in tance, Isa. 5.28.
he drew iniquity with cart-ropes, as Esaias phrases it. First he is idle; then
he lusts after another wife, then he sends for her, then violates her
chaftity; when Uriah had but one Lamb in his bosom, and he had too many
already: then he makes her Husband drunk, then plots his death, making the man
contributuary to his own death by bearing the letters to Joab, and draws Joab
also within the compass of the guilt.

What need have we to attend that caution, Application. Heb. 3.1^.
Take heed ye be not hardened by the deceitfullnesse of sin? We know where we
begin and set out in a sin; but we know not where we shall end and take up. As
no man can say he will let in so many pale^ulls of the Sea and no more. Many
set up the trade of sweating with common interlocutory oaths, as (...), and
troth; many began theeving with pins and pence; many drunkenness with one
(...) more then enough, many last with a glance of the eye, and never dream^
they should ever be prostituted to those prodigious extremities they after find
themselves almost irrecoverably ingulfed in. As when Pompey could not prevail
with a City to billet his Army with them, he yet persuaded them to admit of a
few weak maimed Soldiers, but those recovered their strength, and opened the
gates to the whole Army. The devil courts us only to lodge a sin of infirmity,
or two, and they gathering strength, and sinews, subdue us. It will be our
wisdom to nip sin in the bloom, the bud, the first overture and suggestion; to
kill this Cockatrice in the egg. For if we go with sin one mile, it will
compel us to go with it twain: It will swell like the cloud Eliab saw, from
the bigness of a man's hand to such an expansion, that it will cover the sky:
like the waters of the Sanctuary, that may at first ^each, to the ankles, but
in tract of time increase over our heads.

3. Which is the third expression, I Will but name it. Sin will mount above our
heads, Psalm. 38.4.
if it be suffered to take its course: Above our heads so as to usurp, and
tyrannize over us, to depresse us, to render us contemptible, and to lay our
honor in the dust^^. So over our heads, as to keep us down, so that we cannot
look after our God. So above our heads, as to dull our brains, benight our
understandings, and insatuates us. God calls Israel a sottish people. So above
our heads as to drown us in perdition; as the Apostle speaks, 1. Tim. 6.9.
If God step not in.

Is it not better to keep it down, ^. Use.
then that sin should keep us under hatches, or our heads under water? Oh let
us by faithful approaches to our Christ, drown our sins in the red sea of his
blood; and in the waters of repentance, break the heads of these Dragons.
Implore God for assistance, that sin may not get heart-high in our affection,
or head-high in our thoughts and fancy, and much less gain such a supremacy as
to climb over our heads.

4. A fourth expression remains, Our trespass is grown up to the Heaven: Unto,
not into the heavens. Sin was bred there in the Angels, but cast down thence,
and shall never find the way back thither. Rev. 21.2.
No unclean thing shall enter there. If it could, it would darken the Sun, put
out the Moon, soale up the Constellations: But unto the heavens sin is so
daring bold to fly, whether to intercept the passage of our Prayers thither, or
to stop the influence and the light of heaven from descending hither: or to
knock at heaven gate to solicit for vengeance upon us. The sin of Sodom we
read had a cry; Genesis 18.20. Genesis 4.10. John 1.2. Use.
and Abel's blood a cry: And Ninevehs sin came up before God. And our sins often
out-voice our prayers.

We have no remedy but to send our faith and prayers before them to heaven to
prepossesse our Savior, that he may be our Master of requests, our Advocate,
Mediator, Intercessor, a s^reene between Gods scorching wrath, and us. That he
may plead for us both with words and wounds, Quot vulners, tot (...). Heb 12.24.
for his blood speaks better things then the blood of Abel; The one calls for
vindictive Justice; the other for pardoning mercy, and obtains it; yea even for
overgrown sins.

2. Which inveteratenes of sin is a second aggravation of Isreal's iniquity;
From the days of our fathers have we been in a greet trespass unto this day.

Sin is of a cleaving adhering nature. Point.
It seises us betimes. O Lord, when was I ever innocent (asks Austin) And it
will not leave us; if we welcome, and bed and board it. ^eb. 12.1. ^er. 13.23.
It hangs fast on (says Paul) It clings as swarthy blacknes to the Aethiope,
or spots to the Leopard. As the leprosy to the house, that sometimes could not
be scraped off; ^ev. 14 41.45.
but the stones must be changed: nay sometimes the house demolished. Sin, like
the Ivy on the wall, will not wholly be extirpated, ^er. 2.22.
till these earthen walls of ours be plucked down by death. Not soap, nitre; no
nor fire and brim frone can wash off sin. It will not sound a retreat: Nay,
when the body declines, sin gathers strength like the weary Ox, Bo^ lassus
fortiut sigit pedem.
that takes the firmer footing. Messaline was wearied, but never satisfied with
her baseness.

And that's the reason that the pain of hell are eternal, Lassata, non
sati^ta. Peccator peccat in suo aeterno. Greg. Use. Dilecta delicta.
because we would sin eternally, would God lengthen out our lives here to
eternity.

Oh let us importune our God to cut the thread of our wickedness, that we may
not spin it out to such a length. Let us bet^^^^ break off this match, and sue
out a divorce between us, and our darling sins: That God may never have
occasion to say of us, as of Israel* Jer. 22.21. This has been thy (...) from
thy Youth. Dan. 4.27.
Break off thy sins, says Daniel ^o Nebuchadnezzar, cut this Gordian knot.

It is not yet too late the door of grace is still open, Motive.
There is hope in Israel concerning this; Ezra 10.2.
as it follows. Nay David has no better (...) for obtaining mercy then the
greatness of his (...) Lord be merciful to my iniquity, Psalm. 25.11.
for it is great.

The greater our sins are, the greater need we have of mercy. No man flies his
Counsel because (...) cause is great and intricate, but plies him the more: The
more dangerous diseases are, the more Physicians are sought to. Some offenders
are like Jairus his daughter, newly dead, by consent to some unjustifiable act;
Others, like he Widows son of Naim, carrying out to burial, by acting unworthy
things. Others, like Lazarus four days dead in the grave, stinking, and
putrefying by living in sin, with the stone of custom rouled upon them. Let
none of these despair; Christ can raise all these, as he did those. Defer not
Reformation on this ground: mane is Gods Adverbe, but the devils Verb; God
says early, he faith tarry: But though thou have drawn out the line of sin to
an undue length, (...) not away thy confidence. Christ is good at an old sore,
all cures are alike to him. Go to him by the paces of faith in the words of
Ambrose; O utinam ad monimentum meum digneris accedere, S^ illachrynaverit pro
me vi^am, (...).
Oh that thou would be pleased to approach my monument, where my soul is
enclosed; would thou but weep over me, as thou did over La^^rus, I should
live. That voice that commands thee to come forth, must enable thee, as him, to
arise and walk his ways.

3. But Ezra calls us away to consider another aggravation of Isreal's sin: It
was epidemicall, spreading universal, tainting all of all sorts; he includes
himself, We; mentions here Kings, and Priestrs; but in the beginning of the
Chapter, Prophets, People, and Rulers. He does not frigi^lly assert, they are
s^^ers; particulatizing
they would all uninforced have yielded that: but he takes the boldness to
lay the particularity of their offense, the height, greatness, multiplicity of
sins at every one of their doors.

He that speak promiscuously, Observation.
and indistinctly to all, speak to none. Reproofs and threats are often in
Scripture styled burdens, and yet truly a burden is easily born away with a
common shoulder. But when we lay the axe to the root of the tree, and make our
addresses from the Pulpit, or otherwise, to special ranks of persons, and
particularize their sins; when Nathan comes up close to David, with Thou art
the man; this touches to the quick: And though a David may take it acceptably
at our hands, yet most will kick and fling. Praedicare est ^^hil aliud quam
derivare in se furorem populi; Irritare crabrones. Plaut.
Luther said knowingly, To preach is nothing else but to derive peoples fury on
our heads; to stir a wasps nest; to pull an old house upon us. How impatient
were Stevens hearers, Act. 7.34? And Paul's Act 22.22.? And in those glasses we
may see our own temper. But what though? We must not betray our own souls, nor
yours by our silence. If you could take order that the biting texts of
Scripture had an expurgatory. Index passed on them from heaven; we poor
spirited men are too prone to desire to sleep in a whole akin. Si de^emus,
timemus deleri. Aug. De turpi silenti^ demnabitur.
But if we blot out these passages, we shall be blotted out of the book of
life. And while they are standing here, a Minister may be dam^d for his base
silence. You will pardon us. Man may threaten prison; but God threatens hell.
And truly a cock may have leave to wake a lion: It is pity great men should be
let go quietly to hell more then the meaner. Ezra, here leads the way: He
swallowe not his words, as if he had gone too far already in his indictment,
but undauntedly goes on from an accusation to a condemnation of all Israel,
Rulers, and ruled; high, and low; supreme, and subordinate; Rulers, Priests,
and People as accessory to their own misery. For our iniquities have we, our
Kings, and our Priests been delivered.

2. Observe, That self-accusation, Self-condemnation. Observation.
and self-condemnation are two symptoms of a repentance that need not be
vepented of. They are marks ever to be found on cordial self-abasers; Genesis
18.27.
as we may collect from their language in Scripture, and elsewhere: Abram
cries, I am but dust and asbes that speak to thee. Dust minds us of mortality,
ashes of fire; as if he had deserved one and the other. Jacob; Genesis 32.10. Psalm.
73.
I am less then the least of all thy mercies. David; So brutish was I, even as
a beast before thee. John Baptist; I am not worthy to unloose his she. The
Centurion; I am unworthy thou should come under my roof. S. Peter; Depart
from me, O Lord, I am a sinful man. St. Paul; The least of Saints, the
greatest of sinners. B^ Hooper in our Martyrology; Lord, I am hell, then art
heaven: I a sink of sin, thou a fount of grace. Bradford; I am (...) deaf as
a stone as dumb as a nail; an hardhearted, a painted hypocrite, as he
subscribes some of his Epistles: and Ezra here; for he still involves himself.

Let us write after these Copies. Applicat.
Every man has a County Palatinate within his bosom; and may arraign and
judge himself: and it is our security so to do: If we judged our selves, 1
Cor. 11.30.
we should not be judged. He shall hereby sa^e God a labor: Parcamus (...),
quia sibi (...) pepercit.
Let (...) spare this man, for he spares (...) himself; as Aug. personating
God, says. He that justifies himself fights with God hand to hand, and is
like to be (...) He that lies down at Gods feet, reaches him his hand to lift
him up again. Luke 18.14.
He that humbles himself shall be exalted.

But we must look a little nearer to these words; For our iniquities have we
been delivered.

There is a deliverance from evil, and to evil; the later is before us now:
It is a delivery, a tradition, and resignation of us over to misery.

And the whole nation were passive in it: In this pronoun (we) are concluded
all beside the Kings and Priests here specified. Each sort had peculiar sins
for which they smarted; and all for all: From the crown of the head to the
seal of the foot there is us sound part, Isa. 1.5, 6.
as Esaias complains.

Sometimes a Nations sickness begins at the head, Observat.
the Rulers: as the Shunamites child complained of his head. Sometimes at the
feet, the inferiors; as Asa's disease was in his feet. Sometimes the upper and
lower parts of the body politic mutually contribute to each others ruin; as
we read, that the sins of the people moved God to suffer Satan to tempt David
to number the people; 2 Samuel 24.1, 2.
and then David's sin determined in a plague on his people by passion; on
himself by compassion and sympathy: as the ice begets the water, and the water
the ice: As in the natural body the stomach sends up vapors to the head, and
the head sends down (...) and di^^^lations on the stomach and kings: As the Sun
exhales vapors from the earth, and returns them in thunder and tempests. Note
(...) ^^.9.
However it (...) Note we (...) of our selves* (...) Eagle peirct through with a
dart sea^hored from her own wing; and the mot the word too, Propriis trans^
gimur alis.
We are transfixt by our own feathers. As Noah was drunk with his own wine;
Goliath beheaded by his own sword; the rose destroid by the canker bred in it
self; the breast by a self-bred wolf; the apple by the worm; the dams belly
eaten through by the young vipers; Agrippina killed by Nero, to whom she gave
breath: So are we undone by our selves. Sin like a Friar, whips it self:
Punishment is connate, innate to sin: Connatum, i^^^ tum sceleri supplicium.
Lips.
Fools because of their iniquities art afflicted, says David, Psalm. 107.17,
18. We may thank our own folly for our bane.

This Point calls more for improving, then proof; thitherward therefore shall I
apply my self.

I foresaw the time would prevent me; therefore I shall endeavor to continue
the residue of my Text in Application, General and Particular. Applicat. 1.
General.


General first: This Observation, like a well limnd picture, looks on all that
look on it: It prompts us all, Rulers, and ruled.

1. To justify our God in all his judiciary proceedings toward us: So did
David; Psalm. 51.4. Dan. 9.7.
That thou may be justified, and clear when thou judge. So Daniel;
Righteousness belongs to thee: but to us confusion of face. The cup of the
bitter waters of Marah, and Meribah, that we have drunk so deep of, is of our
own mingling and embittering. The r^ds that have scourged us are of our own
making: We have extorted thunderbolte out of Gods hand; for he, like the Be,
stings not till provoked: Or like the flint, upon a colidion with the steel
(our steely souls) he^ sends forth some hasty sparks. And therefore,

2. Patience well becomes us: It is unequal for the offender to murmur or
repine at the offended, and justly incensed party: I will bear (says the
Church) the indignation of the Lord, ^ic. 7.9.
because I have sinned against him. ^^leramus, and to^^ramur. Tert.
We have been long born with, and why should we not bear? Impatience, like the
bulls struggling in the net, or the birds fluttring in the lime-twigs, troubles,
and fastens us, and engages us the more in affliction: Luke 21.19.
whereas in patience we possess our souls (says Christ.) By faith I possess
God; by love, my brother; and by patience, my self.

3. Let Gods vindictive justice be a restrictive to us from adventuring on any
unwarrantable course; like a Cherubim with a flaming sword, to guard the way to
any forbidden fruit, since it is like to cost us so deer. Deuteronomy. 29.19.
Let us not be secure in our sins, nor bless our selves in any way that God
curses; God is merciful, but withal just; bountiful, but not lavish; he will
spare till there be no remedy, 2 Chr. 36.16.
as he did Israel; but though he has a leaden foot, he has an iron hand, as
it is storied that Heruccius King of Algiers had. Patience abused converts to
fury: Laesa patientia fit furor.
When the snow of Mercies melts we are like to have a great flood: And as near
as we are within prospect of Peace and Political happiness, we may miss of it;
since I find not that our sharp Physic has kindly wrought with us; Lust,
Pride, Excess, Swearing, Lying, Deceit, Gaming, Voluptuousness, and others sins
National (it were easy to be endless in naming but their kinds) ebb not at
all, but flow, and are at a Springtide. We are the more unsafe for being
secure: When Adam was asleep he lost a Rib; it is sad when irrecoverable ruin
is the first sign of danger: Nor let us bo^ ster up ourselves with our
Spiritual Church Priviledges, as the Ordinances or any other; they cannot
exempt or shield us if we still provoke; There i^ no Sanctuary, no Protection
for Presumption: As the Ark could not save Israel from the Philistines* nor the
Temple the Jews from the Romans; nor the Palladium Troy from the Grecians; nor
the Tombs of Martyrs Rome from the Goths, think not that Gods Quiver is spent;
Romans 2.5.
we read of an inexhaust treasury of wrath.

My Text instances in diverse Arrows feathered with Wrath, and headed with
Ruin: Be pleased to cast your eyes on the Text as I proceed.

What think: you of being delivered to men, David calls cruelty? And therefore
Nebuchadnezzar, I conceive, sealed the D^n of lions wherein Daniel was, because
he thought it safer to trust him with the Lions, then with his implacable
Enemies.

To be delivered to the Sword, sad experience, Joel calls the day of War, Joel
2.1, 2. 2 King. 8.12.
a day of gloomy and thick pitchy darkness: Aconitum hos^ litatis. De Pa^^
Eliah wept to think of it; the poisoned kemlock of Hostility, Tertullian calls
it; Complicatissim plaga.
It is a stroke or plague like Pandora's Box; a compound of Plagues; a Bar to
Religion: The Temple went slowly on, when they were fain to fight with one hand
and build with the other. It is said, 1 Kin. 5.3. David could not build Gods
house for the Wars about him; It silences Laws, cuts the sinews of Traffic
and Trading, stifles Arts and Learning; though some Birds of prey can fatten in
hard weather, when all other Fowl are pined. When you hear that in the Trojan
Wars were slain 870000 Greeks and 670000 Trojans; ^^ster Cos.
That Ostend, though a little Fort, was so great a Grave as to devour 120000
persons; That S^lyman before Vienna laid dead bodies in ditches level with the
top of the Walls of Vienna; That 1000000 were slain in the Civil Wars of
France; ^lignius.
and 20000 Churches equalled with the ground; That in our P^arsalicke fields in
the quarrels between the Houses of York and Lancaster, ^terus.
an 100000 fell, so that the red Rose began to be white with the blood that it
had lost, and the white Rose red with the blood it had shed, and 10000 Families
were thereby rooted out: ^mmin^us.
And that red Horse has been some years trampling of late this Kingdom under
foot: Can we find in our hearts still to hug and harbor our old Iniquities,
and to do what in us lies to move God to spin out this War to an eternity?

To be delivered to captivity and bondage, to be flaves (it may be) to slaves,
however to persons suckled by Tigers, of Adamantine hearts: well might the
Prophet forbid to weep for the dead, and bid Weep ^^r^^y for them that were
going away. ^^r. 22.10.
God can reduce us to this.

To be delivered to spoil, your Houses, Cabinets ri^^ed, ^arbarus has se^^es,
and culta ^^valia miles, ^^c.
your ^ranaries emptied for others uses; to plant, and not to taste of the
frai^^; to see the pitchfork in an hour scattering what in many years your
providence has raked together, which will make your ey-strings crack; yet to
this can God bring us.

To be delivered to sharne and confusion of face; to be a pity to our friends,
a scorn to our foes; to be a byword, an hissing to foreign nations; to be
abject objects for others to whet their wits, and to spend their dark sarcasmes
upon; that our names should rot; or, if remembered by posterity, with reproach,
as Pilats in the Creed. Nothing pierces ingenuous spirits more then shame and
scorn: Heb. 11.36.
mockings the Apostle thought cruel: No sword so sharp as the tongue, it flies
lightly; but wounds deeply: Leviter volat, graviter violat.
to all these disasters can God e^pose us.

Oh let us not continue to be cruel to our selves; but for your own sakes, (if
you value not Gods honor) for the wives fake of your bosom, for your
childrens sake which you pretend to tender as the apple^ of your eyes, the
^ignet on your right hand, your heart strings, lay what I have said to heart;
if not, we can but weep in secret for you.

To confess sin this day, and to persist in it, is to profess, This I have
done, this I will do. To beat our breasts, and not to reform, is to harden them.
But I must not forget my main errand hither.

You (Right Honorable) have summoned me to attend you in this service; 2.
Particular.
and I know you would not have me prevaricate, or forfeit my trust. Give me
leave to make my humble addresses to you in serious exhortation. My Text
specifies the guilt of Kings, and Priests, and people; and the third verse
affirms, that the Princes and Rulers were chief in the trespass. I come not
hither to upbraid, but with all humility to advise you to what you are nearly
concerned in, both in reference to your selves and us, for the aversion of that
wrath, that is gone out against us, and is to be read in legible characters on
us; and for the prevention (as much as in you lies) of that inundation of
miseries, that it may be the heavens are big with, ready to be delivered, if
your failings prove the mid-wives. Kings and Priests are in the Text, and
Rulers in the Chapter; but Kings here are none, and I hope no Priests,
therefore I shall meddle neither with Crowns nor Miters; I love not to speak to
the absent, but the present Rulers; here are a ring of Auditors, and you the
Diamond. Let me mind you what Jewels are a gloss to your Corcnets.

1. Prudence, You are our heads, and the head is the Throne of Prudence. It is
prudence to be able to discern, between persons and things that differ; between
tenderness of Conscience, and obstinacy; between zeal and spleen: Doeg is
called a liar, though he spoke truth of David, Psalm. 120.3.
because he spoke not truth in love of truth, but spleen to David; to discern
between self-seeking Privadoes, and public Spirits; between true Church and
State converts, and complyers with times, shifting of sails with every wind,
calculating for every Meridian; that when time was, would bow to the Altar, now
would pull down Churches; that would in Pulpit shrivell up all Prayer, and
confine it to the Lords prayer, and now will censure the saying of that Prayer.
Your strength lies in your head, as Sams^ns in his hair. When Severus was ill
of his feet, and some for that thought him unfit to govern, he replied that he
governed with his head, and not with his feet. And you had need of your eyes in
your head, that sit at helm, and steer between so many rocks and sands. 1
Kin. 3.9, 10, 11.
God was in love with Solomon's request, who wished nothing more, and nothing
else but wisdom to manage his affairs.

Secondly, another sparkling Jem is Justice, Justice.
without which prudence is but Achitophelian, Machiavelian, Jesuiticall craft.
Job. 29.14. Plutarch. Moral. l. 3.
Job counted Justice his Robe and Diadem. Philip of Macedon displaced a
Magistrate because he colored his beard, he was jealous he might color a
cause too. You must be as able, so men of truth, and unswayed integrity; Exodus
18.21.
such as Jethro's Justicers were to be.

1. It is Justice to be accessible, that Petitioners may come at you, and not
your doors guarded with living, as Solomon's Throne was with livelesse Lions. As
it was said to Augustus, he that dares approach thee, seems not to know thy
greatness; he that dares not, seems not to know thy goodness. Gods
presence chamber is always open.

2. It is Justice to have two ears, Si sat accusasse, quis erit innocens?
one for the Defendant, as well as one for the Plaintiff. For though it be
true, if it be enough to deny, who will be guilty? it is as true, if it be
enough to accuse, who shall be innocent? Ca^^ was accused ninety times, and his
integrity still brought him off.

3. It is Justice to awar^ the accusers the same punishment they intended the
accused, in case they make not their accusation good. The geese in the Capitol
at Rome were to be beaten if they gaggled without cause, though they once saved
the Capitol by gaggling; and the dogs legs were to be broken that barked when
no danger appreach'd: such punishment (says Cicero) do aspersers in Courts of
Judicature deserve: Pro Rosc. A^erin. ^unes venatici.
and then those setting-dogs durst not causlesly hurry innocence before your
tribunals; detracters are more bound to restitution than thieves, by how much
the name preponderates the estate, if at least there can be any recompense for
defamation. There are three things that may not be dallied with, Non patitur
ludum fama, fides, ^culus. Tertul. de Pall. c. 5.
our faith, our eye, and our reputation.

It is Justice to proportion the punishment to the offense. He is a strange
Justicer that knocks out a Man's brains to kill a Waspe on his forehead. As
Pollio cast his servant to the Lampries, for breaking a glass. As the grand
Seignior of the Turks ripped nine Eunuchs for one Melon that was eaten without
leave.

5. It is the lifeblood of Justice to expedite Justice, and not to turn it
into Wormwood by unjust sentences, or into Vinegar by delays: to suffer poor
souls to lie longer languishing at hopes hospital, than needs.

6. Exodus 23.2, 3. Prove. 24.23.
It is Justice to be impartial, and not respect Persons, but Causes. Commineus
complains, that many men's Offices and Lands were taken from them for running
away in the battle between Lewis the eleventh, and the Burgundians, and given
to those that ran nine miles farther than they.

3. Mercy. Psalm. 10^.1.
But this Justice must be intermixed with mercy and moderation: My Song shall
be of Mercy and Judgment (says David.) The robes of Judgment are usually red
bestrea^^ with white, the one the color of severity, the other of mercy. You
are the fathers of your Country (styled Patricians among the Romans) we would
look on you with veneration, not slavish terror. You must bear with us, and
bear us in your arms by love, in your hearts by care, Male terrore^ neratio
acqui^tur; timor abi^ secedas m^netmor in odium, mor; timor in ^veren^iam ver^
tat Max.
on your shoulders by patience. Reverence as ill purchased by terrifying, when
you are gone, fear goes too, but love will remrine; fear converts to hatred,
but love to veneration, says Plinius 2. Some seem so to be angry with others
vices, as if they envied them (idem) A debonaire gentleness is a grace to you;
Sic irascuntur quasi invideant Geminio. Id. Art^^in^.
when you temper and allay your severe gravity with so much mildness as may
weigh against it. It will be rare in you so to abstain from sin, as if you
pardoned no man, and yet so to pardon, as if your selves were daily offenders:
you should be our Noah's putting forth your hand to pluck oppressed ones into the
Arc of your protection, when floods are abroad.

Jerome wished Pammachius a noble man, Coecorum ocul^^ manus d^bilium claudorum
pes. Justis suppliciis illachrym^vit.
to be an cie to the blind, an hand to the weak, and a foot to the lame.
Vespasian would mourn over just punishments, and when he was to sign the
death of any, would say, I would I could not a letter of the book.
Vtinamnesciren^ literd^.
What difference between a man, and a brazen statue of man, but that one has
bowels, and the other has none? Sylla was a devil to command Marcus Pletorius
to be slain on the place, Nov^^ (...) miseri^^dia. Val. Max. l. 9. c. 2.
because he fell into a swoun at the sight of the execution of Marius, a new
punisher of mercy. The first that ever was revenged on virtue. It was a sad
thing that the Jews were fain to purchase leave to weep. You resemble God whom
you represent, no way nearer than by mercy; the lovelyest of his Attributes,
and should he take his advantage, (...) and nolle ^bile. ^is est pro^sse Leoni.
we were all lost men. You are never more like your selves, than when
merciful: it is noble not to do all you are able. To lie prostrate to a Lion
saves the life. To be on the higher ground, should be no advantage to a
generous spirit: only cowards, and the ignoble are cruel. The ancient Nobility
of Rome, ^^t. Qu. Romans ^^27. ^^v. 12.1.
and Arcadia, wore moons on their shoes, to mind them of the worlds
mutability. The highest may come to stand in need of mercy; with what hearts
can they expect it, what face ask it, ^^m. 2.13. ^^iv. Decad. 1.
that denied it? Judgment merciless to them that show no mercy. Appius took
away all appeals in case of life and death, and when he came to need an appeal,
he was justly denied it. Eutropius endeavored to take away the relief of
Sanctuaries, and himself was afterward hailed out of Sanctuary, from the very
horns of the Altar. ^d Pop. 36.51.
To show mercy (says Chrysostom) is a greater work than to build magnificent
Temples, nay, to raise the dead.

Fourthly, Shall I add love and inclineablenesse too, and studiousnesse of
peace adornes you. War (I trust) shall ever be your refuge, never your choice.
To war as to marriage, not lust of gain, or dissension, but procreation of
peace should be the motive. Esto bellando pacificus. Aug.
Carry peace in your hearts, when the sword is in your hands. Hercules club was
made of the Olive, the emblem of peace: it is a fit speech for a Spanish
mouth, that the smell of Gunpowder in the Field, is as sweet as of incense at
the Altar. Love of bloodshed becoms the Scarlet whore of Rome, whose Religion
was planted in, and watered with blood. Let the killing of twelve millions in
two and forty years in the West Indies, attested by Bartholomeus A Casa a
Bishop there; Let French-massacres, Sicilian even-songs, Spanish Inquisitions
(which Heinsius aptly calls the fourth Fury) let these stuff Popish
Chronicles, and not furnish out ours.

Fifthly, Nemo regere potest, nisi qui and regi Sen. de Ir^
Patience and temper-render you honorable in men's eyes, passion exposes to
contempt. None can rule well that cannot rule themselves, but are overruled by
passion. He that cannot guide a boat in a River, is unfit to steer a ship in a
storm. It would make the most furious spirit dispassionate to hear of the
great cruelty of the Emperor Theodosius, when he gave life to his Passion,
though otherwise he be by Ambrose and others, famed for a most Temperate,
Merciful, Religious Prince; because a servant of his was slain in an uprore in
Thessalonica, he in a rage caused a Massacre to pass on the City, so that in
three hours seven thousand innocents were butchered. Ye had need set a strong
guard on your passions.

Sixthly, Humility, lowliness becomes the high as well as the low, Non
magni^^co sed tumor. Sen. Nobilis facta humilitate nobilier. Hier. Epita.
Marcel Inopum cellas dignanter intr^cas.
your Savior condescended to wash Judas feet, those feet that trudged up and
down to betray him, and that soil off, which he contracted with those walks.
Pride is no true greatness, but a swelling excrescence. Noblesse is by
humility made more noble. It was Jeromes advice to Pammachius, Vouchsafe to
enter sometimes the lowest cells of the meanest. The proud in ascending,
descend; the humble in descending, ascend in the esteem of God, and all good
men.

Seventhly, Religion deeks ye. Jethro's Magistrates were to be men fearing God;
^xod. 18.21. ^emmata quid ^ciunt? ^iremur te non ^a. -- miserum (...) aliorum
in^mbere famae. ^uvenal. ^abiles quadam ^cessitate con^ringuntur, ne (...)
antiquorum ^robitate dege^rent.
though you are Gods before men, You are but men before God. Plead not your
descent, unless you answer the worth of your Predecessors: Let not that be
escheat and buried with the owners. We had rather admire you, than your stem:
it is wretched to glister with borrowed luster. Nobles (says Hierome) are
constrained by a kind of necessity not to degenerate from the probitie of their
Ancestors: Else as the people did worship Isis, and not the creature that bore
the image: think when we show you reverence, we mean it to your Ancestors. As
Mariners, have your eye upon heaven, when your hand is on the helm. Why should
not great and good stand together? God is Optimus Maximus, Best and Greatest:
and they have met and been concentred in men. As Joseph, Hester, Mordecai,
Obediah, Nehemiah, Daniel, the Lord Deputy of Cyprus in the Acts, Acts 8.27.
Phil. 4.22.
the E^^^^ch of Queen Candace, Flavianus in Vespasianus Court, Derotheus in
Dioclesians, Terentius in Valentinians durst be good. Indeed, there is no true
greatness disjoined from goodness. Exodus 30.15. Gratius einomen (...) quem
p^^^statis. Apol. adv. Genesis c. 34.
Every man is as he is in Gods books. Tertullian said of Augustas, the name of
Piety was more gracious to him, than of Power. The holiest man is the noblest
on earth, says Clement, alluding to that of Solomon, Proverbs ^^.26. The
Righteous is better than his Reighbour. Hierome would say of Paula, (...).
Strom. 7. Genere nobilis, sanctitate nobilior. Nescio quo pacto veritas in
Nobili plus placet; forte quia plus cares.
a virgin descending on the father side from Aenaeas, on the mothers from
Agamemnon, She was noble in Stock, but nobler in sanctity. And Bernard
wittily to Sophia the virgin, God is no respecter of persons; yet I know not
how goodness in the Noble takes us most; perhaps because it is usually more
wanting in them.

8. As you must be good; so do good, be devoted to the public good; the one
profits only your selves, the other us all. Be not felfish, tread not inwards.
Pompey being upon an expedition to Sicilie of purveyance for corn, when it grew
scarce in Rome, and dissuaded by his friends, Necesse est ut eam, non ut vivam.
objecting the danger of the voyage, answered them, It is more necessary that I
should go, then live. An heavy piece of iron, like a good Patriot, will leave
its particular relation to the load-stane; and falling, express its homage to
the earth, the common center of heavy bodies.

If your Lordships be invested with these qualifications, and express them; it
will never be said, that the unjust are set over the Law, the impious over
Religion, ignorance over Learning, or monsters over men: And it may be written
over your House door, as over the Court of Justice in Zant, Hic locus odit,
amat, punit, conservat, honorat,
Nequitiam, pacem, crimin^, jura, probos.


This place hates wickedness, loves peace, punishes guilt, preserves law, and
right, and honors, and incourages the good.

We have all of all sorts heard our duties set out; and had I time to set them
on by persuasive, putheticall convictive incentives, I cannot select better
then the last verse of my Text offers to my hand, coming as uninforced, as
honey dropping from the comb.

Consider what we have, and what we would have; what we enjoy, and what
wee-expect and desire; we may echo forth Ezra's word here.

We have reason to celebrate (as well as Ezra or Israel) the Grace shown to us
from the Lord our God. For a little space ^ath grace been ^hewed. Grace.
He has loved this Kingdom, because he would love it; the ground of his
love is in his immutable self, and not in us: as it is said of his love to
Israel, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8.
The Lord did set his love upon you, because he loved you. And what is such a
love but free grace? For we were fitter to set his foot, then his heart upon.

And this grace could no more conceal it self then the Sun; Showed.
it has shown it self in so many rivulets and streams; in so many mercies,
full, choice, seasonable, melting mercies; that we (if any Nation under
heaven) may say we have comprehended (or rather been comprehended by) the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height of Gods love. The Philosophers tell
us but of three dimensions; the Apostle has found out four in Gods mercy, Ephesians.
3.18.

And we have had a large share in this grace that Ezra memorizeth in the Text:
I Will walk on his grounds. In grace, mercy remembered amidst judgment: in
allayes, remitting and relaxation of Gods heavy hand. He has not let out all
his wrath; but corrected us in judgment, weight, and measure: Vltra, citra
condigmem.
His punishents fall on this side, his mercies go beyond our merits, as David
sings, Psalm. 103.10. He takes away a part, that might have stripped us of all,
as Anitus said of Alcibiades in Plutarch. He sends a fever, that might cast
into everlasting burning; He scourges with rods, that might with Scorpions; He
begins, that might make an end of us: He has afflicted us three or four years
with a Civil sword, that might have delivered us to a seventy years
Babylonish Captivity.

A share we have had in his reserving-mercy; Leaving us a remnant to escape.
Isa. 6. ult.
leaving us a remnant to escape: but decimating, tything us; when he might
have left us but a tenth, as he did to Israel. Nay, we were all forfeited to
his justice: he has laid no more on us then he has enabled us to bear, and
given us a door, a passage out, as S. Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 10.13.

A share in his settling grace: A nail in, etc. Jer. 22.23.
giving us a nail in his holy place, his Church: Establishing us, as Eliakim;
Making us a nail in a sure place. The Gospel has irradiated, and shed his
clear beams without setting or eclipse for above four score years upon us: We
have been a Goshen; we have dwelt in his Tabernacle, and holy Hill, as it is
promised, Psalm. 15.1, ult.
though we have neglected the conditions there specified in the Psalm. We
have deserved to be un-nation'd, un-Church'd by a Bill of divorce from heaven;
to be tumbled about as a ball into strange lands, as it is Jer. 22.18. Israel
complains, Isa. 63.18.
they had possessed the Sanctuary but a little while: We cannot say so.

Ezra is grateful in the Text for grace a little space: what owe we for so
long a possession? To lighten our eyes.


God has also lightened our eyes

By outward favors, Sam. 14.29.
as Jonathans were by honey; and we as he, have received our honey at the end
of a rod, that we might the more value it.

By favors of an higher alloy he has lightened our eyes, that had the shadow
of death upon them: Which was Oecolampadius his support (his name signifies a
lamp or light) on his deathbed; who, when his friends asked him, Whether the
light of the candle did not trouble him, clapped his hand on his breast, and said,
Here I have sufficient light, the light of Gods countenance.

In a word, To revive our hearts.
(to defraud your patience no longer)

God has revived our hearts (as Ezra speaks in the close of the Text) we are
even raised from the grave of an intestine War; and comforted with hopes that
we shall not, like raised Lazarus, fall back into the same grave again. And
this comfort, at the height of affliction, is like mercy at the block; like
welcome showers to the chopped ground; or like the Sunbeams after this flood:
like a shadow, a bower against scorching heat.

Man would never thus have spared man: and therefore David calls his kindness
to the house of Saul (that deserved ill at his hands) the kindness of God, 2 Samuel 9.3.
and not of man. Comfort is here entitled Reviving, or Re-enlivening in the
Hebrew Idiome: It is a kind of resurrection. But I must take leave.

Let me borrow Rhetoric from S. Paul: I beseech, Romans 12.1.
or conjure you (men, brethren, and Fathers) by all these mercies and pledges
of Gods love; and such others as we know not of (for it is with mercy as with
the Globe, Terra incognit^
it is thought the unknown part of the world is greater then what is
discovered) I beseech you that these mercies may be as nails fastened by the
master of Assemblies (as Solomon elegantly) to rivet the former propounded
duties into your heads, hearts, and lives; let the mercy of God lead us to
shame and sorrow for our sins; Let Gods Justice tutor us to be just: Let Gods
moderation and forbearance make an impression of mercy on us toward each other:
and let us not by reiterating, repeating the same sins, be guilty of the worst
of crimes, ingratitude: nor by our obstinacy, our iron sinew, exasperate God to
Judgment, Isa. 28.21. Genesis 3.8.
which is called his strange work. Toward which he walked so slowly, when he
went to doomb Adam; and deferred it to the cool of the day: whereas he ran to
meet the returning Prodigal; and renews his mercies every morning, and is still
aforehand with us: Like the Sun bidding us good morrow before we are up. That
we may not move God to put his mercies into suit, and to recover them out of
our hands: as God chooses to express himself by the Prophet, Hos. 2.9.
I will recover my wool, and my flax that I lent.

But if neither judgment, nor mercy; neither glad nor sad tidings; neither the
dark nor the bright side of the cloud of Providence be operative with us: you
put your Ministers to a stand, and pose us; who with Moses and S. Paul would
have our own Names blotted out of the book of life, as soon as yours, Exodus
32.32. Romans 9.3.
if we could help you, but Gods counsel shall stand. However we by dealing
freely with you, shall free our own souls from being guilty of your blood:
And as the Prophet incourages himself, though once he thought to give over
preaching, conceiving he labored and expended his strength in vain: Isa. 49.4.
Well, Yet my work is with the Lord, and though, Israel be not gathered, my
reward is with my God. I close with that of S. Paul to the Corinthians, 1 Cor.
10.15.
I speak to men of understanding, judge ye what I say.

(...) FINIS.

