A breife RELATION, of some of the most Remarkable Pasages of the ANABAPTISTS
in High and low Germany in the year, 1521. etc. Gathered out of the writings of
Sleyden, Antonius, Servanus, Lambertus, John Gastio, and others who write of
their Practices.

And Bullinger, Luther, Melancthon, Calvin, Vrsinus, and others who write
against their heresies.

When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice: but when the wicked
bears rule, the people mourn. Prove. 29.2.

For through covetousness shall they with fained words make merchandise of
you, whose Judgment now of a long time lingereth not, and their damnation
slumbereth not. 2 Pet. 2.3.

For such are false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into
the Apostles of Christ. And no marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into
an Angel of light. Therefore it is no great thing if his ministers also be
transformed as the ministers of righteousness, whose end shall be according to
their works. 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15.

By GEORGE PRESSICK, of Dublin in Ireland.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Roger Lord Broghill, Sir Charles Coote, and Sir
Theophilus Jones, Grace and peace be multiplied
Righ Honor.
I Have four years since put forth a book in answer to Mr. Thomas Patients
book, called the doctrine of baptism, and the distinction of Covenants, and I
did expect, that, Mr. Patient would have replied to mine, and therefore I did by
reading provide my self in part for a reioynder, but seeing he has not replied,
I have made bold to present to your Honors, something of what I had gathered
together, and by what I have observed from the Anabaptists and Quakers amongst
us: I have drawn up, I think the breifest relation that has been hitherto, of
the most remarkable passages both of Doctrine and practice in Germany 139
years ago, and so forward. In which, the Judicious Reader may observe, how
near these Sectaries in these Nations have advanced both in Doctrine, and
practice to these in that in Germany. And considering how God has raised up
your spirits, and how Isntrumental your Honors have been, in the hand of God
to suppress their insolent, tyrannical usurped Authority, which they
exercised over Gods people in this nation, to inslave us to their insatiable
lusts, and also how God has prospered your Honors endeavors therein, beyond
what we could in natural reason expect, in so short a time. Which plainly
demonstrates the work to be of God, and yet we may and ought, and that upon
well grounded reason own your Honors, as Gods instruments, to be the three
chief worthyes of Ireland, in this blessed work, and though there are many
other gallant spirits in this land, that have acted their several parts, and
are most honorable, yet none have attained to the Honor of the first three. I
therefore humbly beg leave to dedicate my service to your Honors, as your dues
and my duty. First for that your earnest care and endeavors for the defense of
the protestant religion, and the lawful liberties of the people have
manifestly appeared to all men. Secondly, that I may hereby acknowledge my
humble thankfulness First to God the author of all good, Secondly to your
Honors in hope of being a sharer in this mercy of deliverance, as I have had a
sad share in suffering, under their tyranny and wickedness, I humbly beg pardon
for my presumption, and I beseech the God of heaven, to keep your hearts
humble, and to deliver you from every evil way, until he bring you to his
Glory, which is the prayer of him, who is.

February. 1659. Your Honors humble servant Gorge Pressick, of Dublin.

A breife Relation of some Remarkable Passages, of the Anabaptists, in High and
low Germany.
Gathered out of the writings of Sleyden, Antonius, Servanus, Lambertus, John
Gastio, and others, who write of their practices. And Bullinger, Luther,
Malancthon, Calvin, Ursinus and other who write Books against their Heresies.
TRithenaeus Abbas, Aspergensis setts forth, in his Cronicle of the year, 1503.
The disposition of the commons in high, and low Germany. That there arose
agreat sedition of Peasants about Bruxels, which he calls Liga Solutaria, which
were sworn to these Articles (viz) to shake off the yoke of all higher powers,
and get liberty by force of Arms, to pull down all Magistrates, and kill all
that should stand against them, (I pray God bless England, Scotland, and
Ireland, from such plotts) and they engaged to seize on the City of Bruxells,
and invade the Marquess of Baden, and to seize on all the revenues of
Monasteries, Churches and Clergy men, to stay no where above twenty four hours,
but to go forward still, till they had brought many Countries in to their
society, to pay no more tithes, nor Lords rents, nor tribute, and who oever was
received into that league, was to say five times a day on his knees one Pater
noster, and one Ave Mary for the good success of their Enterprise, and their
word of Cognizance was the Virgin Mary, and St. John the Evangelist. But they
were timely prevented, and the authors put to death, by Maximillian their
Prince.

But by this, we may see from whence Anabaptists, and Quakers and Ranters, and
Levelers; all had their original, namely from the Papists, by their word of
Cognizance and their Ave Mary's and their Pater nosters.

If you compare these with the Anabaptists and other their doings some few
years fter, and now in this Age, in these Countries, only the Anabaptists
added something more to their licentious rebellion, as their rebaptizing and
poligamy, etc. but both were varmished with a Color of religion: For about the
year 1521. there arose a new sect in Saxonr much like our Anabaptists and
Quakers now, who boasted, that they talked with God, and God with them, and had
revelations, and that God Commanded them to kill all the wicked, and to make a
new world, wherein the godly shall reign alone Melancthon says, that Nicholas
Stoke was the first that broached this opinion, for (...) spoke to him by an
Angel, and revealed his will to him in dreams, promising him the place of the
Angel Gabriel, and the Empire of the world, he taught that the Saints must
reign in the world, and that he should be their leader to kill all the Kings
and Princes, and to purge the Church, he took upon him, to have the gift of
descerning spirits, to know the elect, from reprobates; he made holiness to
consist in speaking little, and living homely and sordidly, as our Quakers do.

In Nicholas Stokes school was Thomas Muntzer bred, who amplified his Masters
doctrine, he began to teach at Alstetum a place belonging to the Elector of
Saxony. He tanght that his Consorts must have a new baptism, And that
Christians must be of Austere Countenance, and speak, little and wear long
beards, and this he called the mortification of the flesh, and that they ought
to retire into deserts and private places he: ascribed much to dreams.

In that City he began to make a confederacy, administering an Oath, and taking
the names of all them that promised to assist him in his design of killing all
the ungodly and all Princes, and Magistrates, and erecting new ones in their
places, professing openly that he had commission from God, to punish wicked
Governors, and to change there civil policy, as Anabaptists have done with
us, and for this cause being expelled out of Saxony, he wandered up and down
Germany, and Helvetia, sowing the seeds of sedition: at length he came to
Mulhus, where many of his disciples resorted to him: where he prevailed in a
short time, to put down the Magistrates, and assumed to himself to judge all
causes, both civil, and Ecclesias^ciall, affirming that under the new
Testament, all causes must be judged by the word of God, and whatsoever he
determined was received as an Oracle, especially when he preached that all
goods must be common, and all men free and of equal dignity, an acceptable
doctrine, where the Nobillity and Gentry oppressed the poor people, he gave
also the Monasteries for public plunder; and those that had Estates, if he
could not persuade them to give it by arguments, he took it from them by
violence. No wonder then; if this new doctrine wonnemany of the meaner sort to
be of his opinion, who presently left working, and what they wanted, they took
from them that had it.

About that time in Daringen, Fueva and Franconia, forty thousand Boars and
Trades men-rose up in Arms, killed and ransacked a great part of the Nobility,
pilledged and burned many forts and Castles, and overthrew all like a sudden
inundation: for the banks of authority being, beaten down nothing could stop
their suries, till they lost themselves in their own Confusion by running
venturers in that holy war.

Muntzer's chief associate was on Henery Phiser, one that gave much heed to
dreams, and night visions, and amongst other visions, he said he had seen a
great company of rats in a stable, and that he had driven them all away, which
he interpretea as a command from God to take Arm and dispossess all the the
Nobility and Gentry. Whereupon he rushed into the Country, and pilledged
Castles and Churches, destroyed many of the Nobles and brings some of them
bound, and returns with a great booty, which success raised the minds of the
Boares, and caused another defection in the county of Mansfield: so Muntzer
hoping that the rebellion was universal, takes his journey from Mulhus, and
is presently supplied with a Company of Franchusians, but before he could do
much more, Count Mansfield stopped his course, for having raised in have some
companyes of horse, he falls upon him, and killed two hundred of his men; at
which the rude Boares were so terrified, that they all fled to Franckhus, this
skirmedge broke the edge of their fury, and gave time to John Electour of
Saxony, and his uncle George of Saxony, and Phillip Land-Grave of Hesse, and
Henery Duke of Brunswik and Count Mansfield, to raise, Fifteen hundred horse,
and some Companies of foot. The Boares were pitched upon a hill by Frankhus,
but very ill armed, and worse disciplined, the Princes sent to offer them
pardon, if they would yield up the authors of the sedition, but Muntzer
understood not that Gospel; and told the Boares that proffer came from the
Princes fearfullnesse, and that he was sent of God to command, and lead them in
that action, and their duty was to obey as Abraham did, when he was commanded
to offer his son, and that they should ceartinly overcome these and all other
enemies. It being promised, that the righteous should wash his foot, in the
blood of the wicked From hence we may see how Satan transforming himself into
an Angel of light, enters into and deludes poor people, until he brings them
to ruin; Muntzer further exhorted them to be valiant in the Lord, and to kill
every mothers son, for an acceptable sacrifice to the Lord. By this you may
guess, if Anabaptists, Quakers, and Ranters should get the upper hand, what
they would do: Muntzer further assured them, that God himself had promised him
victory, and endowed him with such strength, that he was able to turnt the
bullet back with his coat, and perceiving a rainbow in the sky, he turned
toward his Colors, where a rainbow was painted, look up said he to heaven,
here is a Joyful sign of Gods favor, the rainbow, the very Emblem of our
Colors, and besure that God promises us to be our standard bearer to fight
for us himself.

This new doctrine made a strong impression in some, but the Princes drawing
near with a warlike march, made a stronger impression of fear in that rude
multitude than Muntzers revelations and signs, the Princes began to play with
their Ordinance, one cannot well say to break their ranks, for they kept
neither rank nor sile, nor scarce their understanding: for, for a time they
neither advanced not fled, not put themselves in a postuer of defense, only
they had made some entrenchments, and they began to sing, Come holy Ghost,
expecting that God would fight for them, as their General Muntzer had promised
them, and that he would turn back the bullets with his coat, but then all
proved to be Satan's delusions, for the Princes advanced and came to handy
blows, away fled all the Boares, some one way, some another five thousand were
flayne, Frankhus taken the same day, and three hundred taken and executed,
Muntzer was found on a bed in Frankhus, sayning him to be long sick of an Ague,
but the truth is, he was brainsick of giddie-mindedness, but letters being
found about him, he was known to be Muntzer, which yet this lying Prohpet
denied long: he was executed by the common hangman, and his head set one a high
pole, in the field near Frankhus, in the year 1525. shortly after Phiser and
other rebels were taken and executed at Mulhus.

The rout then of these cracked brained seditious scismaticks seemed to be
rooted out, but the seeds remained; for in the year. 1527. arose another of
great learning, his name was Micher Hopman with several others, they denied
the incarnation of Christ in the virgins womb, Condemned the baptism of
children, and rebaptized themselves, and all that embraced that sect, They
would not allow Christians to recover their own by law, nor to take an oath,
nor to bear the office of a Magistrate, for they pulled down Magistrates where
they had strength, and gave the power of the sword to their Ministers, and
Prophets, who was to decide all differences, they undertook to kill all
Princes, and cut off the ungodly with another sword, than that of the spirit,
they taught that in their Churches all were holy, and that none could be saved
that would not make his goods common, and that it was lawful to have many
wives, and that all learning is profane, and that mean men are the fittest to
expound Scripture, and that there must be no ordinary Calling in the Church,
but every man must speak as he is inspired, and this is it which the
Anabaptists and Quakers and Popish Agents, that are amongst them, who are their
ringleaders, have been endeavoring in these three nations, these eight or nine
years by past: They taught that Christ must reign over all the world, and
therefore all other Kings and Princes must de slain, and what they taught they
went really about to practice until Hopman for his sedition was imprisoned at
Strasburg and his confederates repressed by the maigistrates, that crew
dispersed themselves in Westphallia, Frise, Holland and most parts of the low
countries, where they got many to join with them, and when they were
admonished, and by arguments Confuted, their answer was that the Spirit taught
them other ways, and would say, the spirit blows where it lists as our
Quakers and Annabaptists say now, judging none to have the Spirit but
themselves, but their rage could not be kept in long, for sometimes they would
rush out of Cities and places where they were in great companies, and ransack
Convents, and great men's houses; pretending for their warrant, the Example of
the Israelites, that took the spoil of the Egyptians, yet in these incursions,
they made conscience of entering into the temples of such as were not
rebaptized, as Lutherans or Calvinists, but made no Conscience to lie with
their wives, as being left a prey for the godly.

It is a Grief to tell how that in the City of Munster, truth made way for
errors, for one Bernard Rottman came to St. Maryes Church hard by Munster, and
for a time preached good Doctrine, as I fear many others do amongst us for a
time to get into favor. The people would have brought him into the City, but
the Papists gave him a sum of money to depart, and he loving the wages of
unrigteousnesse did depart for some time, and returned again, at which time
some of the best sort, brought him into the City, but the Papists kept the
Church-dores shut, they made him a pulpit in the Church yard. Rotman, seeing
the progress of reformation, sends to Marpurge, and desires some Ministers
might be sent to carry on the work of reformation, which was done so, that they
challenged the Popish Clergy, to dispute, and presented thirty Articles against
them, and did so prevail, that the Senate allowed the reformed party, six
Churches in the City.

Hitherto all went well, if it could have stayed there, in the interim comes a
pestilent Anabaptist, a Tailor of Leyden, John Becold by name; but better known
by the name of John of Leyden, this man begins to confer with Ministers and
people, mantaining the baptism of Children to be unlawful, seducing many and
sowering the whole lump with the leaven of his perverse doctrine, this was the
year 1533. He being assisted by one John Matthias, a Baker of Harlem, and one
Harman Strapeda, who had been brought up with Henery Rell, a little before
executed at Vtrech for his villainy. With several others, these had their
meetings in the night, and got a great party to join with them, who they
incensed with most desperate resolutions, many of them being the very filth of
men, invited thither by the Anabaptists, from neighboring Provinces, till then
Rotman did well, but seeing such multitudes of Anabaptists, increasing daily,
he hunting after popular applause, joins himself to them by an open revolt,
the Magistrates and people not yet infected with that new seditious Doctrine,
finding so much distraction amongst them, commanded all forrainers, and
sectaries, to depart out of the City, but they went out at one gate and came in
at another, saying, they must not desert Gods cause: The Senate to prevent
sedition, appointed a public conference, where Rotman and his faction
appeared, but was opposed by a worthy divine, one Herman Basilius, that the
Senate was satisfied, and concluded for the truth, and the Anabaptists teachers
were sentenced to be banished, but they being resolved not to go, lay lurking
among the sectaries, whom they had poisoned with their doctrine, and still
increased as they did of late here in Ireland.

One of the Anabptists, faining himself to be seized with a prophetical
spirit, ran through the City crying, repent and be baptized again, or else the
wrath of God will fall upon you, this stirred up the people, for many ran with
him crying the same words, that many of the simpler sort were baptized, some
for fear of the wrath of God, and many for fear of the wrath of men, for this
crying and running through the streets, ended in ransaking the best houses, and
laying violent hands on the owners, for many that lay hid before came forth and
rushed into the market place, crying out that all that were (...) must be
killed presently as ungodly, and heathens: and they seized on the Townhouse,
and the weapons there, and began to dominere as in a conquered place. The other
party gathered themselves in a place called Overwater, and both sides were
fortifying the places for three days, till hostages were given on both sides,
and agreed that every one should enjoy the freedom of his religion, and all
should go home in peace; this tumult was toward the end of December. 1533.

But this would not satisfy the Anabaptists, for we now see by woeful
experience, that Anabaptists will either have all, or else they will not be
satisfied: for this composition gave but time to the Anabaptists, to strengthen
themselves; for in 1534. Rotman, and Bernard Knipperdoling, etc. Sent letters
to Ousburg, Wesel, Croswel, and Waringdorp; that God had sent a holy Prophet to
Munster who spoke wonders and showed the right way to salvation, and that if
they would leave their houses and come to Munster in all have, they should get
ten times more than they left, and with worldly riches, get also spiritual
wealth.

These fair promises, drew all the scum of the neigbouring towns, to Munster,
the poor and Idle people liking well of that religion, that made all men alike,
and all goods common, and put down the Magistrates: that should restrain their
licentiousness. But can any man imagine, that all these were believers before
they were rebaptised, that was won with this kind of doctrine, so pleasing to
the flesh, as to share other men's goods, and to have as many wives as they
pleased, yet in a short time the City was full of strangers, and vagrants that
looked upon the place as a land of promise, and that they must expulse
Cananites, the richest of the town being frighted at their coming, thought it
their safest course quietly to give them place, and without ^oyse to with raw
themselves out of the City.

The Anabaptists seeing themselves strong, ran to St. Lawrence Church and burnt
it, with all the houses about it, and pillaged other Churches, depopulated
Convents and Colleges, and burnt a great Library, and drove all the
protestants out of City but some few that they mistook for Anabapists, drying
get you hence all ye wicked, else ye shall be slain, and with such violence
they thrust them out, that some women with Child, miscarried in the tumult, and
now they being masters of the City, began to order their new state, they made
two Consulls, Knipperdoling, and Kapinbrook: and two and twenty Senatore, or
Aldermen that had the civil power, and the Prophets wereto rule matterrs of
religion, under which name they governed Church and Commonwealth, for all
matters were within the compass of religion, and what ever a Prophet said to
be revealed to him passed for law, the must famous of these Prophets was John
Matthias, a Baker of Harlem, who was in effect, a perpetual Dictator in
Munster that made laws and thanged them at his pleasure, by him was the
aforesaid Order made, his chief adjunct was John of Leyden, and the next was
Bernard Kniperdoling, and by a revelation of John Matthias, an order was made
upon pain of death that all the gold and silver, and moveable goods in the
town, should be brought to the common stock. For which they appointed a public
house, the order was obeyed more for fear than conscience. For two maids
prophetesses, took upon them to find out the fraud: to that common stock were
brought all the goods of those that were driven out of the City, with that
common stock they kept four great Ordinaries, where all fed in common, none
being allowed to diet at home unless he were sick, plenty of provision they
had, and they husbanded it very ill, feasting every day, until the Bishop
beseidged them, and began to cut off their victuals, and then they stinted
themselves, but with too large allowance, for the Town was so strong by
nature, besides the fortification, that the Bishop despaired to take it but by
famine.

The Prophets then turned their care to the spiritual government, Commanding
that none should keep any books but Scripture, and all the books that could be
found but Bibles were brought to a public place and burned: from executing of
books, they fell to execution of persons. For Hubart Trutling, a bl^ck-smith
seeing John Matthias pass by, said there goes a shitten Prophet, for this
offense he was brought before the congregation, and condemned to death: John
Matthias, would himself be the executioner, and first he wounded him with an
halbart, and after shot him through with a pistol, and then pardons him
saying, that God was appeased, and that he had a revelation, the man should not
die, which proved false, for the poor man died in a few days after: we may
from hence see the truth of that in the 12 of Proverbs, the tender mercies of
the wicked are cruel, though they call themselves Saints and Prophets.

But John Matthias, to make amends for his false revelation, when the man was
dead, runs in a mad mood through the City, bearing a pike, Crying that God the
father had commanded him, to drive the enemies from the City, and so rushed
alone into the enemies Camp to drive them away, and was their slain.

John Matthias being dead, John of Leyden comforted the people saying, that he
knew long before by revelation, that John Matthias should die that death, and
that himself should marry his wife, which he did shortly after, though he had
one before, but she was one of singular beauty, able to make a lusty young
Prophet of about six and twenty years old, as he was, to preach up the Doctrine
of poligamy, which he did shortly after, and had Fifteen wives, but he fell to
other work before to make way for that, in the interim Knipperdoling, came
forth with a revelation, that they that were in high places should be brought
down to the lowest, and the lowest raised up to the highest We have seen this
by woeful experience acted amongst our selves. But John of Leyden met him with
another revelation, that seeing it was the heavenly fathers pleasure that those
that were, highest should be brought lowest, he was sent of God to put down
Knipperdoling from his place of Conful, and to make him the hangman, and for
that purpose he gave him from God a sword to execute Justice.

But there was need of more revelations for the alteration of government: John
of Leyden was led by a prophetical spirit upon the City walls, where he put
off his cloths, and ran naked through the City, crying, the kingdom of Sion
is come; the kingdom of Sion is come. By which we may take notice by the way,
that our Quakers, and Ranters, are acted by the same deluding spirit that John
of Leyden was acted by: then John of Leyden returned home, and falls into a
deep prophetical sleep and dreams three days, and three nights together, and
being awaked, he comes forth and speaks not a word, but by signs calls for a
table book, as Zachariah did, and there he writes down the names of twelve men
cobblers, and tinkers, all trades men, but on Gentleman of the City, to these
he assigned the government of the commonwealth, putting down the order set up
by John Matthias, affirming that was the Fathers good will, which he had
received by revelation: In that table book also he writ, and charged the
preachers to teach the people, or else he would have it ratified by the
congregations; which was, that a man is not tied to one wife, but that he may
marry as many as he pleases, and when his Doctors would not approve of that
monstrous paradox, he cited them before his twelve Magistrates, and there he
recoverd his tongue keeping a great clamor, and throwing down his clothes upon
the ground and the new testament upon them, swearing by that holy book, that
the doctrine which he had announced, was revealed unto him from heaven, and
threatened, that if they consented not, God would withdraw his mercy from them,
and to testify his evidence of spirit and Power, he commanded the first
opposer of that new Gospel, to be beheaded, which was presently done, and for
three days together they preached for confirmation of that opinion, but the
best confirmation was his own practice; for presently he married three wives,
one of which was the relict of the grand prophet John Matthias, and married
again and again until he had Fifteen wives; many followed his example, and it
became a matter of great praise to have many wives.

This seems to have been the first motive, to move him to broach that
doctrine. A souldeir of the Bishops having changed parties, was harbored in
the house where John of Leyden lay, and he observed in the night, that this
holy Prophet left his own bed, and went to the servant woman's bed. John of
Leyden perceiving he was discovered, calls the soldier aside, and gives him
gold to keep his Counsel, but after mistrusting the soldiers tongue, he
thought it safer to countenance the fact by a public doctrine, of the
lawfullness to have many wives: this doctrine then was readily embraced, by
those whose Age and temper was ablest to consult with flesh and blood, none
refrayning himself from having many wives for want or Coveteousness, for their
wives were kept upon the common stock, and after receiving that law, the
brethren ran to the handsomest women in the City: striving who should be the
first served, and lay with them without any contract, so that within a few
days, there was scarce a woman of fourteen years of age but she was violated.

But those of the City, that had some remnant of sound mind, and groned under
that tyrany: made a party and laid hold of John of Leyden, Kniperdoling and the
rest of the prophets, but the frantic rabble, which was the greatest number
took Arms, and rescued their Prophets, and killed fifty of their adversaries,
most of them in cold blood: and with several kinds of devised crueltyes: John
of Leyden encouraged the murderers, crying, he that would do God service
should give the first blow.

Whilst they were thus wiving, and thriving in Munster, the Bishop that
besieged them had fair play, if he had husbanded his time well, but hitherto he
bore the charge of the seige himself, but was after assisted with men and money,
by Harman Archbishop of Collen, and John Prince of Clevis, and others about
which there was a meeting at Coblents, December the 13. 1534. But this delay
gave time to John of Leyden, to project new designs. He declared that the
spirit of prophecy was departed from him, and rested upon John Tuscocorer a
Goldsmith of Warendorp whom he before hand had suborned to counterfeit an
Enthusiasme and revelation from heaven, this new Prophet called the
congregation together, and declared, that it was the will of the heavenly
father, that John of Leyden should be King of the universe, and that with
mighty Arms he should kill all other Kings, and Princes: and destroy all the
ungodly, and save the people that love righteousness. Whereupon John of Leyden
fell on his knees and lifting up his hands said, men and brethren, so much. I
knew long ago, but would not reveal it until now, God has made choice of
another to bear witness of that truth, Then said Tuscocorer, thus says the
Lord, as I made Saul King in Israel, and after him David taken from the
sheepfold. I have set John Becold to be King in Sion, give ear, O Israel, thou
shall abrogate thy magistrates and put down thy preachers, and in stead of
them, establish twelve simple men, without learning Arts and tongues, and they
shall read my word, unto my people, and without any help, but my spirit expound
it, and has not this been the practice of Tailors and Cobblers etc. amongst us:
and into them will I pour the spirit of wisdom and understanding, then giving
a sword to John of Leyden, otherwise called John Becold. To thee, Father
Beccold says he, the Father gives this sword, and calls thee not only to
be King in Sion, but over all the world, and to extend thine Empire unto the
ends of the earth, this oracle was followed with great shouting, and
acclamations of the people, crying, God save the King, and as it was then with
these, so it is now amongst us, if they could prevail to bring their
Enterprises to pass, our Anabaptists, and Quakers, would neither have King
Magistrates, nor ministers but of themselves, one Grande said, he hoped that
before Mayday, there should not be a man in the land should he employed in any
places of trust but such as walked in their way, meaning as Anabaptists, they
would have kings but of their own fraternity, instead of having one King, but
of their own fraternity, for instead of having one King, they would have five
hundred Kings: for every man that had any command would reign as a King in his
precincts, some by woeful experience have found it so: they would have
Parliaments too, but of themselves, and their own choosing, they would take
away the privileges of the people from choosing, and destroy all the
fundamental laws of the Land, they would have ministers too, but they should
be such as were without learning, such as John Tuscocorer prophesied, John of
Leyden should have in stead of Orthodox Ministers: their threatening, slighting,
and despising Ministers, and endeavoring to make fewer Parishes and fewer
Ministers makes the truth of this appear to all men's sight, that is not
wilfully blind.

This new King John of Leyden created four Councelours of State, the chief
whereof, was one Gerard a booke-binder, and one Talbek he made Lord steward of
his household, and one Kipinbrok Treasurer of his plate and Jewels, and
Kinperdoling Governor of the City, and appointed twelve Archers for his guard.

This Tailor King presently made use of his skill to make himself fine in
clothes, he translated the copes, and carpets of Churches and Convents they had
robbed, into doublets and breeches and cloaks, which set out his Majesty all in
gold and silver; his horse wore a suitable livery, with gold and silver saddles,
and foot cloths: thus he appeared abroad, having his chief Officers riding
before him in state, next to him rid two young men richly attired, one carrying
a naked sword, with a golden hilt set with precious stones, the other carried a
Bible, and tripple Crown of gold glittering with diamonds, himself wore a great
chain of Gold about his neck, like a collar of some noble Order, with a golden
globe, having a golden sword, through it, hanging at the chain with this
Motto. John King of new Jerusalem, the king of Righteousness of, this whole
world, after him followed Fifty Pencioners with party colored garments of ash
color and Gr^sse green, and white caps, and golden rings on every fingar,
making the Ash color an emblem of mortification the grass green of
regeneration, the white caps of innocence, the golden rings of charity, but
amongst these prophetical riddles, he ordered his court, with so much state
as, if he had been a King borne, truly but that so many godly orthodox divines,
have written of these things that lived in that Age, and in those countries, we
could scarce have believed that men should be given up to such delusions and
that we see others amongst us partly treading the same steps.

In that royal array he showed himself three times a week, and went up to a
high throne set up with great magnificence, where he judged all controversies,
most of which were about divorce, for by his new gospel any man that were
weary of his wife, might put her away and take another, this was the king of
Sions Government. Then this jolly Tailor King having stitched up a kingdom in
have, turns his care to go through stitch with it, to have supply to remove
the seige, and because it should be done in a prophetical way, Tus^^corer his
chief Agent, came to him it seems by his appointment, as he sat on his
throne and told him, King John, The Gospel must be renewed by thee, thus says
the Lord God, go say to the King of Sion, that he prepare my holy supper in the
great Church yard, and choose teachers to send into the four quarters of the
world, to teach the ways of righteousness, and according to this Anabaptists
and Quakers have gone all Ireland over, a public Communion was celebrated of
above four thousand men, but at that time the King accused a man of treason,
and cut off his head with his own hand and with that bloody hand, he took upon
him to administer the Sacrament, being assisted by the Queen, sometime wife to
the lying Prophet, John Matthias, who then did the office of a minister: after
supper the King asked them if they were all willingly disposed to do the will
of God, and to suffer and die for the faith, they answered they were all of that
mind then Tuscocorer their Prophet read a note the names of those he said God
had chosen for that legation, of whom himself was chief, they were twenty six,
seven were sent to Osneburg, six to Cockswold, five to Warendorp and eight to
Suzat; these new Apostles went crying in the streets of these Cities that the
people should repent and join with them, or else they should shortly perish,
with that noise they raised tumules, and were apprehended and brought before
the Magistrates, to whom they said they were sent of the Father to offer them
peace, when it was but John of Leyden that sent them, which peace they said, if
they refused, Gods wrath would follow for their hardness of heart and
ungratefullness, this was just like our Quakers doctrine now, and they affirmed
that the time was come, fore prophesied of that the whole world should follow
righteousness, which God would work by their King, and then he should deliver
up the kingdom to his Father, and being questioned before the Magistrates,
about their faith, they said that none in the world had the true doctrine but
they, which they would seal with their blood, and that since the Apostles time
till then the word of God had not been purely preached, that there was four
great Prophets in the world, two good which was David of Delft, and John of
Leyden, and two bad, the Pope and Luther, Being asked by what Scripture they
could justify their deposing so many good men from their houses, and goods,
and make so bold with their wives; they answered that the meek should inherit
the earth, and that in the same manner, God gave the Egyptians goods to the
Jsraelites, and a among goods they reckoned wives, and that they might
lawfully have as many as they pleased, so that when one was with child they
might take another in her stead, and they put away barren women and past child
bearing, as useless, and that they knew by revelation, that their King wuld
shortly be King of the whole earth and denied all other Magistrates but their
own King, for which they were put to death, and here was the end of their
Apostleship, that should have preached a gospel of rebellion, and
licentiousness over all the world, this was in December. 1534.

To draw toward the last Act, of that wild King among the Prophets that were
taken, on Henery Hilversum was saved by the Bishop in sallying out of the
City, who let him go, and he returned into Munster. 1535. and said God had
delivered him out of prison by an Angel, and told the King that God had given
him three rich Cities, that should embrace his party, namely, Amsterdam,
Deventer, and Wessel; for which news the King made him one of his Court, and
dispatched away one James of Kemp to Amsterdam, to bring it to his obedience,
soon after the King hearing that many of his sect were in Holland, and Frize in
great troops, as sheep without a shepherd, he sent one John Giles, with a great
sum of money, that he like another Moses should be their leader through the
wilderness to bring them to Canaan, that was to Munster, but when much time
was past, and he heard nothing of these Jsraelites nor their Moses, he sent the
Prophet Hilversum and one John Nortell, to Holland and Frize to hasten them, or
to raise new troops, and for that expedition he loaded Hilversum with as much
gold as he could well bear. It seems he prophesied for gold, and he had now
gotten it, therefore he went no further than the Bishops camp, and there
stayed, and writ a letter to the people in Munster, that his former prophesies
were impostures, exhorting them to open their eyes and see how they were
deluded by acompany of rascals, and what beastly lives they led, and how near
they were to destruction. John Nortell went as far as Deventer and soon
after returned without effect, this letter moved some of the people, for their
community of goods was violated, they had their bread by weight, but their King
still feasted. Which one of his wives disliking said, she thought it not
pleasing to God, in such a public misery, while some pined with hunger,
others should surfeit with plenty, the King being told it, brought her to the
market place with his other wives, made her kneel down and cut off her head,
and made his other wives to sing and give praise to their heavenly Father: at
the same time two young men were taken running away and brought to the King,
who killed them both with his own hands, and to appease the people, he told
them that he would not have thought that they being borne again by a new
baptism, would show themselves so impatient in their suffering for Gods cause,
whereas they should with Paul suffer hunger, cold and nakedness to attain
salvation.

But Easter came, at which time their King had promised them deliverance, but
his disciples he had sent to Hollond and Frise, not the rabbel route he
expected came not, which put the Prophet King to a plunge, he shut up himself
six days, and fained himself sick, and then came forth to the people, and
said, God had in his sickness set him upon a blind ass, and laid upon him
the sins of the whole multitude, whereby they were freed from their sin,
and this was the deliverance God had promised them at Easter, this poor Lord of
Misrule, King John all his hopes being frustrate, could no longer pacify the
people, for famine was so feirce, that horses, dogs and cats were consumed, the
grass and the very root; were picked out of the ground, in that extremity the
King commanded the gates to be set open, and that so many as would should go
forth, so that in one day a thousand of all ages and sexes went out, and
yielded themselves to the Prince, who received them, sed them, and let them go.

A few days after, the King proclaimed that as many as wanted faith in Gods
help should avoid the town, but withal he said those that would forsake the
faith should be forsaken of God, many were so blindly zealous, his speeches
stayed them, yet many were so fed with starved mice, broiled shoes and lean
prophesies, they took the safety prosered them. Antomius Corvinus a Lutheran
divine writes, that he had seen books, when the town was taken, whose covers
were eaten in the famine. Children half eaten were found, yet the King had six
months provision left for his own family, the town was taken in June 1535.
having endured a left of eighteen months. Upon the surprise, the Townsmen
cried for quarter and had it, but the King resisted to the last in St. Lamberts
Churchyard, and was with much ado taken with Kniperdoling, and Krechling
another Prophet, and Rotman would not yield, but was slain in the Conflict.

The King and no King, was sent Prisoner to a castle four miles from Mu^ster,
he went thither a little faster then he would, being tied to the tail of a
galloping horse, Kniperdol^ng and Krechling were sent prisoners to another
place, soon after all three were brought to Telgate where the Bishop asked
John of Leyden by what authority, he made himself King over his City, John of
Leyden asked him again, who had given him authority over that City and people,
he answered he came to it by election, and I said John of Leyden came in by the
will and calling of God, two Lutheran Divines were sent to confer with John
of Leyden, and Kniperdoling; the first did abujre many of his errors, and would
hear reasons. But Kniperdoling, was like a mad beast would neither hear nor
answer reason, but stood only upon revelation and a particular spirit as our
Quakers do, they were condemened and executed as Traitors and Rebels, and
Krechling suffered the like death. J. of Le^d^n hearing the sentence read, he
confessed that indeed he had offended the Magista^^s but not offended God, thus
died this imaginary K of justice by the hand of justice, and there was the end
of his kingdom and prophesies, he was about twenty six years of age, a lusty
young Prophet, of a fair proportion, of an awful yet lovely presence, of a
present wit, eloquent, close, politic, ambitious, which aspired to no less
then the dominion of the world; he was a dangerous instrument of Satan, the
good Lord destroy the plots of such where ever they are.

What other tumults were raised in Frezeland, Holland, and other places by the
Anabaptisticall crew, especially in Amsterdam and Leyden, may be seen at (...)
in the province and besotted the minds especially of the vulgar sort under the
color of simplicity, sincerity, humility, charity etc. So that many, otherwise
good and zealous persons, sided with them, and were deluded by them, as too
many do at this day.

But these sectaries brake into Fractions, and like new Incendiares prosecuted
each other with inveterate minds, and writings, thundering against one another,
and delivering each other to Satan: to set forth their several opinions were
almost impossible, but it is well known that then, and now at this day, they
are divided into several Classes, and names derived either from their
Ringleaders, or from the course of life they follomed, or the place of their
entertainment.

In the front are placed the Muntzerians, so called from Muntzer, that grand
incendiary their general; others were called Hulites, from John Hull, who his
after example called themselves the Corporal Israel of God: he taught that all
the Cananites were to be cut down with the sword, and that the day of judgment
was at hand, that the angel was sounding the last trumpet: others were called
the Hopmannians from Melcher Hopman, one furnished with popular eloquence, he
first grew famous at Argentum, and drew a great sort of Disciples after him,
that they cried him up for Elias: others were called Servetians from Michael
Servetus a Spaniard, who for his execrable and not once to be named
blasphemies, against the sac^ed Trinity spread abroad and maintained with great
obstinacy, and other wickedness, he was burnt at Geneva, breathing out his soul
in blasphemies. The Davideans had their denomination from David, George a
Batavian, an infamous Imposter, both for blasphemies and shameful lusts, who
came to that height of impiety, as to arrogate to himself to be Christ the
Lord, to be the eternal son of the eternal Father, to apply to himself the
prophesies concerning Christ our Savior, which blasphemies and other dotages
he compiled into a book entitled wonders, but was bitterly inveighed against,
even by other Anabaptists, whereupon he renounced his own name, and sled,
calling himself by the name of John a Bruck, he went to Basil a famous City,
where with the direful sting of an accusing conscience, rather then any bodily
infirmity he dyed: all these miscreants with an outward form of godliness,
drew multitudes of followers after them.

In January 1535. It was discovered that the Anabaptists had a plot to set
Leyden on fire by night, and although timely notice was given, fire was set in
several places of the town, houses were searched, and the chief of the
conspiratours taken together in one house, fifteen men and five women, the men
were beheaded, and the women drowned, and so baptized the third time.

The neath month in Amsterdam one Theodoret a tailor, who bear himself for a
Prophet, fell upon his face, and prayed with great vehemence, and rising as it
were out of an ecstasy I have seen God (...) Heaven, then he said he descended
into Hell, and searched every corner. Its possible Mr. Gray might descend from
that Tribe, he knowe's Hell so well, because he declares He^, to be paved with
Kings crown, and Bishops Sculls, etc. but thou, says this Prophet to one of
the company, art not good enough for Hell, then the poor condemned man fell on
his knees craving pardon and the Prophet anounced him a full remission of all
his sins, another night the Prophet and six men more and five women, who had
left their husbands in bed met in a house, after some time spent in prayer and
teaching, the Prophet stripped off all his clothes, and his shirt, and threvv
all into the fire, and commanded them all to do the like, and they did so, the
women having not so much as a hairface, nor any thing to hide their shame: for
the Prophets pleasure was to burn all as a sweet sacrifice to God, then he
commanded them to follow him, and so running and his disciples after him
through the streets, they cried horribly Woe, Woe, Woe, the divine vengearce,
the divine vengeance, which put the whole town in an uprore, thinking they had
been surprised by some enemy: they were all taken but one woman that slopped
aside, and brought before, the Magistrates, and they stood naked before Court,
they refused garments offered to cover them, saying they must have no covering,
for they were the ^aked truth, they were kept in prison till the great
conspiracy, about two months after, and then executed.

In another Town at noon ^^y, five Anabaptists ran naked through the streets
with swords in their hands, crying, in the name of the Lord, that the blessing
of God lay upon one part of the Town, and his curse on the other part, and
soon after were followed, with others of the same faction in Arms, but the
Magistrates raised in have some companies of Archers to oppose them, the
Authors of the sedition were taken and the rest quieted for a time. The same
day such another sedition was raised at Harlem, in which six Anabaptists were
slain, and two at the Hague were executed shortly after, six of the most
seditious were burnt at Harlem, and two women d^owned

John Gastio in his Book says, it was their constant doctrine that women must
be common, and three reasons they gave for it worthy to be registered, to
persuade honest women to prostitute their bodies, if they would be saved: the
first was that Christians must renounce those things they love best, and
therefore women must renounce their beloved honesty. The second was, that for
Christ's sake, we must undergo any kind of infamy, the third was that Publicans
and harlots go to heaven before Pharisees, lying with other women than their
wives they called spiritual marriages, with that doctrine they had seduced two
sisters at St, Gall near Zurick as John Gastio writes in his third Book p. 21.
soon after they were rebaptised, being in bed two spiritual husbands came and
lay with them, but with such fervent spirit that they brake the bottom of the
bed, the noise whereof wakened the people in the house, who coming up in have
to know the matter, found two spiritual ^

They had another main reason for community of women, that as Christi^^ are all
one spirit, so they must be all one body: its very like the Ranters teach
these: doctrins now the author says that these two poor maids of St. Gall.
before they were Anabaptists had been much solicited, and could never be won
until they were Anabaptists, and then were persuaded to be whores for
conscience sake: others under pretense of childish innocence, would ride naked
upon sticks, and hobby horses like children in great companies, and women would
run naked with them, and then in pure innocence they lay together, so in the
end it proved to be childrens play indeed.

In the same town one being in his prophetical mood, called his father,
mother, brothers and sisters together, and commanded his brother to kneel down,
and with one blow he cut off his head, and said the will of God was done, and
coming before the Burgomaster, he said I announce unto thee, the day of
judgment, it being the year 1541. a day which two years before they had
foretold should be the day of Judgment: but the Burgomaster announced him his
day of judgment, and he was executed as he deserved.

It were almost an endless piece of work, to reckon up all their Doctrines and
practices, but this I have gathered to give an hint of their woeful
proceedings, where they got to any head, and we may see the sad symptoms
hereof amongst our selves, some have not spared to say, they hoped within a
short time, there should not be a minister left in Ireland, and have they not
rooted out the Parliaments and all the fundamental laws of these lands, and
as John of Leyden did, assumed a usurped power to themselves to make laws, and
abolished laws at their pleasure, and exercised tyranny and oppression over
the poor people, and have they not assumed a regal power, if their wings be
not clipped, to call a Parliament of their own, with no less then one and twenty
Kings, I mean officers of the Army, to have a negative vote in the Parliament,
so that if God do not restrain them, and stir up his people to withstand them,
It is to be feared the consequence that will follow may prove as bad, if not
worse, then their proceedings in Germany, yet they call themselves Saints and
holy people, and righteous persons, and all others that differ from them in not
being rebaptised they counted wicked and ungodly and heathens, not yet come out
of Babylon, whereas upon trial there will little difference be found between
them and, those you read of in Numbers 16.3. Corah, Dathan and Abyram, for just
so they dealt with Magistrates and Ministers. Moses and Aaron as these do with
ours now, seeing ye take too much upon you, ye somes of Levi, seeing all the
Congregation is holy every one of them, to these three Ch^rah, Da^han and
Abyram We may compare the three ringlerders of Anabaptists, Quakers and Ranters
for as then Corah, etc. gathered two hundred and fifty Princes famous in the
Congregation, men of renown to take part with them in their rebellion. So these
in England, Scotland, and Ireland, have gathered, I may justly say two hundred
and fifty Officers in the Army, famous in the Congregation, men of ^ them to
take too much upon them, seeing all their Congregations arch o^y in their own
esteem every one of them. And thefore like Thomas Munster and John of Leyden,
they would either remove or kill all Princes and Magistrates; and all the
ungodly, and root out ministry, but what the end was of these wicked men for
their rebellion, The Chapter shows at large, and the two hundred and fifty
that took their parts, and with their brass censers offered strange fire as
Nadab and Abihu did. Levit. 10.1, 2. Fire came out from God and Consumed them.
I desire these fearful examples of Gods displeasure may be a warning to
others, for in due time God will show who are holy, and who not holy, and as in
Revela. 2.2. He will try them that say they are Apostles, and are not but, are
liars, and those that call themselves Jews, as some of the Quakers do, and are
not but of the Synagogue of Satan ver. the 9. and those that call themselves
Prophets and Prophetesses and are not, but teach rebellion, and seduce the
people, ver. 20. He will also try those that say they are Saints, and are not
but live more like Heath^ns, and those that say they are Christ and are not, as
James Naylor, and James Millner of Beakley in Lancasheer, who also said that
George Fox was John the Baptist, such false Prophets and prophesies as these we
have heard too much of in these three Nations of late, so that it behooves all
godly persons both civil and military and Ministers and people to endeavor by
all lawful means to defend the truth against such seducers.

FINIS.
Certain reasons against some Points of Popery, which they are desired to
answer if they can.
Of works of Supererogation.
FIrst, we demand being the Pope does brag that he has in the treasury of the
Church, the superabounding pains and travells of Saints, Munks, Martyrs and
others, which is called works of Supererogation, and which the Pope converteth
into payment, for the panishments due unto others, distributing them by
indulgence; We demand who has put the suffering of the Saints, etc. into the
Popes treasury to be thus distributed.

Secondly, we demand when this distribution began.

Thirdly how shall we be assured that God will receive that payment for us.

Fourthly, We demand why God should receive such payment for us, seeing the
death of Jesus Christ is sufficient payment.

Fifthly, how do ye prove that Jesus Christ does give to any one that virtue to
pay a debt which ^.

Sixthly, has the Pope also in the Treasury of the Church, the punishment and
travells of Noah, Abraham, Jacob and others, and to whom does he distribute
them.

Seaventhly, why did not the Sacrificers in the time of the law distribute them
to the faithful in their times?

Eighthly, why did not Jesus Christ; nor the Apostles, nor their disciples, in
all the first Age of the Church distribute any indulgence unto the dead.

Ninethly, why was it that they did not celebrate any Jubilee, nor establish any
such privileges as the Pope does, now, whereupon he that causes certain
Masses to be said, draws a soul whom he will choose out of Purgatory, nor
give any bulls to deliver a foul out of purgatory, nor tie the remission of
sins to a certain place, where the pardons are to be procured? Is it because
the Popes have better inventions than the Apostles and others had, or that God
is grown more liberal than he was in former, ^ges.

Tenthly, how do you prove that there are any works of Supererogation seeing
God requires that we should love and serve him with all the heart, and all the
soul, and all the strength, and all the mind; Now if God requires all, who is
he that can do more than all, that he should best of superabounding works more
than God requires, when he requires all.

For whatsoever any man can do, or perform that is lawful to be done, it is
included in this word, All, and it is either expressed or included in some
command or precept in the word of God: and if it be not expressed nor included
in the word of God, then God will say of it as in Isa. 1.1. ^ho h^h required
this at your hands, and God will esteem of it, as he says, Isa. 66.3. He that
kills on ox is as if he slew a man, and he that Sacrifices a lamb, as if he
cut off a dogs neck, and he that offers an oblation, as if he offered swines
blood, and he that burns incense, as, as if he blessed an Idol, and the
reason is given in the latter part of the verse, they have chosen their own
ways, and their so^l delights in their abominations, for whatsoever you do
that is not either expressed nor included in some command or precept, in which
God requires all; it is your own ways, and abominations, and not Gods ways,
and therefore God will not accept it. Ergo there is no works of Supererogation.

Secondly of Merits.
First, how do you prove by Scripture, that any man can merit any good at the
hands of God, seeing Christ himself tells us, that when we have done all that
we can, we should count our selves unprofitable servants, and have done no more
than what is our duty to do, and therefore not meritorious as to Eternal life.

Secondly, the favor of God, says Mr. Perkins, is of such infinite dignity,
that no creature is able to do a work to countervaile the favor of God, but
Christ alone.

Thirdly, says he, for one good work we do, we do many evil works, the
offense whereof defaceth the merit of our best works, and makes them too light
in the balance of the law of God.

Fourthly, God sh^wes mercy unto thousands of them that love him, and keep his
Commandments. Exodus 20 6. Whence we reason thus, that where reward is given
upon mercy, there it is not given upon merit, but reward is given upon mercy,
even to them that love him and keep his Commandments the refore not given upon
merit.

Fifthly, Christ himself has taught us to pray, give us our daily bread, it
must needs therefore, says Mr Perkias, be a Satanicall insolency for any man
to think that he can merit eternal life, who cannot merit bread; but ought
daily to pray for it.

Sixthly, the Apostle in his Epistle, Titus. 5.3. says, that it is not for any
works of righteousness that we have done, but of mercy we are saved, and if of
mercy, then it is not of merit.

Thirdly of Purgatory.
First, whereas Papists teach that Jesus Christ is the intercessor and
meadiator for those souls which they say are in Purgatory. We demand why they
do not presently go forth upon his intercession, but remain some hundred or
thousand years, as appears by five or six thousand year pardons, which the
Po^e grantetth, unless you think that there is more efficacy in the Popes
pardons then there is in Christ's inercession, answer it if you can.

Secondly, we demand how it comes to pass that other religious men now a days
in small account in (...) Carmelites have the privilege granted them by the
Pope, that they shall not be in Purgatory but till the Saturday after their
death, and the Cordilians have this privilege granted them to draw a soul out
of Purgatory, by saying five Pater Nosters, and five Ave Maiyes, why have not
the Jesutes the like privilege, and how prove you that the Carmelites and
Cor^ilians have such privileges.

Thirdly, we demand if the Pope have power to grant such privileges to others,
and have power himself, as some hold by way of jurisdiction, or by way of
suffrage, if he have such power as he pretends, and your Church teaches,
then why does he not take them all out of Purgatory? why does he suffer his
children to lie in a burning fire so many hundred years, if he be able to
deliver them?

Fourthly of Transubstantiation.
First, Mr. Perkins says that in the first Institution before Christ's passion,
the body of Christ was Sacramentally eaten as already sacrificed, now how the
body of Christ Crucified should after a corporal manner be eaten, he being not
as yet Crucified, is impossible to imagine.

Secondly, we demand whether the Priest break in the Mass the same thing that
Jesus Christ brak in the supper with his disciples, for it is evident that our
Lord brak bread, whence it follows that he brake nothing but bread, but the
Priest breaks after consecration, by virtue of which consecration, you say
the elements are changed into the real body and blood of Christ, and if so,
then you actually Crucify Christ afresh, breaking him in pieces both with your
hands and, teeth, putting him to open shame, and yet the Priest says he
sacrifices in breaking, which if it be true, prove it by Scripture, and who
gave you this authority thus to sacrifice Jesus Christ, he being now in heaven.

Thirdly, we do not find in Scripture that the Apostles did adore that which
Jesus Christ gave them, as now the Papists do, neither do we find that Christ
in his administering the supper, spoke any thing of sacrifice, nor made any
elevation of the host, as you now do, he communicated it to all the assistants,
spoke in a language understood of all, why then is it at this day the Priest
does quite contrary.

Fourthly, if there be a real Corporal presence in the Sacrament, as Papists
pretend, and that shortly after the Apostles had received it in their stomachs,
Jesus Christ did sweat drops of blood, and was apprehended and buffeted, Then
we demand, if that body of Jesus Christ, which was in the stomachs of the
Apostles, if it did also sweat drops of blood, and was apprehended and buffeted
by the soldiers, for if it did sweat drops of blood, and was apprehended,
under the species in the stomachs of the Apostles, it was passable, and also
the soldiers that must buffet it, must be put under the same species, but if
it did not sweat nor was not apprehended nor buffeted under these kinds, then
there as wat the same time a lesus Christ suffering, and a Jesus Christ not
suffering, and so by consequence who was not our Savior.

Fifthly, the body of Jesus Christ celebrating the Sacrament was weak, passable
and mo^^^l, but the body which the Apostles received of him was impassible, and
could suffer nothing. Let our adversaries prove, if any ought to receive their
opinion which gives unto Jesus Christ at the same time two bodies of contrary
natures, or at least one body contrary to it self.

Sixthly, when Victor the 3 Pope of that name was poisoned in the Challice, and
Henery the 7. in the Host we demand what that was which was poisoned, for to
say the body of Jesus Christ was poisoned, is to profane his body, what was it
then with which they killed a Pope and a good Emporour? let them answer etc.

Seventhly, but seeing we and you both agree that Jesus Christ at the
institution of this Sacrament, he did eat and drink with his disciples. We
demanded, did Jesus Chist eat his own body, and what profit that would be
either to him or us, but if there be a corporal bodily substantial presence
of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament, by a change or conversion, of the
bread and wine into the same body and blood after the words of Consecration, as
you say there is, then he must needs eat his own body and drink his own blood,
which we put you to prove, if you say the outside of the body is within the
body, its all one as if you should say the sheath is within the sword etc.

Eighthly, if Christ's body be eaten corporally in the Sacrament, and that all
that eat his flesh and drink his blood, have eternal life, as John 6.54.
which you apply to the Sacrament; then should wicked men, as well as the
faithful have eternal life: for they eat that which you say is the flesh and
blood of Christ as well as the faithful, if there be a corporal presence in
the Sacrament, Christ said his body was the bread, his blood it was the wine,
they eat, they drank, yet he their showed their feeding was divine.

Ninthly, we demand how you prove it lawful to pray in a language not
understood of him that prays, seeing the Apostle in the 1 Cor. 14.19. says,
I had rather speak five words with my understanding, that by my voice I might
teach others, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue, and verse. 14.15. If
I pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit prays, but my understanding is
unfruitful, therefore I will pray with the spirit and will pray with
understanding also etc.

Tenthly, we demand how you prove that we ought to adore the Cross with the
same odoration that God is worshipped withal, as Thomas and many other Doctors
of the Church of Rome teaches, and if when the Priests says to the Cross, All
hale triumphal wood, that wood understands what the Priest says, seeing he
speaks to the wood, and where God has commanded us to honor him thus.

Eleventhly, we demand how you prove it lawful to have the Image of God, or of
the Trinity in Churches represented in stone, or in pictures, seeing God has
forbidden it, Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16. Take ye therefore good heed unto yourselves (for
ye saw no manner of similitude on the day that the Lord spoke unto you in
Horch, out of the midst of the fire.) Lest you corupt your selves; and make you
a graven image, the likeness or simil^tude of any figure, the likeness of
male or female, etc.

Twelfly, seeing the Church of Rome holds that Infants which dye shortly
after Baptism go straight way into paradise. We demand whence it comes that
the Priests takes money, to pray and say Masses for them, and what profit
redoundeth thereof unto their children.

Thirtenthly, where is it that God has Commanded that we should offer Jesus
Christ as a Propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and dead, seeing that you say
the Priests calling is that they are established to sacrifice Jesus Christ, We
demand where, in what Scripture God has established them sacrificers, seeing
that Jesus Christ does not give that quality to his disciples, and the new
Testament does not in any place call the pastors of the Church Sacrificers.

14ly. We demand if, in the holy Scriptures there be any command not to eat
flesh on Friday, etc. seeing that Friday was the day in which Jesus Christ did
eat the pascall lamb, and that the Apostle in the 1 Timothy 4.1, 3. says they
are seducers; and calls it the doctrine of the devil to forbid marriages, and
command Abstinence from meats which God has created to be received with
thanksgiving

15ly. When there were many Popes at once, and the strongest Pope, carried it,
how will you prove that the strongest, was the lawful Pope, for if you prove
not that the succession has often been interrupted, and they that followed are
successors of usurping Popes, being chosen by Cardinals, created by the
preceding Pope, who not being the lawful Pope had no Just authority to create
Card^nalls, nor those Cardinals, to chose a Pope.

16ly. How do you prove that the blessed Virgin Mary was rapt up in body into
heaven, and there crowned Queen of heaven, for seeing she is so represented in
your Churches, and the people taught so, we demand how you prove it to be so.

17ly. We say that the Munks and Friars as they stand at this day, are those
the Apostle foretold of, Col. 2.18 that do in voluntary humility worship angels
and pray to them, not holding the head which is Christ, and therefore not
holding the head there is no salvation to be had in any other: they also teach
the people in some things, touch not, taste not, handle nor, which all are to
perish, though they have a show in will worship and humility and neglecting of
the body to the satisfying of the flesh.

By George Pressick.


