TAKE heed in time: OR, A brief Relation of many Harms which have of late
been done by fire in MARLBOROUGH and in other places.

This copy was drawn up and Printed, on purpose for the World to take notice
of, and to be careful to prevent the danger of Fire.

Written by L. P.

London Printed for F. Grove, and are to be sold at his shop on Snow-hill, 165^

A brief Description of the Town of MARLBOROUGH, And of the Harms that were
there done upon Thursday the 28th of April, this present year, 1653.
THe famous and flourishing Town of Marlborough in Wiltshire had of late two
fair Parish Churches, one called by the name of St. Peter's, and the other
Church called by the name of St. Mary's: There was likewise many fair Streets
and stately Buildings, especially one gallant Street, called the High street,
in which they kept their Markets, which Markets consisted of all kind of
necessary provisions which was brought in far and near by the Country people.
And indeed it was a gallant place both for Corn, Butter, Cheese, and other such
like provisions as any was in all the Country: The street wherein the market
was kept, is supposed to be in length and breadth fall as large as Cheape-side,
and on both sides had many goodly shops well filled with rich and costly
Commodities, Silks and Tafety, Cloth, and Lace, Linen and Woolen, Gold and
Silver, no braver Wares can be had or bought in London, then was to be had in
the famous Town of Marlborough. At the upper end of the marketplace was a
gallant Building called the Town Hall, wherein the Magistrates sat and held the
Sessions of the Peace at appointed times: There were many fair Inns. Taverns,
and Victualing houses to entertain Carriers, and Travelers, and such which had
occasion to make use of them, for it stood upon the Road betwixt London and
Bristoll: and to be brief it was a Town of very good Orders and Government.

And thus having told you the situation and substance of the Town, I shall,
with Gods leave, though with a grieved heart, declare unto you the manner of
the ruin and destrustion of the same.

Here follows a brief and true Relation, as near as it can be gathered, of
the harms that were done by fire in the Town of Marlborough in Wiltshire,
April 28. 1653.
ON Thursday the 28 of April in the house of one Mr. Freeman a Tanner, as some
of his Servants were employed with drying of Bark, the Bark took fire so
suddenly, that it quickly did much harm, the house standing on the South side
of the street, toward the West end of the Town near unto St. Peter's Church,
the fire prevatled so much that it took hold of the dwelling house, and so
running a cross the street from one side to the other, it came to be of such
force, and vehemence that the like was never seen in England before, by the
report of some of them that were eye witnesses of that sad object.

It burned on both sides of the street, all the Inns, Tavernes, Gentlemen's
houses, Shop keepers houses, Grosers, Mercers, Habberdashers, all manner of
Tradesmen that were in habitants in that street, lost both Houses and Goods by
means of that consuming fire. Yet that was not all, it burned down the market
house, and run into St. Mary's Parish, and burned the Church and many dwelling
houses in that Parish, so that in St. Peter's Parish, and St. Mary's Parish, it
is verified, that at least three hundred Families were dispossed of their
habitations, all which was done in the space of three or four hours,

For when the fire had fastened on one of the houses where were Piles of Wood
and Fagots in their backsides, it flamed and burned so strongly that all that
ever could be done could not quench the fire until it had devoured, and burnt
to ashes, all these places which I have here named.

Yet that is not all, for it was not the houses that were burned alone, but
also the Goods that were in them, there was Brass and Pewter, Gold, and Silver
melted, the value whereof cannot be made known, there was Silks and Taffety
Woollen and Linner cloth and many other rich commodities consumed to ashes.

There was four or five tun of Cheese which was laid in slore in the Market
house consumed to no thing.

And to be brief, every man that dwelt in the Town is sensible of the misery
that happened, but no man can tell the value of what was lost.

And thus was the stately flourishing Town of Marlborough consumed with fire on
a sudden.

It would make a heart drop tears of blood that had but heard the doleful
cries and heavy moanes that past between men and their Wives, Parents and
Children. The Wife crying out to the Husband, O dear Husband what will become
of us and our Children; The Husband auswering the Wife we are all undone, I
know not what to do,

The Children crying for bread, the Parents had none to give them, nor so much
as a house to put their heads in, nor a bed to lay their wearied limbs upon.

And thus were the poor made poorer, and some of the richest became as poor as
the poorest.

And now are they all in a sad condition, the Lord in his mercy send them
comfort. Little did they that had plenty in the morning think that they should
be made destitute and desolate before night. Wherefore I desire that all good
Christians would both look upon their afflictions and lay it to heart, and
with all possible and speedy means that may be done, help to relieve their
wants.

Gods Word and a good conscience says, that he that has two Coats ought to
give one to him that has none. If it be so, I trust that the good people, and
well disposed Christians, that have plenty, will with the eyes of compassion;
and bountiful hearts reflect upon our distressed friends of Marlborough.

It is an old saying that one cannot help a great many, but a great many may
help one: So I would have it to be, that all the Cities and Shires in England,
may forthwith lend their assistance to relieve the distressed people of
Marlborough, and to do by them as they themselves would be done by if the case
were their own.

One thing concerning Marlborough we have great cause to give the Lord praise
for, and that is this, although there were so many houses burnt, and so much
goods and treasure consumed with scorching fire, yet there were not many people
destroyed, only those which shall here after be spoken of.

There were four Dutch men which labored and took pains and did their best
endeavors to quench the fire, of which two of them were killed outright, and
the other two are since dead of their wounds. Of others there were none but a
Post boy that lost his life, and a Tailors wife burned to death in her own
house, and as for Francis Freeman the Tanner, at whose house at first the fire
began, it is said that he professed himself to be Christ. I pray God that he
may take heed in time.

Thus having told you the manner of the consuming destruction of a late famous
ancient Town: I purpose also in a brief discourse of another strange mis hap
done by fire in St katherines Lane near unto the Tower of London, hoping that
others will take better heed in time to come.

On Friday being ^9 April a woman that was the mother of a child being vexed
with some of her neighbors set her child by the fire in a careless manner,
and went forth of the Room in anger, but before she returned again the child
was mortally wounded with the fire, for it burned off one of the Arms, and one
of the Legs, and so mortified the body of it, that the child lived in burning
misery about the space of two hours, and so gave up the Ghost. This came to
pass through carelessness, and because the mother did not take heed in time.

And this was Printed for others to take example by.

Many more such examples might here be spoken of, if occasion should serve and
this I am verily persuaded, that if people would be more careful, there would
not be half so much harm done by fire as is, therefore I desire all people
whether they be Masters, or Servants; Parents or Children, to have special
care how you afterward repent when it is too late. Fire and Matter are said to
be good servants but ill masters, and so certainly they be, for where fire can
get the mastership all goes to ruin, fire is such a devouring monster that it
takes pity of no person as you have been told in the former discourse.

Here follows a brief Relation of a sad and lamentable accident which
happened by fire this present year, 1653.
AT a gallant market Town called Layton in Shropshire, there dwelt and lived
many wealthy Gentlemen and rich tradesmen, to which place often times many of
the Country people which were men of rank and quality would come for recreation
to eat drink and be merry with their friends. But see what happened upon a
time, when the people, towns men and others were in the midst of all their
ioylity, suddenly a fearful fire arose which began at a nominated place of the
Town, and consumed in little time above a hundred and fifty houses burned to
ashes, and melted Gold, Silver Plate and other goods to the worth of two and
forty thousand pound, thus was merriment changed into sorrow, and their joy
into mourning, good reason therefore have all men to take warning by their
harms, and seek to prevent danger before it comes upon us,

FINIS.

