THE SUN OUT-SHINING THE MOON: OR Righteousness excelling Rottenness: In
answer to a lying scandalous Paper; PUBLISHED BY JOHN MOON; ENTITVLED, THE
TRUE LIGHT Has made manifest darkness, etc.

But it is darkness put forth for light, as it will appear by that which
follows;

And is Published by JOHN PRICE.

Prove. 30.12. There is a Generation that are pure in their own eyes, and yet
are not washed from their filthiness.

Prove. 12.22. Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord: but they that deal
truly are his delight.

Prove. 12.19. The lips of truth shall be established for ever: but a lying
tougue is but for a moment.

Prove. 14.25. A true witness delivers souls: but a deceitful witness
speaks lies.

LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1658.



READER,
I Had no desire to appear so publickely; neither had I so appeared now, if the
wrong and abuse had reflected only upon my self: but lest that the truth
(professed by me) should be abused through my being silent, seeing that the
good will of our God was to deprive me, and many more, of my Brother Hugh
Evans, who was buried before the appearance of John Moons printed Paper: For
if he had lived, I should not have so publickely appeared in this Work, he
being chiefly accused and abused by the aforesaid John Moon. And seeing that I
am also grossly abused, and my words perverted, I judge it my duty, and know
it my liberty to clear my self and others, from the aspersions falsely cast upon
us, and vindicate the truth professed by us. I would have the Reader to know,
that I have no prejudicial thoughts toward John Moon; though I have worse
thoughts of him then I have of many of his Brethren, I would not the least
wrong done to his (nor their) Persons; and I would as willingly give them the
liberty of their consciences, as I would have the liberty of my own. Drunkards
and Swearers can go without being persecuted, neither dragged or haled to
Prison, when civil, sober harmless men, under the name of Heretics, are
abused and imprisoned, and be judged by vile carnal unjust Judges, who have no
Religion nor God, (but their bellies:) but if any should say now, he takes the
part of those whom he himself opposes: (It is true) I do so, but I do not
oppose them (peradventure) as thou do. It may be thou would have men to be
of thy Religion, be it right or wrong, whether they can believe it or not or
else thou will have them persecuted and imprisoned, and so force them to make
Shipwreck of their conscience, or to suffer persecution: And I would use all
Lawful means, in love, meekness, and tenderness, to convince them of their
errors; and if I could be a means to win them, I would rejoice in the Lord
with them; if not, I will pity them, and mourn for them; and not seek to
destroy them, as the manner of most of all Nations is, not considering that the
ninth hour may be behind, or that they may be called at the eleventh hour: But
thou would have them to observe thy time, and not suffer them to stay for
God's time; or if they will not observe thy time, thou would have them
destroyed, and not suffer them to live until the last hour, to see if
peradventure they may enter into the Vineyard and will of God, and be saved.

But I shall desire thee, and all men, to learn of the Spirit of grace and
meekness, rather to pity then to persecute thy poor miserable Brother, who was
created and estated with thee in Paradise, who also have fallen from thence
with thee, and became Children of wrath: and though by grace thou art recovered
to a lively hope of that glory that shall be revealed; O (I say) rather learn
to pity, and to long for the recovery of him out of the snares of the Devil,
then to hate and persecute him. So I leave thee, and desire to find thee led by
the Spirit of moderation and wisdom; and remain a Lover and well-wisher of thy
soul and body:

J. P.


Also I desire thee to read, and not to judge partially of either side: And
likewise thou art desired to observe the difference between their words and
Papers, and ours; for I have published several Papers, which they had sent to
us; and also those which we had sent to them.

Dated the ninth day of July, in the year 1657.

EPISTLE.
TO all them in whom a sparkle of true grace, and sincere zeal has once been
kindled, and have felt the weight, and seen the odiousness and filth of their
sins; And by the light and love of the Father being kindled in the heart, have
seen, and judged it but just to deliver up unto death that Murderer, who has
killed the just; and so have put on a Righteous Resolution, and continues in
the Battle, and fights under the Banner of God's love: and though
peradventure you have been benighted in the pursuit of your Enemy, and were at
a stand in a desolate Wilderness; yet your hatred against the Enemy remaining
(that is to say, your own sins, fleshly wills and desires) and a longing desire
after that peaceable Habitation and life, which is to be attained unto through
death: I wish that Christ's exhortation may prevail with you in this confused
age, in which there is so many Lo here, and lo there; Be ye as wise as
Serpents, and harmless as Doves: wisdom and Innocence are excellent virtues
at all times, but especially in these days, wherein there are so many Forms
and Professions of Godliness; and Antichrist most subtly has laid its snare
in every one of them; and no sooner he is found out in one shape, but speedily
he shifts himself into another shape or Form, and decketh, trimmeth, sits,
and shows himself as though he is God: So I desire that you would carefully
observe his motions, and refuse his society; and that you may die daily to
every thing that dies, and so be weaned from the Vanities of this present evil
World. Chiefly for your sakes have I published somewhat of that which has
passed between the Baptized Believers in these Countries, and the people known
by the name of Quakers. As for the people in general, I shall not say much of,
but chiefly those which I and others in these Countries have had experience of
their Doctrine, Lives, and Conversations: they have not been in this Country
but about eighteen Months; and to speak the truth, they brought many shifts
with them: but before thirteen Months was come about, they were worn
threadbare, in so much that their nakedness and shame was seen. So I commend
you with all Saints to the meek love of God. I rest, and remain,

Your Friend, and Lover of all them that in sincerity seeks and longs after
the fullness of God and goodness, JOHN PRICE.

THE SUN OUT-SHINING THE MOON: OR Righteousness excelling Rottenness: In
answer to a lying, scandalous Paper, Published by JOHN MOON; Entitled, The
TRUE LIGHT Has made manifest darkness, etc.
THere was a meeting in the Parish of Llauvr, in Raduorshire, where Hugh Evans
was exercising his Gifts, to the edifying and building up of his Brethren in
the Faith and fear of the Lord; and in his exercise he said to this effect,
That there is a threefold nature in the people of God: The Divine Nature, The
Humane Nature, And the Serpentine Nature: The seed of the Serpent under the
feet of the seed of the Woman; the seed of the Serpent bruising the heel, but
the seed of the Woman bruising the head: then one John David a Quaker, so
distinguished from other men, spoke to this effect, or these very words: I deny
thy third; there is but two; stop thy mouth; the Plagues and Judgments of God
is thy portion: and with many presumptuous words in the name of the Lord, he
railed much against us; and so began to teach the people, and held forth that
there is but two things, light and darkness; God, and the Devil; the seed of
the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent; and many things to that purpose. After
him John Moon began his Lesson: but Hugh Evans made some reply to this effect,
That if it was so as they said, that there is but two things, light, and
darkness; God, and the Devil; the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the
Serpent; then what is that which is to be saved, or to be damned? for it is
impossible for the seed of the Serpent to be saved, nor for the seed of the
Woman to be Eternally damned.

But John David did give no sound answer; and I believe that all rational men
will say, that he could not: Then this question was by us propounded to John
Moon, but his answer was no better then the other: Whereupon the said John
Moon stared in Hugh Evans his eyes, and asked him many questions (though they
themselves cry out against others, for asking of questions) some of them I can
yet remember. The first question he asked him, was this: Art thou come to the
beginning? He answered: I am come to the beginning and the end, Christ Jesus.
Again he asked him: Have thou eaten of the Tree of Life? He said, He had. Then
John Moon said, How come thou there? Thou know what the sword of the
Cherubin is: Hugh Evans said, It is the anger of God. Then he asked, What the
Soul was? Upon that I desired Hugh Evans not to answer him, knowing them to be
but the Cavillers questions. Then John Moon said to the people, This man, who
is your Teacher, knows not what the soul is. Then Hugh Evans said, Answer not
a Fool according to his folly, lest thou be like him; yet answer a Fool
according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit: And so Hugh Evans
stood up, and read this Scripture, And God breathed into man the breath of
life, and man became a living soul; and so gave the people a Description of the
soul of man. And after he had done, some that were there desired John Moon to
gainsay, if he could, what Hugh Evans had said concerning the soul, but he did
not: much confused discourse has been that day, which cannot be repeated;
neither is it worth the repeating.

At another time there was a meeting of theirs, at a place called Yscwriw; to
which meeting Hugh Evans and others went; and he accused them of denying the
Resurrection, and desired time and silence to prove it, but could not have it,
but much brutish and unreasonable Behavior: shortly after I sent these
ensuing queries to John Moon:

First, Whether God and man was not two distinct things, after he had created
him?

Secondly, Whether man only did not sall from that peaceable estate, which God
had created, and stared him in, and no part of God fell with him, or in him?

Thirdly, Whether that formed creature man, or that body which God created in
the beginning, did not become mertal, and must die the natural death?

Fourthly, Whether that body, or the bodies of all men, shall not at the last
day, or at the dissolution of this world, and all Creatures, be raised up out
of the Earth, and receive a just Sentence?

These queries he did take upon him to answer: But I will leave it to the
Reader, to judge what manner of answer it is. Their answer, with their queries,
are as follows.

John Price, I having received thy Paper, wherein thou seek to put a Cloak
on thy errors, which Paper. I am made free to answer for the innocent sake, and
not to satisfy thy busy mind.

First, Whereas thou broughtest the Scripture in Nehene. 7.5, 64. to be a Cloak
for thy error and covetousness: but the Scripture does declare against all
errors and covetousness; wherein thou art shut out of the Scriptures, and art
a stranger to the life of God, which gave forth the Scriptures, living in thy
Ignorance and covetousness, wresting the Scriptures to thy own destruction.

Answer: It is not for that word Register that I charged thee withal, for the
word in its place I own: But for that thou do follow the way of Balaam, who
loved the wages of unrighteousness, but was rebuked for his Iniquity; and so I
rebuke thee: and whereas thou have confusedly written in thy Paper, concerning
Justice of the Peace, and naming no man, yet for truth sake I answer.

All that are true Ministers of God, and Magistrates I own; and all that are
just, and do justice, is more acceptable to the Lord then sacrifice; and all
that acts for the punishment of the Evildoers, and the praise of them that do
well: For so is the will of God, that with well-doing we may put to silence the
Ignorant and the Foolish men: And herein is our Father glorified, and the
Enemies of God discovered; and all them that acts not according to that which
is just, I deny. An Answer to thy queries.

First Query: Whether God and man was two distinct things, after he had created
him?

Answer: The Lord God is Eternal, and endures for ever, and he formed man of
the dust of the Earth, which is Carnal.

The second Query: Whether man only did not fall from that peaceable estate,
which God had created, and stated him in, and no part of God fell with him, or
in him?

Answer: It was man only that brake the Command of God, as by one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin; so death passed upon all men, for
that all have sinned: herein I deny, that that which is of God, should fall
into sin, or Iniquity.

The third Query: Whether that formed Creature man, or that body which God
Created in the beginning, did not become mortal, and must die the natural death?

Answer: All flesh shall perish, and man shall return to the dust, from whence
he was taken.

The fourth Query: Whether that body, or the bodies of all men, shall not at
the last day, or at the dissolution of this world, and all Creatures, be raised
up out of the Earth, and receive a just Sentence?

Answer: All shall be changed: for the Trumpet shall sound; they that have done
good, to the Resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, to the
Resurrection of condemnation. Here is thy objections and queries answered, by
him whom the world calls John Moons.

This Paper, which he first makes mention of, I sent to him, I have not the
Copy of, else I would have set it down here, but the effect of it was this:
John Moon has charged me with Balaams sin, and why? but because I was a
Register: and he pressed upon me to prove my practice by Scripture, and prove a
Register in the Church of God: Then I produced in my Letter that Scripture,
Nehem. 7.5, 64. which is effectual to answer what he demanded: and as he is
full of confusion in other things; so also in this, in not distinguishing
between the Church and Commonwealth: to be an Officer of a just Law, and justly
executed, is no sin; neither is there any more error nor covetousness in it,
then is in any other calling whatsoever: and wherein he compares me to Balaam,
who would by Witchcraft destroy all the people of God; I will not trouble my
self about it, but leave such a plain case to the Reader, to judge of the
unequality of the comparison.

Here follows several queries, sent by John Moon, and one John David, to
Hugh Evans, and John Price, which are as follows.

Now having answered thy Paper and queries, we have sent these few queries to
be answered by Hugh Evans and thee, and all your followers, and so let them be
particularly answered, according to plain Scriptures, if any of you can, or
else let your mouths be stopped for evermore.

First query: What is the first principle of pure Religion, and undefiled
before God? and whether this pure Religion is to be attained here while men are
this side grave, yea, or nay?

John David, and John Moon, this in brief touching your queries: We answer to
your first, That it is repentance from dead works, and that is attainable this
side the grave, or the natural death. Be ashamed of your ignorance, in asking
such a question, as whether pure Religion is attainable in this life.

Second query: What that light is which lights every man that comes into the
world; and whether that light is within in the conscience, yea, or nay?

Second Answer: Christ is that light, and it shines in some men's conscience,
and not in all; for Esai. says, that there be some men which have no light in
them.

Third query: Whether that light which is come into the world, which is the
condemnation of the world, be sufficient to lead them to Salvation, yea, or nay?

Third Answer: It is sufficient.

Fourth query: Whom God spoke to, when he said Let us make man in our own
image; and where that Garden of Eden is, where the Lord God put man whom he had
formed?

Fourth Answer: God spoke to himself, as he was Father, Son, and Spirit: and as
touching the Garden of Eden, where it is, and seeing you would have us to prove
by plain Scriptures, we direct you to the first Book of Moses, and the second
Chapter; not because we have no more to say of it, but that Ismael is not
worthy of it, or you scoffers.

Fifth Query: Where is that flesh and blood to be obtained, except a man eats
thereof, he has no life in him? now if any of you can witness life, declare
whether it be a this side grave, yea, or nay?

Fifth Answer: That flesh and blood is in the believer, and he eats and
drinks thereof.

Sixth Query: Whether they that are Baptized into Jesus Christ his death, be
not made free from sin, yea, or nay?

Sixth Answer: They are made free from the condemning Power of sin.

Seventh Query: Whether there be any true Church, but that Church in God? and
whether any in that Church were persecutors, or went for the wages of
unrighteousness?

Show one Example in all the Scriptures if you can, or else repent and be
ashamed for the evil of your ways.

Seventh Answer: There is no true Church out of God, but are by Faith in God;
neither does that Church persecute, nor bring a Justice of Peace with them, to
threaten those that comes peaceably to enquire, and to try the truth of its
doctrine (as you have done to us) nor do any of them go for the wages of
unrighteousness: and we do exhort you to repent of your lying, in accusing us
of any such things.

Eighth Query: Where that voice is to be heard, which gathers into one
sheepfold, and where that sheep-sold is? and whether any of them, which follow
the one Shepherd, may be plucked out of his hands, yea, or nay?

Eighth Answer: Where the true Teacher is, there the voice is to be heard: And
where the Saints are gathered, there is the Sheepfold; and they that follow
Christ, cannot be plucked out of his hands: but if any of them will leave
following of him, by hearkening unto such seducers as you are, them they may
come to ruin.

Ninth query: Where that City of the living God, and Heavenly Jerusalem is, and
the Church of the first born; and where the Spirits of the just men made
persect is? and whether this may be known, and witnessed this side the grave,
yea, or nay.

Ninth Answer: That City is where the presence of God in peace is: And we shall
more fully possess it, when mortality shall be swallowed up of life.

Tenth query: Where that bottomless Pit is, where all them that does wickedly,
and forget God, shall be thrown into, if any of you can declare?

JOHN DAVIES. JOHN MOON.


Tenth Answer: Where the presence of God is not in peace, there the bottomless
Pit is.

If you are not satisfied with this answer, do you appoint the time and place;
and send us word, and we will give you the meeting, and will reason with you,
provided that you will be civil.

Hugh Evans. John Price.


These foregoing answers were sent unto John Davies, and John Moon, from Hugh
Evans and my self, speedily after the receiving of theirs; and seeing that John
Moon has put forth a Book; why did he not put forth all that had passed in
writing between us? but in stead of that, he gathered a parcel of his own
forged lies against us, as I shall make hereafter manifest.

Here follows another scandalous Paper, which was sent to us from John Moon,
and John Davies; which is as follows.

A reply unto the answer of Hugh Evans, one of the blind Priests in Radnorshire
in Wales, which he has made unto certain queries, which was given unto him and
John Price, one of his followers, by us who are known to the world by the names
of John Moon, and John Davies: wherein their blindness and Ignorance is made
manifest.

Answer: Whereas thou say that repentance from dead works is the first
principle of pure Religion: herein is thy blindness and Ignorance made
manifest, unto all them which will not be wilfully blind; and thou Hugh Evans
art found in the steps of the false Prophets, which know not the first
principle of pure Religion: For we say that the first principle of pure
Religion was before transgression was, and transgression was before repentance:
And again thou say that the light shines but in some men: herein thou art
found a liar, and wrestest the Scriptures, who deniest the Testimony of John,
who was a true Minister of the Lord, who said, It lights every man; and thou
say some men, and not all: And whereas thou say there is no true Church
out of God, but are by Faith in God; neither does that Church persecute: This
is truth, and this we own to be ours; and we find thee to be in the same
Generation, who said, they were of the seed of Abraham, and that God was their
Father; and Christ Jesus said, Ye are your Father the Devil, who was a liar
from the beginning: And there are all them, who knows not the first principle
of pure Religion, strangers to the Covenant of grace and truth; and this
Covenant we witness to be our light and life; and by this light we see thee,
and all the false Prophets, to be out of the light, walking in the dark world:
and here thy fellowship is with them, who goes for the wages of
unrighteousness, as thy Brother and Companion John Price, who receives moneys
when people are married, and when Children are born: And now let that of God in
all consciences judge, whether this be in the Church which is in God, or in the
world, where covetousness is? And whether you be the Deceivers and Seducers,
who practice and uphold these things, or us, who are sent of the Lord to speak
against these evil practices? And herein we exhort you to that of God in your
conscience, which witness for us against all these evil practice.

JOHN MOON. JOHN DAVIES.


READER, Before I set down the answer to this foregoing reply (as they call it)
which Hugh Evans and I have sent to John Moon and John David; I shall give you
a Relation of what Hugh Evans was.

Seeing that John Moon has the face as to give Hugh Evans the Title of a
blind Priest, therefore Ishall inform you of what Hugh Evans was; He in his
youthful time was bound Apprentise in the City of Worcester, to a Clothier; and
there he learned the Trade, and wrought there many years: Then in the time of
the Wars he went from Worcester to Coventry, Worcester being then a Garrison for
the King, and there joined himself to the Church, and wrought there for certain
years; and being zealous in the Gospel, and his love much kindled toward God
and man, and hearing that his native Country was destitute of that means of
Salvation (that is to say) the Preaching of the word, and the Ministration of
the Ordinance of Jesus Christ, he was much moved with love to the truth, and to
his native Country: yet not judging himself fully furnished or fitted for that
work and Ministry, he by the consent of the Church went to a faithful Servant
of the Lord, Jeremiah Ives, and informed him, and the society there with him,
of the necessity of the Preaching of the Word in Wales; then were they sent,
and came to Wales, and performed the work which they were sent to do. Hugh
Evans having no other mind but to return, then the Brethren besought him to
abide with them, the which he accordingly did for the space often years, and
upwards, until the Lord saw good to deprive them of him; in which time his
Friends can give a large Testimony of his Zeal, and labor in the Gospel; yet
this lying man John Moon has the face as to say that he was a blind Priest in
Wales.

Here follows another Paper of John Moon, which is like the rest, and my
reply to it: but you shall find more by a Friend of mine, who has been accused
for the same things by the forenamed John Moon.

I went from David William unto Hugh Evans and John Price, to give the said
Hugh a Paper: The said Hugh and John fell a discoursing with me, in which
discourse the said John Price said that the Devil was Eternal: And he asked me
whether I would deny it? And I said, I deny that the Devil is Eternal, and bade
him prove it by Scripture: but he did not; neither would he acknowledge that he
told a lie, but goes on in sin, beguiling unstable people; and herein thou
John Price art found one of them who said that God was their Father, but they
were of their Father the Devil; and thou call the Devil Eternal; and herein
I see thee forsaking the right way, and art gone astray, following the lust of
the flesh, living out of the fear of God, speaking high swelling words of
vanity, but is found out among the Dogs, and Sorcerers, and unbelievers, and
they who loves to make a lie, and before the everlasting fire of the Lord is
kindled for the Devil and his Angels. And herein I John Moon do bear witness,
that the Lord God of Heaven and Earth is Eternal, and what ever is Eternal, is
one with the Lord God, and endures for ever: And herein I utterly deny that the
Devil is one with God, whom thou say is Eternal; and so let that of God in
all consciences judge, whether God and the Devil be both one; for he that is
Eternal is one with God; and this is he who is our Salvation for evermore: but
he, who calls the Devil Eternal, knows not Salvation, for there is no Salvation
to be found in him, but woe and misery; which is the portion of unbelievers:
and herein we bear witness to the truth, and against that which is untruth.

JOHN MOON.


Here follows my answer to John Moons foregoing Paper.

A word to thee John Moon, in answer to thy scandalous Paper, which I have
received from thee upon the 21th day of the first month, in the year 1656. in
which I find more of thy vainjangling and false accusing, as thy manner is,
seeking to make me and all Saints odious: But blessed are ye when men revile
you, and speak all manner of evil of you wrongfully, as thou and thy fellows
do unto me, and others who walk in the fear of the Lord, and do continue by his
goodness in his grace, to which he has called and chosen us, and established
our souls and spirits therein; yet you (that is to say) John Moon, and John
Davies, do call us Dogs, the seed of the Serpent, and Sons of the Devil, and
Children of darkness; and presumptuously in the name of the Lord excommunicate
us (if your cursing could) from the love and grace of our God, in pronouncing
all the wrath and plagues of the Eternal God, to fall upon us, and saying to
your own hurt, that you are sent of God so to do. I shall not bring against
thee any railing accusations, but the Lord rebuke thee: and touching what has
been said by me, concerning the immortality of the Devil, It was to this
effect: John Moon said, that whosoever is not Eternal, is external, and that
God only is Eternal: I said that the Devil is not external, and therefore
Eternal, as it did follow from thy own words: And I did then explain my meaning
thus; I do not say he is a Devil from Eternity, but through or by his forsaking
his first estate and habitation, he became a Devil; and I asked thee, whether
thou would deny, that the Devil is Eternal without end; for it did follow
from thy words before, that he has an end, in saying, that whatsoever is not
Eternal, is external, and that God only is Eternal: for that which is external
will have an end; so that one of those two things will unavoidably follow, that
either the Devil is mortal, and will have an end, as all external things will
have an end; or else he is one with God; which I deny, that the Devil is one
with God. See now the snare which thou have laid for me, thy self art fallen
therein; and whereas thou say, that I would neither prove by Scripture the
Devil to be Eternal, nor acknowledge, that I had told a lie: I refused to prove
him to be a Devil from Eternity, as thou would have me; the which I neither
did speak nor mean: but I offered to prove him to be endless; I mean by the
word Eternal, a thing which endures for ever, as Angels and souls of men, and
not always that Eternal, invisible, unchangeable, the only wise God, who
comprehends all things, and nothing can comprehend him: and to say, that any
thing else is so, is blasphemy: nothing is unchangeable but God, nothing only
wise but the Eternal God; but Angels and the souls of men do change their
estates and conditions, yet that does not dissolve them: Angels became Devils,
and men became sinners: The soul that sins shall die; and he has made his
soul a Sacrifice for sin: there is a natural death, and there is a Spiritual
death; a dying life, and a living death: and as thou say, that the Devil
shall be cast into the wrath of God, that is true; but that does not prove him
to be external, or to have an end; that does prove a change of condition, and
not a dissolution, or to have an end. Do thou know from whence, or what is
the root from whence the Angels and souls of men came? Thou say that thou
art come to the beginning: if it had been true, thou should dest have seen the
end also, and that between.

And concerning that which thou call a reply unto an answer of Hugh Evans
and my self, in which thou say that the first principle of pure Religion was
before transgression; Was not this thy query? What is the first principle of
pure Religion? And I say, that before transgression there was no need of Faith
nor Religion: but if it had been propounded, What is the first pure principle?
we should have returned you another answer; but as the case stands now with
man, being a sinner, we say with the Apostle, Heb. 6.1. that it is Repentance.

And whereas you say that we deny the Testimony of John, you do say amiss: but
we say with the Prophet Isai. 8.20. That if men speak not according to the
word, it is because there is no light in them.

JOHN PRICE.


Now I am come briefly to answer to that which John Moon charge Hugh Evans
and I with, in his Book, entitled, The true light has made manifest darkness.

John Moon begins his Book with a glorious Title, The true light has made
manifest darkness: But before he went any further, his Pen went righter then
his confused mind; for said he, or Sion builded up, before he said that Babylon
was thrown down: And true it is, that such a Sion may be is builded up amongst
them, wherein a Babylon is yet in them to be thrown down; for if ever there
has been confusion amongst any people, it is amongst them: but know this, that
as Babylon is thrown down, so is Sion builded up; and not Sion first builded
up, and then Babylon thrown down. He goes on, and says, With a true answer to
what the Baptists Teachers objected against him, (as he calls them) but it is
no answer to any one particular, that they objected against, (that I know of)
but to his own forged or conceited lies, so goes on, and toward the latter
end of Page the first, he falls to Prayer; and well he may record it (for I
think) it is a work he does but seldom.

In his 2d Page he begins to charge Hugh Evans with saying that the true light
shines but in some, and not in all, and backs it with a lie, in saying that he
could not prove it: but he omitted to speak the whole; for when Hugh Evans and
I did reason with him about the true light, we did not use to answer hastily,
nor unadvisedly, but did enquire to this effect: There is the light of the Sun,
which is a true light in its Element; also the Law of nature is a true light,
Romans 2.14. For whatsoever makes manifest is light, and that Law or light which
is in man's nature, does make manifest sin, therefore a true light; but it is
not that light which was spoken of in John 1. which is Christ; that he denies
to be in every man: He and I often denied somewhat to this effect, that that
true light shines or lives not in every man, as it does appear by our answer
to their queries. For further proof of this, that this was our negative, or
denial; I direct you to their second query, and our answer to it, which was
propounded and answered about thirteen months before the appearance of John
Moons printed Paper, entitled, The true light has made manifest darkness.
He further says, that Hugh Evans was demanded to prove that this true light
did not shine in every man, but could not; whereas Hugh Evans produced this
Scripture, to make good his denial, Isai. 8.20. To the Law and to the
Testimony: And if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is
no light in them: from this Scripture, Hugh Evans and others reasoned to this
effect: if all men do speak according to the word and Testimony of God, then
the true light shines or lives in all men: but all men speaks not according
to the word and Testimony of God; therefore some men have not the true light
shining, or living in them.

He says further in his second Page, Now see (said he) how contrary to the
Scripture he speaks, that would deny the Testimony of John: but I say, that
that man that would make John a false witness, may well be ranked with John
Moon; but Hugh Evans did own it, and daily did bear witness with John of the
same truth; and because that there is something spoken of this, in the answer
to his queries, I shall not speak any more of it here; neither do I intend to
answer to all his confused Paper, no, that is not my intention: but to make a
short reply to that, wherein he does particularly and falsely accuse, not only
me, but Hugh Ev^ns also.

In his 3. Page he says, That Hugh Evans said that Christ and his Spirit is
distinct: but he diminished from his words, for Hugh Evans said, that Christ
and his Spirit is distinct in their offices and operations. Now I would desire
every honest mind to consider the baseness of this man, that would cunningly
and purposely leave out half the man's words, and put the other half out in
Print; for these were the words that Hugh E. vans said, That Christ and his
Spirit are distinct in their Offices and operations: Then John Moon accused
him of blasphemy, in saying that Christ and his Spirit is distinct: Then Hugh
said, Why do thou divide my words? said John Moon, I will publish thy
blasphemy: Then Hugh Evans said, I charge thee to publish my whole saying. Now
I would have every sincere heart to judge, whether this man is not left here
without a cover to hide his nakedness and shame. Was it not a shameful thing
for him to accuse the man of blasphemy, and yet he himself afraid to publish
the whole pretended blasphemy? or does it not argue that his malicious mind
would cast a false aspersion upon Hugh Evans, and upon that which he professed,
which I believe he aimed amost at?

Again, consider whether this man has not made shipwreck of a good conscience
(if ever he had any) that would knowingly and purposedly misrepresent a man to
all people, under the title of a Blasphemer; and yet would not publish his
whole saying, which he did over and over repeat. I do not speak this because
that the saying is so gross in the terms, as John Moon has put it out; but
to show the dishonesty of this perfect man: This I say to thee John Moon, that
either thou do not understand the sense of the word distinct, or else thou
art very willing to make uprears and quarrels, where there is no cause: but I
do believe both of thee, therefore I shall show thee, how Christ and his Spirit
is not distinct: Secondly, How he is distinct or distinguished. The word
distinct does not always mean two material things standing at a distance the
one from the other, as it is like thou do ignorantly suppose: there is
distance in places, in times, and in persons, but neither of these distinctions
is to be made between Christ and his Spirit: there is also distinctions in
natures, qualities, and properties; yet I do not say, that Christ and his
Spirit is so to be distinguished: The Father, Son, and Spirit is distinguished,
yet not divided (though it is like that thou do think, that whatsoever is
distinguished, is divided. There are three that bear witness in Heaven, the
Father, Son and the Spirit, and these three are one, yet distinguished three;
and so it may be said of Christ and his Spirit: Very much may be said of Christ
being distinct in his Office, yet not separated nor divided from his Spirit:
Christ said (as he was the Son of man) I have finished the work which thou have
given me to do: but it cannot be said that the Spirit of Christ has finished
his work until all be converted, that ever shall be converted, and all the
Saints glorified; but the work of Christ in suffering for sin in the flesh, is
finished, yet Christ and his Spirit is not divided, but distinguished. It is
like that John Moon thought, by leaving out part of the words which Hugh Evans
had said, that it would appear more like to be blasphemy: It appears also that
John Moon did know that it was no blasphemy, as Hugh Evans had spoken it; or
at least that he would not be believed by others, if he did write the whole
saying: Take the wisest man's speech that ever was, and let me leave out what
part I will of it; I know that I shall either make it blasphemy, or nonsense:
as for instance, Psalm 14.1. which says, The Fool says in his heart, There is
no God: leave out, The Fool says in his heart, and then you may say, that the
Scripture says, There is no God. John Moons affirmative is true, but his
negative is false; it is true that Christ and his Spirit is one; but to say,
there is no distinction in their Offices, operations, and workings, is false,
as may be further proved by many instances, but that the thing is so plain,
that I desire not to trouble the Reader any further: But know this, that Christ
and his Spirit is one, in reference to time, place, and person, and an harmony
of an agreement between them in their Offices, operations, and workings all in,
and fulfilling of the will of the one only wise God; I say further, that the
only wise pure Father, Son, Spirit, and Saints are one, and yet a thousand
distinctions, I believe, may be observed, touching the Father, Son, Spirit, and
Saints: and without distinctions, he (nor no man else) can speak much of them,
and not blaspheme. I say, says John Moon, that they are one, and not
distinct: Then I say, if there be no distinctions, why does he call Christ and
his Spirit they, which does signify pluralities? he nor no man else can speak
of the Father, Son, and Spirit, and not make distinctions: for in the words
themselves lies distinctions: says the Apostle, Joh. 17.21, 22. where he
speaks of the Father, Son, and Spirit, and these three are one; these, and
thine, and mine, them, and us; all these words does signify distinctions, yet
not divisions; he goes on to prove that Christ and his Spirit are one, and so
fights with his own shadow; for nothing else has he to fight with, for all
will say, that Christ and his Spirit is one; but if any would deny it, he goes
very weakly to prove it, for he goes about to prove that which all England
does acknowledge in words, and not make good any thing against what is
affirmed, that Christ and his Spirit is distinguished. And this is the effect
of his reasoning: because John and Paul does witness union between Christ and
his Spirit, therefore no distinction, as he says: after he cited Rom 8.20. and
Joh. 17.21. Now see where is the distinction (says he) then he writes down,
John 17.21, 22. Then said he, Them that have an eye to see withal, let them see
the confusion which the Baptists declare, whereas it is his own confusion,
foaming out his own shame, and falsely accusing those whom he calls the
Baptists, in saying that they say, That Christ and his Spirit is distinct the
one from the other: but thou have grafted on this lie, since thou thy self
did repeat that part of the words which Hugh Evans had said; for neither did
Hugh Evans say, nor thy self till now, that they were one from the other. Is
this thy honesty, first to diminish from the man's words, and instead of them
add thine own? Hugh Evans said, That Christ and his Spirit is distinct in
offices, operations, and workings; and in stead of the words, operations,
offices, and workings, thou addest one from the other; see how thou have
handled, altered, and perverted the man's words: so with a parcel of the old
Lesson, in which we are judged and condemned, he goes on, speaking of the true
Worshippers, and of the false, applying the true to themselves, and the false
to the Baptists: so leaving, He begins with another lie.

In the latter end of his fourth Page he accuses me of saying, That there is
another way besides light and darkness: the which words never proceeded out of
my mouth, as many can witness who were there present: But this is the root of
the matter; John Moon and his Brethren did use to hold forth that there is but
two things, viz. light and darkness; God and the Devil; the seed of the Woman,
and the seed of the Serpent: Then I did inquire what that is that is called to
repent and believe; for the seed of the Woman cannot Eternally be damned, and
the seed of the Serpent cannot be saved: Therefore there is something else that
is in danger of being damned, which by grace may be Eternally saved: But at
that time which he says that I did contradict him in his Teaching, it is not
so; but I accused him of being a false Prophet upon that which had passed
between us at other times, more then any thing that he had spoken then; for
when I came into the meeting place, one of the Quakers, whose name is Hugh
Lloyd, and others, whom he calls the Baptists, were disputing; so that I began
to speak to Hugh Lloyd: Whereupon John Moon replied, and said unto me, That I
was a Blasphemer, and the like terms, which his mouth is full of: so that the
discourse began about the threenesse. When he did put me to prove him to be a
false Prophet, the first thing that I did instance then was this; Thou say
that there is but two things, that is, God and the Devil: Then he puts me to
prove the third: I said, That it was man: then he said something to this
effect; That man was one with God, and became one with the Devil; I replied,
that they were three distinct things in nature or essence: but that I should
say, That they are one from the other, is as true, as that Hugh Evans should
say, That Christ and his Spirit were one from the other. I would have the
Reader know, that we could not then have any orderly reasoning with these men,
therefore there cannot be as good account given of it, as it might, if they
would observe order; and yet they will cry out against confusion as much as any
people.

And as he diminished from Hugh Evans his words, so he adds to my words: for
I said not One from another; neither did I say three ways, but things: So he
pressed upon me to prove by Scriptures, them to be three distinct things. Then
I produced the Scriptures, which says, In the beginning God created the
Heavens and the Earth: Then, In the beginning was God, before there was man;
therein they were distinct, or distinguished the one before the other; the one
being Eternal before all times; the other having a beginning in time. Thirdly,
I produced the third Chapter of Genesis, in the beginning of the Chapter, which
shows the Devils coming to tempt man: Then I asked, Which of the three will
you deny? Then one of their Teachers, named Hugh Lloyd, said; We deny man. I
would have the Reader to understand, that there was so much disorder and
confusion, that it was in vain for me to proceed orderly, to distinguish their
natures, properties, and qualities; for they were more like Oyster-women
scoulding, then moderate men reasoning or discoursing; for many were speaking
at once, as their manner is: and seldom had I any better terms then Serpent,
or Dog, thou would bite if thou could; the Judgment and wrath of God is
thy Portion, with many more words of the like nature as these are: I do not
say, That I do repeat all that has passed between us that day, neither can I;
but this I can say, that I do not leave any thing unrepeated, which does
destroy the sense of that which is repeated, (that I know of.)

The pure holy wise Creator created all things, and formed man in his own
image: but it is no less then blasphemy to say, That God is formed or made,
therefore they are distinct, or we must distinguish between the Creator and the
Creature. Again, if there was no distinction to be made between God and man,
What need was there of Laws and Precepts to bind man upon penalty of death (if
broken?) and though the Text says, God created man in his own image, it does
not follow, that therefore no distinction is to be observed between the Creator
and the Creature: and further, they are distinguished by their names, for if
there were no distinctions, wherefore have they two names; Also they differ in
nature: The nature of God was not, nor is not subject to change nor alter: But
the nature of man was, and is subject to alter. Thus they were distinguished to
be before man fell. Now after the fall of man, and after he had hearkened to
the Devil, and became partaker of his nature; yet he became not presently a
Devil, for as man bore the image of God before the fall, yet man was not very
God before the fall; neither is he very Devil after the fall: Therefore it
admits of many distinctions between God and man before the fall, and also
many distinctions between man and the Devil after the fall: for if there be no
distinctions between God and man before the fall; then there was nothing to
fall, unless some part of God should fall; which is no less then blasphemy to
say that God nor any part of him should fall: For he is the holy, wise,
individual and unchangeable God. Again, if man after the fall was become a very
Devil, then there is nothing to be restored to the image of God, but that which
is or was a very Devil; but there is something which shall be restored, which
is not, nor was not wholly a Devil; for it is written, He took not upon him the
nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham. I had many times told this
unconscionable lying man these, or the like words, That there was but two
ways, or light and darkness: And man was the third thing, which does walk in
one of the two ways: But this I always did, and do deny still, that there is
no union between men and the Devil; but that which is by participating of his
nature, and not that they are essentially one.

And now in his fifth Page, where he comes to give his judgment concerning it;
I find no difference between that which I said, and that which he now says in
his Paper, but only this: I said, that man walked in one of these two ways;
and he says, And man is in the one way. I leave the Reader to judge, whether
he speaks sense, or nonsense, considering his following words. So he concludes
that particular with these words, Let the wise in heart judge where the third
way is; as though his Opposer had said, that there were three ways. And in the
latter part of his fifth Page he says, That I should say, that Faith is not
the gift of God; a thing that I cannot remember that I had any discourse with
him about: But whether I have said so or no; I tell you what I should say, if I
should speak my judgment concerning it: I say, That believing, or giving
credit to the word of God, is an Act of the Creature, performed by the Power
and ability given him of God, as it is written, With the heart man believes to
Righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made to Salvation, Romans 20.20.
I marvel how the Quakers and others are so besotted, that they do not see that
believing or Faith in that sense is a duty required of man: upon the neglect of
it, he is threatened; and upon the performance of it, he is commended, according
to Matthew. 16.16. He that believes shall be saved; but he that believes not
shall be damned. John Moon says, That the Faith whereby a man is saved from
his sins, is the gift of God: And I say, If man be not saved from the
punishment due for sin, that the cause is not in God, for not giving; but in
man for not believing. He says, That I spoke contrary to the Scriptures, Ephesians.
2.8. By grace ye are saved (through Faith) not of your selves; it is the gift
of God.

I deny not that Scripture, Ephesians. 2.8. but own it; and also own Salvation to be
the gift of God, which the Apostle in that place does affirm to be the gift of
God, and excludes all manner of works from having any part or share in the work
of Salvation. So having no desire to be tedious to the Reader, and considering
that other men's Pens have passed upon this subject, which I esteem far before
my own.

In Page the seventh, John Moon faith, That one Rees Davies, and another,
should say, That in the Devil there is as much of God as makes him tremble: But
Rees Davies says, That he said not so; but these are the words which Rees
Davies said, That there is so much fear in the Devil, as makes him tremble; as
for the other, I own not his words, nor himself neither.

In Page the eighth, John Moon quarrelleth with another, whose name is John
Prosser, and accuses him of saying, That Ribbon and Lace does adorn the
Gospel; but the man says with many witnesses, That it is a notorious lie,
which John Moon says of him; and I believe that there is but few, if there be
any, that will believe that any reasonable man will say, that Ribbon and Lace
does adorn the Gospel.

In Page the ninth, John Moon says, That one Evan Oliver should say, That God
and his grace is not both one: whether he said so, or no, I do not know; for he
is and has been in Scotland ever since; but I believe that he might
distinguish between God and his grace, and yet hold Union also.

And as for our Friend Vavasor Powel, I have been informed, that he does intend
to answer for himself; and judging him to be abler and sitter then I my self
am, I shall not say any thing of it, neither can I well, by reason that I heard
not the discourse, nor have not any account of it, But what John Moon says of
it in his Papers, which are not to be given credit unto.

And as for John Moon his Queries in the close of his Book, I leave them to be
answered by those to whom they were propounded; for the life of sanctified and
Baptized Believers is hid in God. Col. 3.3. Therefore they live not in
observation: Yet I say, That God's people do, and ought observe things: See
Deuteronomy. 1^.28. Observe and hear all these words, which I command thee. Psalm
105.45. That they might observe his Statutes, and keep his Laws. Matthew. 28.20.
Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I commanded you.

So I shall say no more at present in reply to John Moons Paper: But desire
the Reader carefully to peruse that which follows, and is written and
subscribed by my beloved Friend William Bownd: And I do earnestly desire, that
all men, especially they that have had any longing desire after God and
goodness, that they stand still, and then doubtless they shall see the
Salvation of God: for whiles man is working, laboring, and moving in his own
will, He is a stranger to the Salvation of God: to which Salvation and gra^e I
commend all those that waits for, and longs after it, and rest,

Their true Friend, JOHN PRICE.


HERE Follows under the same Title, A BRIEF DISCOVERY Of the Erroneous Tenets
of those who are distinguished from other men by the name OF QUAKERS, NAMELY
JOHN MOON, and ALEXANDER PARKER, And others, who own them and their sayings:
wherein is manifested the right consequences that unavoidably follows their
own words, from their own mouths, and under their own hands, at several times,
in several meetings: With a few words in brief, unto several sorts of people,
in several conditions.

BY ME, Who am the unablest amongst many, yet a Lover of Peace and Truth,
WILLIAM BOWND.

Prove. 18.17. He that is first in his own cause, seems just: but his
Neighbor comes and searches him.

Prove. 17.22. Though thou should bray a Fool in a mortar amongst Wheat, with
a Pestel; yet will not his Foolishness depart from him.

LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1658.

A RELATION Of a short Discourse, at a place called the Scwryw, upon the
eighteenth day of the Month called February.
I Hearing that the people which by some are called Quakers, were to meet
there, and that one Alexander Parker was to Preach there that day; I knowing my
liberty, that I might try all thing, and hold fast that which is good,

I went there, and hearing the said Alexander speaking very often unto the
people of a pure principle of God in every man, which pure principle is in
Egypt, in bondage and in slavery in man, and must be redeemed.

And when he had done speaking, I was moved to speak these words following.

Friend, Thou have spoken much unto the people, concerning a pure principle of
God in every man, which pure principle is in slavery, and in bondage, and must
be redeemed.

I would know of thee, whether thou do own any part in man, which is to be
redeemed, besides this pure principle of God.

Then the said Alexander drew near unto me, and asked me some other question;
but did not answer to the question which I had propounded.

Whereupon I told him, that I would not answer him in any thing, until he had
answered to the question which I had propounded.

And then the people many of them did rage and rail against me with open mouth,
carping at they know not what, like Dogs barking at the Moon.

Whereupon the said Alexander fathered that uproar upon me; whereas there had
not proceeded out of my mouth (at that time) any words but these above written;
and then I stated the question again as follows.

Question: Whether thou do own a humane soul in man, which is to be redeemed,
besides that pure principle of God?

He Answered: The Soul is pure.

I replied, that Jesus Christ came not to redeem a pure principle of God, but
an impure soul.

Then said he, Can the soul be defiled? Can the soul be desiled?

I said, The Soul can be defiled; and the Soul is defiled through the fall in
the first Adam.

He said, The soul is under sin and slavery, but it is not defiled with sin.

Then there was one that stood there for their side, stirred up with a very
wrathful distempered Spirit, and said unto the said Alexander, Brother, I
charge thee before God and these men, that thou shall not speak with this man:
And when he had thus spoken three times, then the said Alexander said, That he
would not speak with me: and so withdrew from me.

Whereupon I spoke unto the people, what he had said concerning men's souls,
that they could not be defiled with sin; to the end that all those that see,
and are not stark blind, might have a sight of his erroneous Judgment.

Then the said Alexander drew near me again, lest his Errors should be
uncloaked, and his Doctrine laid naked before the people, saying, Do not wrest
my words: I say, The soul is pure.

I denied that the soul is pure, to which end Christ came in the Flesh, for to
purify impure souls: I did bid him prove his affirmative.

Whereupon one John Moon, it seems of the same judgment, and Alexander, did
bid me prove, that the soul is not pure.

I said, I was not to prove a negative, and so I did demand of them to prove
that the soul is pure.

Then the said Alexander urged that Scripture in Genesis 2.7. God breathed into
[man] the breath of life, and man became a living Soul.

I said, that does not prove what the Soul is, but what the soul was.

Here it appears, that lest he should receive a total rout, or a deadly wound
with his own staff, and his false Tenet be stripped bare; he said, that he spoke
of his own Soul.

Now a word unto the said Alexander Parker, and John Moon, who say, You speak
from the mouth of the Lord, and by that infallible Spirit, as the holy men of
God did, and are fully perfect. How is it that the said Alexander has said,
and the said John Moon seeming to maintain what he had said? and if he spoke
of his own Soul, to be under sin and slavery, how is it that he is also perfect?

Or is it not rather clear, according to his general Doctrine that day, and the
question propounded, that he spoke of every man's Soul? but lest he should be
trapped in his own snare, he said, He spoke of his own Soul.

Here I charge thee with a lie (either of you) show me if you can, which way
you can escape it, let me see which way you can dawb up this tottering Wall
with your untempered Mortar, or else be ashamed of your ignorance, and confess
your Error, and repent.

Now to all you that are impartial, and unbiassed, that can weigh the truth in
the Balance of Justice do I appeal,

First, Whether that Proposition I propounded, was a thing needful, or material
that day?

Secondly, Whether the propounding of that question only was a cause of an
uproar?

Thirdly, Whether it was a difficult thing for me to prove from Scripture that
the Soul was defiled with sin?

Fourthly, Whether that Scripture, Genesis 2.7. does prove his Soul, or any other
man's Soul, to be pure since our fall in the first Adam?

Fifthly, Whether this lying and equivocating aforesaid, be from the mouth of
the Lord, and by the infallible Spirit? Or whether is it by the Spirit of
Error, and from the mouth of Antichrist, who is the Lord of lies?

By one that is embouldened to stand up in the truths behalf, to the face of
truths Opposers.

WILLIAM BOWND.


A Copy of this forementioned Discourse was sent unto John Moon, and Alexander
Parker: After many days I received this reply, which follows.

A Paper I received, subscribed by one William Bownd, wherein I find several
lies, and false accusations, and lying aspersions, cast upon the Messengers of
the Lord, judging of truth, with his dark mind, as that Generation of
Professors ever did, who had a form of Godliness, but denied the light and
Power, as William Bownd has gotten the good words, painted himself with a
covering, but not with the Spirit of the Lord: woe is his Portion for, and to
all who make a show of Goodness, but their lives and conversations contrary; a
blind Zeal, but not according to truth; and out of that blind zeal does judge
of the things of God, judges truth to be Error, and puts light for darkness,
and darkness for light, as thou William Bownd and all blind Professors ever
did, persecute and hate them who were Professors, and did walk in the life and
Power of truth: and to thee William Bownd and all people that were present that
day at David William's house, was the word of the Lord declared a among you,
and that of God in all your consciences shall for ever bear Testimony for the
Lord and his word, and it shall stand for ever, and shall not go out in vain,
and shall be thy condemnation for ever, and all that slight it, and his
Messengers; and we shall be a good Savor unto God, both in them that believe,
and in them that perish: and what was spoken there of the mystery of
Godliness, which is hid from all vulterous eyes, and venomous Beasts, shall
stand for ever: and concerning redemption, and the groans and cries of the
Innocent that groaneth for deliverance, as Israel groaned under Pharaoh; this
shall thou Bownd, and all people one day confess to be truth; and I appeal to
all of that in thy conscience, and all peoples consciences, when any evil of
sin is committed, upon the sense and feeling of it, many times sighs and
groans will be heard, and the groans and cries are entered into the ears of
the Lord of Sabbath; and he is now risen in his Majesty and dreadful Power, for
the redemption of his own people, and will burn up the chafe, the wicked and
carnal Professors, and give them their Portion in the lake of endless misery;
and this shall thou witness, when the Book of conscience is opened, and the
liar has his Portion: And whereas thou Bownd says, That after Alexander
Parker had done speaking, thou spoke unto him. Whether he did own any part in
man, which is to be redeemed, besides that pure principle which he had been
speaking of; and thou say, he did not answer to the question which thou
propoundedst: which thing is false; for answer was made in plainness, to the
satisfaction of many; though thou could not receive it, being full and rich in
thy own conceit, and so was sent empty away: and after the truth was cleared,
to the satisfaction of many people, the Messenger of the Lord passed away, and
then hearing thee Bownd incensing the people with lies, he came up again, and
then was something spoken concerning the Soul; but not before he passed down,
as thou in thy Paper falsely asserts; and the Soul was said to be pure, which
thou Bownd, who knows not the Soul, denied: But the truth shall stand for ever,
and over the deceit Reign; and that in the conscience shall answer it, and
witness to it: And thou Bownd says in thy lying Paper, That before he, to
wit, Alexander Parker, went down, thou stated thy question: Do thou own a
humane Soul, which is to be redeemed, besides, etc. This is false, and a lie;
thou did not mention any such question, before he spoke of the Souls
redemption, and so thou liar art for the lake. Several other things there is in
thy Paper, which truly are not worth the rapping up, nor mentioning by a sober
Christian, which stuff I do return back into the old Bottle again, from whence
it came; and the same Testimony that I gave of the Soul, I give the same still,
that the Soul is precious and pure witnessed, though not comprehended by the
dark wisdom of m^n; for it was then declared that he spoke what he knew, and
not by hearsay, but what he witnessed by the living Power of God, which was
made manifest; whereby he came to know the Soul, and its Redemption, and
purity, and none else knows it but those who witness Redemption; and this
Testimony shall stand for ever against thee Bownd, and against all the Opposers
of the truth: my Soul is pure and precious, and they who live in sin, are
Enemies to their own Souls; for the fleshly lusts warreth against the Soul; the
Enemy may destroy the body, but cannot kill the Soul: Be thou therefore
awarned, and repent of thy lies Bownd, and speak not evil of that which thou
know not, whiles it is called to day, harden not thy heart: thou know not
how soon thy soul may be required of thee: This is in love to thy Soul, which I
love; but for ever I shall stand a witness against thy lies, and that which
wars against the Soul: And this Testimony without daubing or equivocating, as
thou falsely accuses of, I shall really with my blood against thee Bownd, and
all thy partakers, who are warring against the truth and all dear Friends, who
are convinced of the living and Eternal truth, and have seen the deceit: and
the emptiness of all Professions formal, that stands in the will of man, where
there is no satisfaction to the hungry, thirsty Soul, but as Swine, feeding
upon the Hurkes, in that which discovered all these things do you abide, and
keep your habitations and dwellings in the measure of God, waiting for his
Power, to purify, and cleanse, and purge out the old learn, that the Soul,
which is living, you may witness to praise the living: for the dead praise not
God; it is the living, the living that praises God, to whom all praise belongs
for evermore.

Let this be truly Copied over, and sent abroad, and keep a true Copy of it.

From him who loves the Souls of all people, but hates their sin; Whose name in
the Flesh is ALEXANDER PARKER.
But has a new name written in the Book of life, which none can read, but he
that has it.




HEre I shall desire the understanding Reader, for to take notice of the
foregoing discourse, and also of Parkers reply, how he falls to contend and
wrangle about the time and place, but answers not one word to the matter then
in hand, viz. as before he went down, and after he came up, or where he stood
when he spoke the words: This was not material with me: Although I had truly
and rightly laid down the Passages of it, as I could instance many that were
witnesses of the same; but I shall forbear, because in so doing, I should seem
to be so frivolous as he himself.

Has not this man manifested his own folly, in putting Pen to Paper, and
writing so many Lines, and sending them many miles, and yet answers not one
word unto the thing I charged him with?

And whether the manner of it, or the matter of it was the more worthy of being
mentioned, or replied unto, I shall leave the impartial Reader to judge.

But only I shall here demand of Parker this one thing, yet once agains Whose
Soul was that which he endeavored to prove to be pure, by that Scripture, Genesis
2.7. And if it was his own Soul, as he afterward did say, Whether he had
forgotten, that he came out of the loins of his old Father Adam?

But as the Tree is known by its Fruit, so is the stumpe known by the Branches;
but in its due place I shall follow these Branches unto the stumpe, and so
discover the very rottenness of its Roots.

THe greatest cause of my Relating of this Discourse, and bringing these few
Lines into such a public view, is, because John Moon in his lying Book,
entitled, The true Light has made manifest darkness, has cast false
aspersions, and lying accusations upon the Saints in Wales, beginning with Hugh
Evans, who is now ceased from his labors: I being one that was very well
acquainted with his Doctrine, life, and conversation; and the certainty I have
of those sweet, Divine, Spiritual, and Eternal enjoyments that his Soul has
had, and has, and shall enjoy to Eternity, out of the mortal body, does remove
much grief and sadness from my Spirit, in consideration of his absence in the
body: I also having a discovery of the lying and equivocating of John Moon,
and Alexander Parker, and others that tread in their erroneous steps; therefore
I am engaged to manifest some of it, to the end that the tongues of public
known liars may not easily pass their false aspersions, and that truth and
Justice may take place, and that falsehood, and all false dealers may be found,
and taken in their own snares, and wounded with their own Weapons. Although I
acknowledge my self the weakest amongst many, yet seeing the uncircumcised
rejoice, and Goliath standing vapouring in the field, viz. John Moon with his
lying Book, desying Israel, I am emboldened to press into the Battle: for who
is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he should defy the Armies of the living
God?

I being both an eye and an ear-witnesse unto that Discourse between John Price
and John Moon, where John Moon falsely in his Book accuses John Price, in
saying, that he said, There was three ways: This is false; and therefore this
is one cause, Why I publish John Moon for a known liar; for the Discourse was
grounded upon three distinct things, viz. God, Man, and Devil: Whereupon John
Moon Denied one of these three; John Moon did bid him prove them distinct,
the which he did prove, God the Creator creating, and man created, and the
Devil deceiving; which three were punctually proved: But because the Letter of
the Scripture did not name them in this term distinct, it should not pass with
him.

Then John Price asked him, Which of these three would he deny? Then one of
John Moons fellow-Teachers, or rather I may say, his Fellow deceiver, named
Hugh Lloyd, said, that they denied man: Whereupon John Moon being the more
subtle, drew the same Hugh Lloyd back by the shoulder, and said, Let me alone
with them. Then we spoke something to this purpose: If it were so, to whom was
the Gospel Preached, and to what end Christ came in the flesh? But John Moon,
as his manner was usually before, said, There was but light and darkness, God
and Devil; although he would not deal so plain as the other did, as to deny
man; yet he would not deny what the other had said: whereupon we brought this
consequence upon his own words; and we told him what absurdities would follow:
That is, That if God and man were not distinct, if man did fall, as the
Scripture declares, then the only pure wise infallible God must also fall,
which is blasphemy in a high measure: And also we told him, That if man and
Devil were not distinct, that then it must unavoidably follow, that that Christ
which came from the bosom of the Father to redeem Sinners, came also to redeem
Devils: The which is most erroneous. With this, his mouth was stopped for the
present, as unto these things, and had nothing to say; and then the nearest way
they had to escape, the said Hugh Lloyd stepped up upon a feat, or some other
high place, and there began to speak to the people, and to thunder our such
railings, and cursings, and Plagues toward us, that we could not have any
further opportunity to speak: and then, when I got a little time to speak, I
spoke something to the people, concerning those men's erroneous Doctrines: then
John Moon having recruited himself afresh, amongst other railings spoke these
words: Thou Bownd, thou Serpent, thou Son of the Devil, thy brains shall be
dashed against the stones; and so I was silenced by their confounded
Babel-uproar.

Then I having by the goodness of God some insight into their Tenets; I went
nearer unto the said John Moon, and asked him what part in me was that which
he thundered all those Plagues against; or whether that part through being
obedient to that light which he said was in me, might escape them: he answered,
The Candle of the wicked shall be put out: I told him that he spoke nonsense,
as in answer to that which I propounded: then he endeavored to inform the
people that I said, That the Scripture was nonsense.

I was accused also in another Paper jointly with John Price, for saying, That
the Devil was Eternal, as to Eternity, or without end, by John Moon, and one
Edward Stephens, who in that Paper said, That they both bare witness that
there was nothing Eternal but God, and that which is one with God.

Now seeing that the aforesaid John Price has already replied unto the same
accusation, for brevity sake, I shall return the Reader unto his reply
forementioned in this Book; but only I shall lay down some absurdities, that
must unavoidably follow.

First, concerning Angels, they all having their arise in the same Original
Root, are either Eternal, or external.

First, if they be external, then it follows that all the Angelical quire of
Heaven, and also those that fell from their first estates, shall be
annihilated, and come to nothing; which is to say, Heaven, or God's Throne will
be found void of Angels; and also Hell will be void of Devils.

Secondly, If the fallen Angels are Eternal, according to John Moons saying,
That there is nothing Eternal but God, or that which is one with God: Then it
follows that the holy and unchangeable God did also fall: the which sayings
are fearful to express.

Secondly, Concerning Adam's Soul, or all men's Souls in Adam, in his fallen
condition, before the Sprouts of the humane Tree, or the variety of Nations
sprang forth, they were also all either Eternal or external: if external, then
it follows, that the Souls of all the Saints must cease from their sense and
feeling of all their sweet enjoyments; and likewise the Souls of the damned
from all their woe and torments.

And if they are Eternal, then it follows according to John Moons sayings,
as aforesaid,

That the Souls of all men in general are either God, or one with God, and
cannot be defiled with sin, nor damned for sin.

Does it not here plainly appear, that all the Plagues and woes which they
pronounce against men, are but against the external, or outward part of man,
and the Astral Souls or life, the which is but for a time, and shall be done
away?

Is not here the ground of all their sayings found out? John Moon affirming
that there is but two things, which is to say, Light and darkness, Heaven and
Hell, God and Devil.

And is not here their beginning (as they call it) and the arise of Alexander
Parker's own saying, That the Soul was under sin and slavery, but could not be
defiled with sin? And is not this that pure principle of God, which they say is
in every man in bondage and slavery, and must be redeemed?

How now Moon and Parker? have I not pricked you here in your right wound? yea,
are ye not here found out? Is not all your lying, and equivocating, and false
accusing of others, proved too short a covering for you to hide you in?

But it may be that you will say, That I have wronged you, and brought a
scandal upon you.

To the which I reply, that if you are here wronged, it is by your own words;
for I have here but only made use of your own expressions from your own
mouths, and followed your own footsteps unto this den, whence you sprang
forth.

Let this be told you out of the Bowels of love unto your poor Souls, that if
you had come to the right and true beginning, you should have seen the arise
and Original Root of Angels, and humane Souls, how they were generated, and
came forth out of an Eternal Root in love and anger; and how the Angels that
fell from their first estates, advanced, or domineered over, or above the meek
love, and are held captive, and are reserved in everlasting Chains under
darkness, unto the Judgment of the great day.

And how Adam's right, true humane Soul, or all men's Souls in Adam, fell from
their happy estate, and became dead, as to the light and love, and were defiled
with sin, and captivated in the anger, and yet no part of that undivided God
corrupted.

Now unto you poor besotted Souls that are taken by the fair outside shows of
these forementioned Errors, and yet have not altogether swallowed up the very
dregs of their poisoned Cups; notwithstanding you have soon learned that same
Lesson of opposing, railing, cursing, and condemning of all those that tread
not in your footsteps, because they are not taken with those fancies that you
have fixed in your own brains; although thousands of them are more Heavenly
and Spiritual then you your selves. Also you use your uttermost endeavors, to
make the Saints names odious in the sight of others: By these and other means
you have caused the blind to go out of the way, and the seeking Souls to look
back; have you not also quit and sold all your reading, your meditating, and
your earnest seeking of God, for railing and frivolous contending about you
know not what, yea about a false Doctrine, that was never found in the Rowles
of God's Divine Court, and never owned nor confirmed by his dear and only Son,
nor published by his Holy Spirit; which is to say. That all men's Souls are
either God, or one with God, and cannot be defiled with sin, nor condemned for
sin; and that all the Plagues and woes that are pronounced, are but against the
external, or outward part of man, the which shall be done away.

Here I have briefly out of love, and not in opposition unto any, but only
unto the man of sin, given you a discovery of the snare, that is secretly laid
before your Souls; but if you will shut your eyes, and stop your ears, and so
wilfully remain blind, your blood shall be upon your own heads, and I shall
here wash my hands from the guilt of your erroneous revolt.

Now unto you the Cainish Cathedral Stone-church Priests, and Tithe-mongers,
and new upstart Hirelings, you are all for what you can hear said against any
that in any measure do oppose you in your function: Although I have put my hand
to the publish of the discovery of some men's Errors; think not that I shall put
my least finger to the maintaining of yours: you are all for the back and
belly, and for your own glory, if you had but wherewith to attain it: some of
you have been for these many years daunted with the fear of your own ruin; yet
you usually rejoice to hear, that any are cried down besides your selves.

Let the sight and feeling of your own covetous carnal corrupt minds, stop
your mouths.

Let your proud and haughty hearts become meek and lowly.

Let your confounded Languages become silent.

And let your Babel-building cease.

Let your own eloquence and Scholasticke wisdom become foolishness: So that
you may be wise.

Let those that stole, steal no more: Let shame cover your faces; and let your
glory fall to the dust.

Let God arise, and let all flesh be silent before the Lord.

Your dumb Ministry is fruitless, and your words are empty, vain, and
pithlesse, and shall not profit the people, says the Lord.

Your Spirits are benumbed by your unlawful gain, and you and your Souls are
become Servants and Slaves unto the unrighteous Mammon.

Your calling is by a mortal and inferior Power, and your places have you
purchased with your corrupt Silver.

Your strength is in the Arm of flesh.

Your Authority is of mortal men: And they that authorize you, are like unto
you: The Lord God has a controversy against you, and you are all abuilding of
a confounded tottering Tower, that shall shortly fall upon your own heads.

Now unto you blind-folded worldlings, and prodigal proud stone-Kirke Members,
the Devil has found you a Toy to play withal in these days; those seldom
times that you come under the means of grace, and true Preaching of the word,
whereby you, in being attentive and diligent to hear, might have a right and
true salve applied unto your wounded and corrupted Souls: But instead of so
doing, your wanton scoffing minds are then (by your Driver) fitted for another
design: you slight all that is said concerning your own dangerous sinful
slavish condition, and you also are all for what you can hear is said in
opposition against others. And thus you idly and vainly wear out your few
dear-bought days, and spend them in fulfilling of your own false wills.

The minor Party you scoff and jear at, and all that they maintain, be it true
or false.

The Major party and their sayings you brag and boast, be it right or wrong.

Your opposing of the one Party, is more out of the bitterness of your Spirits
against the truths they sometimes speak of, then out of any sensible knowledge
that you have of the Errors they maintain.

And the other Party that you sometimes vainly prate for, it is out of your
partiality, and outward respect you have to their persons, or rather would be
respected by them, more then out of any love you have to any truth that they
hold forth: for you know not truth from falsehood; neither can you discern
between Errors and found Doctrine, because you have forsaken the God that
created you; and ye know not your Redeemer: your hearts are made fat, your eyes
are shut, and your ears are stopped; you see, but discern not* you hear, but do
not understand, Isai. 6.20. You slight the means of grace, and you know not
the day of your Visitation.

Your terriblenesse and the pride of your hearts has deceived you, O you that
dwell in the clefts of the Rocks, and proudly walk upon the high Hills, and
make your nests as high as the Eagle, or amongst the Stars: yet I will bring
you down, says the Lord. Jer. 49 20. Obad. 4. You forsake the Paths of
uprightness, to walk in the ways of darkness; you rejoice to do evil, and
delight in the frowardness of the wicked. Woe be unto you that call good evil,
and evil good, that put darkness for light, and light for darkness, that put
bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. Woe unto them that are wise in their
own eyes, and prudent in their own sight: Woe unto them that are mighty to
drink Wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink, which justify the
wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of the Righteous from him:
therefore as the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumes the
chafe, so their Root shall be rottenness, and their Blossom shall go up as
dust, because they have cast away the Law of the Lord of Hosts, and despised
the word of the Holy one of Israel. Isai. 5.20, 21, 22, 23, 24.

O Poor wretched and miserable men, let this be told you, that your temporal
joy is the producing of your Eternal woe and sorrow; and that the time draws
near, when your laughter shall be turned into weeping, and your joy into
heaviness; and you shall be deprived of all your temporal enjoyments, and the
object of your foolish mirth and youthful rejoicing shall be done away, and
then sorrow and grief will approach unto you, and horror and anguish will seize
upon you, and you will be found naked, and void of the Wedding Garment, and be
bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of Teeth.

Now unto you carnal Professors, and mere lip-labourers, that draw near unto
God with your mouths, and honor him with your lips, but your hearts are far
from him.

You have learned to talk of a God, and Godliness, but the only true God, and
the Power of Godliness you know not; your chiefest Treasure is transitory, and
the object of your joy is but for a moment; your Webs shall not become
Garments, neither shall you cover your selves with your works; your works are
the works of Iniquity, and the Act of violence is in your hands; the way of
peace you know not, and there is no Judgment in your goings; you have made
unto you: crooked Paths; whosoever goes therein, shall not know Peace: Woe be
unto you that are at ease in Zion, yea you that have put your hands to the
Plow, and are looking back; therefore you are not fit for the Kingdom of God
Amos 6.1. Luke 9 62. You sow the wind, and reap the whirlwind; you conceive
chafe, and bring forth stubble; your words are empty, your Wombs are barren,
and your breasts are dry.

Your building is founded upon the Sands, you are a fruitless Vineyard. Isai.
5.2. Bearing sour Grapes; you are Clouds without Water, carried about with
winds, dry Branches, Trees whose Fruit withers, without Fruit, twice dead,
plucked up by the Roots. Jude 12.

O blind, naked, and miserable men, let this be told you, that the work of
regeneration and the new birth, is an earnest work, and that it requires very
much careful watching, and continual striving. Luke 13 24. Mark 13.33, 35. And
earnest pressing to be brought forth out of the corrupt something into the pure
nothing, which is all in all.

Now unto the despised seeking Souls, who earnestly seek the Lord in truth, in
sailing over this Ocean of misery; your Ship has been grievously toffed by
many a raging Wave, and by side-winds have been cast near many dangerous Gulfs;
yet during the time of these storms and tempests, by great providence, and
unspeakable mercies, you cast forth your Anchors upon a sure Rock; and when the
calm comes, so that you take a view of those dangers that you have escaped,
and rejoice; yet you ascribe not the glory of your deliverance unto your
selves, but earnestly make toward the promised Land, notwithstanding you mourn
over those that are over-turned; yet your mourning shall be turned into joy;
your building is founded upon the Rock; your Treasure is not corrupt: You have
a building of God, an house not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens: No
Lion shall be there, nor any Ravenous Beasts shall go up thereon; it shall not
be found there, but the Redeemed shall walk there.

And the Ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with Songs, and
everlasting joy upon their heads, and they shall obtain joy and gladness, and
sorrow and sighing shall flee away.

With whom I desire to commune and associate continually, who am your Friend
and Fellow-traveller, WILLIAM BOWND.


FINIS.
Printed at LONDON, And are to be sold by Daniel White, at the seven Stars in
Pauls-Church-Yard. 1658.


