THE DECLARATION AND Resolution of Col. John Poyer, Governor of Pembroke
Castle, concerning the Kings Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament; and his
Propositions to the Western party, touching his present proceedings.

Together with a full and perfect Relation of the last great Fight, betwixt the
Forces of the said Col Poyer, and Col, Fleming. With the manner thereof, And
the taking of Tinby Castle by a party of Maj. Genesis Langhorns men.

a cavalier on horseback

London Printed for R. VV. and are to be sold near Temple Bar, 1648

A perfect RELATION OF The great Fight at Pembroke Castle, betwixt the Forces
under command of col. John Poyer, and the Forces under command of col. Flemming.
Right Honorable,
SInce my last unto you, of the 14. instant, the work for reducing of Pembroke
Castle has boene much retarded, and businesses have happened contrary to our
expectation, for the insolent deportment of the Governor having awakence again
a discontented party in this Kingdom, which began to fall asleep, and to
acquiesce to the Orders of the Parliament, have now taken a resolution upon
them to aid and assist the said Poyer, 2000. of Major Genesis Langhorns men being
joined with him which came out or South-wale.

But Col. Poyer having notice of their advance, forthwith dispatched a private
messenger from the Castle, to acquaint them, that upon their approach near he
was resolved to make a saily forth, and to fall upon our Forces in their
quarters, and desired that they would be in re^^^^nesse to fall on upon the
other side, which accordingly they did, insomuch that our party were
surrounded; but immediately receiving the allarm, they prepared to receive them,
and drew up into several Bodies, and charged the party commanded by Poyer
himself, and had totally routed them, had not the new Revolters immediately
charged them on the Rear: However, col. Flemming and his party defended
themselves gallantly, for the space of half an hour, and engaged themselves
very much for the preservation of their Ordnance and Artillery, but being
over-powred and unprovided for their coming were forced to retreat.

They have slain diverse, and a great many are wounded, Col. Flemming himself is
^^ssing, but it is hoped he is not slain.

Our men are all dispersed, and about 20 or 30 are carried prisoners into the
Castle.

The number of those killed, is not yet certainly known but we hope not many,
and that which supports out confidence therein, is their good appearance about
Gloucester, and the to vns adjacent.

The Commissioners that went thither are most of them taken.

They have also taken the two great Culverins which Col. Fleming landed to
maintain a Battery, and carried them into the Castle, together with all the
Arms and Ammunition.

Col Poyer has taken Pembroke town, and from thence victuals the Castle. He
sends out parties daily for the fetching in of provisions out of the Country:
And that he has a design to fortify the town of Pembroke, and to Garrison
those that are come in for his assistance therein.

We have likewise received further advertisements from South Wales, That
anothea party of Major Genesis Laughorns men are revolted from the obedience and
command of the General, and has taken possession of Tinby Castle, and do
pretend to keep it for the King and Parliament, according to their former
Engagement and Covenant. Here is great talk in these parts, of the raising of a
new Army for the King, the Royal party giving out very high speeches; but we
hope care will be taken for the sending of such a strength to South Wales as it
is hoped will soon reduce those parts, and bring the new Revolters to condign
punishment.

The insolent Colonel has declared his Resolution to the Inhabitants of
Pembroke, and has sent a Declaration and Propositions to the late Commander in
chief of the Parliaments Forces, a Copy whereof, I have sent you here enclosed,
and remain

Your most obedient servant, John Wilson.
Gloucester 28 of March 1647.
The Declaration and Propositious of Collonell Poyer Governor of Pembroke
Castle, concerning his present proceedings touching the Kings Majesty and both
Houses of Parliament.
SIR,
THE Order and Letter I read before your Drum to the Soldiers, they return
this Answer. 1 That the Officers and Soldiers be paid part of their Arrears
according to the proportion of others, and sufficient security for the rest.

2. That one thousand pounds be paid unto me, which I have disbursed, and my
Arrears, as other officers according to my place and time of my service; this
granted, we are ready to surrender Castle and all that we have in our
possession; if not, we are resolved, with the assistance of the Almighty, to
hold the Castle for the King and Parliament, according to the Covenant by us
taken, until such time that our Arrears, Disbursments, and Indemnity be
assured us, Our trust is not in the arm of fiesh, but our hope stands in the
name of the Lord, and if blood be spilt, judge who shall answer it at the
dreadful day of judgment; such as seeks another man's use to enjoy what is his
right, or that man that stands in his defense to save what is his, we have be
stowed our times to good purpose, to be preclaimed traitors and Rebels for
demanding our own, and no more but what your self and those Mercenaries
desires that you have brought to murder us, and to take the bread out of the
mouths of our wivrs and children.

I have no more but this, as David spoke to Saul, when be hunted after has
life, The Lord be Judge between us, whose heavenly protection, I am assured of,
knowing our Cause to be just, I have not else to trouble you, but rest,

Your humble Servant, John Poyer.
Pembroke Castle 13, March 1647.
The Answer of Colonel Fleming to the said Declaration.
Colonel Fleming being willing of himself to do all things with gentleness,
and upon the advice and desires of the Gentlemen of that County, promised to
give him 200 l in ready money, and to enjoy the same terms for himself, and the
Officers and Soldiers with him, as other supernumeraries that are, or have
been disbanded in other places. Ne promised also that his arrears should be
should be audited, and security given him for the payment thereof, etc. But
these fair offers could not prevail, for he hung out his flag of defiance, and
refused to submit.

The General has written to Col. Poyer, and I. col. Laughorn, That whereas he
understands there is some disputes amongst the Officers belonging to Major Genesis
Laughornes, Forces concerning their disbanding, pretending to the Commissioners
of Parliament appointed for that service, that they desire to be disbanded
together, and other questions about the quantities of money to be paid upon
their disbanding; That concerning the latter satisfaction is given by the
Committee, by order from the Committee of Parliament for the Army: As for the
other of desiring to be disbanded together, it is directly contrary to those
rules his Excelency has prescribed hitherto for disbanding, and therefore his
Excellency expects, that the same obedience which has bin yielded by all
others, be likewise by them, and that they do forthwith upon sight disband,
Troop after Troop, and company after company, until the work of disbanding be
finished.

Imprimatur,

G. M.



FINIS.

