THE DECLARATION AND RESOLUTION OF Col. John Poyer, CONCERNING Lieutenant Genesis
CROMWELL, and the particular Relation of another great Fight in South Wales.
WITH, A Declaration of the Kings Majesty's Loyal Subjects in the Isle of
Wight, concerning the Proceedings of Sir Thomas Glemham, Colonel John Poyer,
and the Scottish Army, for the reinvesting of the King in his Royal Palace at
White Hall, and settling of the KINGDOM. LIKEWISE, A Letter from CARISBROOKE,
concerning the playing of a great Game by the Kings Majesty, and Sir Oliver
Cromwell, and the particulars touching Colonel Hammond.

LONDON: Printed for I. G. MDCXLVIII.

A DECLARATION OF The Kings Majesty's loyal Subjects, in the Isle of Wight,
concerning the proceedings of Sir Thomas Glemham, Col. Poyer, and the Scottish
Army, touching the Parliament of England, Army, and Kingdom.
SIR,
YOur last I received, Dated April the 25. 1648. I shall endeavor to
communicate unto you, the most remarkable passages, that are more extant. As
for the state and condition of this Island, wherein we are now resident, we
find them to be (for the Major part) very real and well-affected, and willing
to obey the power and Authority of Parliament, and extraordinary obedient to
the Commands of those entrusted by them, as may appear by their late unanimous
expressions, both to our Governor and his Officers; who having received
intelligence of the proceedings of Col. Poyer and his confederates, and their
declaring for the King, and (most Judas-like and traterously) betraying the
trust reposed in them by the Parliament of England, resolved with one unanimous
consent to adhere, and stand firm to the supreme Power and Representatives of
England, and to hazard lives, fortunes, and estates, for the defense and
preservation thereof, (notwithstanding many invitations lately sent for their
engagements to the contrary.) And they further declared to our Governor, Col.
Hammond, their unanimous and real resolutions, to adhere unto him (according
to the power and authority of the supreme Council and Representatives of
England) and to stand or fall, live or dye, and to use their utmost endeavors
to aid and assist him against all opposition whatsoever, that shall endeavor
to attempt, or disturb the Peace of the said Island, under any pretense
whatsoever.

Thus much I can assure you of the present proceedings of the Inhabitants of
Weight; yet notwithstanding, they have received many false and various reports
from several parts of the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, to
diswade them to the contrary. And for the proceedings of Poyer, Powel, and
their Adherents, they utterly detest and declare against them, being confident,
(as indeed it may well and apparently appear) that their present D^sign and
Engagement, tends to no other end or principle; but a mere selfe-end, for the
advancement of their own wretched and mechanic ambition, rather then the
preferment of the public good of Englands Commonalty. And for the Scots, they
declare (according to the ancient rule and proverb) that they dare not, nor
will not, put confidence in a blew Bonnet; for say they, Trust a Scot and hang
him, although they pretend fair toward Religion, Crown, and Kingdom, and for
the re-instablishing of the Kings Majesty, in his Throne at Westminster.

But indeed, here is some few persons, who expects great matters from Poyer,
and the Scots, who at the first arising of the Cloud in Wales, gave out very
high speeches, etc.

Sir, as for the state and condition of the Kings Majesty, I can assure you
thus much, that He is in health and merry; but at the arrival of the news
that the Duke of York was escaped and gone, His Majesty seemed to be very
solentary. His Majesty takes much delight in the company of Sir Oliver
Cromwell, and makes choice of him to be his second, for the playing of the
Game, (I mean at Bowls) against Colonel Hammond, or any other two.

Thus, having communicated unto you, that which is (at present) most
observable; I remain,

Your most affectionate friend to serve you, Thomas Hill, Cornet.
Carisbrooke may the 2. 1642.
Another great fight in Wales.
SIR,
Colonel Poyer, Powel, and the rest of the Malignants begin to be very
fearful, and it is thought, repent their undertakings, Col. Powel being lately
at Carmarthen, Col. Horton marched toward him; but the Welsh having notice
thereof, pulled and brake down all the Bridg^s, and endeavored to stop the
passages, so that when Colonel Horton came to Portragorthy, he found the Bridge
down, and Poyers men at the passage, Col. Horton made toward another passage,
and the Rebels in a fear retreated to several holds, the Parl. forces being
joined, followed them: some slight skirmishes have happened, but nothing of
great consequence done as yet.

The Welsh people being more afraid then hurt, conceited that they should
recive strange cruelties from the Soldiers of the Parl. whereupon they quite
lest their dwellings, and drove all their Cattle into the Mountains, Col.
Horton is very diligent in his service, and with all possibility endeavors to
straiten them, because Malignants fl^ck unto him daily, and also to hinder his
getting provisions and mustering the Country, as they had done in several
places; where, at one time appeared about 4000. in another place, 3000. and in
another place 2000. many of them being armed, and Powell the better to engage
the people, declared himself for the King. Here are diverse Porters, Butchers,
and such like rascally fellows come hither from London, the Welsh endeavored
to make good their ground against the Parl. forces, and encamped near the
River Towry, about 20. miles from Pembrooke; but when Col. Horton came, they
all retreated, Embleden Castle is fortifying, and 2. Companies of Col.
Langhornes men under the Command of Captain Cosens, and Captain Aires are to
keep it, they had an intent to have put a Garrison in the Castle of Aburustwith
in Cardiganshire; but I hear they have deserted it. Monmouthshire is quiet, in
Herefordshire Major Sanders has quelled the Malignants there, and taken Col.
Sherington Talbot prisoner, Poyer makes away from the presence of Col. Horton.

Col. Horton has had another great fight with Poyer, and diverse men slain on
both sides; but the number thereof, I cannot justly give an account of, it is
said, that Captain Powel (of the enemies party, has received a mortal wound,
and diverse other Commanders of note; And indeed, diverse fell on our side, but
that which terrifies us the most, is the fall of a great Soldier, (a man
endued both with valor and Resolution). Both parties draws nearer and
nearer, and it is said, Poyer is resolved to fight, so is Col. Horton; but
Poyer is more in number then the party now against him: therefore high time it
is, that the rest of the forces designed for this service, be forthwith
disp^tched thither, which we hope will soon be effected; for Poyer gives out
high speeches, and says that he fears neither Fairfax, Cromwell, nor Ireton,
but is resolved to fight it out to the last man, we hear that Lieut. Genesis
Cromwell is designed for this service, and that he is upon his march thither,
with several Regiments of Horse and Foot: the Cavalry has also received the
same tidings, and Poyer gives out, that they will give him a field, and show
him fair play, and that he will be the first man that shall charge against
Iron-sides, saying, that if he had a back of steel, and breast of Iron, he
durst and would encounter with him. Most of the Inhabitants in these parts are
fled to the Mountains, being troubled with too much malignancy, and Mr. Vulcan
has shown himself a great enemy to our proceedings; for diverse Smiths in
several Towns, have cut up their Bellows, broke down their Stithies, and
made all their materials unserviceable, so that we cannot get a Horse shod not
in 20. or 30. miles riding. This is all for the present from,

Your obliged friend, T. Sands.
Carmarthen the 3. of May 1648.
Imprimatur

GILBERT MABBOT.

FINIS.

