I Have perused this Discourse, entitled, Honey out of the Rock, and find it
(answerable to the Title) full both of strength and sweetness, and therefore
do approve the publishing of it in Print.

April 19. 1644. Joseph Caryl.

HONEY OUT OF THE ROCK, OR, GODS METHOD IN GIVING THE SWEETEST Comforts in
sharpest Combats.

Chiefly intended, As Spiritual Plunder for Plundered Believers.

Judges 14.14. Out of the eater came forth meat.

Hebr. 10.34. And took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your
selves that ye have in heaven a better and an enduring substance.

LONDON: Printed by Francis Neile for Henry Overton in Pope's Head Alley. 1644.

TO ALL THE PERSECVTED Members of Jesus Christ, especially the Exiles, and
Plundered, of Bristol, Exeter, Westchester, Oxford, and elsewhere in these
bleeding Kingdoms of England and Ireland.
Right precious in the Lord,
IT is hard to say whether would first have devoured the persecuted Saints in
the Primitive times; either the depth of their misery, or the weight of their
glory; had not the Almighty enlarged their capacity to bear the one as well
as the other, and therefore (not doubting the Father of mercies continued
dispensations toward you (afflicted for his sake) in a way of like abounding
consolations) your poor brethren (not yet honored as your selves to suffer
for Christ) do look upon you, they know not whether, with more compassion, or
holy emulation, it is true, your outward condition has a sad aspect to the eye
of reason, you are driven from the creature; but it is to the Creator, from the
lower to the upper springs, from the stream to the fountain, is this misery?
before your troubles, you had your ordinary commons with your
fellow-beleevers, but now, your daily food is choice morsels, your ordinary
liquids; waters of life, and superlative refections ( Benjamins mess) your
daily share, the love of God, the power of Christ, the Spirit of glory, the
care of Angels, the prayers of Saints are all upon the wing for your present
welfare, is this misery? the Summum bonum (the great inquiry of this blind
world searching for it in all aboundancie of outward glory) is found by you;
and you by it sitting in sackcloth and ashes; is this misery, your earth is
dissolved before your bodies, and your heaven prevents you before your time,
your joys are immediate, you reap without sowing? you feed on the kernels and
break not the shells, you rest from your labors, the vision of God, the blood
of Christ, the joy of the spirit, the food of Angels, are not these your daily
repast? is this misery? dearest brethren, it is my ambition to be your
unworthy servitor in your present supports, whereby, if I can but help on your
joy, and insinuate my self among the number of your benefactors and share with
them in your daily requests at the throne of grace, it will be a double reward
unto him who is (unworthy to be mentioned with the meanest of you all)

J. P.

Honey out of the Rock.
Holiness is the object of man's hatred and Gods love, and in what subject
soever it be found, it produces the contrary effects of love and hatred from
God and man: there is not one thing wherein wretched man more contends with his
maker, then about the peace and trouble, joy and sorrow, life and death of the
Saints of God, this the Apostle speaks of, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. We are troubled on
every side, but not distressed, perplexed but not in despair, persecuted but
not forsaken, cast down but not destroyed. And Christ expressly affirms, that
in the world they should have trouble, but in him, peace. Joh. 16.33. The great
contention between Michael and the Devil is not now about the body of Moses, as
of old, Jude verse. 9. but the body of Christ, viz. his Church, Revel. 12.6.
whose habitation though it be in the wilderness, and mountains of Lebanon, and
Amana, Shenir and Hermon, the Lions dens, and mountains of the Leopards. Song
4.8. yet even there is she leaning upon her beloved: Chap. 8.5. and there has
God prepared a place for her where she is fed and supported, Revel. 12.16.
where he makes peace her borders, and fills her with the finest of the
wheat. Psalm. 147.14. and with honey out of the rock. Psalm. 81.16. Extracts of
spirits are most vigorous, how much more the Spirit of spirits? which is a
believers recoverie in fainting fits, and therefore the subject matter of our
present discourse shall be this.

The Spirit of Christ is unto believers the sweetest comforts in their sharpest
combats.

In which Proposition, two things are considerable. First, that God has given
unto his Saints the Spirit of his Son. Secondly, that this Spirit yields forth
the sweetest comforts in the sharpest trials.

The ^oynt confirmation, prosecution and application whereof shall be
endeavored in the solution of these Questions.

First, why God gives unto his people the Spirit of Christ. Secondly, how the
Spirit of Christ does comfort believers in evil times. Thirdly, how the Spirit
of Christ may be discerned from the Spirit of delusion
First, why God gives unto his people the Spirit of his Son.

Answ. First, God gives the Spirit of his Son unto Believers, that so they may
be made like unto his Son. Christ is the express image of God, and the Saints
are the express image of Christ, if you will know what God is, study Christ,
there you may read his infinite justice, mercy, love, truth, and goodness, if
you will know what Christ was here in the world, study the Saints, viz.
Quatenus, Saints, there you may read the holiness, meekness, humility,
patience, love, gentlenesse^, with the like glorious perfection of Jesus
Christ, Psalm. 45.7. God is said to anoint Christ with the oil of gladness
above his fellows. This is spoken of the Spirit, which in many places of
Scripture is compared to oil, 1. John 2.27. and elsewhere, and the anointing
oil under the Law consisting of many sweet spices, Exodus 35.8. did tipifie
the pouring out of the Spirit under the Gospel, consisting of many sweet and
precious graces and fruits thereof, and this is called the oil of gladness to
denote the chearing property of the Spirit of Christ, which is as ointment,
Pro. 27.8. to rejoice the heart, and with this was Christ anointed above his
fellows, that is in respect of measure, 3. John 34. but not in respect of
kind, the Saints having received it of his fulness, Joh. 1.16. it pleased the
Father that in him all fullness should dwell, 1. Col. 19. but yet that this
fullness powered forth upon the head should reach even unto the skirts of his
garments, Psalm. 133.2. the Saints are called Christ's fellows, God has given
them fellowship with Christ in the same inheritance, Romans 8.17. and therefore
in the same Spirit Gal. 4.6. Gods design was to make his Elect like his Son,
and in him like himself, we shall be like unto Christ in glory, John 3.2. and
we must be made like him in grace, even pure as he is pure, verse 3. the Spirit
of Christ stamps the image of his Son upon us, looking upon and beholding the
glory of the Lord we are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even
as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2. Cor. 3.18. that is, the first reason, God
gives the Spirit of his Son to conform us to the similitude of his Son.

Secondly, God gives his people the Spirit of his Son which is the fruit of his
death and intercession, that we may be fully convinced of all the glorious
perfections and fruits of the death and merits of Jesus Christ, God has
convinced us of the perfection of his love by sending his Son into the world,
John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his Son, if you will measure
his love, measure the gift, but both the one and the other is infinite; Christ
was the ensuring earnest of his love, having given him, he will surely give all
things with him. Romans 8.32.

Now as Christ is an assuring testimony of the perfection of Gods love, so the
gift of the Spirit is an assuring testimony of the perfection of Christ's
merits, and therefore it is called the earnest of our inheritance, until the
redemption of the purchased possession, 1. Ephesians. 14. greater is Christ then
all other fruits of Gods love, and greater is the Spirit, then all other fruits
of Christ's merits: as all the fruits of Gods love are intayled unto the person
of Christ; so all the fruits of Christ's death are intayled unto the Spirit of
Christ: he that has Christ need not question whether God will give any other
fruit of his love: so he that has the Spirit, need not question any other
fruit of Christ's merits; his Justification, Sanctification, Adoption, Grace,
and Glory will follow. God would not have us doubt of his love, and therefore
he has given us the person of his Son; neither would he have us doubt of the
fruit of Christ's merits, aad therefore has he given us the Spirit of his Son,
the very gift of Christ being understood does convince of the love of God; and
yet Christ in his person did also preach the love of God; so the very gift of
the Spirit does convince of the merits of Christ, and yet this Spirit does
preach and declare the perfection of Christ's merits. None in the world could be
convinced of the love of God, except Christ had preached it unto him; so none
in the world can be convinced of the merits of Christ, except this Spirit does
show it and preach it unto him. Christ did bear witness of the truth of Gods
love, and his witness is true, John 5.31. and it is the Spirit that bears
witness unto Christ's blood, and this Spirit is truth, 1. John 5.6. What ever
God gives, and not his Son, there is no testimony of Gods love; so what ever
the soul has and not the Spirit, there is no conviction of the merits of
Christ, though the Word speaks peace, and the Prophets of God speaks peace,
and all the people of God speaks peace: yet the soul cannot hear it except
God, viz. by his Spirit cause it to hear the voice of joy and gladness, Psalm.
51.8.

Thirdly, God gives the Spirit of his Son unto his Saints to fit them for
glory, God does not love disproportion: when he made a woman for man, he made
her a meet help, 1. Genesis 18. When God sent Christ for the work of
Redemption, he fitted him. A body have thou prepared or fitted, Heb. 10.5. So
God intending his Elect for glory, he makes them meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, 1. Col. 12. and to sit together in heavenly
places in Christ Jesus, 2. Ephesians. 6. and this meetnesse is by the Spirit: for
the Elect of God are chosen to salvation through the sanctification of the
Spirit, and belief of the Truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. who living in the Spirit, and
walking in the Spirit, wait through the Spirit for the righteousness of Faith,
viz. the end thereof which is the salvation of their souls, Gal. 5.5. no
unclean thing shall enter into the Kingdom of God, Revel. 22.15. but the
Saints shall, therefore are they washed, and sanctified, and just fied in the
Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of ou^ God, 1. Cor. 6.11. The
Sacrifices and all the appurtenances thereof under the Law were to be
sanctified and set apart, and the Priests that were to enter into the holy
place were sanctified and chosen from the world for that purpose; and this
sanctification was tipified by the anointing oil sprinkled upon Aaron, Exodus
29.21. So the Saints of God are sanctified, chosen, or separated out of the
world, being made spiritual Kings and Priests unto God, and appointed to come
into that holy place, even the place of glory wherein dwells righteousness,
to give glory and honor and thanks to him that sits upon the Throne that
lives for ever and ever. Revel. 4.9. which sanctification consists in the
pouring forth of the Spirit compared to oil, 1. John 2.27. upon the Saints,
and thereby fitting them for glory.

Lastly, God gives his people the Spirit of his Son, that so they may be
enabled to do and suffer his will in an acceptable manner, God is a Spirit,
and will be worshipped in Spirit, 4. John 23. he requires that we should
pray in the Spirit, and sing in the Spirit, 1. Cor. 14.15. that we should
walk in the Spirit, and live in the Spirit, Gal. 5.25. that we should do
every thing from a spiritual principle, according to a spiritual rule with
reference unto a spiritual end. God is not a hard Master requiring to reap
where he did not sow, exacting a tale of brick and give no straw; but that
they may do the will of God in an acceptable manner, he gives his Spirit unto
all his Saints: the Apostle says, that through Christ we have access by one
Spirit unto the Father, 2. Ephesians. 18. through Christ, viz. the blood of Christ
we are brought into this grace, and by the Spirit we are enabled to improve
this grace, viz. in all spiritual services, so that God gives them his Spirit
that so they may be enabled to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable unto
God by Jesus Christ, 1. Pet. 2.5. And so likewise for passive obedience, he
has given them his Spirit, that with comfort and spiritual joy and
consolation they may undergo that hard work of bearing the cross, which
leads me to the solution of the second general Question: Namely, how the
Spirit does comfort believers in evil times.

How does the Spirit of Christ support Believers in evil times?

Answ. First, by his own natural genuine and proper strength and influence,
1. John 4 4. You are of God little children, and have overcome the world,
because greater is he that is in you then he that is in the world: the Saints
of God are as little children in meekness, humility, singleness of heart,
simplicity of mind, freedom from envy, dependence upon God; and though little
children, yet able to grapple with, and overcome the whole world, how so?
because they are of God, (viz.) of his ancient love, and the birth of his
Gospel.

Secondly, because God is in them, (viz.) by his Spirit, and greater is he that
is in them (viz.) to support, to comfort, to encourage, to preserve, then he,
(viz.) Satan, the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now works
in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. that is in the world, (viz.)
carnal and wicked men, to cast down, to grieve, to discourage, to destroy. We
have another Scripture for this in the third to the Ephesians. 4.16. I how my knee
to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would grant you according to
the riches of his glory to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the
inner man, this our God grants unto believers, first, because he is the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in him their Father, and so interressed in the
same power by which he was strengthened in the inner man, in the days of his
flesh, and sufferings upon earth. Secondly, because it is according to (or
falling in with) the riches of his glory, (viz.) the glory of his grace by
which he has the revenews of his glory coming in even in the highest degree,
Luke 2.14. and whereof there are riches, even treasures wherein he has
abounded toward them: Ephesians. 1.8. Thirdly, because this is the joint request
of all the Saints in each others behalf, I, viz. Paul, how my knee, viz. in
prayer, unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would grant you, etc.
the person of the Lord Jesus Christ intercedes in heaven for all his Saints,
Hebr. 7.25. and the Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ intercedes in the earth for
the same Saints, Romans 8.27. and the Father hears him (who did his will)
interceding both by his blood and Spirit in heaven and earth. Joh. 9.31. this
is that divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. and that power of God, 1 Pet. 1.5. whereby
the Saints are kept against all their discouragements even unto salvation: this
is that whereby the Saints are comforted in all their tribulation, 2 Cor. 1.4.
and whereby their consolations do abound in them beyond the abounding of their
afflictions, verse. 5. it is the Spirit of comfort called the Comforter, Joh.
14.16. which shall be as a continual stream or waters of life in the bowels
of the Saints, to refresh and cheer them in all their losses and troubles of
this life, the comforts whereof the Spouse of Christ prays for, Cant. 2.5.
Stay me with flaggons, and comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love: all
the troubles, sorrows and afflictions of the Saints are sicknesses of love, as
they are from God, they proceed from love, are steered by love, love is the
root, and rule, and end of all: as they proceed from man, they are because of
their love to God, therefore in all their afflictions they may be said to be
sick of love. What is her prayer? why stay me with thy flagons, and comfort me
with thy apples, with thy flagons, viz. of wine, which cheareth the heart,
Prove. 31.6. Comfort me with thy apples, viz. the glorious fruits of Jesus
Christ the tree of life, under whose shadow the Saints do sit with great
delight, and whose fruit is pleasant unto their taste: verse. 2. what are all
these expressions but the setting forth of those sweet Consolations of the
Spirit of Jesus Christ supporting their hearts in evil times. This is that
whereof the Church reports, Cant. 2.6. His left hand is under my head, and his
right hand does embrace me. See here the Churches posture in the time of her
trouble is lying in the bosom of her beloved; grasping her like a tender
husband between his arms, Jesus Christ has bosom consolations for his sick
Saints, watens of life for fainting fits, Manna is reserved for the
wilderness, and the best wine when all is spent; when all forsake, the Lord
stands by: he is light in darbuesse, Psalm. 112.4. Act. 12.7. and man's casting
into dungeons, is but Christ bringing into his banqueting house, where his
banner over them is love, his left hand is under them, and his right
handimbraceth them. Christ has left hand mercies, viz. the comforts of this
lift which though they be contracted within a small bulk, even into a little
oil in a cruce, 2 King. 4.2. five barley leaves and two fishes for five
thousand, Joh. 6.9. that is a poor something next to nothing to support and
maintain a great charge, why this is Christ's left hand, and yet this shall be
sufficient, if he puts but the effecacie of even his left hand it shall be
enough: but his right hand mercies are most high and spiritual; and when the
Lord does any thing with his right hand he does it most dextereously even unto
perfection, as appears if you look Psalm. 60.5. That thy beloved may be
delivered save with thy right hand. And so Psalm. 20.6. 45.4. etc. So when God
imbraceth or comfort with his right hand, he does it so as none can
discourage: when all secondarie means of comfort are gone, the Lord Jesus does
then comfort most immediately, and therefore most perfectly: for whatsoever God
does without secondary causes always are without imperfection. When he made
all things at first coming immediately from between his hands, behold all were
very good, so it is in his immediate consolations: Hence it is we read of joy
unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet. 1.8. even in the time of heaviness through
many temptations, verse. 6. thus Jesus Christ, viz. by his Spirit, becomes a
hiding place from the wind, and a refuge from the tempest, as rivers of water
in a dry place, and the shadow of a great rock in a weary land: Isa. 32.2.
Jesus Christ is a suitable good unto all his people, and what he is he makes
good unto his people by his Spirit. So that as Eliiah stretched himself upon
the dead child, 1 King. 17.21. and the soul of the child came unto him again,
and he revived: so when the Saints are as it were killed and slain at the first
encounter with troubles and persecutions, and losses of all their comforts, why
then does the Lord Jesus Christ by his Spirit as it were stretch forth himself
over them, and then their life, and joy, and peace returns again, yea like unto
that of the resurrection after death in that perfection, that the weak flesh is
scarce able to bear it, Comforts indeed suitable unto glorified Saints. Thus the
Spirit chears and comforts the hearts of the Saints by his natural, genuine,
and proper strength and influence, the Spirit of God being in it self a Spirit
of comfort.

Secondly, the Spirit chears the hearts of believers in evil times, by
presenting God in Jesus Christ as a dear and loving Father unto them, a most
sweet and glorious vision, and assurance whereof (for the most part) he
vouchsafes unto them in the days of their trouble. When Jesus Christ was to
leave the world (whose absence was the sorrow of the hearts of his Disciples:
Joh. 14.1.) he comforts them by telling them, that he was going to his Father
and their Father, to his God and their God. And Philip looked upon this as a
sufficient means to stay the heart, Lord, says he, show us the Father and it
suffices: ver. 8. it cannot suffice that God is a Father, except he be a
revealed Father, show us the Father. And as no man comes unto the Father but
by Christ, so no man has seen the Father but the Son, and he unto whom he will
reveal him. Therefore, says he, Lord, show us the Father, and this he does by
the witness of his Spirit, Rom 8.16. The Spirit it self bears witness with
our spirits that we are the sons of God, and this he does chiefly in a
suffering condition, for so the next verse shows, If so be we suffer with
him, we shall also be glorified with him. The bowels of parents yearn toward
their sick children, and the sweetest language and most tender expressions of
their affections are then little enough: Luke 15. The Prodigal had more
serious thoughts of his father when all was gone, then it seems he had when he
first received his portion: and so the Saints have the sweetest thoughts of
their heavenly Father in the saddest times. When Abraham had bound Isaac, and
was ready to slay him, Genesis 22. yet the child could look him in the face and
cry out, my father, ver. 7. And his father could as tenderly and with as
yearning bowels as ever he spoke with all in all his life reply, Here am I my
son: v. 8. So when the Saints of God seems as it were to be bound to be
sacrificed unto the good will of God in suffering, yet they can look in the
face of God, and cry out Father, and hear the voice of God by his Spirit
answering, here am I my children. The Spirit of God works a threefold
conviction in the hearts of his people in the times of their suffering from
this dear and sweet relation.

First, that he will correct in measure. Jer. 30.11. What ever I do, says God,
to other Nations, I will not make a full end of thee, but I will correct thee
in measure, the Lord pours forth his fury upon the heathen, but corrects his
people in judgment and not in anger. Jer. 10.24, 25. he corrects in measure in
respect of the matter of the afflictions, he will visit the transgressions of
his people with the rod of a father, and their iniquity with stripes. Psalm.
89.32. but he will break the wicked with a rod of iron, and dash them in pieces
like a potters vessel. Psalm. 2.9. Secondly, he corrects in measure in respect
of time, O my people that dwell in Sion (says God) be not afraid of the
Assyrian, he shall smite thee with a rod, and shall lift up his staff against
thee after the manner of Egypt, for yet a little while and the indignation
shall cease, and mine anger even in their destruction: viz. of the Assyrian.
Isa. 10.24.25. Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy shall come in the
morning. Psalm. 30.5. His anger endures but for a moment, in his favor is
life, even in the perfection both of happiness and duration, the Spirit of God
convinces the soul, that yet but a little while, he that shall come will come,
and will not carry. Hebr. 10.37. that what God does in afflicting, he will do
it in measure, that God is faithful, who will not suffer his to be tempted
above what they are able to bear (that is, in respect of the matter of their
suffering) but will with the temptation make a way to escape: there is measure
of time. 1 Cor. 10.13.

Secondly, the Spirit convinces that God as a Father does afflict them in
love, not in passion, for their good; not simply his own will, the Apostle
calls for submission unto the will of God in chastising us from that
consideration, Heb. 12.9.10, etc. Our natural fathers chastened us after their
own pleasure; but God for our profit, that we might be partakers of his
holiness, etc. Wherefore lift up the hands that hang down, and the feeble
knees, verse 12. the Spirit convinces, Romans 8.28. that all things shall work
together for the best, that out of the eater shall come meat, and out of the
strong shall come sweet, that God will smite this rock, viz. of hardship and
trouble, and sweet waters shall issue there from, and that he will make this
wilderness, viz. barren conditions in respect of ontward comforts like the
garden of Eden, in respect of divine and spiritual Consolations, that blessed
is the man whom he chasteneth, Psalm. 94.12. that it is good for him that he is
afflicted, and that God will make it a mercy unto him in the latter end, and
that he shall cordially and not complementally bless the Lord for that
suffering condition, and the sweet experiments of his love therein, that bowels
of love directs the rod, and infinite goodness guides the hand.

Thirdly, the Spirit of God persuades that God as a father will but discipline
him by afflictions, and thereby make him meet for his inheritance, an ingenuous
believer is not satisfied, that glory is purchased for him by the sufferings of
Christ; but is willing also to be made meet for that inheritance by his own
sufferings; forasmuch as it is the will of God that through many afflictions we
must enter into the kingdom of heaven, the Lord Jesus himself sanctifying
that road by his own sufferings, for this cause the Apostle Paul with the rest
of the suffering Saints did not faint, because though the outward man did
perish, yet the inner man is renewed day by day: 2 Corinthians. 4.16. What a
believer is in estate, he is in spirituals. And he reckons himself to rise and
fall as is the condition not of his outward but inner man: and herein is the
difference between a formal and real Christian. Let the formalist abound in
the outward man, he has his will, but a believer rejoices in his increase and
thriving in the inner man, although it be gained by the perishing of the
outward man, and therefore they will rejoice even in affliction, knowing that
their affliction works patience, and patience experience, and experience
hope, and hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in
their hearts. This kindly working of their afflictions caufing them to thrive
in the inner man, and thereby fitting them for glory, makes them sweetly submit
to the will of God herein, it makes them say with sweet submission of heart,
Shall I not drink of my Fathers cup? and ought I not first to suffer, and then
to enter into glory, as Christ did? the soul looks upon these outward
afflictions which are but for a season, as working for them a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2. Cor. 4.18. See here the
disproportion between one condition and the other, here is affliction, there is
glory; here light affliction, there is weight of glory; here is momentany
afflictions, there is eternity of glory. But that that is chiefly for our
purpose in this text, is the influence that these afflictions have toward this
glory in the word works, knowing that these afflictions, etc. works for us
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: the suffering of Christ has
wrought it for us, but our own suffering works us for it, namely, by the
sweet growing of grace, and subduing of sin, through these afflictions. And the
Apostle says, that by afflictions (that is) through the kind working of
afflictions, we are made partakers of his holiness. Hebr. 12.10. the Apostle
vindicates a necessity of afflictions to this purpose; Now for a season (if
need be) you are in afflictions through manifold temptations: if need be, that
is, if the glory of God, and your good does require it. For so says the
context, that the trial of your faith being much more precious then gold that
perishes, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise, and
honor, and glory of God at the appearing of Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 1.7, 8. Let
me appeal unto the experiences of the Saints, whether they do not find and feel
the quiet fruit of righteousness, the fruits of sufferings; do not corruptions
weaken? the sweet influence of divine joy, dependence, patience, hope,
meekness, contentedness, humility, and love to God increase more and more
when they are under the cross? Thus the Spirit convinces that God as a Father
chastises in measure, in love, and to fit them thereby for that glory
whereunto he has appointed them. That is the second particular, the Spirit
convinces, and comfort by convincing, that God afflicts as a Father,
tender and loving in Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, the Spirit of Jesus Christ comfort Believers in evil times, by
opening, unfolding, and breaking up the exceeding rich and precious promises of
the Gospel, and applying the same unto the soul, the word of God is that
River, the streams whereof shall make glad the City of God: Psalm. 46.4. and
these waters breaks out in the wilderness, and these streams in the desert.
Esaias 35.6. When poor Hagar was in the wilderness with her child, and her
accomodations gone, she casts her thirsty infant under a shrub, and not able
to hear the pitiful cries of her bemoaning babe, then does the Angel of the
Lord show her a Well at hand, which was there before though not discerned, Genesis
21.16.19. just so when outward comforts are gone and spent, and the poor soul
at a loss not knowing what to do, but to lift up the eye toward God and
weep, why then does the Lord by his Spirit show them the sweetness and
fullness of such and such promises which before were not regarded. Tell me you
plundered believers, that are driven (as Hagar) out of house and home, did you
ever feel the sweetness of the promises in that measure as you now feel them?
have not these breasts of Consolation been sweet and luscious unto your tastes?
Psalm. 119.50. says David, This is my comfort in my affliction, thy word has
quickened me: and many such passages as these, I had fainted had it not been for
thy word. I rejoice at thy word, as one that finds great spoils, 162. verse.
Has not this been your case? have you not found those treasures in the
promises (the spoils of the victories of Jesus Christ for you) which you never
looked for? has not the word of promise been more precious then gold, and
sweeter then the honey, yea, and the honey comb? have you ever seen your rich
and glorious estate in Christ so clear and evident as of late? has not the
Lord (fince he separated you from your comforts, relations, estates, and
employments, brought you as once he did Peter, and James, and John to the
Mount, and transfigured himself before you? showed himself in such fullness
of glory and satisfaction, that you have said, it is good for us to be here?
has not this time of trouble compared with the rest of your former time of
your lives been like Gideons fleece, most sweetly filled with the fatning dew
of inward joy, and peace and comfort? did not many of the sweet promises of the
Gospel before lie by you as useless? did you ever know the meaning of them as
of late? Experience is the best knowledge, and now have you not experience of
the fullness and truth of such promises as these, In ill never leave thee nor
forsake thee, I will be with thee, when thou art in the fire, it shall not burn
thee, and in the water, it shall not drown thee: I will be thy God
all-sufficient? Have you not seen the truth of this great promise, Trust in the
Lord, and do good, so shall thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shall be
fed? Psalm. 37.3. Can you not read the truth of the promises in your
experiences, as you did before the letter of them in your Bibles? Have you been
a looser by your sufferings? Would you sell (if it were possible) your
experiences for your former enjoyments? Can you not say with Solomon, Blessed
be the Lord God of Israel, who has with his hands fulfilled that which he
spoke with his mouth? 2 Chronicles. 6.4. That is the third way whereby the Spirit
comfort in evil times, by opening the treasures of the promises, and by
staying and chearing the heart with the comforts thereof.

Fourthly, the Spirit of Jesus Christ comfort believers in evil times, by
translating or carrying away the soul above out of the reach of all present
troubles and sorrows: so that as I may allude unto that of Philip in Act. 8.39.
the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip from the Eunuch, and he could see him
no more; but he was found at Azotus: just so when troubles and sorrows arise,
the Spirit of the Lord catches away the heart and soul of believers, and these
cannot find them. Isa. 33.16. it is said of a believer, that he shall dwell on
high, his place of defense shall be a munition of rocks. And in Cant. 2.14. the
Church is said to dwell in the clefts of the rocks: that is, in the wounds of
Christ for security from the guilt of sin; in the attributes of God, for his
security in respect of the power and reach of sin and sorrow; having all the
attributes of God as so many mighty Rocks for his safety, and in or among the
promises of the Cospel for his inward cheer and spiritual consolation, and
here she dwells, it is the place of her habitation and constant abode, that no
trouble or sorrow can come at her, nor touch her at any time. Revel. 12.1. she
is said to have the Moon under her feet. So that it is as easy for men, yea
more casie for men to hit the Moon, and pluck her out of the firmament, then it
is to come at the Spouse of Jesus Christ. I have heard of some Indians that
being scorched with the heat of the Sun, have thrown up their darts to hit it,
which have returned upon themselves; all their power and endeavors this way
being tokens of their malice and madness: And just so the holiness of the
lives of the Saints dazzling the eyes, and scorching the reputes of wicked men,
moves them to cast their darts of malice and persecution against them to their
own ruin; but they are as the Sun in the firmament which God himself has
established, and all the world cannot remove it. Prove. 18.10. The Name of the
Lord is a strong tower, the righteous run into it, and are safe. The Spirit of
God leads them into this tower, yea and quickly conveighs and carries them
into this tower in time of trouble; so that they can enjoy themselves in
security: God has no more for his own security but the Saints have the same.
What has God for his security, peace and glory, but his own blessed self and
infinite attributes, and that is the portion of believers. This made the
Prophet David to say, God is our refuge, and strength, a very present help in
troubles: therefore will not fear though the earth be removed, though the
mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea. Psalm. 46.1. what is the Reason,
verse. 7. The God of Jacob is our refuge: of Jacob, that is, of the Saints in
their lowest estate and condition. For so often in Scripture when the Saints
are set forth in their weakness, it is by the name of Jacob, as Isa. 41.14.
Fear not thou worm Jacob; now the God of Jacob is our refuge: and so Psalm.
18.2. The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my high tower. Why now carnal
men and mere formalists observes the letter of these things, but know not the
meaning of it; It is common and ordinary to say, the Lord is our help and our
defense, our shield, our tower, etc. but it is rare to find a man able to show
from his own inward and personal experience, how the Spirit of God conveighs
him in the time of troubles thus unto God as unto a tower, which is, I
conceive, after this method. First, when troubles do arise, the Spirit of God
presently minds the soul where is his security, where he must be safe, as the
poor Conies which makes their houses in the Rocks: Prove. 30.26. when she is in
danger she presently minds her hole; so does Believers at the first approach of
trouble: for this indeed is natural in time of sudden surprise to think upon
that which we make our stay and our hope. Carnal men minds many things when
they are surprised, and God in the last place, and after the meanest and lowest
thoughts and hopes, with such thoughts that yields poor relief: But the Spirit
of God minds the Saints of God in the first place, and this presently yields
peace and quietness, and other means of comfort are minded in subordination
unto him. When sad and miserable times were revealed unto Habbakkuk, the
hearing whereof made his belly to tremble, and rottenness to enter into his
bones, to consider, that the fig tree should not blossom, nor fruit in the
vine, the labor of the olive should fail, no meat in the fields, no flocks in
the fold, nor herds in the stall, his heart presently thought upon the Lord,
in whom he would rejoice, and joy in the God of his salvation. Habak. 3.16, 17,
18. And many the like instances from Scripture may be given, to prove that the
Spirit of God so soon as troubles do begin, lifts up the thoughts, and minds of
believers to consider where must be their security; they hear the Spirit of
God say unto them, as Isa. 26.20. Come my people, enter thou in thy chambers,
shut the doors upon thee, hide thy self as it were for a little moment, until
the indignation he over-past. My people, the spirit speaks most comfortably,
and in most assured language, in troublesome time, enter into thy chambers,
chambers are places of rest and quietness; chambers in the plural number,
that is, Consider the several grounds of your peace, the attributes of God,
the blood of Christ, the promises of the Gospel. Shut the doors, that is, lock
thy self up in God by faith, keep out unbelief. Hide thy self, viz. in God,
until the indignation, viz. these troubles and sorrows be gone. That is the
first thing.

Secondly, as the Spirit of God minds the soul where his security is, so it
minds him of the way, whereby he may come at it, and that is Jesus Christ. It
were to little purpose to be nigh a Rock, and cannot find the hole to run in
unto it; to be near a Castle when we are pursued, and cannot find the door
that leads into it. God he is a Rock, and Jesus Christ is the hole of the
Rock: God is a tower, and Jesus Christ he is the door in unto him. Joh. 10.9.
I am the door, says Christ, viz. unto the Father: By me if any man enter he
shall be saved; viz. from sin and sorrow here and hereafter, and he shall go in
and out and find pasture. Poor carnal men are like the blinded Sodomites
about Lots house, they grope and buz up and down, but cannot find the way in.
They are near unto God, and God is near unto them, and they run about thinking
to come in at God, by their prayers, and their good meaning, and their duties,
and qualifications: But alas! they cannot find the door. No man comes unto
the Father but by me, says Christ, Joh. 14.6. Unto the Father, that is, God in
his relations of love and mercy; for other ways every man good and bad shall
come before God at the last day: So that the Spirit of God when troubles do
arise, minds the soul of God wherein is his security, and of Jesus Christ as
an open door into his God. Tell me you that have experience of the secrets of
God, did you ever find more sweet and precious thoughts of Jesus Christ, then
when troubles have arose? Did not the Spirit of God as it were drive and force
you against your secret unbelief, and backwardness in through Jesus Christ
unto the Father?

Thirdly, as the Spirit of God minds the soul where is his security, and the
way to come at it, so in the third place it gives inward secret life and
strength, and spiritual abillities to fly unto God, in and through Jesus
Christ. It is in vain for a man to see a tower when the enemy is pursuing, and
to see the door open, if he has no legs nor strength to run in unto it: but
the Spirit of God gives spirit, and life, and strength to make use of God
through Jesus Christ for his support and comfort. That fore named place of
Habakuk 3.19. when he looked upon God as his salvation, he adds, he shall
make my feet as Hindes feet: viz. swift and speedy, to carry me to my high
places, viz. unto God my high tower, God gives unto the soul the wings of a
Dove, as David has it, Psalm 55.6. viz. of his Spirit, whereby he flies away
and is at rest. Tell me you experienced holy ones, did you ever feel the
strength of faith more glorious in you, then since these troubles came upon
you? have you not found your faith a great deal weaker under lesser troubles
then now, when happily you are plundered of all you have?

Fourthly, as the Spirit of God shows the soul where his sccuritie is, and
the door hereunto, and gives legs and spirit to run unto it, it shows God and
Jesus Christ, and brings the soul unto God through Christ: So in the fourth
place, it enables the souleta treat with God in prayer, and to prevail with
him to be his security, his rock, his defense, etc. The Spirit of Christ
moves the soul toward God through Christ, and then suggests and dictates its
request unto him, Gal. 4.6. Because you are sons, God has sent forth the
Spirit of his Son into your hearts, whereby you cry, Abba, Father: the Saints
of God, are sons of God. Ye are sons, says the Text, the free grace of God
makes them so by adoption, the Spirit of God makes them so by the infusion of
the Divine Nature, viz. so far as communicable; the sons of God have the
Spirit of Christ, because you are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his
Son into your hearts, where he gives the privileges of his Son, he gives
the Spirit of his Son; into their hearts, not only the knowledge of his
Son into their heads, and the confession of his Son into their tongues; but
the Spirit of his Son into their hearts, whereby ye cry, the Spirit of Christ
is a spirit of prayer, and of fervency in prayer, ye cry; Abba, Father, the
Spirit of Christ is the Spirit of adoption, and that to the Greeks as well as
to the Jews, and the Spirit persuades that now the sons of God are not only
of the Jews, but the Gentiles, and that he is a Father to all that call upon
him in Truth, whether Jews or Greeks, and therefore the Apostle here speaks
in the language both of the Jews and Greeks, viz. the whole world, Abba
Father, the maine that we note here to our purpose is, that the Spirit of
Christ is a Spirit of prayer, and it cheares the soul in time of trouble by
enabling it to power out it self unto the Lord in prayer, which is a sweet
supporting exercise, God commands in nothing to be careful; but in every thing
to let our requests be made known unto him in giving of thanks, Philip. 4.6.
God would have his people live in quietness, not in anxious troubles, and
solicitous cares of the mind, be so careful for nothing, turn not your
troubles into cares; but into prayers, in every thing by prayer and
supplication, let every thing occasion prayer and supplication, and let your
prayers be always dashed with thanksgiving, your present wants may move your
prayers and earnest requests, your supplications, and your present enjoyments
calls for your thanksgiving: This God commands in many places in the holy
Scriptures, Open thy mouth wide, I will fill it, Psalm. 81.10. we cannot out
pray Gods power and goodness; No, he is able and therefore willing to do
abundantly above all that we are able to ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20. I might
bring in many more places, as that in the Canticles 2.14. Let me see thy face,
let me hear thy voice, and again, Call upon me in the day of trouble I will
hear thee, and turn thy prayer into praises, thou shall praise me, Psalm.
50.15. The Spirit puts the soul into an improvement of these encouragements in
this duty. And here again, let me appeal unto you, Oh ye afflicted and
persecuted Saints, did you ever feel the Spirit of prayer so swectly breathing
in your souls, as since your troubles? Have you not found that freeness and
inlargednesse of spirit, which you never found in all the days of your
pilgrimage? cannot many a secret corner witness such pantings, such movings,
such pouring forth of prayers, and tears, and holy and heavenly affections as
you never knew before? and has not this been a most sweet strengthening
ordinance unto you, though God has touched you as it were in the hollow of
your thigh, I mean your estate, your friends, and outward comforts, that
perhaps you may halt all the days of your life in respect thereof, yet have
you not had such a blessing through your wrestling with God, as that you would
not want it for all your former wonted comforts? That is the fourth particular.

Fifthly, as the Spirit of God does mind the soul of God, his tower of Jesus
Christ the door into it, gives strength to come unto it, enables to pray and
prevail with God for protection, and supplies: so in the last place, the
spirit proves in the soul grace sufficient to support, to uphold during the
trouble it lies under, 2. Cor. 12.9. The Apostle Paul lying under some great
pressure of spirit, what it was is the different judgment of many godly
learned, yet it drove him unto God in Christ, and his answer was, that the
grace of God was sufficient for him: the grace of God, that is, the favor of
God is sufficient to appease and satisfy his conscience from guilt; and the
grace of God, that is, the Spirit of grace is sufficient to support, and keep
up the heart, notwithstanding the power of the affliction. This Spirit of
Christ convaies as it were the influence of Gods attributes, his power,
goodness, and mercy, and the influence of Christ's Offices and Merits, and
applies, and brings home the sweet and luscious promises, and the strength of
supporting ordinances in that experimental and suitable manner unto the
condition of the soul, that no man knows the meaning hereof but spiritual
Christians indeed. And tell me again, O ye afflicted of the Lord, have you not
felt the secret workings of the attributes of God, Offices, Blood, and Merits
of Christ, the Promises of the Gospel, and Ordinances of Gods Worship, like the
still dew of heaven dropping upon your souls, and making you fruitful in all
peace and joy in believing, filling you with patience, meekness, and all
other graces of the Spirit to the praise of his grace? And have not you been
in respect of your inward and spiritual security like God himself, a bove all
storms, and troubles below, able to laugh them to scorn? have you not felt
such refreshings to come from the presence of the Lord, which have been as
waters out of a rock in a thirsty land? Have you not been hereby able to see
all things beneath you? and your selves like God in security, when clouds and
darkness have been round about you, solacing your selves in your God,
pertaking of that fullness of joy, and drinking from those rivers of pleasure
which are in his presence for evermore? And that is the fourth general answer
to the second general question, namely, how the Spirit comfort believers in
evil times, viz. by t^anslating and carrying them above the reach of all
trouble and sorrows here below, and setting them in God as in a sure rock and
defense.

Fifthly, the Spirit comfort Believers in evil times by setting before
them, and clearing up unto them the glory of, and their interest in the
excellency of the other world; the inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, that
fades not away, reserved for them in the heavens, revealed unto them by the
Spirit of Christ, is that wherein they greatly rejoice, though now for a season
if need be, they are in heaviness through manifold temptations: 1 Pet. 1.4.6.
verses, those glorious things which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor man's
beart conceive, prepared by God for them that love him, and revealed by the
Spirit: 1 Cor. 2.10. God having given them the Spirit that they may know the
things that are given to them of God: verse 12. These things, I say, bear up
the heart in evil times; this made Steven seeing the glory of God, and Jesus
Christ standing at the right hand of God, and all the glorious vision of heaven
opened unto him, insensible of that stony strome by which he was translated
unto that glory: quietly refigning his soul unto God, and begging mercy for
those that killed him. Act. 7.60. This was that that made those holy Martyrs in
the old time (an extract of the story whereof we have in the 11. to the Hebr.)
to endure cruel mockings, and scourgings, bonds and imprisonments, tortures
and stonings, sawing in sunder, and to be killed with swords, wandering up and
down in sheep skins, and goats skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented.
Hebr. 11.35, 36, 37. viz. They looked after a Country better then this world,
even heavenly, and a City prepared for them by God, verse 16. Their eyes being
fixed and directed by the Spirit, upon the recompense of the reward, verse 26.
This made both them, and the Lord Jesus himself, with patience to run the race
that was set before them, to endure the cross, and to despise the shame: viz.
the joy that was set before them, Hebr. 12.12. And this was that, that made the
Apostles in after times, not to faint in the sad, various, and manifold
perishings of their outward man, namely, their looking not at the things that
are seen, but at the things that are not seen. 2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18. And their
certain knowledge that when their earthly tabernacles were dissolved, they had
a building of God, an house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens. 2
Cor. 5.1. This made them rejoice in partaking with the sufferings of Christ,
because they knew that when his glory should appear, they should be glad also
with exceeding joy. 1 Pet. 4.13. and that if they suffered with Christ, they
should also reign with him: 2 Timothy 2.12. And this also made the Saints of God
after the Apostles times, in the time of the ten Persecutions, to endure
burning, stoning, frying, roasting, scalding, cutting, whipping with hot wiers,
tearing in pieces with wild beasts, boring out of eyes, tearing of the flesh
from the bones with hot pincers, and iron instruments, plucking out of their
bowels, and all other exquisite tortures as divellish cruel heart of men,
taught by the Devil, himself, could invent; the several stories whereof are
extant, which would make our very hearts to ache and bleed, yea enough to
overcome our very thoughts even unto swounding, to read and believe the same;
yet the Spirit of God made them able, by showing them the glory of a better
resurrection, as the Apostle has it: Heb. 11.35. And this was that, that made
likewise the people of God under Queen Mary's days of later times, to endure
such cruel burnings, etc. even the glory of another life; this made a burning
flame a bed of roses, and this was light in darkness, and life in death unto
them. And again, I appeal unto you, O ye that now fill up the rest of the
sufferings of Christ; do ye not feel the vision of glory chearing up your
hearts, and silling you with inward glory and joy? Did you ever see the heavens
so clear over your heads as now? Does not your waiting for the hope of the
glory of God, raise up your hearts? Does not this make you look upon your
present troubles, and losses of your estates and comforts with more inward joy,
and peace, and quietness of spirit, then ever you could look upon them when
you had them? Has not God by quitting you of your estates and large enjoyments
here below, quitted you likewise of a great deal of trouble and perplexity,
and made you exult in the enjoyment of himself in his Son, by his Spirit, and
of al chose giorious things whereunto he has reserved you? well: that is the 5.
Answer to the Question, the Spirit comfort Believers in evil times, by
setting before them the glory of another world.

Lastly, the Spirit of Christ comfort Believers in evil times, by
furnishing them with, and enabling them to the exercise of those suffering
gifts and graces, that are suitable unto such a condition. Afflicted Saints are
strengthened with all might according to the glorious power of God, unto all
patience, and long-suffering with joyfulnesse. Colos. 1.11. They are in
themselves weak, but of weak God makes them strong; and therefore they are
strengthened with all might: God has no strength beyond all might, and
believers in God are strengthened with all might, unto patience, the Saints
have need of patience; unto all patievce, they are obnoxious unto all troubles,
and therefore need all patience and long-suffering: not patience for a time,
but with perseverance, even long-suffering, and that not with grief and
discontent, but with joyfulnesse. Patience imply sorrows, and comforts imply
sufferings, and yet with joyfulnesse: for the truth is, the very grace of
patience is more precious then deliverance, and freedom from the trouble,
which is the cause thereof. The Apostle says, Romans 5.3. We glory in
tribulation: why so? because, says he, tribulation works patience, and
patience experience, and experience hope. It is a believers joy, and crown of
rejoicing, to see the thriving of the inner man; and that his heart, and every
part there, may be as a fruitful garden, sweetly flourishing with the beds of
spices; he will pray and desire, that North wind, viz. cold winter afflictions,
or South wind, viz. the warm comforts of the inner or outward man, may blow
upon it. Song 4.16. And it will glory even in afflictions, when the fruit
thereof shall be such prosperity in the inner man. If so be that the blessed
prosperity of afflictions shall be such a sweet offspring, as that as Abraham
begat Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob. etc. So afflictions shall beget patience,
and patience experience, and experience hope, etc. Surely a believer cannot
choose but rejoice, yea glory in afflictions, as much as ever Sarah did rejoice
and glory in her great belly: this was that renewing in the inner man day by
day, which made Paul, and the rest of the suffering Saints to rejoice, though
their outward man did perish. 2 Cor. 4.16. And hence it is that they count it
all joy when that they fall into diverse temptations, knowing that the trial of
their faith works patience, and patience having its perfect work, makes them
perfect, and entire wanting nothing. Jam. 1.2.3. A spiritual growth in the
inner man, is so much the more acceptable unto a believer above all outward
enjoyments, by how much the more it is more precious in it self then they:
Outward blessings are Esau his portion; but God is the portion of his Saints,
and the more of God they have, viz. of his divine communicable nature, the
richer they are; if they can see the light of Gods countenance shining upon
them, and the work of his Spirit thriving in them; they have enough, and will
rejoice in that condition wherein these prosper, though it be most irksome to
their frail flesh: and here again I call for your experiences, you refined
Saints, by the fiery trial, did you ever feel God so powerful in you, the
work of his Spirit so strong in you, in patience, meekness, humility,
gentleness, dependence upon God, etc. as you have done since you have been
stripped of your late comforts? Did you not know the time, that the smallest
cross, and trouble in your estates made you peevish, passionate, and froward?
and now you can look upon the spoiling of your whole estate with joy? Did you
not know the time, when the best food, easiest lodging, costly garments, and
many friends, with many other accommodations could not satisfy and content
you? and you are now satisfied, and can bless God, and thank your friends, for
a meals meat, a suit of clothes, a little money, a nights lodging, a mean house
to hide your heads in, and now brown bread and the Gospel is good fare with
you. The time was when you thought your selves high and great men; and that
every man wronged you if he came not to you with cap, and knee, at every word
looking happily, upon your inferiors in estate, though superiors in grace, with
mean thoughts and disrespect, but now you hug them in your bosoms, and bless
God for their society, and Christian company; and is not this a sweet
chearing? Would you want this precious spiritual work upon your hearts, for
all your glory? Well, this is the last way that I shall note, whereby the
Spirit comfort Believers in evil times: viz. by furnishing them with, and
enabling them unto the exercise of those suitable gifts, and graces fit for a
suffering condition. And so much for the second general Question, how the
Spirit comfort Believers in evil times.

The third general Question is, How the Spirit of Christ may be discerned from
the spirit of delusion.

This indeed is one of the most concerning Queries in all the world, as will
appear, if you note these brief considerations.

First, If any man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his: Romans 8.9.
viz. for the present in his own knowledge, and to his own satisfaction.

Secondly, if any man has not the Spirit of Christ, he cannot worship him in
spirit, and in truth; so that to kill an ox in sacrifice is no more acceptable
unto God, then killing a man. His sacrificing a lamb is as if he cut off a dogs
neck, his oblation is as swines blood, his incense is as blessing an Idol: Isa.
66.3. that is, not only not acceptable unto God, but every way as abominable
as these provocations.

Thirdly, if a man has not the Spirit, he is left alone in all his troubles,
and perplexities: for there is no meet help, and comfort for a man, but the
Spirit. When God made man at first, having made the world, behold all was good
save one; and that was for man to be alone: Genes. 2.18. But now among all the
creatures was not found an help meet for him: verse 20. Even so it is not good
to be alone, Eccles. 1.10. that is, alone, to bear all his crosses and
troubles. Now among all other comforters is not found an help, and comforter
meet for man, and therefore God gives his people the Spirit. Adam was above the
capac^ie of all other creatures here below, and therefore he must have an help
of his own quality, and consideration: just so the whole world is beneath the
soul of man; and therefore it must be something like it self that must be a
suitable good, and that is the Spirit of Christ, which indeed differs from
Adams help in this chiefly:
viz. that when God made man at first, his help was the weaker vessel, by
occasion whereof, he fell; but now in restoring man, God intending to make his
recoverie more glorious then at first, his help is the stronger: viz. the
strong God himself by his Spirit within.

Fourthly, confider, if a man has not the Spirit of Christ, the day of his
death will be a bitter day unto him: even the hour, and power of darkness,
when the whole world shall vanish in his own vision, being sensible of nothing
but fear, and dread, and a guilty Conscience, and of Satan ready to prey upon
his trembling soul, ready to expire.

Digest these considtrations, with such like, seriously in your thoughts; and
let them have their own proper working upon your spirit: Consider, are you able
to bear it, that Christ and you should have no interest each in other? that all
your prayers, and tears, and duties of all kinds, shall rise up against you one
day; have you not sin enough to damn you, but your duties must do it? are you
able to be alone in your miseries? are not the Heavens black over your heads,
and the Earth bloody under your feet? do you not see the hills to quake, and
the mountains hurled into the midst of the Seas? is there not such a Concussion
of Kingdoms, Cities, Countries, which threatens a confusion of all? Do you not
see God coming like an armed man against you, attended with a black guard of
bloody war, famine, plagues, pestilences, and the bitter consequences of
these? Do you not expect death every day, when God is coming with his
judgments as with a fieth to mow down the kingdom before him? and can you
bear the thoughts of death without the Spirit to cheer you, and support you?
How might all this put us all upon inquisition, whether we have the Spirit of
Christ? Before we come to the solution of this grand Question. Ssme things are
to be premised by way of caution.

First, that there are many in the world that think they have the Spirit of
Christ, and it is nothing so.

Secondly, that some there are that have the Spirit of Christ, and know it not.

Thirdly, that it is very possible to know that a man has the Spirit of Christ.

Fourthly, that it is a very hard and difficult thing to find it out.

All and every one of these premises, and cautions, may be clearly argued out
both from manifest Scriptures, and Reasons, and Demonstrations; which will (if
prosecuted accordingly) be a too great digression from the thing intended, and
besides much conviction in them all, is extant in the Labors of many godly and
holy men's writings.

There is a great deal of difference in the judgments of some godly men,
whether a man's Justification may be known by his Sanctification, and by the
marks and fignes of Sanctification. It were to be wished that both the one
party and the other, yea the whole generation of holy ones, the Sons of
unity, would study unity among themselves, and make conscience of that
Apostolical Injunction, so far as in them lies, 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. Study to be
quiet, and 1. Pet. 3.8. Be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of
another, love as brethren. Surely if we had compassion one of another,
especially in these times, when our divisions are both the study, and
advantages of our bloody enemies, we would be all of one mind, at least so far
as we reveal our selves to the world, it is very sad to see men, even holy
doubtless, and godly, to be so far from studying to be quiet, that they
study to oppose and to differ, and it is a very acceptable thing unto them to
differ from their brethren, and to blaze the same. (I would not be mistaken) a
tender conscience an inquiring and searching Spirit after the things of Jesus
Christ is very commendable; but yet with special respects to the Community of
Christ and all his Churches, and the truth is, we suffer much disadvantage by
our neglect this way. But to return to the business in hand, this I think
will be granted, that for a man to know his interest in God, and the truth of
the Spirit in his heart, is a part of Sanctification; whether it be by the
testimony of the Spirit, or any other way, and therefore at least in some sense
it is to be granted, that the knowledge of our Justification is by the
knowledge of our Sanctification.

Again, this I think will be likewise granted, that no man can be assured of
his Justification, and not be sanctified, that he cannot know his
Justification without Sanctification, it is very true, that it is a very hard
and difficult thing to find out the truth of holiness, and supernatural work
of Gods Spirit in the soul, the heart of man being so deceitful above all
things, and there being so many counterfeit quallifications, and common gifts,
and it is to be granted also, that many deluded hypocrites think great matters
of their conceited holiness, from such and such quallisications wrought within
them, and such and such things done by them; and many also whose hearts are
most upright with their God, yet through ignorance of Jesus Christ, and
consciousnesse of their own guilt, misjudge of their own happy estate, and
so err on the other hand; yet this I think, is not to be denied, viz. that
the meanest Saints have peculiar and fingular works of the Spirit in their
very worst condition of soul, which the most glorious hypocrites in the world,
never had in their best condition, and greatest inlargements in their hearts.
These considerations being premised, the result herein will be this; that as
inward quallifications are to be heeded, I mean in using them as satisfactory
marks of an undoubted condition,
sound and good in Jesus Christ; so on the other hand, they are not altogether
to be neglected as useless for such a purpose: for doubtless if men will take
that pains with their spirits as they may do, they may in a very probable, if
not certain way, have much satisfaction in respect of the state of their
souls: otherwise I know not how to use and improve that place of the Apostle,
John 13.20.21. If our hearts condemn us, God is greater then our hearts; if
our hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence before God. So in Pet.
1.10. 2. Cor. 13.5. and many such like places, and therefore I take leave to
give my answer to the question in hand, with a very special respect to what
the Spirit of God works in the soul. To the question therefore, how a man may
know the truth of the Spirit in his heart. I answer.

First, The Spirit of Christ in the heart, is Christ spiritually in the heart,
that is, Consider Christ in every respect, and there is an answerablenesse
thereof in the heart of the believer. Christ is considerable in his Natures,
Conception, Birth, Life, Death, Burial, Resurrection, Ascension, and
Intercession at the right hand of God the Father, and in his Offices, and there
is a certain consimilitude of every particular in the heart of a spiritual
man.

First, for the Natures of Christ, he was God and Man, 1. Cor. 15.47. Heb.
1.10. So believers as they are true men, so likewise are they partakers of the
divine Nature, so far as Communicable; God himself dwelling in them, viz. by
his Spirit, 2. Pet. 1.4. John 14.17.

Secondly, For the Conception of Christ; he was Conceived by the holy Ghost,
not by any means of the Virgin, yet not against, or without her, Luke 1.35.
Even so Christ in a believer is Conceived, Not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. John 1.13.

Thirdly, Consider Christ in his Birth, elected before the world, by the
Father, but borne in fullness of time, Gal. 4.4. even so believers according to
the good pleasure of God which he purposed in himself, in fulness of time are
gathered together, as the Apostle has it, Ephesians. 1.9, 10.

Fourthly, Look upon the Life of Christ, from first to last, he did and
suffered all things, and that with all delight and complacency, with reference
to his Fathers will, John 4.33. John 5.30. Luke 22.42. Even so the Spirit of
Christ frames the whole of man so far as he is spiritual to do and suffer
all, and that with delight in reference unto the will of God. Ephesians. 6.6.
Galat. 4.12. etc. And as the Law of God was written in the heart of Christ,
which made him naturally content, and willing to do the will of God: Hebr.
10.7. Even so the Law of God is written in the heart of believers, which makes
them willing, and cheerful in doing the will of God. Hebr. 8.10, 11.

Fifthly, Look upon the sufferings of Christ, that has a manifold influence
and operation in the soul; as first, to pacify and quiet the heart: Christ by
his eternal Spirit tendreth his blood to pacify God sitting in the throne of
Justice, in the seat of glory. Hebr. 9.14. And the Spirit of Christ tendreth as
it were the same blood unto the conscience (Gods vicegerent) to the
satisfaction and pacification thereof: All the oblations in the world, though
they had been ten thousand rivers of oil, could not have satisfied Divine
Justice, nothing but the blood of Christ; nor that too, had it not been offered
up by the eternal Spirit, which was as it were the Altar sanctifying the gift
and offering; So no means in the world, qualifications, duties, promises,
ordinances, can satisfy a sin-seeing conscience, but the blood of Christ; and
that also must be tendered unto it by the Spirit of Christ: The truth is,
nothing can satisfy an enlightened conscience but that that did satisfy God
himself, which is Christ discovered in the excellency of his merits; and this
is by the tendering the same through the Spirit, by which Christ is thus
discovered. Romans 8.1.

Secondly, the death of Christ has another influence and consimilitude in the
soul, and that is the crucifying of the body of sin; and that, first by way of
a holy revenge for the shedding of Christ's blood. Sin persued Christ even unto
the Cross; the Spirit persues sin even to the Cross also. Galat. 5.24. They
that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts
thereof. And again, Romans 8.13. If ye through the Spirit mortify the deeds of
the flesh, ye shall live. Secondly, there is conveyed a certain secret
ennergettical power, and derived in a sweet spiritual manner from the death of
Christ, ( viz. by serious contemplation and belief thereof) to kill, and
mortify sin. Romans 6.6. Our old man was crucified with him, that the body of
sin might be destroyed. And Paul says, Galat. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ.

Thirdly, the blood of Christ is as it were a secret, and yet sensible bath
wherein the soul is healed, and cured, and cleansed, steeped and rinsed from
the filth and guilt of sin. This blood is that fountain opened for sin, and for
uncleanness, to wash in, Zach. 13.1. wherein the Saints are washed. 1 Cor.
6.11. and this purges their consciences from dead works to serve the living
God. Hebr. 9.14.

Lastly, the blood of Christ is the life of the soul, that is, the provision
for the life of the soul; His flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink
indeed. Joh. 6.55. indeed, that is in respect of everlasting nourishment that
flows from it; for, says he, he that eats me, shall live by me: verse. 57. He
that drinks my blood shall never thirst. Joh. 4.14. because Christ died, we
live: viz. in respect of Justification; and because he lives, we shall live,
in respect of sanctification. Joh. 14.19. Thus in many particulars, the death
of Christ has a blessed influence in the hearts of the Saints, which is the
fifth Consideration concerning Christ in the soul, in respect of his sufferings.

Sixthly, consider Christ in respect, as of death, so of his burial; the very
grave of Christ has an operation in the heart: We are buried with him, Gal.
6.4. Colos. 2.12. The old man does by little and little moulder away as it were
in the grave of Christ.

Seventhly, the resurrection of Christ has likewise an influence in the soul,
viz. to raise it up to a new, spiritual, and holy life. We are said to be
raised up together with Christ: Ephesians. 2.6. He that raised up Christ from the
dead, shall quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwells in you.
Romans 8.11. The truth is, there are most glorious and various operations, and
influences of the resurrection of Christ in the heart, which would be too large
now to insist upon.

Eighthly, the ascension of Christ is seen also in its operation in the soul,
viz. to draw up our hearts, and desires, and expectations heaven-wards. Col.
1.2. this is by the Spirit.

Ninthly and lastly, the very session of Christ at the right hand of God, and
his interceding there for us, is felt in the soul (the Spirit of God leading it
into the presence of God, and setting it as it were at the right hand of the
Father among the sheep, not among goats: Matthew. 25. giving it all boldness,
even as a right hand favorite; and there making intercession with sighs and
groans that cannot be expressed. Romans 8.16. Thus you see the first general
Answer to this third general Question: viz. how might we know the Spirit of
Christ in the soul, from the spirit of delusion. Answer. The Spirit of Christ
in the soul, is Christ spiritually in the soul: viz. in the sense before spoken
of.

Secondly, The Spirit of Christ in the soul, does always act, and bias the
soul toward Christ: by this means the intrincicall bent, and frame of the
heart is toward Christ; the Spirit having a most strong and effectual work
upon the will, in answer unto that great defection of the will through Adams
fin, in the Commission of sin. That which I do, says Paul, I allow not. Romans
7.15. And in the 19. verse, The good I would do, I do not; the evil which I
would not do, that I do. Will you see the reason of both? why, verse. 22, 23. I
delight in the Law of God after the inner man; but I see another law in my
members warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to
the law of sin, which is in my members. Sin was his sickness, his complaint,
his captivity; goodness his desire, his delight, his endeavor: the ground of
both, was the law of God in the inner man, viz. the Spirit of life by Christ
Jesus. Romans 8.2. This did still bias the soul contrary to that principle of
corruption of nature: So that look how natural instincts do act and work in
several subjects here below, as in elements the fire to ascend upwards, the
earth to fall downwards, etc. or in all vegitatives, to yield fruit according
to its kind whatsoever. Or in all sensitives, to forbear that which it knows
hurtful; and to feed upon that which is proper for its particular nourishment:
The little kid to suck his mothers milk, etc. as the holy Ghost terms it,
Exodus 23.19. Or in rationals, to preserve it self from known evil, and to seek
after known good. Even so an holy spiritual instinct is in the heart of
believers to do with delight, that which is holy, just, and good, and to be
very heedfull of that which is sinful, and wicked; and its interruption in
both is its sorrow, its complaint, and its pain (as it were.) It is too true,
that the best of Gods people are obnoxious unto many disturbances, and
hindrances in the inward man; but it is as true, that these are their complaint
unto God, and their endeavor for cure. The Spirit in Scripture is compared to
anointing oil, 1 John 2.27. oil, we know, has a natural property to be
uppermost, if it be put into any liquids, whether they be hot or cold, yet the
oil will always ascend; and though there might be some interruption while you
power water upon the oil, yet stay but a while, and you shall see it settle
again, and keep all under it: Just so the Spirit of Christ does as it were
raise up the heart above all in the soul; and though interruptions may be
through violent temptations, and strong passions, and corruptions; yet at last
all will be kept under, and the Spirit of Christ will be above all. The needle
that is once touched with the lodestone, though it may be hindered through the
strength of some motion, yet its natural bias is still toward the North, and
will shake, and tremble until such time as it settles there. Even so an heart
once touched with Christ, is naturally bending (I mean in respect of its new
nature) and acting toward Christ, and is never quiet in its obstructions
until it settles in him: as the Mantle of Elijah being cast upon Elisha, 1
King. 19.19, 20. made him run after the Prophet; even so the Spirit of Christ
being once poured forth upon a man, makes him ever after to run after Christ:
And as the spirit of Elijah did rest upon Elisha, 2 King. 2.15. even so does
the Spirit of Christ upon true Christians; which Spirit does always maintain a
continual war against sin: Galat. 5.17. and at last, as Esau is kicked out of
the womb after much striving, and Jacob possesses it alone; and as after long
war between the house of David, and the house of Saul, yet at last the house of
Saul decreasing, Saul is slain, and David wears the Crown: So sin dies, and at
last the Lord Jesus reigns in the heart, bringing down all strong holds there,
and settling his own blessed and glorious kingdom in the room thereof.

Thirdly, The Spirit of Christ trades for God with the soul, as Christ trades
for the soul with God. There is a holy trade between God and Believers, Gods
wealth and riches are his glory, he trades with Believers, for that, peace and
favor with God is a Believers riches, he trades with God; for that, Believers
have a Factor with God in the heavens, and that is Christ; God has a Factor
with Believers in earth, that is his Spirit, Christ brings it about so with
God, that all that is in God and from God, his Attributes, his Actions, etc.
are according to, and fall in with a Believers peace and benefit in the latter
end; So the Spirit brings it so about in the soul, that the whole soul and
all that is within it, and proceeds from it, is in a sweet degree according to,
and falling in, with the glory of God. Christ has taken away all enmity out of
the heart of God toward Believers, and the Spirit of Christ takes away the
enmity that is in the heart of man toward God: Christ presents his blood, and
his all sufficient Sacrifice unto God, and by this he prevails with God for
man. We have redemption through his blood, Ephesians. 1.5. We are made nigh by the
blod of Christ, Ephesians. 2.13. And we have boldness to enter into the holiest by
the blood of Jesus, Heb. 10.21. These and many such like places of Scripture
holds forth the glorious efficacy of Christ's blood with God in Believers
behalf, and the Spirit of Christ also prevails with the soul, in, and by the
same blood. 1. John 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from
all sin: Not only quitteth us, but cleanses us, Christ having offered his
blood up unto God. God now judges himself satisfied, and therefore has
proclaimed it to all the world, That in him he is well pleased, Matthew. 3.17. So
now the Spirit representing unto the soul the same all-sufficient Sacrifice of
Jesus Christ, the soul becomes now reconciled unto God; No actions now from
God but of love and kindness, and that because of the blood of Christ; So no
actions now from the soul delighted in, and owned toward God, but actions of
love and duty, and thankfulness, and that by virtue of the same blood, the
love of Christ now constrains them, because now they thus judge, that those
now that live through the blood of Christ, should not now live to themselves;
but unto him that died and gave himself for them, 2. Cor 5.14, 15. Christ has
prevailed with his Father, that he should in all things next unto his own
glory, advance his people, in as much as Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Thou shall
be ruler over my house, and according unto thy word shall all my people be
ruled, only in the Throne I will be greater then thee. Genesis 41.40. Even so
says God unto his people, Have ye dominion from Sea to Sea, Psalm 72.8. and
concerning the work of my hands, command ye me, Isaiah 45.11. Only my glory
will I not give to another, Isaiah 42.8. And the truth is, God will not be
glorified but in the peace and welfare of his people, and never did he speak,
think, or do any thing but (next unto his glory) with reference unto them:
and all this is accomplished through the Lord Jesus in their behalf; just so
the Spirit of Christ prevails so with Believers, that they say concerning
themselves, and all that they have, as Ahab said to Benhadad, 1. Kin. 20.4.
concerning his silver and gold, etc. I am thine, and all that I have. Hence it
is that their hearts do so thirste and pant after Sanctification, in so much
as Christ did long to perfect the work of their redemption, crying out, That
he was straightned till he did accomplish it, Luke 12.50. Even so a spiritual
heart cries out, Oh that my ways were so directed, that I might keep thy
Statutes. Psalm. 119.151. And the promises of Sanctification are sweet and
luscious unto their hearts, and they do plead so pathetically, and cordially
the performance of these promises that concerns their Sanctification, the
stony heart is their deep complaint, and the heart of flesh their strong
desires; in so much that these requests takes up the very quintessence and life
of their souls in their wrestling with God; in so much as that what ever God
denies them, he shall not deny them that: the reason of this is, That the Lord
Christ might be more advanced, both in them and by them; So that as Christ
trades with God for Believers peace, even so does the Spirit of Christ trade
with them for his praise and glory.

Fourthly, The Spirit of Christ does most affect the heart with spiritual
objects: things that are spiritual do most take up the soul, the things of
heaven, the building not made with hands, the incorruptible crown, the life
that is to come, and all those things that accommodate that way, are most
taking and acceptable, it makes the heart subscribe unto the testimony that the
Scriptures gives of this world, that all here is vanity, that the world passes
away, etc. and that that which is spiritual is most substantial, faith, hope,
love, meekness, patience, etc. These are their riches, and their substances,
and those duties that are high, divine and spiritual, are most sweet,
spiritual fellowship, spiritual language, spiritual notions, these are most
choice and precious unto the soul; hence the Scripture says, That they mind,
or savor, or relish the things of the Spirit, Romans 8.5. And the natural man
cannot discern the things of the Spirit, but the spiritual man judges
thereof, 1. Cor. 2.14, 15.

Fifthly, The Spirit of Christ gives a being unto the word of God in the soul:
and this does steare and guide the heart and life, this is sweeter unto them
then the honey or the honey-combe, it makes them set to their seal that God
is true, that his word is tried, Psalm. 18.30. settled in beaven, Psalm. 119.89.
that God has magnified his Word above all his Name, Psalm. 138.2. That the word
of the Lord shall stand, Esai. 40.8. That heaven and earth shall pass away
before one jot or tittle of his word shall fail, Matthew. 5.18. This is settled
in the heart by the Spirit, and there it frames the heart according to it, and
this is called Gods writing his laws in the heart of Believers, Heb. 8.10.
Hence it comes to pass, that they obey from the heart that form of doctrine
that is delivered unto them, Romans 6.17. So that they rejoice at the word of
promise, as one that finds great spoils. Psalm. 119.162. And they stand in
awe of the word of threatening, verse 161. and the word of instruction,
direction, consolation, reprehension, from the mouth of God, has most deep
weight and room in the heart. This is one of the most clear, durable, and
effectual evidence of the Spirit of Christ; so that when many other
quallifications fail, and there is no difference in the souls apprehension
between it self and the vilest of sinners, when little or nothing at all of
the fruits of the Spirit appear, when instead of faith, hope, patience,
meekness, etc. the soul is apprehensive of nothing but unbelief, and fear,
passion, pride, hardness of heart, etc. Yet then the word of free grace, and
the promise of healing mercy, this stays and supporteth the heart; Now this
is differenced from that vain, common pretended dependence that mere
formalists have of the word of God, in such particulers as these.

First, Believers in and through Christ waits for the fulfilling of the Word,
in him they expect all to be, Yea, and Amen; So that being acquainted with the
manifold mysteries of God in Christ, through him they expect the performance of
all his word; so that though flesh fail, and heart fail; yet God through
Christ is his portion and help for ever, and this is unto him as good as
current money in his purse, which answers every condition whatsoever: whereas
mere formalists in a slight, general and confused notion of God and Christ,
very faintly profess faith in the word; but their eyes and their hopes are
after carnal and secondary supports, which failing, their spirits faints.

Secondly, The whole Word of God has a proportionable being and power in the
hearts of believers. The word of promise, of threatening, of terror, of comfort,
of command, of prohibition, consolation, direction, etc. each of these has its
proper work upon the heart of Believers; so that there is a sweet commensurable
and proportionable influence thereof in the heart, making it to rejoice with
trembling; and to tremble with rejoicing. Every notion of God has a particular
work upon the heart, working up the whole frame of the soul unto a sweet and
blessed posture of the inward man. But it is not thus with Formalists, they
happily may be affected with the word of promise, and sometimes terrified with
the word of threatening; but the word of direction and instruction seldom takes
hold upon their hearts, they are sometimes tickled with flashy raptures of joy,
in a conceitednesse of their interest in the promises, and again as deeply cast
down with unbelief and despair, when a threatening of the word seiseth upon
their hearts; but they are not proportionably balanced with ingenious,
constant, mutual, and suitable affections from every part of the whole Word of
God.

Thirdly, the Word of God is a Believers meditation, his study, and that for
obedience and conformity sake here unto; insomuch that it has an influence
throughout his whole course of life: Look upon him in his relations, whether
master, servant, husband, wife, father, child, etc. or in his conditions,
whether poor or rich, high or low: or in his calling, in buying, selling,
working, etc. the Word of God runs in his mind, and how he might conform unto
that, as may be clearly showed from the Scriptures in many instances; but that
it would lead into too large a discourse. But now it is not thus with
formalists, the Word of God runs not in his thoughts, but his ends, and aims,
(and not the will of God) steers him in his whole conversation; so that we may
conclude it an undoubted character of the presence of the Spirit of Christ,
viz. its giving a being unto the whole Word of God in the soul; which is the
fifth Testimony of the Spirits presence in the Saints.

Shall we apply this with reference to the comfort of those, whose outward
comforts are lost and gone; is it thus with you? do you find Christ in you
spiritually in the sense formerly spoken of? Do you find your hearts always by
a sing toward Jesus Christ, in respect of the bent and frame thereof? do you
find the Spirit of Christ trading with you for God, as Christ with God for you?
do you find your hearts affected with spiritual objects? has the whole Word
of God a being in your hearts? is it not thus with you in some sweet and
precious measure? Oh do not deny God in you, I know it is thus with you; lift
up then your hanging-down hands, and strengthen your feeble knees; rejoice, and
be exceeding glad, great is your portion in heaven: be not cast down at your
present condition, God has taken away the lesser testimonies of his love, that
he may clear it up by greater; and is this your sorrow? You have heretofore
offered up your selves, and your estates unto God, he has accepted of your
offering; is this your complaint? He has taken away his ordinary and common
favors, that you might partake of his extraordinary and special grace, and
shall this grieve you? He has taken away your shells and husks (the creature)
that he might feed you with kernels (even himself) and is this your dejection?
Cheer up then you children of the most high, sitting (happily for the present) in
sackcloth and ashes, forget not your consolation, which speaks unto you as
unto children: My son, despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither faint
thou when thou art rebuked of him: for whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and
scourges every son that he receives. Hebr. 12.5, 6. Though you are afflicted,
and tossed up and down, yet behold now you are the sons of God, and it does not
yet appear what you shall be; but when Christ which is your life shall appear,
then shall ye appear with him in glory. 1 John 3.2. All your present troubles
extend no farther then your mere carcass; your vile bodies which God shall one
day change, making it like unto the glorious body of Jesus Christ: Philip.
3.21. Yet a little while, and the Lord shall wipe away all tears from your
eyes, yea he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. In the mean while
take these directions for your present practice, the fruit whereof will be
sweet and comfortable to your souls.

First, take heed of sinning in the time of your affliction, this will torment
more then any thing.

Secondly, study not your losses, pore not upon your misery; little good will
come by that, but melancholy and afflicting thoughts.

Thirdly, study the several grounds of comfort, mind your Consolations, it
will be a heart-raising work.

Fourthly, observe every days providence, and the Almighty his careful
provision for you; this will heighten your experiences, and fill you with joy.

Fifthly, be frequent in prayer, and in nothing be careful; but in all things
let your requests be made known unto God in prayer, and supplication, with
giving of thanks. And the peace of God which passes all understanding, shall
preserve your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus. Philip. 4.6, 7.

FINIS.

