EVCHOLOGIA: OR, The DOCTRINE of PRACTICAL PRAYING. By the Right Reverend
Father in God, JOHN PRIDEAUX, Late Bishop of Worcester.

Being a Legacy left to his DAUGHTERS in Private, directing them to such
manifold Uses of OUR Common Prayer Book As may satisfy upon all Occasions,
without looking after New Lights from Extemporal Flashes.

Jer. 6.16 Ask for the old paths where is the good way, and walk therein, and
ye shall find rest to your souls. London, Printed for RICH. MARRIOT, and are to
be sold at his Shop in S. Dunstans Churchyard, Fleetstreet, 1655.

portrait of author with arms of the sea of Worcester The Right Reverend Father
in God John Prideaux late Bp: of Worcester


To my Daughters SARAH HODGES, And ELIZABETH SUTTON.
Dear Daughters,
AFter the expiration of three score and ten years (the ordinary date by Moses
allotted to man's life) finding weakness with age to creep upon me, Psalm. 90.10
and summoning me continually to prepare for a Change: I have often bethought
my self what Legacy of my Love I might best leave unto you, being the only
Survivors of the nine children that God had blessed me with, by your long since
deceased Mother. Acts 3.6
Silver and Gold have I none (as I may well profess with the Apostle) and you
know it too well. Mat. 13.44 46.
But what is all worldly pelf to that Treasure and Jewel, to purchase which, we
should be happy to part with all that we have.

My Education (as it is well known) and course of life has not led me to make
you great in this world; if it induce you to be good, and fit you for an
heavenly Inheritance, it is all that I aim at; and the utmost from me you can
expect.

Your Mother was known to be a religious and modest Matron in all the course of
her life, extraordinarily addicted to Prayer. A Sampler from whom I exhort you
to take, especially in that behalf. To which purpose I have framed these ensuing
Directions, to set you onward. I make no doubt but your loving Husbands will
herein be my Seconds; whom those that know must confess to be Learned, Pious
and painful Ministers; and I think you happy to have met with such above diverse
that hold themselves of a higher pitch in this world. You know who protests,
Psalm. 84.10
He had rather be a Doorkeeper in the House of his God, then to bear a greater
sway in more esteemed Mansions; and intimates the Sparrow and Swallows
condition, almost to be envied at, that have admittance to nestle and lay their
young so near Gods Altar. Besides your Names should mind you of good old Sarah
in the Old Testament, and Elizabeth in the New, what excellent Patterns you
have to follow. And when you read that Timothy (S. Paul's famous Pupil, 2 Timothy
1.5
and first Bishop of Ephesus) had the first ground of his Catechism, from his
Grandmother Lois, and Mother Eunice; you should cast about how you might
perform the like to your little ones whom God has blessed you with abundantly.
That your Sons may grow up as the young plants, Ps. 144.12.
and that your Daughters may be as the polished corners of the Temple; plants
growing to trees, that will bring forth seasonable fruit, and corner stones
that will hold together, and set forth a building.

To conclude, I may not omit one passage of that famous Martyr, Dr. Rowland
Tailor, (which should take the more with you, because by your Mother you are
lineally descended from him); the Chain of Pearl he only left your great
Grandmother, his dear wife, (when he last parted from her to suffer Martyrdom)
was no other but the Book of Common Prayer; in contriving of which, he had a
hand, and which he used only in his Imprisonment, as holding that Book (above
all other, next the Bible) the most absolute Directory for all his effectual
Devotions. The same Book commend I unto you and yours (my beloved Daughters) as
fittest for your use and most complete and warrantable for the grounds it
stands upon. 2 Timothy 4.3
Take heed of itching ears, and damned devourers of widows houses, who under a
show of making long prayers, Mat. 23.14
mislead silly women, to be ever learning, 2 Timothy 5.7
and never come to the knowledge of the Truth. You see what mischief such
Reformers have wrought; which the piety and prudence of manyages are scarce
likely in a long time to recover. The Lord keep you and all his from the snares
of such Hunters and Stools of wickedness, Psalm. 94.20
which imagine mischief as a Law. Luke 1.74
That we being delivered from the hands of our enemies, both spiritual and
temporal, may serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness all the
days of our lives, Which is the hearty Prayer and Conclusion of

Your aged, careful Father, J. W.

A Table of the Heads of the following Treatise.
Which are in General, 1. A Preparation to Prayer. 2. Of prayers in private. 3.
Of Prayers in Public Assemblies.


Particulars of the first part, being the Preparation, are, 1. The Necessity of
Prayer, p. 7. 2. To whom our Prayers are to be directed. p. 18. 3. What we are
to ask in Prayer. p. 24. 4 Of external Gestures beseeming religious Devotions,
p. 46. 5 Of Impediments that distract or frustrate our prayers, p. 65 6 Of
Helps for the stirring up and furtherance of our suits, p. 89. 7. Of waiting
for a gracious Answer from God; and the surest Tokens to discern it. p. 100.


Particulars of the second Part concerning Private Prayers are, 1. Of Personal,
or Prayers in secret. p. 117. 2. Of Household, or prayers in a Family, p. 129.
3. Of Blessings, and Occasional Salutations. p. 146. 4. Psalms and Hymns, and
spiritual Songs, p. 160. 5. Of occasional Ejaculations, 178 6 Of Lamentations,
and complaints on sad objects, p. 190 7 Of Excitations and Encouragements to
all kind of Christian cheerfulness, and alacrity, 204


The third Parts particulars are of 1. Confessions. p. 227 2. Deprecations. p.
242. 3 Supplications or Petitions, 249 4 Intercessions. p. 257. 5
Thanksgivings, p. 267. 6 Praises, p. 277. 7 Comminations or Cursings, p. 288.


THE DOCTRINE OF PRAYER.
INTRODUCTION.
Lord teach us to pray, as John also taught his Disciples: Luke 11.1.
THE Doctrine of Prayer may be termed a fit Direction, collected out of Gods
Word for the right preparing us to pray, both for our selves and others: as
also to praise and give thanks unto God, in Private and Public, for his
blessings bestowed upon us.

It differs therefore from Meditations, Soliloquies, Lamentations,
Expostulations, (though thief border near upon it, and may be made good Helps
unto it) but has a greater distance from Ave-maries, or Salutations of the
blessed Virgin; as also from Adjurations, such as the High Priest or the Devil
used to our Savior: Mat. 26.63
neither Creed said or sung, may be accounted Prayers, but Professions of our
faith, upon which our Prayers are grounded.

For your readier apprehending and retaining that shall be fittest for your
practice and progress herein; I shall divide this ensuing Discourse into three
parts; whereof the first shall be concerning the due preparations to Prayer:
the second of Prayer in private: and the third, of praying in public
Assemblies: wherein it were fruitless to heap together all that may be said;
(the best Teacher has left us a pattern to respect our Auditors capacities) I
have many things to say unto you, Joh. 16.12 1 Cor. 3.2 Heb. 5.12.
but you cannot bear them now. Milk therefore must be the Childrens diet until
their stomachs be fitted for stronger meat. The Preparation comes here first to
be thought on:

Wherein these particulars are especially to be observed. 1. The Necessity of
prayer. 2. To whom our prayers are to be directed? 3. What we are to ask. 4.
What gestures are most beseeming our Devotions. 5 The impediments that are most
likely to frustrate or disturb our petitions. 6. What Helps may most stir us up
to further them. 7. The waiting for a gracious answer from God, and the surest
tokens to discern it.


In none of which (my Daughters) you must expect what might be gathered by me
from diverse Authors, with my own additions; but such touches only as you may
best remember to put in practice. When our Savior had instructed his Disciples
to pray, and showed how prevalent it is with God (if it be continued with
importunity) interposing therewith a Miracle in casting out a dumb Devil,
(which he showed his calumniatours, that he did not by Enchantments, but by the
finger of God;) a certain woman of the company is said to have lift up her
voice by way of applause, Blessed is the Womb, Luke 11.27
that bare thee, and the paps that thou have sucked. But what was the answer
she received for so hearty an expression? yea, rather (says our Savior)
Blessed are they that hear the Word of God and keep it. It is not the
applauding of the Preacher, but the edification and practice of the Hearer,
that finds acceptance at the Throne of Grace. This therefore we should
especially drive at, which is informed and made effectual by continual prayer.
The Necessity of which in the first place is duly of you to be considered.

CHAP. I. Of the Necessity of Prayer.
OF all Christian duties we find none so much urged in Scripture as Prayer.
Luk 21.36 1 Th. 5.17
Pray always (says our Savior;) continually (says the Apostle) which
convinces its Necessity. And Experience informs us, that there were never
any so brutish, who acknowledged a God, but also concluded upon it, that he
must be sought unto by prayer. We therefore that from heavenly Institution have
surer grounds to build upon, 1 Pet. 2.19
may

1. From the command of the Father.

2. From the seconding of the Son.

3. From the enforcing of the Holy Ghost.

4. From the honor given to them in Scripture that have been eminent in
prayer. As also

5 From the wonderful effects of prayer. And

6. From the freedom of it, that cannot be hindered as other duties may.

And last of all, for that it is the only means, that forces (as it were) the
Almighty, and the special Engine that terrifieth and routeth Satan, and all his
Adherents: may well (I say) more peremptorily enforce the Necessity of it to be
such, that as outward works of our vocation cannot be performed without Light,
the night comes (says our Savior) when no man can work: Joh. 9.4.
so no action of ours can be acceptable to God, or profitable for our selves,
except it be seasoned with the salt of prayer.

1. For the first inducement, Call upon me (says the Father) in the time of
thy trouble, and I will hear thee, Psalm. 50.15.
and thou shall praise me.

For the second, Ask and it shall be given you (they are the words of the
Son) seek and ye shall find, Matthew. 7.7.
knock and it shall be opened unto you. Ask by prayer, seek by reading or
hearing, knock by doing good works. And as though all this had been too little,
in regard of our dullness, to have once said the word, he reinforceth it again
with a promise renewed; for every one that asks, receives, and he that
seeks finds, Ver. 8.
and to him that knocks it shall be opened. And further, lest this large
proffer should make the promise suspected, he backs it with an instance, picked
out of our natural corrupt affections; What man is there so perverse among you
(says he) whom if his son ask for bread, Ver. 9.
will he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? And
that we neglect not, or misapply the inference, by our untoward Logic, he adds
for a right application. If ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts to
your children, Ver. 10.
how much more shall your father which is in heaven, give good things to them
that ask him?

3. For the third, Would the Spirit (think you) when we know not what we should
pray for as we ought, Romans 8.26
help our infirmities, and make intercession for us with groanings which cannot
be uttered, (if prayers were not necessary) for the Saints according to the
will of God?

4. In the fourth place, Psalm. 99.6.4.
that passage of the Psalmist, Moses and Aaron among his Priests, and Samuel
amongst them that call upon his Name; and that of the prophet [If these three
men, Noah, Daniel, Ezekiel. 14.14.
and Job, should be intercessors for the putting by of a determined famine and
spoil by beasts, sword, or pestilence for the wickedness of the people, they
only should save themselves]; what may it intimate unto us, but the prevalence
of such men's prayers, where any hope is left, and the heinousness of continued
abominations have not quite excluded pardon.

Fifthly, effects of prayer are sufficiently set forth in that of Joshua, Jos.
10.12.
Sun (says he) stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou Moon in the valley of
Ajalon; which was no sooner asked then had, so that there was no day like
before it, or after it, that God thus hearkened unto the voice of a man. But if
this may seem too extraordinary: Elias (says the Apostle) was a man subject to
the like passions as we are and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain,
Jam. 5.17
and it rained not on the earth, by the space of three years and six months;
and he prayed again, Ver. 18.
and the heavens gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit. And this
makes both for prayers necessity, and excellency: Which (sixthly) may be
further thought on, preaching, Sacraments, visiting the afflicted, giving of
Alms, or the like, may through pressing distractions, want of ability, or
opportunity of time and place, be wholly hindered; no time, no place, no
calamity whatsoever can prohibit us from the practice of praying. Daniel in the
lions den, Jonas in the Whales belly; Acts 5.16 25
Paul and Silas in the stocks, howsoever imprisoned, find place and space, and
scope, to have free access to the throne of grace, to pray, and sing Psalms,
and obtain thereby a miraculous deliverance. For here the heart may be
inditing of a good matter, Psalm. 45.1.
when the tongue is plucked out, and cannot be the pen of a ready writer: Here
the heart of King Manasses finds knees to bow, when the knees of his body, are
so chained, that they cannot move.

7. Last of all, it would be held a kind of blasphemous position, if the
Scripture had not uttered it, that Jacob should wrestle with God, and enforce
(as it were) a Blessing from him by compulsion; that by prayer, Moses should
stand in the gap, and hold the hand of the omnipotent, and cause him to cry,
let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot, Exol. 32.10
and consume this people. And against Satan that roating Lion, and spiritual
Leviathan, think we that any Magick-spells can prevail, or force of arms,
Job. 4.2 7
that esteems Iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood? no surely, our
Savior will better inform us, that faith of it self may do much, but not
wholly to cast out all such adversaries without fasting and prayer. I persuade
my self (my daughters) by that which has been spoken, you are convinced of
the necessity of prayer. Now if any scruple and say, God knows our
necessities before we ask, and has determined what to do, so that our
prayers cannot alter him, and therefore would prove needless: The answer is at
hand, that he that has determined what to do, has commanded us also to ask;
And not Gods secret decrees (which we know not:) but his revealed commands or
prohibitions in his word, are the rule of our actions, which we must follow;
nay the Son himself must ask that which the Father had ever resolved to grant:
Desire of me, and I shall give thee the uttermost parts of the carth for thy
inheritance. Psalm 2.8.
Now if we prove cold in our asking, our hopes may freez from obtaining. But
may not intruding importunity, rather exasperate justice, then obtain a favor?
With men it may, but with the fountain of mercyes the striving to enter into
the strait gate; and offering violence to the kingdom of heaven, Luke 13.24
Mat. 11 12 Luk 18.5
makes the road way for a pardon. In such a case the unjust judge will do right,
to free himself from trouble; much sooner will the Father of mercies be pleased
with such holy intrusion, Isa. 65.24.
and prevent us with an answer before we call.

Last of all, we need not fear that our continued prayers should any way hinder
the works of our several vocations. The Plough-man in the field, the tradesman
in his shop; Martha about her houswifery, may be praying as they are doing, and
do the better for their praying. Acts 9.12.
Go (says the Lord to Ananias) and help Saul of Tarsus to his sight, for
behold he prays. Prayers bring us blessings we little think of; we should
think therefore on prayers the more seriously for the enjoying those blessings.
For those blessings must needs be of small esteem, that we hold not worth the
asking.

CHAP. II. To Whom our Prayers ought to be directed.
IT were to small purpose to acknowledge the necessity of prayer, if we know
not to whom we may confidently direct our prayers: wherefore this is so
punctually set down by our Savior, Mat. 4.10.
that we need not cast about, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve. Calling upon, Deuteronomy. 6.13 1 Samuel 7 3
praising, and praying to, are the especial kinds of Gods worship, which
confirmed by our Savior against Satan in the new Testament, out of the old, to
belong only unto God, so shamed the Tempters claim of it, that he left the
field, and dared not to attempt any further. Testament or new, it can be shown
that any of Gods people ever prayed to Saints or Angels, but only to God. No
saying here of holy Abraham, or holy Peter pray for us; but Thou O God that
hear prayers, Psalm. 65.2.
unto thee shall all flesh come. But you when ye pray, say, not O Holy mother
of God, but [Our Father which art in heaven.] Luke 11.2
And it may further be taken notice of, that Angels, indignation, such supreme
worship and devotions tendered unto them. Though thou detain me (says the
Angel to Manoah) I will not eat of thy bread; and if thou will offer a
burnt-offering, Jud. 13.16.
offer it to the Lord. St. John being about to worship an Angel, in the same
kind, had the same lesson twice given him, Rev. 19.10 and 22.9. Col. 2.18.
[See thou do it not, I am thy fellow servant; worship God] Let not man
therefore beguile you of your reward (they are the words of St. Paul) in a
voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels, intruding intothosethings which
he has not seen. omniscient, that knows the heart; and Almighty, to be able
to help us in all our extremities; and omnipresent every where, to be always
at hand when we call upon him? Otherwise we might play the hypocrites with
him, say one thing, and mind another; or fail of our purpose in craving for
that from a party who cannot relieve us. For what creature may we well imagine
to be every where? or able to help us at all times? or that understands our
very thoughts long before? Psa. 139.1.
but only our Father which is in heaven? This Satan perceives to be most
destructive of his Designs, and therefore sets all his Engines awork; that
where he cannot befool men against Nature, to think that there is no God: he
might at least so puzzle them what that God should be, that most should hold
him to be no other then they and their Leaders have fancied. By such means
gods became multiplied according to the number of Cities or Nations: Jer. 2 28.
and thus (as it were) upon the turn of a hand, The glory of the God of
Israel, was turned into the similitude of a Calf that eats hay. Ps 106.20
Out of the same forge came in Molocks and Baals, with innumerable
abominations, and heathenish Superstitions. In all which the pretense has been
ever among the sagest, That the true God was only worshipped by such
Intercessours, or representations; but the Vulgar foared no higher then that
they saw, and most agreed with their humor, both coming under the Apostles
reproof, Ye men of Athens, Act. 17 22 and 29.
-- We ought not to think, that the Godhead is like unto Gold or Silver, or
Stone graven by Art or man's device. Those that make such puppets are like unto
them, (says the Psalmist;) Psa. 115.8
that is, senseless and blockish, as they are. For God is a Spirit, Joh. 4.24.
and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and Truth. Statua's and
Images, are good memorials to mind us what we should worship; you may answer,
Psalm. 19.
That the Heavens declare the glory of God, and all other Creatures his handy
works, direct us to the worshipping of him, that made them. Thus shall ye say
unto them (as the Prophet charged the Israelites, to tell the Idolatrous
Chaldeans) in their own language, The Gods that have not made the heavens and
the earth, Jer. 10.12.
even they shall perish from the earth, and from under those heavens. Images
for Worship (says another) are but Teachers of lies, Hab. 2.18.
and the promoters of the Doctrine of Devils. 2 Timothy 4.1
They may otherwise have an Historical use, and adorn buildings; but for
Worship we have the Words direction; not a painted Crucifix, to set before the
foolish Galatians Christ crucified. Gal. 3.1.


And for Remembrance of our Saviors Passion, why should not the Breaking of
bread, and drinking of wine in the Sacrament of his last Supper, be accounted
the best Art of Memory, seeing he himself has taught us, Do this in
remembrance of me? Luke 22.19
And would not any wise man take the Sermons of our Savior, and the Writings
of his Apostles to be better Relics then a chip of the material Cross, or the
showing of Saint Peter's Chains, to inform us what they taught for our
salvation, or did for our imitation.

Last of all, Proctors for praying to Saints or Angels, that which our Savior
replied to the Lawyer may be well made use of, Luke 10.26
What is written in the Law? how read thou? Can you show me any Precept or
Example of such prayer throughout all the Old or New Testaments? Or can we
think in reason, that Saints will be more ready to hear, or tender our wants,
or promote our Petitions, then our blessed Redeemer, and our only Mediator and
Advocate Christ Jesus.

The Woman of Canaan found small comfort upon earth of Saints Intercession:
Mat. 15.23
Send her away (say they) for she cries after us. We believe the Saints are
most happy in heaven, and honor their persons and memory here on earth in
appointing Holy Days wherein their Doings and Doctrine are commended to our
Assemblies for their pious Imitation: But what they know of us, or may do for
us by way of Intercession in heaven, is not revealed unto us. Build you
therefore upon certainties (my Daughters) Christ has taught you to say, [Our
Father which art in heaven,] and the Church wherein you were borne and
baptized, teaches you accordingly, That when you direct your Prayers
severally, to any of the Persons (in whose Names you were baptized) or jointly
to the Blessed Trinity, you direct them to One God, which is Three in One, and
One in All. And as many as walk according to this Rule peace be on them, and
mercy, Gal. 6.16.
and upon the Israel of God; which prevailing with God they shall the more
comfortably and assuredly enjoy, if they take with them (as an Antidote) Saint
John's conclusion, [Little children, John 5.13
keep your selves from Idols.

CHAP. III. What we are to ask in our prayers.
TO know the Necessity of Prayer, and to whom we are to pray, will but little
avail, if we are not well advised what to ask. Joh 21 22
Peter may enquire what shall become of John, but receive a check, What is that
to thee? Inquire not after that which belongs not to thee; do that I bid thee,
Follow thou me. And when the mother of Zebedees children, became a suitor for
the preferment of them to that which they were incapable of, Mat. 20.20
we know what a cold satisfaction they obtained from our Savior, Mar. 10.35
Ye know not what ye ask. Neither the joint petition of the Apostles afterward
concerning an earthly Kingdom found better success. Acts 1.7.
It is not for you to know the times and seasons which the Father has put into
his own power. Those therefore that trust to speed, must petition only for
those things, which may be convenient for them to receive, and for God to
grant, as the entrauce to our Liturgy tells us: They must ask those things
which are requisite for the soul and body. Otherwise their prayers may be
turned into sin, Psa. 109.7.
and instead of an expected Blesing, a deserved curse may fall upon them. Genesis
27.12
The caveat therefore of the preacher, as well for the mouth, as for the foot,
is to be observed of all suitors that shall present themselves before the
throne of grace.

First, learn by hearing, what to do, before thou tender a fools sacrifice
(without consideration) in hope to obtain: Eccles. 5.1
and be not rash with thy mouth, and hasty with thy heart, to multiply many
words where few would be more to the purpose, and better accepted; for how can
it choose but prove lost labor, to beg that of God which may not be granted by
reason of his revealed will to the contrary? Hence the salvation of Judas, and
damned spirits, the foreknowledg of the day of Judgment, and secrets of God in
election or reprobation of this or that party, must not come within the
compass of our petitions. And if the tree must lie where it falls, Eccles.
11.3.
and the condition of the dead from worse to better be unchangeable, those
Masses, dirges, and prayers for any friend departed, may very well be spared,
which some are so missled to purchase, and others to sell at so dear a rate:
for who has required this at your hands? Isa 1.12. Psalm. 49.8
It cost more to reedem a soul, therefore that must be let alone for ever: upon
the same ground Samuel might not pray for Saul, nor Jeremiah for preventing
Judahs captivity, where the immutable purpose of God, was once made known unto
them. Things then spiritual, which concern our salvation; and temporal that
make for our preservation in the condition God has put us, or furtheering us
to a better, according to his good will and disposition, not our restless and
itching ambition, must be the line and compass of our approveable devotions.
And this brings in that confidence the beloved disciple speaks of, That if we
ask any thing according to his will, he hears us: Joh 5.14.
and if we know that he hears whatsoever we ask, we know we have the
petition that we desired of him. Many scruples are here suggested, whether we
may pray for one blaspemously sinning to death? or obstinately standing
excommunicate, or rebelliously persecuting the Church and State, seeing the
petition of the Psalmist is express, Stand up O Lord God of hosts, Psalm. 59.5.
thou God of Israel, to visit all the heathen, and be not merciful unto them
that offend of malicious wickedness. But the Prophets prayer runs against
those that God shall find so, not against such as we in passion may censure to
be so; for we are to hope the best of all, and condemn not, Luke 6.37.
lest we be condemned. May not a persecuting Paul become an Elect vessel, Act.
9.15.
and a forsworn Peter go out and weep bitterly? But of this more, when we shall
speak of execrations herafter. What we are to pray for? Sufficient limits may
be found in that heavenly pattern which our Savior has left for that purpose;
Mat. 26.75.
consisting of a Preface, petitions, and a conclusion. In the preface the first
word (as we have it) [Our] minds us of unity, and respect to our brethren, as
well as of our selves, excluding dissension, that frustrates our best
intentions, as also respect of persons in preferring the rich before the poor,
and censuring others as being not capable of Gods mercies equally with our
selves. The second word [Father] assures us of acceptance, tells us we are all
brethren, and that we need not to make our addresses for our wants to others,
whom we may not term fathers, he having will and power to supply us, and
dislikes that we should seek further, in hope of speeding better: for we have
not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; Romans 8.15.16
but we have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Gal. 4.6.7.
Father. This Spirit it self bearing witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God. That which follows [which art in heaven] makes pilgrimages to
shrines and relics superfluous, and superstitious. Psalm. 25. Psalm. 121. Psalm.
122.
For it lifts up our hearts to heaven, and heavenly things, as the Psalmist
teaches us. I lift my heart to thee, and unto thee do I lift up mine eyes, O
thou that dwell in the heavens. Ioh. 17.
Which our Saviors practice confirms; These words spoke Jesus, and lift up
his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the hour is come. And tells us moreover,
that we have an overseer who looks into all our thoughts, words, Ps. 113.5.
and works; Who is like unto the Lord our God, who has his dwelling so high?
and yet humbles himself to behold the things that are in heaven and in earth?
The Petitions that succeed, are by some made but six, but (without quarrelling)
may be reckoned seven. In which the order of them show, that spiritual things
are to be first looked after, Mat. 6.33.
and prayed for, before temporal; according to that of our Savior, first seek
the Kingdom of God, Mat. 6.33.
and the righteousness thereof; and then temporal matters shall be added as an
advantage. In which respects Solomon's choice pleased God in praying for
wisdom, 1 King. 3.11.
before riches and honor: for what shall be best for us, we shall not want, if
we prefer the first petition, the Hallowing of Gods Name, before all
temporalities. Of this Moses and St. Paul were so tender, that the one wished
to be blotted out of Gods book of life. Exodus 32.32 Romans 9.3.
The other to be accursed from Christ, rather then an aspersion should be cast
on God, either of impotency in not being able, or breach of promise, as not
performing what he had of his free bounty undertaken for his Church, to bring
to pass. The Hallowing therefore, glorifying and extolling above all things,
of the infinite Majesty of Gods Name, is the thing that we are to esteem of
above our own salvation. And [Name] here which signifies Gods Essence,
Attributes, and Commands, must be conceived to be no other but that which we
were baptized in, including both Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who being of
one essence, must needs by the same Act of ours, equally be honored, or
dishonored.

The second petition [Let thy Kingdom come.] Gods glory, the good of his
Church must be respected and prayed for, that being militant here, as it ought,
it may triumph hereafter, as it expects. Any thing therefore that may derogate
from this, must be so far from our prayers, that it be rejected as the subject
of our chiefest detestations.

Thirdly, [Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven;] guides all our
desires and petitions to be regulated by Gods will revealed in his word: the
resisting or declining from which, must not once come within compass of our
thoughts, much less of our petitions. And now when we descend to beg for
supplies in our own behalf,

The fourth Petition [Give us this day our daily bread;] word does it lesson us
to exclude exorbitances? [Give] not as due, but of thy mere bounty; not to one
that has of his own, but to those that of unfeigned necessity are forced to beg
with us; not for themselves only, but for their brethren too, who must do the
like for them also: rich and poor are at Gods gate of mercy, must be equally
supplicants, and that for present supply. [This day] our daily bread must be
conferred on us, by a continued liberality: where under the name of bread, are
contained apparel, dwellings, all things necessary; to teach moderation to be
used in all Gods blessings, so that superfluities make not up any part of our
petitions. And that these blessings be not hindered by our sins,

petition puts in a caveat [forgive us our trespasses] as we forgive them that
trespass against us. The condition here expresses the obligation that lies upon
us, of forgiving others, if we hope to be forgiven of God our selves; I say
therefore (says our Savior) bless them that curse you, Mat. 5.44.
do good to them that hate you, pray for them that despightfully use you and
persecute you. So that an irreconciled petitioner in Gods Court of Requests, is
like (as you see) to find no audience. And as not for the remission of his own
debts, so neither to be freed from the assaults and hazards of ruining
temptations, which makes up the sixth request to be granted of him that only
can keep us from, of the World, the Flesh, and also against the most impetuous
incursions of the Devil himself, desired in the seventh and last Petition.

Articles of the Apostles Creed show but the condition of that Kingdom, whose
coming and prosperity we pray for in the second Petition. And what is the
loving of God above all things, and of our neighbor as our selves, but (the
substance of the ten Commandments) that we desire in the third Petition, That
the will of God may be done by us here on earth, as it is in Heaven by the
Saints and Angels. For the more assured obtaining of all which petitions, the
Conclusion adds this confidence, For thine (O Father) is the Kingdome]
therefore thou will; the Power] therefore thou can; the Glory] therefore in
honor, thou art (in a sort) by thy self engaged to tender the prayers of thy
children, subjects, and humble Supplicants, and dismiss them with the Seal of
Amen set to their just requests. You cannot therefore (my Daughters) be
ignorant, what to pray for, or what to decline as impertinent to your
Devotions, being so compendiously instructed by our Saviors own heavenly
Directory. It will do well therefore in the next place to take some notice what
Gestures in our Prayers may be most conveniently used.

CHAP. IV. Of External Gestures beseeming Religious Devotions.
HOwsoever Superstition, as praying in an unknown tongue upon Beads, before a
Crucifixe, or the like, be as wild Goards; 2 Kin. 4.40
that thrown in among good herbs makes the pottage deadly, yet a distinction
must be ever made between that and due reverence. This is required not only of
the mind, but also of the Body. Exodus 4.5. Josh. 5.15.
Moses and Joshuah must put off their shoes when they approach near to have
conference with God. Job, Job 42.6.
that was somewhat too forward upon his integrity, when the Lord had schooled
him, was quickly brought to profess, that he abhorred himself, and repented in
dust and ashes. And it may well be thought, that the heavy doom pronounced
against the Intruder at the Kings Marriage Supper for his Son, Mat. 22.13
without a Wedding garment, was especially inflicted upon him for his
irreverence in that behalf. For would an earthly Prince endure a Tradesman
invited by him to a Feast, to come regardless out of his shop, in his worst
Apparel, without respect of the Person, or place, or honor of his Superior,
that vouchsafed so much to own him? Joseph must not be presented to Pharaoh
without trimming, Genesis 41.74
and changing his raiment. And what ado was there with the Purification of the
Virgins, Esth. 2.12.
before they were thought fit to come into Ahasuerus his presence? To this
purpose God himself lessoneth grieved Aaron for the unexpected death of his two
rash sons Nadab and Abihu, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and
before all the people I will be glorified. It is a plot of Satan to brand due
reverence of the body with the scandal of Superstition: Bowing at the name of
Jesus, standing up at the Creed; kneeling at the Receiving of the Blessed
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, must be held with some Superstitious, and to
smell of Popery, as though it were too much for him that created the body as well
as the soul, to have the due reverence from both. And because Papists are too
peevish in over acting, we should perform nothing at all. That mean therefore
must be kept between warrantable Ceremonies and superstitious fooleries; that
in detesting the one, we prove not profane in the other. Herein our Church
has been very careful and judicious, in giving a reason of Ceremonies, in a
Preface to our Leiturgy, why some be abolished, and some retained: which those
that dislike, will dislike any thing that comes not out of the forge of their
own fancies, and that most commonly (as our fashions) endures no longer then
the starting up of another whimzy, whose noveltie takes more with the people;
Jude.
such clouds without water, fruitless trees, raging waves of the sea, foaming
out their own shame, gifts without grace, shifts withont blushing, drifts
without the least touch of conscience and Christianity, our late experience
has taught us how ruinous they prove to Church and Commonwealth. The smarts
whereof should rather make us to recollect our selves, and recover that we have
lost both in external and internal Devotions, then to proceed in such dangerous
ways which in the end must needs undo us; for this falls in with that of the
Prophet, Jer. 18.15 16, 17.
Because my people have forgotten me, they have burnt Incense unto vanity, and
they have caused them to stumble in their ways from the ancient paths to walk
in paths in a way not cast up, to make their Land desolate, and a perpetual
hissing. Every one that passes thereby, shall be astonished, and wag his head.
But mark the issue if timely repentance prevent it not) I will scatter them as
with an East wind before the enemy, I will show them the back, and not the face
in the day of their calamity. Amendment therefore for the present, and
prevention for the future, will prove at this time especially, more seasonable,
then complaints for that which is past, and cannot be recalled.

That which the Apostle requires, 1 Cor. 14.40
[ Let all things be done decently and in order,] is of a large extent, and
has a more evident reflex in our devotions upon the outward postures of our
body, then the inward affection of the mind.

Such Gestures therefore as these;

(1. Casting our eyes on the earth, and smiting our breasts as unworthy to
behold heaven by reason of our falsehearted exorbitancies.

2. Standing up at the Creed in token of our free profession of it, and
resolution ever to stand to it.

3. The lifting up of our eyes and hands to heaven, as to the Mercy-Seat of
that only God, to whom only our prayers are to be directed.

4 Strong cries and tears, Heb 5.7.
which make our Supplications prevalent with him that puts them in his bottle,
and is able to save us from death, provided they be as well meant, as they are
oftentimes expressed.

5. Bowing of the head and body.

6. Kneeling on the knees.

7. Prostrating our whole body upon the earth;) have pattern and warrant in
Scripture, and may be used of us in our private or public devotions, as
variety of occasions shall be offered.

1 For casting down the eyes to the earth, as unworthy to look on heaven, and
smiting his breast, Luke 18.13
were the penitent Publicans postures, that went home more justified thereby,
then the self-pleasing, vaunting Pharisee. 2. Ps. 106.30
Phineas stood up and prayed, therewith executing judgment (the word bears both
senses) and so the plague ceased. Judge. 3, 26
Eglon the fat King of Moab had so much goodness in him, as to rise from his
seat when he was to hear a Message from God. And may Christians hold it
superstitious to rise up reverently when their Faith is to be professed? And
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, in
acknowledgment of the blessed Trinity, to be given unto God?

3. Moses holding up his hands that purchased victory against Amalek: Exodus
17.11.
David's practice and prayer, I have lift up mine eyes unto the hills from
whence comes my help. Psalm. 123.1 Psalm. 141.2
And let the lifting up of my hands be as the evening sacrifice. Our Saviors
confirmation in that excellent prayer for his disciples, [These things spoke
Jesus, Joh. 17.1.
and lift up his eyes to heaven, and said] are uncontrollable patterns for the
lifting up of our eyes and hands to God in prayer. 4. And he that observes
David's watering his couch with tears by night, Psalm. 6.6.
and mingling his drink with weeping by day: Psalm. 102.4.
Jeremies wishing his head to be a fountain of tears: Jer. 9.11.
St. Peter's bitter tears, Luke 7.38.
and Marie's bath of tears for our Saviors feet, and towel of her locks, to
wipe them, must acknowledge that tears with prayer, make a happy mixture to
procure pity from him who shed tears over Jerusalem, and wept in compassion
with the sisters, Luke 19.41 Joh. 11.35.
that lamented their dead brother Lazarus. knees and body; that humble posture
of the afflicted Israelites, when they received the hopeful message of their
deliverance, may be a lending case to be imitated, when they heard that the
Lord had visited the children of Israel, and that he had looked upon their
affliction: Then they bowed their heads (says the Text) and worshipped. Exodus
4.31.


And what can be the meaning of that prohibition from falling down, and
worshipping images, or any other similitudes in the second commandment? but that
God has retained unto himself, such a religious worship of the body.

King of heaven; I have sworn by my self, the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousness, Isa. 45.23
and shall not return; That unto me every knee shall bow, and every tongue
shall swear; The same posture, when we find allowed to our Savior incarnate
[that at, Phil. 2.10.
or in the Name of Jesus, every knee should bow, of things inheaven, and things
on the earth, and things under the earth] confirms the Oneness of the Son
with the Father; which novellists now question, and make it their glory to
cavil at, where confutation is impossible. 1 King. 8.54
Solomon (with these now masters) for kneeling on his knees, and spreading of
his hands toward heaven, in his dedication prayer of the Temple, Dan. 6.10.
shall be held unwise. Daniel, for praying on his knees three times a day,
shall be scarce thought worthy to be beloved. And Saint Paul might save his
labor for bowing his knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Ephesians. 3.14
Christ, in the behalf of the Ephesians, because sitting (as many do at
Sermons with their heads covered) would be far more easy, and in those men's
discipline, do as well.

And last of all, falling on his face, Matthew. 26.39
and praying [O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me;
nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will.] I should hold him far from
superstition, that in time and place, and where it may be fitly performed,
shall prostrate his whole body, or do more (if it were possible) put his face
between his knees (as Elias did on mount Carmel) in adoring him in whose book
are all our members written, 1 King. 18.24.
and day by day were fashioned when there was yet none of them. Psalm. 139.16.
With great judgment therefore is the 95 Psalm, set in the fore front of our
leiturgy, as a preface to the ensuing devotions; wherein that passage [O come
let us worship and fall down and kneel before the Lord our maker] consorting
with that in the 132. [ we will go into his Tabernacle, we will fall low before
his footstoole] should shame the irreverent behavior of too many in the house
of prayer; which Turks and Infidels would hold abominable to be used in their
Idol Temples. Moreover (wherein women most offend) Gods house is not a place
for the displaying of plaited hair, 3 Pet. 3.3
or wearing of gold, or putting on of apparel, or out-vying one another, in
more then the 24 fashions of the daughters of Sion, (taxed particularly by the
prophet) but for meek and quiet spirits, Isai. 3.16
to humble themselves before God, to set forth his most worthy praise, to hear
his most holy word, and to ask those things that be requisite as well for the
body as the soul. And that is not to be slighted, 1 Cor. 11.
which the Apostle reproves in the Corinthian Assemblies; that men presumed to
pray with their heads covered, and women, with their heads uncovered. I would
have you (my daughters) so to look to your feet, when you enter into the house
of God, that your devotions through irreverent unseemlinesse, prove not the
sacrifice of fools.

It was the modesty and humility of some of your fore-mothers not to seat
themselves in the Church, before they had performed a reverent respect to the
Minister then officiating: which howsoever the high spirits of these times hold
derogatory to their greatness; yet the Son of God will take it as done to
himself, if it be done to the meanest of his, Matthew. 10.41
for his sake: And the B. Virgin his mother will inform the stateliest, that
God will exalt the meek and humble, when the mighty shall be put down from
their seat, Luke 1.52.
and the rich sent empty away. This submisse and religious deportment of the
body in Gods worship, has been too shamefully neglected amongst us; surely
such, that slight Gods Ministers so much, would hardly be induced to wash their
Masters feet with their tears, Luk 7.38.
and wipe them with their curled locks; but those that have ears to hear will
hear.

1. Bowing of the head. And,

2. The body to the earth. Genesis 24.26 52 Psalm. 9 6.


3. Kneeling.

4. Prostration or falling on the face.

5. Lifting up of the eyes to heaven.

6. And spreading forth the hands to the same place: Mat. 26.39 Jo. 17.1.
as also,

7. Smiting of the breast with the penitent publican, are postures of the body
warranted to be used by precept and practice, 1 King. 8.22.
out of the word of God; which if they were seasonably and devoutly frequented
more of us, Luke 18.13
in our private and public prayers, according to the example of our religious
predecessors, Mat. 23.6
would better then any Jewish phylacteries, or fringes, put us in mind of the
weight of the business we are about, set an edge on our dullness, Deuteronomy. 6.8.
and stir up others to offer violence (as it were) and take by force the
kingdom of heaven; Jam. 5.16. Mat. 11.12
but this sacred fervency will meet with many Impediments to be considered in
the next place.

CHAP. V. Of Impediments that disturb or frustrate our Prayers.
PRayer is so effectual against Satan and all his drifts and depths, that he
sets his utmost plots and stratagems to frustrate or hinder it; and therefore,
he that seriously composeth himself to prayer, shall be sure to meet with a
world of Impediments. Amongst which these especially may be taken notice of to
be carefully opposed.

1. Wandering thoughts.

2. Presumption.

3. Ostentation.

4. Superstition.

5. Bosom sins retained.

6. Irreconciliation.

7. Despair.

1. Concerning wandering thoughts, we should eespecially attend that caveat of
the Apostle, Jam. 1.5.
If any man ask wisdom, let him as kit, (not by by Intercession of Saints or
Angels) but of God himself, that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth
not. -- But let him ask it in faith, nothing wavering, for he that wavereth is
like a wave of the sea, driven of the wind, and tossed; and let not that man
think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. Such people in our Saviors
censure honor him with their lips, Mat. 15.8.
but their hearts are far from him. Say one thing, and mind another; pretend
Love, but seek him for the Loaves; John 6 26
and are carried away with the contemplations on their Wives, Luke 14.16
and Farms, and Oxen, (and perchance worse fancies) in the midst of their
Devotions. This is an inbred Disease, and an infectious weed of original
corruption, which must be grubbed up by Higaions, and Selahs, and Hosannahs,
used to raise Attention and Intention (as some probably think) in the Old
Testament; and by that of the Apostles, Lord increase our faith, Luke 17.6
in the New; Mat. 23.5.
which will prove more effectual then any Pharisaical Philacteries.

2. The next Impediment may be held Presumption, which swells up the thoughts
of its own worth, and accounts it a kind of indignity, not to have audience
before others. The wise man sets them forth in their native colors: Pro. 30.12
There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes, and yet are not washed
from their filthiness. Those will tell you (as the Prophet informs) Stand by
thy self, Isal. 65.5.
come not near to me, for I am holier then thou: but what is the Lords censure
of them in the very same place? These are a smoke in my nose, and a fire that
burns all day, with whom he is incensed so far, that he will destroy such
Murderers, and burn up their City. Mat. 22.7.
What the Pharisee got by his presumption, and the Publican by his Humility in
prayer, our Savior tells us; Luke 18.14
The one went home more justified; what the other got, we read not. It is a
substantial Introduction therefore in the beginning of our Churchbook, that
would have us to confess our sins with an humble, lowly, penitent and obedient
heart, that we may obtain forgiveness of them by Gods infinite goodness and
mercy.

3. Therefore how can we presume that those Prayers shall be acceptable which
are accompanied with an Ostentation of Imaginary gifts, and spun out in length,
to beg applause rather of tired hearers, then a blessing from God, or an
intelligent Amen from the most part, that know not what to make of them? You
(my Daughters) may learn of our Savior, Matthew 6.
that such Fastings, Prayers, and Almsdeeds, that are done only to be seen
of men, have no further reward then a windy approbation: but those that sow the
wind, can expect no better crop then a whirlewind, Hos. 8.7.
(as the Prophet tells them) which shall yield no meal, and if it do, strangers
shall swallow it up.

4. As Ostentation, so superstition is to be avoided. External Ceremonies for
Order, Decency and Solemnity, (no way crossing Gods word and agreed upon by
prudent and religious Superiors,) are to be conformably submitted unto; but to
turn Sacraments into Sacrifices, make a God of a piece of Bread, attribute
little less to the Cross then to him that was crucified upon it, make masters
of Requests of Saints and Angels, without commission from the Lord of all; nay,
having prohibition to the contrary, and the like: this can procure no further
grace at Gods hands then that the Prophet expresses, Isai 1.12.
Who has required this at your hands? Such Oblations and Incense are vain and
abominable unto me; as the cutting off a dogs neck, Isai. 66.3.
in stead of sacrificing a Lamb. Let Nadab and Abihn take heed therefore,
(though they be Aarons sons) how they bring in strange fire before the Lord,
Lev. 10.1.
which he commanded them not, lest they more then scald their fingers. For
where a command lies, that must be punctually observed, we must think that our
inventions will not take better in Gods Worship then his own prescriptions.

5. But suppose us free from Superstition, yet a greater Impediment may
frustrate our prayers, and that is, a bosom sin, which most foster as a
Favorite. But this must be outed with the rest, if we expect any favor from
him that hears prayer. Psalm. 65.2. Joh. 9.31.
We know, (said the poor cured blind man) that God hears not sinners; which
was David's profession in his own experience. Psalm. 66.16
If I incline to wickedness with my heart, the Lord will not hear me. Fain
would the young man that came running to our Savior, have kept his pelf with
theinterest that he made suit for in the Kingdom of heaven; but when our
Savior had discovered that bosom impediment, he went away grieved, Mat. 10 20
(says the Text) and (for ought we read) never returned: so impossible is it
to make Christ and Belial inmates. All sins must be sincerely repented of,
before any prayers can be prevalent. Let Joshuah be never so earnest with all
the Elders of Israel, by reason of their unexpected Defeat received by the men
of Ai, Josh. 5.7, ver. 13
yet no other answer from God can be obtained then this, There is an accursed
thing in the midst of thee, O Israel, thou can not stand before thine enemies
until ye take away the accursed thing from amongst you. This is that the
Apostle aimed at, when he importunes so earnestly his newly converted
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 13.5
Examine your selves, whether you be in the faith, prove your own selves; Know
you not your own selves, that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be Reprobates?
Now Jesus Christ never harbors where a bosom-sin keeps residence. The
Prophet David's prayer therefore in this case must make way to our Prayers. Ps.
139.23.
Try me (O Lord) and seek the ground of my heart. Prove me, and examine my
thoughts. Look well if there be any way of wickedness in me, and lead me in
the way everlasting. In which way

6. No happy progress to be expected, if we that sue for Gods peace should
come unreconciled to our brethren. Saint John gives him the plain lie, 1 John
4.20
that professes he loves God, and hates his brother; for (says he) he that
loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not
seen? That we see more effects then that we hear of; and all will say, I will
trust mine own eyes rather then another report.

But how irreconciliation with our brethren, voids all our addresses to God, we
need be lessoned no farther then from our Saviors own mouth.

First, Where he tells us, that all our Oblations will be frustrate, Math. 5.25
if a jar be depending between us and our brother; and therefore agree with
thine Adversary, and that quickly (says he) whiles thou art in the way with
him.

Next, what shall we say to that, that our trespasses are desired to be
forgiven us, no otherwise, then upon this (repeated condition again, and again
most strictly to be observed) As we forgive them that trespass against us.
Mat. 6 14, 15


And lastly, is not that a thundering censure denounced upon that Caitiffe that
took his Brother by the throat for a few pence, when his Lord had acquitted him
for so many Talents? O thou wicked Servant, Mat. 28.32
I forgave thee all that debt because thou desiredst me, should not thou have
had also compassion on thy fellow servant, even as I had pity on thee? And you
may read what follows, Take him Tormentors, not a penny to be abated; those
that afford none, shall find no mercy. And the application is from him that
propounded the Doctrine, ver. 35.
So likewise shall my heavenly Father do unto you, if ye from your hearts
forgive not every one his brother their trespasses.

7. Lastly, Distrust and despair take away all ground of prayer, and turn us
into the Land of Nod with Cain, to denounce with a guilty conscience, Genesis 4.13
Mine iniquity is greater then it my be forgiven; or politickly to hang our
selves with Achitophel, or to give a name to Acheldama with Judas. Such
Murderers and Traitors prevent as it were Gods judgments, and suppose the
pains of hell more tolerable then a guilty conscience.

Let it be your care therefore (my Daughters) with your prayers to beseech God
amongst other blessings, to remove from you these forementioned Hindrances of
prayer. Genesis 15.11
Abraham had much ado when he sacrificed, to keep off the fowls from devouring
it. And Joshuah the High Priest shall no sooner present himself a poor and
ragged supplicant for restoring of his captive Countrymen, Zech. 3.1
but Satan will be at his right hand to resist him. But resist the Devil (says
the Apostle) and he will flee from thee. Jam. 4.7
That is done not by force of arms, nor fasting only, or almesdeeds (howsoever
otherwise commended) but by continued and devout prayers, gronnded upon that of
our Savior, lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. And with
this being put to flight, if the evil spirit return again with seven worse then
himself, Luke 11.26
of his undermining companions. The shield of faith will be sufficient to
quench all his fiery darts, being managed with continued prayers and
supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance, as
the Apostle assures us, Ephesians 6.18.
more fully to be handled in that which follows.

CHAP. VI. Helps for the stirring up, and furtherance of our suits.
HE that intends to build a tower, Luke 14 28
(you may find whose observation it is) first sits down, and counts the costs
what it will amount unto, lest happily when he has laid the foundation, and is
not able to compass it, all that behold begin to mock and say, This man began
to build, and was not able to finish it. In this the case of such, that shall
make their addresses to God by prayer, is in a manner represented. All kind of
snares, distractions, seductions, impediments, shall be cast in his way; that
except preventions, and helps come from above, and are circumspectly used of
us, our best intents will but prove attempts, like a foundation that wants a
purse to complete the building. The helps that herein will best further us,
may be reckoned to be,

1. Meditation.

2. Vows.

3. Fasting.

4. Almsdeeds.

5. Visiting of the sick and distressed.

6. Frequenting pious and lawful assemblies.

7. Putting on the whole Armor of God, whereby we may be able to stand in the
evil day, Ephesians. 6 13.
and having done all, to stand. meditation and prayer mutually help each
other, the Psalmist shows in his early, and earnest prosecution of them.
Ponder my words (O Lord) and consider my meditation. Psalm. 5.1.
O hearken thou unto the voice of my calling, my King and my God, for unto thee
do I make my prayer: my voice shall thou hear in the morning (O Lord) in the
morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up; which when he had
done in a serious turning over three books, the book of Nature, the book of
Scripture, and the book of Conscience (which always lie open for all to look
upon) he shuts up his religious speculation with this supplicant conclusion,
Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be always
acceptable in thy sight, Psalm. 19.14.15.
O Lord my Strength and my Redeemer. Isaak's practice (no doubt from the
institution of his good father Abraham) he went out to meditate in the field at
eveningtide (to pray says the margin in our last translation;) intimating,
Genesis 24.63.
that prayer and Meditation be of such affinity, that prayer without meditation
is as a messenger that runs without his errand. 2. prayers upon deliberate
meditation, Jer. 23.32.
otherwise they may prove rash and sinful. Those that we have made by our
Godfathers and Godmothers in our Baptism, to forsake the devil, flesh, and
world; with all their pompes and vanities, might hold us in a right course,
without any monkish bylaws or further impositions of our own, if they were as
well kept, as they are wisely set down in our Catechism: But such is our
wavering weakness, and itch after Novelties, that we must needs have a new
lesson, before the old be learned, and Manna from heaven shall not relish, if
it grow too common: you should do well therefore (my daughters) not to vow more
then you have undertaken to do already, or else to vow no otherwise then that
it may tend to the performance of that which solemnly before God and his
Church, you have undertaken. For though the obedience of the Rechabites to the
commands of their Father Jonadab, Jer. 35.19.
be approved in Scripture, as an ensample for observing the fifth Commandment,
yet the Pharisaicall tie; for their Corban, that exempted children from
obedience to their parents, or relieving them in their necessity, is branded by
our Savior, as an attempt which justles aside Gods law that man's Traditions
might take place. So wise we would make our selves, to perfect Gods Text with
our marginal notes, and give order for a directer way to heaven, then he that
is the way, John 14.6.
the truth, and the life, had leisure or pleasure to leave behind him.
Notorious are the sad consequences of Jeptha's inconsiderate vow. Judge. 11.39.
And what would Saul's for killing Jonathan? 1 Samuel 14, etc. 25.
and David's for massacring Nabal with his whole family, have wrought, if God
in mercy had not interposed? Our vows therefore (when we make any
extraordinary) must be, 1. Warrantable by Gods word. 2. Fit for our condition
of life. 3. Concerning things in our power. 4. Injurious to none. 5. Changeable
upon necessity. 6. Referred wholly to Gods glory, and the good of the Church
and commonwealth wherein we live. 7. No way exempting from performance of any
Christian duties that justly belong unto us. Vows or resolutions so qualified,
may be a quickening helps to our prayers.

As, 3. Fasting must be acknowledged to be, which is commonly joined with
prayer. Mat. 17.2.
Our Savior mentions a kind of devils that goes out, not by prayer only,
but by fasting, joined with prayer. Where fasting staves off sensuality from
hindering our prayers, which only do the deed, that fasting fitteth us for.
Those that cry down our Lent fasts, ember weeks, fasting on holiday eves,
according to prescribed order in our Church, may as well take exception at the
appointed day of atonement for the afflicting of souls in the old Testament,
Lev. 23.26 Number. 29.7. 1. Cor. 9.27
and St. Paul's bringing under, and subjecting his body in the new, without
which his preaching would not free him from a cast away. You shall do best
therefore (my daughters) to keep these good and warrantable orders in your
families. Your Almesdeeds will be the larger: which help on prayers, Act. 10.4.


4. In the fourth place. Cornelius (says the Angel) thy prayers, and thy
Almesdeeds are come up as a memorial before God; provided always that neither
these, nor fasting be tainted with Pharisaical vain glory, Matthew. 6.
or hypocrisy to be seen of men, which our Savior warnes us of, as of leaven,
corrupting the whole lump. Where,

5. Visiting the sick, or any other distressed, and relieving them according to
our best abilities, makes a fair way to have our own prayers heard, and
distresses relieved. For does not our Savior put such poor layings out (yet
not of our own, but of that we are for a time entrusted with) upon his own
account? I was an hungered, Mat. 25.35
and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger
and ye took me in; naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I
was in prison and ye come unto me. He that takes notice to grace such petty
assayes by the name of blessed, and crowns them through his infinite mercy with
eternal happiness, will he reject the petitions that come thus accompanied?
especially if in their walk they labor also to be peacemakers, Mat. 5 9
for they are honored with the title of the children of God. All which graces,
honor and good acceptance, will be the better understood and improved of us,
frequenters of the appointed assemblies, in set times, and places for Gods
public and sacred worship. Not to hear and observe only what gifts our
teachers have, but to attend to the scripture orderly read, by the lawful
Minister, according to the advised appointment of the Church, manifested in our
Calenders, and to join with him and the rest of the congregation, in
confesssion of our sins, profession of our faith, with one voice and heart
offering up our prayers, as a sweet smelling sacrifice of praise, Psalm. 50.23
and thanksgiving to our Father which is in heaven, through Jesus Christ our
only Lord and Savior. This is that which the Apostle urges, Heb. 10.24, 25.
Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering, considering one
another, to provoke unto love and good works, not forsaking of the assembling
of our selves together, as the manner of some is, some supestitious and
schismatical Recusants, being then, as now there are. For the joint prayers and
orderly reading the Scriptures are the ground whereupon Sermons and
Exhortations must be erected: by which you are faithfully catechized, what to
believe, how to pray, in what sort to perform your duty toward God and your
Neighbors: with what Faith, Hope and Charity to esteem of Baptism, and to
receive the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Now where shall these saving
points be learned, (especially by the Vulgar,) but in our public Assemblies?
which being excluded, or curtelled, 1 Cor 14.8
most Sermons will edify little more then a Trumpet that gives an uncertain
sound in relation to a Battle.

I advise you therefore, my Daughters, to be always present with such as
belong to you, in all devout obedience, at all Common Prayers, Sermons,
Marriages, Baptisings, Churchings of Women, Funerals, or other commanded
Assemblies upon extraordinary occasions, especially to be partakers of the
Lords Supper, where it is orderly and religiously to be ministered. For in such
a communion of Saints (not christened so by their own, 2 Pet. 1.5.
but Gods esteem) you may add to your faith, virtue, and to your virtue
knowledge, and to your knowledge temperance, and to your temperance patience,
and to your patience godliness, and to your godliness brotherly kindness,
and to your brotherly kindness charity. These things abounding in you, shall
make you powerful in prayer, fruitful in good works, cheerful in your Callings,
constant in your good courses, contented in your conditions, happy in your
children and families, comfortable to your neighbors and acquaintance. The
rather, if they are guarded with the whole Armor of God, which the Apostle
commends unto us, and we

7. Lastly, betake our selves unto, as a safe Hold and Help to secure our
prayers. By this Armor,

1. Ephesians. 6.15.
The feet are shod with the Gospels preparation of Peace, such peace as the
world cannot give; this leads us in the right way, and frees us from by-pathes,
or dashing our feet against blocks or stones.

2. The loins are girt about with truth, which is always consonant to it
self; and will not be drawn aside by partial affections and affectations of
singularity.

3 The breast is guarded with the breast plate of Righteousness; not of our own,
Phil. 3.9.
which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the
Righteousness which is of God by faith.

4. The left hand next the heart is furnished with the Shield of faith. So that
when Satan is ready with his fiery darts to drive a guilty conscience into
Despair, upon the horror of Gods immutable Justice, Faith is ready at hand with
an Extinguisher, as with a Pardon to prevent the Execution. If any man sin, 1
John 2.1.2
we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the
Propitiation for our sins. 1 Pet. 2.24.25
By whose stripes we are healed, who as Sheep had gone astray, but are now
returned to the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls.

5. The right hand is fitted with the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of
God. This is not only Defensive but Offensive, Heb. 4.12.
quick and powerful, and sharper then any two edged sword, piercing even to the
dividing asunder of the soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. This frighted and flighted
the Tempter in that onset against our Savior in the wilderness, of which
Triumph we are made partakers, by the using aright of the same weapon.

6. The Head is secured with the Helmet of salvation, settled on the Promises of
the Father in our Redeemer Christ Jesus, in whom only he is well pleased. All
which variety of Armor of Proof is buckled together and made useful to us,

7. By Prayer and Supplication in the spirit, Ephesians. 6.18.
watching thereunto with all Perseverance (as the Apostle there shows) and
that not without apparent necessity. For we wrestle not only against flesh and
blood, but against principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the
darkness of this world; against spiritual wickedness in High Places, which
needs must be most dangerous unto us.

1. For their wariness that grapple with us.

2. For their invulnerablenesse, they being Spirits, whereas we are flesh and
blood.

3. For their principalities, whereby they challenge a pre-eminence over us.

4. For their Power by which they would quickly overbear us.

5. By their rule in darkness, in which unawares they entrap us that see not
what we do.

6. They being spiritual and invisible, we carnal and open to all Assaults.

7. They in high places, we in the lower ground, at pleasure to be over-topped.

The advantages therefore being so many and material, does it not stand us upon
to be armed (as it were from top to toe) to withstand all these Forces in the
evil day; and and having done all, to stand? which if in a storm extraordinary
we suspect will scarce hold out, Recourse must be had to our Savior by prayer,
with his Apostles in danger of drowning, Master, Matthew. 8. Luke 8.
Master we perish, that he may arise and rebuke the winds and waves; and then a
wished calm will follow: which how it may be discerned, the next Chapter may
in some sort direct.

CHAP. VII. Of the Waiting for a gracious Answer from God, to our Prayers, and
the surest Tokens to discern it.
NOne put up Petitions to any, but wait for an Answer, what they may depend
upon. The servants of Benhadad, 1 Ki. 20.23
that in sackcloth and ropes about their heads were supplicants for their
Master to victorious Ahab, observed diligently whether they might catch at any
thing from him that might yield them comfort. Upon Esthers engagement amongst
the Virgins presented to Ahasuerus for selecting a Queen, Esth. 2.11.
Mordecai walked every day before the Court of the Women's house, to know how
Esther did, and what would become of her. It stands much more upon Religious
Petitioners, that have put up their Prayers to God in matters of the highest
consequence, to attend what will be the issue of them, that if they take, their
thanksgiving may be accordingly; if otherwise, their care may search out where
the stop lies, and all diligence to be used to remove it. Whereupon the
Psalmist resolves, Psalm. 85.8.
I will hearken what the Lord will say concerning me, for he will speak peace
unto his people; and to his Saints, that they turn not again to folly. This
Micah seconds him, in a time when neither friend, nor wife, nor children, much
less servants were to be trusted, Mich. 7.7.
I will look upon the Lord (says he) I will wait for the God of my salvation,
my God will hear me. The like attendance we find professed by Habakkuk, for
expecting what God would do concerning a threatened ruin from the Caldeans,
Hab. 2.1
which he had earnestly prayed against, I will stand upon my watch (says he)
and set me upon the Tower, and I will watch to see what he will say unto me,
and what I shall answer when I am reproved; for he that thinks it sufficient
to pray, and observes not what effect it takes, Job 39.14
may be likened to the foolish Ostrich, which leaves her eggs in the earth,
and warmes them in the dust, little reckoning what afterward becomes of them.
Our circumspection must be more then so, not only to pray fervently, but to
wait patiently, till some good token for our good may be discerned for our
comfort in good courses, Psa. 86.17
and shame of those which hate us. Miracles here are not to be expected in such
clear light of the Gospel, which has been confirmed by Miracles: but Events
are to be observed, whereby we may gather, how far our Prayers have been
prevalent.

When Abraham's servant saw with his eyes how all things succeeded as he had
prayed for, in Rebekahs readiness to give him to drink, and water his Camels,
Ge. 24.27.
he made no doubt but that God had heard his prayer.

And Hannahs cheerfulness after her praying to God for a Man-child, 1 Samuel 1.18
was a notable evidence that she should not be disappointed of her hopes.

Manaohs wives Logic in such cases may stand for a rule, The Deed will lead us
to the doer, and that we find, to that we search after. Judge. 13.23.
If (says she) the Lord were pleased to kill us, (as you husband conclude) he
would not have received a burnt Offering, and a Meat Offering at our hands,
neither would he have showed us all these things, nor would at this time have
told us such things as these. Upon this woman's Logic then, why might not the
best men and women thus proceed to gather what is become of their devoutest
prayer. Gal 5* 22^. 23.
The Apostle to the Galatians sets down nine Fruits of the Spirit, which those
that are furnished with, are not liable to any condemning Law. These are 1.
Love. 2. Joy. 3. Peace. 4. Long-suffering. 5. Gentleness. 6. Goodness. 7.
Faith 8. Meekness. 9. Temperance.

If after our humble suits then commended to God, upon unpartial examination of
our untainted consciences, we find our love to God and Man increased, our Joy,
through some good events heightened, our Peace, both inward and outward
confirmed, our Long-suffering quickened, our Gentleness not abused, our
Ingenuity or Goodness more accepted, our Faith or. Fidelity trusted, our
Meekness winning others, and Temperate Moderation in any good measure
improved; Why might not we conclude, That our prayers are accepted and filed
in Gods Star Chamber, to be further thought on to our best advantage? For by
our walking in the Spirit (as the Apostle gives there the rule) we shall find
which way the Spirit blows, Gal. 5.16.
by which we live. And to this walking in the Spirit, there are required these
seven Associates.

1. Light, without which there is no walking or working. John 9 4.
The night comes when no man can work.

2. Confidence to come at length to the Haven where we would be, Ps. 107.30
Psa. 39 14 2 Cor. 5.6.
in as much as here we are but strangers and Pilgrims.

3 The love of the Country to which we are walking; from whence being absent,
we have David's longing; Psalm. 42 2*
when shall I come to appear before the presence of God? Old Simeons craving
his Letters demissory, Luke 2.29.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy Word. And
Saint Paul's desire to be dissolved, Phil. 1.23.
and to be with Christ.

4. Assurance that we are in the right way to it; see that ye walk
circumspectly; (says the Apostle) not as fools, Ephesians. 5.15, 16.
but as wise, redeeming the time because the days are evil.

5. Sobriety; Psa. 119.1.
for, blessed are they that are undefiled in the way, and walk in the Law of
the Lord; which will be a sure guide unto them.

6. Peaceableness with their fellow Travelers. See that ye fall not out by the
way (says Joseph to his brethren;) which we most commonly do through vain
glory, Gal. 5.26.
(that the Apostle taxes) provoking one an other, and envying one another,
when common calamities or blessings invite us most to unity.

7. Cheerfulness, that sweetneth all the crosses in the way, and encourages
us to go on, with assrance of the crown that is set before us. Those that sigh
and cry for the abominations of the times, and see (as it were) Gods hand
lifted up to strike, Ezech. 9.4. Rev. 7.3.
shall find some marked (as in Ezekiel and the Revelation) which we shall
discern in our selves, as we find a conformity between our Actions and
Petitions. For may not he that (as a true Nathaniel without guile) finds
himself Humble in himself, Matthew. 5
mourning for his own sins, and the iniquity of the times; meek to his
companions; hungring and thirsting to do good to all men; Merciful to the
miserable; Pure in his intentions; patient in enduring injuries for
righteousness sake, safely conclude that a Mark of Blessedness is stamped upon
him, which is the chiefest scope our prayers aim at? But what need we go
further in this behalf then the Lords Prayer? If we find our unbyassed
affections striving to compass the

1. Hallowing of Gods name above all things.

2. The promoting of his Kingdom and Church.

3. The doing his will in observance of his word.

4. The acknowledging with all thankfulness our daily bread, and all other
necessaries for this life, to come from his bounty.

5. Our readiness to forgive all other their trespasses against us, that we
may receive remission of all our sins from him.

6. Our desires to be freed from all temptations of the flesh and world in
which we should perish being left to our selves. And

7. Of protection from the violences and stratagems of that roaring Lion, 1
Pet. 5.8.
who is daily ranging about seeking whom he may devour. Should not such hearty
desires which cannot arise from our own strength, ascertaine us, that the
hearty recital of this prayer of the Sons composing, has found favor with the
Father, to our best advantage in due time to be accomplished.

Thus have you (my dear children) the necessity of prayer, and to whom it is to
be directed; the things that we are to pray for, and the awful reverence to be
used in asking: the Impediments that may hinder it, and Helps that may make it
effectual; The Tokens whereby we may conclude that our prayers have found grace
to be accepted. To put a happy period therefore to this Preparation, when we
settle our selves to pray, 2 Th. 5.17
which (the Apostle tells us) must be without ceasing,

1. The infinite Majesty of God.

2. Our own vileness.

3. The fraud and fury of our adversaries, the Flesh, the World, and the Devil.

4 The weight of the business we go about, being our utter making or marring.

5. The Interest we have in our Savior Christ Jesus, who has made an
Atonement for us.

6. The Inevitableness of the account we are to make, and the uncertainty of
the time we shall be called to it.

7. And lastly, The strictness of the judgment, and unchangeableness that will
pass upon it, must most circumspectly and religiously be pondered and laid to
heart, that so we may profess with the Psalmist, Psalm. 6.8.
Away from me all ye that work vanity, for the Lord has heard the voice of my
weeping, the Lord has heard my Petition, the Lord will receive my prayer.
Which how you may frame more particularly, I shall endeavor to give you plain
Directions in that which follows.

THE SECOND PART: Concerning PRIVATE PRAYER.
PRayers are known to be either Private or Public: Those are to be accounted
Private, which touch not only on private occafions, but as they are differenced
from solemn prayers at public Meeting in the house of God. And may be
reckoned to be, 1. Personal, or prayers in secret. 2. Household, or prayers in a
Family. 3. Blessings, or occasional Salutations. 4. Psalms, Hymns or spiritual
Songs appliable to diverse occurrences. 5. Ejaculations framed on all sorts of
conceits or objects. 6. Lamentations for sin or miseries. 7. Excitations or
Encouragements to all kind of Christian cheerfulness and resolution.


CHAP. I. Of Personal, or Prayers in secret.
IT is a question proposed by the Apostle, What man knows the things of man,
1 Cor. 2.11
save the spirit of man which is in him? And cannot be answered otherwise then
it is else where by himself: Romans 8.15 16.
That the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father, bears witness
with our spirit, that we are the children of God.

This Spirit is conscientious to our infirmities, Romans 8.15 16.
and most secret sins. For which if our hearts condemn us, God is greater
then our hearts to punish, or to pity, as his justice, 1 John 3.20 21
or mercy leads him: but if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence
toward God. The book of conscience in such cases is especially to be consulted
with. Hence were all those zealous strains of the heavenly enspired Psalmist.
Psalm. 139.1, 2, 3, 4
O God, thou have searched me out, and known me, thou know my down-sitting,
and my up-rising, thou understandest my thoughts long before. Thou art about my
path, and about my bed, and spiest out all my ways. For lo, there is not a
word in my mouth, but thou O Lord know it altogether. To the same purpose is
that considerate acknowledgment in an other place. Who can tell how often he
offends? O cleanse me from my secret faults, keep thy servant also from
presumptuous sins, lest they get the dominion over me; so shall I be undefiled
and innocent from the great offense. Psalm. 19.12, 13, 14.
Here is a growth of sin, as of an infant in the womb, from scarce sensible
motions, to close committed offenses; which if they meet not with some public
check, they will dare by degrees to appear in public, and amount at length to
that great offense that seareth the conscience, 1 Timothy 4.2
and makes it regardlesse of hell or heaven. This Cocatrice not crushed, in the
egg, will soon become a most dangerous flying serpent: which can be quelled
only with personal prayers, Isa. 14.49
opposed to the temptations, terrors, and assaults we are most molested with.
Now these are only known to God and our selves; and the Father, that observes
in secret our retired suits, will reward us openly to his own glory, and our
best advantage. This Jacob was fully persuaded of, and therefore upon the
affrighting news of his brother Esaus coming with four hundred men against
him, he betakes himself to this effectual personal prayer, dictated to him by
fear, upon the present occasion. O God of my father Abraham, and God of my
father Isaak, thou Lord, which said unto me, return unto thy country, and to
thy kindred; and I will deal well with thee; I am not worthy of thy mercies;
and all thy truth, which thou have showed unto thy servant; for with my staff
I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two hands. Deliver me (I pray
thee) from the hand of my brother Esau, for I fear him, lest he should come
and smite me with the mother upon the children. Genesis 32 6.
Thus wrestled he with God, and obtained a blessing, and thus must all that
generation of them do, that seek him, even of them that seek thy face, O
Jacob. What was St. Psalm. 24.6.
Paul's thorn in the flesh, that buffeted him into humiliatie, Cor 12.9
nonewas sensible of but himself; but what remedy do we find he used to take
it off? no other but personal prayer. For this thing (says he) I besought the
Lord that it might depart from me; and the return he received from God was most
gracious. My Grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in
weakness. In these and the like practices of Piety, you have Samplers (my
daughters) how to fit your selves with personal prayers upon any private
occurrences. Bosom sins, peculiar temptations, and secret defects are incident
to the best, and none knows so well where a fair shoe wrings, as he that
wears it. In such cases therefore the urgency of the matter will quickly frame
a form correspondent to our desires: vexed and barren Hannah, needed not a
prompter besides the bitterness of her soul to teach her thus to pray unto the
Lord, O Lord of hosts, if thou will indeed look upon the affliction of thine
handmaid, and remember me, and not forget thine handmaid, but wilt give unto
thine handmaid a man-child, 1 Samuel 1.11.
then will I give him unto the Lord all the days of his life. I need not
relate how well this prayer took, the story of Samuel being so well known. From
Esthers trembling at the hazardous venture she made upon majestic Ahasucrus,
and the importance of the suit she had in hand, we have this pertinent prayer,
Esth. 14.3.
O my Lord, thou only art our king, help me desolate woman, who have no helper
but thee, for my danger is in mine hand. O thou mighty God above all, verse. 4.
hear the voice of the forlorn, verse. 4.
and deliver us out of the hand of the mischievous, and deliver me out of my
fear. This prayer howsoever Apocriphal, the calamities of these times have
made in a sort Canonical. The dangers are not unslike; all upon the point to be
lost, and no hopes of redress, but by public and private prayers, deliberate
and occasional, which need not justle one the other, but duly take their turns
in their several places. Extemporal and personal conceptions upon private
occasions (which are too often emergent) we must commend, and be stored with;
but in public Assemblies, where Gods people come together, not only to hear
that, whereby they may be instructed, but especially to confess their sins,
and to profess their faith, and give God thanks with their own mouths in an
uniforme manner for all his blessings, and to ask those things which shall be
requisite and necessary, as well for the body, as the soul, not only for
themselves, but for their brethren wheresoever dispersed, present or
distressed; in such public devotions, young men and maidens, Psalm. 148.12*
old men and children, every one according to his ability, must act their
proscribed parts with the Minister, and Praise the Name of the Lord. All must
join in saying, Almighty and most merciful Father, we have erred and strayed
from thy ways like lost sheep. All answer the Ministers entrance, O Lord open
thou our lips, and our mouth shall show forth thy praise. All stand up and
profess with him leading the way. I Believe in God, the Father Almighty,
Maker of Heaven and Earth.] For was not the Hosanna of the children in the
Temple, Mat. 21.16.
justified by our Savior, against those that would have none heard in the
Church but themselves? And why may not the Congregation join as well with the
Minister in praying, as in singing, or (to speak to the point) in prayers in
prose in a set form, as consonantly as in a set form of prayers in verse? must
they come together to admire or censure their Ministers gifts, and perform
nothing themselves? And is there such antipathy between Religious preaching to
men, and public set prayers to God, that they may not stand both together, and
the one the better for the other? Men as religious and judicious heretofore, as
(for ought we find) now are, have determined otherwise, whom you may do well
to follow, till you are convinced with better reasons then have yet been
produced.

CHAP. II. Of Household, or Prayers in Family.
IF any provide not for his own, and especially those of his own house, or
kindred that belong to him, (says the Apostle) he has denied the faith, 1 Timothy 5 88
and is worse than an infidel.

Now if this be required in matters temporal, why should it not be urged more
earnestly in cases spiritual, by how much heaven is to be preferred before
earth, and the soul before the body? For except the Lord build the house, Ps.
127.1.
the labor is but lost of them that build it: as except the Lord keep the
city, the watchman waketh but in vain: labor and wake, and toil we may early
and late, and eat the bread of carfulness, and be never the nearer, Psalm 90.
except the glorious Majesty of the Lord our God be upon us, to prosper the
works of our hands, and impart success, and sleep to his beloved.

Those housekeepers therefore that expect the blessings of the marriage Psalm
(so pertinently used in our leiturgie) upon them and theirs, Psalm. 128.
must be careful (as Abraham was) to have them religiously instructed, and
well chatechized (as those three hundred and eighteen were, Genesis 14.14
with whom he routed the four Eastern victorious Kings, and recovered the
spoils they had taken.) And this God makes a motive, for communicating to him
his purpose in the ensuing destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha. And the Lord
said, Genesis 18.19.
Shall I hide from Abraham the thing that I do? etc. For I know that he will
command his children, and his household after him, and they shall kee? the way
of the Lord, to do justice and judgment. The fruit of which household
Instruction we find afterward in the prayer and faithfulness of his chiefest
servant, whom he sent into Mesopetamia to fetch a wife for his son Isaac. The
prayer of the Servant is very remarkable, O Lord of my Master Abraham, I pray
thee send me good speed this day, and show kindness to my Master Abraham; Genesis
24.12.
with what follows. In prosecution of which business, he refused to eat or
drink before he had received a contenting answer, and then forgot not his
thankfulness to God, but bowed himself to the earth and worshipped. ver. 52.
O for such servants amongst us Christians! we want not means, but care, and
conscience, and giving them good example to make them so.

Job herein out of the Land of Uz, from among the reputed Gentiles, may be a
further pattern to Masters of Families themselves; How early was he and
perseverant, Job. 1.5.
to look after his revelling childrens exorbitances? to offer sacrifices for
them, and sanctify them? For it may be (says he) that my sons have sinned,
and cursed (or as one translates it, little blessed) God in their hearts. And
thus did Job continually.

Of Eli we find nothing but that of himself, he was a good old man, and
harmless, yet for want of taking a rounder course with his scandalous sons, 1 Samuel 2.12
what a breakneck did he draw upon himself and family?

It is well David in settling his family bethought himself better (perchance
upon the grief that some of his darling children had been unto him) not a
wicked person, unfaithful, Psalm 101
froward, slanderous, proud, stubborn, deceitful shall find intertainment or
countenance at his hands. Nay, (says he) mine eyes look upon those that are
faithful in the Land, ver. 8,
that they may dwell with me: who so leads a godly life he shall be my
servant.

Nay, if Captain Cornelius be observed to fear God sincerely, and to be
constant in his Devotions, he shall not be destitute of household servants, and
of a devout soldier, whom he may securely employ in matters of the highest
concernment. Act. 10.7
Such a guide is good example to goodness, and Domestic instruction to prevent
destruction. This consists especially in a strict oversight, by holding every
one under our charge to their daily Devotions, and designed tasks. And these
Devotions, must be first in set and such forms, as all may best be acquainted
with, and easily made their own to bear their part in them.

Next, The time and place for this concurrence, must be so ordered, wherein
most (if not all) may be present. Where the often repetition of the same set
forms, may make such an impression, that the rudest and little ones may have
them by heart, which the best gifted will confess to be most useful and
commendable, and impossible to be learned from voluntary and affected
varieties, which vanquisheth in the uttering, and can hardly be recalled, by
those that first so hastily conceived them.

Now Household Prayers are usually Morning and Evening.

For Morning Prayer it will be found by experience, that by reason of diverse
distractions a concurrence cannot be so well had as immediately before Dinner.
Then the Master of the Family, or fittest amongst the company designed by him,
may proceed in this manner.

1. With the general Confession, Almighty and most merciful Father, etc. to be
repeated by all after him, devoutly kneeling. Then

2. Those two known prayers, the one for Peace, O God who art the Author of
peace and lover of concord, -- The other for Grace and protection, that
follows, O Lord our heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting God, -- may be
fitly added. In the third place, interpose those interchangeable Scriptures,
with the Lords Prayer in the midst of them, as they are ordered in the
Leiturgy, Lord have mercy upon us, Christ have mercy upon us, Our Father, etc.
O Lord show thy mercy upon us, etc. to the end. O Lord make clean our hearts
within us.

4. After, that mixed Petition, We humbly beseech thee, O Father,] for pardoning
our Infirmities, averting deserved punishments, strengthening us with
confidence, and continuance in holiness and purity. May be

5. Adjoined, that prayer that petitioneth our faulty prayers may be graciously
accepted, O God whose nature and property is ever to have mercy and forgive, --
And so the common Blessing, The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 13.14
and the love of God, etc may make up the Conclusion.

Evening Prayer (to be celebrated either immediately before Supper, or else
before the family depart to their rest) proceeds in like manner.

1 With the Confession, Almighty and most merciful Father, etc. or else (for
variety) that other Confession, before the receiving of the Communion, Almighty
God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Maker of all things, judge of all men,
etc.

2. Then come in the two Collects, O God from whom all holy desires, etc. and
Lighten our darkness, etc. answerable to the two morning Collects.

3. After, The Lord have mercy upon us, etc. and the Lords Prayer recited (as
in the morning) you may take those short requests repeated interchangeably,
From our enemies defend us, O Christ, Graciously look upon our afflictions,
etc. to the end. And then, We humbly beseech thee, O Father, etc. O God whose
nature and property, etc. and The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. are to
be added, as before in Morning Prayer.

A plainer and a more warrantable course for Household Prayers let them set
forth that have found it. For mine own part, I must confess, that my long
studies amongst much variety has not met with the like for words and matter so
judiciously fitted. Neither can I be persuaded, but those learned men and
Martyrs, who were Compilers of our Service Book, came any way short for
Gravity, Learning, or Piety of, those men who stand in this age so much upon
their Gifts, and take upon them (as the saying is) to correct Magnificat. But I
must not digress, you have in the former directions, the ordinary Household
prayers for Morning and Evening through all the week. Sundays and Holy Days
are supplied publicly in the Church (which I would have you religiously to
frequent); yet, Wednesdayes and Frydayes in the week, your household prayers
may profitably admit this alteration in Morning Prayer only. On Wednesdayes let
your beginning be

1. O Lord open thou our lips, with those mutual correspondencies, and Glory be
to the Father, etc. will follow.

2. Then let the Apostles Creed be repeated by all, standing with him that
officiates, I believe in God the Father Almighty, etc.

3. The Prayer before the Commandments may be repeated kneeling. Almighty God,
to whom all hearts be open, all desires known, etc Then

4. The Commandments may be repeated by him that officates, standing, to which
the rest kneeling should, as usually they do in public prayers, express their
desires, saying, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts, etc.

In the fifth place may be added, the prayer for the whole estate of Christ's
Church militant here on earth, as you have it, Almighty God, whose kingdom is
everlasting, and power infinite, have mercy upon the whole congregation, etc.
and then, as formerly, O God whose nature and property is ever to have mercy,
and forgive, etc. And The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, makes up the
conclusion.

This will revive the memory of the Apostles Creed, (which we undertook to
believe and profess in our Baptism) and of the ten Commandments, which were
written by the finger of the Father, and by the Son never abrogated, but
expounded, and urged to be strictly observed; the laying aside of which, may
make most (especially the simpler sort) to be liable to such Prophets
reprehension, Jer. 23.27.
They think of their dreams to cause my people to forget my name. And not to
remember into what faith they were baptized.

For the Fridayes Office in Morning Prayer, the Leiturgy as it lies may serve
as complete, beginning with, O God the Father of heaven, etc. and ending with
the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

And so have you the prayers to be ordinarily used with your Families. If
besides in private, when you lie down to sleep, or rise in the morning, you
would have some forms to commend you to God, you shall hardly meet with any
more effectual, that may fit you for the morning then that, Almighty and most
gracious God, I heartily thank thee for the sweet sleep and comfortable rest,
etc. and that other for the Evening. O merciful God, and heavenly Father,
whether we sleep or wake, live or dye, we are always thine, etc. to be had in
the end of most of our Church-Books, which devoutly used, will bring us to that
thankful acknowledgment of the Psalmist, Psalm 3.5.
I laid me down and slept, and rose again, for the Lord sustained me.

CHAP. III Of Blessings, and occasional Salutations.
BLessings may be diversely understood. All Gods favors to us, and our
returning thanks to him, are indifferently called Blessings; of which more
hereafter.

Here Blessings are to be reckoned for such good turns, returns, and wishes
as usually we receive from one another. So Melchizedeck blessed Abraham,
Blessed be Abraham of the Most High God, possessour of heaven and eath, and
blessed be the Most High God, Genesis 14.19 20
which has delivered thine enemies into thine hand. Where Abraham is
pronounced happy through Gods favor, and God is praised and glorified for thus
favoring Abraham.

The Emulation and plotting between Esau and Jacob for their Fathers Blessing,
is an Argument that Parents Blessings were then of some esteem, which now (with
many) are reckoned scarce worth the asking. Esau (not much noted for piety) how
tenderly did he take it that his brother had prevented him? and passionately
with tears urge his father to bless him in the like kind? Have thou not
reserved a blessing for me? Genesis 27.38
Have thou but one blessing? Bless me, even me also, my father. So sensible he
shows himself of so great a loss, and vows revenge on his brother for thus
supplanting him.

Jacob would not let go the Angel without a Blessing, Genesis 32.25
though he got it with an halting ever after; to show, that the blessings of
this life are accompanied with infirmity, 2 Cor. 12.7
as Saint Paul's rapture into the third heaven was with a thorn in the flesh,
to keep him from boasting; which our gifted age so much triumphs in.

In stead of the patterns of the Old Testament, we have Precept in the New, and
that from him in whom all the Naons of the earth are blessed. I say unto you,
Matt. 5.44.
Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute you. And when little
caildren were brought unto him, Mar. 10.16
he took them in his arms, and laid his hands on them, and blessed them.

Saint Peter leads us along in the same blessed path; for after he had fully
shown the mutual duties of Husbands and Wives one toward another, 1 Pet. 3.8.9
Finally be ye all of one mind (says he) having compassion one of another.
Love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous, not rendering evil for evil, or
railing for railing; but contrariwise, Blessing, knowing that ye are thereunto
called, that ye should inherit a Blessing.

And do we not read, that as Aaron was commanded to bless the children of
Israel in this wise, Number. 6.23
The Lord bless thee and keep thee, the Lord make his face to shine upon thee,
and be gracious unto thee, the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give
thee peace. So the Apostles blessing, (which we have in our Leiturgy) [The
Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 13, 14. 2 Th. 3.17
and the love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost be with us all
evermore,] is acknowledged to be his usual Salutation under his own hand, and
is one of the chiefest Arguments for confirming the Doctrine of the blessed
Trinity, and praying to the Holy Ghost; which by Novellists in their Liberty of
Prophecy, is in these days again opposed. In which it is strange also, that a
generation is found amongst us, that scruple at childrens asking blessing from
their parents. Are they afraid they should show themselves to be too dutiful?
Or surfeit upon blessings? Or must no blessing be held effectual that comes not
from their mouths?

This Doctrine may be entertained by itching ears, 2 Timothy 3.6. 2 Timothy 4.3
and silly women, but you (my Daughters) shall do better to follow the tracts of
your pious predecessors, according to the example of good king David, who after
an eminent celebration of Gods public Worship with his Subjects, returned
(says the Text) to bless his house. 2 Chr. 16.43
In your houses therefore let such care be taken, Ephesians. 5.3.
that cursing, or swearing, or lying, or filthy, or foolish talking, or
jesting, which are not convenient, be not heard, or pass unreproved amongst
your children or servants. Let them not offer to eat or drink without Grace
before Meat and after it. It is a piece of Judas character, fore-prophesied
long by the Psalmist, His delight was in cursing, Ps. 109.16.
and it shall happen unto him, he loved not blessing, therefore it shall be far
from him. Our Saviors last parting from his Disciples is thus described, He
lift up his hands and blessed them; and it came to pass, Luke 24.51
while he blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up into heaven.
From whence when he returns to judgment, O how much it stands us upon to be
found with the Blessed at his right hand, Matthew. 25.
to inherit eternal Blessedness! And what are Christian Salutations but
Blessings, whereby we express the unfeigned good will we bear to all Gods
children? 2 Samuel 6.10
King Toi sends Prince Joram his son to salute David, and to bless him. 1 Samuel
13 10
King Saul goes to meet Samuel to salute him (says the Text); the Margin
notes, to bless him. And this must not be performed only to great ones, or
those of our acquaintance: For if you salute your brethren only (says our
Savior) what do ye more then others? Do not the Publicans so? When ye come
into an house, (it is his charge to his Apostles) salute it; Mat 10.12 13
and if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it: but if it be not
worthy, let your peace return unto you. Worthy and unworthy then may be
saluted, which the Apostle is careful to do in the beginning and ending of most
of his Epistles. What a catalogue of Salutations have we in the last chapter
of his Epistle to the Romans, with an allowance to greet one another with an
holy kiss; which the jealousy of some Christians scarce approve of.

The Angels Salutation to Gideon, Judge. 6.12
The Lord be with thee, thou mighty man of Valor, from a Thresher, heightened
him to be a victorious General.

Such a Salutation it was from the Angel Gabriel, Luke 1.29.
that strengthened the blessed Virgin to entertain a conference with him. And
when Elizabeth heard the blessed Virgins Salutation afterward, Ibid. v. 41.
the Babe leaped in her womb (says the Text) and Elizabeth was filled with the
Holy Ghost.

Amongst other faults of clownish and churlish Nabal (who lived like a hog, and
dyed like a dog) this is noted for one of the chiefest, that a discreet servant
acquainted his Mistress with; Behold, David sent Messengers out of the
wilderness to salute our Master, 2 Samuel 25.14.
and he railed on them.

But BoaZ his courteous Salutation to his Reapers, Ruth. 2.4.
[The Lord be with you,] and their civil return again to him, [The Lord
bless thee,] are recorded for patterns to be imitated in like cases.

Let it be therefore a chief Token of your Humility and Meekness (my loving
Daughters) to be free of your Blessings and due Salutations, not only to those
about you in your house, but to your Neighbors, to strangers, nay, to those
that you are persuaded bear you no good will. Pray. 15.5.
For as a soft answer turns away wrath; so a kind Salutation sometimes makes
enemies friends; and neglected, where it should be performed, turns friends
to foes. From Superiors it takes off the suspicion of pride and contempt; in
equals or Inferiors, the note of surliness and incivility. In all it argues a
religious desire to put in practice that Precept of the Apostle; Romans 12.18
If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men.
Neither is this crossed by that of our Savior, Salute no man by the way; Luke
10.4.
or that of the beloved Disciple, concerning a false Teacher, 2 John v. 10
Receive him not into your houses, neither bid him, God speed; withal adding a
reason, For he that bids him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds. For
in the first, Salutation is not forbidden simply, but insisting upon
complements, that might hinder their enjoined quick dispatch of the business in
hand. And in the latter, a fore-knowledg is presupposed that such come to
beguile (as the Serpent did to Eve) and therefore are to be dismissed rather
with a Lord rebuke thee, 2 Cor. 11.3.
Zech. 3.2 Jude v. 9
then with a God speed to be encouraged. And this we may take for a rule in
venturing on any action; If a God Speed may be given to it with a safe
conscience; Go on and prosper: if not, they that sow the wind, Hos. 8.7 Job
8.14.
are likely to reap nothing but the whirlwind, where their spiders webs will
meet with the beesome of destruction; Isai. 14.23 39 6
and those shall not become Garments, neither shall they cover themselves with
their works.

CHAP. IV. Of Psalms and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs.
HOW those differ, there is a difference amongst the Learned; but that is not
to our purpose. Chap. 5 13.
This of Saint James is Canonical, If any amongst you be aflicted, let him
pray: Is any merry, let him sing. What? Not Ballads or Jiggs of the times, but
Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs. So Saint Paul instructs the
Ephesians, Chap. 5.19.
to be done, not out of the excess of wine; but of the fullness of the Spirit;
not only in consort with others, but speaking to our selves, when we are alone,
making melody in our hearts to the Lord. To the same key he tuneth the
Colossians. Chap. 3.16.
In which sort he would have all them (in whom the Word of God does plentifully
dwell in all wisdom) to teach and admonish one another, in Psalms, (as some
take it) with voice, and Instruments of the best Music; and Hymns, in praising
God with the voices only; and Spiritual Songs, of private Meditations, upon all
offered occasions. And is it not of especial note that our Savior for the proof
of his satisfactory Redemption ranketh the Psalms with the fullness of the Law
and Prophets? Luke 24.44
Nay, we shall find scarce any part of the Old Testament, so often cited in
the New, as that which we call the Psalms of David, in regard he was the
chiefest Author of them. Seven of these Psalms our Savior is thought to have
sang with his Disciples, (that is, by the Vulgar account from the 112 to the
119) after the Institution of his last Supper, Mat. 26.3. Mar. 14 26
when he was going toward his passion. This is a plain Text, that Ezekiah the
King, and the Princes, commanded the Levites to sing praises unto the Lord; not
in ex tempere conceptions, in their solemn reformation of Gods Worship, and
Temple; but in the words of David and Asaph the Seer. And did they refuse to do
it? No, but as it follows, They sang praises with gladness, 2 Chr. 29.30
and bowed themselves and worshipped. At the praying and singing such praises
unto God by Saint Paul and Silas, Acts 16.25
imprisoned in the strictest manner, the foundations of the prison were shaken
by an earthquake, the doors flew open, the prisoners bands were loosed, and the
Keeper of the prison terrified into Christianity. A man would marvel therefore
what those men mean, that are so fierce against Church-Musick in consort with
Instruments? Would they cut the strings of David's Harp, (if he were now alive)
and turn out Asaph and his brethren for Fiddlers? It is well that the heavenly
multitude, who sang that congratulatory Antheme for the birth of our Savior,
Luke 2.13.
[Glory be to God in the Highest, and in earth peace, good will toward men,]
descended not so low as these men's hearing, otherwise somewhat might have been
noted in it to be scarce in tune, or according to the new song of these men's
pricking. It would grieve the heart of any pious Christian to ponder seriously
that when as we have had heretofore the monthly reading through of these
Psalms with the New Testament also (except the Revelation) thrice every year,
and the most edifying passages of the Old Testament once a year, to acquaint
the people orderly with Gods Word (which must be the ground and rule of all
preaching, praying, and Christian conversation;) Now such a Reformation is
directed to us, that we know not where we are, or what to expect; but that the
longest liver shall never be acquainted (by this new method in our Church
Service) with the whole counsel of God; Acts 20.27
and (if the Minister please not) the Ten Commandments in the Old Testament,
and Lords Prayer in the New shall never be known to the simple people.

But concerning the diverse uses and applications of the Psalms in private,
that notable Treatise of an ancient Father placed before our Psalms in Meter
may be a profitable Directory; wherein 99. Cases are set down, what Psalms
we may distinctly use for our greatest comfort.

For you (my Daughters) it may be sufficient to take into your particular
Devotions those seven Psalms, termed by the Ancients Penitentials; which are
the 6, 32, 38. 51, 102, 130, 143. and were usually repeated weekly, each on its
set day, which was a pious course. But if this may be thought to be otherwise
supplied in the Family Confessions before mentioned, in your daily Morning and
Evening Prayer; it may be worth your private Observation, to consider the
several works of the six days in the Creation, (as they are registered in
Genesis) with the celebration of the Sabbath, chap. 1.
and then to select seven Psalms which may serve as a most sweet and pertinent
explanation of each of them.

In this accommodation, for Light, the first days work, you have the 27 Psalm,
The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom then shall I fear, etc.

For the second days work, which were the Heavens, the 19. Psalm, The heavens
declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handiwork.

For the Earth with the Sea, of the third days framing, how consonant is the
14 Psalm? The earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, the compass of the
world and they that dwell therein; for he has founded it upon the sea, and
prepared it upon the floods, etc.

In the same order the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, which were created and set in
the Firmament the fourth day, are taken into especial consideration in the 8.
Psalm, When I consider the heavens, the work of thy fingers, the Moon and the
Stars which thou have ordained. Behold what an excellent use he makes of it,
for a pattern to direct us what we should do in contemplating all the rest of
the Creatures, Lord, what is man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of
man, that thou visitest him?

The like use is made upon the consideration of the fishes of the Sea, and of
the fowls of the air (which were the work of the fifth day) in the 104. Psalm.
Ver. ^5.


And for the sixth day, wherein Man was created, with the beast, and the rest
of the Inhabitants of the Earth to serve him, how fit is the 139 Psalm to be
thought upon? O God, Ver. ^5
thou have searched me out, and known me, thou know my down-sitting, and
mine uprising, thou understandest my thoughts long before, etc. My bones are
not hid from thee, though I be made secretly, and fashioned beneath in the
earth. Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfect, and in thy book
were all thy Members written.

And last of all, the 92 Psalm bears this Title, A Psalm, or Song for the
Sabbath Day (conformable to which we have the seventh and Lords day) wherein we
may observe (that which an unwise man does not well consider, Ver. 6.
and a fool does not understand.)

1. What is to be done in celebrating of it, Ver. 1.
[It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto the
name of the Most Highest.

2. At what set times especially, Ver. 2.
[Morning and Evening, To tell of thy loving kindness early in the Morning,
and of thy truth in the night season.

3. With what solemnity, [Upon an Instrument of ten strings, and upon the Lute,
upon a loud Instrument,] any that may consort with, or quicken our praises.
Prayers, or Thanksgivings.

4. Upon what ground? Because God has made us glad through his works; and
therefore this day should be especially set apart for to rejoice, in giving
praise for the operations of his hands, which is intimated in the fourth
Commaudment it self, In six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea and
all that in them is. What should this mean, but that especially upon this day
with all Praise, and Thanksgiving, all these things were to be considered in
pious meditations, and distinct Prayers, Praises and Thanksgivings to be
inferred thereupon, according to every man's private Devotions and capacities,
besides the public Service.

5. In what manner must this be done? Our Psalmist also here furnishes us with
a Gloria Patri, [O Lord, how glorious are thy works! and thy thoughts are very
deep.] And

6. Tells us, that those that pass this over as a slight business, are but
unwise men and fools, who prick up as the green grass, quickly to be mowen
down, and made fodder for beasts; whereas the truly religious, and due
observers of the Lords Day, (according to his own holy Ordinance)

1 Shall have their strength exalted as the horn of an Unicorn.

2. Be anointed with the fresh oil of Gods blessed Spirit.

3. Flourish like a Palm tree, that prospers under pressures; and

4. Spread abroad like a Cedar in Libanus, in spite of winds and tempests.

5. Shall see their enemies danted and put to confusion, according to their
desire. Whereas

6. They themselves shall be firmly fixed and flourish in Gods house, and bring
forth more fruit in their age, then the vigor of their former days has
yielded.

There be that apply the 150 Psalms in this manner; That the first fifty,
should especially stir us up to hearty repentance. The second, to the
consideration of Gods Mercy and Justice. The third, to the contemplation of
Eternal happiness to be entertained with Hallelujahs and Thanksgivings. But
if you answer to this, Such knowledge is too wonderful and excellent, Psalm.
139.5
we cannot attain unto it.

Take then in a shorter way, those three Psalms, which may well be called the
Sermons of David.

In the first of which, (which is the 37th) you have a plaster against
fretting at the prosperity of the wicked, and perplexed estate of those that
(in all men's judgments) deserve better.

In the second, being the forty ninth, a purge for swelling up-starts, whose
state is held no better then that of the beasts that perish: this is set forth
more at large in the seventy third, to beat us off from all worldly vanities,
and to bring us to hold fast by God, Psalm. 73.27 and 37.38.
for that will only bring us true peace at the last. These Sermons will not
over-burden your memories with tediousness, but be easily learned by you, and
taught your children. And seeing you have the Songs of Miriam and Deborah, with
that of Hannah in the Old Testament, and the Magnificat of the most blessed
Virgin in the New, so canonically recorded; Such Patterns should stir you up
to Practice (my Daughters) and to part with your chiefest worldly delights (as
the Hebrew women did with their Looking glasses to make a laver for the
Sanctuary) for the setting forth Gods praises and Worship, Exodus 38.8
to the utmost of your abilities. O clap your hands together all ye people. O
sing unto God with the voice of melody. -- O sing praises, sing praises unto
our God; O sing praises, sing praises unto our King. For God is the King of all
the earth, sing ye praises [to him] with understanding. And if not at all times
in continued Psalms, yet on all occasions in pious Ejaculations, the subject
of the next Chapter.

CHAP. V. Of occasional Ejaculations.
BY Ejaculations are understood such private Prayers, as when upon seeing,
hearing, or thinking on any thing of extraordinary concernment, we turn our
selves immediately to God, and in short petitions, Praises, Wishes, or
Thanksgivings, express our hearty devotions.

In such no set form can be prescribed, but the occasion it self will so frame
the suit, that it will be prevalent, as it is piercing, and the defect of words
made up with hearty affections.

Into such an Ejaculatory confession the Israelites brake out at the sight of
fire from heaven to consume the Sacrifice of Elijah (which all the Baalites
raving and lancing had failed to procure from their Idol) [The Lord he is the
God, 1 Ki. 18.39
The Lord he is the God,] falling upon their faces at the utterance of it. So
David upon report that politic Achitophel was turned Traitor against him, O
Lord (says he) I pray thee turn the counsel of Achitophel into foolishness.
And what foolishness could be more palpable, then in the wise ording of his
family to reserve a halter to hang himself?

King Asa had no time (when Zerah the Ethiopian fell upon him with a Million of
men) but to betake himself only to this Ejaculation, 2 Sa. 17.23
O Lord it is nothing with thee to help, 2 Chr. 14.11, 12
whether with many, or with them that have no power. Help us O Lord our God,
for we rest on thee, and in thy name go we against this multitude. Lord thou
art our God, let not man prevail against thee. And was not the success as
speedy in its kind, as the petition was pithy? For the Lord smote the
Ethiopians before Asa and Judah to their utter overthrow.

Upon the short address of the Disciples to our Savior in a storm, [Master,
Mark 4.38.
carest thou not that we perish?] He arose and rebuked the winds, and said to
the sea, Peace and be still; and the wind ceased, and there was a great calm.]
Sudden dangers must have correspondent remedies. And whence may they be hoped
for, but from him that is always present every where, and expects but our
calling on him, that he may relieve us?

As you provide therefore (my Daughters) to have Hot-waters in a readiness, or
remedies appliable to sudden occasions, lest in the interim before they can be
gotten, the party whom you wish best unto, wanting them, perish much more
should you have at hand and by heart, such passages of sacred Scriptures
whereon to ground good wishes, and pious Ejaculations, which in infinite
unexpected occurrences you shall occasion to make use of: such our Leiturgy has
so pricked out for you, that you need go no further.

To instance in a few of the most obvious particulars. For raising up of a
dejected or drooping soul, what may prove more animating then that we first
meet with at the threshold of our Service? Ezekiel. 46.2.
At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sins from the bottom of
his heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance, Ezekiel. 8.21.
says the Lord? What more effectual to remove Gods judgments for our manifold
transgressions, then that of the lamenting Prophet? Correct us, O Lord, Jer.
10.24.
and yet in thy judgment, not in thy fury, lest we should be consumed and
brought to nothing. A plainer direction cannot be thought upon, for a straying
sinner, then that of the hunger starved Prodigal, I will go to my Father, and
say to him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and against thee, and am no
more worthy to be called thy Son. Your children, and your rudest servants are
acquainted from the Leiturgy, with these piercing Petitions, O Lord open thou
our Lips, and our mouth shall show forth thy praise. O God make speed to save
us, O Lord make haste to help us. O Lord show thy mercy upon us, and grant us
thy Salvation. O Lord deal not with us after our sins neither reward us after
our iniquities. From our enemies defend us O Christ, graciously look upon our
affliction: with the like.

These are made familiar to them by often repetition, which those that term
shreds and porrage, little think upon the short Ejaculation of David, I have
sinned against the Lord, 2 Sa. 12.13
that had presently this return, The Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall not
die. Or that of the simple Publican, God, be merciful to me a sinner; and the
sequel of it, that he went down to his house, rather justified then the
vaunting Pharisee for all his eloquence. And this is an advantage in such short
Ejaculations, that they are not so liable to distractions, as longer Prayers,
and are more easy to be remembered of all, and ready to be used when space and
place may not be had for longer prayers.

To give a touch in some few particulars.

At our first awaking, in the morning, who may not with heart, and hands, and
eyes lifted up to heaven, say, Psalm 4.7.
Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us? and welcome the
appearance of the light with this or the like Ejaculation, Psalm. 67.1.
God be merciful unto us, and bless us, and show us the light of thy
countenance, and be merciful unto us? In clothing of our selves, how becoming
would that be of the Apostle (which converted a holy Father) to be fitted to
the occasion? Romans 13.12
The night is passed, and the day is at hand, Grant, O Lord) that I may cast
off the works of darkness, and put on the Armor of Light, that I may walk
honestly as in the day; not in rioting or drunkenness, not in chambering or
wantonness, nor in strife or envying; but that I may put on my Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus, (more necessary to cover my souls nakedness, then apparel
is for my body) and not to make such provision for the flesh (as is commonly
used) to fulfill the lusts thereof.

In like manner, far be it from Superstition, when we wash, to pray, Wash me
thoroughly from my wickedness, Psalm. 51.2
and cleanse me from my sin: for I acknowledge my faults (O Lord) and my sin
is ever before me.

At our going forth; Psalm 143
Show me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my soul unto thee.

At the hearing of a Clock, or looking on a Watch, or a Dyal, Teach me, O Lord,
Psalm. 9.12.
to number my days, that I may apply my heart to Wisdom.

At the undertaking of any work of our vocation. The glorious majesty of the
Lord our God be upon me; Ibid. v. 17
Prosper thou the works of my hands, O prosper thou my handy work; which if we
cannot desire with a good conscience, a stop must be made, and the business not
undertaken.

Last of all, upon our deathbeds, old Jacobs Ejacalation will be acceptable,
and comfortable, Genesis 49.18
O Lord, I have waited for thy salvation. With old Simeons in the New Testament
to bear it company, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, because
mine eyes have seen thy Salvation, in knowing and depending upon him for my
Redemption, my Lord and Savior Christ Jesus. Luke 23.46
Whose prayer in giving up the Ghost, must be ours at the last gasp, Father,
into thy hands I commend my spirit: The happiest conclusion that all our
Devotions can bring us unto. In the interim, we shall meet with in this vale of
misery many passages to be lamented at, which how it may be performed, the next
Title suggesteth.

CHAP. VI. Of Lamentations, and complaints on sad Objects.
WE read in the Old Testament of the Roll of a Book, Ezekiel. 2.10.
wherein was written, within and without, Lamentations, and Mourning, and Woe.
And in Ramah was there a voice heard, (as it is repeated in the New Testament)
Lamentation and weeping, Matthew. 2.18
and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be
comforted because they were not. The taking up of a lamentation is a Scripture
phrase, Jer. 7.29. Ezekiel. 19.1. and 26.17. and 27.2. and 28.12. and 32.2.
and the practice of it usual. Lamentations are prescribed for Tire and
Pharaoh. Saul has a set lamentation penned by David for his sad overthrow, and
his brave son Jonathans, upon cursed mount Gilboa, in which the Daughters of
Israel are called upon to weep over them, 2 Samuel 1.22
under whom they had enjoyed such Ornaments and happiness. But all the singing
men, and singing women, must by an Ordinance in Israel, 2 Chr. 35.25
speak of Josiah in their Lamentations, who was slain at Hadradrimmon, Zac.
12.11.
in the valley of Megidde: whereof the Prophet Jeremiah was the Penman, from
whom we have those inimitable Lamentations, for the ruins of the Church and
State that fell out in his time, O that my head were waters, Jer. 9.1.
and my eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain
of the Daughter of my people. Jer. 7.29.
Cut off thy hair, O Jerusalem, and cast it away, and take up a Lamentation in
the High Places. Lam. 1.11.
Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? behold and see, if there be any
sorrow like unto my sorrow. Then he turns unto the Lord, Behold, Chap. 2.20
O Lord and consider to whom thou have done this: shall the women eat their
fruit, and the children of a span long? Shall the Priest and the Prophet be
slain, and that in the Sanctuary of the Lord? How cold are all Heathen Poets
and Orators, compared to these burning expressions? Isai. 22.4
Isaiah had the like before for the desolation he foresaw should come upon his
Country for their sins. Look away from me, for I will weep bitterly. Labor not
to comfort me, because of the spoiling of the daughter of my people. And Alas,
Chap. 5.16
alas is the burden of the Lamenration, foretold by Amos in the like case,
which the Citizens and Husbandmen, and all those that are skilful in wailing
must take up, when the Lord is angry, and pours out the Vials of his
punishments upon them. Psalm. 8.5 Psalm. 102.9
Such bread of tears, and drink mingled with weeping, the Prophet David often
made his Kingly repast, when the floods of Belial made him afraid; and mark how
earnest and passionate he is indivers addresses to God, which pierce the
highest heavens to extort (as it were) a blessing. Will the Lord absent himself
for ever, Psalm. 77.7
and will he be no more entreated? Is his mercy clean gone for ever, and his
promise come utterly to an end for evermore? Has God forgotten to be gracious,
and will he shut up his loving kindness in displeasure? And what consorts more
with the miseries of these lamentable times, then that of the sixtieth Psalm?
Psalm 60.1
O God thou have cast us out, and scattered us abroad, thou have also been
displeased; O turn thou unto us again. Thou have moved the land, and divided
it: heal the sores thereof, for it shakes: thou have showed thy people heavy
things, thou have given us a drink of deadly wine.

When you therefore consider (my Daughters) which I will you seriously and
conscionably to do, the irreverent contempt, and worse then heathenish
profaneness, that is fallen of late upon Gods Worship, under a pretense of
exacter teaching, and purer Reformation, you may betake your selves to that
complaint of the Psalmist, Help (Lord) for there is not one godly man left,
Psalm. 12.1
the faithful are minished from among the children of men; the wicked walk on
every side, Ver. ult.
when the vilest men are exalted. And turn that reproof of our Savior into a
necessary Prayer. Mat. 21.13
O Lord, thy house should be called, and so ever acknowledged to be the House
of Prayer, but behold, it is now made, not only a Den of Thieves, but a Stable
for horses, and a Receptacle for Zims and Ohims, and daughters of the Owls to
act their parts therein. Isai. 34.14.
Men of worse then Heathenish conditions are come into thine inheritance, Psalm
79.1
thy holy Temple have they defiled, and made thy Jerusalem an heap of stones,
etc.

2. When you recount with your selves, Things consecrated to God to be
alienated to cursed uses, the shepherds smitten, the flocks scattered, and that
not by strangers, but at home in the houses of our friends: Zach. 13.6.
how seasonably will that be thought upon out of the seventy fourth Psalm, O
God, Psalm 74.1
why art thou absent from us so long? Why is thy wrath so hot against the sheep
of thy pasture? -- Thine adversaries roar in the midst of the congregations,
and set up their banners for tokens, breaking down the carved works (set up
for thy Worship) with axes and hammers. Let us make havoc of them altogether
(say they) root them out, Psalm. 83.12
that they be no more a people, that we may take the houses of God into our own
possession. Is it not time therefore for all good Christians to cry out. Arise
O Lord, Psalm. 74.23
and maintain thine own cause; remember how the foolish man blasphemeth thee
daily.

3 At the dismal spectacle of this flourishing Commonwealth, so late famous
amongst neighbor Nations, and now so ruinated, who can choose but take up those
Lamentations of the Prophet? Jer. 4.19
My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at the very heart; my heart makes a noise
within me, I cannot hold my peace, because thou have heard (O my soul) the
sound of the Trumpet, and alarm of War, destruction upon destruction, for the
whole land is spoiled. -- And all this is done by foolish children, who are
wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge.

4. And may not our own particular sufferings turn us to the lamentable
expressions of the 69 Psalm? Save me O God, Psalm 69.1.
for the waters are come into my soul; I stick fast in the deep mire, where no
ground is: I am come into deep waters, so that the floods run over me. Thy
rebuke has broken my heart, I am so full of heaviness. Ver. 21
I looked for some to have pity on me; but there was no man, neither found I
any to comfort me. And surely, the perfidiousness of friends, the fraud of
flatterers, and the impudent insultations of the basest of the people, may

5. Chap. 30
Put us upon Jobs complaint, They who are younger then I have me in derision,
whose fathers I would have disdained to have set with the dogs of my flock.
They were cried after as a thief -- They were the children of fools and base
men. -- But now I am their song, -- they abhor me and flee from me, and spare
not to spit in my face.

6 Upon survey and sense of our own disabilities, to procure the least
refreshing to our galling grievances, how feelingly may that of Isaiah vent our
sorrows? Chap. 24.16
My leanness, my leanness, woe unto me, the treacherous dealers have dealt
treacherously; yea, the treacherous dealers have dealt very treacherously.
Fear, and the snare, and the pit, are so ordered upon us, that he who flies for
fear shall fall into the pit, and he that comes out of the midst of the pit,
shall be taken in the snare.

7. Last of all, Psalm 119
If David's eyes gusht out with water, because men kept not Gods Law, what
rivers of tears should run down our cheeks, at the beholding of our obstinate
offending under the rod of Gods confounding punishment? Even in the sight of
Moses and the lamenting congregation by reason of the plague amongst them, an
impudent Zimri will trace along with his shameless Cozbi. Number. 25.6
In stead of true humiliation, we shall have obtruded, deluding dissimulation,
and dogs shall prove more pitiful to disconsolate Lazarus, Luke 16.
then purple Dives or any of his full-fed attendants. To all which what have we
to say? Psalm 64.1
but, O God, to whom vengeance belongs, Thou God to whom vengeance belongs,
show thy self, etc. and to comfort our selves in this, Genesis 19 16
that in Sodoms destruction from heaven, Lot shall find a protection to escape.
And Baruch shall obtain his life for a prey in all places whithersoever he
goes. Jer. 45.5
In the destruction of that Temple and City, which was the beauty of the whole
earth, a Mark shall be set upon those that sigh and cry for all the
abominations that they see committed, Ezekiel. 9.4
Rev. 7.
that so in the day of vengeance they may be passed over, and preserved.
Whereupon we may safely conclude with the experienced Psalmist, as much in this
kind, Psalm. 126.6
as any of Gods children, They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. He that
now goes on his way weeping, and bears forth good seed, shall doubtless
come again with joy, and bring his sheavs with him. For expressing of which
rejoicing, we may use for a Directory the Helps that follow.

CHAP. VII. Of Excitation, or Encouragements to all kind of Christian
cheerfulness and Alacrity.
SUch is our stupid dullness since the Fall, and loathing averfenesse from all
goodness, that though it be erected by grace and directed in the plainest
paths that lead to happiness, yet without continual goadings on, it will look
back with Lots wife, Genesis 19.20
and be like the Horse and Mule, which will follow us no longer then they are
drawn to it with the bit and bridle in our hands. Psalm. 32.10
Hence the Psalmist being exceeding sensible of this original Lethargy, no
less then seven times in one Psalm sues to the Physician of our souls for
spiritual quickening, Aqua vitae, in these and the like expressions; Quicken me,
Psalm. 119.25, 37.88
O Lord, according to thy word; -- in the way; -- according to thy loving
kindness. And the blessed Apostle thinks it not enough to put his Scholar
Timothy to endure hardness, 2 Timothy 2.3.
except he joined with it, the stirring up of the gifts which God had given
him, Ibid. c. 1.6.
and improving them to the utmost in the vocation the Church had set him. When
the people told blind Bartimeus (whom they had blamed before for his balling)
that our Savior made a stand, Mar. 10.46
and called for him, O how nimbly the blind beggar bestirs himself! Ver. 50
off goes his garment, up he starts, scrambles to Jesus as well as he could,
was presently healed and followed after with all alacrity, praising the
heavenly Donor of so inestimable a blessing. Such cheerful and confident
alacrity, the Lord himself in peculiar manner gives in charge to General
Joshuah, Have not I commanded thee? Josh. 1.9.
Be strong, and of a good courage? be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed, for
the Lord thy God is with thee whithersoever thou go. Psalm. 57.5
Amongst teeth, as spears, and arrows, and tongues of his enemies as sharp as
swords, and nets to entangle his foot, and pits to swallow his whole body,
observe how the Prophet David chears up himself, My heart is fixed, O God,
Ver. 1
my heart is fixed. I will sing and give praise. Awake up my glory, awake Lute
and Harp, I my self will awake right early. And this is the ready, Psalm. 108
the willing, the cheerful Worship, the dancing of the heart for joy, Psalm. 28
the praising of God with the best member we have, that was prophesied to be
performed after our Saviors erecting his Church of Jews and Gentiles, Psalm
110
In the day of thy power the people shall offer thee free will offerings, with
an holy Worship (or as our latter translation has it) thy people shall be
willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness. The dew of thy
birth is of the womb of the morning, gentle, for the descending in drops
innumerable.

For putting life into, and hearting this Free Will Worship, which is only
acceptable unto God, when it proceeds according to his own Directory, three
things in the Scripture and our Church Book, are especially to be taken notice
of.

1. Proclamations from God.

2. Excitations of our selves.

3. Incitations of others.

I. Of those which may be termed cheerful Proclamations, you may take notice of
these seven especially.

1. Of that whereof King David is made the Herald, Psalm. 34.11
Come ye children, hearken unto me, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord.
Your Teacher shall be a King and Prophet, your Teaching shall be gratis; your
Learning shall be such as shall make you eternally happy.

2. And because (perchance) to some it may come more plausibly from the
deliverance of a woman, Solomon the son brings in wisdom bestirring her self,
and sending abroad her maidens to invite all desirous to learn, to a great
feast in her stately house, erected upon seven pillars, Prove 9.1
Whosoever is simple (She proclaims in the highest places of the City, where it is
likely of the greatest Audience) whose is simple, let him turn in hither, and
he that wants understanding, come eat of my bread, and drink of my wine which
I have mingled.

In the third place, that of the Prophet Isaiah would be diligently hearkened
unto, Ho every one that thirsts, Isai. 55.1
come ye to the waters, (for spiritual refreshing, which is infinitely beyond
all carnal comforts) come ye, buy and eat, come ye, buy wine and milk without
money and without price. Wherrfore do ye spend money for that which is not
bread, and your labor for that which satisfies not? Hearken diligently unto
me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight it self in
fatness.

And to prevent all surmises that a pious life is accompanied with sadness,
and lays a tie upon us, which would abridge us of all cheerful society, the
Proclamation of our Savior himself, does (fourthly) ascertain us to the
contrary, Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, Mat. 11.28
and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am
meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls: for my yoke is
easy, and my burden is light. This is taken into our Leiturgy for a chief
ground of the Excitations that are set before the partaking of the Lords
Supper, Lift up your hearts, We lift them up unto the Lord. Let us give thanks
unto our Lord God, It is meet and right so to do. Upon this,

5. The great Kings Invitation of all sorts to his wedding Supper of his Son,
Matt. 22.4.
would be most seriously hearkened unto, Behold, I have prepared my dinner, my
Oxen and my fatlings are killed, come unto the marriage: and not turn it off
with excuses of absence, or profane it by irreverent intruding without a
wedding garment, Matthew. 7.
for this shall never pass without an heavy censure.

Neither is the sixth Proclamation of less consequence, Come out of her, Rev.
18.4
my people, that ye be not partaker of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues. Take it how you will, either for clearing your selves from the Babylon
or confusions of Popery, or of Schismatics, or of wretched worldlings, the
case is of such consequence, that the not abandoning of such Societies, will
make us incapable of the privileges of the

Seventh and last Proclamation, Rev. 22.17
And the Spirit and the Bride say, Come; and let him that hears say, Come;
and let him that is a thirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the water
of life freely. What sense is so benumbed, what affection so bewitched, what
heart so stupefied, that such proffers, if they win not, yet at least will not
retard from the desperate courses, which the world, the flesh and the devil
continually put us upon?

To strengthen those graces so freely offered. These Memorandums or Mementoes
may do well to be had in a readiness.

1. Eccles. 12.1
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth; while thou have abilities and
opportunities to do it; for thou know not how soon thou may be deprived
of them.

2. Luke 17.30
Remember Lots wife; fall not back from a good course wherein thou art, lest
thou be at a loss, which thou shall never be able to recover.

3. Remember Dives, Luke 16.25
Lot and Lazarus. We must not think to fare well here, and never to be called
to an account hereafter.

4. Remember the Sabbath to keep it holy; not in harkening so much after other
men's undertakings in speaking, as the worshipping of God our selves in the
beauty of Holiness: Heb. 10.25
Considering one another to provoke unto love and good works, not forsaking the
assembling of our selves together (as the manner of some is) but exhorting one
another; so much the more as we see the day approaching. This will draw on the

Fifth Memento, Remember that Jesus, 2 Timothy 2.8
of the seed of David, was raised from the dead, having spoiled principalities
and powers, and made a show of them openly; Gol. 2.15.
tryumphing over them by himself in his Cross; thereby freeing us from Satan's
slavery, and purchasing to us an immortal Kingdom. In traveling to the
possession of which, we must labor to support the weak; and take the

Sixth Memento of our Savior with us, It is more blessed to give, Act. 20.35.
then receive.

And yet when all this is done, to keep us from undoing all again, that Memento
of Jude in the last place will be necessary, Beloved, remember the words which
were spoken before of the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, Jude v. 17.
that they told you, that there should be mockers in the last times; who should
walk after their ungodly lusts. But how shall we discern them from honest men,
seeing they varnish all their actions with the exquisite veil of holiness,
and hold forth their zealous projects with the most taking professions of
Saintship? The nineteenth verse will there tell us in down right terms, These
be they that separate themselves, sensual, having not the spirit. The
Separatists, Libertines, and Enthusiasts of this ages spawning, which some
suspect to have affinity with the three frogs issuing out of the mouth of the
Dragon, Rev. 16 1^
the beast, and the false Prophets, which set Kingdoms and States against the
Lamb, and his followers, until in the battle of Armageddon they be utterly
defeated.

Here the like number of Caveats may be put in, and all from our Savior
immediately. As

1 Take heed that no man deceive you by putting false Christ's and false
Prophets upon you. Mark 13.5.


2 Take heed what you hear, Mat. 24.7.15
and how you hear.

3. Take heed of vainglory in your best works, Mark 4.24 Luke 8.18.
of Almesdeeds, Fasting, and Prayer.

4. Take heed that the light which is in you be not darkness, Matthew. 6.
by aiming at wrong ends, Luke 11.35
and over-prizing your Sanctity in comparison with others.

5. Heed also must be taken of men, Mat. 10.16 17
by joining the Serpents wisdom with the Doves innocence; which intimates that
which the Prophet Jeremiah has more at large, Jer. 9 4
Take heed every one of his neighbor, and trust ye not in any brother; for
every brother will utterly supplant, and every neighbor will walk with slanders.

6. Take heed and beware of covetousness; Luke 12.15.
for the abundance that a man has makes him not happy, but the well bestowing
of it; which basely neglected, proves oftentimes the bane of the owner, and a
booty for those that will wickedly set it packing.

7. You that are better advised, Take heed to your selves, lest at any time
your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, or drunkenness, or cares of this
life, and so that last day come upon you unawares: for as a snare shall it come
on all them which dwell on the face of the whole earth.

But enough has been spoken, if it be well remembered and practiced. But what
will Caveats, Memento's, or Edicts from heaven avail, if we be wanting to our
selves, and bend not an ear to hear, or a heart to entertain what the Spirit
says unto the Churches, and in them to us in particular?

II. Here then come in, these Excitations which among Divines are called
Soliloquies, in which, by reflecting upon our selves in what condition soever
we are, we set the superior faculties of our souls, that is, the Understanding
and Will, to comfort and cheer up our drooping senses and consciences, upon
heavenly principles that will never fail. And herein a Lanthorn to our feet,
and a light unto our paths, we have the Prophet David in so many passages,
that it may distract us in which especially to instance. Psalm. 27.2
In the midst of his devouring canibal enemies, that came upon him to eat up
his flesh, how cheerfully does he rowze up himself? The Lord is my light and my
salvation, whom then shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom
then should I be afraid. Upon the scoffs of his Adversaries, that having him at
an advantage, would cast him in the teeth, Psalm. 42.12.
Where is now thy God? he reflects upon himself, and without passionate
retortion, makes good his ground against them. Ps. 42.14, 15
Why art thou so vexed, O my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me? O
put thy trust in God, Psalm. 43.5, 6
for I will yet thank him, which is the help of my countenance, and my God.
Psalm. 103.1.
Praise the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me. Psalm. 146.1.
Praise the Lord, O my soul: While I live will I praise the Lord, as long as I
have any being I will sing praises unto my God. Such a communing with her own
heart has the poor woman troubled with the bloody-issue. Mark 5.26. Matthew. 9.21
If I might but touch his garment, I shall be whole. And how calmly in this kind
does Job put off the losses of his goods and children, Job 1.21.
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return again. The Lord
gave, and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord.

III. Last of all, for inciting others; not only all sorts of people must be
called upon in these and the like terms. O praise the Lord,] O give thanks unto
the Lord,] O sing unto the Lord a new song.] which are as familiar as
comfortable, but also beasts and senseless creatures must be fetched in to bear
a part, Psalm 150
Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord, is the close of the Psalms.
Let the sea make a noise, let the floods clap their hands, Let the Hills be
joyful together before the Lord: And O be joyful in the Lord, all yea Lands:
serve the Lord. These and like select passages set in our Leiturgy, made
familiar to you and yours (my Daughters) may serve to make you heavenly melody
in the greatest distractions and affrightments this world may put upon you;
Psalm. 94.13, 14
for, the Lord will not fail his people, neither forsake his inheritance; but
give them patience in the time of adversity, until the pit be dug us for the
ungodly. Bruised reeds shall not be broken, Isai. 42.3.
smoking flax shall not be quenched; Psalm. 34
Sheep shall find green pastures, when lions hunger: the meal shall not fail in
the barrel, 1 King. 17.
nor the oil in the cruse, until there appear a more plentiful supply. Cast
your care therefore upon God (my Daughters) in all your exigencies, for he
cares for you, 1 Pet. 5.7.
and be content with what he bestows upon you: for he has said, I will never
leave thee, nor forsake thee. And our Savior who tells us that in this world we
shall have tribulation, Joh. 16.33
and be sharers with him in his fufferings cheers us up notwithstanding with
this conclusion, Be of good comfort, I have overcome the world.

THE THIRD PART: OF PRAYERS IN Public Assemblies.
CHAP. I. Of Confessions.
Public Prayers are such as are celebrated solemnly by Congregations in
appointed times and places according to set forms prescribed to Priest and
people by particular Churches, within their several Jurisdictions. Such was
that of blessing the people by the Priest, Number. 6.22
not in variety of forms and phrases, as he thought fit, but in such terms
and words which are enjoined by God himself. And the Lord spoke unto Moses
saying, Speak unto Aaron and his sons, saying, On this wise shall ye bless the
children of Israel, saying unto them, The Lord bless thee and keep thee, The
Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee; the Lord lift
up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. And they shall put my Name
upon the children of Israel, and I will bless them. This name some would have
to import the blessed Trinity, by reason of the word Jehovah, or Lord, here
thrice repeated; to which that Blessing is well conformed which is imparted
usually by most parents to children, In the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost. And in the same form precisely all children of
Christians are commanded to be baptized. Mat. 28.19
In like manner, it was not at the choice of him that presented his first
fruits, to acknowledge his thankfulness in what terms or variations he
conceited; but, Deuteronomy. 26.5.
[Thou shall speak (as the Text commands thee) and say before the Lord thy God,
A Syrian ready to perish, was my father, and he went down into Egypt, and
sojourned there with a few, and became a Nation great, mighty, and populous;
and the Egyptians evil entreated us, and laid upon us hard Bondage; And when we
cried unto the Lord God of our fathers, the Lord heard our voice, and looked on
our affliction, and our labor and our oppression: And the Lord brought us forth
out of Egypt, with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with great
terribleness, and with signs, and with wonders: And he brought us into this
place, and has given us this Land, even a Land that flows with milk and
honey. And now, behold, I have brought thee the first fruits of the Land, which
thou, O Lord, have given me.] So Isreal's repentance is directed by Hosea, Take
unto you words, Chap. 14.2.
and turn unto the Lord, and say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive
us graciously; so will we render the calves of our lips. So in their solemn
fasting, the time was not to be unseasonably spent in tedious Teaching, or by
extemporal rapsodies, to set forth the gifts of the Speaker, or tire the
devotion of the Auditory; Joel 2.17.
but (as the Prophet directs, Let the Priests the Ministers of the Lord,
neep, between the Porch and the Altar, and let them say, Spare thy people, O
Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach, that the Heathen should rule
ever them. Wherefore should they say among the people, Where is their God?
Which set forms in Public Meetings were so far from altering in the New
Testament, that they are summed up and perfected in the Lords Prayer, and so
transmitted by the Apostles to all posterity, that no settled Church can be
noted that had not some Public Leiturgy, wherein the people might join with
the Minister in Gods Service; children, and the simpler sort might be
instructed by hearing the same words constantly repeated; and not to come only
as spectators to a Theater, to hear much, learn little, and do nothing, as
though all had not an interest in Gods Service according to their abilities and
callings, and that out of the mouths of babes and sucklings, Hosannaes were
not to be endured.

Public Prayers may be either 1. Confessions. 2. Deprecations. 3.
Supplications. 4. Intercessions. 5. Thanksgivings. 6. Praises. 7. Comminations.


For Public Confessions, what can be contrived more fully and effectually,
then that used at the entrance of our Devotions, [Almighty and most merciful
Father, we have erred and strayed from thy ways like lost sheep, etc.] And
that other before the receiving of the Lords Supper, [Almighty God, Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, Maker of all things, Judge of all men, we acknowledge and
bewail our manifold sins, etc.] These you and your children must have by heart,
to be ready at all times, upon all pangs of sadness for sin, or more dangerous
convulsions of conscience. Psalm. 32.6.
In this the Psalmist found present ease, I said I will confess my sins unto
the Lord, and so thou forgavest the wickedness of my sin. This the Apostle
commends as a salve most sovereign, 1 John 1.9
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins. But,
Ver. 10
If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.
The Prophet Daniel fully relates how it wrought with him; for no sooner had he
made that earnest and passionate Confession in the behalf of himself and his
fellow Captives in Babylon. But, while I was yet speaking, Dan. 9.21
(says the Text) and praying, and confessing my sin, and the sin of my people
Israel; -- Tea, while I was speaking in Prayer, the man Gabriel being caused to
fly swiftly, came and touched me to give me satisfaction. So quick in
operation is an hearty Prayer and Confession. No sooner shall David say, 2 Samuel
12.13
I have sinned against the Lord, but the Prophet shall reply, And the Lord has
put away thy sin, thou shall not dye. As soon as he shall acknowledge, that his
feet has slipped, Psalm. 94.18
he shall presently have good cause to add, Thy mercy, O Lord held me up. In
the multitude of the sorrows that I had in my heart, thy comforts have
refreshed my soul. For as vomiting after excess of gluttony eases the stomach,
so does Confession the conscience after a burthening sin committed. For this
purpose to have recourse to those Hymns in our Church-Book, and sing them
devoutly, [O Lord of whom I do depend, behold my careful heart, etc.] And, [O
Lord turn not away thy face from him that lies prostrate, etc.] And, [O Lord in
thee is all my trust, etc.] will be a great ease to an afflicted soul. And they
that have some fuller taste and relish of Gods Word, may make a kind of
confessionary Letany to themselves, fitted to the times of trouble they live
in. As for example.

[1. By our Fratricide, with Cain, who causelessly murdered his innocent
brother.]

[2. By our unnatural irreverence, with Cham, that scoffed at the nakedness of
his father.]

[3. By our contemptuous profaneness, with Esau, who sold his birthright for a
mess of broth.]

[4. By our Sacriledg with Achan, who wickedly ventured on that which was
consecrated to God, to the destruction of himself and all his.]

[5. By our divellish conspiracy with Corah and his Accomplices against Moses and
Aaron, Gods spiritual and temporal Prelates.]

[6. By Doegs brutish falling upon Gods Priests to make them away, that he
might have the greatest share in the plundering of their means.]

[7. By Absoloms most unnatural rebellion against his most indulgent Father;]
We have (O Lord) affronted heaven, and plucked down thy just vengeance upon us:
but correct us therefore, O Lord in thy judgment, not in thy fury, lest we
should be consumed and brought to nothing.

And if you (my Daughters) would fit it more properly to your Sex, you may
dispose it in this manner.

[1. Genesis 34.1.
With Lots wife deserting her husband in looking back to the Luxury of Sodom.]

[2. With Dinahs gadding abroad to her own shame, the enraging of her
brethren, and discontent of her father-]

[3. With the plots of Joseph's Mistress upon her chaste servant.]

[4. With Jobs impatient wife to add affliction to the greatest afflictions of
her tormented husband.

[5. With Michaels scoffing at her husband David's Devotion, as misbeseeming his
High place to be submissive to God.

[6. With the haughtiness of the daughters of Sion, Isaiah 3
displaying their fancies to the world in twenty one fashions.]

[7. With the peremptory Jewish wives, Jer. 44.16.
we have snapt at Gods Ministers, as they did at the Prophet Jeremiah in Egypt,
and told them in plain terms, Let them say what they would, we would do as we
list, and our husbands should justify us in it, as there it is undertaken.
Ver. 19.
In all which unsufferable exorbitancies, or some of them we have drawn thy
just judgments upon us.] But spare us, Good Lord, spare thy people whom thou
have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for ever.
Which leads us to Deprecation, the second kind of Public Prayer.

CHAP. II Of Deprecations.
AFter Confession, Deprecations may be best thought upon, by which we being
conscious to our selves how manifold punishments our innumerable sins have
deserved, cry out unto God with the Psalmist, Psalm. 130.3
If thou, Lord, should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who may
abide it! And to fall in with our Leiturgy, O Lord, deal not with us after our
sins, neither reward us after our iniquities! And fully to this purpose is that
excellent Deprecation that follows, O God, merciful Father, that despisest not
the sighing of a contrite heart, etc. This is seconded by another no less
material; We humbly beseech thee, O Father, mercifully to look upon our
infirmities, and for the glory of thy Name sake turn from us all those evils
which we most righteously have deserved, etc. And here may be taken in those
interchangeable Votes of Priest and People, which are interposed, O Lord,
arise, help us and deliver us for thy Names sake! O God we have heard with our
ears, etc. and therefore now, Arise, O Lord, help us, and deliver us for thine
honor! that we may always with united hearts and voices in the highest
strain profess and say, Glory be to the Father, etc And what are all those
recountings of dangers (in particular Orisons) rising up from our sins as
vapors, that gather into a black cloud of vengeance; to shun which, we
unanimously cry in our Letany, Spare us Good Lord! and, Good Lord deliver us!
What are they but so many Deprecations for removal of just executions, which
would otherwise utterly confound us? It was not without just cause therefore
that Saint Paul so carefully exhorted Bishop Timothy (whom he had left in
Ephesus to settle Church-Dectrine and Discipline) that in Doctrine he should
labor to divert them from Novelties, Fables, 1 Ti. 1.3 4 and 6.20.
and endless Disputes concerning Genealogies, and such wrangling questions,
nothing tending to Edification. And for Discipline, he would have set in the
first place, in the ordring of public Worship, Deprecations, 1 Timothy 2.1.
Supplications, Intercessions, and giving of thanks for all men, but especially
for Kings, and those that are in Authority. Which lesson if it had been well
pressed by those that take on them to be somewhat gifted above their brethren,
and observed better by their zealous followers, we should have had little need
then of such Leitugical Deprecations.

[From 1. Herodian Tyranny.]

[2. Pharisaical malicious hypocrisy.]

[3. Saducean brutish incredulity.]

[4 Judas his highest Treason.]

[5. Simon Magus and Elymas his hellish oppositions.]

[6. Ananias and Saphira's dainty deludings with a smooth lie.]

[7. The Silver Smiths and Copper-Smiths boisterous and mechanical tumults to
have Church and State forged on their Anvils, as they would hammer it,] (to
repeat again and again) Good Lord deliver us!

Let your care therefore (my Daughters) be in all such cries and clamors, ( Lo
here is Christ, or there is Christ; Behold, you shall find him by such a River
re-baptizing, or meet with him in such a Conventicle exercising or distributing
his gifts) not to forsake the old way, which has warrant to be good from the
Ancient of days, but to hold fast by God, with the Psalmist, Psalm. 73.27
and possess your selves in patience (according to our Saviors direction) in
the heaviest calamities; Luke 21.19
and not forget that advice of the sad, Jer. 18.14, 15.
but serious Prophet; foreign waters are not to be preferred before our
better tried springs at home; nor untrodden paths that are not cast up, before
the ancient ways wherein our fathers have safely walked without stumbling. For
the performance of which Supplications will be found necessary, and therefore
fittest to be considered of in the third place.

CHAP. III. Of Supplications, or Petitions.
SUpplications are Prayers directed to God for supply of our wants, or
prospering our pious intentions and endeavors, whether spiritual or temporal.
Of which our Leiturgy is also a treasury, that contains all good things new
and old to be desired; as likewise a Magazine, wherein that armor of God is to
be had, whereby we may be able to withstand all principalities and powers,
Ephe. 6.12, 13
and rulers of the darkness of this world, and spiritual wickedness in high
places; if we continue with all Prayers and Supplications, and watch thereunto
with perseverance, as the Apostle exhorts us. For herein, after Confession of
sins, and Deprecation of punishment, how orderly are we led on, both in
Morning and Evening Prayer, to be humble Petitioners for Peace and Protection?
which yield the greatest happiness that in this world may be expected.

Now for the first, we have these Prayers, O God, which art the Author of Peace
and Lover of Concord, etc. And, O God from whom all holy desires, all good
counsels, and all just works do proceed, give unto thy servants that peace
which this world cannot give. etc.

For the second, those, O Lord our heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting
God, who have safely brought us to the beginning of this day, defend us in the
same by thy mighty power, etc. And, Lighten our darkness we beseech thee, O
Lord, and by thy great mercy defend us, etc. Those that hold these and the like
Supplications the less effectual, because common, and so fitted for the mouths
of babes and sucklings, of least understanding amongst the Vulgar, may as well
slight the Sun and Moon, imparting their beams equally to the Prince and
Peasant; and cast off the whole Sacred Text of Scripture, because it comes not
out weekly in a new Translation.

Those also, that further require variety, as more grateful to their appetites
(whom Manna from heaven would not long satisfy) if they will but take the
pains to peruse with deliberation and singleness of heart the ninety two
Collects, which are no other, but quick and pertinent petions, framed and
fitted to the time of the year, out of the Texts of Epistles and Gospels for
Sundays and Saints-daies, shall find the like vein of Devotion, not to run in
any H^lps or Handmaids, or Practices of Piety, that may fill the hungry with
good things, when the rich in their squeamish choiceness may be sent empty
away. Where, by the way, if we but cast an eye on the Letany, what are all
those necessary desires (which the religious thoughts of many ages have laid
together, with which, young and old, rich and poor, offer violence as it were
jointly with their outcries to the Throne of Grace, We beseech thee to hear
us, Good Lord!) but a sum of Petitions linked together, wherein all have a
share, which the best gifted men on the sudden will hardly think upon? O what
admirable variety of choice may be here found! As when we consult the
Scriptures, to begin with that Collect of the second Sunday in Advent,
Blessed God, which have caused all Scripture to be written for our learning,
etc.

When we undertake and begin any work of our vocation, to procure a blessing
unto it, with that so well known Supplication, Prevent us, O Lord in all our
doings with thy most gracious favor, and farther us with thy continual help,
etc.

For an entrance into our Prayers, how fit is that? Assist us mercifully, O
Lord, in these our supplications and prayers, etc. or that which follows,
Almighty Lord, and everlasting God, vouchsafe we beseech thee to direct,
sanctify and govern, etc.

And after the hearing of a Sermon, how becoming and pious is that Petition?
Grant we beseech thee, Almighty God, that the words which we have heard this
day with our outward ears, etc.

And for the close of all our Prayers, that which closes up the Service of the
Communion; Almighty God, which have promised to hear the Petitions of them that
ask in thy Sons name, etc.

They are unworthy to pray, or to be heard, Jer. 2.13
that forsake such fountains of known and living waters, to hew out to
themselves Cisterns, broken Cisternes, that hold troubled, or no water, or
(perchance) some mixtures of Marah, or Meribah; which will not guide us to the
Springs of Intercession, that next we must take in our way.

CHAP. IV. Of Intercessions.
AMong those kind of Prayers which the Apostle exhorts, 1. Tim. 2.1.
especially, Intercession succeeds Supplications, which are Petitions put up to
God for others for whom we are bound to pray, either by Nature, Law, or
Christian charity. Under this title therefore come all those prayers we have
for the Church in general, and then more distinctly for Superiors, Leaders,
Equals, Friends, Enemies; all that be desolate and oppressed, that they may be
relieved; all that be in good courses, that they may be preserved and
encouraged.

To such Intercessions the Psalmist exhorts all well-affected people,
especially when they are assembled together, Psalm. 122.6, 7, 8, 9
O pray (says he) for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love
thee. Peace be within thy walls, and plenteousnesse within thy Palaces. For my
brethren and companions sake I will wish thee prosperity; yea, because of the
House of the Lord our God, I will seek to do thee good. So Samuel prayed for
Saul, until God told him in plain terms, that he had rejected him. And so
long in charity we are to pray for those that are most untoward, until God has
evidenced by cutting them off, that their case is desperate, which we must not
be too bold to prejudg, seeing she that had seven Devils in her did become the
most zealous Attendant of our Savior, and he that was a most violent
Persecutor, 1 Cor. 15.10
the most laborious amongst all the Apostles. Small hopes there was of
imprisoned Saint Peter's preservation, the sword having so fatally cut off Saint
James; and Herod being so fully bent to please the bloodthirsty Jews. Acts
12.5.
Peter was therefore kept in prison (says the Text) but prayer (that is,
Intercession) was made, without ceasing of the Church unto God for him. And was
not the event as miraculous? Peter is delivered by an Angel, and the
expectation of the Jews. deluded. Few would imagine that Saint Paul (who had
the favor to be rapt up into the third heaven, 2 Cor. 12.4
and hear unspeakable words which were not lawful for a man to utter) should
have need of the Intercession of any of those Converts of his, which he had so
lately catechized in Christianity; yet we see what he writes to the
Thessalonians, 1 The. 5.25
Brethren, pray for us. And to the Hebrews, Heb. 13.11
Pray for us; for we trust we have a good conscience in all things, willing to
live honestly. Nay Pharaoh and Simon Magus were not so hard hearted, though in
the gall of bitterness, but they allowed and desired the intercession of Gods
servants. Entreat the Lord (says Pharaoh) that there be no more mighty
thundrings and hail. Exodus 9.28.
Acts 8.24
And pray ye unto the Lord for me (says Magus,) that none of these things
which ye have spoken come upon me. Whereupon Saint James laid it down for a
Canon to be observed of all the faithful, James 5.16
Confess your sins one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be
healed. Which two Ingredients make an excellent Soulsalve for all spiritual
wounds and bruises. And therefore we have so diverse and effectual forms of
Intercession in our Church-Book, that I may well use the words to you that Boaz
sometime did unto Ruth, Ruth 2.8.
Hear ye not, my Daughters? Go not to glean in another field, neither go from
hence; for here you shall find that will satisfy. The pattern of Intercession
we have from our Savior, for his Apostles, Successors, and Converts, John 17.
(as we had his general prayer before for all things necessary, Matthew. 6.)
conformable to which we have framed that excellent Intercession in our
Leiturgy, under the Title of Let us pray for the whole estate of Christ's Church
militant here on earth, in these words, Almighty and everlasting God, which by
thy holy Apostle have taught us to make prayers and supplications, and to give
thanks for all men, etc. This Prayer is to be had by heart, and always used
upon any occasion. And in particular, find we not further Intercessions for the
King, Queen, and Royal Progeny, Bishops and all the Clergy, most orderly
following one another? To the same purpose are those interchangeable
Intercessions between Priest and People, O Lord, show thy mercy upon us; and
grant us thy salvation. O Lord save the King, etc. Which your little ones may
be brought to repeat in answering one another. The like passages are interposed
in Matrimony for the parties married; O Lord save thy servant and thine
handmaid, that put their trust in thee, etc. In the Visitation of the sick, O
Lord save thy servant which puts his trust in thee, etc. And at your
Womens-meetings, commonly called Church-going, O Lord save this woman, thy
servant, which puts her trust in thee, etc.

Persuade your selves (my Daughters) these things are not to be little set by.
This simplicity in coming to God with good hearts and humble minds, in
obedience to our Mother the Church, which has thus directed us, will be more
acceptable to him, and more prevalent then Balaks seven Altars, and Balaams
thence fetching Prophecies. Nay, then the Sacrifice of a Bullock (to use the
words of the Psalmist) that has horns and hoofes. Psalm. 69.32
For God is not taken with quaint inventions, or excellency of speech, 1 Cor.
2.1.
(as the Apostle tells us) The wisdom of this world to him is but foolishness;
chap. 3.19.
chap. 4.20.
and his Kingdom consists not in words, but power. If our hearts therefore
condemn us not, God is greater then our heart, and knows all things. And
then (says the blessed Apostle) we have confidence toward God; 1 John 3.20
21, 22
and whatsoever we ask, we receive of Him, if we keep his Commandments, and
do those things which are pleasing in his sight. And so we may close with the
man after Gods own heart, Psalm. 69.33.
The humble shall consider this, and be glad. Seek ye the Lord (in this way)
and your foul shall live.

CHAP. V. Of Thanksgiving.
WEll may Thanksgiving follow Intercession; which is the only high-rent that
God expects for all his infinite blessings bestowed upon us. Amongst the
Sacrifices of the Old Testament, this of Thanksgiving has a special
prescription, Lev 7.12.
to be tempered with plenty of oil of gladness, that makes the face to shine.
Ps. 24.25
In this behalf the Psalmist is so copious that it is hard to pitch upon any
passage, wherein he seems more expressive then other. In that ninety second
Psalm which carries the Title, for the Sabbath day no entrance is found but by
the door of Thanksgiving, It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and
to sing praises unto thy Name, O thou most high. To tell of thy loving
kindness early in the morning, and of thy truth in the night season. Upon an
Instrument of ten strings, and upon the Lute, upon a loud Instrument, and upon
the Harp. Church-musick then in those days was not held Superstitious, but
taken in for an help to set forth Praise and Thanksgiving. For performance of
which duty, so many ties are upon us, that the Prophet cries out, as destitute
of expressions, Psa. 116.11
What reward shall I give unto the Lord for all the benefits he has done unto
me? and can resolve no otherwise for himself, but, Psalm. 145.1
Every day will I give thanks to thee, and praise thy name for ever and ever.
And for stirring up of others to the same duty, O praise the Lord (says he)
for it is a good thing to sing praises unto our God; yea, Psalm. 147.1
a joyful and pleasant thing it is to be thankful.

But what need we go further, where we have the practice of our Savior to lead
us? I thank thee, O Father, Mat. 11.25.
Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them to babes: Even so Father, for so it seemed good
in thy sight.

According with this, we have that large form of Thankgiving, besides many
others (to stir up our selves and others) of the Kingly Prophet, Psalm. 136.
O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious, and his mercy endures for
ever. O give thanks unto the God of all gods, for his mercy endures for ever:
O thank the Lord of all Lords, for his mercy endures for ever; and so going on
in numbering up Gods blessings, for which thanks were due, with a repetition
from whence they proceeded, from Gods mercy, not our deserts, for his mercy
endures for ever. He ends as he began, as though in his acknowledgment he had
never said enough, O give thanks unto the Lord of heaven, for his mercy
endures for ever. O give thanks unto the Lord of Lords, for his mercy endures
for ever.

Upon this ground proceed the four and twenty Elders, representing the whole
Church of the Faithful, falling upon their faces and worshipping. We give thee
thanks, Rev. 12.17.
O Lord God Almighty, which art, and which wast, and which art to come, because
thou have taken unto thee thy great power, and have reigned.

From these and the like patterns our Leiturgies forms are derived.

A Thanksgiving for rain in time of drought, [O God our heavenly Father, who
by thy gracious providence do cause the former and the latter rain to descend
upon the earth, etc.]

For fair weather, [O Lord God, who have justly humbled us by the late plague
of immoderate rain and waters, etc.]

For Plenty, [O most merciful Father, which of thy gracious goodness have heard
the devout prayers of the Church, etc.]

For Peace and Victory, [Almighty God, who art a strong Tower of Defense unto
thy servants against the face of their enemies, etc.]

For Deliverance from the Plague, [O Lord God which have wounded us for our
sins, etc.]

After receiving of the Lords Supper, [Almighty and everlasting God, we most
heartily thank thee, for that thou do vouchsafe to feed us which have duly
received these holy Mysteries, etc.]

And last of all, under the Title of Prayers most commonly set in the end of
the Church-Book, what a complete form of Thanksgiving have we, that thus
begins? [Honour and Praise be given to thee, O Lord God Almighty, most dear
Father of heaven, for all thy mercies and loving kindness showed unto us, etc.]
Which ends with this most pious and necessary petition, to be used at all
times, and on all occasions, Let thy mighty hand, and outstretched arm, O
Lord, be still our defense, etc.]

For your Sex also (my Daughters) is not to be omitted the Thanksgiving of
women after Childbirth, commonly called the Churching of Women, (though latter
times have held it superfluous, if not superstitious): wherein, [Forasmuch as
it has pleased Almighty God of his goodness to give you safe deliverance, and
preserved you in the great danger of Childbirth.] You are called upon to be
thankful heartily, and to pray with the words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 121.
I have lifted up mine eyes unto the hills from whence comes my salvation; my
help comes from the Lord which has made heaven and earth. And that which
follows, ( The Sun shall not burn thee by day, nor the Moon by night, etc.) is
not impertinent (as some will have it) in as much as it ascribes all
preservation to God at all times, and in all places, in our greatest
extremities. When more punctual devout and judicious Thanksgiving upon surer
grounds and authority shall be tendered to you (my Daughters) you may satisfy
your consciences in making use of them. In the mean time you and yours may
feed on the milk which your Mother the Church so plentifully affords you; and
not cast about for change of Nurses who will scarce prove so natural.

CHAP. VI. Of Praises.
PRaise is a due acknowledgment of Gods infinite excellency, expressed in his
works of Power, Mercy and Justice. It has such affinity with Thanksgiving,
that most commonly they go together, and usually are taken one for the other.
Psa. 145.11
As in that Psalm. All thy works praise thee, O Lord, and thy Saints give
thanks unto thee. I will magnify thee, Ver. 1, 2.
O Lord my King; and will praise thy Name for ever and ever. Every day will I
give thanks to thee, and praise thy Name for ever and ever.

Notwithstanding, howsoever Magnifying, Praising, Blessing, and giving of
Thanks to God are used to the same purpose; yet praise may belong to Excellency
which we are not bound to thank; whereas Thanks includes Praise for affording
us a Blessing, by which we are obliged to magnify the Donor.

In the Old Testament, those that will seek for forms in this behalf, shall
find all the Psalms of David in the Original to come under the title of The
Book of Praises. Not that all Psalms therein may be so termed, but because the
most part are so, that gives the nomination to the whole.

And Samplers for Praises to you (my Daughters) may be as pertinent, that of
Miriam registered to all posterity for imitation in these words, Exo. 15.20.
And Miriam the Prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a Timbrel in her hands,
and all the women went out after her with Timbrels and with Dances (none being
so scrupulous in those days as to take exceptions at them) And Miriam said,
Sing ye unto the Lord, for he has criumphed gloriously, the horse and his
rider has he thrown into the sea. O what an excellent Emulation it is
between men and women, when they contend who may praise God most for his
Blessings bestowed upon them! In the same strain of praises is the consort of
Deborah and Barak, for the overthrow of General Siserah: Judges 5.
Praise ye the Lord for the avenging of Israel, when the people willingly
offered themselves, etc. In comparison of which piece, the highest touch of
Heathen Poetry sounds but flat and livelesse.

Neither must the goodwives of Bethlehems praising of God for the birth of
Obed, King David's grandfather, be thought not worthy to be imitated upon the
like occasion, Rut. 4.14, 15
And the women said unto Naomi, Blessed be the Lord which has not left thee
this day without a kinsman, that his name may be famous in Israel. And he
shall be thee a restorer of thy life, and a nourisher of thine old age; for thy
Daughter in Law, which loves thee, which is better to thee then ten sons,
has born him.

Thankful Hannahs Hymn is tuned to the same key, for the birth of her son
Samuel, And Hannah prayed and said, 1 Samuel 2.1.
My heart rejoiceth in the Lord, my horn is exalted in the Lord, my mouth is
enlarged over mine enemies, because I rejoice in thy salvation.

But eminent above all the rest is that Magnificat, or Song of Praise and
Thanksgiving of the most blessed Mother-maid, Luke 1.46
retained in our Leiturgy, to be always repeated. Wherein Humility in her
greatest advancement, referring all to Gods glory; and reflecting still upon
the Churches good is most lively set forth, He has looked upon me a poor
wretch regarding the low, and inconsiderable estate of his Hand-maiden, passing
by the flourishing Pomp of the rich and mighty: He has remembered his mercy for
the redemption of Israel, according to the promise made to our forefathers; and
therefore, My soul does praise and magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices
(not for any worth found in my self, but) in God only my Savior. O that the
proud ones of these times would but think upon this! This one pattern might be
sufficient to take down their haughty looks, and new fangled attires, by
minding them that the blessedst amongst all women was otherwise affected.

In the like strain is that Benedictus of holy Zachary, Luke 1.68.
Blessed, or, praised be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and
redeemed his people, etc. And that, Psalm. 100.
O be joyful in the Lord all ye Lands, serve the Lord with gladness, and come
before his presence with a Song. O go your way into his gates with
Thanksgiving, and into his courts with praise; be thankful unto him, and speak
good of his Name. And it is worth the noting, that as the Book of the hundred
and fifty Psalms begins with, Blessed is the man (or, many blessings are upon
that man) that has not walked in the counsel of the ungodly, but kissed the
Son and ordered his walks to God, to which the first fifty Psalms especially
lead him: Neither stood in the way of sinners, which the second fifty beats him
from as most dangerous: So the third fifty, plucks him and his from the Seat of
the scornful, lift him up with Psalms of Degrees, and Hallelujahs to thank and
praise the Maker and Preserver of all things, sealing all up with this
conclusion, Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord.

Wherefore let not the Te Deum, [We praise thee, O God, we acknowledge thee to
be the Lord,] or the Benedicite, the following Canticle, [O all ye works of the
Lord, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever,] be thought
superfluous in our Leiturgy, for not having that Canonical Authority, which the
former Scriptures have; lest our Sermons and unpremeditated praises and prayers
should be in that respect excepted against, and so Preaching be discredited, as
bordering too near sometimes upon Apocrypha. Let it be sufficient then, that
such holy prayers have ground in Scripture, from which, as the Articles of our
Creed, they are deduced and framed to the capacity and memories of all that
cannot be more edifyingly instructed. So [Glory be to the Father, and to the
Son, and to the Holy Ghost,] so often repeated to uphold the Doctrine of the
sacred Trinitg against the ancient and modern Heretics: and that Angelical
Rapture used after receiving of the Lords Supper, [Glory be to God on high, and
in earth peace, good will toward men. We praise thee, we bless thee, we
worship thee, we glorify thee, we give thanks to thee for thy great glory, O
Lord, etc.] are such collections, whereby young men and maidens, old men and
children may praise the Name of the Lord, Psa. 148.12
as the Psalmist exhorts them to do. With whom we may safely conclude, in that
which our Leiturgy takes up for an entrance, Psalm 95.
O come, let us sing unto the Lord, etc. with the Postscript of that good wish,
Psalm. 40.19.
Let all those that seek thee be joyful and glad in thee; and let such as love
thy salvation say always, The Lord be praised.

CHAP. VII Of Comminations, or Cursings.
COmmination in our Leiturgy is a part of Church Discipline, whereby Gods
judgments are denounced against notorious offenders, to terrify them from
their desperate courses, and to put a stop to others, that they follow not them
in their damned ways, which by their own mouths they have pronounced
accursed.

This is grounded on the twenty seventh of Deuteronomy, with little alteration
of words or matter, for the applying it to our time. And to the same end serve
the Woes denounced by our Savior ( Matthew. 23) against the hypocritical Scribes
and Pharisees; which will never be out of date, as long as the same sins are
fomented, and thought good policy, and not heartily repented of amongst
Professors of Christianity.

With this Commination the Church-Excommunication has a near affinity, whereby
obstinate notorious offenders are excluded from the benefit of the Saints
communion, and delivered unto Satan (as the incestuous Corinthian was by Saint
Paul) to the destruction of the flesh, 1 Cor. 5.5.
that the Spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

These warrantable practices of Primitive Discipline considered as they ought,
should breed a restless horror in the consciences of those that lie under such
censures. Gal. 6.
For, Be not deceived, God is not mocked; who will not have his Church
neglected; whose privileges of binding and loosing here on earth are enrolled
in heaven. Mat. 18.18
And if we account it a slight matter, to be reckoned of Gods people, as an
Heathen or Publican; at the last admittance of the faithful and obedient into
the New Jerusalem, a better portion cannot be expected for us, Rev. 21.8. and
22.15
then to be shut out with Dogs, and Socerers, and Whore-mongers, and Murderers,
and Idolaters, and Forgers and approvers of lies, into that utter darkness,
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, and the worm dies not, and the
fire goes not out.

But that which may be more useful for you (my Daughters) and more consonant to
prayer, which we have in hand, is Imprecation or Cursing; how far that is to
be detested, and yet in some cases to be allowed as a commendable Prayer.

Such Imprecations then may either be upon unreasonable creatures, or
reasonable.

So the Serpent is cursed above all cattle, Genesis 3.14
for being an Instrument of the Devil to seduce Man.

The ground is cursed for man's sake, that had yielded to the devil so easily to
transgress his Makers command.

Likewise in the New Testament. Mat. 21.9.
did the Figtree that yielded only leaves in stead of fruit, escape the curse
of our blessed Savior?

These things are not for our practice, but observation, to catechize us, that
as nothing prospers without Gods blessings; so when he curses, the least
good or scruple of comfort cannot be expected.

It is a fashion of diverse, when their horse stumbleth, to wish, The Devil take
him; or when any thing thwarts their will, to bid a vengeance upon it, or the
like.

Such Imprecations are intolerable abuses in Christianity, and give no further
content then that which the Psalmist speaks of, Psa. 109.16
His delight was in cursing, and it shall happen unto him; he loved not
blessing, therefore it shall be far from him.

Imprecations against reasonable creatures may be either against such as are
blasphemers and profaneners of Gods Name and Worship, Destroyers or persecuters
of his Church and Saints, Oppressors of their Countries wholesome Laws and
Liberties, or against other persons or Societies, that by private injuries,
have wronged us or ours.

That Blasphemers, and Profaneners of Gods Name and Worship, Destroyers and
Persecuters of his Church and Saints, oppressors of their Countries Laws and
Liberties, or making any approaches that way, lie under the curse of God and
all good people, no man may doubt, that finds a mongrel boy stoned to death
for blasphemy, Levit. 24.14. Achan and all his family executed for Sacriledg,
Josh. 7.22. Meroz cursed bitterly for not coming to help Gods people against
the mighty, Judge. 5.

So that those Psalms of David, the eighty third, and the one hundred and
ninth, with like passages in others, may be thought not so much Prophecies what
will befall the wicked, as Imprecations to implore Gods justice to take
vengeance on them, that continue still in their obstinate courses. Smite
through the loins of Church-Opposers, is a passage of Moses blessing upon
Levies enemies, Deuteronomy. 33.11. Let him be Anathema, Maran-atha (says Saint Paul)
whosoever loves not the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 16.22. And from the same
incensed zeal proceeded that against the Factors for a new Gospel amongst the
giddy Galatians, Galat. 1.8. Though we, or an Angel from heaven preach any
other Gospel unto you, then that which we have preached, let him be accursed.
And, As we said before, so say I now again, If any man preach any other Gospel
unto you, then that ye have received, let him be accursed. Here is Curse upon
Curse, but upon just cause, and a supposal, that damnable Seducers should make
head to affront Gods truth. Where the Imprecation or Curse (as you see) is in a
public Cause, and levelled against the sins, rather then the persons of the
offenders. For those, if it so please God by prayer and repentance may be
recocovered; as Peter after denying his Master, when he had cursed and sworn
that he knew not the man. Matthew. 26.74.

All this will stand well with our Saviors mildest Doctrine and Practice; I
say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them
that hate you; and pray for them that despitefully use and persecute you,
Matthew. 5.44. For personal wrongs may and must be forgiven where a curse is ever
due to the opposers of all true peace and piety. Whence we have that highest
pitch of charity in his extremest Agony on the Cross toward his scorning and
brutish Executioners, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do,
Luke 23.34. Thus when he was reviled, he reviled not again, when he suffered,
he threatened not, 1 Pet. 2.23.

No such words ever proceeded from his sacred lips, I may forgive, but I will
never forget; I shall find a time to cry quits with you; or, The plague of God
fall upon him that so divellishly wrongs me, or the like: No, he commits
himself only to him that judges righteously; who will plead the cause of the
innocent, Psalm. 35.1.
with them that strive with him, and fight against them that fight against him;
and say unto his soul, I am thy salvation. For vengeance is mine, Romans 12.19.
and I will repay, says the Lord. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him;
if he thirst, give him drink; for in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire on
his head.

And according to this calm and Christian temper, I make no doubt, but Gods
Spirit directed the learned, pious and judicious Compilers of our
Church-Leiturgy to insert that charitable prayer, to be tendered to God on
Good Friday (as we call it) for all sorts of people for whom our Savior
suffered, that by believing in him, they might apprehend the only means of
their salvation. [Merciful God, who have made all men, and hate nothing that
thou have made, nor would the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be
converted and live, have mercy upon all Jews, Turks, Infidels, and Heretics,
etc.]

To such Charity and Blessing we all are called (as the blessed Apostle
instructs us) that we should inherit a blessing. 1 Pet. 3.9


The exemplary King David, in settling of his family (as it was touched before)
would not endure that any (1.) Psalm. 101.
Unfaithful, (2.) Froward; (3) Scandalous, (4) Slanderous, (5) Proud, (6)
Cheating, (7) Lying person should have any residence in it.

And if you (my Daughters) do ever expect Gods Blessings upon you or yours,
(1.) Irreverent mention of Gods holy name, (2) Lying, (3) Swearing, (4)
Cursings, (5) Calumnies, (6) Profane jestings, especially on Gods Word or
Ministers, (7) Rotten communication, that corrupts good manners, must not once
be countenanced or named amongst you, but knocked (as it were) in the head with
your most effectual reproofs and correction. Which if you shall religiously do
in zeal to Gods glory, and not out of a passionate disposition, to vent your
own mis-beseeming harshnesse, then shall you be delivered from the hand of
strange children, Psa. 144.11
whose mouth talks of vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of
iniquity; then shall your sons grow up as the young plants, and your
Daughters be as the polished corners of the Temple; your garners shall be full
of all manner of store, your sheep shall increase, your Oxen be strong to
labor, without decay, leading into captivity or complaining in your streets.

And thus have you (my dear Daughters) the best Legacy which my ruined worldly
estate, amongst so many distractions could lay together for you. Wherein you
may take notice, that of purpose I have tied my self to the Scriptures and
Church-Book, not adding any Quotation of any other Authors (who yet
notwithstanding are plentiful and profitable in this kind) or Prayer of mine
own making; to let you to understand, that in those two books you shall have
sufficient, if you set your hearts to make true use of them, without coasting
about for any newer refined Directories.

I end with that Collect appointed for the fourth Sunday after Epiphany, which
especially sorts with the times wherein we live, and was commended unto me by
your Grand father John Prideaux, my dear Father, when I was a boy, in the time
of a Plague. The words are these:

O God, That know us to be set in the midst of so many and great dangers,
that for Man's frailenesse we cannot always stand uprightly, grant to us the
health of Body and Soul, that all those things which we suffer for sin, by
thy help we may well pass and overcome, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

To this you may add (if you please) the Collect for the second Sunday in Lent.

Almighty God which do see that we have no power of our selves to help our
selves, keep thou us both outwardly in our Bodies, and inwardly in our Souls,
that we may be defended from all adversities which may happen to the Body,
and from all evil thoughts which may assault and hurt the Soul, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Who make You and Yours Partakers abundantly of all Temporal,
and Spiritual Heavenly Blessings, External, Internal, Eternal. To Whom with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, Three Persons, and One God, be all Honor, Might,
and Majesty, in Prayer, Praises, and Thanksgiving ascribed both now and
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

