A famous City turned INTO STONE.

OR, A Fearful example for England To take warning by: In which is contained
all the full and whole Description of a famous City in Barbary, that was for
their Rebellion against God (in the twinkling of an eye) both Men. Women, and
Children, with all the Cattle, Houses, and materials therein turned into Stone.
The manner how shall in this little Book be faithfully and truly Related
according to very good Authors, which have since this great and miraculous
wonder happened, been at the place where it was done, and have seen (with much
Teror) those things which shall be presantly spoken of.

Written by Laurence Price.

London, Printed for Tho. Vere at the Angel without Newgate. 1657.

A famous City turned INTO STONE.

Entered according to Order.

Angrogra
depiction of a city overlooked by Calvary and threatened by a heavenly sword
and thunderbolt two men and a woman lament

A famous City turned INTO STONE.
THat God is angry with the World for Sin, may appear by this following
wonder; the like whereof was never known since the Worlds first Creation: in
the fruitful and flourishing Kingdom of Tripilo in Barbary, foam fourscore
miles up in the Land, there was not long since a famous City called Angrogra,
at which City in former times before the Wars grew so hot between England and
Spain, our English Merchants had great commerce, and made Traffic with the
inhabiters thereof. This City was senced about with many lofty bull-works, and
walls, with eight great Gates made of Cedar, and Cyprus wood; the City it self
was of seven miles compass round by just account and measure: within the which
were six and fifty fair and goodly Parish Churches, most richly adorned with
Gold and Silver, having their locks and keys for the most part of them made of
pure Gold, the reason why? was because that Gold in that parts is more
plentiful then Iron or Steel, and there is a mighty great Golden Mine some
seven or eight miles from the City in which many laboring Men are working and
digging for the ore continually, and according as Men dig for the ore, and
mettell of Iron, Coals, Tinn, or Lead here in England, so fast do they dig and
get Gold and Silver in some parts of Barbary, and the Barbary Gold is accounted
to be the finest and purest Gold in all the World: and now to go forward in my
discourse concerning the City, I will endeavor my self to be as speedy as I
may. The fornamed City had many stately Buildings and Territors therein, and
abundance of pleasant streets facing every way, with several Market places
belonging there unto, in the midst thereof there was a stately Burs or
Exchange, where all manner of rich Merchants and others daily frequented about
their Worldly affairs, there were likewise three gallant Theators, or
Play Houses, which were aloud every day in the week so often as they thought
good to use their vain glorious excercises. Moreover there were great plenty
of wealthy Shops, and rich Merchants Houses, in all the chiefest streets of the
City? and to be brief there was never a City of that bigness in all Africa
that had more abundance of People in it then was in the City of Angrogra, nor
never were People given to more pleasure, then were the People of that City at
that very same time when their destruction came upon them: some were buying and
selling in the Markets for profu^t, some were Feasting and merry making amongst
their Friends and acquaintance: some were vauting and dancing in dancing
Schools, some were acting their parts in the Play Houses, whilst others were
drinking and swaggering in Alehouses. But in as short space as Lot's Wife was
turned into a Pillar of Salt Genesis 23. v. 14. was this stately City turned also
into stone, and so it is like to continue to the end of the World; and as for
the People that were therein they were all transformed into stone every Man,
every Woman, and every Child, the manner how is as follows.

HEre is a brief and true relation of the admirable alteration of the famous
City of Angrogra according to the Letters that were sent into England this
present year 1656. which Letters were sent by them that were eye witnesses, as
namely the potent Dake of Florence; the Bassa or Prince of the Country, and
two of our English Merchants that by reason of Tempestious weather at Sea, was
driven to an Anchor nere unto the shore of Barbary, who hearing of this strange
miraculous wonder, some of our English Seamen having admittance, traveled up
into the heart of the Land, and did behold this sad and unexpected admiration,
and lastly one that is very well known to be a faithful Friend to his Native
Country, Sir Kellum Digby by name. a worthy English Knight, who having
received intelligence from the Prince of Barbary, and the Duke of Florence,
sent it into England to have it put in Print, that we may take warning by their
destruction: the Men that were at that time in the City walking up and down
the streets about their Business, were imediately turned into stone, so were
the rich Aldermen and Merchants with chains of Gold about their necks, and all
the Gorgerus, Gowns, and Aparrell that they did wear, were likewise turned
into stone; they also that were in their Houses were served in the self same
kind: a great company of the chiefest young Men and Maids were assimbled
together in a large and spacious Hall, to solemnize a wedding, with Music and
dancing, and much merriment, were in the twinkling of an Eye both Bridegroom
and Bride, Neighbors and Strangers, every, living body and dead Creatures all
turned into stone: yet are every Man and every Woman standing still in the same
posture and shape as they were in when they were alive; them that were dancing
and caporing after the Music, and they that stood still were all stricken dead
and turned into stone, standing still in the place where they were before: they
that were eating and drinking, sitting at their Tables or in other places, both
them and their Victuals, Flesh and Fish, Bread and Wine, and the Vessels that
held it was Metamorphosed, and turned into stone; Women that had their little
Infants sucking at their tender Breasts were in the very same Form and
portraiture, whether standing or sitting, all turned into stone. A company of
Men to the number of sixteen, that were digging in a plot of Ground, intending
to make a Vineyard thereof, were like the rest all turned into stone, standing
stooping toward the Ground with their Shovels in their hands: All the People
that were at the Theators and several Play Houses, as well the Actors as the
Spectators were every Creature turned into stone: and to be brief the
Multitude of People rich and poor, old and young all speed a like, there was
not so much as one Man that escaped alive out of the City, to tell what was
become of the rest: and thus was all humane and unhumane Creatures that lived
in the City struck dead at an instant, and turned into stone; the covetous Man
had no time to repent of his Sins, nor had the Drunkard the space to ask God
forgiveness: furthermore all the Horses, Oxen, Sheep, and Cattle, and
feathered fowls, as Cocks, Hens, Geese, and Turkeys, Trees, wood, Timber, Gold,
Silver, Brass, and all other sorts of Minerals, and Metals, became to be
stone, which may stand for a monument, and be known for a wonder from one
Generation to another, so long as the Sun and Moon gives light, and the Earth
and the firmament does endure? and I am verily persuaded, and so are many
thousands more beside, that these Signs, and these Tokens, and these wonders,
the pleasure of the Lord was to send upon them that have little or no relation
to the holy Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, because we that are accounted for
Christians may consider with our selves, and learn to bear a better conscience
both to God and Man; and this is my desire that all sorts of People that would
willingly be called by the name of Christians, may show themselves to walk
like Christians, and with speed every on to amend their sinful lives, for fear
that the Lord in his anger should lay the like, or as bad a punishment upon our
Sinful Nation; which God in his Mercy grant may never come to pass.

HEre follows directions drawn both from the Scriptures, and from humane
reason, whereby to advise all Sinners in time to fly unto the Lord for Mercy,
and so to prevent Gods heavy Judgments before it come upon us. Adam when he had
lived but a little while in the Garden of Eden (which is called Paradise) for
his disobedience and breaking of Gods Commandment was driven out, and quite
excluded for his rebellion. Genesis 3.14. The great and general deluge, and
drowning of the World, which is called Noah's flood was for provoking God to
anger, in so much that God repented himself that ever he made Man. Genesis 6. v.
6. and when the Lord rained down Fire and Btimstone upon Sodom and Gomorah, it
was done for the wickedness of the People. Genesis 19.24. The curse of the Lord
sell upon Egypt whereby their Land became unfruitful, the Caterpillars
devoured their Herbs, their rivers of water were turned into Blood, and Frogs,
Lice, and Grashopers brought the People to ruin Exodus 8.2. all which was
brought to pass for their ungratefulness toward God. The Chileren of Israel
for murmuring against God, and his Prophet Moses, were bitten and stung to
death with fiery Serpents. Numb. 25.6. And the destruction of Jerusalem was
because they harkened not to the voice of the Lord, but Stoned and Murdered the
Prophets when they were sent unto them. Mat. 23.37. Corath, Dathan, and Abiram:
ware swallowed up alive into the Earth, for their blaspemous Sinus; and the
prodigal Son was feign to feed upon the empty husks, long of his abominable
Pride, and voluptuous living. Luke. 1516. Judas Jscariot had never have come to
have hanged himself, if it had not been for his false dissimulation and
treachery. Nor had the glutton Dives been tormented in the flames of Hell, if it
had not been for his covetovsnesse, and despising of the Poor. Luke. 16.20. A
many more such sad and strange examples, may be proved by the Scriptures, which
is the word of the living God, to show to the World wherefore God made us, and
what in duty we are bound to do: and now let us once more think upon the
famous City which was turned into stone; their punishment was more then ours;
our Sins are greater then theirs: for had they had so many good and Godly
Ministers in that City, and Country, that are both able and willing to preach
and to teach them the word of the living God, as praised be the name of the
Lord, we have here in England, no doubt but they would have repented them of
their sins before that heavy vengeanc of the Lord lighted upon them. And now
let every Man and Woman in England and else where turn from their wicked ways
and amend their sinful lives, and as the Loord has been more merciful to our
sinful Nation then unto others, let us endeavor our selves to be more
thankful unto his Holy name, for the great and manifold Blessings which our
good God have bestowed upon us; and let us henceforth lay a part all pride of
heart, and covetousness of mind, all hypocrisy, dissimulation, all vain
glorious and blasphemous opinions, all hatred, malice, spite, and envy, all
cursing and swearing, sedition, and mischief making, all conspiracy and
treachery one toward another; and to love and obey the commandments of the
Lord above all Earthly pleasure, and to keep a good conscience, and do unto
all Men as we would have them to do unto us: and withal to pray unto the Lord
to take away from us our stony hearts? and give us hearts of flesh, and then if
our fine were as red as Scarlet the Lord will make them as white as Snow, and
though they were like Purple they shall he made as white as Wool. Esaias. 1. v.
18. And to conclude in a word we were better all to repent with Ninivy, then to
be burnt with Sodom, and take warning and learn by the fall of others, to lead
our lives in the time to come in a better manner then here to fore we have
done: which that we may, let us every one with diligence call upon God early
and late, at our up rising, and lying down, at our going forth and our coming
in, that he will be our defender and keeper all the days of our lives, and that
for the sake of Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

FINIS.

