Englands Golden LEGACY: OR, A brief description of the manifold mercies and
blessings which the Lord has bestowed upon our sinful Nation. Set forth to the
end that all people that reads or hears it, may repent them of their sins, and
be thankful to the Lord for his benefits. Here is also a brief description of
Jerusalems sorrows and troubles, which is worthy to be kept in memory.

Written by Laurence Price. 1656.

Jerusalem


London, Printed for The. J^ next door to the Eagle and Child in
Giltspur-street.



The Epistle to all Christians.
BEloved friends the matter contained in this Book is to give warning to the
world, that every man may take heed of that fearful sin of Ingratitude, and to
that purpose I have here for a president laid open the bitter calamities and
extremities of that glorious and unparaleld City of Jerusalem, which was once
known to be the mirror of the whole world: but at last brought to utter ruin
and desolation, by their unthankfulness and disobedience to their Lord and
Savior. So hoping that you will consider, and lay it to heart, to foresee the
dangers to come, I remain your friend and Servant so long as you serve God.

Laurence Price.

ENGLANDS Golden Legacy.
CHAP. I. How Christ foretold the miseries that would come upon Jerusalem, is
plainly here set down as an example for us to take warning by.
OUr blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, when he approached near unto the
fair and goodly City of Jerusalem, he most bitterly wept and lamented over it;
and knowing of the manifold miseries which would after his death fall upon the
City, and the Inhabitants thereof; and therewithal being in a great Passion,
with a loud voice he cried out in this manner, saying, If thou had known,
even thou at lest those things which belong unto thy peace, even in this thy
day but now are they hid from thine eyes: For the days shall come upon thee
that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and, compass thee round, and
keep thee in on every side, and make thee even with the ground, and thy
children which are in thee, and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon
another, because thou know not the time of the visitation, Luke 19.42, 43.
and 44. those words so spoken by our Savior was heard by many of the Jews, yet
few believed, and none regarded his sayings; but while he wept for them they
laughed at him and his disciples, and although he had before shown many wonders,
and done many miracles in all the Countries round about as was very well known
to them that were then in place: He made the deaf to hear: the dumb to speak:
the lame to go: the blind to see: cleansed the Lepers, and raised up the dead
from the grave, Ioh. 11.44. Yet would not all these miracles, bring the
stiff-necked Jews into a right belief; but instead of giving God the praise,
they sought the death of him that came into the world to cure their bodies, and
to save their souls from everlasting damnation.

CHAP. II. Of the cruelty of the Jews, and how bloodily they dealt with our
Savior Christ, was as follows.
AND it came to pass afterward he himself went throughout every City and
Village preaching and showing the glad tidings of salvation, and of the Kingdom
of God, and his twelve disciples were with him, Luke 8.1. Casting out of
devils, and healing all diseases: yet was the hatred of the Jews so much they
could never let him rest at quiet: for why the Scribes and Pharisees of the
people conspired his death; and the High Priests consulted to deprive him of
his life, and to that end and purpose came false witnesses to accuse him of
that which he never did, as you may read Matthew. 26. And when Judas had betrayed
him into their hands, they dealt with him so wickedly that the like was never
known before: No Pen can write, no tongue can exrresse, nor no heart of man can
think what extreme sorrows, and woeful bickerments he went through, They took
him and bound him, they scourged him and whipped him, they buffeted and sm^te
him, they spit in his face, they crowned him with a wreath of pricking thorns,
and they made him in disgrace to carry his own Cross to the place of Execution,
where they most bloodily nailed him through both his hands, and feet, between
two sinful Malefactors; and last of all they gave him vinegar and gall to
drink, Mark 27.34. But for all those bitter torments and sufferings of our
Savior Jesus Christ, he was never heard to give them so much as one angry
word; but with mild and gentle words he prayed for his enemies, saying, Father
forgive them, for they know not what they do, Joh. 18.32. So, crying with a
loud voice, Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit, he gave up the Ghost:
and when they had so murdered the Lord of Life, there was immediately after such
a horible unexpected Eclipse of the Sun, that there is was a darkness over all the
Land; and the vail of the Temple rent from the top to the bottom, and there was
also a most terible earthquake which rent the vail of the Temple from the top
to the bottom, Mark 15 38. And then the Centurion and others that beheld it,
which had no bolief in them before, did both confess and say, Verily, and
truly, this was the true Son of the living God, Mark 15.40.

One thing more to be considered of is this, that whilst our Savior was at the
Bar of Arraignment, every one was against him and no man pitied his sorrows,
but only the Judge Pilate, which was then set upon life and death, whose
conscience was sorely pricked when he was to pass the Sentence of death upon
Christ, and therefore he took water and washed his hands; saying, I am
guiltless of the shedding of the blood of this innocent man; whereupon they
cried out all with one consent, Away with him, crucify him; and let his blood
be upon us, and upon our children for ever, Mark 15.13, 14. A heavy curse God
knows did the Jews wish to fall upon themselves; and I pray that Christians may
never do the like evil, nor know the like sorrow. And what become of them after
the Passion of Christ, you shall hear in this following Chapter.

CHAP. III. Of the grievous Afflictions and miseries that befell the Jews,
after they had crucified the Lord of Life: And of their desolation, and total
overthrow and destruction is here set down for our example.
NO sooner was our Savior Christ out of sight, but he was also out of mind; for
the Jews thought they had done well in p^^ting him to death, and never took
sorrow till it was too late, they eat drank and were merry; they gave their
minds to all manner of voluptuous* living as carousing in Alehouses and
Taverns, Swearing and Blaspheaming, wantonness and chambering, and what not.

But with the old Proverb, every sweet will have his sower: So tared it with
the Jews; for in the midst of all their pleasure, they beheld most strange
and wonderful Visions and Apparitions in the A^re; one while there seemed to
be a mighty Host of warlike Soldiers a fighting one against the other. Some
times there appeared a strange and prodigeous blazing Star, shining more bright
then the Sun in his full glory: and for a long time together there was every
day seen a fierce fiery flaming Sword, hanging right over the stately City of
Jerusalem with the point downwards, which brought such amazement through all
parts of the City, and Country round about, that the People were (many of
them) at their wits end, not knowing what were best for them to do.

And in these sad destracted times, some hanged themselves, some drowned
themselves, some cut their own throats, all which was done for want of serving
of God; as many have lately done in the City of London, and in other parts of
England, the more is the pity.

But to go forward with my Discourse, it is not one Swallow that makes a
Summer? neither does one evil go alone by it self; for as the waves of the
Sea in a tempestious Storm, drives and beats one upon another along with the
voiolence of the wind, even so does vexations, crosses and troubles, one come
on the neck of another when men have offended God: For in the time that the
Jews were in this sad destraction, then came a Messenger of sorrow into the
City, to bring them tidings of Titus Vespatians approach with a mighty great
Army of valiant Soldiers, which had vowed to scale the stately walls of
Jerusalem, and make their buildings level with the ground.

Whereupon the Governors of the Jews took courage upon them, and made this
Reply, Let not that proud Emperor Vespatian think but that we scorn to be
subject to, or bow our necks to his yoke. We have quoth they an hundred
thousand lusty fighting men: we have plenty of corn and other provision, enough
to serve us for twenty years. We have above a thousand stately Towers of
defense to save us from the slaughter of our enemies if need require. Why then,
quoth they, should we be danuted, or stand in fear of any power that can come
against us.

Thus while the Jews slattered themselves within the walls of the City,
thinking themselves secure, the valiant Emperor Titus encamped, and besieged
the City round about, where they lay so long, doing spoil and cutting up the
water pipes; and many other such like mischiefs that is t^o tedious here to be
told.

But to be brief, this it was: That the Jews that were within the City fell out
amongst themselves, and divided themselves into three parts, where they made
more havoc and slaughter one of another, then all the enemies that ever came
against them could do. God grant that the like may never be done in England;
for there were people all together by the ears: One neighbor killing and
murdering one another. The Son had no compassion on the Father, and the
daughter ripping up the bowels of the mother. Soldiers from place to place
with drawn swords in their hands, run up and down not caring who they killed;
for they neither spared old nor young, friend nor enemy; insomuch the channels
run down with blood, as if it had been water: besides all this the dead corpse
of the People lay in heaps about the streets, that they stun^e above the ground
for want of burial: and with the noysumnes thereof there bred such an
Infection amongst them that hundreds of thousands were quite eaten up and
destroyed with the grievious Plague of pestilence: but the last punishment they
had was the worst of all, as you shall presantly hear.

There was two seditious Captains amongst the Jews, who in one night set on
fire, and burned up all the Provision which was in the City; whereupon there
came such a great Famine in the City, that they were at last enforced to feed
upon Dogs, and Cats, or any other stinking carrion, nay worse then that, some
were glad to eat their own excrements, and some Mothers Roasted and eat the
flesh of their own children, and when it was too late, they that were left
alive delivered up the City, and themselves to the mercy of the enemy, who
dealt with them according as Christ had foretold^ for they left not one stone
upon another that would do them any good.

Thus much have I spoken for a truth, conserning the destruction of the Jews,
and their City; having a testemony for the same, both from the Scriptures, and
other sufficient Authors. And I pray to God to give a blessing to all them that
hears, and reads the word of God? so that they make better use of their ways
and actions, then the Jews did: To which let all true Christians say Amen.

And now before I conclude, I desire you all that are in presence to take good
heed, and bear in mind this last chapter of my Book, which is called Englands
Golden Legacy.

The Legacies, and Blessings that the Lord has bestowed are so many, that they
cannot all be unmbred: but those which we every day and minute make use off, we
may best remember; as namely the light of the Gospel to eluminate our souls,
Gods holy word and spirit to assist us in our ways, and actions; the
Scriptures interpreted and made plain unto us, and Expounded in our Language?
these things if we pursue and make good use off we can never do amiss.

Besides this we have praised be God, all manner of bodily sustenance in great
plenty, and at a cheap sat; as food for the body, and raiment for the back;
only Trading is something dead, and money hard to come by for this present, but
I would desire every one to wait with patience till better times come, and let
us not in any case murmur against the Lord, nor provoke him to anger, least the
sweet and happy Legacy and blessing which we now enjoy should be turned into a
Curse as the Jews was; and since we bare, and have the name of Christians, I
would have all men and women to carry themselves li^e Christians, laying a part
all hatred, spite, envy and malice; all drunkenesse, wh^ring, swearing, and
cursing; all lying, backbiting, and saithfully to learn and labor, and to ma^e
use of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ his new Commanbment, which is to love
one another.

L. P.

FINIS.

