THE Beacons Quenched: OR The Humble Information of diverse Officers of the
Army, and other well-affected persons, to the Parliament and Commonwealth of
ENGLAND; Concerning the Machivilian design of the Presbyterians, now carrying
on by the Stationers of LONDON.

To bring an odium upon the Parliament and Army, Introduce the whole body of
Presbyterian doctrine and worship. To seduce the good People of this
Commonwealth, unto the Presbyterian slavery, than which nothing can be worse.
By Publishing diverse Treasonable and most Scandalous Books (a Catalogue of
many whereof is here inserted) against the Honor of the Parliament, the Lord
General, and several other worthy Members of this COMMONWEALTH.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, and are to be sold by Giles Calvert at the
Blackspread-Eagle at the West End of Paul's, and William Larner at the Blackmoor
at Fleet-Bridge, 1652.

To the Supreme Authority of the Nation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
ENGLAND.
Right Honorable,
HE that shall read Mr. Calamy, and his Party in their late writings (some of
them published by the Stationers petitioning) cannot but read expressly, and by
clear consequence, Your glorious Titles to be, Speckled Vipers, Murderers,
Traitors, Rebels, Blasphemers, Southsayers, Adulterers, Perjured persons,
Oppressors, Hypocrites, Villains, Rogues, Beasts, Antichrists, Foxes, Serpents,
Liars, Usurpers, and the Spanish faction in Pulpets, and Thrones exalted.

But if the God of Heaven, the God of Truth, have writ your Names aright (with
the beams of the Noonday Sun in the eyes of all the Nations of the World) You
are the Saviors of the Oppressed, the Conquerors of Tyrants, and the Breakers
of those Clergicall Yoakes, whose Authors would still subscribe (as the Butcher
and Butchers son in Henry the eighth his days) Ego et Rex Meus, I and my King,
I and my Parliament, I and my People, etc.

Your Honors have lately been alarumd with the noise of Popish books,
Blasphemous books, etc. and had we heard and seen no more but such fair Grass,
without a Snake, and the Plots of our constant Powder-Miners, we had held our
peace. But rummaging in their dark Cellars, and finding under the Covers of
provision against Winter, the horrid store of Gunpowder lie covered; We cannot
but in faithfullness tell your Honors, the Plot is, to amuse you with the noise
of Popery, and Blasphemy, and in the interim to spring their Mines, to blow up
your Selves, the Council, and Army, our Victories, our Families, our Freedoms.
For they hope yet for the day (since while you wake they cannot wring it out)
to steal the Sword of God out of your hands, while sleeping. For can your
Honors imagine that such Licensers who write such language abovesaid, will
ever set your Honors Imprimatur to any Lines but of the same unclean and
Treasonable Spirit?

And for the Stationers subscribing to the first and second Beacons, do all
those golden Characters of Zeal and Holiness, spell any more than plain
Presbytery? Is not the sale of Popish Books the greatest part of the trade of
some of them, who are also strongly reported to have a Factor in Rome it self?
Has not the most Treasonable book that ever was printed against the State been
certainly bought at the shop of some of them, even since they fired the Beacon
to the Parliament? Do not these Mercenaries know that a fair current for sober
Disputes and writings in matters of God controversial, engages more Authors to
write etc. than a stop and stifling to the Spirit of God and Men?

And as to Books of Heresy, Popery, Blasphemy, if their be equal liberty of
engaging against them, when did the most glorious Sun Christ Jesus not dare to
meet the darkest night, attended with ten thousand Popes or Devils? And when
did they ever meet and he not conquer?

Yea can it be without amazement remembered that one of their Lords (and ours,
and yours that would be) should proclaim that most blasphemous Crack [Stupor
Mundi Clerus Britannicus, the Amazement of the World, is the Clergy of
Britain?] And yet our Beacons must be fired, and the Alarm given to the
Magistrates Sword, Arm, Arm, etc. for not a man dare stir of our British
Clergy, to receive the charge of some few (often conquered) Religious
adversaries.

We presume not to propose, but we humbly conceive that your late former care
of the Printers name, and readiness to produce the Authors, or bringers of
their Copies, together with some convenient Regulations, cannot justly by any
just man be complained against.

And we pray, that as it pleased God (after the world of Priests and Bishops
had burned John Hus at Constance) to send immediately from Heaven this
inestimable Jewel of Printing, so it may still please him, (as it has
graciously done ever since the burning of Christ's witnesses in Q. Mary's days)
to stir up faithful and able writers against all sorts of Poperies and
Blasphemies, and to stir up your Noble hearts to protect and encourage those
blessed Liberties and Endeavors.

For our selves we shall desire to draw in no longer English air, than we are
cordially ready to draw out our swords and blood at your command, against the
Violations of such (dear bought) precious Freedoms, and against such
Treasonable books and charges; a taste whereof is here presented,

By your Honors most humble servants, Thomas Pride, Col. William Gough, Lie.
Col. Tobias Bridge, Maj. Richard Merest, Adjut. Genesis William Kiffen, Capt.
Isaac Gray. George Gosfright, Citizen. Samuel Richardson, Citizen.


The Humble Information of diverse Officers of the Army, and other well-affected
persons to the Parliament and Commonwealth of England, concerning scandalous
Presbyterian books and designs.
It Is not any by-respect, but conviction of duty which puts us out to this
humble address, First, to the Lord Christ, for his wonderful deliverances from
a Prelatical bondage, and a Presbyterian slavery, the last of which (though of
but a short continuance) yet lives fresh in the memory of all good people.
Secondly, to the renouned Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, the happy
instruments of our freedom, and painful Laborers in the work of Christ,
notwithstanding whose vigilance, we have had a sad experience of the Plots and
designs of a Presbyterian party, especially in and about the City of London,
who have not only kept a correspondence with those of Scotland, but also
contributed moneys and other encouragements to their several Invasions; And
have from time to time, by most malicious scandals and forgeries, both in the
Pulpit and at the Press, endeavored to bring an odium on the Parliament and
present Government, by affirming that the Army was a Popish Army, and full of
Papists and Jesuits, that Mr. Hugh Peter's and diverse others (who had bin
principally active for the Parliament) were Jesuits, and that such lay people
who had a call of Spirit, and did dispense their gifts (without the formal
humane Ordinances of the Presbytery) were Popish Priests in disguise, Nay,
(which is most abominable, even to be repeated) they stuck not to affirm (such
was their malice) that my Lord General was Antichrist, and the man of sin,
with such like horrid scandals and abuses. But when their Armies of flesh were
by Christ's own powers subdued both at Dunbar and Worcester, to the eternal
memory of the 3d. day of September, the fury and insolence of these Kirkists
was in some measure debelled, and their unquiet spirits tamed; yet through the
too much mercy of the Parliament toward them, and the continuance of them in
places of public trust and employment, they begin to fancy new hopes, and (we
have just cause to fear) are broaching new designs against the Parliament of
this Commonwealth, whom we trust the same great God will still defend.

To this purpose we are certified from an eminent hand at Edenborough by a
letter dated 5 Junii last, and published by Mercurius Politicus, numero 106.
That the Kirk Clergy preach damnation to such as accept of the Union, and
though they agree in nothing else among themselves, yet they agree in their
opposition to the Parliament. And again in the next Mercury by another letter
dated the 12th of the same June. Indeed the spirits of division, faction,
rebellion and devil himself of pride does wholly act this wild order and
degeneration of men, and their rage is the greater, because their Kingdom is
falling. Nor must it be forgotten (says another) what hazard our Nation has
run of late, through the malice, falsehood and faction of the late Presbyterian
drivers, etc. Politicus, numero 111. page 1739.

Much more might be said to evidence that this rigid party of soul-drivers has
been the only considerable party that has opposed all along the proceedings
and establishment of our Paliament and Commonwealth, even beyond all Jesuits
and Popish party whatsoever, but that it is in it self so clear, that it needs
no other eviction.

And that these six Subscribers are of that Tribe will also manifestly appear,
as by the sequent discourse, so by their setting the first Beacon on fire; for
they are true Salamanders in a State, and delight in nothing more than in
persecution of tender consciences by fire and sword; they are Boutefeux in a
superlative degree, whose chief content consists in making combustions in all
well-governed Commonwealths. And that the world may the better know these
Subscribers, take their names (according to their own subscriptions) and places
of abode, as follows.

Booksellers.
Luke Fawn at the sign of the Parot in Paul's Churchyard. Joshua Kirton at the
late Kings arms in Paul's Churchyard. Samuel Gellibrand at the Golden Ball in
the new Rents. Thomas Underhill at the Anchor and Bible in the new Rents. John
Rothwel at the Sun and Fountain in the new Rents. Nathaniel Webb at the sign of
the Bear in the new Rents.
These were the Subscribers of that Pamphlet, but the Contrivers and
counselors of it, we shall in due time, and upon just occasion discover.

Their Preamble is embellished with much seeming zeal for exaltation of the
Gospel of Christ Jesus, which were truly commendable, if it came from pure
hearts, but we have too great an assurance that Self-interest is their aim, and
Hypocrisy their zeal.

In the first Section they intimate a fear to be necessitated to leave their
calling, (for want of trade) rather than the pretense of keeping their
consciences pure; And in the fourth they insinuate Proposals for effecting
their desires, and so would fain serve themselves into some Office or Monopoly
for licensing, printing, and selling of books, that they might engross the
Trade, and lash their neighbors with some Presbyterian whips, and none be
permitted to publish any thing but what they please.

In the second Section the Pamphlet says, The Parliament well knowing that the
Common People of this Nation will be of one Religion or other, and if by
public authority they be not kept to the Reformed Religion, they will be
easily drawn to the Popish.

Here they speak plain English, and would have a coercive power in matters of
Religion, a ( Presbyterian Class would do well, but let it have some new name,)
that may excommunicate, enjoin Penances, pronounce Censures (and what would
this be less than a Spanish Inquisition) etc? And then the Subscribers would be
pleased; But they know both the Parliament and Army have often declared against
such proceedings, and Have disclaimed all other punishments for matters of
Religion, and will not (we are confident) permit them to be revived under any
image or shape whatsoever; See the Parliaments Answer to Scotch Papers in March
1647 fol. 43 and 63.
the weapons of Fasting and Prayer (to speak in the Parliaments own words)
being both more available and more Christian in such cases, than those of force
and violence, etc.

And how simple are these Subscribers to imagine that the Truth of Christ's holy
Religion needs the support of human arms to sustain it, or that the Parliament
will make use of any power to so unlawful an end? An excellent late Treatise,
entitled Zeal Examined, will give them better light in this point of Liberty
of Conscience.

And how distrustful are these men of Gods Providence, and doubtful of our
own strength, to imagine, that any Papist can say more than we, or write more
than we can answer? We desire nothing more than that they and all dissenters
should propound their doubts in a Christian way, either by Word or by Epistle,
and meet in the love of Christ for better instruction.

They forget that about the beginning of July last a Petition was presented to
the Parliament by many thousands of well-affected persons, one braneh whereof
was, That the Press might be open to all, which these men would by a subtle
insinuation shut against all but themselves; Yet it was not intended by that
Petition, that the Press should be open for any such scandalous Books of
Libells against the State and present Government, as at least some of the
Subscribers will appear to have of late printed and published.

Now (if it were worth the examining) we might certainly find many Untruths
also in a few leaves of that Pamphlet; As that all the Books there mentioned
were printed in England, is very doubtful, and that 1500 should be printed of
every sort is most improbable.

And we cannot but take notice that these Subscribers rank the Christian
Moderator amongst Popish Books; because it equally rejects the Episcopal
Bondage, and Presbyterian Slavery, and holds forth an absolute incoertion in
matters of inward belief, which these men love not to hear of, nor of any
Christian Moderation; nor has that Book (to our best remembrance) any one word
against the State, or present Government, but much in honor of the same, and of
diverse Members thereof.

In page 13 they say, That Christians of a different belief are not tolerated
to profess their Religion among Papists.

How then do so many thousands enjoy a perfect liberty of conscience without
any mulct or penalty, even in France our next neighboring Country? We ought
to speak truth, even of our enemies whomsoever.

As for the Popish Books mentioned in their Catalogue, we do believe (upon good
information) that the greatest part of them only hold forth Moral Divinity, as
they call it, with exhortation to, and rules of good life; which it seems the
Subscribers do not desire to be guilty of; And if those Books have 19 parts of
good Matter, and the 20th. part Popery, it were great pity the much good
should suffer for the little evil, as it was excellently said by a Worthy
Member of Parliament upon occasion of debate concerning the Racovian Catechism,
who upon that reason passed his Vote against the burning of it.

For what these Pampheteers urge against Mr. Hobbs, and Mr. Josua Sprigg, out
of their Leviathan, and Testimony to approaching Glory, we have not time at
present to examine whether the points are truly cited: however those persons
are very well able to answer for themselves; only this we may gather, that they
are the more violent, as we conceive, against Mr. Sprigg, for being the Author
of that excellent piece entitled Anglia Rediviva, wherein the Noble Acts of
that renowned General, Thomas Lord Fairfax, are memorized, by whose gallantry
and success the Presbyterian Tyranny began first to be abated.

And to show the Hypocrisy of these men, who though in page third say, they
fear left we should be tempted, for want of other trade, to be venders of such
loathsome wares (as Popish Books) or else necessitated to leave our callings to
keep our Consciences pure; yet it will be sufficiently proved, that at least
some of these Subscribers do daily sell both Latin and English Popish Books, if
they can get Customers for them; And did lately quarrel with one of their
Neighbor Booksellers because he would not exchange the Books called the Holy
Court for some of their Presbyterian Books.

Now the truth is, this party of men make an appearance of zeal against Papists
and Popish Books, the better to disguise their designs; when as their malice
and spleen is against the well-affected, whom they style Independents, and
Sectaries, and would fain bring the world to that pass, that no Religious
person whatsoever should write any Book, but what should first pass the Test
and approbation of their Presbyterian Censures; which we humbly hope the
Parliament will never permit.

The Catalogue and Contents of some of those Presbyterian books, the greatest
part of which have been printed and published in England, within these 3. last
years, against the Parliament and present government.
1. Scotch Papers abundantly extant.

2. History of Independency first and second part.

3. A plea for Non-subscribers.

4. An Answer to Bonds and Bounds.

5. Several Pamphlets in vindication of Mr. Love, whom they account a Martyr
(as in the Preface to his Sermons) and charge the Parliament with injustice, in
putting him to death, etc. More particulary Mr. Calamy in his late Epistle
before Mr. Loves 17. Sermons, and his funeral Sermon, hangs out a Flag of
Defiance to the State, proclaming Mr. Love to die in and for the Lord. And the
Saints he calls Murderers, Traitors, Rebels, Blasphemers, Soothsayers,
Adulterers, Perjurers, Oppressors, etc. and charge the highest sins to have
ascended into Pulpits and Thrones, etc.

6. Manus testium,
Linguae testium, Digitus testium,
which in the Epistle has these words, The Dragon seems to have got the better
(meaning the Parliament and Army) and a little further these words, Our design
is only to unbowell that little big-bellied viper (of the Romish Conclaves
hatching) the Engagement, which, like the Trojan Horse, has concealed in the
belly of it, the ruin of the lawful magistracy, lawful ministry, and the lawful
reformed Religion, etc.

(...) OR A Narration of mysteries of State, etc.
A most malicious and scandalous book against the State and present government;
the main design of it being to prove that the present Parliament and Army are
of the Spanish faction, and that the same faction has carried on a design here
ever since King James's time, with much bitterness and reproach to the
Parliament and Army, etc.

For a taste, the Epistle is dedicated to the Renouned Gentlemen of Europe, the
Merchants of England: In the Epistle, and throughout the book, they charge the
Independents to be the Spanish faction, Unnatural Rogues, Impudent Traitors and
Murderers, and say they have murdered the King, and tumbled down his Throne
into the dunghill of Democracie. And concerning the Lord General amongst other
base and scurrilous language against him they call him the Beast, the
Antichrist, Fox, Serpent, Traitor, Liar, Usurper. The like language use they
against the Lord Ireton.

And the Honorable Members of Parliament and the Army, they style Traitors,
Rebels, the Spanish Faction, etc.

This book. and others of like nature will be proved to be (since the Beacon
fired) sold at the shops of some of the late (Beacon-firing) Stationers.

These, with many other Books of like nature, have bin printed and published by
these Subscribers and their fellow Presbyterians in London within these 3 years
last past, which we should not have mentioned but through a necessity of
quenching the fire of this Beacon; And of what more dangerous consequence such
Books are, as strike at no less than the high scandal and dishonor of the
Parliament, and the very subversion of the present Government, than another
sort of Books whatsoever, which only express particular opinions in matters of
faith or outward worship, we leave to all true lovers of their Country to
judge; And humbly hope that the Parliament will not restrain any peaceable
Spirit from the liberty of prophesying, nor shut up the Press from any Godly
persons, having due regard to the honor and peace of the Parliament and this
Commonwealth.

FINIS.

