THE Astrologers Bugg-beare: Being a brief Description of many Pitthy
Passages, which were brought to pass upon that day which the Astrologers
painted out for Black-Monday: Whereby we may all see and know that God's power
is beyond man's expectation.

Mark well and take notice, it is worth your observation. Written by L. P.



London Printed for Sicnarf Seloc, in the Year of the downfall of dark
Astrology. and are to be sold in Country and City, by honest harmless people,
that love England and 'its Friends

The ASTROLOGERS Bugg-Beare.
Being a brief Description of many pitthy passages which was brought to pass
upon that day which the Astrologers painted out for Black Monday.
CHAP. I.
TO Condemn all for some man's faults, were too severe a matter to work upon;
or to give credit to all the reports that are going, were the ready way to be
deceived, as may appear by those late Astrologers, who have bin accounted to be
the chiefest men for Wisdom, Knowledge, and Understanding that was in all the
world beside; those lines which are here written of them are not written in
spite nor malice of them, neither do I speak against that which is necessary
in Astronomy.

Astronomy I hold to be very good and beneficial, if it be honestly,
faithfully, and reasonably dealt withal; as for recording what has bin done
in former ages, and to foretell the seasons of the year, the length of the
day, the changes of the Moon, the circle of the Sun, the nature of the Stars,
and the time when is fitting for Bathing, Letting blood, and the like.

But I would not have men to undertake to study so far in Astrology, whereby to
write of matters more then becomes them, as some of late have done to their
shame and discredit.

Whose names I need not to repeat in this discourse, for they have themselves
at large set forth their own Names, as you may read it in several Almanacks,
as Lilly, Culpepper, and others, who though in some things, yet they all took
aim at one mark, although never a one of their arrows came to the right
place: they all spoke of the 29 day of March, which some of them called
Black-Monday; More-over, they reported that it would be a sad day, a dismal
day, a day of darkness, and such a day that the like had not bin since the
oldest man alive can remember: also they foretold what the effects of that
sorrowful and dreadful Eclips of the Sun and the Moon would bring forth, how
that Cities should be fired, Towns and Castles over-thrown, great Ship-wracks
at sea, Robberies done on the land, and that many fearful Sicknesses and
Diseases should be amongst us: so that men and women should be suddenly
stricken and fall down dead as they went along the streets: the consideration
of which matter made many people of a belief, what things some of them had
written in their Almanacks would prove to be very true, nay I am persuaded that
some put more confidence in Lilly, then they did in God: but now see what God
can do to their Sexes: the very day which they had painted out to be such a
dismal day as is before spoken of, fell not out according to their
Expectations and Prognostications, yet a small Eclips was of the Sun, and did
visibly appear for a little space, and so the day became Fair and Clear,
blessed, praised, and glorified be the Name of our good God for our deliverance.

CHAP. II. Here follows a brief Relation of many several passages and
strange effects which was done upon the 29 of March, this present Year, 1652.
which the Astrologers called Black Monday.
AT the conceit of the matter which the Astrologers had written in their
Almanacks concerning the horrible and terrible Eclips of the Sun, bred such
Rumors and Fears throughout all the Cities, Towns and Countries in England,
that men and women were amazed and knew not how to bestow themselves nor what
to do, doubting what would come to pass; whereat some falling into despair,
made short dispatch and hanged themselves, others run mad about the streets,
and many came by untimely deaths before the day of of the Eclips came.

But when the day of the Eclips was come, in the morning many thousand of
people both in the City of London and in the Country were in such fear, that
although they had business to do, they durst not go about their occasions,
doubting what danger might come upon them.

Some there were in London which kept fast their shops, their doors, and their
windows, and would neither buy nor sell till they had seen that the worst was
past.

Some that were market folks durst not go in the Market to sell their
commodities.

Some lay a bed til 2. of the clock in the afternoon fasting, because they
durst not rise out of their beds to eat their dinners.

Among the rest a gallant young woman that had made promise, and was to be
married to a Gentleman, durst not stur out of the house to go to the Church,
he having made a vow that he would not be married in any other place; by which
means she lost her love and was dismissed of her husband, and afterward wished
that all the Almanack-makers were hanged for their false Predictions.

A. Usurer that was to receive money of a country man that was his debtor on
that day, durst not to venture fourth of his house; by which means the man rid
forth of London and paid not in his moneys, for which cause the Usurer was
about to cut his own throat, and had don it if he had not bin prevented by
some of his Neighbors.

Some other Christians were so fearful of what would befall, that they sent
their maids two days before Black-monday for to fetch in fair water in a
redynesse to wash, fearing that the air would infect the water.

Some took Medicines, Pills, and Antidotes, which was administered unto them by
a supposed out landish, doctor, which he had set bills for in several places,
caling his Medicines, an Antidote against the tirrible Eclipes of the Sun, so
he got money, and they went away as wise as woodcockes; yet their were some in
London that proved stout hearted, and said, that they would neither beleve
Lilly, Culpepper, nor any other false prophecy, but that they would only trust
in God to be their guide and to defend them from all evils, and so went through
their businesses and praised be God they speed never the worse.

CHAP. III. Thus having told you of many passages were done in and about the
City of London upon the day that the Astraligers called Black-monday, J pray you
to have the patience to hearken to some thing of what was done in the Country.
IT is very true, the Country people in many places put so much confidence in
Lilly and Culpeppers Almanackes, and monthly observations that they beliued
every syllable that was there written to be true: and therefore upon
Black-monday they would not undertake to do no manner of business, neither would
they suffer their servants nor Children to go forth of their doors sor fear
that they should come by some strange mishap to be scorch't with the sun, or to
be killed with a Thunder Bolt.

Others thought that there would be an Egyptian darkness over all the whole
land: wherefore the Plowmen durst not in some places to go to plow, the maids
were fearful to go to milking; Carriers and Trauilers were fearful to pass
along the rode, nor durst they that were from home return to their own, tell
such time that they had seen the danger of the time over past, which at last
came to nothing.

But praised be God we hear of no harm that was done to man, woman, nor child
on that day, neither in London nor in the Countries; and now we may see what it
is for mortal men to presume to fortell or to prophisie of what God will have
done: we may read in the Scripture that God is only true, and all men are
liars; therefore dear friends, I desire you all to consider of the matter and
never depend upon, nor believe liars, but settle your affections, your hopes,
your trust, and your belief, only upon God the Father and his only Sone our
Savior Jesus Christ, and so wheather we live or dye, we shall be sure to do
well. So to conclude I remain your Servant so long as you serve God.

L. P.

FINIS.

