THE Present State of Affairs IN IRELAND. BEING A Full and Distinct Relation of
the Condition of the Irish Army; Of the Miscarriages of the French Officers;
And of several other Remarkable Things relating to Dublin. In a LETTER from
CHESTER, of February 5. from some Persons lately arrived from IRELAND.
LICENSED, Feb. 10. 1689/9^.

LAst Night, there arrived here upon a small Barque from Ireland, several
Officers who left our Camp on the Thursday before, from whom I have received
the following Account of Affairs there, which I have thought fit to Communicate
to you.

That one Mr. R. K. an Attorney, and one Mr. Hutchison a principal Gunner in
the Town of Cork with some others, having with some difficulty made their
Escape from Dublin in a small Boat, did on Tuesday before these Gentlemen came
away, get safe to Donaghdee, and being brought before the Duke of Schonberg,
they were Examined upon several things relating to the Condition of Affairs at
Dublin. The substance of their Answer consisted of the following particulars.
That Colonel Buchan with some orher Offic^rs, was sent by the late King into
Scotland, in a Scotch Frigate of twenty eight Guns, which had been refitted at
Dublin, with Clothes and Arms, and several Commissions, in order to raise
Disturbances and Commotions in that Kingdom, and that they are gone for
Innerlochy, where Sir Evan Cameron, Lord of Locheale Commands. That the late
King is in daily Expectation of the Arrival of Six or Seven thousand French men
from France, whether an equal Number of Irish is to be sent in lieu of them,
under the Command of Lieutenant General Mackarty, who lately made his Escape
from Inniskilling. That the Earl of Clancarty having been some time since out
of Favor, was upon his Unkle's return to Dublin, restored again to his
Regiment of Horse. That Monsieur le Comte D'Avaux the French Ambassador in
Ireland, is preparing for his return back again into France, from whence they
say, He is to go in Quality of Ambassador Extraordinary to Rome; at the same
time, the Comte de Rose, the French Governor of Cork, makes account to return,
he being much out of Favor, for having abused the Trust the late King had put
up^ him, and for defrauding the Country he Commanded in, of Five and thirty
thousand Pounds, which they say he sent to France some while ago. The French
Go^ernour of Drogheda, is ^h the same Circumstances of Disgrace, being found
Guilty of false Musters, and of receiving of the Pay of Six hundred Men (for a
considerable time) more then he actually had; he is to return into France at
the same time that Monsieur D'Avaux does.

That the Irish Horse are much spoll'd and diminished in their Numbers,
insomuch, that it is generally believed that the late King will not be able to
bring into the Field the next Campaign, nothing nigh so good a Body of Men or
Horse, as he did last year; and that for all the great noise that was made of
their mighty numbers then, Mr. K. says, That they were at no time more than Six
thousand Horse.

That they have made some Fortifications about Dublin, such as Trenches and
Palisadoes, and set up Gates on the several Bridges of the Town; but that there
has not been so raging a Sickness amongst the Inhabitants of Dublin, nor such
Mortality as was talked of; tho it was very great amongst the Army, and they
carried the same wheresoever they came. That the late King is at Dublin, where
there are only three Regiments Quartered, and two Regiments more at Drogheda,
the rest of the Army being Quartered up and down in Munster.

They further say, That the Protestants in Dublin have all their Churches but
Christ Church, which i^ employed by the Roman Catholics; that there have been
no hardships put upon them of late, and that all things are pretty plenty
there, considering the Circumstances they are under, excepting Bread; the
scarcity of Corn being occasioned by the late Kings raising the Copper Money to
double the Value that it past for at first, which made the Country People
unwilling to bring their Corn to Market, but that that was presently remedied
by a Proclamation, wherein all Persons were strictly Commanded to bring in
their Grain to the Market, threatening withal, that in case they forbore
bringing their Corn as formerly, the same should be taken from them by the
Army, and expose them all to Military Execution; which had such an Operation on
the People, that they began immediately to repair to the Market with their
Corn. And that one of the Ships that carried over the Money and Clothes for our
Army, had been in some danger of striking on an unseen Rock, insomuch, that the
Master quitted her, and gave her over for lost; but that the Masters Mate
continued on Board her, and had the good luck to bring her safe into
Carrick-fergus.

This is all that I have at present to acquaint you with, on the truth whereof
you may rely, having had it from the Mouths of those that are come lately from
those Parts.

LONDON: Printed for J. Williams in Fleetstreet. 1690.


