A ready way to prevent SVDDEN DEATH: Being a brief and true Relation of many
sad misfortunes which have happened unto Men, Women, and Children both in the
City of London, and in diverse parts of the Nation of England, which came
through negligence, wilfulness, hardness of heart, presumption and
carelessness. This was Written and Printed to the end that all people
whatsoever that read or hear this little Book read, may learn to beware and
prevent danger of Sudden Death before it comes upon them.

Reader peruse this little Book,
And heedfully upon it look;
It may preserve thy soul from strife,
And through Gods blessing save thy life.
This Book was written by Laurence Price, this present year 1655.

London printed for William Gilbertson in Gilt-spur street, 1655.

A ready Way to prevent SUDDEN DEATH.
Here begins the book of several sad Examples which have happened unto the
people of England, for want of serving of God, and taking good heed from March
1. to this present time 1655.
BEloved Christians, it is a saying amongst many people, that there is a
foreknowledge by the planets whereby the wisards and soothsayers of our times
can foretell what death a man or a woman shall die: and some there are that
will take upon them to foretell how long the world shall endure, and at what
time the later day shall come; but I am sure they have no warrant from the word
of God for what they say; and therefore to convince such Diabolical errors, I
refer you to the words of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who says, of that
great and notable day knows no man, no not the Angels which are in heaven,
but my Father only, Matthew. 24. 26. This place of Scripture may very well serve
to withdraw men's hearts from believing in false prophets, fortune tellers,
wisards and soothsayers, and to put their whole trust and confidence in the
living Lord; which God give us all grace to do. And now I will tell you of a
sad misfortune which happened to a Fortune Tellers on the second of March last. In
the famous city of Exeter there was a certain dissembling fellow which
presumed to say that he had such skill in knowledge, that he could discern by
the palm of the hand, by the visage of the face, or by the color of the hair,
how long any man or woman should live, what courses they should take, and what
deaths they should die. This false fellows name was Thomas Jones, who had so
deluded the people, that they followed him up and down which waysoever he went,
thinking that he had passing skill; but all the skill he had was but to cozen
them of their money, as you shall hear: At one end of the city there was a
great Barn which had nothing in it; to which every day for a long time together
he frequented and came into without the consent of the owner; and as often as
he came thither, a multitude of simple people followed him; but without money
he would do nothing. Moreover he said, that if they would not believe that he
could do them good, and give them satisfaction for what they came for, he would
not meddle with them. This set such an edge upon the fancy of the people, that
some gave him money, others gave him cheese and bacon, and some gave him the
clothes from their backs, because they had nothing else to give him. But at the
last some of the Magistrates of the city finding themselves agrived at his
doings, they sent officers which apprehended him and brought him to prison;
where when he had lain there the matter of four hours, the Devil appeared to
him in a bodily shape, and bade him to hang himself, or cut his own throat:
whereupon he cried out with such a loud voice, insomuch that the Keeper of the
prison came into the room where he was, and asked him what was the matter, who
told him that he had given him self to the Devil some 3 years since, and that
he was now come for him, and that he bade him cut his own throat: Whereupon the
Keeper looking round about, and saw nothing appear, told him that it was but
his fancy to think so, and therefore bade him serve God and repent him of his
sins, and he should be sure to prevent the danger of sudden death, and that the
Devil should have no power over him: to whom he answered, that he had done so
many villainies and traspasses against God and the world, that his sins could
never be forgiven. The Keeper desired him to pray; he answered, that his heart
was so much hardened, that God had forsaken him, and that he had no power to
pray. Then the Keeper searched his pockets, and took away his knife, and the
garters from his legs, because he should do himself no harm, and so went out of
the room, thinking to have sent some body to keep him company, till he had
order from the officers to let him go: but he having a knife in the skirt of
his Coat, which the Keeper knew not of, cut his own throat therewith, before
any one could come to him; and there was an end of a false blasphemous,
dissembling hypocrite: God grant that others may take example hy his death, and
learn to amend their sinful lives.

Here follows another sad Example which was done at Collyweston two miles
from Stamford, March 20. 1655.
THere lived in the Parish of Collyweston a young man whose name was Francis
Jarvice, who fell in love with a beautiful maid that dwelt in the same parish;
and so between them two there was no love lost, for she loved him as dearly as
ever woman loved man, as you shall hear: this loving couple having made a match
together between themselves, appointed a day to be married on; and when the
time was near at hand, the young woman all too late, she being great with
child, made her father and mother acquainted with her mind, and how she had
made a promise to be married on such a day; which when her father heard, he
became like a mad man, and in his angry mood did swear, that if she married
with such a beggarly fellow as Francis Jarvice, he would never own her for his
child; an said, that he had rather keep the bastard when it was born, then that
she should marry with him: whereupon she made and errand to Stamford, as if she
were to buy poison to poison the Rats; but by the way coming home she poisoned
her self, and the infant within her, and so she died a sudden and desperate
death: which when her sweetheart heard of, he vowed never to eat nor to drink,
nor to take any sustenance whilst he lived in this world, and so pined himself
and died. Her father ran about being distracted of his wits, and threw himself
off from a high gallery and broke his neck. Her mother drowned her self in a
deep Drawwell; whose sudden deaths and untimely ends many thousands do lament.

About that very same time there was a sad disaster happened to a servant maid
near unto Smithfield Bars in London at the sign of the Castle; which maid went
up into a high room to hang out clothes to dry out at a window upon poles
which were made for that purpose; but for want of taking good heed, the pole
which she put trust unto, slipped away from her, and so losing her hold, she fell
out of the window and dashed out her brains against the stones, and had never
the power to call upon God for mercy, nor to speak one word to any man or
woman, and so poor soul she came by a sudden and untimely death, which might
have been prevented if she had taken better heed; for certainly if she had
thought that her death had been so near at hand, she would have had a better
care of herself. The truth of the matter here. spoken of, there are more then
a thousand people that can witness, which be held the maid after she was dead,
and some of them that were eye witnesses, desired that it might be put in
print, because all other servants that go carelessly about their business, may
by this sad example serve God, and take a care of themselves.

Here follows another sad example very necessary to be had in memory.
In the county of Suffolk, at a town called Bugles, there lived a man named
William Tite, being possessed of an evil quality of jealousy: Upon a certain
time he made show of love to his wife, so caught her in his arms, set her upon
his knee as they sat in a chair, and with a Judas kiss saluted her, and said
unto her as follows: Ah my dear and loving wife, that have been always
faithful and true unto me, now my conscience accuses me that I have done thee
great wrong, laying that to thy charge, that I know thee to be guiltless of:
And for the several abuses which I have done thee, I am heartily sorry, and
henceforth I protest never to abuse thee more. The woman being overjoyed with
her husbands comfortable words, made him this reply; Husband I thank you for
your good words, and I hope that good deeds will follow after. Yes, said he,
your desires shall quickly be fulfilled; and with that word having a knife
which he had prepared for that purpose, put his hand under her Apron, and ripped
up her bowels and belly, insomuch that the child which was in her womb, fell
out on the ground, and sprawled before him. And having done his mischief,
presently ran away from the place, and came to Yarmouth, and was entertained
into a Ship to go beyond the Seas; but as they were failing along on the salt
Seas, there suddenly arose a mighty tempest of weather, both of thunder and
lightning, wind and rain, that the like has but seldom been seen or known.
Whereupon the Master of the ship desired all the people that were in the ship
to join with him in prayer, that God would be pleased to preserve them and
their ship from the dangers of the surging and merciless waves. Then said
William Tite that had murdered his wife so bloodily, making a scoff of that
which the Master of the ship had spoken, saying as follows, As for my part I
need not fear drowning, for I was born to be hanged: for I killed my wife but
three days before I came on shipboard, and I will see you all damned before I
will pray for any of you all. There was at that time a lusty young man in the
ship named Miles Johnson, who ran unto him and said, It may be that it is for
thy wickednesss that our ship is so troubled, and our lives in such extreme
danger, and therefore if thou will not pray unto God to deliver thy self and us
from peril, I will presently throw thee over the shipboard and drown thee, and
so thou shall never live to be hanged. Then said William Tite, hang me or drown
me, or cut my throat, or do what you will with me, you shall never make me to
say any prayer, for the safeguard of our lives. Whereupon the young man having
the consent of some others that were in the ship, took him by the twist, and
threw him headlong into the Sea, and left him to the mercy of the waves, for he
was no more to be seen; and immediately the tempest abated, and the wether
became temperate, and they all praised God for their deliverance.

The Ship which they were in, had a Dutch Skipper, which served to carry
passengers to and again. The certainty of this matter was written in a Letter
by James Roberts, Thomas Moody, and Roger Gale, which were then aboard the
Ship, and sent to London on purpose to have it printed, for others to take
warning by, and to avoid murder and blasphemy.

Here follows a most strange and miraculous Example of a great deliverance
and preservation of a woman from sudden death, by the providence of Almighty
God, the like whereof was never heard of before; and this it was.
THere lived in the County of Kent a Gentleman of good Rank and quality, who
had great store of money at command, and did usually lend and lay out, and take
in mighty great sums. This gentleman oftentimes frequented to come to the City
of London to buy and to sell, having to his wife a very modest, civil,
welgoverned woman, and one that feared God, with whom her husband left all the
substance that he had. Upon a time when the gentleman was from home, there came
a great company of villains, thieves and robbers to the house, and surprised
the servants, and bound them with cords, hands and feet; and after coming into
the room where the gentlewoman her self was, and commanded her to bring them
and to show them the place where her husbands money bags all were: The woman
being in a maze, knew not what to do, but being in danger of her life, but
praid them even for Gods sake to spare her life, and she would do for them all
that she could; and so she brought them to a room where was great store of gold
and silver, money and plate, and other rich commodities which they took away
and loaded some of their horses with; but having not enough to satisfy their
greedy desire, they eame again to the woman, and said they would hang her, if
she would not help them to more money. She answered, that she knew of never a
penny but what they had already. Whereupon one of the villains took her and
would have ravished her, and afterward like a merciless wretch hanged her up
by the neck in a silk scarce which she had about her middle: which being done,
he went again with some others of his fellows, and searched every room about
the house, and took what they could find; and coming back again the same way
that they went, they found the woman praying upon her knees, and praising God
for her preservations for the knot which they had tied was loosened, and so she
fell to the ground, by what means she her self nor none else does know. Then
they took her and hanged her the second time with a bridle of one of their
horses, saying, if that were not strong enough, that they would be hanged for
her. Which being done, the Thieves made away. Now mark well what afterward
came to pass, it pleased God that with her struggling and striving when they
were gone, that the bridle broke and she fell to the ground again. And when her
husband came home, she having recovered her senses and health, told him of all
the passages which had happened unto her. Not long time after that her husband
and she came to London about some business which they had to do; and on the
day when the great show was to be seen in the fields with the Train bands of
London, the gentleman and his wife were there, and standing near unto the Tent
where my Lord Mayor was, the woman saw the man which had hanged her, and done
her all the wrong, and knowing him to be the same, caused him to be apprehended
and sent to the prison of Newgate, and being arraigned at the Bar for his
life, confessed the matter, and peacht others of his companions, For which
offense there were five of them taken and condemned to dye, of which one was
pressed to death, and the other four with two other offenders, were hunged at
Tyburn in April the last day of the Month, whose names were as follows,

Mr, Prescot, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Tailor, Mr. Horton, Mr. Loveridge, all hanged to
death, Mr. Hancock pressed to death.

The truth of this may be verified by more then ten thousand people which saw
them suffer at the place of Execution.

By this we may see how powerful and how merciful God is to them that put
their trust in the Lord: Therefore let no man nor woman think that any one is
able to foretell or know what God will have brought to pass. And of this be
sure, that God will never leave us nor forsake us, except we leave him and
forsake him first: therefore I desire all good people to serve God truly and
duly both day and night, and to pray unto him that he will be pleased to guide
our hearts and minds in the true knowledge of God, and of his Son our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be ascribed all honor and power, might, majesty, and
thankesgiving.

FINIS.

