A NEW DIALOGUE Between Dick of KENT, AND Wat the Welch-man.

Filled up with many pretty Conceits, written and Printed on purpose to make
folks merry in time of sadness.

By LAVRENCE PRICE.

This New conceited Book will move Delights,
And serve to pass away some dolesome days,
Also the tedious melancholy nights,
For in the same is many a pretty phrase.
No harm at all is in it but mirth and joy,
Then buy it first, then bear't with you away.
LONDON, Printed for John Andrews at the White Lion in the Old Bailey. 1654.



A New Dialogue between Dick of Kent, and Wat the Welch-man.
Dick of Kent. COme who buys my new merry Books?

Here Is new News, and true News,
from all the world ever,
From Scotland, from Holland,
from Calice, and Dover.
News as you shall understand,
From every part of fair England,
News from Bristol, and from Gloucester,
News from Worcester, and from Sicester,
News from Cornwall, and from Wales,
From Sussex Hills, and Surrey Dales.
Amongst the rest it is my intent
To speak of News come out of Kent;
Then what is he that will refuse
To buy my new conceited News

Wat the Welchman. I prithee if thy News be so good, let me hear thee read it,
peradventure here are some that will buy some of thy News books to carry into
the Country with them, and others that lives in the City will buy News to make
themselves merry at home, for all the world now adays desires to hear News,
and since we have not seen each other this many a long day, I would have thee
in the first place to tell me where thou have been, how thou have behaved thy
self, and what honorable deeds thou have done since thou have been out of
England, for I understand thou have been a Traveller in foreign Countries.


Dick. Why then I Will tell thee such strange News,
That cannot choose but make thee muse.

Wat. Speak on, and spare not, for I long to hear thee discourse.


Dick. When first I took my leave of my native Country Kent, where I was born,
I took shipping at Dover, and landed at Calice in France.


Wat. Well, speak on.


Dick. I traveled through many parts of France, and was made wonderful
welcome in every place where I came, so long as my money would hold, and
afterward I took up Arms, and became a Soldier.


Wat. Were thou a Soldier in France?


Dick. There Is never a man in all this company can deny it.


Wat. How long wast thou a Soldier?


Dick. So long as till I had received a push with a Pike, a cut with a Sword, a
knock with a Pole axe, and a shot with a Bullet, and then I threw down my Arms,
and betook my self to my legs.


Wat. How many men did thou kill, whilst thou wast in the Wars of France.


Dick. I killed but one man.


Wat. What but one man, tell me how thou did kill that one man?


Dick I did cut off his legs.


Wat. O thou fool, thou should have cut off his head.


Dick. Why thou silly Ass, his head was cut off before.


Wat. But what shift did thou make to come into England again.


Dick. I did as others had done before me, I traveled from one place to
another, I made many excuses, sometimes I got in favor with my Hostices and
Landladies, sometimes with the Maids, sometimes good Fellows would bestow
kindness upon me, and so by degrees I came to a place where was a Ship bound
for England, in which I happily got into, and in a short time was landed in
Cornwall.


Wat. What is the best news in Cornwall, Devon shire, Somersetshire, Dorset,
Wiltshire* Bristow, Gloucester shire, Worcestershire, Cicester, Hamp shire,
Surry, Sussex, and all the rest of the Countries which thou have past ^^o^ow
since thou came on shore, tell me the truth of all as near as thou can, and
it will be a credit for thee all the days of thy life, for the old Proverb runs
thus; Tell truth and shame the Devil.


Dick. Why then the truth of the matter is this, That in all the parts of
England where I have been, the Country people are much like the Citizens of
London, there is Coverousnesse, Perjury, Forgery, Extortion, Drunkenness,
Whoredom, Blasphemy, Wrathfulness, Pride, Envy, Hatred, and Malice, insomuch
that a man can hardly know his friends from his foes.


Wat. How do the people stand affected to Religion, or what opinion are they
of? if thou can give me satisfaction, and answer me safely to this question,
I shall love thee the better all the days of my life, and it will be a means
to make thy Books sell the better all England over.


Dick. As for my part I will tell you nothing but what I have heard, seen, and
known by experience, and thus it is; In all places through England the people
are of many several opinions concerning Religion, some says the Old Religion
is the best, some holds with the Papist, some with the Protestant, some with
the Anabaptist; some are of this opinion, that we shall never see nor have good
days in England til such time as the Book of Common Prayer is read in all the
Churches and Parishes in England, according as it was in former times; and
others there be that would have all the Churches pulled down.


Wat. This cannot choose indeed but breed a great distraction through every
City, Shire, and Country in England, Scotland, Wales, and any other place where
such doings is used; are not former friends become new enemies about these
matters?


Dick. Too true it is, that friends are become enemies about this matter, for
this makes the business so heinous amongst many that the Father cannot abide
his own Children, the Wife cannot agree with her Husband; the Brothers and
Sisters falls to discord, and one Neighbor is ready to pick out another
Neighbors eyes, and all about matters of Religion, and sundry opinions; and to
be brief, this makes rich men to despise the poor, and many poor men to fall
into despair, and except it be the sooner prevented, it is like to bring the
whole Land to destruction.


Wat. Now Brother Dick I see that thou have thy wits about thee, and moreover I
find thee to be a man of a good Conscience, for thou have spoken the truth to
the life, but now I would desire thee to leave off thy solid discourse, and to
talk of some meriment, which may make thy auditors a little light-hearted.


Dick. Then will I tell thee of a Jest that was done in Old Street near unto
London, and this it was; A man that married a wife for lucre of twenty pound,
of which he had ten pound readily in hand, and the other ten pound he was to
receive at the birth of his wifes first Child, but he either for want of skill,
or ability, could not get his wife with child himself, and therefore hired
another man, and promised to give him one half of the money if he would
undertake to do the deed for him, which bargain being made he brought the man
to his wives Bed, and so she thinking it had been her Husband, there being no
light in the room, entertained him very kindly at the first, but when she found
by his actions that it was not him that she looked for, she presently cried out
so loud, that although it was twelve a clock at night, that her Neighbors
heard her cry, and came running to help her; whereupon her Husband and the
other both departed, and so the room was rid of a couple of knaves.


Wat. This was a notable Jest indeed, it is well the good woman saved her
honesty, but for her Husbands part I wish him no other punishment but this;
That he might have a tired Horse to ride a long journey in dirty weather, with a
Whore behind him, and never a penny in his pocket, and to be kept fasting both
from meat and drink, till such times that he have made his honest wife
satisfaction for the wrongs he did her. And now I will tell thee of as good a
jest as this which was done in Wales.


Dick. Prithee speak on, for I have heard no news cut of Wales since the Welsh
Ambassador left off his merry Note.


Wat. There was upon a high craggy Mountain in a Town where no body dwells, two
men which sent their wives to Market to buy provision for their families, but
by the way as they were going, one of the women seeing a handsome young man
coming to meet them, took an occasion to stay behind, her neighbor being
willing to have some secret discourse with the young man, so the one woman
being gone before, the young man met with the other; and so having made a hasty
bargain, he laid her down in a haycock.

But what he did to her I cannot tell,
It seems she pleased the young man well.

Dick Well, but what came after all their business, let me know that?


Wat. The young man gave her half a crown
For the kindness she to him had shown.
And so having taken her leave lovingly of the young man went apace, and
quickly overtook her neighbor, and to make short of my Tale, she bought her
self a new pair of shoes with the half crown which she had gotten by the sweat
of he But --; at night when they came home to their husbands, one with a new
pair of shoes, and the other almost barefoot, wherefore the one man demands
of his wife what should be the reason she had not got her a new pair of shoes
as well as her neighbor; Marry quoth she the other woman lay with a man in a
hay cock, and he gave her half a crown, and that was the money which bought her
the new shoes.


Dick. Well, what said her husband to her then?


Wat. You Whore quoth he, were not you as well able to get the money as she, for
this cause will I never buy thee new shoos again whilst I live, and therewith
all fell a beating his honest wife, as if he would have killed her, who falling
on her knees crying out, Good husband, hold your hands at this time, and the
next time that I go to the Marker, I will get new shoes for you and my self
too.


Dick. This was such a trick that I never heard the like in all my life, and it
is fit that that man should soundly be punished for his faults with more
severity then he that put another man to bed with his wife.


Wat. Well, what punishment would thou alot him if thou might rule the
roast.


Dick. I would have him on a hot Sun shining day to be stripped stark naked, to
be anointed with Hampshire-hony, and to be tied to a Post, till such time the
Bees had eaten up his flesh, and afterward I would have his bones not to be
buried, but to be thrown into Cuckolds-haven, and that all the Cuckolds both in
London and in the Country, might blow their Horns, and make a Holy day for his
sake.

Come, who buys my New Merry Books?


FINIS.



