PREROGATIVE Anatomized: OR, AN EXACT EXAMINATION Of those Protestations and
Professions, whereby she has attempted and endeavored to prefer her self
above the PARLIAMENT.

By a Lover of Truth, Peace, and Parliaments.

JOHN 7.24. Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous
judgment.

Multa videntur quae non sunt.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright, in the Old Bailey. 1644.

PREROGATIVE ANATOMIZED.
THE Disputes between the King and Parliament are so high, the Declarations so
numerous, the Prerogative-Protestations, and Pretenses so plausible, though
tending to public destruction; the Parliament proceedings so slow, so
chargeable, so new, though just, no Parliament heretofore having power, or
opportunity, to maintain the Kingdoms Rights, (the rod of dissolution being
perpetually held over them) that the amazed People stand betwixt the King and
Parliament, like the silly Popish Priest between the blessed Virgin and our
Savior Christ, and know not which way to turn them, or whence to expect their
salvation: I think it fit therefore to take the liberty of this scribbling age,
in setting down my sense of Prerogative, that the deceived people understanding
the nature and end of it, may see the necessity that lies upon them, now or
never to lay hold upon this their day, to un-inslave their souls, persons and
estates, from Ecclesiastical and Prerogative tyranny, by means of this
present Parliament, so wonderfully given and preserved to us by the divine
providence and mercy. Prerogative therefore, in the native, proper, and
original acception and intention of it, is nothing else, but a necessary,
just, and innocent accommodation of the Prince, to such a proportion of
splendor, honor, and authority, as may enable him, without incroa^hment to
balance the other two Estates, and bear himself in all things answerable
unto his Office: for, they exceeding in number, were to add weight to him, to
make a flourishing and sweet compliance: but as it is distinguished from the
only end and bound of true Regality, (the good of the people) is a tyrannical
power, destructive to Religion, Property, and Liberty, yea and to Regality it
self, by narrowing and shrinking up the heart of a public person, to
self-will, ends, and aims.

The truth of this description is evidenced, by the miserable fruits of
Prerogative before the Parliament, which are now generally known, though not
generally acknowledged: our Religion was overgrown with superstition and
profaneness, Popish opinions were publicly defended in the Universities, and
preached in Pulpits, Popes Nuntio's admitted into the Kingdom, Covents of
Friars erected, public Mass telerated, preaching, pictie, godly Preachers
suppressed, suspended, banished: As for our Property and Liberty, they were quite
lost, and all the grievances that were singly introduced in the times of our
predecessors, did jointly, like a deluge, overwhelme us. For the redress of
these pressures was this Parliament called, and cried up by the People, I
fear, with as much, too much confidence in it, as the Jews of old had in the
Temple of the Lord, when they cried, Templum Domini, Templum Domini, and in the
mean time rebelled against the God of the Temple; and for this sin, amongst
others, I doubt, the peace made with Scotland proves but a change of our
adversaries, from them, to our selves: And yet, though the continuance of our
misery be very grievous, in my judgment, the state of the war is much better
then it was, before the Parliament: For, now (whatsoever pretenses are made) we
conflict with our true enemy, the Popish party, and their adherents; whereas
before we should have been led hood winked for the service of our enemies,
mutually to destroy our selves, and our Protestant Friends: And, me thinks, in
this very thing, which draws the greatest odium upon the Parliament, they
deserve infinite commendations, that since they could not keep off a war from
the Kingdom, they occasioned this happy divertion. Yet hence the people
complain, we hoped for help from the Parliament, and we are now in worse
condition then we were before. So it fared with the children of Israel, after
Moses appeared for their deliverance: their task was doubled, and Moses their
deliverer is charged by them, to have put a sword into the hands of Pharaoh to
slay them. Thus all the evils that by the adversaries of the Parliament have
been mischievously multiplied, to hinder Reformation, are unjustly laid upon
the Parliament; and thus God is dishonored every way: for, when hopes of
deliverance first appear, we idolize the means; and when our deliverance
proves not so sudden, nor so easy as we expect, then we despise the means. By
Gods goodness, for his own glory, the Parliament has appeared, as it is, an
arm of flesh, unable to save; and yet by the same goodness, the major part
continues faithful to him and the Kingdom, and God has not left it without
glorious testimony of his assistance, and good assurance to us, that God will
give us the like success he gave our Brethren the Scots, if we would yet
follow their zeal, to (...) glory, and their unity amongst themselves; neither
is it altogether to be contemned, that which is already effected by this
Parliament: the Popish and Prelaticall party are wholly discountenanced, and
resolutely opposed, by the Parliament, by whom faithful Ministers are
encouraged, and the purity of the Gospel maintained, and such Laws past, for
the vindication of Property and Liberty, as better cannot be devised: and now
the Scales are quite turned, Prerogative pleads nothing but Law, and
conscience; Papists and Prelates defend the Protestant Religion, Delinquents
the Law and Parliament: And the Parliament, clean contrary, destroys
Religion, Property, King, Parliament, and Kingdom: and in a word, the Lion is
turned Lamb, and the Lamb is turned Lion. But this is no new thing, we have an
example of the first, Psalm. 10. ver. 9, 10. He lies in wait secretly, as a
Lion in his den, he crowcheth, and humbles himself, that the poor may fall
by his strong ones. Whatsoever pretense the Lion makes of humility, his end is
to devour.

For the other, we know there is no juster indignation then that which proceeds
from patience abused, or love contemned; the meekest man upon the earth, will
be kindled into rage, when an Idol stands in competition with the God of all
glory; or when the being of a Kingdom, and the Church of God are both
endangered; in such a case as this, Moses tries what party he can make in
Israel, and commands them every one to slay his brother: if God or good men,
cause any to be troubled, it is of very faithfulness, and for their good. But
here it is objected: what danger is our Religion, Property, or Liberty in?

1. Prerogative will defend the true Protestant Profession, as it was in the
days of Q. Elizabeth, 2 It will defend the Property, and Liberty of the
People, according the old and new Laws. 3 It will defend the just Power and
Privilege of Parliament.
To the first: Prerogative will defend the true Protestant Religion, as it ^as
in the days of Queen Elizabeth. How good a defender of the P^otesta^^
Religion Prerogative was before the Parliament, you had a little Breviat at the
beginning, and how good a defense she is like to make for the future, we see by
the instruments she chooses to defend it; Papists, Enemies, and Prelates,
Travtors to Religion: but her solemn Protestations must be believed. Well then,
let us admit the utmost of those Protestations, and the result is this; The
same Religion, and the same Ecclesiastical Government, that was in the days
of Queen Elizabeth, is that pitch of Reformation, which Prerogative will
consent to, and maintain, but one jot further it will not go; and why should
not this content the Parliament, as well as the Kingdom? were not the times of
Queen Elizabeth the happiest that ever England saw? To this the parliament, and
all good men, answer, that in the heginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, she
chose such men to be Bishops (for the most part) as had suffered persecution
for the telamonie of the Gospel in Queen Mary's days, and by such sufferings
had, both evidenced their fidelity to Christ their Master, and learnt
compassion toward the Church their Brethren: the succeeding Bishops were
something worse, but civil authority was then so active to suppress Popery,
and encourage good Ministers, to do their duty, that a slender and insufficient
Ecclesiastical Government might not be much taken notice of: but now we have a
Popish Queen, that has a great influence into the Civil State; we have (for
the most part) a dissolute, and degenerate Clergy, that has once already
betrayed and persecuted Religion, and yet now we must have no better guard for
Religion, then the not unchaste, because untempted Prelacy, in the time of Queen
Elizabeth: It Is hard usage, because I need not any cloak when the Sun shines,
to keep it from me in a storm: or, because in time of peace, I walk unarmed,
to put me naked in the front of a Battle: surely in this (which is the
greatest matter of all others) the Parliament is to be justified, that they
seek another manner of defense for Religion now, then in the days of Queen
Elizabeth: and in that they set not any times, or persons, to be a standard of
Reformation, but the Word of God, which is, and ought to be the rule of all
Reformation of the Church, both in Doctrine and Discipline: and this I suppose
is satisfactory to the first: we will proceed to weigh the two other promises
of Prerogative.

It will defend the Property and Liberty of the People, according to the old
and new Laws, and it will defend the just Privilege of Parliament.

To satisfy for this, we must always direct our eyes, and fix them upon
Prerogatives self, by considering what she is by nature, rather then what she
speaks by art; and to discover the nature of Prerogative, we must consider
what her constant actions are, how she carries her self, when her motions
proceed only from her own internal disposition, when she is a free agent,
without any interposition of true necessity, fear, or danger; for then, and
then only, she acts her self: and how can you have a better and fuller
discovery of her disposition, then by her constant course of proceedings,
before this Parliament, set down at large, in the Parliaments Remonstrance of
the State of the Kingdom: for the keeping of which from the peoples view,
there was so strong a party made in the House of Commons (consisting, as we
may well suppose, of that Prerogative-party which have now deserted that House)
that the debate of publishing it was two several times protracted ^ill
midnight, the resolution curried but by 11. voices, and the printing of it
(...) protested against; so dangerous a thing was it counted, to let the people
understand their danger, and see the evils intended, lest the should look out
for redress, and endeavor for a remedy; nothing could be more contrary to the
designs of Prerogative, who had formerly blinded their eyes by suppressing
preaching, and the Law; and Found their stands, by taking away Property and
Liberty, that thus blind fold and bound, they might be carried at pleasure by
their stand leaders, till both fell into the ditch. This opening the eyes of the
blind, was the sedition and faction of Parliaments; for this, after their
former dissolutions, they were always charged to be led by a few dangerously
affected persons, pests and vipers: and for this they were dissolved, because
they also would not become a grievance, by giving money in the first place, with
out redress or speech of their grievances.

Thus you see the nature of Prerogative: but it is answered, that the
unparalled Acts of grace granted this Parliament, may justly challenge, not
only oblivion of these things past, but confidence for the time to come, that
the very nature and judgment of Prerogative is changed. From the good Laws
granted this Parliament, this conclusion follows very naturally, that it is
happy for the Kingdom when the King concurs with the advice of his
Parliament, but I believe it will hardly follow from thence, that Prerogative
is regenerate, there was something in the balance of those gracious Grants
besides good nature: the presence of the Scotch Army which caused this
Parliament, made it act more vigorously whilst it was here, then other
Parliaments, but that Army being returned, and the Kingdom of Scotland settled,
it was conceived that the tame Kingdom of England, which only Per
Antiperistasin, had received a little heat from the North would quickly cool
again, and be reduced to its former malleablenesse. For the better effecting
whereof Prerogatives first act was, notwithstanding the rebellion in Ireland
and the just fear of Popish Assasinates, to discharge the Guard of the
Parliament, and when they petitioned to have their Guard again, one was set
upon them under a Commander they could not confide in, so they chose rather to
be without. The next act of Prerogative was, to destroy the whole Parliament,
by breaking the bundle, stick after stick, and this was attempted by an
assault made upon the House of Commons, with an intent forcibly to have seized
some of their Members, under the pretense of an accusation of high Treason,
which was so much resented by the Kingdom, that all the Counties of England,
though it necessary by numerous Petitions to present the pledges of their
public affections to the Parliament, and to declare their unanimous
resolutions, to maintain their Privileges, amongst which well-affected
people, very many that were near hand, appeared in good numbers, voluntarily
to guard the Parliament, some of them with all importunity, crying for Justice,
and against Bishops, which last general discontent occasioned the passing some
more good Laws for public satisfaction, though now, that Ebullition of public
affection is the pretended cause of all our misery, under the name of tumults,
which are so mightily declaimed against, and so continually complained of by
Prerogative, who was contented to whip the Kingdom till it cried, and now
makes that crying, a maine argument of deserting the Parliament, and of
bringing open force to destroy that, and the Kingdom: and indeed Prerogative
had good reason to be incensed against these officious Assemblies; for thereby
not only all her designs were made abortive, but all hopes of effecting any
thing against the Parliament, in the Southern parts of the Kingdom wholly
frustrate; therefore she must retire to a place of strength, where her servants
(Fugitives and Traitors to the Parliament, and Kingdom,) may be avowed and
protected: and then, for the better effecting a division in the Kingdom,
Prerogative begins to withdraw her party from the Parliament; some by
especial Letters upon their Allegiance, others for fear of being put out of
their Offices and services, under His Majesty. In a word, all the trees were
wind-shaken, and those that were not fast rooted, fell; who though they had
stood out all the tumults, without danger or hazard, yet two months after they
must withdraw themselves from the Parliament, as Prerogative says, for fear
of tumults, though themselves being summoned to return and give their
attendance (according to their duty) in Parliament, allege only His Majesty's
command for their absence. After this a journey is pretended into Ireland, that
an Army may be raised with less suspicion: then His Majesty (that, in the
greatest heat of discontent, went through London hunted at New Market; past
through the whole Kingdom, secure and dangerlesse alone,) in the midst of that
dutiful Country of Yorkshire, proposed as a pattern of affection and loyalty
to the Kingdom, must have a guard, which now (by the assistance of Papists and
Delinquents, at home, and by means of foreign supplies from abroad) is
grown a royal Army, not only avowing His Majesty's Servants, but open war,
against that traiterous Faction in both Houses of Parliament; and yet His
Majesty's soul abhorres the very thought of war against his Parliament, and
yet the Parliament are now declared abettors of that Faction, against which the
war is maintained, and nothing, that will or malice can devise, held bad
enough, sufficiently to asperse and blast their proceedings.

Now after all this, he that can think Prerogatives nature changed, because of
a few good words, and fair Protestations, let him think so; and he that will
be deceived, let him be deceived; but wisdom is justified of her children: in
vain shall we expect figs of thorns, or grapes of thistles; such as the tree
is, such the fruit will be. Yet suppose that Prerogative should really intend
to perform her Protestations, and engagements to the Kingdom, when this
present Faction of both Houses of Parliament is subdued; though no man ought to
question His Majesty's personal goodness, yet no man can doubt, but that this
Army, thus composed, when it has mastered the Parliament, will also give Law
to His Majesty, as the Roman Army did to the Emperors, after the conquest of
the Empire: and then, the question is not, Whether we will trust His Majesty?
which no man will question; but whether we will subject our selves, with the
most desired, and best deserving Parliament that ever was, to Papists and
Delinquents?

But here it is objected:

The Parliament is as justly to be blamed, and there lie as clear and manifold
Objections against it, as against Prerogative.

1 It endeavors unnecessarily to perpetuate it self. 2 It seeks the
alteration of the ancient frame of Government, and the abolition of the
fundamental Laws of the Kingdom. 3 It destroys Property and Liberty, as
much as ever Prerogative did. 4 They are seduced by a few factious Members, who
are wholly transported with private ends and aims. 5 They seek the ruin of
the King and his Posterity.
To the first: This Parliament endeavors to perpetuate it self unnecessarily.
Answ. I do not wonder that Prerogative is impatient of this check, and that it
endeavors therefore to cut this Gordian knot, it cannot untie: but why the
Parliament should not be infinitely more desirous to be dissolved, then
continue, if the Religion, peace, and prosperity of the Kingdom were once
thoroughly settled, no wise man can give a reason.

The Prelaticall Party proclaim every where, That if the Revenue of the Church
be taken away (which is all they fear, though no man endeavors it) Religion
and Learning will utterly decay; their very godliness will not stand without
gain: and why the Parliament should be so much in love with a gainlesse
uncessant labor, I cannot devise. Oh, but every man is ambitious of power.
Truly, power in a multitude, where all equally bear the burden, (but the most
active carry the most honor) will never be valued by the major part, whose
private interests, and care of their family and estates, is nearer and dearer
to them, then any other thing whatsoever, after their engagements shall be
discharged to God and the public. And therefore that the desired dissolution
of this Parliament might be effected, it were much the readier way, to
endeavor the settling the distractions of the Kingdom, then by multiplying the
dangers, to necessitate the continuance of the Parliament.

But to the second Objection: The Parliament seeks the alteration of the
ancient frame of government, and the abolition of the fundamental Laws of
this Kingdom. Answ. Of the Ecclesiastical Laws and Government it does, for
the reasons given before; and because it ought to obey God rather then man: but
for the authority of the civil Magistrate, and the common Law and Justice of
the Kingdom, it has always conformed to them, having never endeavored any
thing without the Kings consent, but only to preserve it self and the
Kingdom, in such a case: and I doubt not, but this Position of theirs will be
found very legal, That the Kings Authority, signified by his Courts,
(especially by the high Court of Parliament, the representative Body of the
Kingdom) is more obligatory to the Kingdom, then his personal Commands, out of
his Courts, though his personal Commands are always to be reverenced, when
they contradict not those Courts, and the Law: and therefore I assure my self,
in conclusion, the loyalty and duty of the Parliament, and of that part of the
Kingdom which obeyes the Parliament, will be found unblemisht.

But to the third Objection: The Parliament invades the Property and Liberty of
the Subject, as much as ever Prerogative did. An. When I consider, how often,
and with how much art Prerogative inculcates this to the people, pretending
great affection to them, and much care of their sufferings, together with much
displeasure against the Parliament, for their oppression; I look upon this as
the maine design of Prerogative, to multiply the dangers and miseries of the
Kingdom, thereby necessitating the Parliament to lay excessive charges upon
the people, that the present sense of evils, which always make deepest
impressions in men's minds, might induce the people, whose love lies most in
their purses, to desert the Parliament; but the wise will consider, that the
searching of a deep wound is more painful then the making of it: yet he that
searches my wound, to cure me, is more my friend, then he that makes it, only
to abuse me, and please himself. This is the true state of the case:
Prerogative oppressed the people before the Parliament, for her own pleasure,
without any necessity, and laid the foundation of these present evils; the
Parliament, at the earnest desire of the people, undertake the cure: and,
whilst they might operate without interruption, proceeded in the work, though
with much difficulty and charge, yet with much good success, and general
satisfaction; settling peace with Scotland, and good Laws in England. But the
Jesuitish Adversary, fearing, thereby, our happiness, and their own ruin,
stir up that cruel and universal rebellion in Ireland, which might very
well put the Parliament into Fears and Jealousies, making them expect
whatsoever the malice of hell could inspire into their rage and fury, who in
cold blood could contrive a powder plot. Yet for all this, the Parliament could
not obtain a Guard, but instead of that, has been assaulted, and pursued,
with those continual mischievous and wicked plots before recited. And now for
the Parliaments taxing the Kingdom, to the twentieth part of their estates,
and imprisoning those that oppose, is there not a cause? a just, a manifest,
and a necessary cause for it? shall this be called destruction of property and
liberty? If the Parliament, entrusted for that purpose, may not employ the
estates and persons of the Kingdom, for the necessary defense of it self;
then let it be the wisdom of the Kingdom, to preserve themselves a fat, full,
and easy prey for their enemies, but by no means to preserve themselves from
their enemies: Let the Physician cure his patients, but let not them observe
the prescriptions and ordinances of the Physician: let ill humors be purged,
but let not the body be weakened: put any impossibilities upon the Houses of
Parliament; let them be accused of infidelity, if they do not their best to
deliver us: and let them be accused of oppression, if they do their best to
deliver us. The Parliament has a very happy time of it to serve such humors,
and receive such encouragements: but the blessing of the Saints on earth is
upon them, their way is with God, and their reward in heaven. As for those that
repine at this charge, Sodom and Gomorrah, Rome and Antichrist, at the last
day shall rise up in judgment against them, and shall condemn them. For, the
Popish party spare for no cost, stick at no danger, venture all, both estates
and life, for the Catholic cause: but we had rather our Religion, and all
that is dear unto us, should be submitted to their cruel mercy, then
contribute the twentieth part of our estates for our own deliverance. And thus
much for the third Objection.

For the fourth: Their factious leaders are carried with private ends and
aims. Ans. Certainly, whatsoever their ends are, they that accuse them, are
not so much of their counsel, as to know their ends; and as sure it is; they
might have attained their private aims, (if they have any) much more speedily,
by deserting the public, as others have done, then by adhering to it, as they
do: but whatsoever their ends and aims be, we will leave that to God and
their own consciences; let their ends be what they will, the Houses of
Parliament have no relations to them, or dependence upon them, that they should
serve their ends, if at any time they consent to their opinion; they are
convinced by public reasons, and it very well beseems the honor of a
Parliament, that he who speaks most reason, should rule the Parliament: I
never heard that it was any disparagement, to the Apostles, and Church
assembled in the first Synod, that they all submitted to the sentence of S.
James, and out of his opinion framed the first Canons of the Church.

The fifth objection is, They seek the ruin and destruction of the King and
his Posterity. To that the Parliament answers, That the force they employ, to
recover him and his children again out of the hands of those wicked
Counselors; who have seduced him away from his Parliament and Kingdom, is a
service to the King; as dutiful and loving, as it would be to endeavor the
redemption of him by force, if he and his children were taken prisoners by
Turkish Pirates, and detained by force. And for the hazard of His Majesty's
Person, and his Princely Children at Keinton Battle, had it been in the power
of the Parliaments forces to have kept them out of the danger of that Battle,
as it was in the power of that Army about the King, they would not have
suffered him or his children to have ventured an hair of their heads. But
perhaps the leaders of that Army will say, the Kings resolutions were so
strongly set, and his commands so peremptory, that they could not keep him from
the Battle. Fidelity never made such a plea. To compel the King for his
safety, is more loyalty, then to obey him for his destruction: therefore the
danger of the Kings life, that day, and of his childrens, let it lie (as it
ought) upon that destructively obedient Army, which might have kept them from
that hazard, and would not.

But it is objected further: 1. The Houses of Parliament are favorers of
Brownists and Anabaptists. 2. They have promised the Papists to repeal all the
Laws-established against them, if they will join on their side. 3. Their
reformation, will be a deformation. 4. They reject the Book of Common Prayer.
5. They differ so much amongst themselves, that if they had their own minds,
they know not what they would have.


These Objections are with so much art and cunning interweav'd in the several
Declarations and Libells of the Prerogative-partie, and with so much confidence
affirmed, that a man who knows assuredly the contrary, must have a good
resolution, if he be not out-faced in his own knowledge: yet take these
Objections nakedly, as they are sum'd up here together: how contradictory are
they in themselves? how impossible some of them, how scandalous all? the very
likeliest of them bare surmises, and prophetical conjectures: nevertheless
let the people be ensnared by them and it is enough. But certainly, if the
Prerogative penmen did themselves believe them, they would put it to an issue,
by procuring the Parliament their desired Synod, and then it would evidently
appear, what the persons are the Parliament affects, what opinions they
incline to, and what reformation they intend. But I fear their consciences
misgive them; the womb of this intended birth being declared to be the Word of
God, the fruit can be nothing but the child of truth, and therefore the surest
way is to hinder the birth, and in the mean time make the people believe, the
Parliament is in labor of a Moon-Calfe. But the Houses declare their
intentions clearly enough, to satisfy any honest man.

1 They say it is safer for Religion, that we concur with other Protestant
Churches in point of Discipline, then with the Papists, and it will beget a
stronger mutual confidence between us and them. 2 They do and have declared
against the pressing of indifferent Ceremonies, (though estabished by Law) upon
weak consciences. And hereby let all the world judge, whether their
proceedings in all these things, be not pious, and moderate, and such as may be
expected, from the representative Body of the Kindome of England.
And now, O England, why haltest thou between two opinions? If Prerogative be
turned thy friend, cleave to Prerogative: if the Parliament be turned thy
enemy, desert the Parliament: nothing will sooner destroy thee, then this thy
neutrality. I have declared unto thee my sense of both: the judgment is thine,
resolve wisely and speedily: which soever thou choosest, it is either life, or
death; God direct thee in thy choice, as may be most for his glory: for my
part, I think the Parliament may justly take up this ensuing complaint, against
all those that withdraw their confidence from them.

Parl. We have forsaken father and mother, wife and children, houses and lands,
for the Gospells sake and yours; we daily spend our selves, decay our healths,
venture our lives, for your service: for your sakes we have walked craggie
paths, and not been wearied: the Lion has roared against us, and we have not
been terrified: mountains of opposition have been heaped one upon another, in
our way, like Pelion upon Ossa, and we have not been discouraged. For your
sakes we are cursed, reproached, killed all the day long, and yet for all this
we complain not: That only which breaks our heart is, that you, even you, for
whom we have done and suffered all these things; that you, I say, should grudge
to assist us, murmr against us, revile and hats us. God knows, we desire your
good, as our own souls, and all this unkindnesse of yours is not sufficient
to turn our hearts from you, but we stand still, resolved to spend, and be
spent for you, though the more we love you, the less we be beloved of you: God
knows, we have no other intention, but for your good, to take away the dross
from the silver, Tradition from the Church, and wicked persons from the King:
that the Worship of God may be established in purity, and the throne of the
King in righteousness; for the effecting whereof, we know no other way, but
that. His Majesty (according to his own Proposition) follow the example of
Queen Elizabeth, not in maintaining Prelates, but in esteeming Parliaments: She
accounted them the Representative Body of the Kingdom, not a Faction: She
sought their loves, not their lives: She called them often together, only to
see her good people, and to inquire of their grievances, that she might
redress them, and when return was made, Omnia been, and then Subsidies given,
she refused their thank-offering, saying, I seek not yours, but you. Then the
blessing of God went along with the justice of the Prince, and the dutiful
obedience of the People waited as a handmaid upon the eye of her Mistress: The
love of Parliaments was that, and that only (under God) which made the times
of Q. Elizabeth happy: and the contempt of, and opposition against Parliaments,
is that, and that only, (the secret judgments of God for our sins, being
left to God) which is the visible cause of all our miseries.

Therefore O King and People, if ye desire to attain the happiness of blessed
Queen Elizabeth, and her prosperous times, observe but this one precept,
Confide in Parliaments.

FINIS.

