York
Canter.


A NEW DISPUTATION Between the two Lordly Bishops, YORK and CANTERBVRY.

With a Discourse of many passages which have happened to them, before and
since that they were committed to the Tower of LONDON.

Being very necessary for observation, and well worth the Reading.

The second Edition, corrected and enlarged.

Written in English PROSE by Laurence Price, February the 15. 1642.

The simple sort lives most at rest,
Whilst Lordly Bishops are distressed.
London Printed for J. Wright. 1642.



A New DISPVTATION Between the two Lordly Bishops, YORK and CANTERBURY.
York. FEllow and friend as a man may say, you are well overtaken; who would
have thought to have seen you here at this time of the day?


Cant. Prithee York be meddling with some others matters, and talk not to me. I
am not thy fellow yet; and thou know I was never thy friend, it is well for you
that you are so light-hearted, I tell you truly I am heavy.


Yor. Why Canterbury, if I may not be so bold as to call you fellow nor friend,
yet I am sure we are neighbors; how long ever 'twill last I cannot tell: and
whereas you say you are very heavy (if I am not much ^istaken) You will be made
lighter by the head before three months come to an end, I am sure you have
well enough deserved for it.


Cant. Neighbor York, if you will be so called, here we are both forth-comming
though not coming forth, if thou have any thing to charge me with, speak thy
mind and spare not, I fear thee not.


Yor. And shall I speak my mind freely?


Cant. Ah, say what thou can.


Yor. I am in doubt I shall make you angry?


Cant. Fear not that, nor spare no speech.


Yor. Then Canterbury mark what I shall say to thee, I verily think if thou
were rewarded answerable to thy deeds, thou should be served as the two
Romish Priests were in January, which were benefactors for the Pope.


Cant. Why how were they served?


Yor. Thus, first they took shipping at Newgate, afterward sailed up
Holborne, and came a shore at Tyburne.


Cant. And have I deserved to be drawn hanged and quartered?


Yor. If thou were as sure to have it as thou have deserved for it, thy turn
would be the next.


Cant. I wonder York why thou should be so ambitious, and to pass rash
judgment against me? thou art like him that can discern a little mote in
another man's eye; but thou can not see a beam in thine own eye: for any
thing I can perceive, our cases are both a like, I am in the Tower of London,
so are you, I am here kept a Prisoner, so are you, I am like to suffer death
for my misdeeds, and so are you. Wherefore then should you not rather study to
cure your own diseases, then to apply a plaster to my wound.


Yor. Stay, stay, a little my little Lord, you put me in mind of wounds and
grievances, I pray you tell me one thing if you can remember it, how has your
body fared since your Doctor gave you the purge, which made you vomit up the
Crosse-keyes and the Miter? me thinks you look very costive upon the matters?


Cant. Now you speak of my looks, have you forgot my Lord, how the Devil
made two looks over Lincoln? I would wish you to beware the third, least you
come home by weeping cross.


Yor. De'e hear me Canterbury, since your mind runs so much upon crosses, I
can tell such strange news of a Cross, which I think will cross your humor
to hear it. It is for certain spoken, that Cheape-side Cross is quite
defunct, and stands like one forsaken of her former Solicitors.


Cant. Why, what have they done to Cheape-side Cross? I thought that had not
offended any body?


Yor. It seems it has offended some body, For I am sure they have torn down
part of the portraiture of the body of Christ, and the Cardinals Crosier
staff, and the Crown that was placed upon the Virgin Mary's head.


Cant. Now by my Holy-dame, I think that they were no Papists, that did it,
but how can you approve this to be true, I am sure that you were not there to
see it?


Yor. Are you so hard of belief, that you cannot believe any thing to be true
unless you see it? Then you will not believe that the two Popish Priests were
drawn hanged and quartered for offending the Kings Laws; whose heads were no
sooner set upon London Bridge, but Bensteed your young watchman turned his
toward the Tower, expecting a third man. Then you will not believe that the
Lord Digby is gone beyond Sea? Then you will not believe that Colonel Lunsford
is taken, If you will not believe nothing but what you see, it is in vain to
tell you any news at all.


Cant. But are you in mind that the disfiguring of Cheape-side Cross, is a
greater distaste to me then it is to your self?


Yor. It't please your graceless grace my little Lord, you know that I ever
hated Papistry from the beginning; for which cause you caused me to suffer a
long time imprisonment. Moreover you thought to have seen an end of my life,
but now I may chance to live to see your end.


Cant. You talk like one that is overioy'd, but tell me one thing at your
leisure, have you given in your answer to the charge, which was the other day
laid in against you at the Parliament? or have you never seen the Welch-mans
Protestation?


Yor. 1. I would have you answer me to this question, and then I shall answer
you the better? What news do you hear from Rome? has your ghostly father
the Pope ever a pardon in store for you? are you sure that when you dye you
shall be Canonized for a Saint? resolve me that question Canterbury.


Cant. Me thinks your tongue runs a little too fast York, have you any more
questions to ask me?


Yor. Yes, Yes, more I think then you will be willing to answer to.


Cant. Let me hear your excellent wits; it is very well known that I have
answered too many great matters in my time, therefore I make no doubt but I
shall be ready to give you satisfaction to the full.


Yor. Then I would have you tell me what you hear from the Cardinals, Monks,
Friars, Nuns, Popish Priests, Jesuits, Seminaries, and Seducers in Rome, and
other Countries, are they all friends with you? Is your grace in such high
favor with them, that they will send some of their Agents privily to convey
you out of this strong Tower. They intend sure a practice, let them take heed
of the London Prentices, for Bensteeds death is not forgotten.


Cant. Fie York forbear, thou talkest to me in such a railing manner, that
although I can, I will not answer thee; therefore rest thy self content for
this, I am persuaded to that, if all thy faults were written in thy forehead,
thou would appear to be as bad, as who is worst.


Yor. Canterbury, if you are weary of my talking, I would also have you to be
weary of your wicked deeds, and labor to serve your Maker as a true Protestant
ought to do, and to be faithful to the Kings Majesty, and the Honorable
Houses of Parliament; in so doing, you may have peace of Conscience in this
life, and after death, your fins may be remitted, through the merits of our
Savior.


Cant. Hark, hark, there is a Messenget comes, which has brought me tidings
that my dinner is ready, so York adieu far this time.


Yor. Canterbury farewell, remember the last counsel that I gave you, and as
for my part I conclude, Honey soit qui mal I pence.


Cant. Stay York, yet a little longer, I have one question more to ask thee,
which I had almost quite forgot.


Yor. I thought you were troubled with the simples, you have so many things to
think on, that I think you will forget every thing are it be long: what would you
say to me if you could speak?


Cant. Tell me this one thing in courtesy.


Yor. What thing is that?


Cant. What is the reason that so many Countrymen came up to London lately? I
hear that thousands of men came up in troops, some on foot, and some on horse
back. What was the meaning of their coming?


Yor. Sure enough Camerbury, they came not for any good will they bare to you.


Cant. Why should they bear me any ill will?


Yor. They say you have caused them to have worshipped Idols, and that you
would erect new Crosses, with Popish Pictures about them, and that they were
forced to set up Altars in their church by your means, These are things which
Protestants neither can, nor will endure.


Cant. Why, does the Law lie in their hands?


Yor. For certain they made Petitions to the honorable Houses of Parliament;
to the end, that they would have all the Bishops put down for your sake.


Cant. And do you understand that all the Bishops shall be put down?


Yor. Yea, all the Popish Bishops.


Cant. Then what think you will become of all the Romish Catholics?


Yor. The Priests and Friars may take their chance,
And walk a journey into France;
The Jesuits they may trudge to Spain,
And never more return again;
The Papists all may pack to Rome,
And stay there till the day of doom.

Cant. If all these things you live to see,
Then will a merry England be.

Come a way to dinner.

Enter a poor Musitioner with a new SONG.
FIDDLER.
May it please both your graces to hear a new Song,
In which on my word I mean no body wrong.
Cant. Is It worth the hearing?


Fid. I hope it will give your Lordships content.


Yor. Come lets hear your Song.


Here begins the Song, to the tune of, Banks his Bill of Fare.
1.
I Am a poor man and scarce worth a shilling,
As unto my neighbors is too too well known,
Yet to live upright in the world I am willing,
I covet for nothing but what is mine own:
2. And now in the first place to tell you my mind,
For false-hearted people I care not a straw,
This is my conceit by experience I find,
There Is none but offenders that fears the Law.
3.
I am not in question called for my Religion,
From every vile Sect I my self can withold,
Both Papist and Atheist I hold in derision,
I Will not wrong my conscience for lucre of gold:
4. My tongue I will govern by the line of reason,
From every dissembler myself I Will withdraw.
I hate all such Rebels that dares to speak Treason,
There Is none but offenders that fears the Law.
5.
I marvel what harm has old Cheape-side Cross done,
That some mere mechanics has wrought it spite,
To disfigure Picture of Mary and her Son,
And dare not to show forth their heads by daylight:
6. They also have pulled down the Crosier Staff
Which once was fast plac'tin the Cardinals claw,
This sport cannot choose but make Lucifer laugh,
There Is none but offenders that fears the Law.
7.
One thing above all the rest I do admire
Why so many vulgars are in an uproare?
To put down the Bishops is that they desire.
Although they can show no good reason wherefore:
8. But now to conclude least I should you offend,
And you for my Song would no money me draw,
I Will shut up my Pipes and so make an end,
There Is none but offenders that fears the Law.
Yor. Why there is no hurt at all in this Song upon my word.


Cant. If all that reads Pamphlets, and sings Ballads about the City of London
and in the Country, did no worse then this, I should be a great deal better
pleased with them: Hold there is something for thy reward.


My Lords I thank you both, although your lives stands in jeopardy.
The Fiddler hopes to live so long, to see your heels at liberty.
L. P.

FINIS.

