A MODERATE REPLY TO THE Citie-Remonstrance; PRESENTED TO THE HIGH COURT OF
PARLIAMENT the 26 of May, 1646.

Containing several Reasons why many well affected CITIZENS cannot assent
thereunto.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Simmons, and Henry Overton in Pope's Head Alley.
1646.

A MODERATE REPLY TO THE CITY Remonstrance.
THE City Representative; as it is made up, and chosen by the City
collective; so should it act for the good of the same; but it is more common
then commendable, for men betrusted with other men's good, to behave themselves
to their trustees hurt.

There are four cases wherein the City collective is not bound to the City
representative, but ought in duty to dissent from it, if not to protest against
it.

1. When the City representative acts in a direct, evident, and obvious manner,
against the express will and word of God.

2. When in the like plain, and direct manner, it acts against the apparent
welfare, peace, and good of the Kingdom.

3. When it acts after the same manner against the proper end of its own being,
the Cities welfare.

4. When it acts beyond the bounds, limits, and extents appointed, to the
endangering of all its immunities and freedoms.

All which granted (as cannot be denied) the serious examination of the late
Remonstrance and City Petition presented to the Parliament, May 26. 1646. by
the City representative, yields matter and reason sufficient for our utter
dislike of, if not protestation against the same, and that will appear if we
consider,

First, the Narrative and Remonstrative part of it.

Secondly, the Prayer or Petitionary part of it.

Thirdly, the probable tendency, and dangerous effects of both. First, for the
Narative and Remonstrative part of it.

First, we observe the Phrase, Style, and Dialect thereof, carrying a full
compliance with his Majesty's wonted Declarations against the Parliament, and
(as if indeed) drawn up by the same hand, framed by the same head, insinuating
into the people, that all manner of heresies, schisms, and blasphemies, are
tolerated, and the fomentors thereof, with all swarms of Sectaries, are
encouraged, emboldened, yea, admitted into places of profit and trust, in
Martial and Civil affairs by the Parliament, and that under a pretense of a
Christian respect unto tender consciences, (evidenced in their late
Declaration) they design a toleration for all these. All which are dangerously
insinuated, page 2.

Secondly, a close, but clear intimation to the people, that a sacred
obligation lies upon them from their solemn League and Covenant, unto a
downright suppression of all those who cut either of weak or tender
consciences, cannot fully submit unto Presbyteriall government, though it is
notoriously known, that the Parliament did promise in several Declarations, a
gracious respect unto tender consciences, and did act accordingly in the
beginning of this Parliament, releasing many poor men of different judgments,
from their heavy pressures, under the cruel tyranny of the late Prelates (to
the general contentment, joy, and acclamations of all the people) for
nonconformity unto their government, though established by the Law of the
Land: and most evident it is, that the end of the Covenant was not at all a
rigid exaction of a forced uniformity unto Presbyterial government, upon the
subjects of England; and the truth is (all things considered) it is a most
putid and irrational thing, once to conceive, that any such thing was ever
intended by our present Parliament in the imposing thereof. For

First, could any suppose it could consist with the Parliaments wisdom, to
swear themselves, and enforce the people to covenant a subjection, unto that
Church government which they, nor the people, did not at that time understand?
Could it enter into their hearts, at least to imagine that such a blind
Sacrifice would ever atone the wrath of the Almighty for our former abuses in
matters of Church government, to lay the first stone of a blessed Reformation
in blindness and ignorance, and so to destroy Prelacy by Popery?

Secondly, if they did understand this platform of Church Government, to what
end has the Assembly been searching out the will of God about
Church Government ever since the imposition hereof? Was it to frame their
Reformation according to the Word, or the Word according to their resolutions?
Did they first resolve and then enquire? First conclude, and then debate? If
any reformed Church must be the exact pattern for us to walk by; what need any
further expense of toil, and time, to find out the mind of God herein, when
the resolved pattern is before our eyes?

Thirdly, it is notoriously known that the dissenting brethren in the Assembly,
City, Country, have taken this Covenant, and were as forward in the promotion
hereof by all due means, as well as others; knowing full well the true intent
and meaning thereof: and could we think they were so far at variance with
their own peace, and future welfare, as thus freely and voluntarily to contrive
and promote the ruin hereof, as it necessarily must follow upon the aforesaid
interpretation?

Fourthly, the Parliament did never yet give any such interpretation of the
Covenant, and who ought to explain the meaning but the makers thereof? Is it
not most absurd, that they shall compose and enjoin the Covenant, and others
shall put their sense upon it, and endeavor the enforcement of their own sense
both upon them and the whole Kingdom; for no less is insinuated in this
Remonstrance, page the 3d.

But you will say, the very express letter declares the sense, it is the very
Text, and not the interpretation which they plead, being plain and obvious to
every man's eye: We reply,

The letter thereof does not tie us to a perfect conformity to Presbyteriall
government already established in any reformed Church in the world; for we are
tied by our Covenant unto a sincere, real, and constant endeavor in our
several places and callings, the reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of
England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government,
according to the Word of God, and the best reformed Churches. So that here is
no positive determination of any thing; but an engagement unto an inquisition
after the best; and the word of God to be our chief informer, and directer
herein; and we are tied likewise to the like endeavor of our nearest
conjunction and uniformitie in Religion, confession of faith, form of
Church Government, Directory for worship and Catechizing, viz. according to the
word of God, that possibly we can, so that if our Brethren of Scotland have
taken the same Covenant with us, they are bound as well to hearken to what this
Kingdom shall propound unto them, as this Kingdom is to consider what is
tendered from them to us; and if they have not taken the same Covenant with us,
yet we are bound by our Covenant (in case this Kingdom find out a more
perfect way of Church Government, according to the word of God, then that
Kingdom of Scotland has done) we are bound (we say) more to persuade, and
reason them over, to conformity with us, then in such a case, to conform to
them. But

Lastly, It Is as clear as the Sun, that the true intent of the solemn
League and Covenant, was a more plain discovery of the Parliaments enemies,
and not for a snare to the Parliaments friends, and (as touching reformation in
matters spiritual and ecclesiastical) to root out Popery, Prelacy,
Superstition, Heresy, Schism, and profaneness; and God forbid, but that all
these in a due, and Christian way, should be endeavored against; But are we
bound by this, to ruin the Parliaments friends, who loves not their lives
unto death in the Parliaments cause? Men cordial to the State, conscientious
in Religion, yea, holy, godly, learned, and that by the testimony of their
hottest adversaries, and for no other reason, but their non-resolution, to
swear subjection to what they know not; as if the tender conscience was the
troubler of Israel, when the want hereof is the only plague of this wicked
world, the naming whereof is an evident offense, yea no less then a
provocation unto these angry Remonstrants, who can hardly bear it, even from
the pen of the Parliament of England. This is the second ground of our utter
dislike of the narrative part of this Petition.

Thirdly, You tell the people in print, as well as the Parliament, by your
written Remonstrance, what Vows you have made in the Covenant as well as in
former Protestations, to preserve the Rights and Privileges of the Parliament,
and the Liberties of the Kingdoms, and to preserve and defend the Kings
Majesty's Person and Authority, in the Preservation and Defense of the true
Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms, that the world may bear witness
with your Consciences, of your Loyalty, and that you have no thoughts or
intentions, to diminish His Majesty's just power and greatness, and do humbly
rest in the assurances you have received in the many former Declarations of
both Houses, concerning their intentions toward his Majesty, his Royal
Posterity, and the Peace of this Kingdom.

But to what end is all this? is it to call for the popular testimony of your
constant care, you ever have had, of the Parliaments Privileges? if it was
meet for us to remember, what the Parliament have forgotten, to unvaile for
detection, what in love, they have buried in oblivion; you very well know, what
truth can say to this particular; Is it to call for a popular observation of
the Parliaments neglect, of their obliged care, not to diminish his Majesty's
just power and greatness? As for the Parliament, let envy her self disgorge
her poison, and speak her worst; nay, in this case, speak Malignants, speak
the Oxfordian Aulicus; but first consider a word or two, what an unnatural
war has been raised amongst us? how managed on the Kings side? how
maintained? how much innocent blood split in the three Kingdoms? what slanders
have been cast upon the Parliament of England? how they have been written,
remonstrated, and declared again and again, Traitors, Rebels, a pretended
Parliament, and what not? how the The Author of Truth it is manifest positively
affirms that his Majesty himself sent a Commission from Scotland, sealed
with the S^ots broad Seal, unto the Irish Rebels, to authorize them in that
bloody work, Page the 20.
Irish, Scottish, and English wars did rise, what murtherings, killing and
slaughtering the poor subjects? what tearings, rendings, and crippling the
poor people? what burning, wasting, and plundering men's estates? how many
poor, distressed, and afflicted fatherless and widows are made? what woeful,
bitter, and sad complaints, and showers of tears are shed in corners, and
secret closets by many men, whose former quality, with the remembrance thereof,
makes them wipe their eyes, and counterfeit cheerfulness in the sight of men?
What tamperings with foreign Nations, for the utter ruin, and perpetual
enslaving of the three Kingdoms, to an arbitrary power? what evident, plain,
and palpable detections, to the perfect discharge of all doubts, and scruples;
from whom, and whence all this has been, the relating whereof will fill
volumes, and will be the affecting subject of the Readers heart, in another
age; and yet, how tender has the Parliament been still to maintain his
Majesty's honor, by charging all upon his evil Counselors? making him merely
passive, and only seduced, as if altogether innocent, notwithstanding all
this, almost to the very regret of charity it self. And as for their care, of
his Majesty's royal posterity, blood, and family, how careful have they been
for the princely education of his Majesty's children within their quarters?
their bountiful provision, and noble respects, for, and to his Majesty's
Sister, and her royal family? All this considered, and many things more, which
may be asserted, I challenge again the desperatest Malignant, in City or
Kingdom, on this side the grave, to let his tongue articulate his Consciences
thoughts, and give an answer, whether the Parliament has not had a tender care
to his Majesty's honor, his blood, and family. Do you rest in the assurance
you have concerning the Parliaments intentions about the peace of the Kingdom?
why are they then interrupted in their work? are not they in the fairest way
to a happy peace, that ever they were in since the wars began? and will you
now obstruct them herein? does this course of yours, promote in the least the
public peace? what now to discourage the Parliament? now to press them in
all haste unto a sudden enfeebling their strength by crushing a considerable
party of as cordial friends as ever they had since the wars began, and that
because they will not swear a submission unto that Church Government, which
neither they nor your selves yet understand? Presbyteriall Government, the
Model whereof is yet unseen? Is this your requital for their winters work?
have not you lived (shall I say by the sweat of their brows?) nay by the
expense of their blood? is this in lieu of their promised arrears? what, have
they been walls and Bulwarks to you, and will you prove briers and thorns to
them? have they watched whilst you sleep? hazarded danger for your peace?
undergone such separations from their wives and children, friends, and
Families, such hardships of hunger and thirst, cold and nakedness, lived in
the valley and shadow of death, for yours and the Kingdoms sake? and shall
London be the unworthy pattern of inhumane unthankfulness to the whole
Kingdom? You rest satisfied in the assurance of the Parliaments respects to
the King; but do you rest so satisfied in the like assurance of the Kings
respects unto the Parliament? Let your Consciences speak, are you so satisfied?
if so, what is the ground of this persuasion? is it because of his late good
words, fair, sweet, and pleasant lines he has written to his Parliament of
England, sitting at Westminster? or to his right trusty, and well beloved the
Lord Major, Aldermen, and common-Counsell of London? how can London be thus
deluded? is the word of a King now so taking in Londons thoughts? If you have
not pledged a health of the waters of forgetfulness, to his Majesty's success
in his Prerogative designs; look back a little to former times, surely it was
not in the former age that you have, (or at least seem to) forget, how his
majesty has writ to his Parliament, sometimes calling them his Parliament of
England sitting at Westminster; suddenly after in his printed Declarations,
the pretended Houses; anon after his Parliament at Westminster, within a while
after, Rebels, Traitors, men that seek the ruin of him and his; and as for
London, is it not notoriously known, how he has called it that rebellious
City, prohibiting all trading with it throughout his quarters, endeavoring the
utter ruin, and spoil of it? how many times has he offered the spoils of
London as the wages of those who would help him on in his design, which his
soul so longs for? How many stories to this purpose may you read, in a late
Book called Truth its Manifest, which as some say, calls a Scotch brother the
father thereof, which affirms, that once he, viz. the King, plotted with his
Army, which he raised against the Scots, to come and destroy the Parliament of
England, and to take the spoil of London, for their reward, p. 17. line ult.
and after that, tempts the Scots to comply with him in his designed work, and
offers unto them for recompense, not only the spoil of London; but also the
four Counties near adjacent unto their Country to be adjoined hereafter to
it, etc. page the eighteenth, line 4. and can a Court Complement so strangely
intoxicate the chief City of the Kingdom of England, as now to be ensnared and
entangled thereby?

But you will say, we have now deeds as well as words, his Majesty is come to
our Parliaments Quarters, has committed himself to our own Armies, is in safe
Custody with our faithful friends, our Scotch Brethren.

This must be premised, that we will not question the love, and faithfulness,
truth and integrity of our Scotch Brethren, for although,

First, seldom ever any Nation came in to the help of this Kingdom in its
necessity against the Enemies thereof, that did willingly depart the same upon
terms of love, amity and friendship, (the milk, and honey of this Land of
Canaan) I mean the riches, and treasures thereof being a snare upon them: and
although,

Secondly, we have been often upbraided by the malignant party (formerly vexed
at the Scots forwardness to help the Parliament) that we should boast of their
love, when they departed from us; and that they would at last prove our dear
Brethren indeed: and although

Thirdly, further jealousies are still fomented by the common people from
several passages from our Scotch Brethren, as the continual rumor of their
keeping our English garrisons in their own hands, sore abuses of the English
people by the Scotch soldiers, the keeping back of Ashburnham, and the escape
of Hudson from the Scots hands; the increasing rumor of many Scots come into
the Kingdom, whether true or false we know not, with several notions of this
nature, although these are jealousies of the fearful people, yet can we hardly
suppose, that our dear Brethren after so many Protestations of their brotherly
love; such an obligation, by so sacred, and solemn a Covenant; such a
profession of piety, and holiness; such zeal for a blessed reformation; that
after all this, they should prove our enemies, false, deceitful, self-seekers,
making Religion and zeal of reformation, a mere pretense, for base designs;
no doubtless; they very well know, that, that God, which has beaten the
profaneness of this Kingdom with rods, will scourge such hypocrisy with
Scorpions, that they will then prove the firstborn of abominations, both to
God and man, the scorn and odium of all Nations; we are full of hopes, that
it cannot stand with many things we have seen in them; therefore this
premised, though we do not question our Scots brethrens love and respects to
the Parliament; yet have we the same reason, to think so well of his
Majesty's love, as of the Scots? Let our reasons, and judgments give an answer
to this question, Had his Majesty no fine design in this? was he as cordial
to the Kingdoms good; as we hope our Brethren are? If so, why then does he
not give present order to all his Garrisons, in all the Kingdom, for their
present surrender unto the Parliaments Forces as he did to the enemy in
Scotland, without any conditions? You will say, He has done so. We answer; Not
so absolutely, but upon honorable terms; and what is this more then a
delusion, a casting a mist to amaze the the people? What means he by honorable
terms? There is no doubt, but that all the Garrisons in his Majesty's quarters,
might long before this have been surrendered, the wars concluded, and all
ended, upon that which his Majesty calls honorable terms; do not his poor
subjects still lie a bleeding? If his Majesty be so cordial to the Kingdoms
peace, how is it that the Malignants every where, and our professed enemies in
the Kings Garrisons rejoice hereat, will not surrender, stand upon their terms,
professing themselves in a better capacity to keep and maintain his Majesty's
cause, against the Parliament, then ever they were in since the New Model
began? Can his Majesty's going to the Scots (all things considered) be so full
satisfaction to reasonable men, of his real intentions for the Parliaments
cause? Has he not addressed himself by many attempts, secret insinuations,
frequent tamperings, to Danes, Dutch, French, Irish, English; to Papists,
Prelates, Protestants, Independents, Presbyterians, to accomplish his design?
What stone has he left unturned, what means unattempted to promote the same?
Do not you think his coming to the Scotch Army was a new design, a last cast,
one game more, which if it miscarry, all is lost? Alas, alas, what security
does his Majesty give you more then his word? And is this so forcing in Londons
eyes? Do you hear of any real remorse upon his heart? any relentings for the
innocent blood that has been spilt by his means? Have you any hearsay of his
personal reformations? What Is become of Londons reason? Had you not as good
words concerning the bleeding condition of his distressed subjects; and his
hearty endeavors for the peace of the Kingdom, in the midst of his hottest
violence against the Parliament, as he has given you now? Call to mind your
former experiences, the several transactions in the Scottish, Irish, and
English wars, have not the deepest designs, and fairest words, the most
desperate and horrible actions, and the most zealous professions, deepest
imprecations, and strange protestations, been always discovered at the same
time? Shall London now be charmed by these into its own misery, perpetual
slavery, and utter undoing, as most undoubtedly, the truth will be, if Englands
Parliament should now be discouraged? Shall London, that has stood out so
nobly, been a special instrument in the Parliaments hands, to save the
Kingdom, spent so much treasure, lost so much blood, stood so fast in the
liberty that God has given them, and would not be entangled with the yoke of
bondage, be now bewitched as it were into its own misery, and utter undoing?
Shall the glory of your former fame be thrown in the dust? your gallant
resolutions, and unparalled transactions, be all buried in the grave of
oblivion? and at the last gasp (as it were of our enemies hopes) London should
revive their fainting spirits, and put life into their dying hearts? Shall the
whole Kingdom, that was almost ready, in all its quarters (consulting of
tokens of thankfulness) to congratulate with London, for all its love, and
care, pains, and purses, and their general safety (through Gods blessings)
the fruit hereof, throw by these thoughts? and with sad hearts, and pale faces,
wringing hands, and running eyes, tell their wives, and children, friends, and
neighbors, Woe, and alas, London will ruin us, London begins to decline the
Parliament, London begins to close with the King, London is filled with the
Malignants language! London Remonstrates, to the Parliaments prejudice! Will
not this prove the perpetual language of succeeding ages, that (if London
should now desert the Parliament, and tyranny once get up in the throne by
means hereof) Londons City is Englands woe?

Fourthly, You further acknowledge the particular assurance this honorable
House has again given the whole Land, in their late Declaration, to lay hold
on the first opportunity of procuring a safe and well-grounded Peace in the
three Kingdoms, which you doubt not but this honorable House will pursue with
all speedy dispatch of Propositions to His Majesty, now whilst God does so
mercifully and miraculously go along with your Armies in all the parts of the
Kingdom.

That Declaration, that gave you this assurance, assured you likewise, whence
it was, the thing was not done, but suppose, that (providence quite altering
the state of affairs) the Parliament judge Propositions for Peace are not now
so suitable, so seasonable, as then they were, when they promised the same; must
not they judge, what is most meet to be done in such a case? Propositions for
Peace, are to be tendered to enemies, not to friends; does his Majesty continue
the Parliaments enemy? if so, his coming to our Quarters, is evidently then, a
design of mischief, and not of peace; and the truth is, an enemy will do
more mischief in his adversaries quarters, then in his own; but, if he be our
enemy, and yet in our hands, such Propositions, as before were tendered, may not
consist with wisdom, and policy, to tender now, the case is altered, the
Market is fallen* men will not give for the commodity thereof, as they would
before; now you see his Majesty is in our own quarters, and God does mercifully
and miraculously go along with our Armies in all the parts of the Kingdom.

Fifthly, You mind the Parliament of our brethren of Scotland, how they were
first invited to engage with this Kingdom in Gods cause, when yet they were at
peace at home, in what Covenant this Nation is mutually linked with them, at
what time, in relation both to the weak condition of our Forces then, and the
season of the year, they adventured upon an Enemy warmly lodged, and well
armed, and prepared; what they have since suffered for this Cause in their own
Kingdom, how succesfull ever since God has made our Forces in suppressing the
Common Enemies of both Nations, and what present hopes we have of a
well-setled Peace, while we continue in this mutual Amity; And then cannot
but lament the many jealousies which the Enemies of our Peace, Union, and good
Government, do now strive to beget between both Nations, and tremble at the
sad effects thereof, if not timely prevented by the wisdom of the Parliament
of both Kingdoms.

It is most true, their love, and kindness, is never to be forgotten; for
although it is true,

First, that both they, and we, are embarked in one and the selfsame
vessel, and we sink and swim; stand and fall together, and Englands misery,
will be Scotlands woe, so that what ever they have done for us, it is virtually
for themselves: and although,

Secondly, these miserable wars, and bloody blows, which fell upon us, were
first attempted for our Scotch brethren, but Englands Parliament (then in
being) would not consent to such unnatural wars, and by that means kept off
the blows from our Scotch Brethren, as all can witness; and although,

Thirdly, this Kingdom has been likewise ready to help the Scots, in a
former case, of their like necessity, against their enemies; as is most
apparent by authentic Histories, and a form of thanksgiving, formerly
appointed by the Church of Scotland, for the good success of their English
aid, (a Copy whereof is added at the end of this Book) that we may ever
observe the due care both Kingdoms should have for the mutual peace and
prosperity of both Kingdoms; and although,

Lastly, we must not look so much on our Brethrens successes, as their good
intentions, measuring their love by their endeavors, and not events; yet let
that mouth be for ever shut up, and that hand wither, which shall maliciously
speak, or write the least word, to foment jealousies between both Kingdoms;
and confident I am, that this heavy curse will fall upon none, but that party
who join issue with the old design, of promoting their personal Interests
and base ends, of Honor and greatness in the public misery.

Sixthly, you say you cannot but with reverence look upon this Honorable House
as trusted with a great share of the supreme power of this Kingdom, and as it
is the representative of the whole Nation, out of which and by whom, the
Members thereof are chosen, do fix your hearts the more upon the same, and
do by the mercy of God, so long as this Kingdom does adhere to our Covenant,
promise your selves now and in all future ages, great blessings and assurances
from the endeavors and labors of this Honorable House; and in regard of this
dignity of Trust, you have and do submit to all Privileges of Parliament; yet
because it may now become a Tenure for life, if this privilege should be so
made use of by such Members of Parliament as owe great sums of Money, and
protect diverse under them as Servants, Attendants, Officers, yea, and their
Servants, if all these should be exempted from course of Law, how many Citizens
of London, and other Subjects of this Kingdom may be undone? you do therefore
with all Duty and Thankfulness put this Honorable House in mind, that in a
Remonstrance to the Kingdom, 15. December, 1642. you find this expression;
viz. That for the matter of Protections, the Parliament is so sensibe of it
that therein they intend to give whatsoever ease may stand with Honor and
Justice, and are in a way of passing a Bill to give satisfaction concerning the
same.

Is it the great share this Honorable House has of the supreme power of this
Kingdom, which makes you look with reverence upon it, or an opinion, that it
has but a share of the supreme power of this Kingdom that you have no more
reverence unto it? will you not allow so much unto the representative Kingdom,
in reference to the whole Kingdom, as the representative City will assume unto
themselves in reference to London? Is not the Parliament of England the
representative Kingdom? And does not the whole Supreme power of this Kingdom
reside therein? And if so, why say you they have a Share? Unfold your Riddle,
and speak it out; if our judgment deceive us, we are willing to be informed.
Was the like insinuation, and dividing principle ever suggested unto the common
people; except it was from his Majesty's Declarations? there is little doubt,
that (however the City is blinded herein) the rise of this business come from
Court, let the Author of a little book lately published, entitled, A full
answer to the Plea for the Commonalty of London, (except he himsel is become
enervatus in his judgment and reason) stand up like a man of right Principles,
and true thereunto, and plead the just power of the Parliament of England, as
he has well done of the Commons of London, and thereby he will show himself the
Parliaments friend, as he hitherto has done: But what do you mean, when you
say the Parliaments privileges may now become a tenure for life? Surely had
this passage been found from one of the old Declarations from Oxf^rd against
the Parliament, it could not be judged any thing else, but a malignant scorn,
and a notorious jeer, being of the same affinity with the like passages found
therein: viz. a perpetual Parliament, and an everlasting Parliament. If any
Members of that House do owe great sums of Moneys, and protect diverse under
them as Servants, whereby they plead exemption from the course of Law; and so
Citizens or others are undone, or endammaged thereby; let the parties agrieved
frame their Petitions and complain of the men, and let not London remonstrate
this to the Parliaments prejudice: it is very true, the intention of the
Parliament is the good of all, the butt of none; every man's benefit, no man's
undoing; yet remember your Covenant, the preservation of the Parliaments
Privileges is a maine Article thereof, if any privilege proves prejudicial
to the Subjects benefit; you your selves say, they did anticipate your desires,
by that Remonstrance of the 15. of December, 1642. Yea were then in a way of
passing a Bill, to give satisfaction concerning the same, and have any Bills
been past since that time, and that neglected? and is the case now, with the
faithful Members of this present Parliament, as it was then? Is it not
notoriously known, that their faithful sticking unto the Kingdoms Cause, has
been the utter undoing of themselves, and their Families? whilst they have been
here in the Kingdoms service, the common enemy has wasted, spoiled, burned,
plundered, and ruined their Estates, but the truth is, this kind of Dialect
concerning the Parliament, in Print (for the peoples view) does import no less
then an evident charge, that Parliament men are now mean men, of broken
Fortunes, men that cannot, or else (which is worse) men that will not* pay
their debts, but live upon the people, and make a trade of it, and the same
shall be a tenure for life.

Seventhly, you proceed further, and tell the people the Kingdom is almost
reduced, by which means the Revenues of the Kingdom will be unburthened, and
the Customs and Excise increase, and the public charge of the Kingdom
decrease, now that Delinquents do daily come in and compound, and now that the
Enemy has but few Holds left, we hope that the great and extraordinary Taxes
and burdens on this City and their Trade, shall be in the future abated; that
the Debts owing to the City and Citizens of London, either by particular
Assurances of the Parliament, or upon the public faith of the Kingdom, be
taken care for and discharged, as well as those assigned upon the Excise, and
may not be diverted from the uses appointed by former Acts and Ordinances.

If so; have a little more patience, your debts owing you, are coming apace,
eight per. cent. shall reward you for it, you cannot but see extraordinary
charges do still appear, the payment of our Armies; long in Arrears, though
sufficiently active in the Kingdoms service; the vast sums paid to the
Scotch Army; the relief of Ireland; and many ways more, so many Garrisons, so
many Parties, so many Sieges do pray your patience a little longer; but must
every particular have a charge in the bowels of it? What sums of moneys are
by the Parliament diverted from the uses appointed by their Acts and
Ordinances? if none, what is the ground of this particular thus remonstrated?
is it because of some few gratuities lately conferred upon deserving men, for
their valiant, painful, and faithful services for the public safety? are not
such sums employed in the uses appointed in their Acts and Ordinances? must the
Parliament of England advise with London, about the disbursements of the
public stock?

Eighthly, you complain of the Committees work at Haberdashers-Hall, as a
grievance to the City: viz. that any more Malignants should be detected, or
further course taken, to find out Delinquents, which have not as becomes them
assisted the Parliament: surely they little thought the times would so face
about, as that London should turn Delinquents advocate; we say no more to
this, but remember your Covenant.

Ninthly, you further proceed, and profess your zeal for our bleeding
Brethren of distressed Ireland, etc. It is a good motion, and for Gods sake do
not binder so good a work, by weakening the Parliaments Party, by any more such
Remonstrances, as these.

Tenthly, in the last place, you heap up your deserts and your grievances
together: to the first, we confess you did run well; Suffer not your Crown to
be taken away by your discontinuance in your work begun; but yet consider, have
you done more, then the Law of God, of nature, of Nations engaged you? Has all
this been for the Parliament, or for your selves? was not your Estates, your
Liberties, your freedoms the grand price of your Enemies race? the Crown they
strive for? the spoils they fight for? Speak your Consciences; what had
become of you by this very day, if the present Parliament had not stuck to you?
what of your Religion? what of your Estates? what of your Liberties? Has it
not been in their power every day to ruin you, yea, and (perhaps) by their
personal preferments to advance themselves? Have not the Subjects Liberties
been dear in their eyes? have they not layen under many temptations, many
discouragements, to continue constant under them all? were all able to abide
the same? why then did many desert the House? How often have they protested by
word of mouth in your common Halls, and many Declarations, in the public view
of Heaven and Earth, that they would live with you and dye with you, stand, or
fall with you, that they would never leave you, till they had made you free,
and have they not been faithful in their promise herein? Is not their
preservation your security? their glory your Crown? their freedoms your
Liberties? As for your grievances, we consider them as they lie.

First, you complain, that the Letter sent you from the Parliament of
Scotland, should still be detained though petitioned for, as if this Honorable
House were doubtful of your fidelity: We suppose the House is not bound to be
accountable to you, though you are obleiged to account to them in this
particular; and whether they be doubtful of your fidelity or no, we cannot
tell, only we wish they may have no cause. Your next complaint is, that in the
last Propositions to his Majesty at Uxbridge the power of the Militia of this
City was fully represented, that it should now be reassumed, and endeavored to
be altered, to the endangering of this City, and parts adjacent: as if you now
deserved less trust from this Honorable House, then a twelvemoneth ago: We
think it not safe to tax the Parliaments wisdom, in their ordering and
disposing the power of the Militia, of City, or Kingdom, as they shall see
cause: and it cannot be asserted, that their reassuming the Militia of London,
into their own hands, is matter of danger to the City of London, and parts
adjacent; without an unworthy aspersion upon that Honorable House; such, that
will say so, give just cause to think, that they deserve less trust from that
Honorable House then a twelvemoneth ago, when they were better affected then
so to affirm. Thirdly, you complain and remonstrate, that some late Petitions
of this City, presented to this Honorable House, should lie yet unanswered;
If the Parliament were bound to answer all your Petitions, and that forthwith
even in your own time, why did not you rather enjoin then petition? and if all
your Petitions should be answered to your own content, we well perceive how
the case would stand with this poor Kingdom; the Parliaments love both to
City and Kingdom may cause them to deny the Petitions of the City; as the case
may stand. Your fourth complaint, that Quarterman a notorious Sectary, one whom
the City not long since cast out for his misdemeanors, should presume, in the
contempt of the privileges and Government thereof, to enter the City, and to
make Proclamation with Trumpet, without acquainting the Lord Major therewith;
the like of which (to our best knowledge) in no age, when the City was most
neglected, was ever so much as attempted.

What Quatermain do you mean? there are many in the Kingdom, for all that we
know, but we presume you intend Roger Quatermain, late Marshall to the City.
That this Quaterman is a Sectary, lies upon you to prove, and him to defend;
and herein you will befriend our intellects, and help us to understand, what
you mean by your Sectaries, against whom you so much stickle in this
Remonstrance: That the City cast him our ( viz. from his Marshallship) for so
we presume your meaning is, (though you speak as disturbed, that the Reader
must study to find out your meaning) will be denied by one of the chief
promoters of this Remonstrance, except he has changed his judgment in the
Government of the City, (as sometimes it falls out, men continue not their
judgment, especially in matters of government both civil and ecclesiastical)
for it was neither the City representative, or collective, but the Lord Major,
and Court of Aldermen, that put him out of the place, and surely, they are no
more the City in that act (except the Common Counsel gave them power herein,
as we cannot understand they have) then any other City Justices, or Officers
in the City are so. As for his misdemeanors, none were urged as the causes
hereof, except this was his crime, that one Marshall should serve the City.
And though it is a crime circumstantiable to a great aggravation for one man to
wrong a whole City; yet it is more strange (because less usual) that a
representative City should wrong a poor man, by taking away his good name,
and so his livelihood in his present employment. As for his great transgression
herein specified, we dare presume, the poor man is ignorant of the City
privileges, i^ this be one, that the Parliament of England cannot make
Proclamation, in the City of London, with Trumpet, or otherwise, without
license given by the Lord Major of London. If the case be thus, well may you
say, that the Parliament of England is betrusted but with a share of the
supreme power. Custom is one thing, privilege another; that it is a custom
to acquaint the Lord Major in such cases, is quickly granted: and if he did
willingly, and wilfully, in contempt of the Major, or customs of the City,
perform that work, he is blameworthy, and not to he pleaded for; but when
such customs, of single Corporations, shall entrench upon the power of
Parliaments, and change their names, and call them Privileges; it is high
time, to change those customs. Many customs, in former times, had almost
undone the Kingdom; we would not now meet with any that raze our foundation,
and strike at the Parliament.

And lastly, You complain that after the present Lord Major had so faithfully
behaved himself in his Office, and with the testimony of the City, so
carefully discharged the same, that yet he should be suspected and questioned
upon general informations, which (it may well be doubted) might be designed to
divide between the Parliament and the City.

If general informations that do greatly concern the public danger of the
City, or Kingdom, should be so far neglected, as not so much as to make an
enquiry, according thereto; how could they, to whom they do come, discharge
their consciences, and Covenant, to God, or the people? The Lord Majors
faithfulness can never hurt him; and a faithful man, may lie under suspicion,
but will take no offense at a through purgation; as we hear his Lordship
himself is sufficiently satisfied; and if former faithfulness should for ever
discharge all future jealousies, (though but general informations be given of
danger) the two Hothams, and many more, might have now lived, and by this time
seen the Parliament and City weltering in their own blood.

More you could add, but you have done enough, if not too much of this nature,
and more, I presume, then was ever expected from this City. You presently
slide from your remonstrative part, into the prayer or petitionary part; and so
shall we, and give you to understand, wherein we can, and wherein we cannot
join with you in your desires to the Parliament; with the reasons thereof,
which is the second general head of our present method; you resolve your
complaints into prayers.

1. That some strict and speedy course may be taken for the suppressing all
private and separate Congregations.

We know not your meaning by private and separate Congregations, if your
meaning be the private meetings of Christian people, for prayer, exhortation,
repetition of Sermons, or any other laudable and Christian duty amongst the
Saints, in their private assemblies, as sure we are, your words do import,
abhorred be your request by God and good men, and the Lord prevent the
Parliament from ever stumbling at that stone. What you mean, we cannot tell;
we would not desire, we do not know what; we cannot join with you in this
Petition.

2. That all Anabaptists, This is the self same et cae^^ra that was in the
Bishops Oath, and ^^ub^lesse the Episcopal party cannot but look upon this as
the resurrection from the dead, only herein it differs, they enjoined men to
swear to what they knew, this would have men resolve upon what they know not;
and so it is a step nearer to Popety.
Brownists, Heretics, Schismalicks, Blasphemers, and all such Sectaries as
conform not to the public Discipline established, or to be established by
Parliament, may be fully declared against, and some effectual course settled
for proceeding against such persons.

First, Anabaptists, Brownists, etc. in the Kings Declarations did always
intend the Parliaments friends; and besides these, whom you mean we cannot
tell.

Secondly, if all such Sectaries as conform not to the public Discipline
established or to be established by the Parliament, must be fully declared
against, and some effectual course taken for proceeding against such persons;
What shall become of our Presbyterian brethren, which hold Presbytery to be
jure divino, and cannot submit unto Commissioners over the Presbytery, though
established by Ordinance of Parliament? Surely the Remonstrants are not of that
opinion, but if they be, their feet are taken in the same snare they laid for
their brethren. If this Petition should be granted, our Presbyterian brethren
as well as others, must be suppressed: and for that cause (though no such
allowance is given by them unto their weak brethren) we cannot join with you
in that Petition.

3. That as we are all Subjects of one Kingdom, so all may be equally
required to yield obedience unto the Government set forth, or to be set forth
by the Parliament.

To resolve to submit to what we know not, in matters of Religion, and to
Petition the suppression of all that will not subject thereunto, is against the
principles of Religion and Reason; we cannot conceive, a Parliament so
religious, so rational, will prove so irreligious, so irrational, as to
enforce the Subjects to stifle the light of their own Consciences; and let God
and conscience say what they will, to swear conformity to the will of man, in
matters of Church Government we cannot join with you in this Petition.

4. That no person disaffected to the Presbyteriall Government, The Bishops to
our best remembr^nce did never so publicly make the like motion to the
Magistracy of this Kingdom.
set forth, or to be set forth by the Parliament, may be employed in any place
of public Trust.

We judge our selves bound, to leave that business to the Parliaments
wisdom, as supposing them best able to judge what is meet to be done in that
particular. If men prove faithful in their trust, intamperable by their
adversaries, succesfull in their work, untainted in their integrity,
courageous in their services, etc. such men are not usually after many
experiences of such particulars, put out of their public trust (though they
should be an Army of Turks) and why men should be discharged from their public
trust for so small a punctillo, as difference in judgment about
Church Government; nay, so much as dis-affection to the Presbyteriall
Government, for that is your expression, we see no cause; and truly, if this
desire should be granted, as the case now stands, the Parliaments strength
would be much abated, and the Malignant Rovalists very much pleased, we are
none of them, we cannot close with you in this Petition.

5. That this Honorable House will please to hasten Propositions to his
Majesty, for settling of a safe and well-grounded Peace amongst us, after so
long and unnatural a War.

A well grounded peace is our hearty desires as well as yours; but whether to
be sought for by tendering Propositions from the Parliament to his Majesty, the
wisdom of the Parliament, not we, must determine. When a man meets me to
take away my purse, my life; if the combat be over, and the party disarmed,
and his weapons in mine own hands, I will not indent how much he shall have to
do no more; when the truth is, he has done his worst; A well grounded Peace
we desire with you, the means hereunto we leave to the Parliaments wisdom,
we would not offend them, we therefore wave this Petition.

6. That this Honorable House, according to the Covenant and Treaties, will
please to study all means to preserve the Union between the two Nations of
England and Scotland, and to remove all jealousies which may endanger our
mutual agreement.

We close with you here with all our hearts, and heartily pray that wisdom may
be given to them from God to direct their studies to so good a work.

VII. That this Honorable House will please to consider of some means whereby
the privilege which its Members their Servants and others enjoy by being
protected and exempted from being proceeded against for their Debts, may be sa
qualified, as that the Subject may be able to recover his own in some due time.

This Petition implies a charge; we will not at all intermeddle herein.

VIII. That all public Revenues and Receipts may be employed to public uses,
that so the Taxes of the City may be abated.

We know no public Revenues employed at all by the Parliament of England, for
any other then public uses; and if this Petition may be altogether clear from
secret aspersions of our worthy Parliament, we can fully join with you in this
particular.

IX. That the Estates and Compositions of Delinquents, may, according to the
engagements by Ordinances of Parliament, be applied to discharge the great
sums owing to this City and Citizens.

The public Faith for the public debts will be valid (we doubt not) and in
due season will so appear; we hope they mind the main what ever becomes of
particular cases, due time will be time enough, we durst not engage (as the
case stands) with this Petition.

X. That the Plymouth Duty may be taken off the Trade, especially now the West
is reduced.

That poor Garrison is still to be encouraged: Surely these are the last times
when mercy and charity waxes cold, we utterly wave this Petition.

XI. That the Committee at Haberdashers-hall may be presently dissolved; or at
least so limited and regulated, as that the City may have no cause of complaint.

This Petition seems, in the first part of it, to favor Malignants, we
remember our Covenant; we cannot close with you in this, the later is ours as
well as yours.

XII. That the reducing of the Kingdom of Ireland may be taken into
consideration, before the good party there be too far wasted and discouraged.

This is our Petition and prayer to God, we join with you here with all our
hearts.

XIII. That the Original Letter of the Parliament of Scotland to this City
may be returned.

We leave this to the Parliaments wisdom, and shall not at all intermeddle
therewith.

XIV. That the City may enjoy the Militia fully, as it was presented at the
last Treaty at Uxbridge.

We leave that unto the Parliaments wisdom, and God direct them what to do
therein; we neither join with you nor against you in this particular, but
only wave it.

XV. That Quarterman may be brought to some exemplary punishment, for the
affront done by him to the Privileges and Government of this City.

When we are convinced of Quatermains affront to the privileges and
Government of this City, we shall desire with you his exemplary punishments;
to condemn the innocent, is a great abomination, we judge Quatermain so, till
the contrary appear; we cannot join with you in this Petition.

XVI. That the Lord Major of this City may be fully vindicated.

When we once understand how, wherein, and by whom his Lordship was wronged,
we would Petition with you for his vindication; in the mean while we wave this
Petition.

XVII. And lastly, and above all, That this honorable House will please not to
look upon any expressions of this our Remonstrance and Petition, as charging
any thing upon this Honorable House, or as intended to entrench upon any
privilege thereof, but favorably to accept thereof, and so to interpret the
same, as from a single and humble heart it is sincerely, and without any
by-ends, or to comply with any Party whatsoever, intended and breathed forth
from the sad heart of the Petitioners, who are overwhelmed with many fears on
all sides. And who call God, the Searcher of all hearts, to witness, that
according to their Covenant and duty, their zeal, devotion and obedience, is
as fervent and prostrate as ever to serve the Parliament with their Lives and
Estates, against all the Enemies of our Peace, to conjoyne the City more and
more to the Parliament, and to maintain the Union of both Nations against all
opposers whatsoever.

This is an Apology for the whole business, and the truth, is, you have cause
sufficient, and we verily believe the like Remon-pray that wisdom may be given
to them from God to direct their studies to so good a work.

VII. That this Honorable House will please to consider of some means whereby
the privilege which its Members their Servants and others enjoy by being
protected and exempted from being proceeded against for their Debts, may be so
qualified, as that the Subject may be able to recover his own in some due time.

This Petition implies a charge; we will not at all intermeddle herein.

VIII. That all public Revenues and Receipts may be employed to public uses,
that so the Taxes of the City may be abated.

We know no public Revenues employed at all by the Parliament of England, for
any other then public uses; and if this Petition may be altogether clear from
secret aspersions of our worthy Parliament, we can fully join with you in this
particular.

IX. That the Estates and Compositions of Delinquents, may, according to the
engagements by Ordinances of Parliament, be applied to discharge the great
sums owing to this City and Citizens.

The public Faith for the public debts will be valid (we doubt not) and in
due season will so appear; we hope they mind the main what ever becomes of
particular cases, due time will be time enough, we durst not engage (as the
case stands) with this Petition.

X. That the Plymouth Duty may be taken off the Trade, especially now the West
is reduced.

That poor Garrison is still to be encouraged: Surely these are the last times
when mercy and charity waxes cold, we utterly wave this Petition.

XI. That the Committee at Haberdashers-hall may be presently dissolved; or at
least so limited and regulated, at that the City may have no cause of complaint.

This Petition seems, in the first part of it, to favor Malignants, we
remember our Covenant; we cannot close with you in this, the later is ours as
well as yours.

XII. That the reducing of the Kingdom of Ireland may be taken into
consideration, before the good party there be too far wasted and discouraged.

This is our Petition and prayer to God, we join with you here with all our
hearts.

XIII. That the Original Letter of the Parliament of Scotland to this City
may be returned.

We leave this to the Parliaments wisdom, and shall not at all intermeddle
therewith.

XIV. That the City may enjoy the Militia fully, as it was presented at the
last Treaty at Uxbridge.

We leave that unto the Parliaments wisdom, and God direct them what to do
therein; we neither join with you nor against you in this particular, but
only wave it.

XV. That Quarterman may be brought to some exemplary punishment, for the
affront done by him to the Privileges and Government of this City.

When we are convinced of Quatermains affront to the privileges and
Government of this City, we shall desire with you his exemplary punishments;
to condemn the innocent, is a great abomination, we judge Quatermain so, till
the contrary appear; we cannot join with you in this Petition.

XVI. That the Lord Major of this City may be fully vindicated.

When we once understand how, wherein, and by whom his Lordship was wronged,
we would Petition with you for his vindication; in the mean while we wave this
Petition.

XVII. And lastly, and above all, That this honorable House will please not to
look upon any expressions of this our Remonstrance and Petition, as charging
any thing upon this Honorable House, or as intended to entrench upon any
privilege thereof, but favorably to accept thereof, and so to interpret the
same, as from a single and humble heart it is sincerely, and without any
by-ends, or to comply with any Party whatsoever, intended and breathed forth
from the sad heart of the Petitioners, who are overwhelmed with many fears on
all sides. And who call God, the Searcher of all hearts, to witness, that
according to their Covenant and duty, their zeal, devotion and obedience, is
as fervent and prostrate as ever to serve the Parliament with their Lives and
Estates, against all the Enemies of our Peace, to conjoyne the City more and
more to the Parliament, and to maintain the Union of both Nations against all
opposers whatsoever.

This is an Apology for the whole business, and the truth is, you have cause
sufficient, and we verily believe the like Remonstrance was never known from
the City of London to the Parliament of England. You would not have them look
upon any expressions in this Remonstrance and Petition, as charging any thing
upon the honorable House; that is, you desire them to throw by their
understanding when they read your Remonstrance. Though we cannot join with you
in this Petition, to accept your Remonstrance, and grant your Petitions; yet
we humbly desire this honorable House, to pass by all provocations herein,
and to measure their respects to this famous City, not according to some few
weaknesses, which through some powerful insinuations may surprise the same,
but to the constant, settled, and resolved practices of the Inhabitants thereof,
of which we are confident there are many thousands, that are still ready to
sacrifice themselves to the service of the Parliament: the only means under
the Almighty to preserve both us and our posterity from slavery and misery.

You have done with your Remonstrance; but have you understood what you have
done? Let us propound two or three Queries.

First, is it proper for one single Corporation to Remonstrate to the people
their grievances, or indeed rather complaints against the Parliament? do you
not know the nature, the majesty, the power of a Parliament? do Londons
Magistracy no better understand the Parliaments Authority? are you become the
primary pattern, and popular example to all the Kingdom of an unparalleld
Remonstrance? are you the chief Magistracy of London, and give such a
president? We say no more, but make this use of it, that wisdom and weakness
may have their habitation, (yea sometimes the latter may be predominant) even
among wise and religious Rulers.

Secondly, did the Commons of London give you authority in their name to do
that which is not at all within their Charter? if you act as Subjects, you act
for your own persons, and you have liberty of your selves so to do, standing
or falling to your own peril; but if you act in the name of the City, whom
you represent, know your bounds, look to your rule, the City collective never
gave you further authority, then to act within your sphere, the City Charter;
and if you do otherwise, upon your peril be it, they will not stand by you.

Thirdly, who were the chief promoters hereof? doubtless Royalists, (to give
it out in the softest language) the style, the dialect, the matter, do not
these insinuate prerogatives advance, not a word throughout for punishing
Malignants, for requiring justice against Delinquents; (a main article of our
solemn League and Covenant) men would think that doubtless some of the old
Patentees, or men that builds their houses by the subjects bondage, were the
chief framers of this Remonstrance. Surely, if that heart was right for the
Parliament that framed this Remonstrance, he has an unhappy hand that
transcribed his thoughts in so strange a dialect; for the truth is, if this
Remonstrance had not been presented by the City of London, our after-ages would
ever have known it by the black Character of the Malignant Remonstrance; it is
not to be doubted but the City, though well affected, may be overtaken in an
act unworthy, (for even Parliaments have slipped, for they are but men) and
therefore it is this one act, and not the persons are here found fault withal.

But now to come to the last general head, we desire this honorable City
seriously to consider, what are the dangerous tendencies, and effects of such
kind of Remonstrances, and that in few particulars, very briefly, for we are
unwilling to harp too much upon this unpleasant string.

First, it tends to the manifest grieving of the hearts of our faithful
Parliament, who for our sakes have suffered more base affronts, injuries, and
losses, then ever any Parliament did before them; Have we not often
acknowledged them again and again to be the only means (under God) of all
the peace and liberties, estates and comforts that we do enjoy? suppose their
failings appear before us, have we never a garment to cover their nakedness,
but Ham-like we call for the eyes of brethren and fellow subjects to behold
the same? was it not of God that the Parliament and London were joined
together, hand in hand, and heart in heart? and whence is it that this knot
begins to be loosned? have they not brought us (through the mercy of God) to
the sight of our Inheritance, our liberties and freedoms, our Land flowing
with milk and honey? shall we now begin to murmr against our deliverers? is
it not likely that God for this should bring us back again into the
troublesome wilderness, more wars, and the bitter, bitter effects thereof?
the clouds condense and thicken again, let us not grieve our God and our
friends, the Parliaments faithfulness God will not forget, and our
unthankfulness he will not put up.

Secondly, Consider whether such kind of Remonstrances as these do not weaken
the Parliaments strength? confident we are, (how ever London comes thus to be
deluded, which cannot but be the amaz^ment of the Kingdom,) that the first
original of this Remonstrance must needs be bred in a Malignants breast, such
complaints for the peoples view, such p^titions, to suppress the Parliaments
friends, to remove faithful, valiant, untamperable, and succesfull Officers
from places of trust, to take away those ways and means, whereby moneys are
procured to maintain the wars against the common enemy, to press them in all
haste to the payment of their debts; what are all these, but the direct desires
of the Parliaments enemies? and do not all these things weaken the Parliaments
strength?

Thirdly, Consider how this does rejoice the Malignants hearts, observe their
faces, their discourses, look into the prisons, where Malignants are, what is
their dialect? all will be well, the day is ours, the times face about,
roundheads must fall, this Parliament must down, the City declines them, their
armies must presently be disbanded, the Kings friends exalted, their services
rewarded, all things work well, the City Remonstrance speaks our minds, it
strikes at the root of the round heads prosperity, we see now how the game
goes.

Fourthly, consider the probable tendency of this Remonstrance in the opinion
and judgment of the most considerable both of the Parliaments friends and
enemies, the fear of the one sort, the expectation of the other, and that is,
implaine terms, the disbanding of our Armies, the discouraging of our friends,
the utter disenabling of the Parliament against any adversaries either foreine
or domestic, that shall appear against them, the advancing of prerogative and
arbitrary power, the exalting of all those bloody oppressors that in all these
wars have sought our ruin. Do not say these are the irrational notions of a
melancholy mind, the groundless conceits of a crazie brain? no certainly,
that kind of reason that draws natural conclusions from undoubted premises, or
which judges of the proper effects from proper causes, steers the judgment in
these assertions; let your own reason decide the matter, if the Parliament
should be disabled in their Armies, in their moneys, in their friends, as the
granting of your petition would quickly effect; what would hinder the things
we affirm, take away the Parliaments strength, and then the promise of
settling the Militia to your hearts desire, would secure you from slavery, as
the settling of Presbytery would preserve you from Popery; but the word of a
King, and the faith of a favorite, will be all your security for the one and
the other; is this a time to weaken the Parliament? is there no fear of
incursions from a foreine adversary? has not the French the sword in his hand?
do we not know, that the Quondam factors for Englands misery, and those that
almost had ruined the Kingdom, have been tampering there for the old design?
is there no fear of incursions from Ireland? are not they as ready to advance
prerogative as ever they were? is our own nation settled in peace? is not every
County almost disturbed? and a party appearing upon any advantage in
prerogatives quarrel? We say no more, we have discharged our Consciences, it
is not disrespect to authority, but conscience of duty; not contembt of
Magistracy, but love to the City; not private interest, but public good which
was the real cause of what we have written; if London must taste of that cup of
trembling with the rest of the Kingdom, it will be bitter indeed, when this
will be minded, that Londons folly is Londons misery; that God sent Saviors
for London, and would deliver it, and they would not be delivered, but rejected
the means of their own good, would none of his mercies, despised his counsels,
discouraged his people, did shut their eyes against as glorious visions of
kindness and goodness, as ever was seen in all the world; Moses, and Aaron,
Josuah, and Gideon, were not instruments of more glorious victories for Israel
of old, then those deliverers, whom God sent London, have been of late, the
despifing whereof may bring down wrath, but God will find a way to save his
people.

In the last place consider this for the conclusion of all, which might rather
have been a Preface.

It is the great unhappiness of well meaning and plain hearted men, to be
still made isntrumental to the masked and disguised designs (and to have
their innocence imposed upon by the craft and practice) of those that dare not
own their own endeavors, lest they should alarm those whom they would
deceive, and hinder the concurrence of those multitudes without which their
ultimate end cannot be attained: There were two hundred in Jerusalem (that
never wished ill to David) went along with Absalom in the simplicity of their
spirits, (knowing nothing) who yet gave the beginning to that horrid Rebellion,
in which he endeavored to dethrone his Father, and deprive him of life, who
several ways gave him his, which practice (with the parellel in hand)
although it be so ordinary as a Design can hardly be instanced (that must be
acted openly) that has not first obtained credit by the patronage of abused
simplicity, (appearing in it) yet it still takes as often as it is attempted,
like Stratagems military, where those of curious contrivance are many times
abortive: Those that are every day practiced, do notwithstanding every day
take effect. For the sake of such as are so abused, it were a work worth the
charity and labor of a free leisure, and an able pen to undeceive the world in
this particular, to set open the windows of this dark Cabinet, to discover the
Methods of these impostors, to let simple integrity see how these approches are
made upon it, and to unlock those ciphers in which (unknown to themselves) they
maintain a dangerous intelligence and correspondence with their enemies; In
which employment, if some happy Genius had before this time disposed it self,
it might have proved an Antidote to this spreading plague, and might have
prevented the birth of that Mulate conception which now calls it self the
Remonstrance of the Common Council of the City of London. For it cannot be
imagined, that so many honest pious men (as the major part of that Council are
known to be, who have hitherto showed themselves in all these troubles so
faithfully devoted to serve the interest of freeborn Englishmen, in adhering
to, and defending the Parliament of England) should now be brought (by putting
forth and pressing this Remonstrance) to serve the implicate designs of a
triple (if not quadruple) faction, were not they deceived and abused by the
finenesseand artifice of these Impostors, wooing them from their duty, and into
ruin, under specious and pious pretenses; themselves the while propounding
several ends, though agreeing in one common (the destruction of the liberty
and freedom of the English Nation) though in several and differing degnees.
And although the times will not now presently bear such an opening this
mystery of Iniquity, as might convince those whose malignity, prejudice, or
(perhaps) good opinion of some promoting it, have sealed their eyes and muffled
their own understandings, yet those whose confidence has been abused, and
whose facile dispositions carried down in the general crowd, or whose piety
taken with the specious show of Reformation, and Uniformity, are desired
seriously and maturely to weigh these few lines by way of Animadversion upon
that Remonstrance, until the times shall give leave to one more complete, and
we doubt not but such as shall remember their covenant (to maintain the
privileges of Parliament, and continue still in a sense of duty to it) which
God has thus far honored, owned, and carried on in delivering the Kingdom
from the attempts of tyranny, and which (in probability by the concurrence of
the same blessing they are like to effect) if it be not hindered and
endangered) will be so far satisfied thereby, as to esteem it as little for
their reputation in this civil Schism, as in that religious to be called
Remonstrants.

A Form of Thanksgiving used by the Church of Scotland for their deliverance
from the French by the English, Anno 1575.
NOw, Lord, seeing that we enjoy comfort both in body and spirit, by reason of
this quietness of thy mercy granted unto us, after our most desperate
troubles, in the which we: appeared utterly to have been overwhelmed; we praise
and glorify thy mercy and goodness, who pitiously looked upon us when we in
our own selves were utterly confounded. But seeing, O Lord, that to receive
benefits at thy hands, and not to be thankful for the fame, is nothing else
but a seal against us in the day of judgment; we most humbly beseech thee to
grant unto us hearts so mindful of the calamities past, that we continually
may fear to provoke thy justice to punish us with the like or worse plagues.
And seeing that when we by our own power were altogether unable to have freed
our selves from the tyranny of strangers, and from the bondage and thraldom
pretended against us, thou of thine especial goodness did move the hearts
of our neighbors (of whom we had deserved no such favor) to take upon them
the common burden with us, and for our deliverance, not only to spend the
lives of many, but also to hazard the estate and tranquillity of their Realm
and Commonwealth; Grant unto us, O Lord, that with such reverence we may
remember thy benefits received, that after this, in our default, we never enter
into hostility against the Realm and Nation of England. Suffer us never, O
Lord, to fall to that ingratitude and detestable unthankfulness, that we shall
seek the destruction and death of those whom thou have made instruments to
deliver us from the tyranny of merciless strangers. Dissipate thou the
counsels of such as deceitfully travel to stir the hearts of the Inhabitants
of either Realm against the other. Let their malicious practices be their own
confusion, and grant thou of thy mercy that love, concord, and tranquillity may
continue and increase amongst the Inhabitants of this I Will, even to the coming
of the Lord. Jesus Christ, by whose glorious Evangel thou of thy mercy do
call us both to unity, peace, and Christian concord. The full perfection
whereof we shall possess in the fullness of thy Kingdom, when all offenses
shall be removed, iniquity shall be suppressed, and thy chosen children be
fully endued with that perfect glory, in the which now our Lord. Jesus Christ
reigns. To whom with thee, and the Holy Ghost, be all honor, praise, and
glory, now and ever. So be it.

FINIS.

