Compassionate CHRIST. A SMALL TREATISE, Setting forth the tenderness of
Christ toward the bruised and broken in spirit.

By H. PRIME. Minister of the Gospel.

ZACH. 13.7. I will turn my hand upon the little ones.

MATTHEW. 11.29. I am meek and lowly in heart.

LONDON, Printed for G. Calvert, at the black spred-Eagle at the West End of
Paul's. 1645.

The Preface.
IT is generally received that CHRIST is come in the flesh, and yet it is a
little of the best that is done in the blind world, Matthew. 21.
to make up this Christ of any thing; But the truth is, there is no real
Christ to thee or me, until we find his finger upon our haerts kindly breaking
and bruising of them, till then we spend all upon Physicians (with her in the
Gospel) and are never the better, but the worse. It is worth the while to look
to this, that we err not in our beginning for heaven and foundation for happy
eternity: This Treatise tells us in a little, how the Kingdom of heaven is
laid in the small, but sure beginnings of Gospel bruisings; a day of small
things it is that dawns to heaven and glory, take heed it be not despised. Many
men have been long in gathering of a little, and even that poor seeming
little, crumbles to nothing, because Christ is not in it. Yea, not only that
which is wide from Christ, but even that which is like him, if it be not
himself, and our touch and hand of faith handles and feels it so, vanishes.
But if it be he himself, his sweet Spirit inwardly enlivening, heating, and
kindling his good word, outwardly breaking, melting, humbling, though it be but
upon a reed or smoking week, it being his work abides for ever.
Soule-bruisings, and soule-healings, both are from him. It is drawing toward
night (everlasting night) with many a poor soul who know little, and believe
less of this Divinity; where to lay the fault I know not, but sure I am, that
the face of Ignorance and unbelief shall gather blackness at the day of
Christ's appearing. In fine I say but this, 2 These. 1.8.
to be a reed shaken with the wind, that is, to be a light formal outside
professor is a very vanity, but to be a solid sound true Christian indeed,
Joh. 1.47.
though but as a bruised reed, is a very hopeful and happy condition.

COMPASSIONATE CHRIST.
MATTHEW. 12.20. A bruised reed shall he not break etc.


CHRIST having cured the withered hand upon the Sabbath, the Pharisees were
offended: His Answer, First, for curing on the Sabbath it was a good work, and
it is lawful to do good upon any day; the Sabbath only forbids sinful and
servile works. Secondly, in that he did heal and cure, he shows that it was
his Calling, and the end of his coming in the flesh, formerly foretold by the
Prophet, Esaias 42. out of which this text is taken, He shall not break a bruised
reed, etc. How hard a thing it is to do good without some exceptions, yea, for
the best to carry themselves so but offense will be taken, as here etc. yet
conscience of our duty must prevail against all discouragements.

Here are two things in this text: 1. The condition of weak Christians,
compared in this text to bruised reeds.

2. Christ's carriage toward such, He will not break etc.

Observation singular.
That Christ is tenderly affected toward all his, especially unto such as be
weak.

Proofs.
Esaias 61.1, 2 3. A description of the Saints necessities. 2. Of Christ's
qualification for his office. Thirdly, of his accommodation of himself to their
Several conditions, made all things to all men, Esaias 49.13, 14, 15. verses. So
Esaias 63.7.89. verses, the Church praises God for his kindness toward her,
and that when she was at the worst in the wilderness, Christ that Angel of
Gods presence, Col. 3.12, 13. Christ's example is propounded.

This is further proved by several instances.

1. Christ's promises and invitations, are melting promises, and invitations
universally propounded, Joh. 7.37. What a melting invitation universally
propounded. So Esaias 54. Ho every one that thirsts. Matthew. 11.25. Come unto me
all ye that are weary and etc. A melting invitation to all bruised broken
spirits, laboring under the burden of sin or sufferings.

2. His carriage was an humble carriage, the humblest soul that ever trod upon
the ground, I am meek and lowly, Mat. 11.25. How humble was he toward his
Disciples, then especially when he took a towell, bound it about him, took
water, and stooped, and washed his Disciples feet, John 13. An Example of
humility for them to do the meanest offices for the poorest bruised reeds
belonging unto him.

How humble in his carriage was he toward the woman of Samaria, she mightily
proud, and he greatly humble in his words and behavior toward her, as that
Answer of his shows; O woman, if thou knew the gift of God, and who it is
that says unto thee, give me drink, etc. His Disciples marvelled at his
carriage toward her, being such a woman, and alone.

3. Christ has a quick sight to behold the least more or scruple that troubles
any of his: and healing is in his very looks. So in Esaias 66.2. compared with
the 57.15. Thus his eye was upon Nathaniel, Joh. 1. I saw thee under the
Fig Tree. So he looked upon Peter, Luke 22.6. after his denial Christ could
not come to him, nor speak to him; Peter durst not own Christ, but denied him
with swearing; Christ did as he might to preserve this broken reed, this poor
soul from sinking: Christ looked upon him, and Peter wept; Christ cast a
loving eye upon him, or woe had been unto Peter.

4 So he has a compassionate heart, his Soul was grieved for the misery of
Israel, Judge. 40.16. How did he lay to heart Jerusalems misery, Forty years
before it fell out ill with them? All that then he could do for them was to
pity them, and so he did, lamenting over it, Luke 19.41.

5. Has he not a skillful hand to make a plaster and lay it on: Consider,
Luke 7. When Magdalen came into the Pharisees house, Christ had enough to do
both to stop their mouths, grumbling at him for suffering such a one to come
near him; and to quiet and comfort her grieved and perplexed spirit: And
therefore first addresses himself unto Simon, and stops his clamor against
her and himself, by the parable of the two debtors; applying of it to her,
showing that her weeping and wiping, wiping and weeping again and again, and
kissing his feet, came from her love, more than he would do for him, or did
since he came into his house, etc. And then with the other hand applying a
plaster to her, saying, Woman, thy sins are forgiven thee; and woman thy faith
has saved thee, go in peace, Luke 7.50.

6. Christ's doctrine is dropping doctrine, distilling doctrine; distilling as
the dew, Dropping as the rain upon the tender grass, Deuteronomy. 32.2. He preached
at lowest, and prayed at lowest, spoke in parables to win his followers: At his
first Sermon, Matthew. 5. What tender droppings of the Word of Grace from his
lips: beginning with blessings, Blessed are the poor in Spirit, meek,
hungering, pronouncing blessings unto the beginnings of grace, poverty of
spirit, hungring and thirsting, little more than privations, preceding habits
of grace, or else preparations unto grace; and so along, treating of divine
providence by arguments taken from Lillyes and Sparrows, as they were able to
hear: So that as Luke says, all were affected with his ministry, all bare him
witness, as, wondering at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth,
Luke 4.22.

7. So his discipline, gentle discipline: Matthew. 11.30. My yoke is easy,
burden light, easy to the spirit, though not to the flesh, or hard at first
putting on, though gentle and light afterward; and this is the yoke of
obedience to Gods Commands, whose Commands are not grievous: Besides, Christ
has drawn in this yoke himself, he learned obedience by the things he
suffered, and so must all his, all is not done at first, Peter, James, John,
etc. were a long time learning conformity to this yoke.

8. He is tenderly carried toward his when they are well and in health, Joh.
11. How familiarly conversing with Lazarus, Mary, Martha, eating, sitting,
talking at times with them: how pleasant is the company of a wise, grave,
godly, loving friend to us.

9 Much more when they are sick and ill, how readily do they come to tell
Christ of Lazarus sickness? Lord he whom thou love is sick: Who but Christ
to them who are sick? For this, he is compared unto the good Samaritan, Luke
10. who came to, and comforted, and took care for the future of the poor
bruised and broken travelers good: When Priest nor Levite, neither did nor
durst come near him: the Priest especially: Ne Cadaveris contactu pollueretur.
Beza. How speedy in rising from the grave to comfort his perplexed Disciples,
Peter especially, that had both crazed his conscience and lost his office by
his denial: Go tell my disciples and Peter: And so to Thomas: Bring hither thy
finger, etc. and to Mary weeping at the Sepulcher

10 Last of all, and most of all to his, when they die, as, Joh. 11. Our friend
Lazarus sleeps, weeping, groaning in Spirit; all the Saints dye in Christ's
arms: Into thy hands I commend my spirit. So Stephen: So Luther, Thee only O
Christ have I known, have I loved, trusted, served, Into thy hands I commend my
spirit.

Reasons of the point.
1. The near relation between Christ and his: He is our elder brother, our
kinsman, our flesh and blood, which he took into fellowship with the Godhead,
that he might compassionate our estate. See Heb. 2.14, 15. The best nature in
heaven, and the best nature on earth united in one person.

2. He was a bruised reed himself from his infancy to his death, Herod sought
to crush him in his cradle: See his bruisings in all the Evangelists, Esaias
53.3.5. verse.

3. He was free from sin, which made him so compassionate toward all, his
especially: Sin hardens the heart; Lest your hearts be hardened through etc.
Self-love, pride, covetousness, bring a callosity upon the heart.

4. He is full of grace, and thereby sufficiently qualified for this office:
Note Esaias 61.1, 2, 3. Having the fullness of the holy Spirit, he was made fit
to accommodate himself to the comfort of every distressed case; if the heart
were broken, his office was to bind it up: if in captivity, he was to proclaim
liberty.

5. Whither should the Saints go in their difficult cases? if Christ had no
bowels, refuge may utterly fail. See Esaias 63.15, 16. Abram is ignorant of us,
Psalm. 44.17, 18, 19. So Paul left and forsaken of all, though not of God, 2 Timothy 1.15. 2 Timothy 4.16, 17.

6. If Christ were not thus tenderly affected, God would have none to serve
him, seeing the righteous fall seven times a day. And therefore David speaks of
him as of a loving Master, that will not always chide, but has the pity of a
Father, Psalm. 103.7, 8.13, 14. God is very careful not to discourage his
bruised reeds: naturally Christ is thought an hard Master, as that servant
falsely said, I knew that thou were an aushere man, but nothing so, he was a
foolish slothful servant, and was glad of such an excuse to put off Christ's
service; but the Saints upon trial find it otherwise, being sorry they knew
him and his service no sooner, not willing to change it for another: Whiter
shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life.

Application follows.
1. Admire the wisdom and goodness of God, that has set such a one over his
household so wise, so compassionate, our lot might have been under bondage all
our days, and to have had such over us as would have rent our flesh with
Scorpions, and pulled out our heart out of our bodies, and after all have been
sent to hell: The Lord might have set Lions and Tigers over us, but he governes
his by the Lamb, Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world; Eliakim in this was a type of Christ, Esaias 22.21, 22, 23, 24. this is
for our holy admiration.

2. Admire the excellency of our Redeemer. What is thy beloved above other
beloveds? My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousand, none so
wise as he, none so gracious, so merciful, so compassionate to his poor
afflicted bruised reeds. As their Prophet, resolves all their doubts. Clearing
all the Cases out of Scriptures. As their King, subduing all their lusts,
confounding all their enemies, maintaining all their liberties. As their
Priest, pardoning all their sins, perfuming, mending all their prayers with his
Odors, bringing them into favor with God.

3. It shows their vileness that sin against so tender a Savior; those
principally that, first, despise his Word and Ordinances; secondly, that refuse
his Government, We will not have this man to reign over us.

4. See what great dissimilitude there is betwixt Christ and men; men in place
set over others, where shall we find Christ's bowels in many men's bosoms?
Where is become the spirit of Elisha, when others would have had the Armies
slain? His word was, Set bread and water before them, and send them to their
master.

5. Christ herein is a pattern to all Governors, Masters, Ministers, Parents,
etc.

6. Here is comfort to all bruised reeds, from their relation they have to
Christ: Their case is exceeding comfortable, though much afflicted: It is
better to be a bruised reed, then a broken gilded gaudy Idol, Jer. 22. God
calls Coniah 2 Broken Idol, a vessel in which is no honor, though a great
man, and such is all sinful greatness, when under judgment: What more
deformed, despised a thing than a broken Idol? Wicked men that must be adored
as Idols for their honors, greatness, riches, learning, parts, in the day of
their visitation and destruction (coming as a Whirlwind from God) most
miserable, forlorn, and despised is their condition. Such was Coniah's case
and Saul's.

7. Be exhorted to seek to Christ, all you that are his, though much afflicted
and tossed, Psalm. 132. Lord remember etc. In all thy breakings and bruisings,
seek to him; for bruisings may come like waves very thick; There are the devils
bruisings, the worlds bruisings, and Christ's bruisings: The devils bruisings,
are the bruisings of sin: The worlds are the bruisings of sufferings, losses
and crosses: Christ's bruisings are the bruisings of repentance and godly sorrow
for sin in all have recourse to Christ.

The devils bruisings, are the bruisings of sin, such were David's, and Peter's
bruisings, Psalm. 51. Psalm. 32. Luke 19. both sifted, and both bruised.

The worlds bruisings, are the bruises of losses and crosses; such were Jobs
bruisings, in his Children, Cattle, houses, etc.

Christ's bruisings, are the bruisings of godly sorrow and repentance for sin:
Such were Marics, Luke 7. Such the Prodigals, such the Publicans.

Thou may pray, and yet be bruised, and yet thou must pray still: Thou
may hear, and yet be bruised (as there) and yet thou must hear still. Thou
may come to the Sacrament, and yet be bruised, and yet thou must come to the
Sacrament still: wait upon Christ.

8. Is he tenderly affected toward thee? then carry thy self respectively
toward him: Take heed thou sin not presumptuously against mercy, tender mercy.
If he do not break thee, take heed that thou do not grieve him: When God sent
his Angel in mercy before Israel, his warning was, Take heed thou provoke him
not. Exodus 23.21, 22. So Exodus 34.7. Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving,
etc. but by no means clearing the guilty. If we run upon the Score with so
gracious a God; who shall clear it? This was the Aggravation of David's sin;
it was against Gods great kindness, 2 Samuel 12. God takes it unkindly when men
forget his benefits; which David prays against, Psalm. 103.3.

9. This is for comfort to these bruised reeds; Is Christ so tender? Then shall
they want nothing good for them.

1. No Compassion, Lament. 3.23. his Compassions fail not; Sun may fail of
light, and Moon and Stars, and the waters of the great deep may be dried up,
friends may fail you, yea, life it self; but Gods Compassions in Christ fail
not.

2. They shall not want Instruction, God will teach the humble, Psalm. 25.80.
Esaias 50.4.

3. Not Correction: A thing which no Son can be without, Hebr. 12. Amos 3.2.
Jer. 46.28.

4. Not Protection, Matthew. 12.2. He will not break them, says Matthew here,
but he will bless them, be their bulwark, strong tower, fortress, rock, Psalm.
18.1.

5. Not Direction, 1 Samuel 2.9. He keeps the feet, etc. He guides and
directs them in their way, even then when they tread upon the Lion, and
Adder, and walk in the midst of snares.

6. Not Consolations, They may want Corn, and Wine, but the light of Gods
countenance, puts joy into their hearts, Psalm. 4.6, 7. verses

FINIS.

