A BUNDLE OF MYRRH. OR Several sweet Truths Spiritually unfolded under these
following Heads. 1. Mercy magnified. 2. Practical Graces. 3. Christ's
Humiliation. 4. Certainty of Salvation.


Published by H. P. Minister of the Gospel.

2 Pet. 1.16. We have not followed cunningly devised fables.

Psalm. 138.2. Thou have magnified thy Word above all thy Name.

Col. 3.16. Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly.

London, Printed by R. I. for Livewell Chapman, and are to be sold at his shop
at the Crown in Popes-head-alley. 1653.

TO The much Honored Gentlewoman Mris Prudence Thorold, at Her House at
Clapham. Grace and Peace in our Lord.
TRuly Honored, I here present you with a few small pieces, observing that
smaller Tractates have been of greater use among many, and still are;
especially such as speak Scripture to us in power and plainness. The lesser
pieces of Mr. Perkins, viz. His grain of Muster-seed, Golden Chain, Government
of the tongue, like to Pearls, even much desired and esteemed as bearing the
more lively impression of the strength and spirit of their Maker. And such is
that little Book (which for Honors sake I mention) entitled, Christ set forth,
an entire piece worth its weight in Gold, wherein the Author upon that
Argument, the chief of all desirable Truths, has satisfied his Reader more
abundantly, even to the full. It was told me once, that Aquinas being asked,
What if all Paris were his? answered, I had rather be the Author of the
imperfect work of Chrysostom; a small and broken Tractate. Also greater Volumns
have their use, such as Mr. Foxes Book of Martyrs, a Volumn composed for the
good of England, if ever any, a Book that can never be out of date; and I
believe is of the Cabinet with most wise men; for seldom any work of industry
and eminency appears, but savors much of the spirit, and rich experience
Treasured in those A^^^lles. I mention this the rather, because perceiving the
English of this age to be under a very rich blessing of an increase of Sacred
Knowledge, next unto the Sacred Scriptures, the Wells of Salvation, those of
our Nation would come and draw here, rejecting the watery Pamphlets so much
abroad, enfeebling men's spirits, yea, our choicest wits have bin most infected
by them.

As for those thicker and grosser sort of souls amongst us, I mean the profane
and ignorant multitude, I am much at a loss in my thoughts for them, and yet I
think again, had we such provision on foot as would reach them, I cannot think
but a good account might be given of them, as there has been of late of the
like, in some parts of Wales, even to admiration; for as I dare not entertain
such a thought, as if God had appointed these poor people, we speak of, all of
them to misery; so I hope in due time, it will not be found impossible to
rescue them out of Satan's power, of whom they are taken at his pleasure.

For when those prophecies shall be fulfilled, which say, That the veil shall
be taken off from all hearts, and the kingdoms of this world, become the
kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Son Christ, and the sinners of the Nations,
both Gentiles and Jews shall have the Spirit of Grace poured upon them, and
shall look upon him whom they have peirced, and mourn after him; in that day
there shall be a Fountain opened for them to wash in, even from sins of
separation.

Truly Honored, I know you are of the Bride chamber, and do expect the coming
of the Bridegroom, as all the wise Virgins do. May it therefore ever be your
Care, and Crown, to have your Lamp trimmed, and your Vessel filled, I mean an
abundant increase of Heavenly Wisdom and Watchfulness; so shall that day be to
you as the Hind of the Morning, an early day of entrance upon an eternity of
rest and refreshing.

Such is the desire of him that honoreth you, and is your servant in our Lord,
H. Prime.

Mercy Magnified.
LUKE 17.13. Have mercy on us.


THey would be healed, that required power; they crave mercy whereby Christ
might be moved to use his power for their help.

Mercy is the fountain of all the help of man's misery, of temporal or spiritual
good; common or special mercy, is that which moves God.

His goodness wherewith the Earth is filled, is called his mercy, Psa. 119.64.
And that which all his Creatures partake of, Psalm. 145. his tender mercies,
that his own people are not consumed, Lam. 3.22. recover out of sickness, or
have their sorrows moderated, it is of his mercy, Phil. 2.27. that they have
the blessing of marriage in children, of their labors in stock, Genesis 32.10. and
33.5.

Spiritual blessings are of his mercy, as election to salvation, and the means
of it.

It was his mercy to Jacob, that he loved him and not Esau, who will show mercy
on whom be will; Romans 9.28, 23.
the elect are therefore called Vessels of mercy.

That which moved him to send his Son, that the world might live by him, was
his tender mercy, Forgiveness of sins, Luke 1.78. Acceptance in Christ, 1 Timothy
1.16. Quickening, or regeneration, Ephesians. 2.4, 5. 1 Pet. 1.4.

The whole work of our salvation is of his mercy, Tit. 9.3, 5. Eternal life is
not of works, which we work, but of the mercy that God shows, 2 Timothy 1.18.

Take the best of the sons of men, he needs mercy at the day of judgment; Woe
to the holiest life judged, without mercy, Psalm. 130.3, 4.

mercy, which moved him, and nothing either had or hoped for from us.

He does good to them that love him, Exodus 20.6. To them that fear him, Psalm.
103.13. To them that seek him, and fall down at his feet, Matthew. 18.27. That
show mercy to their Brethren, Matthew. 5. But it is not of the merit of their
love, fear, humility, mercy; for all these are so defective and stained with
sinful pollution, that without mercy they cannot have acceptance with him: But
it is his mercy that pardons all their sins, that love him, and keep his
Commandments, and rewards them here and hereafter, with admiration they
glorify his mercy, Mic. 7.18.

Exodus 34.7. He delights in showing mercy, that men will give place to it,
Jer. 9.24. Mic. 7.18. He waits that he may be gracious, and will be exalted,
that he may have mercy on his people, Isa. 30.18. He cannot forget to be
merciful, Isa. 49.15. With the knowledge whereof David upholds his soul in a
temptation of despair, Psalm. 77.7, 8. It cannot be corrupted by the contrary,
his wrath, Psalm. 77.9. In wrath he remembers mercy, Hab. 3.2.

It cannot be worn out by time, it is everlasting, endures for ever, Isa. 54.7,
8. It is not wearied with multitude, Exodus 34.7. Luke 1.50. Exodus 20.6.

It cannot be too scant for all their miseries and fins that seek it. God is
rich in mercy unto all that call upon him, Romans 10. With him is plenteous
redemption, Psalm. 130.7. Abounding above sin, Romans 5.20. And his pleasure is in
them that hope in his mercy, Psalm. 147.11.

Vessels of his mercy; how can I tell, that I am one of them to whom mercy
belongs in Gods purpose?

Deuteronomy. 29.29. Your shutting out from Gods mercy is no where revealed, why then
will you carry such an evil suspicion of God, as that he has not willed mercy
to you?

He has revealed his Son and his promise of mercy in him to you, and given you
commandment to believe it; It is said to your face, Believe thou in the Lord
Jesus, and thou shall be saved.

In both the Sacraments, not only Christ, with his benefits of the mercy of
God is offered to you, but the Application of him represented in the signs; and
believe God deals seriously with you.

You are forbidden such prejudice, and putting flumbling blocks before your
Faith, Isa. 56.2, 3, 6.

To them that believe, to them that repent, and would find grace and favor
with God, God has opened a Fountain for sins, even for sins of separation,
Zach. 13.1.

Practical Graces.
COL. 3.13. Forbear, forgive, as Christ forgave you, so do ye.


THe exercise of long suffering is in forbearing and forgiving our Brethren.

It is our duty to hold, and not to lose our meekness and calmness of soul, for
continuance of afflictions or injuries.

God commands long-suffering, a continued calmness of mind in moderation of
anger, slow to wrath, Jam. 1.

Our affections should be all at Gods command, to move or rest at his will.

Our anger must be set on work, as the executioner is by the Magistrate, as the
servant by the Master, by appointment with the known will of God, at that to
come and go.

Anger may be of good use, as fire, but when it is in our power, to call it up
and suppress it, that we use no more of it, then is needful. Fire in the top of
the Chimney, is dangerously out of place: Use anger like quicksilver, well
tempered with love, or else it will eat in dangerously.

We have Gods example in the reprobate, to whom he is kind, bountiful, Romans
2.4. Romans 9.
and long in patience, suffering their manners; also in the elect, unto whom
his long-suffering is salvation, 2 Pet. 3.15.
in waiting to have compassion upon them, Isa. 30.18.

It is a great part of our comfort to be as he is in this world, evidence of
our adoption and filiation; that we have the godly nature, Luke 6.35. and
express his virtues.

This is one of the fruits of the Spirit, by which we know whether he dwell in
us, and whether the Law have left his cursing force in us, or no, Gal. 5.22,
23. by which Gods servants approve themselves, 2 Cor. 6.6.

It is a great glory to a man, First, of discretion and wisdom, Prove. 14.29.
and 19.11. Whereas an hasty spirit deals foolishly, yea, exalts folly, Prove.
14.17, 29. Lifts it up, that all may see it. Secondly, It is his glory in
power, above a mighty man that wins a City, Prove. 16.32. for he conquers and
leads in triumph, not only flesh and blood, but devils full of malice, Ephesians. 6.

Let patience have her perfect work, Jam. 1.4. where ye lack this wisdom and
power, pray; consider how long you have been suffered and waited for, do you so
also to others, especially in seeking their conversion, 2 Timothy 2.25. And
amendment of some manners in the weak Christian, forbearing one another.

This belongs to the Elect and sanctified, the beloved of God; to exercise
their love to their brethren, in bearing with the weak in faith or practice, 1
These. 5.4. and that long, and forbearing and supporting them, Ephesians 4.2.

We must bear one another burden, Gal. 6.2. Such manners and infirmities as
are either of natural constitution, and disposition, or oversight of
ignorance, or prevailing of corruption, which in some degree is mortified, that
are grievous and troublesome to bear as burdens; we must pass over diverse
offenses, and not take notice of every act of infirmity: Some if we take notice
of them for admonition and amendment, yet we must so bear, as we alienate not
our minds, nor cast them out of our friendship for them, seeing the root of
the matter may be in them, not persecute them with our suspicion and censure
rigorously, Job 19.19, 22, 28. nor suffer our first exactions of them to be so
strict and merciless, as to bear nothing, but give them time to profit, Phil.
3.15.16. and wait for them.

Consider the difference of age in Christians, some are as Babes in Christ,
some young men, some old men: Babes have the true nature of men, and may have
strength meet for Babes, though weak, compared with Men; so Babes in Christ
have the true parts of Nature, of Christianity, though not strength of
spiritual faculty, whereby corruption more shows it self, 1 Cor. 3. 2. Among
the strong, all are not alike, some are in health, and hold their strength;
some are sick, and the disease troubles their constitution. God tenders the
weak, and spares them, Mal. 3.
as a man spares his son that serves him; bears the Lambs in his bosom; Isa.
40.11.
and gently leads them that are with young; takes care of the sick, Ezekiel. 34.4,
16.

And so do his servants tender the weak, 2 Cor. 11.29. The spirit is willing,
but the flesh is weak, but of weak beginnings will Christ bring forth his
Kingdom victoriously, Matthew. 12. and increase their power, Isa. 40.31.

Rigor is a dangerous mastership, Jam. 3. and is of pride, and ignorance of a
man's self, Gal. 6.3. All need Gods forbearing, and may need the forbearing of
the Brethren, they may be tempted.

It is much for Unity and Peace to forbear, Ephesians. 4.23. in Church, Commonwealth,
Family.

Forgiving one another. This is also in long-suffering required of the beloved
of God, to forgive one another, where they have manifest cause to complain.

This is of necessity, to hold assurance of Gods forgiving us, Matthew. 18.35.
Luke 6.37. it is commanded, Ephesians. 4.32. Because we are forgiven, it is nothing
to give, unless we forgive. Ought thou not to have had compassion of thy
fellow servants, as I had compassion on thee. Christ forgiving us, must be our
pattern as well as our motive.

As Gods rule is, Levit. 19.18. to forgive in three degrees,

First, The revenge, not recompencing evil for evil, 1 These. 5. it belongs to
God. Say not, I will do to him as he has done to me. Proverb.

Secondly, The grudge upon the remembrance of the wrong, God forgives the
punishment, and remembers the sins no more, urges them not with the mention of
them, Ezekiel. 33.16. nor hinders himself from doing them good, or praising the
good he sees in them for former injuries, Isa. 54.9.

Thirdly, So to forgive, as to love him, Matthew. 5.
that has done the wrong as my self, for an enemy is my Neighbor, and within
that Royal Law, be he poor or rich. God so forgives us, as he loves us with
the same love, wherewith he loves his own Son, in whom his soul delights,
Joh. 17.

Fourthly, Matthew. 18.32. 1 Pet. 4.
God forgiveth fully all sins that we commit; for love covers all trespasses,
though the offenses have been often committed, not once, but a thousand times,
though often in one day. So we till seventy times seven times, Matthew. 18.21.
Seven times in a day, Luke 17.4. Where we see Repentance and the offender
grieved and bruised, we are to comfort him, as forgiven of God, the sin as well
as of us the scandal or trespass, 2 Cor. 2.7. And we must confirm our love to
him. As Christ forgave you. This being put as a motive and pattern, our
forgiveness received of Christ.

That Christians do know that their sins are forgiven them.

In this stands the chief part of their comfort, The knowledge of salvation by
the remission of their sins, Luke 1.77.

John before his precepts of love and good works, and evidence of salvation by
them, sets down this as their chief foundation of comfort, their sins are
forgiven for Christ's sake, 1 John 2.12. though the conscience of inherent
righteousness is a good prop to hope; yet it is so little, and corruption so
much, and sensible to them that have light and life, that when they see God in
Majesty, and contemplate his holiness and spiritualness of his Law, they cry
out of their own misery and death, Romans 7.24. and forget sometimes they are
separate from them that perish, Isai. 6.5. till the knowledge of forgiveness be
confirmed in them, v. 7, 8.

In this David reckons a man's blessedness, that the burden of his sins is
lifted off from his Conscience, and the quarrel taken up between God and him,
Psalm. 32.1.

Quest. How may a man that yet is doubtful, be persuaded, that his sins be
forgiven him?

Answa. By the beginning of the work of the Spirit of Adoption, Romans 8.15. Luke
4.8.
inspiring the motion of Faith, and working a man's soul, bruised for his sins,
to seek Gods face and favor in Christ, by the Commandment of believing, with
love to obey it.

The smoking flax, Bruised by weight, and striving for liberty.
and the bruised reed shall not be quenched. Grace saving is already poured
into the soul, which shall after appear in more strength, Isai. 54.6.

Affliction of spirit in Conscience of injury to God, as a wife that has been
false, and would return to her husbands favor: Thus promises are made to them
that be troubled in spirit, that afflict themselves for Gods offense, and God
is said to delight in such as chief sacrifice, Psalm. 51. and will dwell with
them. It argues a mind reconciled to God, which cannot be but by grace, when
his favor is so sought, Romans 8.5, 7.
his friendship so desired, that nothing will satisfy a man till he find it.

God eases not men of all their grief at once, Luke 7.47, 48, 50. She was
persuaded that he was her only refuge, but remained afflicted, and Imgring for
relief and found comfort.
but holds them lingering after him, only his stirring up their desire to him,
and moving their love in such passion for him, argues he is reconciled, and
has forgiven the injury, Cant. 5.4, 5, 6.

As it is in the recovering of peace, so in the first working, for most part,
by our affection to God settled, know we his affection to us.

He gives a little light, that gives them hope; and in their prayers, and use
of the means, sometimes chears them a little, but settles them not yet, but
makes them love and hope.

The will of believing, with strife against corruption (of love to God) is Gods
work of his favor, as well as the power of Faith, Isa. 1.19. Phil. 2.13. Romans
7.18, 22. Mark 9.24. Psalm. 42.5. and argues his with such.

Other men strive not for faith, Remission in order of nature, is before our
repentance, but joined with it in time, that repentance argues God reconciled.
Levit. 20, 41.
but they that have the grace begun. Grace is first infused without our
seeking, and by it we aspire to grace, and give no quiet settling to corruption.

Inward shame of that which has been done against God (though not amongst men
shameful) (or if such, not known) voluntary remembering of sins, with shutting
up a man's mouth, that he cannot complain of God for judgment, though it were
of Hell (with hope, yet that it shall not be so) Ezekiel. 16.63. Romans 6.21. Joh
42.6. Ezekiel. 20.43. In a time of Gods gracious dealing with them, not only when
he urges them to accuse themselves by judgments, Ezekiel. 36.31. entreating the
Lord, and enquiring of him for his mercies, v. 37. It is the note of Gods
people, They seek the Lord, Psa. 24. confessing their sins, 1 John 1.9.

Healing of our nature, Gods Spirit given to a man to dwell in him, is his
testimony of his accepting of the man, Acts 15.7, 8. His seal. Ephesians. 1.13. His
earnest, 2 Cor. 5. That if a man know Gods grace has changed him to be that
which he was not, and he is not that which he was; he has sin in him, and
appearing yet in his life; now appears the study of piety, that he aspires
still to the grace of God, and would unfainedly have it govern him, poor, in
sense of his nothingness in himself, purging the remnants of sin, Romans 8.13. 2 Timothy 2.21. 1 John 3.3. Striving against sin, Prove. 28.4. Heb. 12.4. 1 Cor.
9.27. Fearing sin, Prove. 28.14. Eccles. 8.12. 2 Cor. 7.11. He has it under
Gods testimony and seal, that he is forgiven, and God reconciled to him.

God freeth some, and strengthens others that he brings into the battle about
Faith. Both serve the Lord, some in sweetness, some in sharpness, some with
glorying over adversaries, some weeping in the strife, yet laboring to dissolve
the temptation, some serve without fear, some delivered from the cause of the
fear, yet feel it trouble them, and yet obey, love, hope, pray, hang on the
Ordinances, to suck and be satisfied, Isai. 66.

So their fear is not as the fear of the wicked in fullness, Isa. 8.12, 13.
without study of casting it out, as a sin against God, and the fruit of
unbelief, with hatred of God, without seeking God, or care of sanctifying him
in heart.



A tender, merciful, conscionable forgiveness of other men that offend us, and
trespass against us, is a sign that God has forgiven us; for it is of that
grace we have received from God reconciled to us: It is therefore a prop of our
Faith in praying for forgiveness, For even we forgive them that trespass
against us, Luke 11.4. Has promise, as being an effect or fruit of the merit
of Christ in us, Luke 6.37. It is reckoned a note of singular righteousness
above civil, to love enemies, Matthew. 5.
to pray for them in their distress, Psalm. 35.13, 14. to relieve them, Romans 12.
and especially to be so desirous of their salvation, that a man could find in
his heart to die for them, that their souls might be saved.

Heathens may remit some injuries, but not hating the sin, not grieving for the
sinner, not of love of the Commandment, not to all that offend, not with
unwearied continuance in the duty; because not of habitual love to God, and
men, but occasionally at friends requests for by-ends.

Christ's Humiliation.
PHIL. 2.8. He humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death
of the cross.


THe Apostle urges his Exhortation to lowliness, and minding the good of other
men, mentioned Verse. 3, 4.

1. By the example of Christ Jesus, Ver. 5, 6. 2. By the good which does follow
of it, as it appears in the exaltation of Christ.

In the example of Christ, he propounds to be considered, both his natural
excellency, v. 6. and his voluntary humility or infirmity, taken upon him for
our sake, v. 8.

He humbles himself] Christ humbled himself, in his birth, in his life, in his
death. In his birth to be born of a poor mother, who confesses her
contemptible state, and low degree, Luke 1.48, 52. espoused to a poor
Carpenter, to be born in a stable amongst beasts; in his life, in that till
thirty years of age, he led an obscure and private life, as is gathered,
working with his supposed Father in his Trade; for which, they which knew his
education, objected it as ground of their contempt of him, that he was not
only the Son of a Carpenter, but himself a Carpenter. Mark 6.3. Is not this
the Carpenter, the Son of Mary.

He at his time came to seek Baptism at the hands of John, as if he had needed
it; which John would have refused, knowing that he baptized with the Holy
Ghost, and needed not to come to him.

He refused not to be in the wilderness among wild beasts, and there to be
tempted of the devil, to be carried in his blessed Body, as is probable, from
place to place to the pinnacle, to a high mountain by the devil: in companying
with them of low degree, as Fishers, not disdaining to touch the Lepers for
their healing, nor to give himself to be used of any that would make use of him.

To that end, he eat with sinners, talked familiarly with Harlots, etc. He
washed his Disciples feet; he turned not his face from shame and spitting; he
suffered very unworthy things with a quiet mind.

And he humbled himself in death, to die between two thieves, a death accursed;
with the sense of Gods wrath, offering himself to the judgment of God for all
the Elect.

Consider his mind in such a dignity, by personal union of his humane nature,
and follow lowliness.

And became obedient] Obedience follows humbleness of mind. We are therefore
commanded to humble our selves, to walk with our God, Micah 6.8. The Saints are
said to sit down at Gods feet, and every one receive his words, Deuteronomy. 33.3. Sin
has pride with it, and in wilful sins, Jer. 2.31.
even good men are said to despise the Lord, 2 Samuel 12.9.

It is the brand of all them that are lewd in their ways, they despise the
Lord, Prove. 14.2. and are stout against him. He humbles men first, and takes
away their pride, and then makes them obedient, Job 33.17. An humble mind is
willing to be appointed.

2. Christ was obedient.

First, Voluntarily of his own accord, with delight, as his meat and drink,
John 4.32, 34.

Secondly, In all things, and in all degrees, he told John as a reason of his
coming to Baptism, that he must fulfill all righteousness, Matthew. 3. and says,
he came to fulfill the Law, Matthew. 5. Not to do his own will, but the will of
him that sent him, John 6.38. Unto which will he fully submitted himself,
Matthew. 26.39. Heb. 10.9.

And not only to the Moral Law, but also to all those Laws, which were
peculiar to Gods people, whereby they professed themselves sinners, Gal. 4.4.
he was circumcised, offered oblations, Luke 2.21, 24. and performed other
ceremonial observances, Matthew. 26.17, 20. Matthew. 26.26.
Joh. 7.2, 10. He was baptized and received the Sacrament of his own body and
blood, Matthew. 3.18.

Thirdly, He did that always which pleased his Father, John 8.29. Both
materially and formally, both in respect of the work, and the heart, seeking
the glory of him that sent him, John 7.18. With all that love and zeal, with
all that mercy and compassion which the Law commands.

He does affirm, that thus he continued in his Fathers love, John 15.10.
keeping his Commandments, which before his death he mentions in his prayer,
commending himself, and his Disciples to his Father. I have glorified thee on
the earth, I have finished the work which thou gave me to do, John 17.4.

Fourthly, He was obedient to all, to whom by the Law he should be obedient, to
God, to the Civil Magistrate, to his Parents.

He paid tribute, maintained Cesars right, acknowledged Pilates power over him
from above, and came down with his Parents, and remained SUbject to them, Luke
2.51. yet in the Lord, discreetly, giving to God that which belonged to him.

Fifthly, He continued in his obedience until death, and died in obedience to
his Fathers will, whereby he was the more accepted, Heb. 5.8. John 10.17. That
he preferred his Fathers will of our Salvation, before his own life, and
refused not that death, which was the death of all other accursed, that the
most odious malefactors were put to.

This was partly that he might be a fit High Priest, Heb. 7.26, 27. who needed
not to offer for his own fin; and herein he answered the Types, and was an
offering without blemish accepted, and making acceptable.

Hereby we are justified by his obedience unto death, both in doing and
suffering, Romans 5.18, 19. For as Christ was born to us, and given to us, Isa.
9.6. John 4.10. Romans 8.32. his obedience was for us, and some part of it,
specially a part of his Mediation; it was a part of his Humiliation, whereby he
declared himself inferior to his Father. It must needs then be imputed unto us,
to our Justification, Heb. 10.10. by the which will we are sanctified, Romans
10.4. Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness to all that believe.

And herein we have full consolation, a full discharge from our sins by his
suffering death, and a perfect righteousness, as much as the Law can require,
in which we please God, and are accepted unto eternal life. And in all, he is
the Lord our Righteousness. And it may be to us an example of obedience, to
obey from the heart, counting it as our meat to obey entirely in all things, to
obey devoutly with chief affection to Gods glory, to obey constantly, and with
continuance unto death, and in death, for the time, place, kind, etc.

To death] The death of Christ was the will of the Father, and Christ was
voluntary in dying, though death had no power over him, being without sin; yet
he yielded himself to it, and died (not only in apprehension) (which to some,
is more then the thing suffered comes to) but in sense; such a death as made
him fear, cry, weep, sweat blood, and utter his sense of Gods wrath forsaking
him, not separating the united natures, but not so presently delivering him.

He offered himself to God by his Eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14. Acts 4.27, 28.
God by his counsel determined, what Herod, Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles,
and the people of Israel were gathered together to do to him, and God is said
to deliver him for us all to death, Romans 8.32. And Christ consenting to his
Father, came into the world, to give his life a ransom for many, Heb. 9.26.
Romans 4. 1 Cor. 15.
Matthew. 20.28. He did die to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself, to
dissolve the works of the Devil according to the promise; the seed of the woman
shall break the head of the Serpent.

To reconcile us to God, and set a peace between God and us, and between the
Jews and the Gentiles, making of twain one new man in himself, Ephesians. 2.15, 16.

To deliver from the Devil that had the power of death, them that for fear of
death, were all their life held in bondage, Heb. 6.14, 15.

He has set Heaven open, and given us free entrance unto the Father, in the
holy place, Ephesians. 2.18. Heb. 10.19.

He ratified Gods Covenant for ever, Heb. 12.20. He kills the power of sin,
Romans 6.6. He destroyed death, concerning the power of it.

as sacrificing our life unto God, whether it be a natural or violent death,
none of us ought to live or to die unto himself, but to the Lord, Romans 14.7.

We are to be moved hereby to lay down our lives for the Brethren; therefore,
that which is less then our lives, 1 John 3. to use humility, mercy,
gentleness, toward others.

First, We may hereby know the worth of Gods favor, by the price which it cost.

Secondly, The great mercy of God, in delivering his Son to death for us, Romans
5. The abundant love of Christ Jesus to die for us.

Thirdly, The hatefulness of sin, seeing the imputation of it brought Christ so
low.

Fourthly, Labor for assurance of the communion with Christ in his death, and
glory in the certainty of Gods Covenant for forgiveness of sins,
sanctification, perseverance, and eternal life.

It reproves them that remember not Christ's death, do not think of it to work
their affections to be like Christ's therein, we owe to him the remembrance of
him, and showing forth of his death.

Of the Cross] This was Gods will, and herein Christ obeyed, that his death
should be for the kind, the most odious and fullest of reproach, that is, to
be hanged on a tree.

This was figured in the sacrifice laid upon the wood, as in Isaac, in the
Brazen Serpent lifted up on a pole, Deuteronomy. 21.23.
and God in his secret counsel had pronounced them accursed that hanged on a
tree, according to his purpose in Christ Jesus, that he should bear our curse,
Gal. 3.13.

They suffered for their own sins, and he for ours; God would have that a
prefiguration of this. And thus defilement is taken away and removed from us;
the purgation being made by the death of Christ on the Cross; the remembrance
of our vitiousness is to be removed from all men's eyes.

This Christ himself foretold, Matthew. 20.19. Joh. 3.14. and 8.28. and 18.32.
and for this it was ordered, that the Jews were stiff in desiring him to be
crucified.

And thus the Apostles charge the Jews, Acts 5.30. and 2.23. he took our sins
with him to the tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. Spoiled principalities, and powers, and
triumphed over them, Col. 2.

On the Cross, Christ was encountered with exceeding fury, on which, legions of
Devils of incomprehensible rage, and long experience, and Gods anger was
kindled against him as a surety for sinners.

The Devils are spoiled, God satisfied, the wretched spirits are, as it were,
dragged after the Chariot of Triumph, and exposed to shame, and the Elect are
restored.



Seeing he, being in the Form of God, abased himself in the form of a servant
to die on a tree for us; let us endure the Cross, and despise the shame.

Seeing the fruit of this death for us, Let us glory in the Cross of Christ,
and in nothing more, Gal. 6.14.

Seeing in the Cross was Christ's triumph, Let us not be ashamed of Christ
crucified, but resolve to overcome also by sufferings, Revel. 12.

And lastly, Let it move us to take heed of sinning against Christ, who
submitted himself to the Cross for us: How precious should his remembrance be
with us, and that Sacrament of his holy Body and Blood that carries with it
special remembrance of his love, in his dying on the Cross for us, how should
it be desired of us?

It must move us to look carefully to this, That the Cross of Christ be not
made of none effect by us, either by receiving any Doctrine, making the death
of Christ in vain, Gal. 5. or not applying the Doctrine of Christ by Faith unto
reconciliation, but receiving grace in vain, 2 Cor. 6.1.

Or not making the death of Christ in the efficacy of it, powerful in us to
crucify the flesh with the affections, as love of the world, worldly sorrow,
corrupt hatred, etc. Lusts, as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye etc.

It should move us to take to heart, Phil. 3.18.
even to tears, that men in the Church should be enemies to the Cross of Christ.

Certainty of Salvation.
1 THESSALONIANS. 5.9. For God has not appointed us to wrath.


THe Apostle adds this Reason to his Exhortation to watching, sobriety, arming
with Faith, Love, and Hope of Salvation, taken from the certainty of obtaining
Salvation; which certainty is grounded in the knowledge of the gracious act of
God in their exemption from his ordination to wrath, in his counsel and decree
of their Salvation.

Where note four things. First, Gods act, ordained or put; the subject matter
us; the end whereunto, amplified by antithesis, Not unto wrath, but to obtain
salvation; the means whereby his decree was executed, By our Lord Jesus Christ:
Or thus, the Author of the decree, God; the nature of the decree, appointment
or ordination, putting unto salvation, amplified by the contrary not unto
wrath; the object of the decree Paul, and the believing Thessalonians, us.

In that Paul pleads his and the believing Thessalonians exemption from Gods
Ordination to wrath, and his and their appointment to Salvation, observe we,
That our freedom from perishing, and our appointment to eternal life, may be
known, and we infallibly made certain, so as to profess our knowledge therein.

This is the peculiar joy of the Disciples of Christ, that their names are
written in heaven, Luke 10.20. not that they may not rejoice in other things,
so they rest not in them separate from this, but their proper joy is not
temporal grace, or mundane glory, but eternal salvation, which begins in Gods
election; which if they know not, how shall they rejoice in it?

The Apostle grounding the security of Christians, against the sense of their
corruptions within, and crosses without in Gods benefits, to the Elect his
justification secures them from accusation of all other, and Christ's
intercession from condemnation. Gods love in Christ from all adverse power in
respect of separation from life. How shall this be applied, but by knowledge of
our election? Romans 8.33, etc.

Paul knows his own salvation, and his election unto it, and professes his
knowledge, Romans 11.2. Peter calls upon us to make our election sure, 2 Pet.
1.10.

Election to life, and freedom from ordination to wrath, may be known two ways
ordinary, besides the way of special revelation.

1. By the testimony of Gods Spirit, who assuring our adoption, does thereby
assure our predestination to the adoption: Gal. 4.6. And it secureth their
hearts against fears that arose of former bondage; that with liberty of spirit
they call God Father with great certainty, as appears in the doubling of the
Word.

And knowing themselves for the present the sons of God, as they wonder at Gods
love, so they are sure they shall he glorious like Christ at his appearing; and
as they know their salvation with eternal glory, they know their election
thereunto, because none are glorified, but the predestinate.

2. Election may be known by the proper effects of it, of which a judgment may
be gathered in a man's own soul, to assure his heart before God, and to give him
boldness.

As the Apostle gathers the election of others, 1 These. i. 4, 5. 2 These. 2.13.
from the appearing effects, wherein God manifests his purpose of saving them,
at least probably, so may we by the evidence of the same grace, to be in truth
in our selves, Psalm. 65.5.
as causing to come to God by true conversion, and to Christ by Faith; so as we
are new creatures, are made meet for Gods use, and fitted for our part in the
lot of the Saints in light, perceive the power of Gods Ordinances in us,
satisfying us with the pleasures of his house, purging our selves from Errors
and Vices, 2 Timothy 2.21. 1 Ioh. 3.3.
purifying our selves, as Christ is pure; and cleaving with purpose of heart,
and with love of soul to God, and his doctrine in Christ.

Generally all the good that God does to us, concerning our salvation as
effectual grace, with the right use of it, is the effect, and so an evidence of
election.

Would God do such things for us, show us such things, receive our offerings,
if he went to destroy us? would a wife man bestow lace and trimming on a filthy
rag, to cast it to the Dunghill?

Psalm. 106.
it serves, First, to stir us up to seek this of God, and to mark the voice of
his Spirit in our hearts; when we hear the Gospel, and when we pray to him, and
with all to acquaint our selves with graces peculiar to the Elect, and prove
our selves, whether we have them in us.

It is profitable to be certain, both for thanksgiving to God, and for kindling
love, that may move us effectually to live to him, and to rest our souls in
fears and want of present things. Fear not little flock, it is your Fathers
pleasure to give you the Kingdom, Luke 12.32. It is profitable also, even for
humility, to know that all the reason of our differing from other is Gods good
pleasure, he had no respect of any thing in us, of the profit of the knowledge
of Election after.

Secondly, This serves for confutation of Papists, that hold no certainty to be
had ordinarily of a man's election while he lives here, because this is a depth
unsearchable, Romans 11. verse. 33.

To which it may be answered, That the reason is unsearchable, but the thing is
revealed to Gods children, what his will is to them by the Spirit, that
searches the deep things of God; or because a man cannot be certain of his
Faith and Justice to be true, or if he could, yet they are not proper to the
elect, but are given to reprobates, who continue not in them, and none know
they shall have perseverance.

To which, it may be answered, That a man may know his Faith, and Justice such,
as he may know he is not reprobate, 2 Cor. 13.5. If so, then he may know he is
elect, he may know his grace, so far as to assure his heart before God, to have
boldness in the day of judgment, and his perseverance he knows by Gods
promise, Jere. 32.40. his faithfulness, 1 Corinthians. 1.8, 9. by Christ's merit and
intercession, by the Spirits sealing unto the day of Redemption.

Object. But we are commanded to fear.

Sol. Fear to sin, but withal to trust perfectly, to give diligence to full
assurance of Faith unto the end; hold the confidence and rejoicing of our hope
fast.

For God has not appointed us.] As this stands for an Argument to excite the
will to the choosing and pursuit of these graces, to furnish us for the good
fight, observe we,

That the certainty of our salvation under the seal of Gods decree, is an
incentive to virtues, no occasion of looseness. It provokes to the study of
Faith, and Love, and puts on the care of all holy means and endeavors, tending
to accomplish Gods appointment, Col. 3.12, 13. As the elect of God, holy, and
beloved, put on, etc. 2 Peter 1.3, 4. 1 John 3.2, 3. Revel. 19.7. God has
joined life and godliness, virtue and glory, Gods image is a great part of our
glory, 2 Cor. 3.

Gods decree is to the means, and to the end; it is to save by sanctification
of the Spirit, and Faith of Truth, chosen us to be holy, Ephesians. 1.4. To
obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, through sanctification
of the Spirit. And this study God works in their hearts, unto whom he reveals
their election unto life, for the accomplishing of his counsel, that they may
witness their thankfulness to him, that they may be counted worthy of his
Calling, and of his Kingdom; For howsoever none be worthy of the inestimable
felicity in Heaven, yet God does fit all, Col. 1.12.
and makes them meet for himself, and their inheritance in light; for whom he
has prepared it, and uses their own study, care, and labor, to apprehend that
holiness and happiness, for which they have been apprehended of him. To this
purpose are the Exhortations to walk worthy of God, and of their Calling, and
Prayers to be counted worthy to escape the things that come upon the Earth, and
worthy of his Calling, 2 These. 1.11.

earthly things, with neglect of spiritual graces, we should thus reason. God
has not appointed us to perdition, and therefore we must not yield to motions
stirring us to such things, as bring perdition, but to obtain Salvation, which
he has declared in his calling of us; therefore we must, and we will flee
these things, and follow after Faith, Love, Godliness, Righteousness,
Gentleness, etc. Fighting the good fight of Faith, till we lay hold on eternal
life, whereunto we are called. 1 Timothy 6.11, 12. If we do these things we shall
never fall, but abundant entrance shall be ministered unto us, into the
everlasting Kingdom of God.

2. If sin have prevailed in some act, let it move us to repentance, to purging
our selves, reasoning thus, This is not the way, from election to salvation,
but from reprobation to damnation: I will up therefore, and turn my feet into
Gods Commandments, and forsaking the way of destruction, keep the way of life;
for I am not appointed to wrath, but to salvation.

3. In them it appears election takes place, that make the love, and mercy, and
unchangeable decree of God, a motive to follow Heavenly graces, and to give
themselves to God. They that share in the mercies, Romans 12.1.
move their resolution thereby to sacrifice themselves to God, 2 Cor. 5.14.
that partake of Christ's love, to work an addicting of themselves to Christ etc.

Where therefore this is wrought, it is a sign of our sharing in this grace of
election, when from the thought of it, we fight for our deliverance from sin,
the world and the devil, and arm our selves with grace unto the fight.

Then it is evident, Paul has his part in the love of Christ dying for him,
when for Christ he dies to the world, Gal. 2.19, 20.
that he may live to God.

She loves much, therefore her many sins are forgiven her; her affection
argues in her devout actions to Christ, that she has her part in his merit.

Has not appointed, or put us unto death] In this exemption of the Apostle,
and the believing Thessalonians from ordination unto wrath; there is not darkly
insinuated, That some are ordained to wrath by the Lord. Some men's destruction,
not only in general but in particular, not only simply but in comparison;
this man, not that; Cain not Abel, Esau not Jacob, Judas not Peter, decreed,
etc.

He will show mercy, on whom he will show mercy; and whom he will, he hardneth.
There are Vessels of wrath prepared to destruction, not only by themselves
sinning, but by God ordaining their end, according to his absolute power, and
his prerogative; as the Potter has to appoint his clay to the end and use of
honor or dishonor, and so to frame it out of the lump, Romans 9.

I have hated Esau, I have loved Jacob, without foresight of their works; as
Christ is set for the ruin of many in Israel, Luke 2.34. so some stumble at
the stumbling stone, Romans 9.32, 33. they stumble at the Word, 1 Pet. 2.8.
being disobedient, unto the which they were even ordained; or, also appointed:
Forewritten unto this destruction, or condemnation, Jude v. 4. Prove. 16.4. He
has made all things for himself, even the wicked for the day of evil.

In appointing to wrath, three things are signed, Rejection from grace and
glory, deputation to sins, ordained to destruction.

1. For clearing God, Though we could not find out his justice in this, yet we
must hold the principle, God is righteous, Jere. 12.1 Romans 9.14. Is there
unrighteousness with God? God forbid. Reject such thoughts with abomination.

2. God may be cleared, First, in respect of his absolute liberty, and right,
or prerogative, by the similitude of the Potter. He is not unrighteous in his
action, whose will executes but lawful power.

Secondly, God in his liberty and prerogative, may be cleared in his ends of
his action.

He appoints none to damnation for damnation sake; he delights not in the
destruction of his Creature; he respects his glory of power, of wrath, of
justice, of patience, in bearing long with sinners; and at last, punishing them
powerfully, and righteously, and declaring his rich glory in the Vessels of
Mercy.

As all things are of him, and through him, so all things are for him, Romans
11.36. It is just for God to will his own glory, by that of which he has
absolute power.

3. He is cleared in his obtaining of this end of the glory of his justice, and
power, in that he condemns, and destroys none in his wrath, but the material
cause of their condemnation is found in themselves.

He created all righteous, left man in the power of his will, by his own
freewill he sinned against God, and so lost himself, and his freewil; his mind
set on evil, his wisdom contrary to God, and cannot be subject to God.

He suffers them with patience, gives means of Repentance and Salvation for
many, and many gifts, not only worldly but spiritual, makes them taste of the
excellencies of the life to come, does what he can do for them, excepting the
new creating of them, which is not unto just proceeding required.

He causes not, but permits their sin, or in justice makes latter sins,
punishments of former, blinding them that will not see, but wink at the light,
hardening them that harden and obstinate their own hearts against his motions;
delivering them to their own hearts lusts, that will not hear his counsel, till
they fulfill their full measure of sin; rejecting them without purpose of ever
reclaiming them: And this is just.

And howsoever they cannot now but sin, yet they sin with freedom, without
constraint from him, with delight, that they are said to love death, Prove.
8.36. and to seek death.

all have not faith.

2. It may provoke us to hasten our assurance of our exemption from this
ordination to wrath, by separation from the way of reprobates, by getting grace
peculiar to the elect; distinguishing between restraining grace, and renewing.

3. It should stir us up to vows of eternal thankfulness to God, having found
our exemption from wrath, and our appointment to Salvation; not only rejoicing
with thanksgiving, that God has appointed us to life, but that passing by
others, he has respected us; Luke 10.21.
it adds mavelous amplification to the mercy and love of God, Heb. 2.16.
Mal. 1.2, 3. The soul that has tasted this mercy, can never express the
measure of it, but rather faint in the admiration of it.

But to obtain Salvation] The salvation of the saved, is made sure by decree of
the unchangable God. It is not only foreknown, but put for us, The persons
ordained, us.
and we put unto it into Gods eternal decree, and foreordination; which is
certain, not only that some shall be saved; but for number, more or fewer
shall not be saved; and for persons, these be, not they.

Which may be gathered by the distinction of Brother and Brother, Abel, not
Cain; of such as have election to the same office, of King, David, not Saul; of
Apostles, John 13. I speak not of you all, I know whom I have chosen; of
ordinary Preachers, many never known, Matthew. 7. Some written in the Book of
Life, their name in Gods eternal memory, Phil. 4. Such as have common favor to
hear Salvation offered; the Election obtain, the rest are blinded.

As many as were ordained to life, believed; As if we should say, Pew-fellows;
so Work-fellows, Bed-fellows, one taken, another left; as God eternally had
decreed, that does all things after the counsel of his will, to whom his works
be known all, from the beginning of the world. Act. 15.18. Romans 8.29.


Gods foreknowledge is in order before predestination. Act. 15.18. Romans 8.29.
This puts difference between one and another, Gods purpose according to
election, Romans 9.11. not of works, but of him that calls, Matthew. 20.16.
Calling is effectual only in such persons, and no other, as God has chosen,
Whom he predestined, them he called.

The particulars are known, the means sent to them, continued for them, Acts
18. and made effectual to them. The Lord knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19.
Christ calls his sheep by name, knows them, and knows others not to be his,
Joh. 10.26, 27.

Of all the persons that have been, are, or ever shall be in the world, the
number is finite, defined, and certain with God.

The generation of men, as it had a beginning, so shall it have an end by Gods
will: And of all that are, some are appointed to salvation, some to damnation.

God is not ignorant whom he will save, whom he will damn; for he is most wise.
The means prepared for the salvation of some, and foreseeing ordained for the
destruction of some, cannot fail; for he is most mighty.

If the hairs of their heads be numbered, much more the persons elected be
numbered.

and that alterably, as they stand in faith and holiness, or fall away from it.

First, Man's wisdom deals on better certainties, first determining of the end
of his work, and accordingly disposing of his workmanship.

Secondly, This way we are beholding to our selves, more then to Gods grace;
that I may be elected and saved, I must thank God; that I am elected and saved,
I may thank my self. God made it possible, my free will made that possibility
beneficial unto me; and so one man may insult over another, as making the
difference between himself, and another man, contrary to that, 1 Cor. 4.7.

Object. 2 Timothy 2.21. If a man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be
a vessel unto honor: It seems then a man may frame his own fortune, and make
himself a Vessel of honor.

Sol. It is to be understood of his own knowledge of his election, by the figns.

Object. It seems God has not so unalterably determined of the persons, but
that one that was elect may fall from election, and another take his room; or
else why is there mention of putting out names of the Book of life? Psalm.
69.28. Exodus 32.33.

Sol. Such sayings are to be understood of the manifesting of Gods counsel.
They whom God, by open signs, joins unto his people, are said to be written in
the Book of life; and so contrary, when God openly casts them away, and roots
them out of the Church, they are said to be blotted out of the Book of Life
that he has written, as the false Prophets, Ezekiel. 13.9. They shall not be in
the Assembly of my people, nor be written in the writings of the house of
Israel, etc.

Some seem to be written, and are not; some seem to be written, and are so;
they that seem, and are not, the Lord will upon their sin manifest it, that
they were not written; the other shall hold their account, Revel. 3.

It is a strong foundation of comfort, that the persons be unalterably elected.
Rejoice in this, your names are written in Heaven. Romans 8.33. Who shall accuse
the Elect of God?

Nothing can separate from the love of God in Christ. Election is in God, who
changes not; not in us that change, of Gods will, and foreknowledge, not of
our works.

To obtain Salvation] To obtain salvation, is not meant here to acquire it by
their own merits; for the mean of their obtaining is determined in the Text,
Christ Jesus. But it is all one with other places, where the Elect are said to
be ordained to eternal life.

God then has determined of the final state of the Elect: Elect they are, not
only to Means and Grace, but to the End, Salvation, Acts 13.48. To eternal
life, Romans 9.23. prepared to glory; to conformity with Gods Son in his Image,
Romans 8.29. Blessedness of a Kingdom, Matthew. 25.34. Their place in Heaven near
Christ, Matthew. 20.23. Blessing with all Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly places,
Ephesians. 1.

From Election, as a cause, flows Grace, and the right use of it to the Elect;
whatsoever pertains to Life or Godliness; all Graces qualifying the persons
elected, and making them meet for their Masters use, and their lot among the
Saints in Light.

As the revealing of Christ, the secrets of the Kingdom, Faith in Christ, Union
with him, Justification, Adoption, Regeneration, Good works, perseverance, with
an impossibility to be seduced finally.

God keeps them by his power unto salvation, they shall never perish. God
reserveth them to himself, Romans 11. preserved in Jesus Christ, Jude 1. so as
their salvation is sure and infallible.

Which is matter of plentiful Consolation, in all thoughts, perplexing or
distressing. Fear not little flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure to give
you the Kingdom.

By Jesus Christ.] This is the only mean resolved of in Gods Counsel, for the
accomplishment of Gods purpose, concerning the salvation of the Elect, Jesus
Christ.

He is therefore said to be predestinate before the world, and we predestinate
in him, 1 Pet. 1.20.
Ephesians. 1. Our Salvation of his gracious purpose, given us in Christ Jesus
before the world, 2 Timothy 1.9. And given are all to Christ Jesus, that God will
save; that he may purchase their salvation by his merit, and put them in
possession of it by his efficacy. John 6.37, John 17.2.
38, 39. Him has the Father sealed, to this work, to give food unto Eternal
Life, John 6.27. And propounded for reconciliation by Faith in his Blood, Romans
3.25. There is no other Name under Heaven to claim Salvation by.

Whence follow these things.

First, That Christ is not the cause of our Election, though he be the Savior:
There is no cause without God, that moved him to choose where he has chosen.

Purpose, Grace, Good pleasure, will of showing mercy, doing with his own what
he will, working all according to the Counsel of his will; These are alleged
as the only cause, why he resolved upon these persons, in them to show the
riches of his Glory.

We are chosen in him, not for him; we are saved according to Gods purpose, for
him; as ordained the mean, and meritorious cause, the Author of eternal
Salvation.

Secondly, As many as God means to save, he (as he gives to Christ) so causes
to come to him, and not one more or less; that not being in this life joined to
Christ, to be finally out of Christ, Ioh. 10.
is a sign of rejection from Grace and Life.

It is not as some dream, that an honest life, in a true or false Religion,
will save. Then what lost the Jews by stumbling at Christ, who sought
Righteousness and Life without him?

The Apostle counts all dung for Christ, and desires to be found in him: He is
our hope, by him only we believe, and have access to God. If we be Christ's, we
are Abraham's seed, and heirs of the Promise.

Christ gives himself for no other, but such as are given of his Father to him;
he lays down his life for his sheep; he excludes the rest out of his
Intercession.

What Christ is as Mediator; what he does as Mediator; to whom he does any
thing by Mediation, is all by the will and appointment of his Father: His will
he came to do; his work was appointed him, and that he finished according to
his will.

All other means are but subordinate, as Faith, Preaching, Sacraments, with
relation to Christ. Christ only absolutely necessary; these as instruments to
receive him.

Some, wanting these, have Christ to Salvation.

FINIS.

