A PRIVATE CONFERENCE BETWEEN Mr. L. Robinson, AND Mr. T. Scott, Occasioned
upon the Publishing his MAJESTY'S LETTERS AND DECLARATION.

LONDON. Printed for Isack Goulden at the Dolphin in Pauls-Church-Yard, 1660.

A PRIVATE CONFERENCE.
ROb. Pox, O this damned Fellow Lambert, we may thank him for all this; He must
be quarrelling like a Knave, and we must be retorting again like a company of
Fools as we were, as if we had done it on purpose to let honest men come by
their own. Well, we have had many a true jest put upon us, but never were so
paid with a true proverb before.


Scot. Storkes come into England, quether! I Will be hanged if ever any Storkes
came hither: No, no: I see Commonwealth birds wont live in our Climate.


Rob. What a devil were we chosen into this House for.


Scot. To sit in it like two Owls for people to stare and point at us. There Is
Tom. Scot -- cries one -- Lord Chief peeper into the Rumps secrets; Who Is that
cries another? Luke Robinson the Barbarian, The Chrimme Tartar, whom Cerberus
begat upon an Elders maid.


Rob. And their so unanimous (I wonder where they learnt it, I am sure not
from us) that I profess I am amazed to see it, they hold together as if they
had studied nothing but the 133 Psalm. I was forced to oppose a motion the
other day my self, least there should have bin a nemine contradicente in the
House.


Scot. God's life! But did you hear the man that cried give unto Caesar that
which is Caesar's.


Rob. I could have wished it had bin left out of the Bible, for thought it be
not much Significant, If rightly expounded, yet it does a great deal of
mischief at the first sight.


Scot. Upon my credit, brother Robinson, they were very severe words: they were
more painful to me than the pains of the Pox: And now, God help me I have felt
both.


Rob. There Is no man would expound it as these men do: why suppose we are bid
to give Caesar his due, we are ready to do it: but Caesar is not the King,
neither is the King Caesar; when they can prove the King to be Caesar, then
we will give him his due. besides Caesar was an Emperor: now if we are bid to
give the Emperor his due, we are not therefore bid to give the King his due.


Scot. Why did you not urge this in the House, Brother.


Rob. Because I thought 'twas to no purpose.


Scot. It Is not the first thing that we have done to no purpose. Did not we
visit Monk to no purpose? and break down the City gates to no purpose? and send
all our Soldiers out of town to no purpose? and have not we been
Common-wealthing it here these twelve years to no purpose? why then could not
you speak two or three words to no purpose?


Rob. I confess I have been good at Snarling and Wrangling and Contradicting,
but now I know not what ails me? I think the times have almost doaz'd me. Did
I think ever to have lived to have seen a King again, in England? -- hum h -- a
King -- very good -- no, it is not so very good neither, now I think on it.


Scot. I profess I don't like it neither. Well Thom. Scot now bid all thy
worldly honors adue, bid thy Secretary Ship farewell too; but part civilly
however, tell um it is against thy will that thou part'st from um, and if thou
did ever oblige any friends whilst thou were in power, call um to mind, for
I am afraid thou will want a great many.


Rob. A Letter from his Majesty --


Scot, yes I hear it, there is a dainty bit for a Rumper to chew upon -- but the
reception and submissive acknowledgment of it -- those are two excellent
ingredients to purge melancholy: ^uppose a man should now divide a Sixpence
into three parts or a Groat into two parts, and bestow either the third parts
of the Sixpence or the half of the Groat, would it not be better than to linger
out a man's days in scorn and contempt? -- How? The Lion and the Unicorn? -- How
many times have I ordered um to be pulled down? And are they got up again? Yet I
am sure my warrants were not wont to be sealed with Butter, -- but it is all one
whether Wax or Butter, -- for I see now one will melt as well as the other. --
Have we been sitting here this 12 years only to wake Lions couchant? Nay then
farewell Frost. The Picture of the Devil with all his Claws, his long Tail, and
his strange misshapen Countenance, looks like one of Perells Land-skips,
compared to this dismal sight of the Lion and the Unicorn.


Rob. Nay here is another apperition as bad as the other.


Scot. What Is that for the Lords sake?


Rob. Look here, -- CHARLES R.


Scot. Heaven defend us! Lord how we wondered in former time to see an et
Cetera. Pray God this be not the name of an Angel, for I am afraid I shall even
dye now I have seen it; Prithee Brother turn over the leaf, it makes my knees
shake worse then Belshassars Mean Tekel


Rob. But here is not only CHARLES, but CHARLES R. yes and this suffered too.


Scot. Men will suffer any thing in these days, did they not suffer me, and
you, and Cromwell, and did not the King suffer? And therefore prithee suffer
that R. to stand there; I had rather see it in the front of a book, then placed
upon my forhead. God keep all Hyeroglyphicks from coming there.


Rob. Here Is another song to the same tune. Trusty and well beloved. But let
that pass, for it concerns not us at all. Trusty quether; indeed we have bin
very Trusty, if the whole truth were known; And why well-beloved? It Is a name
that was never given us before: the very Preachers when they know we are at
Church, leave out the word beloved, lest they should give us a wrong style in
the Crowd. Why should we give Caesar his due that will not give us our due?


Scot. How? Insupportable Calamities, by which the Nation was near exhausted?
Now you see Mr. Robinson what it is for a man to speak out of ignorance; had
this man been of our Gang, he would have known better than to have said so, for
I Will swear my thought they were the bravest days I ever saw in my life; I never
commanded more, and never had more money in my Pocket; Our very news-Monger
could loose his 40 or 50 pieces in an afternoon; And I am sure these were no
signs the Nation was quite exhausted. I fear we shall never see such times
again.


Rob. But will the King come in again in good earnest.


Scot. In good earnest I know no body to keep him out.


Rob. Where Is Hazelrig that said he would roll to his Grave in blood, before the
King should come in?


Scot. Hang him lying Bragadochio, he will say more in an hour, than he will
perform in the length of a Troy Siege.


Rob. Are not we then in a fine condition?


Scot. What do you mean by a fine condition Brother?


Rob. I mean are we not in a delicate plight?


Scot. Fine and dilicate de'ye call it? These are dilicate words, but I fear
they will not suit either with us, nor the condition we shortly shall be in.


Rob. Why is there not an Act of oblivion promised?


Scot. Yes to all excepting such as the Parliament shall except.


Rob. Why are not we Parliament men? we will except our selves I warrant ye.


Scot. If there were none of the Parliament but we two, we might make a shift,
but what think you of that plaguie thing called the Major part,


Rob. Nay if ye talk of the Major part once, I Will be of the Major part too: I Will
go and recant.


Scot. How recant?


Rob. Yes fore God I Will recant; I Will rather turn than burn, Martyrdom! hang it,
it is obstinacy; it is true, I can be as obstinate as another, but not when my neck
lies at stake.


Scot. I know not what to do, I am made a Murderer, and a Traitor, it is time for
me to be packing.


Rob. I have been deeply enough engagd against him too, but there was one Thief
upon the Cross spared, because he asked forgiveness.


Scot. Would I could but get a good Chapman for my part of Lambeth house, and
I Would e'ne go travel in my old age.


Rob. You may travel brother Scot, your Legs are both of a length, for my part
I cannot walk far, and there* I Will repent. I know full well what belongs to
Sequestrations and Compositions, and therefore I Will not stand to the hazard of
either.


Scot. You may do as you please, but for my part I am resolved to drive it off
to the last, till I see what they intend to do. Twould vex a man to the Soul to
repent and whine, and then to be hanged afterward. Poor Common-wealths-men,
it is time for us to look to out buttocks, when they take down our breeches. What
a sad destruction will here be of Harps and Crosser; The Gentlemen think they
do us a great courtesy to take away our Crosses, but I had rather they would
break my ^hins. But what say the People? Hang their new Heraldrie cries one, --
not so cries another, they are not fit to make signs of -- Burn um cries
another, -- and then they rejoice; -- This man quoth they, has spoken like a
Seer, -- next Bonfires have at um, -- and I believe within this fortnight we
shall see no more sign of the States Arms, than of Nimrods Pedigree.

Must they be pulling down Crosses, because we were once in the humor of
pulling um down? -- Yes, -- for we did it with a bind zeal, but they do it with
a knowing zeal. But see the Seamen too, Fellows that hardly know what a King
is, they are for his Majesty too.


Rob. How can we expect otherwise but that they should love Monarchy, when
every petty ship is a kind of Monarchy.


Scot. it is against the officers interest indeed: but why should not the
Soldiers have their share too in the Government of the ship, as well as the
Commanders; would to God we had ordered it so, when we were in Authority; I
believe they would have found a hard task to make the Mastiffs let go their
hold. What a pox do they travel for? -- Not to see fashions you will say -- no, I
believe not, -- If they did they would remember, how much more Seamen thrive in
Commonwealths than in Monachies. Hang um -- remember -- they don't remember
that we paid um, and that they served us -- but they remember that they served
us and we did not pay um -- does that stick in your stomachs Gentlemen? --
truly we are sorry for it, not for yours, but for our own sakes -- as for our
flaggs and pendents, they now must perish like chafe before the wind -- would
it not greive a man to see the women of Wapping peticoted in the Commonwealths
jacks and Ancients -- and to see the pride and glory of Respublica Angliae
mantling a boatswaines Lechery. O Lawson, Lawson! once thou did bravely for
us; But our Jason is gone, and woe is me for all my fellow Commonwealths --
Argonauts, we never more must think to regain the golden fleece again. Well
Brother, I can talk no more on it, God b'y; these things make me mad.


ROBINSONS RECANTATION IN THE HOUSE
GEntlemen, I have been a great many years against the King, because I saw it
was convenient to do so; And now because I find you are all for him, I am for
him too: It Is ill striving my Masters against the stream, I Will nere do it while
I live. Gentlemen, you know the common excuse, -- I have been deluded a great
while, but now my eye are open, -- Pray Gentlemen let this serve, -- I am very
sorry for what I have done, because it has thrived so ill, -- and therefore pray
forgive me, -- and the Lord forgive me, and so let us all forgive one another.

A BONFIRE CAROLL.
WHy does the pale Phanatick Grin
To see our general Joy?
Who thinks there is no use of Fire
But only to Destroy.
He longed to see the City Flame,
And now has his desires;
But now he see's the City Flame,
Quoth he, Pox take your Fires.
Come boy's more wood -- there is no more,
Then fetch a Harp and Cross;
Nay, fetch us all those rotten boards;
We Will burn 'um by the Gross.
Great CHARLES the second is proclaimed
Lord of his Native Right:
The day's too little for our Joy,
Which makes us Joy by Night.
Behold a sight! The Earth it self
Is now our Altar made;
But where is the Sacrifice you will say?
Oh! that is quickly had.
Bring hither the Rebelious votes
That beardlesse Tichborn framed;
And Records of The Infernal Act
Of Bradshaw, who is damned;
Bring what the bold Conspiracy
Of Rumpers did impose,
When they abolished Regal Power,
In dread of Cromwells Nose;
Bring the cursed Hue and Cry, and him
That dared to write it too,
And bring that Vote which Commonwealth'd us
Into our deepest woe;
Bring whatsoere the chief of Rebels
Upon the Nation forced,
To dispossess his Sovereign,
For which his Sons are cursed;
These should the Sacrifices be
If we might have our will,
And as for Priests ye shall not want
To burn and burn 'um still.
But now I think on it where is Sir Arthur
As dry as Norway deal,
It Is just he should be burnt, that first
Did fire the Commonweal.
Where Is Thomas Scott, he is pretty dry too,
As having lost his marrow;
But lest our fire be out too soon,
Bring Vane in a Wheel-Barrow:
Bring Martin too, that beastly Slave,
And bring his Leman hither,
For as they lived like Ancient Gauls,
We Would have 'um dye together,
Then boldly let um throw themselves
Into these Funeral Piles,
That all Rebellion may be buried
While we dance Round the whiles;
It Is better so to dye than live
Still Ignominious:
Perhaps they want a President,
There Is Sardanapa us.
FINIS.

