THE PRIME WORK OF THE FIRST TRIPPLE-PARLAMENT; OR, The modest Motion of
Religion's friends, humbly tendered by way of Petition to the first
Representative of Great Britain and Ireland.

Thus published, that some good Men of every County may present a Copy thereof
to the Members of Parliament by them elected.

Praemonitus, praemunitus.

He that takes warning shall deliver his Soul. Ezekiel. 33.5.

As they went through the Cities they delivered them the Decrees for to keep,
that were ordained of the Apostles and Elders; and so were the Churches
established in the Faith, and increased in number daily. Acts 16.4.5.

London, Printed by T. W. 1654.

To the Supreme Authority of the Commonwealth of Great BRITAIN and IRELAND,
The most HIGH and HONORABLE Court of PARLIAMENT. The humble Petition of diverse
well-affected in behalf of the CHURCH of CHRIST in all the three NATIONS.
Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioners with all cheerfulness and contentation affying in the
happy settlement both of Church and State, by the prudent and Religious
endeavors of His Highness the Lord Protector and this Honorable Assembly, and
with due humility and obedience submiting to the unanimous Conclusions of this
Supreme power, do conceive themselves bound in duty, thankfully to acknowledge
that they are much comforted, that in this time of Jacobs trouble, Revel. 12.15.
wherein the Serpent has cast out of his mouth a flood of Heresies and
Errors, God has even beyond hope, called together such Men of stature in
Religion, and such worthy Champions for Religion, as are resolved vigorously to
oppose the enemies of the Truth and Kingdom of Jesus Christ, Jude 3.
and earnestly to contend for the Faith, which was once for all delivered unto
the Saints.

As the end of your calling and meeting together, is to serve the Lord God and
these Nations: so your way most surely and powerfully to effect both, is by
settling the Distractions of the Church of Christ; for as the Church is part of
Christ himself: Ephesians. 5.23.
so is it a principal part of these Nations, even the Pillar and stay of all;
for the State and Welfare of the Commonwealth have their subsistence by true
Godliness. Therefore as Religion is the whole duty of Man: Eccles. 12.13.
so the whole work of a Parliament. It is the Basis and bottom on which all
Happiness of a People are grounded, Doctor Usher.
the Soder of all Societies, the Rule of right ruling, the Mother of entire and
hearty love and obedience, the Life and Cement of Laws, the Nurse of Peace, the
Bond of Unity, the Strength of all Defense, and such a Blessing as blesses all
other blessings unto any People. Therefore now at your first Entrance, whilst
your thoughts are free and devoted to God, Your Petitioners do mind you of
nothing else, but only of settling the Doctrine and Discipline of the true
Reformed Religion. By Sir Ben. Rudyerd.


This has often heretofore been Petitioned and moved for in Parliaments, and
will now lie heavy upon Parliaments until it be effected; for when God is
neglected of Man, Man shall be contemned of God; when man abridgeth God of his
honor, God will shorten man of his happiness. But now if you do indeed make
Religion your Business, you will become a Heavenly Parliament; for that will be
your guide and stay in all other businesses, you will Steer your course by that
Compass, it will new model your desires and affections, and direct, limit and
circumstantiate all your Debates, Votes and Acts. And in securing Religion, you
will also secure His Highness and your Selves, not only by maintaining His and
your best Interest (the Union and Love of the People) but by defeating any
Plots that are or may be conspired by the enemies of Religion, whose factious
and seditious Spirits, as they do already much disquiet the Church, and
discontent all good people: So they do evidently endanger the Peace of the
State, subversion of the Civil Government, and destruction of the Governors;
for Church-Rebels will soon become State-Rebels, and their Doctrine and
practice have ever been, Master Hooker.
either to Level Commonwealths, or to assume Magistracy unto themselves.

They that drove on so furiously in the late Parliaments, will again
undoubtedly contrive to encounter you with their Faction; for having already
unrivetted the Fabric of Civil and Ecclesiastical Government, they do now
imagine nothing is too difficult for them to attempt. It needs not be
instanced, how they therefore exclude all Order, that they themselves may rule;
mean while setting up so many different and contrary Congregations one against
another, that they have almost rendered themselves incapable to be reduced into
the Body either of Church or State; yet still think themselves the only fit men
for the Keys and Scepter. So that greater Divisions and more horrible Factions
will inevitably ensue, to the breach of that Union; which is the sacred bond
and preservation of the Common Peace of Church and State. Wherefore, unless you
will be undermined by them, surely you will not so silently and patiently
tolerate them.

If you please to consider with what vehemence of Spirit they prosecute their
Designs, how plausible their popular Infusions are in their poisoning Sermons
and pestilent Pamphlets, how industrious and earnest some of them were to be
elected into this present Parliament, and what insolent speeches, terrible
menaces, and liberal promises they then publicly used, offering unto the
people for their Suffrages, no less than the Tithes of this Nation, and
scandalizing honest men that Voted for most worthy Members; you will with your
Petitioners soon acknowledge, that of all the Distempers that at present
threaten the Welfare of this Realm, no one more imploreth the speedy, mature,
and effectual consideration of your most High and Honorable Council, than the
Torrent of such Violent spirits to be stopped, ere ever they swell beyond the
Banks of Government; the overflowing of which Torrent is easily foreseen, but
will very hardly be remedied, unless the vigilance of your Zeal do the more
seasonably prevent.

You are now the Governors, you are the Nursing-Fathers of Gods Church, unto
you is committed the care of all the Churches in all the three Nations;
wherefore your Petitioners do further presume to point out unto you some other
Troublers of our Israel, and to lay open before you some other sore Grievances
of the Church of Christ, humbly beseeching you with pity to behold the
miserable disorder and breaches thereof, for alas it shakes, Psalm. 60.2.
and to foresee the Calamities that will (unless by your great wisdom
prevented) unavoydably follow. It is a work worthy the labor of a Parliament to
redress them, none but a Parliament can do it, and none can do it more
succesfully than this Triple-Parlament. For most of the Churches of Ireland are
unprovided of sufficient Ministers and maintenance; many Churches of Scotland
and Wales are deprived of their maintenance, and consequently of Ministers; in
the Marches or utmost Borders of England are few good Ministers; and throughout
this Nation in Country Parishes generally, where there is so great Contempt
begun, so heavy a Burden continued, and so mean a Reward left to be had, and
with so much difficulty to be received, what marvail if good Ministers are and
will be rare? All Laborers and Artificers have their hire increased; only he
that labors and sweateth in the Vineyard of the Lord, has his hire abridged
and abated. Is not this a shame for England, that ever since the knowledge of
the Gospel has been increasing amongst us, the maintenance of the Church has
been decaying? and will not this be the destruction of the Gospel and of the
Nation too?

As God in his Law took strict order for the maintenance of the Levites, Number.
35.2.
so has he given his Ministers of the Gospel his own Portion, Tithes and
Offerings; Matthew. 23.23.
that so the splendor of the Church should hold a participation and proportion
with the prosperity of the temporal State. Both these have been confirmed unto
the Ministry in all Ages since: but now so it is, that some, and chiefly they
that are or should be Patrons of the Church, are become Merchants in the
Church, and a great deal more intolerable than were they whom Christ whipped
and chased out of the Temple; John 2.15.
for these muzzle the Ox that treads out the Corn, and encourage others so
to do by their ill example; none of them considering that by deteining Tithes
and Offerings, they rob God himself, and draw a Curse on their own Estates.
Mala. 3.8, 9.


Now what Consequences will the Forcible Entry into the Inheritance of the
Church, and this Forcible Deteiner of the Ministers Portion produce, but (that
which succeeded in the like case in Jeroboam's time, when he robbed the Priests
and Levites) Ignorance, Barbarism, 1 Kings 12.31.
and the lowest of the people to be the Preachers of Gods word? whereby the
blind will lead the blind, until both do fall into the Ditch? Matthew. 15.13.
Poor scandalous Livings will cause scandalous Ministers, and the poverty of
Ministers will make them despised; for be their Calling of it self never so
glorious, yet outward Poverty will soon bring Contempt upon them, Eccles. 9.16.
especially amongst those who measure men by the Acre, and weigh them by the
pound, which indeed is the greatest part of men. And the contempt of the
Preachers will quickly make the Word of God despised, and so consequently God
himself; 1 These. 4.8.
For he that despises these, despises not man, but God. And can any think,
the Great God will allow his holy Name to be despised? Nay, as some of these
evil Events are already come to pass, so are his Judgments already begun, and
his wrath is already manifestly kindled, in-so-much as in several places the
people do already wander abroad as Sheep having no Shepherd. Matthew. 9.36.
In Ireland and Wales there are few that can discover unto the people the
Iniquity of their Sins, few that can move them to seek Faith and Repentance,
few that can Preach unto them Forgiveness through Christ, few that can forewarn
them against Temptations to Evil, few that can build them upon the foundation
of the Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. 2.20.
few that can instruct them concerning the hope of everlasting Life. For the
same cause multitudes in England also live still in their Sins, Romans 1.28.
Phil. 3.18.
like Heathens which know not God, without any feeling of Conscience, without
any fear of God; many walk as enemies of the Cross of Christ, who blaspheme the
blessed Name of God, and rent his Church; Therefore it is but just if the
Kingdom of God be taken from us, and that He send a Famine in this Land, Amos
8.11.
not a Famine of Bread, but of hearing the Word.

Thus, as the establishing of Religion in these Nations is your main Business
and of greatest importance, so your Petitioners trust you will take it into
your first and tenderest thoughts: for if Religion have the first Vote from
you, and God the precedence within you, other things will surer and sooner be
granted unto you; because Christ himself has said it: Matthew. 6.33.
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you.

It was well observed by that Honorable City of London, Presented Sept. 2.
1653.
in their last years Petition (to the same effect with this) That whilst the
first of these Parliaments did promote the Interest of Christ in taking care of
all able and faithful Ministers, setting them at liberty from persecutions,
giving them encouragement in the exercise of their Ministry and adding to their
maintenance; Also in their encouraging Learning, by Reforming the Universities,
and increasing the maintenance of the Governors of Colleges; the Lord did
bless their Councils and Forces by Land and Sea even to admiration. And now it
is as experimentally observed by your Petitioners, that our later Parliaments
were therefore less prosperous; because they preferred other matters before
Religion. What they did in the Church, proved most unhappily against the
Church; witness their pulling down the established Maintenance and Discipline,
and setting up none in stead thereof. So that whilst they endeavored to shut
out Superstition, they let in a crowd of Innovations, and such as give grievous
scandal to the Reformed Religion, great advantage to our enemies of Rome, and
encouragement to all turbulent Spirits in this Island, as appears by the late
increase of Atheists, Anabaptists, Heretics, Ranters, Quakers and Blasphemers;
who walk after their own ungodly lusts.

Jude 18, 19.
These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit. They
take Liberty of Conscience to Tyrannize over the Consciences of others, by
introducing into the Church, and imposing upon others all things which
themselves do affect. They revile the Protestant Churches, holiest Ministers
and public Congregations as Antichristian; and in this vacancy of
Church Discipline, many (even in contempt of Authority) do what seems good in
their own eyes only; they seize on Ministers Livings, and usurp their Function
and Pulpits, belching out Blasphemy, Schism, Sedition and Heresy, without dread
or punishment. They teach that the Civil Magistrate has nothing to do in
matters of Religion, though it be written: Romans 13.1.
Let every Soul be Subject unto the higher powers. Every Man, says Chrysostom,
whether Lay or Clergy.

They persuade that there is no need of a Ministry, especially of a learned
one; therefore they would destroy the Universities, and do labor to alienate
the hearts of the people from their Pastors, and to take away the settled
maintenance of Ministers by Tithes, and to suppress Learning and Studious
Divines, by allowing double Honor to none but themselves: And in all these
they do gratify and assist the Papists and Jesuits in their designs against our
established Religion, and do manifest unto all the World, that they intend no
less than the ruin of all Order and Government both in Church and State.

They boast of the Spirit: Gal, 5.22.23.
but show not the fruit of the Spirit, viz. Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance. But the works of the Flesh
are so abundantly manifested in them, that your Petitioners in all humiliy do
desire to prostrate before you the dangerous Consequences of these Innovators
and their Innovations, that so you may Cordially and Unanimously hasten to stop
all their Exorbitances and Encroachments; lest these ungodly men overrun His
Highness Dominions, Anno. 1533. 2 Timothy 3.13.
and over-whelm them in Blood, as others did Germany; For evil men and seducers
will wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived.

Be pleased therefore to take notice, that the blessed Sacraments, and other
holy Ordinances of God, are not only depraved by many of those who should teach
conformity to established Laws: but in contempt of them, in many places wholly
neglected, or administered by the hands of unfitting men, that have no outward
calling to the Ministry, audaciously and without any punishment. Marriage (an
Ordinance of God also) is exposed to contempt, and that by virtue of an Act of
Parliament. Excommunication laid aside. Catechizing but seldom used. Matthew. 6.9.
That absolute Model the Lords Prayer reviled.

Our only and blessed Savior in his Deity and Scriptures blasphemed. His
Ministers reproached. Many Houses of God robbed, wasted and made desolate. The
Moral Law abrogated. Obedience to Civil Magistrates denied, and in these the
foundation both of Religion and the Commonwealth overturned. By all which
evils Almighty God is highly provoked, the present Government dishonored, the
Peace of the Nations disturbed, the Consciences of Gods people disquieted, the
Ministers of Gods word discouraged, the glory of our Israel departed, and the
enemies of the Church emboldned in their enterprises.

Now not only to redress these Grievances, and prevent these sad Events, but
that all may come into the Unity of the Faith, Ephesians. 4.3, 13, 14, 15.
and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man; and may all keep
the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, and may henceforth be no more
Children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, by
the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to
deceive; but may grow up unto him in all things, which is the Head, even
Christ: May it please this Great and Honorable Court speedily to command
throughout these Dominions, a general due observation of the true Reformed
Religion by Law established, in such manner as may seem best to the piety and
wisdom of His Highness and this most Honorable Council; For your Petitioners
do in no wise presume to prescribe Rules, only these are their humble and
ardent Desires.

1. That to prevent a Combustion, you would please to blow out the sparks, and
constrain irregular and disorderly Schismatics and Heretical Sects (now the
most dangerous Incendiaries of all) into right Paths of serving God, to
frequent his House as well to pray as to hear, to be under a Discipline, to bow
to Authority, and to live in Peace and Order: Else variety of Opinions will
beget variety of Affections; and when men's hearts become Flinty each to other,
if they meet, they will strike Fire.

2. That the Word of God be not blasphemed, nor any Innovation of Doctrine
admitted or tolerated, nor the holy Administrations profaned; you would
please speedily to commit to Justice all known Blasphemers, to suppress all
Schismatical Pamphlets, to provide against Heretical Sermons, and to make some
severe Law against Lay men's during to arrogate to themselves, and to execute
the holy Function of the Ministry in public.

3. That to dispel the Darkness of Ignorance, you would please to let in the
Light of divine knowledge; by appointing public Catechizing every Lords Day in
every Church. And to propagate the Gospel more effectually. You would please
sadly to consider the desolation of the Churches in Ireland, and the In both
their Books.
cries of the Churches in Wales, and to restore unto them their former
maintenances, and to send forth able Pastors into every Parish.

1 Cor. 9.13.
4. That they that Minister at the Altar may live by the Altar, and without
Contempt; you would please to enact some Law for Parsons and Vicars recovery of
Tithes and Offerings, in such a way as may be most speedy and least chargeable,
and to grant Augmentations to such as have the smallest Livings.

5. That learning may be cherished, and a supply of able Divines continued; you
would please to maintain the just rights and properties of the Universities,
which are the Seminaries of good Literature, and the Schools of the Prophets,
and to reduce them to the due observation of their Statutes, and to place
worthy Governors in them.

6. That the study of Divinity, and the faithful Dispensors of the Gospel may
be encouraged; you would please not only to confirm unto them the settled
maintenances without further diminution; but also propound good Preferments to
men able in this Heavenly Calling, that thereby men of worthiest Gifts may be
won unto it: For herein the Papists show themselves wiser than the true Church
of God.

7. Lastly, that the precious Truths of the Gospel and the holy Ordinances of
God may be preserved in their purity and brightness, and all Differences
concerning Doctrine and Ceremonies of Religion may be composed; you would
please that a free and National Synod may speedily be convened of most grave,
learned, pious, judicious and unbyassed Divines, to be chosen by all the
Clergy, because all the Clergy are to be bound by their resolutions; And the
determination of this Synod to bind all persons, after you have formed them
into a Law. And this your Petitioners humbly conceive to be according to the
ancient and fundamental Law of this Land, confirmed by Magna Charta.

All which your Petitioners do humbly offer to the grave wisdom and pious
consideration of this most Honorable Assembly, as the thoughts and desires (as
they are persuaded) of multitudes of the sound Members of the Church of Christ.
And in confidence of your forward Zeal for the Lord, in advancing the true
Religion, they hold it needless to press you with Subscriptions of any of their
Names; but humbly beseech the Almighty God to direct and prosper all your
Counsels and Results, and ye to pardon their Errors and Presumptions herein.

Be of good Courage, Psalm. 31.24. and 73.1.
and God shall strengthen your Heart, all ye that hope in the Lord. For truly
God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart.

PSALM. 25.22. Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his Troubles. Amen.

FINIS.

