The Profession OF THE TRUE PROTESTANT RELIGION: OR The Protestation of the
Kirk of Scotland, with a Confession of the Faith, and solemn Covenant, or
Oath, of that Kingdom; as it has been diverse times Protested, and Enacted by
King James, and confirmed by an Act in the second PARLIAMENT of our Dread
Sovereign King CHARLES, the 11. of June, 1640.

WHEREIN Is specified the particular Heads of Popish Doctrine, and
Superstition, of the CHURCH of Rome, contrary to the sacred Scriptures, and
Discipline of the Reformed CHURCHES: with an Act of Confirmation of the said
COVENANT.

Also an Act against Liesing m^kers (or evil Counselors) of whatsoever
Quality, Office, Place, or Dignity.

Printed at Edingborough by E. T. 1641.

And now reprinted at London by THO: FAWCET, for Lawrence Chapman, 1643.

An Act of the General Assembly in Scotland, the second Parliament of King
CHARLES; Ordaining by Ecclesiastical authority, the subscription of the
Confession of Faith and Covenant.
THe General Assembly considering the great happiness which may flow from a
full and perfect Union of this Kirk and Kingdom, by joining of all in one and
the same Covenant with GOD, with the Kings Majesty, and amongst our selves,
having by our great Oath declared the uprightness and loyalty of our
intentions in all our proceedings, and having withal supplicated his Majesty's
high Commissioner, and the Lords of his Majesty's honorable Privy Council,
to injoyne by Act of Council, all the Lieges in time coming to subscribe the
Confession of faith and Covenant, which as a testimony of our fidelity to God,
and loyalty to our King we have subscribed; And seeing his Majesty, high
Commissioner, and the Lords of his Majesty's honorable Privy Council, have
granted the desire of our Supplication, ordaining by Civil authority, all his
Majesty's Lieges in time coming to subscribe the foresaid Covenant, that our
Union may be the more full and perfect, We by our act and constitution
Ecclesiastical, do approve the foresaid Covenant in all the Heads and Clauses
thereof and ordaines of new, under all Ecclesiastical censure, that all the
Masters of Universities, Colleges, and Schools, all Scholars at the passing
of their degr^es, all persons suspect of Papistry or any other error; and
finally all the members of this Kirk and Kingdom, subscribe the same with
these words prefixed to their subscription: The Article of this Covenant, which
was at the first subscription referred to the determination of the general
Assembly, being determined. And thereby the five Articles of Perth, the
Government of the Kirk by Bishops, the civil places and power of Kirk-men,
upon the reasons and grounds contained in the Acts of the General Assembly,
declared to be unlawful within this Kirk we subscribe according to the
determination aforesaid. And ordaines the Covenant with this Declaration, to be
insert in the Registers of the Assemblies of this Kirk General, Provincial,
and Presbyteriall, ad perpetuam rei memoriam; and in all humility supplicates
his Majesty's high Commissioner, and the honorable Estates of Parliament, by
their Authority, to ratify and injoyne the same, under all Civil pains,
which will tend to the glory of God, preservation of Religion, the Kings
Majesty's honor, and perfect Peace of this Kirk and Kingdom.

The Confession of Faith subscribed at first by the Kings Majesty and his
Household, in the year of God, 1580. Thereafter by persons of all ranks in the
year, 1581, by Ordinance of the Lords of the secret Council, and Acts of the
General Assembly. Subscribed again by all sorts of Persons in the year 1590.
By a new Ordinance of Council, at the desire of the General Assembly; with a
general Band for maintenance of the true Religion, and the Kings Person. And
subscribed in the year 1638. By Us, Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen, Burgesses,
Ministers, and Commons, then under subscribing: Together with our Resolution
and Promises for the causes after specified, to maintain the said true
Religion, and the Kings Majesty, according to the Confession aforesaid, and
Acts of Parliament. And now upon the Supplication of the General Assembly to
his Majesty's high Commissioner, and the Lords of his Majesty's honorable
Privy Council, subscribed again in the year 1639. by Ordinance of Council,
and Act of the General Assembly.
We all, and every one of Us underwritten, Protest, that after long and due
Examination of our own Consciences, in matters of true and false Religion, We
are now thoroughly resolved of the truth, by the word and Spirit of God; And
therefore we believe with our hearts confess with our mouths, subscribe with
our Hands, and constantly affirm before God, and the whole World, that this is
the true Christian Faith and Religion, pleasing God, and bringing Salvation to
man, which now is by the mercy of God revealed to the world, by the preaching
of the blessed Evangel, and received, believed, and defended by many and sundry
notable Kirks and Realms, but chiefly by the Kirk of Scotland, the Kings
Majesty, and the three Estates of this Realm, as Gods Eternal Truth, and only
ground of our Salvation, as more particularly is expressed in the Confession of
our Faith stablished, and publicly confirmed by sundry Acts of Parliaments,
and now of a long time has bin openly professed by the Kings Majesty and whose
body of this Realm both in Bu^g^ and Land. To the which Confession and form of
Religion we willingly agree in our consciences in all points, as unto Gods
undoubted Truth and Verity, grounded only upon his written Word. And
therefore, we abhor and detest all contrary Religion, and Doctrine: But
chiefly, all kind of Papistrie, in general and particular heads, even as they
are now damned and confuted by the Word of God, and Kirk of Scotland: But in
special, we detest and refuse the usurped authority of that Roman Antichrist
upon the Scriptures of God, upon the Kirk, the civil Magistrate, and
Consciences of men, all his tyrannous laws made upon indifferent things
against our Christian liberty: His erroneous Doctrine against the sufficiency
of the written Word, the perfection of the Law, the office of Christ, and his
blessed Evangelists. His corrupted Doctrine concerning original sin, our
natural inability and rebellion to Gods Law, our Justification by faith only,
our imperfect Sanctification and obedience to the Law, the nature, number and
use of the Holy Sacraments: His five bastard Sacraments, with all his Rites,
Ceremonies, and false Doctrine, added to the ministration of the true Sacrament
without the word of God* His cruel Judgment against Infants, departing
without the Sacrament: His absolute necessity of Baptism: His blasphemous
opinion of Transubstantiation, or real presence of Christ's Body in the
Elements, and receiving of the same by the wicked, or bodies of men: His
dispensations with solemn Oaths, Perjuries, and degrees of Marriage,
forbidden in the Word: His cruelty against the innocent divorced: His divellish
Mass: His blasphemous Priesthood: His profane sacrifice for the sins of the
dead and the quick: His Canonization of men, calling upon Angels or Saints
departed, worshipping of Imagerie, Relicts and Crosses, dedicating of Kirks,
Altars, Days, Vows to creatures; His Purgatory, Prayers for the dead,
praying or speaking in a strange language, with his Processions, blasphemous
Letany, and multitude of Advocates or Mediators: His manifold Orders, Auricular
Confessions: His desperate, and uncertain Repentance; His general and
doubtsome Faith; His satisfactions of men for their sins: His Justification
by works, opus operatum, works of Supererogation, Merits, Pardons,
Peregrinations, and Stations: His holy water baptizing of Bells, conjuring of
Spirits crossing faning anointing, conjuring hallowing of GODS good creatures
with the superstitious opinion joined therewith; His worldly Monarchy, and
wicked Hierarchy: His three solemn vows, with all his shavelings of sundry
sorts: His erroneous and bloody decrees made at Trent, with all the subscribers
and approvers of that cruel and bloody Band, coniured against the Kirk of GOD:
And finally, we detest all his vain Allegories, Rites, Signs and Traditions,
brought in the Kirk, without* or against the word of GOD, and Doctrine of this
true reformed Kirk: To the which we join our selves willing^y in Doctrine,
Faith, Religion, Discipline, and use of the holy Sacraments, as lively members
of the same in Christ our Head: Promising and swearing by the Great Name of the
Lord our GOD, that we shall continue in the Obedience of the Doctrine and
Discipline of this Kirk, and shall defend the same according to our vocation
and power all the days of our lives, under the pains contained in the Law,
and danger both of Body and Soul, in the day of GODS fearful Judgment: And
seeing that many are stirred up by Satan, and that Roman Antichrist, to
promise, swear, subscribe, and for a time use the holy Sacraments in the Kirk
deceitfully, against their own consciences, minding thereby, first under the
eternal cloak of Religion to corrupt and subvert secretly GODS true Religion
within the Kirk, and afterward, when time may serve, to become open enemies and
persecutors of the same under vain hope of the Popes dispensation, devised
against the Word of GOD, to his greater confusion, and their double
condemnation in the day of the LORD JESUS: We therefore, willing to take away
all suspicion of hypocrisy, and of such double dealing with GOD and his Kirk,
Protest, and call The Searcher of all hearts for witness, that our minds and
hearts do fully agree with this our Confession, Promise, Oath, and
Subscription, so that We are not moved for any worldly respect, but are
persuaded only in our consciences, through the knowledge and love of GODS true
Religion, printed in our hearts by the holy Spirit, as we shall answer to him
in the day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed: And because we
perceive, that the quietness and stability of our Religion and Kirk, does
depend upon the safety and good behavior of the Kings Majesty, as upon a
comfortable Instrument of Gods mercy, granted to this Country, for the
maintaining of his Kirk, and ministration of Justice amongst us, we protest and
promise with our hearts under the same Oath, Handwrit, and pains that we shall
defend his Person and Authority, with our goods, bodies and lives, in the
defense of Christ his Evangell, Liberties of our Country, ministration of
Justice and punishm^^t of Iniquity against all enemies within this Realm, or
without, as we desire our G d to be a strong and merciful defender to us in
the day of our death, and coming of our Lord JESUS CHRIST: To whom with the
Father, and the holy Spirit, be all Honor and Glory Eternal.

LIKE AS many Acts of Parliament are conceived for maintenance of Gods true and
Christian Religion, and the purity thereof in Doctrine and Sacraments of the
true Church of God, the liberty and freedom thereof, in her National and
Synodall assemblies Presb^teries, Sessions, Policy, Discipline, and
Jurisdiction thereof, as that purity of Religion, and liberty of the Church was
u ed, professed, exercised, preached, and confessed according to the
Reformation of Religion in this Realm; It is declared and ordained, seeing
that Gods true Religion, and his highness Authority are so joined as the hurt
of the one is common to both, that none shall be reputed as loyal and
faithful subjects to our Sovereign Lord, or his authority, but be punishable
as Rebellers and gain-standers of the same, who shall not give their
Confession, and make their profession of the said true Religion, and that they
who after defection shall give the Confession of their Faith of new, they shall
promise to continue therein in time coming, to maintain our Soverain Lords
Authority, and at the uttermost of their power to fortify, assist, and
maintain the true Preachers and Professors of Christ's Evangel against
whatsoever Enemies and gain-standers of the same: and namely, against all such
(of whatsoever Nation, estate, or degree they be of) that have joined, and
bound themselves, or have assisted, or assist to set forward and execute the
cruel decrees of the Council of Trent, contrary to the true Preachers and
Professors of the Word of God, which is repeated word by word in the Articles
of Pacification at Perth the 23 of February 1572. approved by Parliament the
last of April 1573. ratified in Parliament 1587. and related, Act 123. Parl.
12. of K. James 6. with his addition, that they are bound to resist all
treasonable uproares and hostilities raised against the true Religion, the
Kings Majesty and the true Professors.

Like as all Leidges are bound to maintain the Kings Majesty's Royal Person,
and Authority, the Authority of Parliaments without the which neither any Laws
or lawful Judicatories can be established, Act 130 and 131. Parl. 8 K. James
6. and the subjects liberties, who ought one y to live and be governed by the
Kings laws, the common laws of this Realm allanerly. Act 48. Parl. 3. K.
James the first Act. 79 Parl. 6. K. James 4. repeated in the Act 131. Parl. 8
K. James 6. Which, if they be innovated or prejudged the Commission anent the
Union of two Kingdoms of Scotland and England, which is the sole Act of the
17. Parl. of K. James 6. declares such confusion would ensue, as this Realm
could be no more a free Monarchy, because by the fundamental laws, ancient
privileges, Offices, and liberties of this Kingdom, not only the Princely
Authority of his Majesty's Royal descent has been these many ages maintained,
but also the peoples security of their Lands, livings, rights, Offices,
liberties* and dignities preserved. And therefore for the preservation of the
said true Religion, Laws and liberties of this Kingdom, it is statute by the
8. Act Parl. 1. repeated in the 99 Act. Parl. 7. Ratified in the 23 Act Parl.
11. and 114. Act, Parl. 12. of K, James 6. and 4. Act of K. Charles, that all
Kings and Princes at their Coronation and reception of their Princely
Authority, shall make their faithful promise by their solemn Oath in the
presence of Eternal God, that, enduring the whole time of their lives, they
shall serve the same eternal God to the uttermost of their power, according as
he has required in his most holy Word, contained in the Old and New Testament:
And according to the same Word, shall maintain the true Religion of Christ
Jesus, the preaching of his holy Word, the due and right ministration of the
Sacraments now received and preached within this Realm (according to the
Confession of Faith immediately preceding) and shall abolish and gain-stand all
false Religion contrary to the same, and shall rule the people, committed to
their charge, according to the will and command of GOD, revealed in his
foresaid Word, and according to the laudable Laws and Constitutions received
in this Realm, no ways repugnant to the said will of the eternal GOD; and
shall procure, to the uttermost of their power, to the Kirk of GOD, and whole
Christian people, true and perfect peace in all time coming: and that they
shall be careful to root out of their Empire all Heretics, and Enemies to the
true worship of GOD, who shall be convicted by the true Kirk of GOD, of the
foresaid crimes, which was also observed by his Majesty, at his Coronation at
Edinburg, 1633. as may be seen in the Order of the Coronation.

And because we cannot look for a blessing from God upon our proceedings,
except with our profession and subscription we join such a life and
conversation as beseems Christians who have renewed their Covenant with God;
We therefore faithfully promise, for our selves, our followers, and all others
under us, both in public in our particular families, and personal carriage,
to endeavor to keep our selves within the bounds of Christian liberty, and to
be good examples to others of all Godliness, Soberness and Righteousness,
and of every duty we owe to God and Man. And that this our Union and
Conjunction may be observed without violation, We call the living GOD the
Searcher of our Hearts, to witness, who knows this to be our sincere Desire,
and unfeigned Resolution, as we shall answer to JESUS CHRIST, in the great Day,
and under the pain of GODS everlasting wrath, and of infamy, and loss of all
honor and respect in this World, Most humbly beseeching the Lord, to
strengthen us by his holy Spirit for this end, and to bless our desires and
proceedings with a happy success, that Religion and Righteousness may
flourish in the Land, to the glory of GOD the honor of our King, and peace and
comfort of us all. In witness whereof we have subscribed with our hands all
the premises.

An act against Liesing-makers of whatsoever quality, Office, Place, or
dignity.
THe Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
Authority, Considering the Honor, Dignity and Authority of the supreme Court
of Parliament, over the Council and Session and all other civil Judicatories
of this Kingdom, which have their original, their power and antiquity from
the Kings Majesty and the Estates of Parliament is subordinate thereunto, and
ought to be countable and censurable by them, for their abusing of their power
to the prejudice of the Country: For the weal whereof they were established,
according to the twelfth Act of the second Parliament of King James 4. wherein
the Kings Council was sworn in presence of the three Estates, to give his
Highness a true and effauld Council, in all matters, concerning his Majesty
and his Realm; And to be responsall and accusable to the King and his Estates
of their Counsel, Considering also that during his Majesty's absence forth of
this Kingdom it is most necessary for the public peace of this Kingdom and his
Majesty's honor, that all mis-informers, raisers, and entertainers of
Jealousies suspicions, and divisions betwixt the King, this Kirk and Kingdom,
should be severely punished, and especially all bad Counselors, who instead of
giving his Majesty a true and effauld Counsel has given or will give
information and counsel to the evident prejudice and ruin of the liberties of
this Kirk and Kingdom, should be exemplarly Judged and censured by the Kings
Majesty and the Estates of Parliament. Therefore they renew and revive all Acts
of Parliament made against Liesing-Makers, raisers and entertainers of
Jealousies contentions, and divisions betwixt the Kings Majesty and this Kirk
and Kingdom. And declares, that no dignity, quality, place, or office
whatsoever shall exeeme these or any person whatsoever from the censure of the
said Acts.

FINIS.

