The Principles of Faith, presented by Mr. Tho. Goodwin, Mr. Nigh, Mr. Sydrach
Simson, and other Ministers, to the Committee of Parliament for Religion, by
way of explanation to the Proposals for propagating of the Gospel.
FIrst, That the holy Scripture is that rule of knowing God, and living unto
him, which who so does not believe, but betakes himself to any other way of
discovering truth, and the mind of God instead thereof* cannot be saved.

2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12. Because they received not the love of the Truth* that
they might be saved; and for this cause God shall send them strong delusions,
that they should believe a Lie; that they all might be damned, who believe not
the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, verse. 13. But we are bound to
give thanks always to God for you, Brethren, beloved of the Lord, because God
has from the beginning chosen you to Salvation, through sanctification of the
Spirit, and belief of the truth, verse. 14. whereunto he called you by our
Gospel, to the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

15. Therefore Brethren stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye have been
taught, whether by word, or our Epistle.

1 Cor. 15. 1, 2, 3. Moreover, Brethren, I declare unto you the Gospel, which I
preached unto you, which also you have received, and wherein ye stand.

By which also ye are saved, if ye keep in memory what I Preached unto you,
unless ye have believed in vain.

For I delivered unto you first of all, that which I also received, how that
Christ died for our sins, according to the Scriptures.

2 Cor. 1. 13. For we write none other things unto you then what you read, or
acknowledge, and I trust you shall acknowledge even to the end, compared with
Acts 26. 22, etc.

Having therefore obtained help of God, I continue unto this day, witnessing
both to small and great, saying none other things then those which the
Prophets, and Moses did say should come.

Joh. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures, for in them you think to have eternal
life; compared with Psalm. 147. 19. and 20. verses.

He showed his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and judgments unto Israel, he
has not dealt so with any Nation; and as for his Judgments they have not
known them.

And with John 4. 22. Ye worship ye know not what, we know what we worship;
for Salvation is of the Jews.

2 Pet. 2. 1. But there were false Prophets also among the people, even as
there shall be false teachers among you* who privily shall bring in damnable
heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction, compared with 2 Pet. 3. 1, 2. This second Epistle (beloved)
I now write unto you, in both which I stir up your pure minds by way of
remembrance.

That ye may be mindful of the words which were spoken before by the holy
Prophets, and of the Commandments of us the Apostles of the Lord and Savior.

II. That there is a God, who is the Creator, Governor, and Judge of the
World, which is to be received by faith, and every other way of the knowledge
of him is insufficient, Heb. 11. 3.

Through faith we understand that the Worlds were framed by the Word of God; so
that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear.

Ver. 6. But without faith it is impossible to please God; for he that comes
to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him.

Romans 1. ver. 19. Because that which may be known of God, is manifested in
them, for God has showed it to them.

Verse. 20. For the Invisible things of him from the Creation of the World are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal
power and Godhead; so that they are without excuse.

Verse. 21. Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God,
neither were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish
heart was darkened.

Verse. 22. Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools, compared with
--

1 Cor. 1. 21. For after that, in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew
not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that
believe.

2 These. 1. 8. To render vengeance on them that knew not God, and that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

III. That this God who is the Creator, is eternally distinct from all the
Creatures in his being, and blessedness.

Romans 1. v. 18. For the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all
ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness.

Verse. 25. Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served
the creature more then the Creator, who is blessed for ever, Amen.

1 Cor. 8 v. 5. For though there be that are called Gods, whether in heaven, or
in earth, (as there be gods many, and lords many.)

Verse. 6. But to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things,
and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.

IV. That this God is one in three Persons, or subsistences.

1 John 5. 5. Who is this that overcomes the world, but he that believes that
Jesus is the Son of God.

Verse. 6. This is he that came by Water and Blood, even Jesus Christ, not by
water only, but by water and blood, and it is the Spirit than bears witness,
because the Spirit is truth.

Verse. 7. For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word,
and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one.

Verse. 8. And there are three that bear witness in earth* the Spirit* the Water
and the Blood, and the (...)

Ver. 9. If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater, for
this is the witness of God, which he has testified of his Son. Compared with
Joh. 8. 17.

It is also written in your Law, that the testimony of two men is true.

Verse. 18. I am one that bear witness of my self, and the father that sent me,
bears witness of me.

Verse. 19. Then said they unto him, Where is thy Father? Jesus answered, Ye
neither know me, nor my Father, if ye had known me, ye should have known my
Father also.

Ver. 21. Then said Jesus unto them, Ye shall dye in your sins.

Mat. 28. 19. Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, baptising them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; Compared with
Ephesians 4. 4. There is one body, and one spirit, even as ye are called in
one hope of your calling.

Ver. 5. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism.

Ver. 6. One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in
you all.

1 John 2. 22. Who is a liar, but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ? he
is Antichrist that denies the Father, and the Son.

Verse. 23. Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the Father; but he that
acknowledges the Son, has the Father also.

2 Epist. Ioh. ver. 9. Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the Doctrine
of Christ, has not God, he that abides in the doctrine of Christ, he has both
the Father, and the Son.

Ver. 10. If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him
not into your house, neither bid him God speed.

V. That Jesus Christ is the only Mediator between God and man, without the
knowledge of whom there is no salvation.

1 Timothy 2. 4. Who will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge
of the truth.

Verse. 5. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man
Christ Jesus.

Ver. 6. Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time.

2 Timothy 3. 15. And that from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures,
which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in
Christ Jesus.

1 Ioh. 2. 22. Who is a liar, but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ? He
is Antichrist that denies the Father, and the Son.

Acts 4. 10. Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, That by
the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from
the dead, even by him does this man stand here before you whole.

Verse. 12. Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is none other
name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.

1 Cor. 3. 10. According to the grace of God which is given unto me, as a wise
Master Builder, I have laid the foundation, and another builds thereupon. But
let every one take heed how he builds thereupon.

Verse. 11. For other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which is
Jesus Christ.

VI. That this Jesus Christ is the true God, 1 John 5. 29. And we know that
the Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding, that we may know
him that is true. And we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ.
This is the true God, and eternal life.

Isa 45. 21. There is no God else besides me, a just God and Savior, there is
none beside me.

Verse, 22. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the earth, for I am
God, and there is none else.

23. I have sworn by my self, the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousness, and shall not return, that unto me every knee shall bow, every
tongue shall swear.

24. Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength, even
to him shall men come, and all that are incensed against him shall be ashamed.

25. In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory,
which the Apostle applies unto Christ Romans 14. 11, 12. and Philip. 2. 6. to the
12.

VII. That this Jesus Christ is also true man, 1 John 4. 2. Hereby know ye the
Spirit of God; every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is of God.

Verse. 3. And every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is not of God. And this is that spirit of Antichrist.

2 John 7. For many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a Deceiver and an Antichrist.

VIII. That this Jesus Christ is God and Man in one Person, 1 Timothy 3. 16. and
without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness. God was manifested in
the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles,
believed on in the World, received up into glory.

Matthew. 16. 13. Jesus asked his Disciples, saying, whom do men say that I the
Son of man am?

Verse. 14. They said, some say thou art John the Baptist, etc.

Verse. 15. But whom say ye that I am?

Verse. 16. Simon Peter answered, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God.

Verse. 17. Jesus said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-Jona, for flesh and
blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven.

Verse. 18. And I say unto thee, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build
my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.

IX That this Jesus Christ is our Redeemer, who by paying a Ransom, and
bearing our sins, has made satisfaction for them.

Isa. 53. 11. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, for he
shall bear their iniquities, compared with

1 Pet. 2. 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that
we being dead to sin, should live to righteousness, by whose stripes ye were
healed.

25. For ye were as sheep going astray, but are now returned unto the Shepherd
and Bishop of your souls.

1 Cor. 15 2. By which also you are saved, if you keep in memory what I
preached unto you, unless ye have believed in vain.

Verse. 3. For I delivered unto you first of all, that also which I received,
how that Christ dyed for our sins, according to the Scriptures.

1 Timothy 2. 4. Who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge
of the truth.

Verse. 5. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man
Christ Jesus.

Verse. 6. Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time, 1
Cor. 6. 20. Ye are bought with a price.

X. That this same Lord Jesus Christ is he that was Crucified at Jerusalem,
and rose again, and ascended into heaven.

Ioh. 8. 24. I said therefore unto you, that ye shall dye in your sins; for if
ye believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins.

Act. 4, 10. Be that known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that
by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised
from the dead, even by him does this man stand here before you whole.

Verse. 11. This is the stone which was set at naught of you builders, which is
become the head of the corner.

Verse, 12. Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is none other
name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.

Act. 10. 38. How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with
power, who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the
Devil, for God was with him.

Verse. 39. And we are witnesses of all things which he did, both in the land of
the Jews and in Jerusalem, whom they slew and hanged on a tree.

Verse. 40. Him God raised up the third day, and showed him openly.

Verse. 41. Not to all the people, but unto witnesses chosen before of God, even
to us who did eat and drink with him, after he rose from the dead.

Verse. 42. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that
it is he, who was ordained of God, to be the Judge of quick and dead.

Verse. 43. To him give all the Prophets witness that through his Name,
whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins.

1 Cor. 15. 2. By which also ye are saved, if ye keep in memory what I preached
unto you, unless ye have believed in vain.

Verse. 3 For I delivered unto you first of all that which I also received, how
that Christ dyed for our sins, according to the Scriptures.

Verse. 4. And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day,
according to the Scriptures.

Verse. 5. And that he was seen of Cephas, then of the Twelve.

Verse. 6. After that he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once, of
whom the greater part remain unto this present, but some are fallen asleep.

Verse 7. After that he was seen of James, then of all the Apostles.

Verse. 8. And last of all he was seen of me also.

Act. 22. 8. Who art thou Lord? and he said, I am Jesus of Nazareth.

Act. 2. 36. Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God
has made that same Jesus, whom ye crucified, both Lord and Christ. Verse. 37.
Now when they heard this they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto
Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, What shall we do?
Verse, 38. Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you
in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the
gift of the Holy Ghost.

XI. That this same Jesus Christ, being the only God and Man in one Person,
remains for ever a distinct Person from all Saints and Angels, notwithstanding
their union and communion with him.

Col 2. 8. Beware lest any man spoil you, through Philosophy and vain deceit,
after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after
Christ.

Verse 9. For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

Verse. 10. And ye are complete in him, which is the head of all Principality
and Power. Verse. 19. And not holding the head, from which all the body by
joints and bands, having nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases
with the increase of God.

1 Timothy 316. God manifested in the flesh, believed on in the world.

XII. That all men by nature are dead in trespasses and sins, and no man can be
saved unl^ss^ he b^ born again repent, and believe, Ioh. 3. 3. Jesus answered
and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again
he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Verse. 567. Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I
say unto thee, Except a man be born of water* and of the Spirit, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God; That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and
that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. Marvel not that I said unto thee,
Ye must be born again. Verse. 10. Jesus answered, and said unto him, Art thou a
Master in Israel, and know not these things?

Act. 17. 30, 31. And the times of this ignorance God winked at, but now
commands all men every where to repent, because he has appointed a day
wherein he will judge the world in righteousness.

Act. 26. 17 18, 19, 20. Delivering thee from the people, and from the
Gentiles, unto whom I now send thee, To open their eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive
forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith
in me. Whereupon I was not disobedient to the heavenly Vision, but showed first
to them at Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and throughout all the coasts of Judea,
and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent* and turn to God, and do
works meet for repentance, Luke 24. 47. that repentance and forgiveness of
sins should be preached in his Name among all Nations.

Act 20 20, 21. I have showed you, and have taught you publicly, and from
house to house, testifying both to Jews and Greeks repentance toward God, and
faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.

Ioh. 5. 24, 25. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my word, and
believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but is passed from death unto life. Verily, verily, I say unto
you, the hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God, and they that hear shall live.

XIII. That we are justified and saved by grace, and faith in Jesus Christ, and
not by works.

Acts 15. 24. For as much as we have heard, that certain which went out from us
have troubled you with words, subverting your souls; saying, Ye must be
circumcised, and keep the Law, compared with Gal. 1. 6, 7, 8. 9. I marvel that
you are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ, unto
another Gospel which is not another; but there are some that trouble you, and
would pervert the Gospel of Christ; but though we, or an Angel from heaven
preach another Gospel unto you, then that which we have preached unto you, let
him be accursed. As we said before, so say I now again, If any man preach any
other Gospel unto you, then that ye have received, let him be accursed, Gal 5.

Ver. 2. 4, 5. Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ
shall profit you nothing; Christ is become of none effect to you, whosoever of
you are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from grace, for we through the Spirit
wait for the hope of righteousess by faith. Romans 9. v. 31, 32. 33. But Israel,
which followed after the Law of righteousness, has not attained to the Law of
righteousness* wherefore? because they sought it not by faith, but as it were
by the works of the Law; for they stumbled at that stumbling stone; As it is
written, Behold I lay in Sion a stumbling stone and rock of offense, and
whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed, compared with Romans 10. v. 3,
4. For they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to establish
their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of
God, for Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness for every one that
believes

Romans 1. 16, 17. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ. for it is the power
of God unto salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also
to the Greek; for therein is the rightnousness of God revealed from faith to
faith, as it is written. The just shall live by faith, compared with Gal. 3.
11. But that no man is justified by the Law in the sight of God, it is evident;
for, the just shall live by faith.

Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. 10. For by grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of
your selves, it is the gift of God, not of works, least any man should boast;
for we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God
has before ordained that we should walk in them.

XV. That to continue in any known sin, upon what pretense or principle soever,
is damnable.

Romans 1. 32. Who knowing the Judgment of God, that they which commit such
things are worthy of death, not only to do the same, but have pleasure in them
that do them.

Romans 6. v. 1, 2. What shall we say then? shall we continue in sin that grace
may abound? God forbid; How shall we, that are dead to sin, live any longer
therein? compared with verse 15. and 16. What then? shall we sin, because we
are not under the Law, but under Grace? God forbid. Know ye not, that to whom
ye yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey,
whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness?

1 John 1. 6. 8. If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in
darkness (...) deceive our selves, and

Chap. 3 ver. 3. And every man that has this hope in him purifieth himself
even as he is pure. Verse. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Whosoever commits sin,
transgresses also the Law, for sin is a transgession of the Law, And ye know
that he was manifested to take away our sins, and in him is no sin; whosoever
abides in him sins not. Whosoever sins, has not seen him, neither known
him* Little children, let no man deceive you; he that does righteousness is
righteous; he that commits sin is of the Devil, for the Devil sins from
the beginning, for this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might
destroy the works of the Devil.

2 Pet. 2. 19, 20. While they promise them liberty they themselves are the
servants of corruption; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he
brought in bondage. For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world,
through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again
entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them then the
beginning.

Romans 8. 13. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye, but if ye mortify
the deeds of the flesh by the Spirit, ye shall live.

XV. That God is to be worshipped according to his own will, and whosoever
shall forsake and despise all the duties of his worship, cannot be saved.

Jer. 10. 15. Pour out thy fury upon the heathen that know thee not, and upon
the families that call not upon thy name, for they have eaten up Jacob, and
devoured him, and consumed him, etc.

Psalm. 14. 4. Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my
people as they eat bread, and call not upon the Lord.

Jude verse 18, 19, 20, 21. How they told you there should be mockers in the
last times, shall walk after their own ungodly lusts, these be they who
separate themselves, sensual, not having the Spirit. But ye beloved, building
up your selves in your most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost, keep your
selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto
eternal life.

Romans 10. 13. For whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord; shall be saved.

XVI. That the dead shall rise, and that there is a day of judgment wherein all
shall appear, some to go into everlasting life, and some into everlasting
condemnation.

1 Timothy 1. 19. 20. Holding faith and a good conscience, which some having put
away, concerning faith have made shipwreck; of whom is Himenaeus and Alexander
whom I have delivered to Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme, compared
with 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18. And their word will eat as does a canker, of whom is
Hymenaeus and Philetus, who concerning the faith have erred, saying, That the
Resurrection is past already, and overthrow the faith of some, Act. 17. 30, 31.
And the times of this ignorance God winked at, but now commands all men every
where to repent, because he has appointed a day wherein he will judge the
world in righteousness.

John 5. 28, 29. All that are in the grave shall hear his voice, and shall come
forth, they that have done good unto the resurrection of life, and they that
have done evil to the resurrection of damnation; compared with 1 Cor. 15. 19.
If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most
miserable.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

Henry Scobell.

Printed at London for Robert Ibbitson. 1654.

The younger Brothers.

ADVOCATE: Or a line or two for Younger Brothers.

With their PETITION to the PARLIAMENT.

By Champianus Northtonus.

LONDON, Printed by W. W. in the year 1655.

The younger Brothers Advocate, or a line or two for younger Brothers.
I Having long expected (amongst the multitude of papers, and promised
Reformations, that these Parlimentary years, and reforming deformed times have
produced) to have found some Champion that would have stood up, some Heroical
compassionate spirit that would have taken into consideration the poor and
despicable condition and provision of younger Brothers; I thought that there
would have been some amongst the reforming Combatants of that fraternity, that
would have been mindful of that so grand a pressure still continuing with us,
but whether it be through the multitude of their employments, or that they have
acquired to themselves (great possessions and sufficient maintenance) being now
careless and forgetful of the welfare of their fellow brethren, or whether it
be through want of remembrance and ingenuity, as not taking notice of it as so
great a grievance* in regard of the long use it has had with us, there being
nothing so absurd in nature, so horrible in it self, or so ridiculous in reason
and common sense, which long use will not make plausible and acceptable;
custom making good seem evil, and evil good. That it might not altogether be
buried in oblivion, and that none has seemed to be sufficiently mindful of
it, and that it appears to me (as yet) so dissonant unto Scripture, and
natural reason, so opposite to common equity, which ought to be the foundation
and chief corner stone of all Laws.

I have been moved, though most unworthy, though most unsufficient, cursorily
and as confusedly to discover some thoughts concerning it, that which I was
most unwilling to do, not only in regard of my disability with other
disadvantages, but in respect of the potencie, and the prevalencie of its
adversaries, though it is a thing worthy my labor, yet my labor is far
unworthy of it, for I find every man is not a fit Champion for truth; one may
be as truly and really in possession of a truth (as a soldier of a Fortress)
yet may be forced to lose it, but they that best can, will not, and those that
worst may sometimes holds the light. That it should not be forgotten, and
seeing likewise this unnatural and unequal Law or evil use, for I can not
call it so properly a custom, but a corruption (for as I remember the Lawyers
say, that Consuetudo est jus non scriptum, nunquam repugnans rationi naturali.
A custom ought not to be contrary to the Law of nature) which by long
continuance in the Kingdom has got such a general allowance, it being so
commonly and so frequently practiced, together with the considerations of the
disquietnesse and dangerous effects it often produces; the discord and
dishonor it brings to houses and families, and likewise the miseries, contempt,
and reproach to the younger brothers themselves; I have adventured to put in
view, though in so ragged and uneven a manner, these undigested lines only as
a remembrancer, hinting at things, hoping thereby to put in mind and to awaken
the hearts and resolutions of some of that Fraternity, of greater abilities and
advantages to pursue it to some better reformation.

In which design let us not be discouraged, nor discountenanced,
notwithstanding, our elder brothers are advanced in power and authority above
us, but let us rather be animated that our cause is just, and our determiners
we hope not unjust, we shall not be unreasonable, let us not despair, for
greater things then this have been effected: let younger brothers likewise
consider, the misery, the disesteem, this use, this vast difference brings on
them, the Elder enjoying large possessions, the younger having not sufficient
maintenance, the Elder gentlemen, the Younger beggars, as if they were bastards
and no sons, servants and no children, this is so usually practiced, that the
very name of a younger brother is a word of contempt, and an expression of want
and slender means, and amongst other Nations reckoned as one of the poor
companies, some commiserating their poor condition and maintenance, that the
Elder and Younger being brethren by birth of so near relation, of the same
flesh and blood, should be so severed, so disjoined, and so far off in
fortunes; some again deriding at the ill policy of our Kingdom, and
carelessnesse of some Parents in bringing them up as their children, but not
maintaining them as their sons, in giving them a generous breeding, but leaving
them a slender allowance for the continuance of it, dealing with them as
Pharaoh dealt with the children of Israel, that would have them make brick, but
would give them no straw, that would have them Gentlemen, but will give them
little or nothing for the support and maintenance of it.

This education taking such a deep impression in many, as having first taken
possession in them, (none are ignorant of the force of education) the ceasing
of which is most harsh to the soul, it is better never to have been godly, then
after to turn apostate, it is happier never to have been in plenty, then after
it to fall into want; it is the speech of deposed Dionysius, they are happy
says he that have been unblessed from their youth, it was the wish of a noble
Queen in misery, that she had not been of the royal blood; so younger,
brothers may often wish that they had been rather the sons of some yeomen then
of Knights. They being often left to the dispositions and dependence of their
elder brothers, and so consequently servants, if not vassalls at least to their
humors, and many times upon the lest distaste and difference are casheer'd,
and left to the four winds; It is written the Elder shall serve the younger,
but not that the younger shall be a slave to the Elder.

Some I confess being more fairly dealt with (as having somewhat more
considerate Parents) by leaving them more certainty, pension or allowance, not
depending so much upon the will of the Elder, but commonly it is of that
quality and quantity, that it will scarcely afford them a single competence,
neither is it any ways proportionoble to their Fathers estate; it being
likewise generally of that nature, and their education such, that they cannot
employ it for their best advantage, so that they are as it were enforced to be
idle And if natural desires prevail, they must be forced either to be one of
Origens disciples, or intercede for the public tolleration of Stews, they
having allowance in some Nations as a necessary evil, or else petition for the
reedifying of Cloisters, there to live in solitarines from the view of the
world, there to be dieted with Agnu. Castu. and Sacru. Saturni; by the
dissolutions of which our Ancestors took away that advantage from us, with
others, establishing nothing in lieu thereof.

Now if viriles appetitus, are predominant (which God and Nature does not
forbid) they must but Tantalize, and as Prisoners look through the Grate, so
that they must either be torn in pieces by predominate affections, burned with
fevers or drowned in dropsies; or if they have not the gift of abstinence,
they and their children are commonly precipitated into extreme indigency and
miseries, being forced to lay aside all badges of their birth and education; so
that which way soever they turn, lupum auribus tenent, they must either burn or
starve, which things are most grievous to the soul, and which the temper of
many spirits cannot brook. It is better never to have been a Helen then after
to become a Hecuba, the want alone of a foregone joy is troublesome, how much
more when it declines to miserable extremities, Jobs aflictions were more
piercing when he remembered the days of old: David, a man after Gods own
heart, complains that his present calamities more completed his grief in
regard of his former freedom; Adversity is in his full strength coming upon
him, who formerly has been prosperous, for the common enduring of misery
dulleth the edge thereof, and makes it much less sensible to him whom custom
has made familiar with grief.

These exigencies having with some such an operation, that when they cannot, it
may be they know not how to maintain themselves by honest and lawful ways, are
driven to take indirect courses, and by consorting themselves with ill company,
acquainting themselves with shifts, and practicing how to deceive, hence it is
that many are driven to beg, cheat, steal, and many times hanged for theft;
then what can be more ignominous, more disgraceful to the Family, the sonns
descredit must needs be the fathers disgrace, and what can be more offensive to
the quietness of a nation. It is this inequality which compelle the many brave
spirits desperately to run into the gulf of discontent, to turn Pirates,
Turks, Fugitives, Hectors, Knights of the blade; nay, any thing, it is like
Polygamy amongst the Turks, that has made almost all the Country robbers,
being forced thereunto for the maintenance of their wives.

1. But our insociable Inheritors as one calls them, may say to us, that the
Laws being such, there is no remedy but patience; you must be content, and
frame your minds according to your lots, otherwise you do but bite the chain in
which you are tied, and so wrong your teeth.

Thus we see how Issachart like, they would have us couch down between our
burden, sed meliora spero, and persuade us to a stupidity, not patience; It is
no breach of content, nor repining against our Maker, for to complain that
their sufferings are unjust as offered by men, and by lawful means to seek
redress, content (as Divines say) is an humble and willing submitting our
selves to Gods pleasure, and not to murmr at him, they would deal with us as
it is related that Father Parsons dealt with Elliot, who being through his means
defeated of his goods; Elliot making addresses, and expecting relief from him,
but instead thereof he gave him a lecture of patience, humility, and
mortification, and to go into a Cloister; the usual Cordialls for discontents
in that religion, the benefit of which refuge we here cannot enjoy; but why may
not this argument be retorted upon them, why can not the Elder of many
Younger, be content to accommodate their mind^, and frame their Education
according to the first born of so many younger brethren, and participate of the
good and ill fortunes of their Parents, why should it all go upon the score of
the younger.

2. But they may further allege, that this law is not of such a nature, but
that it is in the Parents power to mitigate.

Sometimes and in some cases they may, but generally they cannot, especially
the Father dying intestate or in his full strength, etc. the elder like a
ravenous beast seiseth on all, and leaving but the excrements and carkase to
the rest; how naked then are they left, they having but part of the goods of
which the Nobles and Gentlemen are general not so fully stored with, as also
in case of intayles with other devices, which are too tedious to review, but if
it be (as they say) a law which rather inviteth then commands Parents so
unequally to proportion their Estates: We see notwithstanding by manyfold
examples, how men generally are apt to incline to the worst, and how ill
examples more in force, then good precepts, they measuring themselves by
themselves, and comparing themselves amongst themselves, but go not according
to the pattern, how frequently is this unequal dealings practiced even of
those who have power, ability, and possession to do otherwise: under a vain
pretext of upholding their house and name, contrary to nature, religion, and
right reason, forgetting their Christian names to remember their sirnames, not
so well considering that Gods ways and Laws are the best to uphold houses and
Families) especially having a Law and practice to back them, and will still be
practiced, unless there be a Law as there is in some places, obliging them to
the contrary; If you say that other Kingdoms have the same customs, I say, if
they have, they retain them not upon sound principles, however I am sure where
they do take place, they are allowed greater privileges, and advantages then
is here tolerated.

3. They may likewise object to us, that Law being so ancient, and so long
established, and so engrossed in our Laws and natures, so constantly
practiced, that if it be an error, yet communis error facit jus, however that
it may be difficult and dangerous to alter it.

We cannot deny but that it has been of too long standing, the more has been
our injury, but let them consider, that it is the equity and not the Antiquity
of Laws which makes them venerable, jus permanebit semper nec unquam mutetur,
lex vero scripta saepius, says Silvi. Antiquity is an argument for nothing but
truth, equity, and goodness. That Law was established by corrupt principles,
may well and as wisely be altered by the Suprem Authority, acting upon better
principles, true prudence, and policy consisting not in an obstinate retaining
old customs, but in the electing or relecting, in continuing or changing of
forms according to better information and sounder principle, according to the
circumstances of times, places, and persons; To what end otherwise do
assemblies meet, neither can there be more danger in this, then in the
Alteration of other things, the fabric being to be altered, this may likewise
be put into the building.

That it may better appear to be unnatural and unreasonable, and not agreeable
to holy writ, let me go a little further, how it had its first original;
Certainly for the Antiquity of it, it will appear but a Mushom of yesterday in
comparison of Moses division, and Job, Moses contemporary; you cannot find any
such Law or practice before Moses, nor long after, but contrary, I am sure from
the beginning it was not so. It having had its first institution, when heathen,
infidells, or tyrants had the reigns of government in their hand; moved
thereunto by tyrannical and ambitious, and Turkish principles, and in
continuance of time the evil customs and examples of such came to be imitated
by inferiors, and so turned into Laws, it being brought unto us by the
Conqueror, our more ancient Laws (as appears by Lucius, following the counsel
of Elutherius in making Laws for his Kingdom) was taken out of the word of
God, and grounded on the Law of God and nature, and not so much from the Laws
of Rome, notwithstanding Caesar in his Com. with other ambitious Romans,
attribute so much to themselves for the civilizing of others (as the French now
a days for Apish apparel, we being indeed more then babonish so far to humor
them in it, whereby we do not a little undervalew our selves) for says he, the
Laws of Rome; and Caesar may be reproved, but not the Laws of God, as it
manifestly appeaes likewise by our Kentish Gavel kind: And I am sure God gave
no such direction at the first, as is manifest by the practice and precept of
holy writ before and after Moses, it is clear likewise that Abraham by virtue
of the Law of God written in his heart, and the Law of nature, would have
divided his real inheritance in the promised Land between Isaac and Ishmael,
had he not had a special and extraordinary command (which precept was in
relation to the spiritual promise) however those gifts was of such a quantity
and quality, that he and his posterity became Princes and Dukes. It is the
opnion of the learned, that Ishmael was answerable in outward Estate to Isaac,
though not in the spiritual promised land, neither was that difference made by
Isaac and Jacob to their Children. Moses likewise gives but a double portion
to the eldest; what better Moderator can we have to determine what is
unnatural and unreasonable then this authority, which I hope none dare say but
it is of infinite more value then humane reason; it is the saying of a heathen,
that Law ought to be the reason and mind of God, differing just and unjust.

But you may say that Moses does not forbid but that the eldest may have more
then a double? Ans. It appears that rather before this Law was made, Parents
were so far from doing as is done with us, that they many times gave not so
much to the Eldest as to the youngest, or else divided it, conceiving it may
be, that the Eldest having some authority by their Birthright, and advantage
in years above the youngest, would quickly advance their estate to a greater
proportion, as also too much lord it over their brethren, of the same flesh
and blood. Now that authority (in process of time) over their brethren being
decayed, which it may be causing too great a neglect and contempt of him (wise
Legislators make their Laws against those enormities which they see are
generally predominate in the people) it was thought fit to enact, that they
should have a double portion, which was the mind of God in that case, and if
any did deviate from it, you cannot think but that it was a transgression of
the Law, for if you observe, you shall find diverse Laws enacted in that manner,
which they ought not to exceed; but if any did transgress, it was generally in
the minor then major, rather in giving him not so much, then allowing more, as
is manifest by their general practice in the old Testament.

The new Testament likewise holds it forth, as is clear by the younger brothers
coming to Christ to divide the inheritance, so in the Parable of the Prodigal,
how boldly comes he to his Father, and says, give me the portion that
belongs to me, and after we read that he divided unto them his living, though
these be no absolute precepts; yet it is an instructing parable, and likewise
holds forth the customs, then likewise used, by virtue of Moses division. It
was likewise practiced in the first primitive times, as also of later years, as
Constantine the first Christian Emperor, Theodosius with many others, as may be
made good.

This being now likewise the practice of our Neighbor nation, as also of some
members nations of this Kingdom, being as they say most agreeable to gods
word, and the Law of nature, and so strictly observed, that if some Parents do
transgress, the Magistrate has power to dispose of it accordingly, more
instances might be brought, which for brevity I omit, especially from those who
endeavor without partiality* to make the Divine word the rule, and ground of
their Laws; For amongst Christians the testimony of Gods word alone and above
all should have sufficient Majesty to answer all oppositions; It should be
their ipse dixit, in which they ought to acquiesce. What superexcellencie is in
the Eldest beyond the rest, they are of the same extract, members and branches
of the samebody, as lawfully begotten, nay, many times more legitimate; has
not God likewise in scripture often expressed more peculiar favors to younger
then to the Elder, as to Abel, Jacob, Joseph, David, etc.

I do not deny but that there is a priority, a precedence of place, a civil
respect due to the Elder from the younger; And before the Law, a blessing and
special privilege and prerogative annexed to their Birth, but I have not read
that by virtue of that birthright, that then they had power to detain all the
inheritance from the younger (much less ought they now so to do) Esau selling
his birthright, sold not his goods and Lands, but his claim of being Priest
with other privileges, after his Father, as for the rule they had over the
Family, the world then being in its infancy, that people might not be left to
their own fancy, and every one do what seemed good in his own eyes, and to
avoid confusion, strife, and emulation; it was then ordaind, that the Elder
should have the rule of the rest, for as the case then stood, if any order and
government, there must be a prior and posterior; it is most requisite and meet,
that the Elder (if qualified) rather then any of the rest should enjoy that
privilege.

This Family-Government about Moses and Aarons time (people being more
multiplied) ceased, after which time they could plead no such prerogatives,
neither then was this privilege so general and inevitable (the Elder wanting
other qualifications to accompany his birthright) that very often the younger
was preferred before him.

However they may again allege: that it is necessary and convenient that this
English Custom should be continued, for the name, reputation, and upholding
the house and Family, for a sanctuary and refuge for younger brothers, and
likewise that there might be persons of sufficient estates and abilities for
the execution and managing of the offices and charges of the Commonwealth, etc.

These allegations may seem plausible and of some force, especially amongst
Heathens and Tyrants, which allow many things as commendable, which in a
Christian state should be most odious, for such states square out their form
not by pious rules, but by the judgment of their sensual appetites, where any
thing is allowable that will help it forward, more respecting greatness then
equity and goodness, but the impoverishing of many for the enriching of one
(contrary to the pattern in the Mount) the debasing and pulling down of many
for the elevation of one, especially natural brethren, members and branches
of the same natural body, should not be with us ( consuetudo Cedat authoritati
divinae) it is the speech of a Heathen. Tully as I remember, that if a law be
made contrary to the Law of God, it is not to be called a Law, though all the
world in a joint assembly confirm it; we must not frame arguments of
conveniencie to conclude against the testimony of holy writ, the state must
comply with it, and not the rule to the state; it is the preferment of the
precepts of divine writ, before humane policy, that discovers sound
Christian states from Athisticall and heatheenish infidells.

What natural justice and reason is it, that the upholding of the house should
be only applied to the Eldest (like some Churchmen that count no good done to
the Church of God but what is for their peculiar benefit) as if the other were
bastards and no sons, servants, Aliens, and not of the same blood and relation;
why should the due maintenance of the younger be taken from them to be spent
upon mere strangers; in hawks, hounds, and that many times Acteon-like, they
and their children are devoured of them, in Luxury, Pride, Prodigality, with
other exorbitances. Why should the elder brothers multitude of attendance and
servants be maintained by that which belongs to the younger brother. None
should be deprived of their due, though to build Hospitalls, much less to be
spent upon extravagant humors.

The spreading of a Family was held to be one of the greatest temporal
blessings, but now many Parents (as it seems) conceive it a greater blessing to
suppress the greatest part, imitating therein the great Turk in some measure,
who for the greatness of one, destroys the rest; is not a house, a name
better upheld by more props then one, that one failing, as very often it does,
then all falls to the ground; is it not an oversight in Parents, that they
should be more careful to provide for the profuseness, vanity, and
unnecessary expenses of the Elder, then the competent and comfortable
necessities and livelihood of the younger. As for being a sanctuary and refuge
to the younger; I cannot but confess, but that many elder brothers, (to their
superlative praises be it spoken) do deal most ingenuously in that nature, not
only out of conscience, but likewise moved thereunto by Heroic noble
principles, but examples in that kind are rare, generally this Sanctuary
proves but a weak privilege, a slender refuge, feeding them like a bird in a
Cage: and too often making them by their unnatural imperiousness, to live in
an uncomfortable condition, most unlike their own brethren. This reason is
often alleged by many before therebe occasion to use them, but then disclaimed
with many pretenses, and often like the Devil, pleading scripture for their
unnatural inhumanity, though it be expressly against it; Inordinate affections
taking place beyond the necessities of their natural brethren; occasioned
often I confess by their too much uxoriousnesse, and especially their wives
being of a malevolent genius, and troubled with that Tripl P. of Pride,
penuriousnesse, and perverseness, daily experience manifests, how apt men are
to be drwawn away to this unnaturallnesse rather then meliorated by precepts;
how necessary therefore is there of a law* to regulate them.

For that other plea that they might be of abilities for executing offices, and
the Charges of the Kinhdome.

This might formerly have carried some show of pretense, when their charges by
exactions were far greater; but not near proportionable to that vast
difference, those offices of charge coming but seldom, and not general, in a
manner but once in an age, so great expenses likewise were often occasioned
more out of a profuse and vain glorious humor, then any ways essential to
their office or charge.

I am sure great wisdom is not always accompanied with great riches, however
we need not doubt but men of sufficient abilities will be found for such
charges, who have not many younger brothers to provide for.

But why should the Magistracy, offices, and charges of the Kingdom be upheld
and maintained by the younger brothers; I am sure in those states where this
unequal distribution is not practiced, Magistrates are maintained with
reverence, office, and charges, duly executed, and justice as impartially
administered; if they cannot be executed but with such charge and majesty, let
it be born by public contribution, as in other places, for as they ought not
to consume and impoverish their inferiors, so should not they exhaust
themselves, for this cause says Paul, pay you tribute.

They will however object against us, for the upholding of this unnatural
custom, that industry might not decay, that having so weak means, we might be
thereby provoked to employment?

A. We ought to be driven in employments upon better principles, then by
injuring us being innocent; the same argument may be reverberated upon them,
why should they have a writ of ease from industry; their profuseness and ill
examples often causing more idleness, and doing more injury to the
Commonwealth, by breeding idle attendance; why should not the Elder of many
younger submit to providence; why should the wits of the younger be so much
put upon the wrack and tenterhookes, and their small alowance often put upon
hazzardous adventures, thereby if they can to enable them to live in some good
manner, and in some proportion to the sonns of their Father* may not the Elder
advance their Estates, they having not only advantage of means, but likewise
an other double advantage of us in their Education and years; the Parents often
being taken away, before the younger are acquainted with the affairs of the
world, for the better managing of their poor pittance, which causes them very
often to receive a foil, they being then driven Nolens, Volens, to be idle or
do worse.

The younger brothers idleness arising more for want of means and due
Education, which being rectified, they cannot, they will not be idle; let not
their sufferings be counted a fault, however their idleness may be prevented
at first by the discretion and policy of Parents, as in other Countries who
more industrious and thriving then they.

They have likewise another objection to encounter with us, which is that
threefold distinction (which some make of Moses Law) of Morrall, Ceremonial,
and Civil or Judicial; The ceremonial that being wholly abrogated by divine
precept; the Politic or Civil, that being not binding to us, but framed
particularly for the Commonwealth of the Jews, and that it is left to the
prudence of every nation toestablish constitutions of their own, so that the
Moral part is only now obliging to us.

If according to this division it be not of force, why is the observation of it
of such power with us, and so much pressed upon the conscience, by some merely
upon that account (as may be instanced in the degrees of marriage with other
things) it being by this notion no ways obliging to the conscience, but it
seems sometimes it is binding, sometimes not; neither do I conceive ought it to
be so far neglected, in this particular as it is, so much disrespected and
trodden under foot; for certainly such laws, that have their first institution
and practice, from the most just, equal and natural grounds, and from the
best and most excellent Authors, are orought to be ever in highest esteem and
account, and imitated of all wise, virtuous, conscientious, and temperate
spirits; so should the contrary bring much discredit and disregard unto those
customs that have their first original from corrupt and barbarous principles:
Now the wisdom of God establishing this, Moses receiving it immediately from
God, (not at the second hand) not in a vision and dream, but mouth to mouth,
which is the clearest and fullest revelation. In which institution, there is
nothing, ceremonial, Judaical, or Typical; but being of a moral nature, has
a perpetual moral equity and justice in it, founded on the Law of nature, and
right reason (which ought to be alike in all places.) Those laws are just and
equal (says that learned, pious and judicious Divine, Pet. Du Moulin, which
being founded on nature, are consentaneous to the Law of God; Is it not
apparent likewise in St. Matthewes Gospel, that no usage, or custom ought to
destroy a right ground upon an universal law of God.

As how can there be an example of greater and more reverent authority, and
better rule of reason and natural justice, a surer way for the prepetuating of
Families, who promised it as so great a blessing; certainly his blessings and
laws are not contradictorie; let us not make our selves wiser then our maker.

Nay, is it not a question made by some, whether or not this custom of ours be
not a national sin against the eighth Commandment; for according to the
opinion of the learned, it has relation to the Judicial or Civil laws of
Moses, they being branches and particular explanations of the moral law; And
you know public establishment and connivence, or Common practice, and a
general insensiblenesse, makes sins to be national; let not the Mohammedan
shame us, they follow their Alcaron; let not us so much prejudice the
testimony, authority and practice of the scripture, and primitive times, and
reformed Churches, nor so far forget our principles.

So that I cannot see, but that a more equal division, then is gerally
practiced with us amongst brethren, is more agreeable to scripture, right
reason, natural justice, and no prejudice to the flourishing condition of a
Nation, and true happiness of a Commonwealth.

Let us therefore make our humble addresses unto our Legislators, who make so
great, so many professions, and protestations of protecting and promoting
natural justice equity, and liberty, that they would be pleased to take into
consultation this our sad and deplorable condition, this grand Monopoly, so
silently remaining yet amongst us, that either there may be a more equal
distribution, (then now is generally used) in some proportion to our Parents
Estates and conditions amongst brethren; or that some equivalent expedient, may
be found out for us, that we may not be more suffering, and more injuriously
dealt with, then the younger brethren of other Nations, (who have made much
less profession then we) there being in those Countries (where a more equal
division is not practiced) some special privileges, prerogatives, and
advantages peculiar to them, as also Monasteries, Nunneries, with other helps
and provision, which here now we have not, and which at the first original of
this custom with us we did enjoy; Parents then often using that way of
provision for their younger children, thereby (according to the humor, and
mode of those time;) rendering them in a less despicable condition, and more
comfortable subsistence then now, all which being taken away, this custom
notwithstanding continues without any supply. why should not younger brothers
receive some benefit of the freedom and liberty which is so much pretended?

Let us likewise offer to their consideration, that a more harmonical division
and proportion will not diminish the strength, honor nor happiness of the
Kingdom, but may rather increase it, and likewise causing Parents to be more
provident and moderate in diverse exorbitances, as also how that the clear rays
and principles of our religion has dispelled villenage (so that now it is
become the best tenure) let it likewise take some place in this, which to some
is little better; and lastly let them consider the perpetual honor and renown,
that will redound to them for it, and how they will perpetually engage and
oblige, not only no small number* but those likewise generally of good
resolutions.

Now if those our applications should be rejected with repulsive complements
(Dominion I confess being so tempting a bit, and so pleasing a morsel, that
it too often tempts the most temperate palates)* and that we find no other
redress then good or ill language; let us leave no stone unturned, but let us
notwithstanding make our further supplications, that either we may have some
peculiar privilege in some generous way or calling here, or else in some noble
undertaking, or plantation abroad, by a public countenance and assistance,
where we will frame a policy and government according to our own mode, and
established decrees and constitutions of our own, which for the present I shall
omit, leaving all to the consideration and wisdom of our Superiors.

FINIS.

