A PROPOSAL Humbly Offered, FOR THE FARMING OF Liberty of Conscience.

Printed in the Year, 1663.

A PROPOSAL HUMBLY OFFERED, For the Farming of Liberty of Conscience.
SInce nothing can be dearer unto poor Christians, then Liberty, for the Free
Exercise of their Judgments and Conscience, which has kindled that Fire in the
Bowels of the three Kingdoms, which all the precious Blood that has been shed,
during these late Troubles, has not been able totally to extinguish: And since
many of us, whose Names are affixed, were so profitably Instrumental in these
late Combustions, as appears all along in our Sermons, before the Honorable
House of Parliament, in the Years, 1642, 43, 44, 45, 46. in exciting the good
People of this Nation, to seek and maintain their Christian Liberty, against
all Prelatical and Antichristian Imposition whatsoever. And considering, that
the little Finger of Apostacy, from our first Love, would be a greater Burden
upon our Tender Consciences then the Loins of Episcopacy, we being more bound
in Honor then Conscience cannot totally desist; Neither need any man fear, or
so much as suspect, lest any inconvenience or Alteration should happen in
Religion by the great diversity of Opinions, Tongues and Languages, tolerated
amongst us, unless in the great Babel of Episcopacy that may possibly be pulled
down and destroyed by this our notable Confusion: For if the Gospel was
wonderfully disseminated and spread abroad by every man's speaking in his own
Language, and the very Enemies thereof astonished and miraculously wrought into
a belief of it; how is it likely to be now obstructed in the free exercise of
our Spiritual Gifts with these our cloven and divided Tongues?

And since many Worthy persons (from whom we might little expect it, but far
less deserve it) out of their Goodness and Clemency, are pleased to incline
to some Liberty, did not some persons, Aliens and Strangers to the
Commonwealth of Israel take up a reproach against us, as persons reprobated
into an unpossibility of submission to Principles of Concord, Peace, and Order
in Church or State, never being able hitherto to come to any Consistency
amongst our selves the Ark of God having for twenty years together been exposed
to Highways Streets, and worse places, for want of an agreement amongst our
own Brethren, where to rest it, or how to entertain it.

If this be our Case, and could we be sure of so much favor as Saul once
desired of Samuel, That the Bishops would but honor us before the People, we
would in a private Christian way lay our hands upon our hearts, and acknowledge
the hand of God and the Justice thereof, in turning us out of his Vineyard as
wicked and unprofitable servants, and to suffer the iniquity of our heels to
overtake us, Crying out with Reverend Mr. Calamy, The Ark of God is justly
departed from us: But being not yet thus assured, do hope the people will yet
believe these to be only Bears Skins lappt about us by Episcopal hands: And
therefore, to the end that a Consistencie and Oneness of Judgment of the whole
separating Brethren, and their Moderation may be known unto all men, and that
the world may know, there is a spirit of Rule and Government resting in us,

It is humbly Proposed, That the sole power of Granting Licenses and
Indulgences for Liberty of Conscience within the Kingdom of England, Dominion
of Wales, and Town of Barwick, may be Vested in the Persons under-named, for
the Term of Seven Years, under the Farm Rent of An hundred thousand Pound per
annum, to Commence from the 25th. day of March next, under such Rates and
Qualifications as are hereafter specified.

The Names of the Grand Commissioners and Farmers of Liberty of Conscience;
proposed on yesterday, being Monday, March 2. 1662. being the day of a Private
Fast kept by Mr. Calamy, Mr. Baxter, and others, at Mr. Beal's house, near my
Lord of Ely's Chapel in Holborn.
Mr. Edmond Calamy Mr. Tilham, late of Colchester Mr. Philip Nigh Mr. Feake. Mr.
Stanley Gower of Dorchester. George Fox, Executor of the last Will and
Testament of James Nailor deceased. Doctor Lazarus Seaman Mr. Dell, late of
Cambridge. Doctor Owen Mr. Bryan, late of Coventry. Mr. Matthew Mead Mr. John
Coppin Doctor Manton Mr. Kiffen Mr. William Jenkins Mr. Fisher, late of Kent.
Doctor Thomas Goodwin Mr. Hammond, late of Newcastle. Mr. Peter Sterry Mr.
Bridges, late of Yarmouth. Mr. Joseph Carroll Mr. Tombs, late of Lemster. Mr.
Leigh, late of Lumbard street. The Executor of Mr. Venner lately Executed. Mr.
Thomas Case Mr. Reynor, late of Lincoln. Mr. Raph Venning Mr. Rogers Mr. Benn,
late of Dorchester. Mr. George Griffith, late of Charter House. The Executor of
Hugh Peter's lately Executed. Mr. George Newton, late of Taunton. Mr. Dan Dyke,
late of Hertford-shire. Mr. Mayo, late of Kingston. Mr. Joshua Sprigg. Mr.
Henry Jessey. Mr. Newcomen of Dedham in Essex. Doctor Tuckney of Cambridge.
Doctor Cornelius Burges. Mr Zachary Crofton Doctor Holmes. Mr. John Cann Mr.
Thomas Brooks.
That the Persons aforesaid, may be constituted Grand Commissioners, and
Farmers of Liberty of Conscience, within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of
Wales, and Town of Berwick, and may be empowered to set up one Public Office
within the City of London and to nominate and elect a convenient number of
Registers Clerk, and other Officers: And for the more certainty of all
Certificates to be granted as is hereafter appointed, The said Grand
Commissioners and Farmers may form a common Seal to be known, and called by the
name of The Public Seal of the Grand Commissioners and Farmers of Liberty of
Conscience engraven. An Ass without Ears, Braying, with this Motto incircled
Star pro ratione libertas: And the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers, or any
24 of them in the said Office assembled, may from time to time, compound and
agree for Liberty of Conscience, with any person or persons, under such Rates
and Qualifications, as are hereafter specified.

That the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers, or any 24 of them, may
constitute and appoint, under the Public Seal of the Office,
Sub-Commissioners, and other Officers, for every County within the said
Kingdom, not exceeding the number of 12. for each County whereof 7 to be a
Quorum, who may compound and agree for Liberty of Conscience, with any person
or persons, select Congregations, Cities, Towns Corporate, Parishes Hamlets,
and Villages, by the great, or otherwise, within their respective Countries,
not exceeding the Rates hereafter mentioned.

Rates to be observed in all Compositions for Liberty of CONSCIENCE.
Per Annum. A Presbyterian Minister 5 0 0 A Ruling Elder 4 0 0 A Deacon 3 0 0 A
Hearer Male or Female in Fellowship to all Ordinances 2 0 0 A Common Hearer
only 1 0 0 An Independent Pastor 5 0 0 A Teaching Elder 4 0 0 A Helper in
Government 3 0 0 A Deacon 3 0 0 A Hearer male or female in Fellowship to all
Ordinances 2 0 0 A common Hearer only 1 0 0 A Baptist admitted to the
Administration of all Ordinances 5 0 0 A Preaching assistant 4 0 0 An Elder in
Office 3 0 0 A Deacon 2 0 0 A Hearer in Fellowship male or female to all
Ordinances 2 0 0 A common Hearer only 1 0 0 A Fifth Monarcher admitted to hold
forth 5 0 0 An Elder under the same Administration 3 0 0 A Deacon under the
same Administration 3 0 0 A Hearer male or female in Fellowship according to
the value of his or her Estate 2 s. per l. per annum. A common hearer male or
Female according to the value of his or her Estate 12 d. per l. per annum. A
speaking male Quaker 4 0 0 A speaking female Quaker 3 0 0 A common Quaker male
or female 2 0 0 A Confessor 6 0 0 A Seminary or Mass-Priest at large 5 0 0 A
private Mass-Priest 4 0 0 A Roman Catholic in any other order 3 0 0 A Roman
Catholic not in order male or Female 1 0 0 An Officer under any Administration
not mentioned in the rates aforesaid being a Native of England, such only
excepted as stand Conformable to the Church of England 5 0 0 A common person
under any Administration not mentioned in the rates aforesaid being a Native of
England, such only excepted as stand conformable to the Church of England 2 0 0
An Officer under any Administration whatsoever not a Native of England, except
conformable to the Church of England 10 0 0 A private person under any
Administration whatsoever not a Native of England, except conformable to the
Church of England 5 0 0

Rates to be observed in compounding for Liberty of Conscience in the
particulars following, viz.
For Liberty to assert the Popes Supremacy 10 0 0 For Liberty to write, speak,
or Preach against the Government as they shall be inwardly moved 5 0 0 For
liberty to keep on their Hats before Magistrates, or in Courts of Judicature 2
0 0 For Liberty to rail publicly against the Bishops and Common Prayer 1 0 0
For Liberty to refuse all manner of Oaths, of Allegiance and Supremacy, or in
Cases Civil or Criminal 2 0 0 For liberty to deny Tithes and other Church
Duties 1 0 0 For liberty to expound the Revelations and the Book of Daniel 1 0
0 For Liberty to disturb any Congregation after Sermon 0 10 0 For Liberty to
assert the Solemn League and Covenant 1 5 0 For Liberty to instruct youth in
the short Catechism set forth by the Assembly of Divines 0 10 0

That any person or persons gifted for any the Particulars abovesaid, may have
liberty therein either as an Itinerate, in private or Public, at the Rates
abovesaid.

That no person or persons be admitted to compound for Liberty of Conscience,
until he or they have first taken and subscribed the Solemn Protestation
following, before the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers, or their
Sub-Commissioners respectively.

I A. B. do here solemnly protest, That I judge my self still bound by the
Solemn League and Covenant, by the Engagement, by private Church Covenant, or
by any other Oath which I have taken ever since the year 1641. and that so far
as with safety to my person and Estate I may, I will endeavor the utter
extirpation of Episcopacy, and to the utmost of my power, will abet and promote
all Schism, faction, and discord, both in Church and State, according to the
best form and manner, prescribed and laid open in the Sermons of many of the
Grand-Commissioners and Farmers, before the Parliament, appointed to be
Printed, and now called the Homilies of the Separated Churches. And that I will
never by what Conviction or Authority soever, whether legal or Episcopal,
ever consent to the Established Doctrine and discipline of the Church of England.

And I do likewise believe, That Liberty of Conscience was a Mysterious, yet
profitable talent committed to the Churches, and that it may be lawfully Farmed
out for advantage and improvement.

That no person within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of
Barwick, may, from, and after the 25 day of March next, use or exercise any
manner of Liberty of Conscience, except persons standing conformable to the
Church of England, until such person or persons shall first take the Solemn
Protestation, and shall compound with the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers
for Liberty of Conscience, nor shall he be admitted or permitted to be a
Speaker or Hearer, in any Meeting or Assemblies whatsoever.

That the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers of Liberty of Conscience, may
have power to constitute under the Public Seal of the said Office, a
convenient number of Spiritual Gagers, who may have and exercise all such
Powers, Privileges, and Authorities, as the Gagers for Excize of Beer and Ale,
have, or ought to have and enjoy, and may at any time, in case of Suspicion,
enter into any house or place, public or private, to gage and try the Spirits
and Affections of any person or persons; and by Praying, Preaching, or other
good Exhortation, dissuade from Episcopacie, and the Common Prayer, the better
to fit and prepare them to compound for Liberty of Conscience.

That the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers of Liberty of Conscience, may
have power to fine any person or persons (not exceeding the sum of 20 l. for
every offense, who shall, after Composition for Liberty of Conscience, and
subscribing the Solemn Protestation, be present in any Church or Chapel,
within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick, in the
time of any part of Divine Service, unless at the Funeral of his Father or some
other like occasion: or, if being present at any such occasion, he shall either
respond, be uncovered, or carry himself reverently, in the time of Divine
Service aforesaid.

That the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers of Liberty of Conscience or any
24 of them assembled at the Office aforesaid, may have and exercise a
Jurisdiction of Appeal in all matters relating to Liberty of Conscience, within
the said Kingdom of England, and shall have a conclusive power in all matters
brought before them, by way of Appeal as aforesaid.

That for the better management of all such matters as shall be brought
judicially before the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers of Liberty of
Conscience by way of Appeal the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers, shall
have power to constitute and appoint Mr. Oliver St. John's, and such others as
they judge fit for their said Service, to be of Standing-Councel with the said
Grand Commissioners and Farmers: And the said Mr. Oliver St. John's, being so
constituted and appointed under the Public Seal of the said Office, shall, and
may be exempted and discharged from being in any Public Office, or place of
Trust or Profit, for the said term of 7 years, any thing to the contrary
notwithstanding.

That if any person or persons shall happen to be proceeded against in any of
the Ecclesiastical Courts of the Bishops of this Kingdom for Contumacy, for
Nonconformity, for non-payment of Tithes, and other Church-Duties, for public
railing against the Bishops, the Common Prayer, or the Government of the Church
of England, or shall speak Oprobriously or Scandalously against the Doctrine or
Discipline thereof, as Antichristian, or shall maintain any Positions or
Doctrines contrary thereunto: Every such person producing a Certificate from
the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers under the public Seal of the said
Office, that such person or persons are under Composition for Liberty of
Conscience, shall actually be discharged, and all further proceedings stayed;
Any thing to the contrary notwithstanding.

That if any persons shall happen to be Indicted or Criminally proceeded
against in any of His Majesty's Courts at Westminster, or elsewhere within the
Kingdom of England, either for Treasonable Speeches or Practices, for public
railing at the Government, or for Scandalous words against either or both
Houses of Parliament, or for Transgressing any of the Penal Laws and Statutes
of this Kingdom; Every such person or persons producing a Certificate from the
said Grand Commissioners and Farmers under the public Seal of the said Office,
that such person or persons are under Composition for Liberty of Conscience;
and that such words or practices were not spoken or acted malitiose, but were
only the natural and proper effects and product of Liberty of Conscience, shall
be discharged, and all further proceedings stayed; Any thing to the Contrary
notwithstanding.

That the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers of Liberty of Conscience, may
have power from time to time to Ordain Pastors, Elders, and Deacons, or any
other Officers under any Administration whatsoever, by the laying on of the
public Seal of the Office: Which said Imposition of the said public Seal
being received with a Certificate, shall be as lawful an Ordination, as if
every such person had received Imposition from the hands of the Presbytery, Any
late Usage or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

That the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers may have power from time to
time, to set apart days for public Fastings, and Humiliation and
Thanksgiving; on which days it may be lawful for any person or persons
appointed to Officiate before the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers, to stir
up the people to a holy Indignation against themselves, for having by their
want of Zeal and Brotherly kindness one toward another, lost many precious
enjoyments; and above all, the never to be forgotten Loss of the late Power
and Dominion, which with the Expense of so much Blood and Rapine, was put into
the hands of the Saints. And to take up for a Lamentation and great thoughts of
heart, the Divisions of Ruben, That having our Sacks full, such an evil spirit
should be found in the midst of us, as to fall out by the way; might it have
been with those that abode by the Stuff, as with those that went out to the
Battle, it had not been with us as at this day. Some starting aside, like a
broken Bow, in the year 48; others continuing to bear the burden and heat of
the day until 60, being harnessed, did then turn their backs in the day of
Battle; as was most sweetly handled at the Fast kept Yesterday at Mr. Beale's,
by Mr. Callamy, Mr. Baxter, and others.

That the twentieth day of April next, commonly called Easter-Monday, be kept
as a day of Solemn Fasting and Humiliation, for a Blessing upon these Gospel --
Undertakings, and that Mr. Edmond Calamy, Mr. Peter Sterry, Doctor Lazarus
Seaman, and Mr. Feake, be desired to carry on the Work of the Day in Prayer and
Preaching, before the said Grand Farmers, and that the particulars following,
be recommended to their Consideration in the Work of the Day.

1. To Bewail, 1. All our Court Sins. 2. Our Bishops Sins. 3. Our Monk Sins. 4.
Our Common Prayer Sins.
2. To Divert, 1. Westminster Hall Judgments. 2. Our Old-Bayly Judgments. 3.
Our Tower Hill Judgments. 4. Our Charing Cross Judgments. 5. Our Tyburn
Judgments.

Lastly, For deliverance from the Hand of Dun, that uncercumcised Philistine.

That the said Grand Commissioners, and Farmers of Liberty of Conscience, may
have power to build Churches and Chapels in any place or places, except upon
such Ground only where Churches or Chapels do already stand, in regard of the
inconvenience of setting up Altar against Altar; And forasmuch as the Custom of
Reading some part of the holy Bible before Sermon, commonly called first and
second Lessons, has been found fruitless, That therefore the said Grand
Commissioners and Farmers may have power to appoint instead thereof, the Annual
reading of those Sermons preached by many of the said Grand Commissioners and
Farmers, before the Parliament, Upon special Occasions of Thanksgiving and
Humiliation, from the Year 1641, to the Year 1648: Which said Sermons may be
called, The Homilies of the separating Churches.

That the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers may have power to require Mr.
Gilbert Millington, and Mr. Luke Robinson, the lame Evangelist, to deliver up
all such Articles, Orders, Books, Papers, and other Writings, as were
transacted before the late Committee for plundered Ministers; and likewise, all
such as were passed and transacted before Mr. Philip Ney, and some others of
the now Grand Commissioners and Farmers, and heretofore called Commissioners or
Spiritual Tryers, to the end, the said Articles, Orders, Books, and other
Papers may be Printed and Published, and may be kept at the said Office upon
Record for ever, and appointed to be the Book of Canons of the separated
Churches.

All this being done, we may upon Scripture Grounds expect, that the door of
Hope may yet be open to Us, and Our Children after Us, to see the travel of
our Souls, and to let Us into the promised Land, and to reap some of those
Clusters of the Grapes of Canaan, which with so much Labor and Toil of Body
and Mind were planted, especially in the Years of 1641, 42, 43, 44, 45. by many
of Us, and other precious Saints and Ministers of the Gospel, who are since
fallen asleep, and have, We hope, reaped the Fruits of those Labors, the Lord
having in that Day put a mighty Spirit into Us, and set Us as Watchmen upon the
Towers of Israel, to cry mightily, Curse ye Meroze, Curse ye bitterly; the Lord
Grant, That those Heartbreaking Labors of Ours, those King-destroying
Labors, these Kingdom-ruining Labors, those Gospel-scandalizing Labors,
those Church-subverting Labors, those Soul-confounding Labors of Ours, may
never be forgotten, but may be written as with the point of a Diamond, upon the
Heart of the King, upon the Hearts of the Bishops, upon the Heart of the
Parliament, and upon the Hearts of all the People from Dan to Beersheba, that
so in Gods good time we may receive our Reward seven fold-into our own Bosoms,
and that the Generations to come may hear and fear, and do no more so wickedly.

So prays, B. G.


