Die Mercurii, 25. Septembr. 1644.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Colonel Ven, Colonel
Long, and Sir Robert Harley, do from this House give Thanks to Master
Proffet, for the great pains he took in the Sermon he preached this day at
the entreaty of the said Commons at S. Margarets Westminster, it being the day
of Public Humiliation, and to desire him to print his Sermon. And it is orde
ed, That none shall presume to print his Sermon without license under his hand
writing.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I do appoint Christopher Meredith to print my Sermon,

NICOLAS PROFFET.



ENGLANDS IMPENITENCIE UNDER SMITING, Causing anger to continue, and the
destroying hand of God to be stretched forth still. Set out in a SERMON
preached before the Honorable House of COMMONS, at a Public Fast, Sept. 25.
1644.

By Nicolas Proffet, late Rector of Peter's in Marlebrough, now Minister of
Edminton, and one of the Assembly of DIVINES.

Published by Order from that House.

Jer. 9.12. Who is the wise man that may understand this? and who is he to whom
the mouth of the Lord has spoken? That he may declare it, for what the land
perishes, etc.

LONDON, Printed by George Miller for Christopher Meredith at the Sign of the
Crane in Paul's Churchyard. 1645.

TO THE HONORABLE House of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
WHen I understood you had pleased to design mine unworthy self to this
weighty service of preaching at your public Fast; Although I could not but
apprehend it a work far above my fitness, yet might I not think of flying from
it with Jonah, or making objections against it with Moses, for your power and
his providence, Brod. 3.1^. and 4 10, 13.
who is higher then the highest, meeting together in this appointment, made it
both impossible and unlawful to desert the service. And indeed, these
calamitous times that are come upon us do call upon all men, to show
themselves willing, if they have any hope they may be able to do any thing for
a perishing Kingdom, to use their best endeavors with all alacrity unto that
end. That noble resolution of the soldier so much commended, is most worthy
imitation, of whom it is reported, That having lost both arms and legs in
services, and having nothing but the trunk of his body remaining to him: yet
would needs be in the breach. If (says he) I can do no other thing, yet
perhaps I may keep off a blow, or blunt the edge of some sword drawn to the
foyling and wounding of some other; although he had neither hands, nor feet, he
wanted not an heart to do what he could, and showed himself willing, when he
was able to do little; how mean soever our abilities are, the times will
permit none to be silent that are called to speak, nor idle who are called to
work. The lion (says Amos) has roared, who will not fear? Amos. 3.^.
the Lord has spoken, who can but prophecy? I did unfeignedly desire to
speak a word in season, and thought no subject more suitable, then what might
serve unto that end whereat you aim, which is to divert anger, and prevent
utter ruin. I therefore made choice of such a Scripture as did discover the
cause of our continued miseries, and so did direct unto the cure of this
wounded and languishing Nation, by removing that cause, the great core is
impenitencie under smiting. The people turn not to him that smites them: For
upon the one hand there are the divisions of Reuben, causing great and sad
thoughts of heart, and on the other, the stupidity and profannesse of the
multitude which causes great droopings of spirit; these things do sadden the
hearts of the Seers, and servants of God, and do fill many with fear and
doubt as well as sorrow and grief; seeing how little this last means does
prevail with either party, (...) Hom. ^8. (...) 17. (...).
it is hard to say what sin has been forsaken of the multitude, since God
began to smite the Kingdom, as far as I can discern some sins are rather
much increased then at all abated, as namely, that of drunkenness, a sin so
much the more to be lamented, abhorred, and restrained, as it is more unseemly
in it self, more unsuitable with the present condition of the Kingdom, and more
unsufferable, where reformation should begins for it is (I doubt) too true
which Chrysostom. has briefly noted of this sin, that nothing is a nearer friend
to the devil than it, and that it is the fountain and mother of all other
vices, that by which the Devil drew the Hebrews of old into idolatry, etc.
and that which does make swine of men, and men worse than swine, the sow does
wallow in the mire, and is nourished with dung, but such spread a more
abominable table for themselves, thinking upon impure mixture and wicked loves,
yea, they are as men possessed with the Devil, and whereas they are the object
of our pity, these of our hatred, because they of their own accord bring fury
and madness upon themselves, neither is there any more filthy thing then a
drunken woman. These and such like passages he has there and elsewhere, with
many other of the ancient and latter Divines, which I mention, because we live
in such times as have far more tolerable thoughts of this sin which is so
common among us, and committed openly in the sight of the Sun, and not
thought to be in the number of those vices which might occasion shame. It were
to be wished that in as much as no instructions nor admonitions will work on
such men, the bluenesse of the wound might be applied, which is a purging
medicine for such like evils: Prove. 20.30.
which while they reign there will be little hope of any thing tending to a
through Reformation found in such men. Now the way to turn away anger, and to
stay the destroying hand, is to cause the people to turn to him that smites
them, this (most noble and renowned Senators) is that which this wounded and
much weakened Kingdom calls for at the hands of her State-Physitians, and
being dangerously sick of her wounds, which seem mortal, if they be not
speedily cured, she cries unto you from all quarters of the land, as the man
in the Gospel unto Christ in behalf of his son, which had a dumb spirit, Mark
9.17. and 21.
that did oftimes cast him into the fire and water to destroy him. If you can
do any thing have compassion on us, and help us, This is a work worthy your
wisest endeavors, if it may be, to become healers of a distressed Kingdom,
unto which, if this mean piece might contribute the least mite, the unworthy
Author should have his end in choosing this Text, preaching and publishing this
Sermon, which is now (although somewhat late) presented to your view, sooner it
should have been, but being much mistaken in the time of preaching it, by
reason of the silence of the clock, I was constrained, when I did perceive I
had exceeded much the bounds allotted, to pass over many things, and dis-rank
others which caused the more labor to place them right, and to supply some of
those I did then omit, and transcribe the whole, about which I have spent all
the hours that I could ever since, spare out of those public Attendances,
unto which I am tied. I have not made any material addition or alteration,
although here and there something was of necessity to be supplied. It is now
(such as it is) humbly presented unto your patronage and acceptance, whose it
was preached and is now published. If any of you shall happily cast an eye upon
it now printed, as you were pleased to lend an attentive ear unto it when it
was preached (and in stead of blaming me for mistaking my time, to show your
good acceptance of my weak endeavors) I hope it may be of some use, at least
to remind you of that which must steer your course in all your endeavors for
the Kingdoms safety and Churches good, which is to remove the maine
obstruction, by causing (if it be possible) that the people may turn to him
that smites, which if it may but in some good measure be effected, we shall
not need to fear or doubt the audience of our Prayers, and crowning your other
endeavors with such success as shall move not only them that now live and
pray, but the generations to come to bless and praise your God and theirs both
with and for you; which is continually begged of God at the throne of his
Grace, who is exceeding abundantly able to do above all we ask or think, by

The unworthiest of his servants and yours, N. PROFFET.

Errata.
PAge 2. line 3. read their aid. p 9. l. 21. also redundant. p. 11. l. 21. r.
may seem. p. 11. l. 22. r Conclusions. p. 12. l. 8 r. terrible approach. p. 17.
l. 26. r. one. p. 20 l. 26. it redundant. p. 22. l. 31. resolution f.
reflection p. 32. l. 23. r. (...)and (...). p. 33. in the marg. r. animi ej^^
varietate. and l. 12. observe f. obtain. in the marg. r. timet. p. 38. l. 5.
r. fill up. p. 46. l. 24. r. some means. p. 47. l. 10. r. their men. p. 44. in
the marg. r. quisqui^.

A Sermon preached before the Honorable House of Commons at the public Fast,
September. 25. 1644.
JSAIAH 9.13. -- For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is
stretched out still.

For the people turns not unto him that smites them, neither do they seek
the Lord of Hosts.


THat the scope of this verse may be better perceived, it will be necessary to
take a short view of the Chapter, in which this noble, and eloquent Prophet,
Hieron. ad Paul. and Eustach. to. 3d p. 26.
as St Hirome styles him, of whom he further says, in the same place, non tam
Propheta quam Evangelista dicendus sit, he is rather to be called an Evangelist
then a Prophet. Does notwithstanding here, (as in other places) mingle wine
with oil, Law with Gospel, Comminations with Consolations. For (as David
Psalm. 101.) does sing, so he does preach and prophecy mercy and judgment. Yet
he begins with comfort and goes on with terror, from verse 1 unto the 8 he is
full of comfort, a son of consolation, but in the rest Boanerges, a son of
thunder; In that former part of the Chapter he sets himself to comfort
(according unto some) the good party of the Israelites, both against former,
and future menaces of wrath, judgment and ruin, of which they had heard very
heavy burdens before, and were now to hear more and heavier hereafter, such
as should not only crush, and bruise, but break, and ruin the state and
Kingdom; The Godly hearing this might quake, faint and sink, if not despair,
if some cordial were not first given for their comfort and support.

Or (as some others think) the Prophet does endeavor hereby by to comfort
Judah, at this time in a very sad condition, greatly weakened by war; for
Israel, that is, the ten tribes had warred against them, and now obtained in
unto them aid, the King of Assiria: who was a potent, and mighty Prince; by
whose help they made no doubt but they should extirpate the royal stock and
wholly subdue Judah and bring them into perpetual subjection. Now against them
the Prophet sets himself to comfort Judah.

The comfort wherewith he does endeavor to support them, is drawn out of the
well of consolation, he gives them of the water of Shiloah, (...) 8.6.
the promises of the Gospel and free grace through Christ. As you may further
perceive by comparing what you here read with Math. 4.14.

Then in the 8 h verse, the Prophet begins (as diverse interpreters have
observed) a new sermon sure it is, he does change his voice. for as there he
was promising grace, so here he is menacing wrath.

In this part we may observe, how having to do with a secure, proud,
pertinacious and incredulous people, that made but little account and set very
light by the menaces of their Prophets, he does first set down the certainty
and authority of these comminations, assuring them that they should undoubtedly
come to pass and they should surely feel them. ver. 8.

And howsoever they out of pride and confidence, did seem altogether to slight
them, using a proverbiall kind of speech which did imply as much ver. 10. for
by it they intimate, that what they lost in overthrowes and ruins should be
recovered, raised and repaired in greater splendour and glory then before. Yet
they, even all the people should know, that God who is true of his Word had
foretold as much, and should assuredly make it good.

2 As he sets down the authority, and certainty, so he sets down the time,
manner and means, showing how punishment and ruin should be brought upon
them. viz. the Lord would set up the adver faries of Rezin against him and
join his enemies together, and then the Syrians before and Philistines
behind, and they should devour Israel with open mouth ver. 11, 12. i. e.
Their enemies being enraged should rise up against them on every side, and make
a prey of them like wild beasts, rather then reasonable men.

Now whereas secure and obstinate men are wont to think, it will be but a
storm at the most, after which they should have a calm, for being over and
God pacified they should be safe, and free from further fear and punishment,
for they having suffered some strokes, usually grow more hard and obstinate
then before, and promise themselves greater freedom and take greater liberty
in sin. The Prophet therefore lets them know that the Lord has not shot all
his shafts, neither is he pacified, but his anger does continue, and his hand
is stretched forth still. In which words he does represent God unto them in the
habit and posture of an angry man, a mighty man that is wrath, who had bin
smiting heavy strokes, and yet by his countenance and hand stretched forth
still to strike, does show himself notwithstanding the blows already given to
be no less angry then before. Neither are they safe (as they verily imagine)
but still more and heavier strokes hang over their heads which they shall by
no means escape. Now whereas this might seem strange, that the Lord should be
so exceedingly moved against his people, that the cause might be known and God
justified in his judgment; the words of the Text are added, so as if any make
question or desire satisfaction concerning this continuance of his smiting and
anger against Israel, he may hereby understand there is cause enough.

For the people turns not unto him that smites them, although they have bin
grievously smitten, to the end they might return and seek the Lord of Hosts,
yet they are so obstinate and so impenitent and pertinacious, as they will not
for all that return, but do more provoke the wrath of God against them.

The word translated (for) being Vau in Hebrew, does properly signify (And)
but is variously used and (as some Gramarians have observed) in well near 40
several significations, and sometimes is causall and does signify for, or
because.

And in this place the most interpretors take it as causall and not copulative,
and being so taken, you see the words show the cause why the Lord would not
take off his heavy hand, nor turn away his wrath from Israel. Namely because
the people were so stubborn and shameless as they would by no means be
brought to repentance and conversion, and therefore it was most just and
equal, that the Lord should not give them over, and as it were give place and
way unto them in their wickedness, but as they went on in sinning, so he should
go on in smiting them still, until at length they were utterly destroyed.

So that these words are not so much a prediction, as a commination, yea an
accusation, letting them know, that it was most just, that the Lord should go
on in punishment, because they did still go on in sin, and therefore
howsoever there might be some intermission, yet no dismission out of his hand
which is stretched out still. The words are considerable by themselves and in
their relation unto what went before. In themselves they contain an heavy
indictment against Israel, in which this heighnous crime is charged upon them,
that they were grown so obstinate, as they could neither be drawn by mercies,
nor driven by judgments, to turn and seek the Lord of Hosts, from whom
they had turned away by their sins, such was their impenitency and obstinacy,
their minds and hearts in their Apostasy so alienated from God, as though they
had bin smitten with heavy and very grievous strokes, and their misery such as
they could neither avoid nor endure, yet they would not take notice of Gods
hand, so as to turn from their sin, no nor so much as seek the Lord of
Hosts, and crave pardon and seek help at his hand. For this last branch
seems to be a further aggravation of their obstinacy, intimating that they
were so far from repentance and conversion, as that they did not so much as
seek unto the Lord of Hosts that smote them. Now in their relative
consideration, they set forth how just it is with God to go on still to be
angry, and still to stretch forth his punishing hand, not ceasing to smite till
ruin and utter desolation come upon them.

In the words there are these particulars especially considerable. First who
smote Israel, noted in the relative (him) and expressed in the last branch of
the Text, the Lord of Hosts.

Secondly, why and to what end he smote them, both employed in the word turn,
they were smitten, because they had turned from him, and that they might be
brought to turn again unto him.

Thirdly what use they made of this smiting, what fruit it had among them, and
that was as little as might be, for they turned not to him etc. this smiting to
them was fruitless, and vain.

Fourthly, how ill it was taken, and what hurt this obstinacy and impenitency
of theirs did procure unto them, and that is not only the reproof of the
Prophet, but the continuance of the anger of God and the stretching forth of
his hand still to strike them with more and much heavier strokes. For all this
etc. So that these words (if they should be largely handled) might furnish our
observations with at least these six several Doctrines as employed or expressed
in the words.

First, That the eternal God is the Lord of Hosts.

Secondly, That Israel smitten by their enemies in war, it is the Lord that
smites them.

Thirdly, The cause of the destroying sword among them was, their departing
from the Lord by their sin.

Fourthly, The end of smiting was, that they might return and seek the Lord
of Hosts.

Fifthly, Israel was obstinate and impenitent so as they did refuse to turn
and seek the Lord.

Sixthly, This obstinacy and impetinency did greatly provoke the Lord to anger,
and was the cause of the continuance of his anger and stretching forth his hand
to smite them still.

But because it will be impossible to speak of more then the one half of
these Doctrines within the compass of the time, I shall reduce the^ unto these
three Conclusions, and only touch upon some of the other, as occasion shall
serve, in some of the Uses, and because that which is here spoken of Israel,
does also belong unto any other people, whose case may be paraleld with theirs,
I shall propound and handle these Doctrines, rather in thesi then hypothesi,
thus.

First, That Israel, or any people in covenant smitten with the sword of an
enemy, It is the Lord that smites them.

Secondly, It is an heinous and grievous provoking sin, for a people when
they are thus smitten, not to turn and seek the Lord of Hosts.

Thirdly, That Israel or any people continuing thus obstinate and impenitent,
is the cause of the continuance of God his anger, and the increase of their
punishment.

These are the Doctrines which (as I conceive) will be most suitable and
useful, and therefore of them as time shall give leave and God shall assist.
And first I begin with the first.

When Israel or any people are smitten by their enemies in war, it is the
Lord that smites them.

When a people is smitten with the sword of a foreign, or domestic enemy, it
is the Lord that smites them.

The Doctrine will be of use, especially for way unto the rest. Some^hing must
therefore be spoken of it, although we shall be more brief in this, and more
large in the rest. Now this first Doctrine for the sense of it, I suppose it is
so clear to every one of ordinary capacity, as I shall not need to spend time
in explication.

And for the ground, it will be no less evident unto any that shall observe
unto what the Relative (him) does refer. Unto their enemies it cannot be
referred, who were mentioned in the former Verse, but unto Jehovah, the Lord of
Hoasts, as the words following do declare.

But to clear this point from some other Scriptures. Ezekiel. 7.9. Ye shall know
that I am the Lord that smites; whatsoever the rod or sword may be, the Lord
will have it known that he smites.

And more particularly and plainly, Deuteronomy. 28.25. The Lord shall cause thee to
be smitten before thine enemies, etc. and Verse 49. The Lord shall bring a
Nation against thee from far, from the end of the earth, etc. if they be
smitten, the Lord is he that does cause it, and he does bring their enemies how
far soever they come, Ezekiel. 11 8. Ye have feared the sword, and I will bring
a sword upon you, says the Lord God. Amos 4.10. Your young men have I slain
with the sword, etc. Ezekiel 14.17. Or if I bring a sword upon that land and say,
Sword, Go through the land, so that I cut off man and beast from it.

These Scriptures do clear the point. Yet for better satisfaction unto such as
do not see how God should be said to strike them that are smitten by men, we
shall briefly note how, and in what sense and respect the Lord is said to
smite. God is pleased to work sometimes with, and sometimes without means,
mediately, and immediately; and thus immediately and without means he formed
our first Parents, and upheld them being created; and he led his Apostles into
all truth. And in things belonging to this life, he sometimes works with, and
sometimes without, yea above and contrary unto secondary causes and means. Thus
he fed his people in the Wilderness; divided the Sea; drew water out of the
Rock.

Sometimes he works by means mediately, and uses second causes; yet then he
has an especial hand in these means: Acts 17.28. For in him we live, and
move, and have our being, etc. and Ephesians. 1.11. he works all things after the
Counsel of his own will. God is not to be conceived in his working by means
as men. Kings and Princes-governe their Kingdoms by their officers, so as
themselves many times neither act with them nor do know what is done by them.
But the Lord has an eye and hand in the whole government; All creatures, and
every second cause is ordered and disposed by him: Who is therefore called the
Lord of Hosts, not only because all creatures in Heaven and earth are his
soldiers and his great army, but also, because of his special cammand, order
and government of them all, and particularly of men, in point of war, which
is his sword, and is so ordered by him as he may well be said to smite them
that are smitten, In these and the like respects.

First, Because when a sword is drawn upon any people he does call for it.
Ier. 25.29. For I will call for a sword upon the inhabitants of the earth.
Isay. 13.4. He is said to be the Lord of Hosts, who does muster the host of
the battle.

Secondly, he does send it whithersoever it does at any time come. Ezekiel 14.17.

Thirdly, he does appoint who shall be smitten, when, by whom, how far it
shall go, and how long it shall continue, Hosea 11.6. Ier. 47.6, 7.

Fourthly, he gives strength and victory unto them that smite and prevail.
Eccl. 9.11. The battle is not to the strong. Psalm. 33.17. An horse is a vain
thing, neither shall he deliver any by his great strength. Psalm. 144.1. Blessed
is the Lord my strength, which teaches my hands to war, and my fingers to
fight. Prove. 21.31. Victory is of the Lord.

Fifthly, The Lord does cause war to cease, and command the sword to return
and put it self into its scabbard, rest and be still. Ier. 47 6. Psalm. 46.9.
He makes war to cease, unto the end of the earth. etc.

people. How then can they be said to be smitten of God?

Psalm. 17.13. Deliver my soul from the wicked, which is thy sword. And Zeph.
2.12. Ye Ethiopians, ye also shall be slain by my sword.

Sometimes the Lord does send wicked men to destroy or smite wicked men, and
sometimes to correct his own children for their good, Aug. con^^^ (...).
that being tried, they may be made manifest, either to themselves for hope, or
to others for imitation. Romans 5.3, 4. Knowing that tribulation works
patience, and patience experience, and experience hope.

Secondly, The Lord does menace and punish their cruelty toward his people,
and that justly, Because they do not smite them in obedience unto God, whose
will they inquire not after; but have aims, and ends of their own, yet God
does use them to do his will, and pleasure, even then when they do least of
all obey him. This you have noted Isa. 10.5: Ashur is the rod of his
indignation, or anger: and God does send him against an hypo^^iticall Nation,
etc. but ver. 7. He means not so, his end is not to punish an hypocritical
Nation, neither does his heart think so: But it is in his heart to destroy,
and cut off Nations, not a few. His aim is not to serve the Lord, but by his
tyranny to enlarge his d^minions: and to subject as much people as he could,
unto himself, and so to serve his own ambition, and avarice, and therefore
the will of his God was not his rule, unto which he had no regard: but did
abuse his power, and (as Hierom does observe on the place,) went beyond the
bounds of Gods anger, and beyond his own Commission. The like may be noted in
Iehu, who was sent of God to destroy Iezabel, ^ Kings 9.7.^.
and the false Prophets, and the whole house of Ahab. And he did well in
executing that which was right in the sight of God, and is promised a reward
for his service. 2. King 10.30. Yet the Lord will avenge the blood of Iezreel
upon the house of Iehu. Hosea. 1.4. And the reason is, because Iehu had another
aim then God, for he looked no further then his own honor, Annon ^oc
^aci^^t ownes qui de corpore di^^ol^ suat. Occo^amp. In I^a. ^^.7.
that he might reign King: But God aimed at the rooting out of Idolatry, by
taking away the Patrons of Idols and Authors of it. Now Iehu departed not from
the Golden Calves that were in Dan and Bethel. 2 Kings. 10.29. And the like by
ends may be noted in others.

Use 1. If when Israel or any people are smitten by the sword of an Enemy, it
is the Lord that smites them, then it must needs follow, that Germany smitten,
and miserably wasted, it is the Lord that smote them. Ireland smitten and
almost consumed, the Lord has smiten them. England, at this time smitten,
divided and much weakened, it is the Lord that has smitten us. This Doctrine
does assure us, as the woman of Tekoa does inform David, that the hand of Ioab
was in all that, so the hand of God is in all this, his hand has smitten both
them and us. The more therefore to blame we, and the greater our sin, who
look much below the hand of God. Isa. 26.11.
It was a just complaint of our Prophet. Chap. 26.11. Lord when thy hand is
lifted up, they will not see: and in this Chap. (as was noted before) he
charge this people, that they were so far from turning to him that smote
them, as they took no notice of the hand that hurt them. Israel looks lower
then heaven, then the hand of God, and looks on other hands, they could not
see his hand that smote them. I fear. Israel and England, are so like each
other in this, as England is the worse. I remember what one has noted of
Israel, and I pray let us consider whether it be not true also of England also
at this day. When the Jews endured so many miseries, even from their first
plantation in the land unto their final casting out, they were seldom aware
of this point; etc. If the Philistines, Cananites and other borderers upon them
do spolle their Country, tyrannize over them, and oppress them with cruel
slavery, as they did in the times of the Judges, they will interpret this to be
nothing, but an old grudge of these nations for dispossessing them of their
Country, for which they were hated, and all occasions sought to work revenge.
If the Kingdom be divided, that is nothing but Rehoboams folly, and ill
counsel of ill advised Courtiers. If Israel make war on Judah, or Judah upon
Israel, that is but policy to keep down one another, least one should
encroach upon both Kingdoms: If there be civil war, that is through the
factions of potent and ambitious Statesmen. If a forraigner invade them, it is
nothing but the pride of ambitious tyrants, that cannot be content with their
own, but seek after glory and greatness in the ruin of other Kingdoms. Yea
if Salmanazer, or Nebuchadnezzar carry them away captive out of their Land,
though they may think God not well pleased with them, in the general, yet
they would resolve these effects into other causes, more proper as they
conceive. It was weakness in their Kings ^^generating from their ancient valor,
want of good considerates, of good Councillors, of skillful and trusty
Commanders, or hardy Soldiers, they were over-borne by multitude; and these,
or some things like these, were the cause of this misfor^^^e. etc. But the ^and
of God they will not see, they will ascribe ^^^ther unto any thing, then unto
the hand of God. Just as (...) speaks of the people of his time, in case of
good suc^^^^ Alius fortuna, Alius eventui etc. One does ascribe it to ^^^^une,
another unto event, a third unto the advice of their leaders, a fo^tth unto
good counsel etc. nullus Deo. Hardly a^y unto God. How true this is of our
times, and whether this he not our National sin, I shall leave you to consider
and judge, (...) so, it is very great, and we in it like Israel, and not much
b^yond the Heathen may much behind some of them, who were wont to look much
higher then many of our people do. For to say nothing of him, that having
slain a great Enemy of his Country, and when there was a strife among the
Officers, who ^^old give him most honor, did ascribe all to Heaven, and would
take nothing to himself and others, but only the lending their hands unto the
work, they ascribing victory and success unto Fortuna, and Victoria, did as
they imagined, ascribe them to God. For Fortune, as they thought was a divine
power, and no less indeed then a God. And the like they held of Victoria as
Aug. notes.

This sin is so much the more to be noted and reproved, as it is more sinful
and dangerous; for it is a fault in the first concoction of the use which
should be made of the judgments of God not to be recovered in the rest. It is
observed by two learned ^^xp^sitors upon the Text, that Israel not
acknowledging whence these strokes came, therefore they did not turn by true
repentance unto the Lord, neither did they seek him. And whereas these
strokes were laid on them that they might convert, bring neglected they become
more obstinate. It is the policy of Satan, not unlike to that of Jeroboam 1
Kings 12.26, 27. (...) the people should go up to Jerusalem, to Sacrifice in
(...) that their heart would turn again unto their Lord, the King of Judah.
And therefore he does set up Golden Calves and said unto them, It is too much
for you to go up to Jerusalem, behold thy Gods O Israel, etc. Thus the Devil
well knowing it might prove dangerous, if men should look so high as the hand
of God, for then they might possibly lay to heart his hand, and inquire into
the cause, and fall out with their sin, and fall off from Satan, therefore he
endeavors to make them to cast their eyes upon Golden Calves, and does fasten
them on any thing on Earth, that they may not look up to Heaven, And by this
means it comes to pass that God loses all the glory, and they all the
gain of his mercies and punishment upon them for their amendments.

A confedracy with them, to whom they say a confederacy. Isa. 8.12. Their fear
may drive them to make unlawful leagues, or to be of the opinion, judgment or
practice of the wicked, in working out their way out of danger, and at the
least withdraw themselves from God, in whom alone is help, and comfort in time
of trouble, and danger. As it is noted of Astianax, when his own father came
toward him armed (although it was to embrace him) yet being afraid at the
sight of his head-peece, and hairy plume bending toward him: the child does
forthwith hide his face in his nurses bosom, and cry: the poor child took
his father in that habit, for a foe, rather then a friend. Thus Gods children
may mistake, and fear, yea and fly unto the creature for shelter. But now this
Doctrine being remembered, that it is God that smites, and that the rod, or
sword, is in the hand of our Heavenly Father; When Turk or Traitor, some Irish
Rebel, English Papist, or Atheist, is the sword, yet the hand of God does
order, and guide it, and whatsoever their malice, or bloody cruelty may be, yet
it shall do no more, nor go any further then he shall carry it; they cannot
move but as they are guided and ordered by him: this will quiet their spirits,
and stay their fears. You know when some General or Commander of an Army is
reported to be barbarous and cruel, it strikes great fear into the hearts of
such as apprehend his terror approach: as on the contrary, if the General be
reouted a mild and merciful man, it does much mitigate the fear of such as
are like to fall into his hands. When therefore, we shall consider; that the
great Commander of all Armies and Lord of Hosts, is the friend, yea the Father
of Israel, of his people, and that all the counsels and smitings, yea and very
motions of wicked men are at his dispose; it makes no matter who, or what they
are, the strokes shall be no more nor heavier, then our Heavenly Father shall
appoint. Psalm. 76.10. Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee: the remainder
of wrath shall thou rebraine. The fierceness and cruelty that they exercise
against his servants, shall be so ordered, as shall be for the glory of God,
and for the good of his people, even then when they prevail; And the residue
of it God will restrain from effecting and attempting further evil; so that
whatsoever strength and power they have joined with their rage, it shall be
limited unto what may be for the glory of God, and good of his people, neither
shall it break forth further then is expedient unto these ends, be it never so
great.

And as they shall be no greater, so neither shall they bear* them longer than
is meet and convenient, Psalm. 125.3. For the red of the Wicked shall not rest
upon the lot of the righteous, lest the righteous put forth their hands unto
iniquity. He at his pleasure makes wars to cease. Psalm. 46.9.

^inally, this smitting shall not so much wound, destroy and kill; as heal,
cure, and save his people: for Isai. 27.7, 8, 9. God does not smite his people,
as he smites those that smote him, etc. But in measure, etc. ver. 8. And by
this therefore shall be iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit,
to take away his sin, etc which well considered, would prove a sweet cordial
of comfort in these smitting times, and who would think much to be smitten by
such an hand? I have read, that among the Persians he that is commanded to be
beaten by the King, does give thanks unto him, accounting it to be an happy
thing, quod Rex sui memor fuerit, that the King is mindful of him. Sure I am,
they that are smitten of God their Father, have cause to account it a favor;
for if the wounds of a friend be faithful, how much more the strokes of such a
Father? they are ever laid on his in faithfulness, and so in mercy, to make
them fit to receive his Promises of Grace, and to free them from sin. And to
this end David does desire that the righteous might smite him, and he should
take it for a kindness, Psalm. 141.5. It is reported of Cyrus that he knew the
names of all that were in his Army; the Lord does know the names and conditions
of all in his; and will see that none shall have more, or heavier strokes laid
on them, then they shall be able to bear; for the hairs of their heads are
numbered, and not one of them does fall on the ground, but by his providence. I
conclude with Isai. 54. the beginning of ver. 4 and ver. 5. Fear not, for thy
Maker is thine husband (the Lord of Hosts is his Name.) etc.



And the people of God themselves (as it must be acknowledged) are too apt to
look too much and dwell too long upon second Causes, they many times as young
Samuel (when God called) he runs to Eli, so they run to men, and means,
when they should answer to God calling them unto himself, and this on both
sides is not only an hinderance unto them, so as they do not improve the
strokes unto their ends, but many times a means to make them impatient, and
ill advised, at the least: Whereas if they did consider that it is the Lord
that smites, it would make them dumb, and not to dare to open their mouths,
because he does it, Psalm. 39.9. Therefore as a remedy of impatiencie and many
other evils, which may and many times do follow upon the non-observance of his
hand in smiting, let us mind and remember this doctrine, that when any people
is smitten, it is the Lord that smites them, and then we shall always join
these together in our thoughts, as they did in their cry, Judge. ^.20. The sword
of the Lord and of Gideon: and then we shall the better follow the counsel
given Micah 6.9. The Lords voice cries unto the city, and the man of wisdom
shall see thy Name: hear ye the ^^d and who has appointed it.

Thus we have done with the first point, which shows who it is that smites
Israel, or any people that are smitten, although by a foreign enemy in war.

Now we come unto the second, which declares what use Israel made of their
smiting, and how ill their behavior under the rod was taken. And here we have
three distinct particulars, which we shall for brevities sake join in the
Doctrine, and distinguish in the Use.

First, the ground and cause of their smiting.

Secondly, the end at which God aims in his smiting Israel, that which moved
the Lord to smite them, and the use they should have made of his strokes, which
are both employed in the word (turn,) the contrary whereof is laid to their
charge, they did not turn, he smote them for their turning from him, and that
they might turn unto him.

Thirdly, the Lord by the Prophet does charge this upon them as a great and
heinous offense, for which this is here charged on them as an heinous crime, as
before you heard, that the people did not turn to him that smote them, and
brought in as the cause or reason why the anger of God did continue, and his
hand was still stretched forth: so then the next Doctrine may be thus
propounded.

That it is an offense very heinous (a crime of an high nature) for I^rael, or
any people being smitten of God for their sin, that they ^ight return* and
seek the Lord of Hosts; to continue impenitent and of stinate, so as not to
turn to him that smites them.

Or more briefly thus:

That it is a wrath provoking sin for a people being smitten of God with the
sword of an enemy for their sin, to continue obstinate, so as not to retur^e.

I shall speak something by way of Explication: First, of this short
description of God, styled The Lord of Hosts, unto whom they should have turned.

Secondly, of the duty which they did owe and should have performed, which was
to turn and seek the Lord of Hosts: and then we shall further declare how, and
why this should be charged on them, or any people as a crime so heinous, or sin
so grievous, and then come to the Use.

First, the Lord is styled the Lord of Hosts, and it is an usual Title or
Attribute, which is given and taken by himself, as a style well-fitting his
Majesty, and the Lord is so styled, because that all Creatures are his Army,
and he their General and great Commander, Genesis 2.1. Thus the heavens and the
earth were finished, and all the host of them. By a Metaphor he calls the
Creatures with which the several parts of the world are adorned an host: for
hereby is meant all Creatures in the earth and heavens, which stand as an Army;
thus in the highest heavens there are the glorious Angels, who are a part of
this Host or Army, Luke 2.13, 15.

Secondly, in the visible heavens the stars, and they are sometimes brought
forth to fight against the enemies of the Lord of Hosts and his people, Judge.
5.20. they fought against Sisera.

Thirdly, in the lower heavens, the Fowls of the a^re a part of God his Army;
and in the water, the Fishes; in the earth, men, Piscat.
beasts and creeping things; for they all are said to be an Army in respect of
God, whom they serve, and therefore he is called the Lord of Hosts, Psalm. 1
19.91. Isai. 45.12. Joel 2.25.

Now all Creatures being called the Armies of God by way of resemblance, you
may briefly note, wherein especially that resemblance does stand, namely in
these, and the like particulars.

First, in respect of their number, for any multitude in Scripture is called an
army, if it be orderly; Illenc.
and armies usually consist of great numbers.

Secondly, in respect of Order, which is especially observed in Armies; and
this makes the Host of God admirable: and the very word translated Host Genesis
2.1. does signify an army standing in order.

Thirdly, in respect of Obedience. In armies well ordered the soldiers are
obedient, and at the beck and command of their Captain, as Matthew. 8.9. and thus
locusts, flies, lice, and every creature are at the command of their General.

Fourthly, I shall add one thing more, and that is in respect of power. Armies
are very potent, and some have been formidable and irresistible, and thus the
Army of the Lord of Hosts is formid^ble and irresistible, who with flies,
frogs, and such like is able to overcome as potent and proud an enemy as
Pharaoh King of Egypt. In these and the like respects, the Creatures are said
to be the Hosts of God; I might (for prevention of mistake) further note, how
that there is not a resemblance in every thing. For, other armies or hosts are
raised for defense; and may (although great) be put unto the worst: but it is
not so with God, who has no n^ed of any Creature, nor can be resisted; but I
omit that, and this s^^ll serve for the first particular, how God is styled the
Lord of Hosts.

Secondly, let us in the next place consider what it is to turn unto the Lord
of Hosts, or him that smites. The word here used is sometimes translated
turn, and sometimes return, as you may see in these places, (...)
Isai. 6.13. and 37.7. and Chap. 31.6. Ier. 3.7 etc. It does properly note out
local motion of them that pass, or move from place to place, leaving some
place or person where, or with whom they were before, thus 1 Samuel 7.17. Samuel
his return was to Ramah, for there was his house, etc. but thus it cannot be
taken here, for Psalm. 139.7, 8. it is not possible to go from the presence of
God, if one ascend to Heaven, or m^ke his bed in hell, God is there, etc. The
phrase is translated from l^call motion of the body, and applied unto
spiritual motions, in which men by a kind of similitude are said to walk, to
depa^t, or go from, and to return again unto the Lord, and it may be noted
in the words of Austin, Aliud est migrare corpore, aliud cord, etc, It is one
thing to move from place to place in body, and another thing to move from place
to place in heart; in body he does move from place to place, that does change
his place, (...). Deu^. ^2. (...) Ioa^. cap. 7.^9. p. 25^.
he does it in heart, qui cordis mutat affectum: si aliud amas, and aliud
amabas, non ibi es, ubi eras: he does move in heart from where he was, that
does change the affection of his heart, and if thou did love one thing, and
do now love another, thou art not there where thou wast before; by sinning
against God, withdrawing our affections from him, and placing them upon the
creature, we go away from God; sin is contrary unto the nature of God, and
far from him: and when on the contrary part, we place our affections upon
him, and become obedient, we return to him, from sin and vice unto virtue
and grace; and therefore as he further observes to this purpose, Aug. in Joan.
tract. 48. p. 35^.
he that believes does come, and he that goes away, non movetur anima
pedibus, sed affectibus; the soul is not moved with feet, but with affections;
and God who is despised in any place, does depart from their hearts who do
forsake him in their manners and lives not with their feet; he comes to them
who turn to him not with their face but with their faith, and approach unto
him in their minds, not with their flesh. In a word, by serious repentance we
turn to him; so that to turn to God, is to repent, or convert from Satan and
sin to God, Act. 3.19. Repent and be converted: and Ezekiel. 18.30. Repent and
turn your selves from your iniquities, etc.

Thirdly, let us in the last place note what it is to seek the Lord of Hosts,
which is the other act or branch of the duty they should have performed; To
seek the Lord of Hosts (as is observed by one upon the words) is sometimes to
pray, Psalm. 34.4. I sought the Lord. And sometimes to obey, it is put for the
observation of the Commandments, 2 Chronicles. 14.4. Asa commanded Judah to seek
the Lord God of their fathers, and to do the Law and the Commandments. But it
will not be amiss to open this Phrase a little further, which does very often
occur in Scripture. The word is borrowed from common use (as the former) and
seeking properly is a solicitous and sedulous action of ones desiring and
endeavoring to find some person or thing which they apprehend to be lost, or
at least, is out of their hand and possession, thus Luke 2.15. and 4.8. and
Luke 2.44. this being the proper use of the word does hold some proportion with
this duty of seeking applied unto higher objects and divine things, generally
it may imply and comprehend repentance and all other acts and exercises,
whereby the Lord of Hosts is sought and may be found, and more specially it is
called a seeking of his face. 1 Chronicles. 16.11.

For God is every where in his Essence and Power, as an Ancient has noted,
Deus manet intra omnia, extra omnia, etc. God abides within all things,
without all things, Greg.
and he is above and below all things; he is above all things in his power and
dominion, and below all things by his sustentation, without all things by his
greatness, and within all things by his piercing and subtle nature.

But the face and favor of God is not so extensive as his presence.

To seek the Lord is to use all means by which his favor may be obtained, and
his grace exercised and manifested to us; and this seeking God is to rest on
him, to believe in him, to obey his will, to worship and serve him, no
otherwise then himself has appointed; and being angry, to endeavor
reconciliation, and to implore his help, and grace; others say, men seek the
Lord by faith, repentance, an entire and serious endeavor and desire of the
heart after reconciliation and grace, with prayers and an endea^our after
righteousness and beneficence, by putting off the old man and putting on the
new.

Now that which is charged upon Israel is, that they did not seek the Lord of
Hosts. It was their duty so to seek the Lord, as has been set forth; but (as I
conceive) the Prophet does not speak of such a seeking in this place, but of a
lesser degree of seeking then turning unto him; for it is a further
amplification and aggravation of their sin, as was before noted; in the
resolution of the words they were so far from turning to God by true
repentance and conversion, as they did not so much as acknowledge and crave
pardon for their sin; they did not perceive and take notice of the wrath of
God against them for their sin, and therefore did not cry to him for mercy,
as the Lord of Hosts by whom they were smitten, and in whose power it was to
wound and heal, to save and destroy them, which is a great aggravation of
their sin, that they did not at all seek to him who was the Lord of Hosts,
able to help or hurt whom he would. ^or had he been unable to hurt or help,
or were he so far off as they might seem to be out of his reach, or that he
had not at all to do with them, it had not been so necessary that they should
have sought him, but he being the Lord of Hosts and he that smote them, and was
able utterly to ruin and destroy them; for them not to turn nor so much as
seek unto him, was an offense of a very high nature: It seems to be such a
kind of aggravation of their sin, as that Ier. 5.21, 22.

Now for the proof of this Doctrine, I shall have less need to s^end time,
because the Doctrine is so near unto the words, at least the sense and scope
of the Text; for they are charged with this as an heinous crime, and as the
cause of anger and smiting continued, that they did not turn, etc. you may
please to observe that Ier. 2.30. In vain have I smitten your children, they
received no correction, etc. And Chap. 5.3, 4. O Lord, are not thine eyes upon
the truth? thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved; thou have
consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction, they have made
their faces harder then a rock, they have refused to return. Therefore I
said, Surely these are poor, they are foolish: for they know not the way of
the Lord, nor the judgment of their God. In which places, especially the
latter, they are charged with obstinacy, in contemning chastisements and
corrections; which contempt of theirs did greatly provoke the Lord to wrath
against them, Isai. 1.5. there the Prophet does charge them with obstinacy and
impenitencie as an high and heinous offense, that neither mercy nor correction
would make them better, and many the like places might be brought to this
purpose, I shall only add that Amos 4.8. and thence to the end of that
Chapter, in which they are reproved or rather reproached and upbraided with
this: that notwithstanding they had been visited with all sorts of judgments,
and yet they did not for all that return unto him that smote them. See ver. 8,
9, 10, 11, 12.

Jer. 5.3.
they have refused to return; Ier. 5.3. such men are unfruitful under means,
unthankful for mercy, frustrate Gods endeavor to do them good, show
themselves incorrigible, and irrecoverable when mercies nor judgments will do
them no good. In the 6. Chapter and ver. 29, 30. the desperate condition of
such an obstinate people, is excellently set forth by comparing such sinners
unto Oar, God unto a refiner, and his Word a rod unto a furnace, these means
used to take away the dross of their sin, and not prevailing, he with
indignation does now cast them away as dross that is good for nothing.

Job 20.12. Though wickedness be ^reet in the mouth of the sinner, (...).
though he hide it under his tongue; though he spare it, and forsake it not,
but keep it still within his mouth ^^t his meat in his bowels is turned, it is
the gall of Aspes within him. And as the Prophet Ier. 2.19. It is an evil
thing and a bitter to forsake the Lord. This Dalilah, this Absalom, so much
affected, beloved and delighted, does provoke God to anger, and draw down
punishment upon us; sin sets Heaven against us, keeps good things from us,
if famine, war, pestilence, or any other judgment seize on the land, we may
thank sin for it, which is the only procuring cause of it. God smote Israel
for their sinful forsaking him, and he smote them that they might return; if
this were well considered, we should not so easily entertain and embrace this
hateful enemy, presenting it self unto us in friendly and delightful
shapes; but we look on sin as a tender mother on the fruit of her womb
smiling upon her, and representing nothing but what is delightful unto it,
whereas looking upon that tender infant through the Prospective of Gods Word,
she might see are bell, a traitor, a serpent full of deadly poison, and which
may prove a Judas, another Absalom, if not renewed or restrained by Grace; thus
sin looked upon through the Word, although in the shape of pleasure, profit,
etc. yet it is that which does cause the Lord to be angry, and in anger to
smite us with bloody strokes of the destroying sword.

God smites, that they might return unto him: his aim and endeavor is to
do Israel, or another people good by smiting them: he would not come to blows
at all, if words would serve the turn, or any warning be taken; but if words
will not, if no warning may serve, then the rod must open the ear, and if it
may make us return, it is howsoever from the wisdom and goodness of God,
that a sinful people are smitten, for hereby he applies an healing hand unto
such as would perish without such means used for their good. This is that must
recover them if they be not incurable, for it is the physic which his own
wisdom has found out, and prescribed to us, in recovering such as we have
under our hands. Pro. 22.15. Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child: but
the rod of correction shall drive it far from him. And therefore, Pro. 23.13.
Correction must not be withheld from the child: for if he be beaten with the
rod he shall not dye, and in the next verse, Thou shall beat him with the rod
and shall deliver his soul from hell. So that to use the rod is to show love
and care for the child's good; But to spare the rod, is to hate the son; And
he that loves him chasteneth him betimes. Pro. 13.24. God does exercise his
Fatherly goodness, even in smiting, that he may cause men to turn to him
smiting them. That of Hab. 1.12. Is worthy Observation: Art thou not from
everlasting, O Lord my God; mine holy one? we shall not die: thou have ordained
them for judgment, and O mighty God thou have established them for correction.
Where he shows, how that although God suffered the enemies of his people to
spoil them, yet he was their God, and kept his Covenant with them; by noting
the manner and end of such a smiting: he shows that the Lord does order and
dispose them by his providence, and that he had a gracious end in such strokes,
not to kill but to correct them; and finally there was a measure in the manner
of his smiting his people by their enemies, as the word Judgment does imply,
they had bounds set, which they could not pass.

Use of this Doctrine may be to inform us concerning the use, and improvement
of this smiting, hereby a nation, and so a particular person may see whether
they have made a right use of the strokes of war, or any other judgment; If
they have caused us to turn to him that smites us, and that we have bin
brought to learn obedience, Heb. 5.8.
(as our Lord did) by the things which he suffered; and that as David says of
himselfs Psalm. 119.67. Before I was afflicted; I went astray: but now have I
kept thy word: thus if the Land can say, and the inhabitants of it, looking
unto the cause of the controversy of God. Hose. 4.1, 2. The cause of the
controversy with Israel, is the want of truth, mercy and the knowledge of God.
And because by swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and comitting
adultery, they break out and blood touches blood. There are many other sins
which move God to be Angry with Israel, some of which we noted in the Context,
these are for instance, now if a man can say before these wars began, I was a
liar, but now have I cast off lying, and speak the truth; I was a cruel man,
but now am full of bowels of mercy, and tender affection, and humanity; I was
ignorant and Atheistical, without the fear of God in my heart, but now have I
gotten some knowledge, and fear of God into my soul, and so of the rest. I
did use profanely to Swear, made no conscience of Lying, and other Sins, but
now I fear an oath, speak truth, and am tender of the life, and just in the
dealing with the state of my neighbor, etc. Surely this man may be said to
have profited by this judgment, which is become a correction unto him for his
amendment; and the like may be said of a nation. But if it may be said of such
a Nation, or person, because they were false, unjust, and ignorant before, God
smote the land, and they are such still: they were profane Swearers before,
and are such still: Liars before, and are Liars still; and so of the rest. It
is sure such a person, or nation has not made the right and true use of such
strokes, which should have caused them to turn to him that smites them.

Use we shall make of this Doctrine is examination and reprehension. Israel did
not turn to him that smote them. It is a heighnous crime laid to their charge,
and a very great offense. The use therefore of this Doctrine by way of
resolution, would be examination of our selves, namely that every one should
consider, and inquire, what do I? what do we? and am not I to be charged
justly with some such crime, and provoking si^? may it not be laid to my
charge, that I turn not to him that smites? I fear it may too truly be laid
to our charge, as it is charged on Israel, That the people turn not to him
that smites them, neither do they seake the Lord of Hosts. But as it is said
of Israel, (elsewhere) it may truly be said of England, ^os. 7.10.
that the pride of Israel testifies to his face, and they do not return unto
the Lord God, nor seek him for all this. That is, notwithstanding all
warnings, menaces, corrections and severe punishment: they are not bettered,
they yield neither to words, nor blower, but hold on their sinful course,
continue obstinate, although grievously afflicted and oppressed, and that their
pride does testify to their face, they are evidently convinced of it. In this
pride they did slight and contemn all warnings, which is an argument of
intolerable pride indeed. They were admonished, reproved and warned, yet did
not regard it. I wish it were not true of us, who have bin for many years
together admonished, and warned: for as Jeremiah speaks of the people of his
time. The Lord has sent unto you all his Servants the Prophets, rising early,
and sending them; but ye have not hearkened, nor inclined your ear to hear.
Jer. 25.4, 5.
The^ he shows what their message was; They said, turn you again now every
one from his evil way, and from the evil of your doings, and dwell in the
land that the Lord has given unto you, and to your fathers for ever and ever,
etc. Then he shows what use they made of this admonition, and message, and
that is in the seventh Verse, Yet ye have not hearkened unto me says the Lord,
Ver. 7.
that ye might provoke me to anger, with the work of your hands, unto your
own hurt. But of this more in the next point.

Thus much of the second Doctrine, I proceed now unto the third and last, which
is this,

Israel smitten for his sins, and not returning and seeking the Lord of
Hosts, moves God to continue his anger, and to stretch forth his smiting hand
still.

This Doctrine I chiefly intended, as that which may be suitable unto the time,
and useful to us all; the worst is, I fear I shall not have time to speak so
fully unto it, I shall therefore do as a traveller that is likely to be
belated, pass over such things as are not of necessity, and post over the next
way unto what I principally intend.

The Doctrine may be propounded in thesi as well as the former, or we may
propose it in hypothesi, it will be useful either way: if you please you may
take it thus:

When God is angry with Israel, or any people in Covenant, and smites them
with the sword of an enemy for their sins, if they do not return and seek
the Lord of Hosts, God will continue his anger and stretch forth his hand
still.

I conceive the Doctrine for the ground to be so clear, and for meaning so
plain, as I need not waste time (which we shall want,) in Explication or
proof.

For the ground of it, briefly let this be observed, that whereas in the former
verse he had avouched God to be angry still, and still to stretch forth his
hand to smite, although they had been grievously smitten before, he shows
this to be the cause and just ground of the continuance of anger and smiting,
namely that they do not turn to him that smites, nor seek, etc. so that
this reason in its relation does hold forth the Doctrine, that when God ^s
angry with Israel or any people in Covenant, and smites them with the sword of
an enemy for their sin, if they return not, neither seek the Lord of
Hosts, he will continue his anger and stretch forth his destroying hand still.

And for the sense, only in general, for I have not time to speak of the
terms in particular; when the Lord brings the sword upon a people to cause
them to repent and return unto him, they continuing impenitent and obstinate,
not repenting of their sin and yielding unto him, the Lord will not cease to
be angry, he will not be appeased, nor cease to punish, but will go on, and
multiply and make his strokes more and heavier then they were before, for so
much is employed, when he says, His hand is stretched f^rth still: (...).
Parata ad graviores poenas infligendas. His hand is ready to inflict more
heavy and grievous punishments.

Now although I might spare further proof of the Doctrine, I shall point you
to a place or two, and have unto the Use. That obstinacy under punishment and
smiting does cause anger to continue, yea, and punishment to increase is
manifest by that, Levit. 26.17, 18. And I will set my face against you, and ye
shall be ^aine before your enemies: they that hate you, shall reign over you,
etc. then ver. 18. And if ye will not yet for all this hearken unto me, then
will I punish you seven times more for your sins. Whore you see such as are
smitten and do not become obedient, shall feel the hand of God seven times
heavier then it was before. In the Prophecy of Amos Chapt. 4. throughout the
latter part of the Chapter from ver. 6. you have a clear proof of this point,
especially ver. 12. where (as some understand that place.) Therefore thus will
I do unto thee, O Israel, that is, I shall bring the punishments before
mentioned, and more heavy and grievous, even ruin and destruction; because
they had been punished with lesser punishments, and would not turn unto the
Lord, therefore this would he do.





Secondly, they add contumacy to their sin, and show themselves to be
obstinate, so as their sin is another sin in the nature of it, although the
same in the matter: for now they refuse to receive correction, and make their
faces harder then a rock, Jer. 5.3.
and refuse to return, as was before noted out of the Prophet.

Thirdly, they show their love unto their sin, and delight in it to be
greater: In operationibus malis ab eodem habitu posteriores sunt pejores
prioribus. Tostat.
for in evil works proceeding from the same habit, the latter are worse then
the former, this iteration does argue delight in offending, which therefore
does deserve greater punishment.

Fourthly, this continuance in sin under smiting is a sign of obstinate
malice and wickedness, for such men being thus punished and do not repent,
do apertum bellum cum Deo agore, wage open war with God.

Psalm. 58.10, 11. God will overcome when he judges, Romans 3.4. If he be a
vessel of mercy, and one that the Lord loves, he will smite him till he make
him smart, if he do not attend his pleasure, and turn from sin with lesser
strokes, the Lord is forced to make them greater, till he bring down their
proud heart, and make them to yield, as Psalm. 107.11, 12. they do rebel
against the words of the Lord and contemn the counsels of the most High,
therefore he brings down their heart with labor, they foll down and there
is none to help. The Lord will break the pride of their power, as he
threatens Levit. 26.19. if the judgment should be removed while the sin is
not left, it were judgment and wrath, not mercy and grace; and so much for the
reasons and fitting the Doctrine for Use, I come now to the Application.

This Doctrine thus cleared, the Uses might be many, and would require much
more time then we have for their full pro^^cution; but we shall contract our
selves and apply the point, first, for Iustruction; secondly, for Conviction;
thirdly, for Humiltation; and finally, for Exhortation and Direction.

And first for Instruction and Information: this Doctrine will serve to inform
us what the true and maine cause is that our hopes are delayed, our
expectations not answered, endeavors disappointed, designs defeated, and
proceedings which might hasten our peace and happy weale-publike so much
retarded; you may find many inferior and lesser causes, and give diverse
politic reasons; but the great and chief cause is in truth, that in the
text, the obstinacy and impenitency of the Nation; this, I say, this is the
cause why our expectations are not answered, why our hopes are blasted, our
long desired peace is deferred, and the smiting hand of God stretched out
still, his anger continued and not turned away. The people turn not unto him
that smites them, neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts. Here it sticks,
and this is the obstruction, the true cause of all our misery, the very reason
why we obtain not our long expected mercies; we hoped for an happy peace, the
paths whereof drop fatness, and that crowns the year with her goodness; we
promised our selves that the day would have come before this time, in which we
might have seen that verified in the Psalm, Mercy and Truth are met together,
^al. 8^.1^.
Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other: Although it must be co^^^ssed
that these expectations did bottom themselves upon Prerogative rather then
upon an ordinary way of God his proceeding with a sinful and unthankful
people, and yet our Watchmen and Seers thought verily they heard that voice of
Christ sounding in their ears, of which the Church makes report in these
words, My beloved spoke and said unto me, Cant. 2.10, 11, 12.
Rise up, my love, my fair one, and come away. For lo the winter is past, the
rain is over and gone. The flowers appear on the earth, the time of the
singing of birds is come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in our land,
etc. they thought they saw all good things flowing in upon us, or at least
coming toward us.

But since that we were put into such hopes, we have had many fears, great and
sore troubles have been brought upon the land, and it may complain as the
Church. Psalm. 71.20. and 44.19.
Thou have sore broken us in the place of dragons, and covered us with the
shadow of death, and still may we complain of the disappointment of our hopes,
as they in the Prophet, We looked for peace, but behold no good came: Jer. 8.15.
and for a time of health, but behold trouble. And as it follows, The harvest
is past, the summer is ended, and we are not saved: Ver. 20.
no although we have fasted, and prayed for peace, and earnestly besought the
God of peace to grant it, and that our distractions might be composed, that our
breaches might be made up, our ruins repaired, Religion settled, that the Lord
would be reconciled to the Nation, and Prince and people one unto another, and
do continue to hold up our hands and lift up our hearts to the throne of
Grace, for these things summer after summer, and year after year, these out
suits have not been (as the prayers of Gods people commonly are) as the bow of
Jonathan which turned not back, and the sword of Saul that returned not empty.
2. Sam. 1.22.
We have not seen these our prayers return as the Dove did into the Arc with
an Olive branch of a gracious answer in these things. I grant (which to deny or
not to acknowledge unto the glory of God, were sinful ingratitude,) they have
had many gracious answers and grants of such things as we could not have been
without, to have preserved us from desolation and ruin. But in the things
before named they have not yet been answered. It has been with us in what we
have obtained, as with Israel in the wilderness, in the blackest night we have
had a pillar of fire, and in the brightest day a pillar of a cloud: Piety and
prosperity, and Religion, and Peace are not yet met to make us happy; now why
is it thus? and what is the reason? where is the obstruction? is not God as
able as ever? his hand as long as ever? surely it is, but consider the
Doctrine, ^^^m. 21.1.
and it will be as the Oracle in the three years famine, year by year, as it
certified David, there was cause of that famine; so this Doctrine will assure
us, there is a cause of this continuance of anger and smiting; and it is as 2 Chronicles. 20.33. as yet the people had not prepared their hearts unto the God of
their fathers: so that the high places were not taken away, they did not
convert and return, they would not reform their ways, as in the Text, they
turn not to him that smites them, either do they seek the Lord of Hosts; it
is not because God is not the God that hears prayers, or that he cannot save,
or not afford us mercy; this is not the cause why the hand of mercy is pulled
in, and the hand of his wrath is stretched out, but because people are
impenitent, and turn not; this, this is the true cause of all our misery, and
why we want many a mercy, we make not use of wrath and smiting; and this is
that which no doubt has made the Lord even to repent of the good he intended
toward us, as you have it, Ier. 18.9, 10. At what instant I shall speak
concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom to build and to plant it; If it
do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice, then will I repent of the
good, wherewith I said I would benefit them. Let this then be the first Use,
and let it open our eyes to see the true cause of our sorrow, and say with the
Church, Lam 5. The crown is fallen from our head; ^^^n. 5.16, 17.
woe unto us that we have sinned. For this our heart is faint, for these things
our eyes are dim. Israel had sinned, and continued in sin, and England has
sinned and does continue in sin under smiting; no marvel, though we pray
against war and punishment, and our miseries still continue, for although God
hears prayers, and is able to help, and loves to be sought and s^ed unto,
yet he seems to hold the Prayers of his best Servants unseasonable, till
sin be removed, Josh. 7.10. Get thee up, wherefore lie thou thus upon thy
face? Israel has sinned, etc.

England was guilty of that heinous crime charged on Israel, which was
impenitency, and obstinacy under santing, they did not turn, this was an heavy
charge and no easy and ordinary chiding of Israel, when it was said of them,
that they were so obstinate as words, rods, nor swords would work upon them;
for what can be spoken or thought more grievous, it is a great offense and
sin if men obey not so soon as they hear a duty propounded, but more
grievous if reproves and chidings will not affect them, but gravissimum
adversus plagas ipsas durescere, vel potius calcitrare, most grievous to wax
harder when they are smitten, or rather as it were to spurn against them, and
by that means further to incense the anger, and increase the indignation of the
Judge, as Calvin observes on the Text, now the continuance of the anger of God
and stretching forth his hand still, did evince the obstinacy and impenitency
of Israel there, and does in like manner prove any other people in Covenant
with him, if having been smitten, the anger of God continue and his smiting
hand be stretched forth still, that they turn not but are impenitent; for as
God his smiting a people is a proof of their sinning, so his continuing to
smite is a proof of their continuance in or not turning from their sin;
punishment follows sin as the shadow follows the body, and as the plaster
the sore; take away the body and the shadow does cease; when the sore is healed
the plaster is no longer used: so when the sin is left, and the land turned to
him that smites them, the rod is laid aside, the hand is drawn in, and no
longer stretched out to strike: when God continues the punishment and shows
himself angry still, it proves Israel, England, or any other people smitten
for their sin, that they might return and seek the Lord of Hosts, not to
have returned and sought him: so that here again England and Israel are so
like as England is the worse; for Israel a people very near and dear to God,
so abused the bounty of God, as he became angry with them and smote them with
the sword of an enemy, yea, raised up civil war among them, Isai. 7.9, 21.
just so is it with England, only with this difference, England has had more
abundance of Grace in the Gospel, which has brought forth more abundance of
sin in their abuse of it.

Secondly, Israel being smitten did not turn and seek the Lord; just so is it
with England at this day being smitten, it does not return.

Thirdly, Israel is charged with obstinacy and impenitencie as an heinous crime
and provoking sin, they refused to return, yea, are so far from it as they
did not seek the Lord of Hosts, and of that this might be justly denied of
England; but it is true (as we noted before) our people seem to have hardened
their faces as a rock, and they refuse to return, Ier. 5.3. and although God
set Watchmen over England, saying, Hearken to the sound of the trumpet: yet
they said, We will not hearken. Jer. 6.17.

Fourthly and ^ually, against Israel thus smitten the Lord did continue his
anger, etc. and just thus is it with England, the anger of the Lord is not
turned, but his hand stretched out still, for of us (as of them) it may be
said, the people turn not, etc. Thus England is not so like Israel in name,
nothing near, as in state of sin and misery.

But some may say, (...).
for all this it is better with England then with Israel; for we do seek the
Lord of Hosts daily, and humble our souls before him in our monthly fasts,
confess our sins, and seek mercy at his hands.

Ieromiah sprakes of himself) so may the Ministers of God say of the
generality of our people with grief, we hearkened and beard, but they spoke
not aright: (...). 6.
no man repented him of his wickedness saying, What have I done? every one
turned to his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle: and who but he
that is wilfully blind does not see the sins which usually show themselves
openly, as pride, drunkenness, not only in men, but in women also, and odious
thing that makes them (as the Son of Syrach notes) that they cover not t^^^ own
shame; Scripture good enough (although Apocrypha) f^^ such a purpose; oaths and
blasphemies as common and feare^^ as ever before our smiting; the like may be
said of other ^^es.

Secondly, but admit it were not so, that our people did not declare their
sin as Sodom, (...).
but hide it rather: What shall we say unto the heavy hand of God upon us? and
of his anger which is toward us still? If his smiting had its end, he would
make an end of smiting; for national turning would turn away national wrath
from the nation: and although sin be a high wall of separation, yet
repentance would break it down. Ier. 18.9. if the nation did truly repent,
the Lord would repent of the evil; if England did turn, God would turn his
judgments into mercy, but while he goes on in anger and punishment, it
proves that we go on in sin: when a wise and tenderhearted Surgeon
continues his corrosives, yea, does still lance, cauterize, and take off now
an arm, and then a leg, you may be sure the child, or patient is yet in an
ill case; if you should see a loving father lay on his son, and bruise, yea
break the very bones of his own child, you could not but think there is some
great fault committed; if that should not always hold, yet this is certain,
our heavenly Father has no passion to transport him, nor does he afflict
willingly, man does sufer for his sin: such an effect as punishment on a
nation does infallibly conclude such a cause as sin: and the Lord does
manifestly reveal his wrath from Hewn against our sins, for he has drawn
two swords at once against the nation; and whereas of the two, that of war is
the worst, yea the heaviest of God his sore punishments, Civil war is of all
wars the worst; In which (as the Latin Orator said) in bellis civilibus
omnia sunt misera, sed nihil miserius, quam ipsa victoria; for as it is said of
K. Ed. the second Tuno vere victus quando tot vicit milites prudentes. In these
wars although every thing be unhappy, yet nothing more miserable then victory
it self, because by victory such a body does overcome it self: These heavy
judgments bring with them a sad report of wrath, as he that writes of strange
Grasshoppers that did depopulate England, which had written upon the one wing in
black letters ira, and upon the other Dei: how truly he reports that, I stand
not to avouch; but these judgments have ira Dei, wrath, and wrath of God, as
it were written upon their wings, and such wrath as will depopulate and ruin
the land, if the wrath be not appeased and these judgments removed; for these
divisions are fatal to this Island, and will be its infallible ruin. England
being as a great and strong body that will not dye, unless it kill it self;
our Lord himself has said, A Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand:
and as the land was darkened when Ephraim was against Manasseh, and Manasseh
against Ephraim, Isai. 7.9, 10: so is our land under this kind of smiting, in
which the Lord does chastise us with Scorpions and not with whips, with
destroying swords and not with chastising rods.

Thirdly, but (for further conviction, and nearer Application of this Use) it
is granted that we do keep days of Humiliation, and we seek the Lord, etc.
And admit Israel did not so much, although there were (no doubt) among them
that did, unto whom (as the most Expositors think) the former cordials were
sent, howsoever this is not enough to take off this charge; for under such
smiting as is now upon us hypocritical Israel might seek unto the Lord for
help, as Psalm. 78.34. where it is said of them, That when he slew them, then
they sought him: and they returned, and enquired early after God And they
remembered that God was their rock: Ver. 35.
and the high God their Redeemer. Never thelesse they did slatter him with
their mouth: Ver. 6.
and they lied unto him with their tongues. For their heart was not right with
him: neither were they steadfast in his Covenant. Ver. 37.
There is much deceit in such constratned turning and seeking God. The
faithful Ministers of God, who have occasion to visit many on their sick beds,
and when the hand of God is heavy upon them, find by sad experience how men
will at such times flatter with their lips, when their heart is not right; they
will sigh, groan, and sometime weep abundantly in the confession of their
sins, and promise amendment; it God will please to spare them; but hardly one
of ten (I had almost said of twenty, it may be, an hundredth) that remains
steadfast in those resolutions, if they do recover: For this turning and
seeking God was not free, but rather forced by the whip and smart: and as
Chrysostom. observed long since, (...). ^^^^s in Matt, 6.17.
He that is made good by constraint, by necessity, he is never good; (as you
shall see) for being loosed from that constraint, he does return again unto
his own disposition: and the reason is manifest, his affection is not changed,
only his action constrainedly intermitted. But the bulk and body of the people
of this land come far short of this, and seem rather to come home to Israel,
who did not so much as seek the Lord of Hosts, etc. they observe not these
days of Humiliation unto this end: at least, this is certain, they turn not
to him that smites them; and the better to clear this, I pray note the manner
of speaking here, it is said they returned not (...) ^sque ad (as one observes
on the Text) they did not return unto him. (...).
i.e. they did not repent, and although they seemed to turn from their trade
and wicked way, yet usque ad Deum non redierunt, i.e. they did not turn
truly, seriously, fully, constantly and closly, or wholly and altogether, they
came not fully home, but did, as it were, stand still in the way, and were but
hypocrites feigning repentance, but persevering in their impiety, as they Psalm.
78.36. and Isa. Cap. 29.13. men may bring shadows of turning, ceremonies of
repentance: and think with them to flatter away the rod from their backs; and
continue still as sinful as ever. Men may, and often times do turn, yet not to
him that smites them. As for instance.

Versum quidem puto, qui dolet de crimine, conversum, qui dolet de animi
vanitate. Vertitur qui jam vult demittere peccatum, convertitur qui jam totus
and omnino vertitur, qui jam non tantum paenas non timore, sed ad bonum domini
contendere fest inat. De vera and falsa paenitent.
First, Some turn, but do not return (as August has noted) a man is said to
be turned, who grieveth for the offense, or crime; but he is returned, who does
bewail the vanity of his mind, he is turned from sin, who will part with it,
he is returned, who is wholly and altogether turned: who does not only, not
fear punishment, but does diligently make have to observe the goodness of
God. Men may seem to turn from all their sins, and yet not turn so far
as unto the Lord.

Secondly, Some turn not unto the Lord, nor yet from all their sins, they
still keep some Delilah, as Herod; they may as Saul slay the lean and keep
the fatt, at least, keep Agag alive, some special sin. Now these turn not
to him that smites, for Conversion must be from all sin.

Thirdly, Some come short of both the former; for they turn not to him that
smites, although it cannot be denied but that such an one does turn, yet it
is either from God, to sin: or from one sin unto another. And these in
their practice contradict what duty calls for in returning, and truly, (as
has bin observed) we have many examples of such turnings, our times are
turning times, hardly any in which there has bin more turning then now, for
men are like weathercocks, turning about with every wind of Doctrine: some
turn Papists, some Arminians, some turn Socinians, some Anabaptists, some
Antinomians, some loose Libertines, some Epicures, some Malignants, and some as
the dog to his vomit, and sow to the wallowing in the mire. Some who seemed to
have left Egypt and forsaken Babylon (as many did with Israel) and to have led
the way in a glorious profession, yet have looked back, and with Demas embraced
this present world.

Fourthly, You may go farther and find men yet worse, and farther off from
turning, for there is a generation of men that in practice and open profession,
in conversation and resolution that neither say nor do, return not to God,
but resolve as they Ier. 44.15, 16. they will not do what the Lord calls
for, but whatsoever thing goes out of their own mouth, etc. they in the very
height of rebellion take up arms of hostile opposition against that unto which
this smiting does summon them, and how fearful the condition of such
incorrigible rebels, is, you may hear from many Scriptures, such as Prove.
29.1.1 Sam. 2.25.

Fifthly and finally, there is yet an higher degree of aversion from this duty
in another rank of men, who are so far from returning themselves, as they
labor by all means of evil couns^^l, corrupt example and encouragement, to
abbet others in their sinful course, and to withold such as they perceive to
be bent or inclinable to return; men so vile as they make it their work to
draw as many as they may from this duty: there are and not a few such masters,
parents, neighbors, kindred, acquaintance, and pretended friends among us, I
would there were none, or but a very few such of our own tribe, Ministers
guilty of an offense, so heinous in any, and most odious in them; unto such I
should commend the consideration of that of the Prophet Jeremiah, I have seen
also in the Prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing, J^^. 23.14.
they commit adultery, and walk in lies: they streng then also the hands of
evil doers, that none does return from his wickedness, etc. If you shall
consider how many there are that will be found faulty, and guilty in the
premises, it will be more then manifest, that whatsoever may be done by a
small remnant, the body of our people turn not unto him that smites them, nor
do they seek the Lord of Hosts.

And so much for the Use of Information, and Conviction; in which I have been
the more large, to make way unto the practical Uses of this Doctrine.

Psalm. 102.
and with the Prophet, to eat ashes like bread, and mingle our drink with
weeping: yea, tears may be our meat day and night, Psalm. 42.3. Joel 1.12.
for Joy seems to be clean withered from the sons of men: if the Causes we
have to mourn were well observed and considered, they might make us blush and
bleed, causing, if it were possible, rivers of tears to trickle down our
eyes. The Causes are many, I shall present you with some few, yet such as if we
have either the grace of Christians, or the nature of men, will move us to
mourning: who can think upon the desolation of Germany, without lamentation?
or if we could not see so far, cast an eye upon Ireland nearer hand, and see
it wallowing in its own blood, and bleeding it self to death, unless help
come from Heaven to prevent it. What child can see his father smiting and
breaking the bones of his brethren, and not weep? But if the desolations of
Germany and miseries of Ireland will not affect us, let us at the least behold
our own calamity with tears, England is smitten with such a stroke as may move
all to mourn over her that bear any true love unto her, she is under one of
God his sore judgments mentioned Ezekiel. 14.21. yea, the very sorest of those
sore judgments, the sword in the hand of men, Ezekiel. 14.21.
an heavier judgment then in the hand of a destroying angel; and as war is
worse then pestilence, so civil war the worst war of all other, in which
with every stroke the Kingdom does hurt and endeavor to destroy it self,
which is a sad spectacle for strangers to behold; if any of us at any time see
a poor man in an Epilepsie or sit of the falling sickness, lie beating
himself against the ground, biting his own tongue, and bestowing all his
strength to raise himself up, that he might with greater violence cast
himself down again, to the wounding and breaking of himself, beating the
breath out of his body, as it may fall out: Such a man may not only bruise his
flesh, or break his bones, but destroy himself: could we in this case do
less then lament this man's condition, although a mere stranger? or if we
should see any man so bereaved of sense, or desperately bent by delyrancy, or
any other cause, as he should wound, stabbe, and by all means endeavor to
destroy himself, one hand wounding the other, or both of them stabbing him in
his own bowels, and at last (if not hindered) in the head, or very heart: who
unless without all bowels, but must needs be affected much with the condition
of such a man; our Kingdom is at this time in the condition of a man in an
Epilepsie, and does beat, bruise, and by all the strength it has endeavor to
undo and destroy it self; it is so delyrant by the just judgment of God, as
it does study its own ruin, one hand wounding the other, and both stabbing
it in the bowels, and at the very heart, unless the Lord shall graciously
prevent it. Now if there be cause of sorrow to see one man, and a stranger in
such a condition: with what mourning should we look on such a flourishing
Kingdom in such a condition? who can think of so many men loosing their
li^es, and not knowing what becomes of their immortal souls (many of them
as it is to be feared being unfit to dye) but must needs mourn? Yet this is
not all the cause of Humiliation and mourning, if we look up higher from earth
to Heaven, from men to God, we shall see further and greater cause of mourning,
and that is, that Heaven lowreth upon us, and the God of Heaven is angry with
us, his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still: yea, by
looking into the cause of this continued anger in a God so full of pity,
Ez^k. 14.
which is the grievous sins of the land, it has grievously sinned, otherwise
he that has so abounded in goodness toward it, had never sent so sore a
punishment upon it. God has showed his love toward England in former time
more then toward any Nation, putting it as it were in his bosom, and yet he is
now wrath with it, and his hand stretched forth still to strike, as if he meant
to destroy it, and all for the transgressions of it, Do ye thus require the
Lord, O foolish people, ^^ut. 32.6.
and unwise? Is not he thy Father that has bought thee? Has he not made thee,
and established thee?

Neither are these all the causes we have of Humillation and mourning; there is
this also, That after our provocation of God, and under his displeasure and
these destroying strokes, the people turn not to him that smites, etc. that
which the Prophet here complains of, although the Lord have thus smitten us,
and does continue to declare himself greatly displeased with us; yet we
continue in sin; and provoke him to provide heavier strokes for us: the day
of battle and time of affliction is the furnace that shows what metal we
are, whether gold or dross, and being dross we may fear to be utterly
forsaken, Ier. 6.

Finally, there is yet another cause, and in some respect greater then the
former, and this is a cause why we should mourn, because the Kingdom does not
mourn, we have cause of deep Humiliation, for that the Humiliations of the
Kingdom are so slight and shallow in the very days destinated to humiliation
and mourning; when we fast, it is rarely seen or heard that we either weep,
or sigh, if we mourn, it is with dry eyes, and it is to be feared with hard
hearts, and herein our times seem more hard then any. Israel and this people
of the Jews had many grievous sins (as you have heard) in which we are as
bad as they; but in this we seem to be much worse, if you look throughout the
Scripture, and in all ages of that Church, you shall perceive them to be of a
softer temper; when the Lord sent an angel to tell them that he would not drive
out the inhabitants out of the land, Judges 2.4. the people hearing this lift
up their voice and wept: when the Ministers of God told our people some years
past of this Judgment we now suffer, some of our people have been ready to
laugh, and very many of them heard it as a fable, or that which needed not be
feared, or at all regarded. They when they heard of Judgment coming on the
land, or being in danger could mourn, as 2 Samuel 15.23. David and his men being
in danger, the story says that all the country wept with a loud voice, and
Josiah hearing what was threatened, namely that they should become a desolation,
etc. his heart was tender, and he humbled himself before the Lord and wept, 2
Kin. 22.19. We, when we see these judgments that make way for desolation on
others, and our selves, yet we shed no tears. When the plague broke in upon
the Congregation, Numb. 25.6. it is said the people were weeping, but now both
pestilence and sword are on the land, and rage in all quarters of it, yet where
be the tears of the Congregation. Esau could weep for the loss of the
birthright, but in our times men mourn not for the loss of birthright, or
blessing, no not for the provocation of wrath and judgment; yea, such among us
as can take on for some outward loss or hurt, and weep at the unkindnesse of
a friend, yet shed no tears in all these miseries. James 4.9.
That exhortation of Saint James is very seasonable, Be afflicted, and mourn,
and weep, let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to heaviness:
in the fifth Chapt. of that Epistle, he exhorts rich men to weep and howl for
the miseries that shall come upon them; Chap. 5.1.
miseries are come upon us, and we are come to humble our selves and mourn
before the Lord for them, and our sins the causes of these calamities It is
reported of the Jews, not on their days of mourning, but of greatest
rejoicing, in their marriage feasts, that they break a glass with wine in
remembrance of Jerusalem, and say, when they throw it down, thus was Jerusalem
broken, and then what they spill in wine they fill with tears; if they in the
times of their feasting weep in remembrance of Jerusalem destroyed so long
before, what should we do, in the days of our solemn fasts for England now a
breaking? and ready to be ruined with smiting? especially seeing we stand here
before the Lord to mourn for our sins, and the sins of the land, which are the
cause of these our stripes? and truly if they when they heard that God would
not drive out the inhabitants of the land, but leave them as thorns in their
sides, did lift up their voice and wept, Judge. 2.3.5.
so as the place was thought worthy to be named Bochim weepers: now that God is
about to destroy and drive out the inhabitants of the land, should not we so
weep, as the place of our tears may be made a Bochim? sure I am, we may
weeps much, cry long and loud before the cry of our prayers should outcry our
crying sins. And as this duty belongs to us all in general, so especially
unto such as are over the rest, whether of Judah, Joel 1.14. and Chap. 2.16, 17.
the Rulers and teachers of the people, who at such times as these are, ought
to be chief in this duty, and are to mourn, not only for their own sins,
but (as it were) to bear the iniquity of the kingdom, which no doubt would be
very acceptable in them, and in time give them occasion with David to say, I
thank the o Lord that thou have heard the voice of my weeping. And for the
Ministers above all others, they seeing how hardly the people are brought
either to turn from, or mourn for their sins, after these warnings and
smitings, have reason to resolve with Jeremiah, If ye will not hear it, my
soul shall weep in secret places for your pride, Jer. 13.17.
etc. Could they with the same Prophet weep day and night for the sin and slain
of his people (and as the Prophet Ezekiel is commanded to sigh bitterly, Jer.
9.1.
and unto the breaking of his loins) it could not be altogether without cause,
considering the sinful, and sad and miserable condition of the kingdoms, and
yet alas the people are as far from mourning as they are from returning to
him that smote them. It is true of many among us which Elihu observes, If they
obey not they shall perish by the sword, Job 36.12, 1^*
and they shall dye without knowledge. Yet the Hypocrites in heart heap up
wrath, they cry not when he binds them. Such as do sometimes make fair
shows, being still inwardly impure and corrupt, do not humble themselves under
the correcting hand of God nor repenting of their sin, do increase and
incense the wrath of God more against them, so far are they from being
bettered by affliction, as by their obstinacy they do yet more provoke the
anger of God against them. They cry not to God so as they might obtain pardon,
grace and help, but content themselves with some formalities and outward
shows. Austin makes mention of a sort of foolish women, which did use to
dress themselves fine, and went to the Capitol and sat there all day long,
and thought Jupiter was in love with them; (there are many among us that I
fear) come hardly so far as unto the dress and outward formality of this
duty, in the days of our humiliation, and yet think God is well pleased with
their service, who yet keep themselves close unto their sins.

if the anger of the Lord be not turned away etc. because the people turn not
to him that smites them; It will serve for Exhortation and Direction, let this
move us (as ever we desire the wrath of an angry God should be appeased, the
bloody streakes of the destroying sword should be stayed, and the deadly wounds
of a bleeding Kingdom should be cured,) to turn to him that smites us, and
set our selves to seek the Lord of Hosts. This is the result of all, and the
principal use of Text and Doctrine; impenitency under wrath and smiting
causes their continuance, that they may sease, let us cease to sin and to
go on in sin; the Physician that he may recover his patient of a dangerous
distemper, does first find out and then endeavor to remove the cause, which is
the direct way (according to the rule of his art) unto the recovery of his
patient. Our state is in a sick and dangerous, and deadly distemper, and this
Doctrine shows the causes; all that wish well unto it, that desire to do any
thing for the recovery of it, must show themselves Physicians of value, by
removing the causes, and so procuring the health and happiness of it. You
understand why the anger of God is not turned away, why his hand is stretched
out still. Oh therefore that we might all remove the cause, to the utmost of
our ability, that if it be possible, the effect may cease. This is the way,
that God himself does prescribe in many places. (...). 1.2, 3, 4.
I will name but one, and it is that in the Prophet Zechariah; The Lord has
bin sore displeased with your fathers. Therefore say unto them, thus says the
Lord of Hosts, turn ye unto me says the Lord of Hosts, And I will turn
unto you, says the Lord of Hosts. Be ye not as your fathers, unto whom the
former Prophets cried saying; thus says, the Lord of Hosts, turn ye now from
your evil ways, and from your evil doings: but they did not hear, nor
hearken unto me says the Lord.

Now because this is a duty of great importance, and that wherein the aims of
all that are well affected to church and state, must meet, and that whereunto
their endeavors should tend, I shall propose a few considerations to press
this Use, generally upon all, and then more particularly recommend it unto some
whom it does more specially concern. I have not tune to enlarge my self, and
to urge both the branches of the Use, the chief is turning to him that
smites, the other is included in it.

There are a multitude of motives which might be brought to press the duty
upon our people, and to move our nation and us all to turn. I name only these.

First the authority and power of him, unto whom you are exhorted to turn, or
of him by whom you are summoned, and that is the Lord of Hosts: you are called
upon to repent and convert, not by man, but by God: not such a God as you can
either shun or resist; for he is the Lord of Hosts, styled the Lord of Hosts
in the Text, and in that place of Zachariah, which was mentioned before, he is
thrice in one verse, called the Lord of Hosts: which fearful title might
strike terror into such as should be found guilty of disobedience in this
duty, and still refuse to return.

Secondly, There is a great deal of equity in this duty, for by sin we have
turned from him, which is the cause of his anger, and all our misery, Isa. 31.6.
it is therefore most equal that we return unto him, as our Prophet does urge
this duty, in these words, turn ye unto him from whom the children of Israel
have deeply revolted, and the equity of this duty, and the iniquity of them
that yield not unto it, is set forth by the Lord hin self in Jeremiah, Jer.
8.4.
Moreover, thou shall say unto them, thus says the Lord, shall they fall, and
not arise? shall he turn away, and not return? intimating how unreasonable
and inequitable it is for men to fall by sin, and when they have so done to
refuse to rise and return by repentance again unto him from whom they fell.

Thirdly, Another motive is drawn from the terminus a quo, and ad quem, from
what and unto whom we are to turn, which will further open and urge the former
motive. This conversion is in a word, from darkness to light, from sin to
grace, Acts 16.19.
from evil to good, from satan unto God. It is from the way of sin, which
is evil, unto the way of righteousness, which is good, from that path which
is foul to that which is clean, from a course which is full of fear, and
danger, and loss unto that which is comfortable, safe, and exceeding
advantageous to all that walk in it, as you may see Pro. 4.11, 18. and Cap.
3.17, 22. and 11.3. Psalm. 117.1.

So that as Bern. has it; Dico omnes Deumignorare qui nolunt ad eum converti.
I say all such are ignorant of God, that will not turn unto him; they do not
know him to be that chief good by whom they may be made happy, and therefore
they do turn aside unto vain things, that cannot profit.

Fourthly, An other Motive may be the hope we have of turning away the strokes
from the Land, and of anger from our selves, and that God will be reconciled
unto us; and we turning to him by repentance, he will turn to us in mercy,
pardon and grace, that which you have set forth in many places, and that before
quoted Zech. 1.3. Turn ye unto me, says the Lord of Hosts, and I will turn
unto you, says the Lord of Hosts. This is sure, that the soul which does
truly turn, shall find God reconciled to him. Never did any make use of this
counsel and perish, and the Lord will repent him of the evil, If men will
hearken and turn, every man from his evil way. Ier. 26.3. Jonah 3. ult.

Fifthly, For our farther encouragement, the experience we have had of the
mercy of God well considered, might be a very strong Motive to this duty. For
as it was said of Israel, Psalm, 148.14.
that they were a people near unto him; so may it be said of us, that we have
bin a people near unto him, and he has showed himself nigh to us in all that
we call upon him for, Deuteronomy. 4.7.

Sixthly, In the last place there is a Motive drawn from the necessity of our
repentance, and conversion unto God. This Motive lies in the Text and Context,
the anger of God is continued, his hand is still stretched forth; yea, the Lord
will strike yet heavier strokes, and as it follows in the next verse unto
the Text; Therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel, head and tail, branch
and rush, in one day. Seeing they will not return, he will suddenly destroy
them, the mighty and the mean, the honorable and the base, ruin and
destruction shall sease upon them, if the people turn not; the anger of God
shall not turn away, no his wrath will be further increased, his strokes will
be heavier then they have bin; and that black and bloody cloud which hangs
over our heads, will break and fall upon us, if we remain impenitent. In
vain shall we promise our selves pe^ce, and look for mercy, if we cast off
the care of our duty, although we seek the Lord of Hosts. Fast, Pray and
think nothing too much, that we hazard and lay out and bestow, if we turn
not, it will do nothing for our security from utter ruin. That which is noted
of Caesar, when one that was up in arms against him, yet sent him a crown, at
the very same time, but Caesar sent back his Crown, with this message; Let him
return first unto his obedience, and then the Crown might be accepted. If we
use other means, any means to obtain favor with God, and keep our selves
still to our sins; and so continue in rebellion, and refuse to do his
commands, had we Crowns to dedicate to his honor, all were but vain, unless
we return first to our obedience. Let us therefore consider the authority of
God; who requires we should return unto him: the equity of this duty, the good
that may be expected in the way of mercy, if these will not prevail with us,
yet let the consideration of the anger of the Lord of Hosts: the sword in his
hand which is stretched forth to strike with strokes of death, and ruin. Let
this make us to resolve even all of us to return and seek the Lord of Hosts.
God judges the righteous, and is angry with the wicked every day. If he turn
not he will whet his sword: he has bent his bow and made it ready; he has
also prepared for himself the Instruments of death, etc. as the Psalmist has
it, Psalm 7.12, 13. So that (as Austin observes) quia illi nolunt converti in
melius, Deum convertunt in pejus, in as much as they will not turn better,
they turn God upon that which is worse; for Levit. 26.18. If you will not yet
for all this hearken; then will I punish you seven times more for your sins.
To conclude, consider that patheticall passage of the Prophet, Ezekiel. 33.11. As
I live, says the Lord I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that
the wicked turn from his way, and live: Turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye
dye, O house of Israel?

Now before I leave this branch of the Use, it will be necessary to add a few
things for direction unto this duty, to help them that are willing to put it
in practice, but ignorant. I shall therefore briefly note unto you, how we must
turn to him that smites in these four ensuing particulars.

Corporli Conversio si sola fuerit, nulla erit.
First, sincerely, not formally and alone in the outward man; which let it make
never so great a show, yet it comes to nothing, therefore Joel 2.12, 13. it
must be even unto God with all the heart etc.

Secondly, entirely, we must turn from sin, not some, but all; not from sin
alone, but unto God: and truth must aspire unto Perfection.

Thirdly, we must turn speedily; God calling for a duty he looks that we
should set about it presently; and now that the destroying sword is in his
hand, every man may perceive that delays are dangerous: Archimedes drew lines
so long in the dust till his City was taken, and the soldiers brake in upon
him and slew him. Many that have thoughts of repentance and returning to God
loose their precious souls by their sinful delays.

Fourthly, I may add to the former in the last place, turning sincerely,
entirely, and speedily; we may return hopefully, not doubting of mercy which
is promised in Christ to all that truly turn to God at what time soever it is,
Lam. 3.40. Psalm. 119.59. A regione nostra superbiendo, inobediendo, visibilia
sequl. do, cibum vetitum gull ando discessimus: 01 sed ad eum necesse est
flendo, visibilia contemnendo atque appetitum carnis refraenando redeamus.
see that Deuteronomy. 4.29, 30.

And to help your selves in such a purpose of turning, let a right course be
taken: for this end every man must search and try his ways, and so turn; when
a man has seen how he has turned from God to sin, he must the contrary way
return from sin to God; thus David thought on his ways, and turned his feet
unto Gods testimonies; as we go from God by pride, disobedience, following
after things which are seen, and tasting the forbidden fruit, etc. so we must
turn to him weeping, obeying, contemning things visible, and bridling the
desire of the flesh, etc. which is to return the contrary way to that in which
we have gone in the course of sin: because we departed with joy, we must return
with lamentation.

1. And for further help, attendance must be given upon the Word, (...) 7.
which (as the Prophet David says) does convert the soul.

2. A faithful and powerful Ministry, in which the voice of the Lord may be
heard, does work such as have fallen from God to a willingness again to
return, as Ier. 3.22. Return ye backesliding children, and I will heal your
backeslidings (says the voice of God in his Word) and then they answer,
Behold, we come unto thee, for ^^ou art the Lord our God.

3. In the third place, another help is, adjoining our selves unto such as do
return; and forsaking the company of those that go still on in their
trespasses. Psalm. 119.63, 79. with ver. 115. David is for their company that
fear God; and that he may keep the Commandments of his God, he does abandon
the society of evil doers.

(...) inter ^^n pro^^l^te a^t^e muta^ (...) lo^^^l co^gruum. (...) tud^ etia^
corporaliter eve^lt. ubi qui qui^ l^ece. ^^i. d^^e^vi^i^, (...) H^^^^^l. (...)
b^n^
4. Finally, (if need be) the change of place, which sometimes is of necessity,
that a man may be rid of evil company, and that he may be freed from such
temptations as will still keep him in some one or other evil way.

5. Lastly, because Conversion and Repentance are the work and gift of God,
unto him we must seek by Prayer and Supplication through Christ, that he would
please to work that in us which he requires of us: Ier. 31.18. Ephraim there
does thus pray to God, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, thou art the Lord
my God. Thus let every one under this chastisement, being as a bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke, cry to God, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned,
etc. and all of us as the Church, Lam. 5.21. Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord,
and we shall be turned. And when we pray we must put forth our endeavors, V
tia ^^le co^vers^ (...) quisi (...) cum homi^^ habent, quando autem.
ex^elluntur a^rior^ virtute censurgu^t. Is^d.
and arm our selves against opposition, and improve such means as serve unto
this end. Some do commend unto men converting this direction, first, to take
off themselves from the action of sin, and then to deal with the appetite and
cogitation; howsoever they must look for strong opposition; for vices before
Conversion are, as it were, at peace with a man, but being opposed and
expelled, they rise up with more strength and violence.

Now in the last place, this Doctrine may be applied for Exhortation and
special direction to our Parliament Worthies, upon whom it lays a double
charge, particularly for themselves, and generally for the whole Kingdom. If
impenitencie and continuance in sin cause the continuance of anger, and does
pull down more and heavier strokes upon our Nation, then it must be their
endeavor to remove this cause of anger, that the anger may be diverted, and
this heavy judgment removed from the Kingdom; Isai. 58.12.
this is the way for them to become repairers of the breach, and restorers of
paths to dwell in; for if men will return, anger will cease, and the quarrel
would soon be at an end; but if the cause of wrath still continue, we cannot
expect that the destroying hand should be drawn in, but that it should be
stretched out still. Upon you therefore honorable and beloved this Use falls
with a double weight, the Doctrine requires for the removing of the strokes
with which the land is smitten, and preventing of heavier ready to fall upon
it, that you see that none of your own sins under smiting; that your not
turning from them, do not cause the anger of God to continue, and that (being
Physicians of the State, such as are in places of power) you endeavor by all
possible means to cause the people to turn to him that smites them; that
removing the cause wheresoever you find it, this miserable effect may cease;
turning your selves from whatsoever may be found to be a part of the cause, and
endeavoring, as much as in you lies, to cause the whole Kingdom to turn
from their sins also, that anger may be appeased, and smiting stayed and
cease.

It is not to be doubted, it has been your desire and care; and is your
endeavor to make others to return, you have used means to that end, and have
therefore sent Ministers into many places, where they were wanting, to call
upon men to return; and to remove such as have been idle, unfaithful, and
scandalous; And yet his anger is not turned away, etc. the people for all this
do not turn to him that smites them. I should humbly present unto your wise
considerations, whether something further be not to be done to cause the people
to return. Solomon, Prove. 29.19. tells you that a servant will not be
corrected with words. Men of a servile disposition will not be amended by so
easy means as bare instructions, be they never so wholesome and good: They
will not answer the expectation of such as shall bestow their pains upon them.
And the Holy Ghost, Jude ver. 22, 23. shows, that men must be variously dealt
with according to their various disposition. and of some (says he) have
compassion, making a difference. And others save with fear, pulling them out
of the fire. Compassion is to be used toward some, and severity toward
others, that (if it be possible) they may be pulled out of the fire; men must
be dealt with for the saving of their souls, as Chirurgions are wont to deal
with their Patients for the saving their lives, if lenitives, and more gentle
means will not serve; corrosives, cauterizings, and the like must be used. God
himself does take the rod into his hand, when the Word is contemned; and if
lighter strokes will not serve, he has heavier* blows for those that be
impenitent. That the people may be brought to return, instructions and
corrections must be used; Magistrate and Minister, the Word and Sword in m^^ be
joined; there are many grievous sins among us, which have provoked the wrath
of God against the Land; and from which the people should turn, that his anger
may be turned a way, and his destroying hand taken off from the Nation; many
that have been complained off ^y others, that I have no time nor intention to
name, I shall only represent some few, which are more common and obvious, and
withal more impudent and scandalous, humbly entreating that some course, which
seems best to your wisdoms, may be used to suppress them, and to cause the
people, if it be possible, to turn from them: as,

First, the great neglect of the duty of these days of Humiliation, which many
(especially in the Country) do not only slight and dis-regard, but abuse and
profane, spending the day, or a great part of it in Alehouses and Tavernes, or
about their worldly employment, as if it were indifferent to come or not to
come to the public Assemblies, ^o seek or to provoke the Lord of Hosts.

Secondly, the horrible profanation of the glorious, and dreadful Name of God,
by execrations, blasphemies, and bloody oaths, a sin that does exc^edingly
abound, and under which the land does grievously mourn.

Thirdly, The sottish, and swinish sin of drunkenness, by which men and
women make themselves like beasts rather then Christians, and yet in these
times of smiting it does so abound, as hardly can men walk the streets, but to
their grief they shall see of both sexes, reele and vomit in a brutish manner
without control.

Fourthly, the hateful sin of pride, Isai. 3.16, 17, 18, etc.
especially of women, against whom our Prophet has spent a good part of a
Chapter; and elegantly set forth the levitie and vanity of the women of his
time, and withal how this sin did provoke God, and pull down such a
judgment as this land is under; for he does threaten war, and declare that
these men should fall by the sword, and their mighty men in the war, ver. 25.
yet some among us, (as if they durst out-dare Heaven it self) do come into
the presence of an angry God in the days of Humiliation with naked breasts and
such vain attire as do openly discover that lightness and wantonness which
is shameful and unsufferable.

Fifthly, there are many other sins, such as Sabbath-breaking, oppression,
etc. of which I thought to have spoke something, if the time would have given
leave; but I shall only name one thing more, which might much further this
work, and that is, that some course may be taken for the purging of the
Magistracy, that as scandalous Ministers so ill Justices and scandalous
Magistrates may be removed, and those that be zealous and pious put in their
places: for there will be little hope (if sin be set up to correct vice, and
they that turn from God themselves, shall stand in the places of those that
should cause others to turn) that the work of Reformation will ever go
forward, the former or other sins be suppressed, and the land purged of them.
A faithful Magistracy, and a pa^nefull Ministry may do much more together,
then either of them can do apart. I beseech you, that some course may be taken,
such as to your wisdoms may seem best, to put life into Laws and Ordinances,
that they may not be suffered to sleep, and wicked men to sin: but that they
may be constrained to break off these sins which do so highly provoke God,
and so much hinder our Peace. It is noted of King Josiah, that having made a
Covenant to walk before the Lord, 2 Chro. 34.31. ^.
and to keep his Commandments, etc. he caused all that were present or were
found in Jerusalem and Benjamine to stand to it, i. e. (as some read and
expound it) he constrained them by Royal Power and Authority etc. this is the
way to remove the cause of our misery, and to save your selves and the Nation,
at least, to discharge your own duty, to perform a most acceptable service to
your God, and therefore in the words of David unto Solomon (when he had showed
his care and preparation for the building the house of the Lord, and the work
that was before him) let me make bold to exhort you to this duty, and sue to
God for success, Arise therefore, ^ Ch^o. 22.16.
and be doing, and the Lord be with you.

FINIS.

