Popular Errors. OR THE Errors of the People IN PHYSIC, First written in
Latin by the learned Physician JAMES PRIMROSE Doctor in Physic.

Divided into four Books. viz. 1. The first treating concerning Physicians.
2. The second of the Errors about some diseases, and the knowledge of them. 3.
The third of the Errors about the diet, as well of the sound as of the sick.
4. The fourth of the Errors of the people about the use of remedies.


Profitable and necessary to be read of all.

To which is added by the same Author his verdict concerning the Antimoniall
Cup.

Translated into English by ROBERT WITTY Doctor in Physic.

LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson for Nicholas Bourne, at the South-entrance of the
Royal Exchange. 1651.

The Explication of the Frontispiece.
Lo here a woman comes in charity
To see the sick, and brings her remedy.
You Have got some grievous cold, alas! (quoth she)
It lies sore in your bones, no part is free.
His pulse is weak, his vrine's colored high,
His nose is sharp, his nostrills wide, he will die.
They talk of Rubarb, Seen, and Agaricke,
Of Cassia, Tamarinds, and many a trick,
Tush, give the Doctors leave to talk, I Have brought
A pepper posset, nothing can be bought
Like this in the 'Pothecaries shop; alone
It cures the Fever, Strangury, and Stone;
If not there is danger, yet before all fail,
I Will have a Cawdle for you, or Mace-ale:
And I Will prepare my Antimoniall Cup
To cure your Malady, one little suppe
Will do more good, and is of more desert
Then all Hippocrates, or Galens Art.
But lo an Angel gently puts her back,
Lest such erroneous course the sick do wrack,
Leads the Physician, and guides his hand,
Approves his Art, and what he does must stand.
It Is Art that God allows, by him it is blessed
To cure diseases, leave then all the rest.
POPULAR ERRORS OF THE Errors of the people in matter of Physic.
London Printed, by W. Willson for Nicolas Bourne at the South Entrance of the
Royal Exchange 1651

T. Cross sculpsit


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The Lady FRANCES STRICKLAND, Eldest Daughter to THOMAS
late Earl of Winchilsey, and wife to Sir William Strickland, one of the
Honorable Members of the Parliament of ENGLAND.
Madame,
IT is as much beyond the height of my ambition to requite, as the extent of my
abilities to deserve, that favorable eye of respect, your Honor has been
pleased to cast upon me, ever since I was first known to you. A thankful
acknowledgement whereof (I know) is all your Honor does expect, or I can pay.
And now it fares with me, as with some Tradesmen that prove banquerupt, who
when they have run so far in debt, that they needs must break, their grand
design is to get still further into debt, not caring then how much they owe,
since they can never pay. If therefore your Honor will be pleased to add
unto the former score of my engagements, the acceptance of this tender of my
service in this Translation, and call it yours, you much oblige me in bond,
which I shall never seek to cancel. I know its first admission into your
Honors closet, and welcome there, will so credit it, that it will find the
freer access to all my Countries Ladies and Gentlewomen, for whose sakes
especially I undertook this task. I thought it pity that so learned,
juditious and useful a book, for the information of their judgments, and
amendment of their Errors, should pass without their cognizance. In trivial
matters an Error is less dangerous; But in Physic, being a noble Science,
conversant about such a noble subject as the body of man, Errors are more
palpable, especially when they are grown vulgar and popular, tending to the
general harm of the Microcosme. I here present your Honor with a literal
interpretation of such of them, as have been already observed by my learned
Author, wherein he has so elegantly discussed them, that he has deservedly
gained much credit among the Learned, although indeed the book does more
concern the vulgar and unlearned, whose Errors it does detect. Pardon, I pray
my boldness, and accept this offering, from

Madame Your Honors most humble servant Witty.
November. 30th 1650.
The Translator to the Reader.
Courteous Reader;
IT is above eleven years since this Translation was finished, and in the
Printers hand; the Distractions of the times having hindered the printing, and
withheld from thee the benefit I intended. My desire of profiting those that
cannot understand the Latin, first prompted me to this Work; as for others, I
refer them to the Original. But my especial aim was to do an acceptable
service for my countries Gentlewomen, to whom this subject will be exceeding
useful and delectable; and therefore I have endeavored to be as plain as the
Nature thereof, and my task would permit. I do here present thee with a
Catalogue of the gross, yet common Errors of the people in Physic, as they
did occur to my Author in his practice, and are obvious to all men, the
which he has excellently confuted with solid and convincing arguments grounded
on sound reason and authority. I need not commend his Labors herein (mine
own I cannot) let the Work speak for it self: I am confident thy self after
perusal wilt save me the labor. I have only inserted herewith the judgment of
Lacutus one of the most famous writers of our age, as I find it printed before
an Impression of the Latin in Holland, which I have faithfully translated into
English, omitting the rehearsal of the high esteem and welcome it has found
among the Learned throughout Europe; which I have endeavored to use as a
forcible argument with my much honored and intimate friend my Author, to
increase this volume with a confutation of some additionall Errors which he
is also resolved upon, as also that he would make public his other labors
upon the whole body of Physic, with several other pieces relating thereunto,
which I have had the happiness to see, wherein (if I mistake not) he comes not
short of our best modern writers. One thing here I must not omit to inform
thee of, to wit, that most of the Errors that are rife among the people at
this day, are upheld by the ignorant runnagate Quacksalvers and Empyricks with
which this Nation abounds, who having not patience to keep to their honest
Trades at home, do wander abroad with foolish Receipts, claiming Kindred, or
some other relation to some eminent Physician, hereby cheating the
over-credulous people both of their Money and Health. It is admirable to
consider with what impudence most of these fellows claim kindred to Dr.
Butler, whom for honors sake I mention, who lived in Cambridge, and dyed about
35 years ago, a very able and learned Physician as was in his time. Many also
claim relation to him, as having served him, and learned much from him: and
this is enough (forsooth) to beget them credit among the vulgar, and make them
Doctors, which title they willingly embrace. But that I may undeceive the
people, I shall here insert what I have from Mr. Crane a Gentleman of very good
credit and repute in Cambridge yet living, who was his Apothecary; Dr. Butler
was borne at Ipswich, had two Brothers, the one a Dr. in Physic, the other a
Goldsmith, who dyed both without Issue; He had three sisters, who all dyed
before him without Issue; so as that relation of Uncle and Nephew is false. As
for men he never kept any, our Apprentices serving for that business; nor any
maid but a fool. -- And yet notwithstanding, there are so many men (yea I
have met with some women too) that pretend to have served him, that he had need
had a Noblemans estate to have maintained them all. Many of them do by
Ouroscopie or Chiromancie undertake to tell Fortunes. But no more of these.
There is added hereunto by my Author in some few places something that was not
in the Latin Copy for thy better understanding, and two errors concerning the
choice of Nurses, as also his verdict concerning the Antimoniall Cup. If my
labors herein he advantageous to thee, I have my desire: Accept them kindly,
as I bestow them willingly, and thou shall encourage me to do thee any further
service to my power.

From my house at Hull, December. 2. 1650. R. W.

Ad charissimum suum JACOBUM PRIMIROSIUM Medicinae Doctorem, in librum ejus de
vulgi Erroribus.
Errores vulgi dum corrigis, ipse peritum
Paeoniae populo porrigis artis opus:
Ast ita si speras Errores vincere vulgi,
Iste opere in toto hoc unicus Error erit.
Rob. Leedes
Armiger.
Praeclaro Medicinae Doctori JACOBO PRIMIROSIO tetrastichon Graeco-Latinum.
(...)
(...)
Primula-veris habet virtutes art medendi:
Quantillo Hoc virtus quantaque Flore patet.
Anth. Stephanson
in Artibus Mag.
Praecharo suo, and intime habito ROBERTO WITTY, Medicinae Doctori, vulgi
Errorum Interpreti vero dodecastichon.
ERrantis morbi medicis symptomata constant,
Quo trahitur vulgi corpus ubique rudis:
Doctor adest, praescribit, habet sua pagina salvam
Docta dofin, peccans, qua vacuetur onus.
Hanc legit Interpres solers, paret art, dolenti
Exhibet, ex imis hauriat aeger eam.
Si faciat, morbos curet dosis unica plures,
Quam vel Galenus, Cous and Hippocrates.
Sin minus errorum nondum curatio fiet,
Doctor sit patiens, Plebs erit and Medicus.
Ergo
Est Error morbus, Rosa Doctor, Vulgus and aeger,
Ingenium Interpres, sit medicina liber.
Anth. Stephanson.

To his kind friend Dr. WITTY, upon his Translation of the Popular Errors.
HE that at first so quaintly did thee pen,
Spoke to the Learned, not to Vulgar men:
Now in their proper Idiome they may see
The Pop'lar Errors which in Physic be
So You Are the peoples guide, and foe to all
Who do seduce by the Art Empyricall:
For now the strange delusions of that sect
In English to all eyes thou do detect.
Ergo Abite Turba indoctorum,
Ergo Jamque pudeat vos Errorum.
Yours assuredly, Rich. Roper, Mr. of Arts.

Amicissimo suo Doctori WITTY de sua Vulgi Errorum Interpretatione.
BEllua multorum capitum leve Vulgus habetur,
Qui sanum his cerebrum redderet, ipse sapit.
Hic unum, ille aliud, neutrum horum tertius addit
Utile, sed Medicus quis moderator erit?
En Rosa: cujus odor cerebro bonus atque saluber:
Nec suavem vulgi est error amare Rosam.
Pande Rosam, and vulgi hanc indoctis naribus aptans,
Has referas lauds, Ingeniosus eris.
Rich. Rakes
in Art. Mag.
Dignissimo suo amico Doctori WITTY, de Translatione Vulgi Errorum.
NEmpe sic innumero succrescuntagmine libri,
Saepia vix toto ut j^m natet una mari.
Fortius assidui surgunt a vulnere praeli:
Quoque magis premitur, auctior Hydra redit.
Heu quibus Anticyris, quibus est sanabilis herbis
Improba scribendi pestis, avarus amor.
India sola tenet tanti medicamina morbi,
Dicitur and nostris ingemuisse malis.
Utile Tabacci dedit illa miserta venenum,
Acci veratro quod meliora potest.
Jamque vides olidas libris fumare popinas:
Naribus O doctis quam pretiosus odor!
Hac ego praecipua credo herbam dote placere,
Hinc tuus has nebulas Doctor in astra vehit.
Ah mea quid tandem facies timidissima charta?
Exequias siticen jam parat usque tuas.
Hunc subeas librum sancti seu limen asyli,
Quem neque delebit flamma, nec ira Jovis.
Andrew Marvel. A. F.

To his worthy friend Doctor WITTY upon his Translation of the Popular Errors.
SIt further, and make room for thine own fame,
Where just desert enroles thy honored name
The good Interpreter. Some in this task
Take off the Cypress veil, but leave a mask,
Changing the Latin, but do more obscure
That sense in English which was bright and pure.
So of Translatours they are Authors grown,
For ill Translatours make the book their own.
Others do strive with words and forced phrase
To add such luster, and so many rays,
That, but to make the vessel shining, they
Much of the precious Metal rub away.
He is Translations thief that adds more,
As much as he that takes from the store
Of the first Author. Here he makes blots
That mends; and added beauties are but spots.
Caelia whose English does more richly flow
Then Tagus, purer then dissolved snow,
And sweet as are her lips that speak it, she
Now learnes the tongues of France and Italy;
But she is Caelia still: No other grace
But her own smiles commend that lovely face;
Her native beauty's not Italianated,
Nor her chaste mind into the French translated:
Her thoughts are English, though her sparkling wit
With other language does them fitly fit.
Translatours learn of her. But stay I slide
Down into Error with the vulgar tide;
Women must not teach here: The Doctor does
Stint them to Cawdles, Almond milk, and broth.
Now I reform; and surely so will all
Whose happy eyes on thy Translation fall.
I see the people hasting to thy book,
Liking themselves the worse the more they look,
And so disliking, that they nothing see
Now worth the liking but thy Book and Thee.
And (if I judgment have) I censure right;
For something guides my hand that I must write.
You have Translations Statutes best fulfilled,
That, handling neither sully nor would guild.
Anrew Marvel A. F.

To his ingenious friend Dr. Robert Witty upon his Translation of the Popular
Errors.
APollo's sons have stripped him of his Bays,
Impov'risht Daphne to enrich their lays
With an immortal I strain, that so their verse
May keep thy memory still green; no hearse
May overtop thy fame; so that they have left
No verdant branch for me, but have bereft
Me of all hopes to find a Laurel forth;
Yet in despite of them, I crown thy worth
With Ivy. O disdain not for to tie
Thy brows with such a wreath; for though it lie
(If not supported) grovelling on the sand,
It holds no dirt, 'twas culd by a clean hand.
I praise thy smooth Translation, that does teach
The Vulgar Errors in a Vulgar speech.
Their Errors else the Vulgar had not known;
In Latin Primrose was in the bud, now is blown,
Its blown so fair too, that (all do confess)
No wit can put it in a fairer dress.
On thy Translation one may look an age,
Yet find no Errors but in the Title page.
John Burnsell
in Art. Mag.
The Judgment of Doctor Zacutus the Jew a famous Physician in Amsterdam,
concerning this Tractate of the Popular Errors, which I find printed before
the Hollands Impression, directed to the Printer.
MY dearest Johnson, I have perused this Book of the most excellent man James
Primrose, wherein he discourses accurately concerning the Errors of the people
in Physic. It is an excellent and pithy piece, full of variety, pleasant and
profitable, and worthy to be prized by Physicians. This learned Author reasons
strongly, answers objections acutely, and refutes wittily. Go too (Mr.
Johnson) print it without delay; no clear-witted man will slight this wholesome
counsel, but it will be very much approved of, and delighted in by the
Learned, and in their esteem it will like the Rose-buds, every day flourish
more and more: For it detects the ignorance and Errors of Quacksalvers, who
go about to enrich themselves by mischieving others, cheating the silly people
with false and feigned promises of more then they are able to do; such as
insolently oppose the known principles of Physic, and envy them that with
admirable care and dexterity do make more safe and speedy cures. These, this
Tractate armed with the most rational Method of Hippocrates, as it were with
Hercules his club, levells with the ground, and utterly overthrows their
erroneous opinions; it curbs the foolish vaunting and arrogance of Quacks, and
stops the proud attempts of those fond Bablers. For I abhor to think on this
one thing, that a sort of silly Plebeans, and deboyst idle Empyricks, should
dare to take to themselves the honorable Titles and employment of the Learned:
Even as the country Curres seem to follow the sent as does the generous Hound,
and (as the Proverb has it) the Goat would seem to be like the Rhinoceros.
But to let pass these. You Mr. Johnson whom I know to be an entire lover of
Learning, make haste to print this gallant book; for it will be entertained
with great applause in these Belgian Provinces, in Europe, yea throughout the
whole world. Farewell, and love

Amsterdam June 4th 1639. Your affectionate Friend Zacutus Lusitanus, Med. Dr.

The Authors Preface.
HIppocrates said well in his book De Lege, that Physic is of all Arts the
most excellent, for the antiquity and necessity thereof, and the nobleness of
its subject, to wit, man's body do sufficiently manifest the same. But be adds
further; In respect of the ignorance of them that practice it, and of those
that judge rashly of them, it seems inferior to the other Arts. In which
words, he seems to point out two causes of all the Errors which happen in
curing. The first concerns Physicians themselves, the second all others that
judge of Physicians and Physic. Touching Physicians be says that many of them
are like to dissembling Stage Players, who represent the person, which
notwithstanding they do not sustain; so as indeed there are many Physicians
in name, but in performance very few, which as in Hippocrates his days, so
also in our age experience shows to be most true. The second cause concerns
them that judge amiss of Physicians; every one wishes always the best for
himself, but who is he that is able to discern well the good from the bad,
for many do oftentimes make use of them whom either boldness, or the favor
of some friend, or the proud bragging of a malapert tongue, not the sound
knowledge of Physic has set forth, which fault was also familiar in Plinies
time, Men presently (says he) give credit to every one that calls himself a
Physician, when notwithstanding in no one thing can there be a greater Error;
for oftentimes a greater danger is like to happen by the Physician, than by the
disease it self. From these two causes all the Errors of the people we have
said do arise: For many of them that practice Physic, being ignorant of the
rules of Physic have persuaded the people of many things, which stick so
deeply in their minds, that they can scarce be rooted out by any force of
reason. For there are very few Errors abroach among the people, to which
heretofore some Physician or other has not given a being, by reason of some
Theoremes and rules of Physic, by them ill understood. Nor ought any to
marvel at it, seeing that among the learned and well created Physicians
themselves, exceeding great difference and variety of opinions, not yet fully
composed may be found. But it is not my purpose in this place to treat of the
controversies of Physicians, but only to show forth certain Errors of the
people, which disturb the right reason of curing. Of this subject but few have
written. Laurentius Joubertus, indeed a frenchman has meditated something
like to it, but he has left the work imperfect, and has unfolded but a few
Errors, and those not very gross, and in my judgment little concerning the
people. When therefore I had observed here some Errors apparent enough, I
thought good, briefly to declare my opinion concerning them. That old common
custom of foretelling by urine, which also at this day many Physicians do
foster and follow, first gave occasion to this work, of which, when a certain
friend long since had requested my opinion, I gave it him in writing. But
afterward observing other Errors, I noted down some thing touching them for
my own use especially; At length when I had perfected a Centurie, and this
book had grown up to this bulk, I put an end to it; perhaps hereafter as
occasion shall serve, I may note more especially if to good and learned
Physicians; this tractate shall seem acceptable and profitable, for unto their
judgment do I refer all. In this book I have compiled the Errors not of
one Country only, but of many, that what is here written in the general,
every man may fit for himself, if he find the same in his own country. And
this shall be the order of this tractate; the first book comprehends the
Errors about Physicians, to wit, about all those that cast their sickle into
this harvest: The second is conversant about the nature and signs of some
diseases; the third about the diet as well of the sound as the sick: The fourth
and last does treat of certain remedies of diseases, misconceived of the
people. Now let us set upon the work.

POPVLAR ERROVRS.
The First BOOK; Which concerns Physicians.
CHAP. I. Of Physicians in general.
SEeing then, as we have said in the Preface, the number of Physicians is so
Great, we must explain in the first place, who may lawfully practice Physic
properly so called: for Physicians that are created in the Universities do
practice, as also their servants, Ministers, Many sorts of Physicians.
Mountibanks, Runnagate Quacksalvers, and women who are said to meddle in
Surgery; of every one of which Something is to be said in order.

Hippocrates would have a Physician to be an honest, diligent, and ingenious
man, and in his Book de Art, he would have him to be instructed from his
childhood in a fit and convenient place, and a lover of pains. Galen in a
peculiar book says, that he ought to be a Philosopher; and Hippocrates says,
that a (...).
Physician which is a Philosopher, is God-like. Aristotle says, that in a
Geometrician, the knowledge of another Science which is diverse from Geometry
is not to be desired: And so it may be said of a Physician, only the exquisite
knowledge of his own Art is to be expected. (...)
From whence a manifold Error of the people does arise. First, That they call
him a learned Physician, and a great Scholar, who can perhaps speak Latin, or
understand a little Greek, but not him that is well experienced in his own
Art; and this is it which some think is sufficient to fit a man to sustain
the person of a Physician (As of late I knew one, who in that he professed
himself to be a Physician, (although he was but lightly tinctured with the
knowledge of Physic) yet was accounted so for a little smattering that he had
in the Latin tongue). But there is a great difference betwixt these; for well
said Celsus chief of the Latin Physicians, that Diseases are not cured with
Eloquence. For although the knowledge of the Tongues (in the compass whereof
the greater part of the Vulgar does comprehend all Learning) does make way for
the understanding of all the Arts, yet they are not acquired without new
labor, care, and industry. Therefore let the people from henceforth, think him
a learned Physician, not that knows a little Greek and Latin, or some other
Science besides Physic, but who being well instructed in the Rules of Physic,
and well read in Galen and Hippocrates, understands thoroughly the Diagnostick,
Prognostic, and Therapeutick parts of Physic; for he that is either wholly
ignorant of these things, or understands them but meanly and in part, can
scarcely be accounted a good Physician. But who is he that shall judge of these
things? For they are not a few, who having gotten some fame among the people,
and become renowned with a certain name of Learning, which never read Galen
and Hippocrates, do study very little, no not when they are most at leisure,
and follow some new Writers scarce worth the reading. But because there are
also very many good diligent Physicians, learned, and laborious, we will add
no more. Well therefore writes Aeschylus the Poet; (...)
He that knows profitable things, not he that knows many things, is wise.

CHAP. II. Of Doctors of Physic.
GAlen makes two sorts of ignorant Physicians, one of them which are mere
Empyricks, the other of them that would have a name of knowledge, and yet are
but meanly furnished therewith. Of this sort are very many, who, that they may
acquire to themselves a better credit, for some small matter get the honors of
Universities, which they call Degrees, and yet return home not awhit better
learned than when they went up. Doctores non doctiores redeunt.
Now the approbations of Universities have been wisely ordained by our
Ancestors, being indeed both proper and necessary, yet concerning them
diligent heed is to be taken. But now adays great is the neglect herein; for
on many, although but of mean learning, the Degree of Doctor is conferred,
insomuch as from some Universities, they return Doctors, but little learned,
fit for nothing less than to teach or practice Physic. And there are few
Universities into which that abuse has not crept; Therefore in Itlay and
France the degree of Doctor procures not much respect, nor is it permitted to
any, although Doctor, to practice Physic in their famous Cities, who has not
been first approved by the Magistrates of the City, being examined by
Physicians, of whom also perhaps some are not Doctors. In like manner, he that
is Doctor in one Universitie, cannot practice in another, unless therein also
he take his Degree. The same also was well and wisely ordained at London, that
no Doctor of the Universitie should exercise his Art there, before that after
new examination he be approved by the College of Physicians. For in many
Universities, although Physic be diligently taught in their public Lectures,
yet in conferring those Degrees they are too careless, denying them to few or
none. Therefore it were an excellent thing, It is most honorable to take
degrees at home.
if it were permitted to no man to take those degrees and honors out of his
own Country, that he might have his own Countrymen, among whom afterward he
intends to exercise his Art, to be witnesses of his learning, as they do in
France. Andreas Laurentius that famous Interpreter of Anatomy, when by the
Kings royal Writ he had obtained the office of the Physick-Lecturer at
Monspelier, yet could not be admitted, until he had again commenced, first
Batchelour of Physic, then Licentiate, afterward Doctor, and had so often
kept his Acts again in Physic, as was requisite according to the Statutes of
the Universitie. In like manner at Bordeaux where I was educated, it was not
permitted Julius Caesar Scaliger a man so learned and skillful, to reside,
because he would not be examined by the Physicians of that City. He would not,
not because he disliked that order of that City, which is also observed
throughout all France, but because he would not expose his fame to every mean
question of a young Physician; concerning which thing there were mutual
Letters dispatched betwixt him and Manialdus, a very learned Physician of
Bordeaux, which also Manialdus his son, the ancientest Physician of that City
had lately in custody. These are the things, which because many do not take
notice of, they so easily give credit to every one that professes himself to be
a Doctor. To a learned man indeed these degrees do add honor, yet they
confer no learning. For he that to day is no Doctor, but shall be to morrow,
is not wont of such a sudden to become for that cause more learned, nor if he
abstain from that degree, will he be more unlearned than a a Doctor. As
therefore I do not speak against the constitutions of the Universities, but
rather reverence them, yet so many abuses can no man approve. For many
mongrell-Physicians, ignorant of this art, or at best but meanly skilled
therein, having bought the title of Doctor in foreign Universities, or perhaps
but feigning that they have bought it, and so become proud of that counterfeit
honor, return home that they may be crammed with the blood and wealth of their
Countrymen. But for the most part it is to be observed, that greater danger
hangs over the sick by those practitioners in Physic, which have but little
knowledge therein, then from that know nothing at all. For they become
audacious, talkative, outbrave and resist their betters, and brag that they
either excel them, or at least equallize them. I have observed in some, this
evil custom, that whatsoever a Physician shall speak well, they contradict,
that they may get to themselves some fame, out of the ruin of another man's
name.

CHAP. III. Of the servants of Physicians, and of Apothecaries that practice
Physic.
THis is an ordinary Error, that they that have been Physicians servants,
although mere ignorant fellows, Physicians servants, and Apothe caries far
short of the abilities requisite to make them Physicians.
after the death of their Master, or many times before, address themselves to
the practice of Physic; of whom I have known many, and they are also thought
by the people to have some knowledge, because for many years they have served a
Physician, have written down his prescriptions, which they call Bills and
Receipts, and have observed the success.

The same may be said of some Apothecaries, whom some Physician has long
employed; but all this is not sufficient to make a Physician, nor can the
Medicinal art be so easily learned. For Hippocrates, What is requisite to make
a Physician.
in him that desires to be a Physician, besides a prompt wit, requires
instruction from his childhood, a fit place for his studies, labor,
discipline, convenient time, and other things which these men want; as if to
follow a Physician were sufficient to learn Physic, or as if those Physicians
whom they serve, were more excellent than others, who have commended their
learning and experience in their writings, to posterity. Not that I think it
absurd for a poor painful Scholar to serve a Physician, and to learn from him
what he can, but that it is too much sauciness, for such fellows and drudges
adventurously and malapertly to imitate their Masters; for seeing that no man
is such an exact Physician, to whom many things are not wanting to that
perfection which should be requisite for a Physician, how can these fellows so
easily become Physicians. And yet they as well as others are much extolled by
the people.

CHAP. IV Of Ministers that practice Physic.
AMong men of Ecclesiastical order, that have dedicated themselves wholly to
God, and the Churches commodity, there are many that do seriously, and
greedily, and with much gain to themselves, undertake the cure not of souls
only, but of bodies likewise, and strive to their utmost to get patients to
themselves for the healing of their bodily diseases, even in such places where
there is store of Physicians. I know this is disliked by many Physicians,
especially by them that gape all for gain; but seeing that many Physicians of
lighter note do scarce patiently brook others better then themselves, it is no
wonder if they approve not that order of religious men. But this is no new
thing, for Marsilius Ficinus, that great interpreter of Plato, was both
Physician and Priest, and proves it to be lawful, because to the holy Priest
all the offices of charity do belong. Wherefore he that to the Priesthood
joins Physic, procures that a sound mind may be lodged in a in a sound body.
But if in a Minister the knowledge not only of Theology, but of other sciences
also be requisite, why shall Physic be excepted? How many of them are there,
that are full well versed in the knotty questions of the Law, why not also in
Physic? But some will object (...), who is sufficient for these things? The
study and practice of Physic requires the whole man.
For the Medicinal art seems to be so cumbersome, difficult, and long, that it
cannot be thoroughly learned of any man, but it requires and exacts the whole
man. Wherefore the Divine feems to be blame worthy, who leaving and neglecting
the nobler science, to which he has given up his name, and has gotten to
himself a character never to be blotted out, does addict himself to another, so
slippery, so hard, so unconstant: for it must of necessity follow, that a
sufficient knowledge of another art must be wanting to him. But they have many
things to object, whereby they can defend that singular charity, forsooth,
toward their neighbors. And first, the curing and preventing of diseases is
not contrary nor opposite to the study of Divinity, and to the preaching of
Gods Word; for even the Apostles and promitive Christians did heal diseases,
and also preach. Now, though that kind of curing was miraculous, yet from
thence we may gather, that the curing of diseases in it self, and its own
nature, is not oppugnant to the Ecclesiastical office, but does well and
friendly agree therewith. If it be lawful therefore to atchieve the end, it is
likewise lawful to use the means that tend to that end, and such are remedies
which God has created to this use. But perhaps some will say, that curing of
diseases in respect of the thing it self, does not oppugn the office of
Divines, but only because it does suppose the knowledge of another Science, to
which together with Theology, it is not easy to give diligence. But they may
answer, all men's wits are not alike, and the gifts of God to every one are not
the same: Some perhaps are so prompt of wit, able of memory, and such lovers of
pains, that they can employ their minds in both arts with very much profit.
Yea, at this day there are but few, that to the study of Divinity have not
added some other Science, to which their Genius does most incline. Some are
conversant in the study of Mathematics, or of Astrology, or of the Laws, or
the like, nor does any man blame them for it. That the knowledge of both these
Arts is possible, the example of some Physicians themselves does manifest, of
whom many study but little, and yet in regard that they are taken for
Physicians, they desire to be preferred before any painful Divine, but for
what reason it is unknown. For if a Minister do employ that time in the study
of physic, which a mongrel physician does shamefully spend, either in doing
nothing, or in ill doing, or in playnig, as many do; what should hinder him to
become a skillful Physician? Nor is it a new thing that some Physicians also
are delighted with the study of Theology, and verily I see no reason, why in
this our age, where abuse has corrupted almost every thing, that some Divines
may not be more learned than some Medicine mongers, seeing that many Physicians
(or at least, such as would be accounted so) do so little bend themselves to
the study of Physic, that it is an easy thing with a light labor, to know
more in Physic than they know. Volaterranus reports, that Trusianus (who was
called more than a Commentatour) whose admirable and most ingenious Comment
upon the Art of Galen, is extant, was made Monk of the order of the
Carthusians. If therefore any painful and ingenious Divine has adquired so
much knowledge of Physic, that he is able to make use of it, why shall he not
practice with a good Conscience? It is therefore to be left to their
conscience, whether they do well understand this Science or no, let them look
to that.

Benedictus Arrias Montanus, as Arceus relates, taught Surgery in Spains, but
few like Arrias Montanus does this country bring forth. Neither hitherto has
it been my hap to see any Minister (and I have known many) practicing Physic,
that understood it well, yea that knew scarce the Tithe (that I may say no
worse) of those things which are needful for a Physician to know. Not probable
that Divines should be able Physicians.
Therefore (although the knowledge of both these Arts is possible, yet that
seldom happens; for the practice of Physic does wholly turn away the mind
from the study of Divinity, and the study of Divinity (in them that preach
especially) does interrupt the practice of Physic; therefore it is very
probable, that Physic cannot, with a safe conscience be exercised by any
Divine who has the cure of souls. Nor do the cited examples move me a whit.
As for Marsilius Ficinus, he was a man more witty than learned in Physic, a
busy man, nor does his books of Physic argue any depth of knowledge in that
art, and he busies himself more about trifles, and dreams of the Platonists,
than about serious matters. And as for Trustanus, he grew weary of practicing
Physic, and therefore relinquished it utterly, and put on a Monks hood. So
likewise Arrias Montanus left Surgery, and meddled no more with it. And the
order of the Decree is clear in this point in diverse places. In general it
forbids Ecclesiastical persons all negotiations, especially for lucre sake,
which withdraw them from their sacred functions. The Decrees of the Church
concerning Ministers that meddle in Physic.
They that in the Church of God are preferred to the order of Clerks, let them
in no case be diverted from divine administration, nor let them be distracted
with cares and Secular affairs, but let them serve day and night in heavenly
and spiritual matters. And a little after it gives the reason. Because no man
warring for God does entangle himself also in Secular affairs. And in another
place. Let the Laickes who have more leisure do these works one for another.
But in particular concerning Physic in another place, speaking of the malice
of Satan, etc. Namely thence it is, that transforming himself after his wonted
manner into an Angel of light, under pretense of consulting for the feeble
bodies of their brethren, and of managing their Church business more
faithfully, he persuades some regular persons to read the Laws, and to weigh
out Physical confections, and so draws them out of their Cloisters. Therefore
lest by occasion of their knowledge therein, Spiritual men be aga ne involved
in mundane affairs, We make a decree, that no man after a Vow of Religion,
and religious profession made in some place, be permitted to go forth to read
Physic, or the humane Laws: but if they shall go forth, and return not to
their cloister within the space of two months, that they be avoided of all men
as excommunicate persons, etc. Where it teaches that religious persons under
pretense of Charity and Piety ought not to meddle in Physic, and that it
does proceed from the Devil, the Arch enemy of Mankind, if at any time
religious persons employ their studies in Physic. But more clear is the
Council of Yours related in the same place. Cap. 10.
Against religious persons going out of their cloisters to hear Law or Physic
Lectures; Alexander our Predecessor made a Decree formerly in the Council of
Tours, that except they return to their Cloister within the space of two
months, they should be avoided of all men as excommunicate persons, and in no
case he heard, if they would plead: And being returned, that they be the lowest
of all the brethren in the Assemblies, at the Table, and in the Convocation
house, and unless by the mercy of the Apostolical chair, to lose all hope of
preferment. But because some of these, through the different opinions of some
men, were excused, and found indulgence: We willing that for the future they
do ipso facto incur the sentence of Excommunication, do straightly charg and
command, to the end, that as well by the Diocesants, and in their Consistories,
as by the Bishops in whose Diocesses they study, such excommunicate persons be
publicly pronounced liable to the aforesaid penalties. And because we desire
that the study of Divinity may be enlarged, that the place of its Pavilion
being dilated, it may be further propagated, that the Catholic Faith may be
environed with an impregnable wall of warriors, which may be able to resist
those that oppose it, We will and command, that this be extended to all
Archdeacons, Deacons, Provosts, singing men, and others that have
Ecclesiastical livings, moreover Parish Priests (unless they desist within,
the time limited) and that in the name subscribed it be firmly observed. And in
the ninth Chapter it is forbidden, that any Subdeacon, Deacon, or Priest,
exercise any part of Surgery, which concerns burning or incision, which
notwithstanding is the easiest part of Surgery, as to let blood, etc. But if
these easy things be forbidden, without doubt it much rather comprehends
harder matters. But our Ministers that practice Physic more adventurously than
is fitting, intruding it upon the people under covert of counterfeit Piety,
will perhaps, but lightly esteem of the censure of the old Church; wherefore I
leave them to the judgment of GOD, to whom one day they must be accountable
for all their words and works.

Chap. V. Of Women that meddle in Physic and Surgery.
HAving taken upon me to point out some Errors of the people, or at least the
common Errors of many, I have willingly favored Churchmen (as much as I
could possibly) so I resolve also concerning Women. For it is not a thing of
such consequence, nor ought any Physician of note, or Surgeon to think worse of
Women, which are borne for the care and service of men, if they do their whole
endeavor for the good of Mankind; for they know how to make a bed well, boil
pottage, cullices, barley broth, make Almond milk, and they know many remedies
for sundry diseases. But they especially are busied about Surgery, and that
part chiefly which concerns the cure of Tumors and Ulcers: Notwithstanding
the cure of Ulcers and Wounds does require very much art; The cure of Ulcers
and Tumors require much ar^.
as first all their differences must be known, to wit, whether it be a simple
Wound, or corroding, contused, with putrefaction of the bone, corrupt,
cancrous, fistulous, etc. Then the variety of remedies and circumstances in
curing, makes the art to be fallacious, uncertain and conjecturall. All which
things, seeing they cannot be known but by a skillful Physician, women ought
not so rashly and adventurously to intermeddle with them. Again, they usually
take their remedies out of English books, or else make use of such as are
communicated to them by others, and then they think they have rare remedies for
all diseases. But Galen in his books of Method, The necessity of the altering
of remedies makes the art more difficult.
teaches that remedies are to be altered according to the person, place, part
affected, and other circumstances; for in some a deterging Medicine will draw
unto suppuration, as Frankincense; in others the same remedy will generate
flesh, and Galen gives an example of a Surgeon, who in an Ulcer where he saw
great putrefaction, did daily apply a strong deterger, viz. Verdigrease, and
the oftener he did so, by so much the more did the putrefaction increase,
because the remedy was stronger than the disease. The same malady in different
parts requires a different cure.
The same Ulcer in the Leg does require a different remedy from that in the
breast, or another part, because of the diverse nature of the parts. If
therefore they understand well all the differences and causes of ulcers, as
also a right method, and a right use of suppurating, deterging,
flesh-generating, and cicatrizing medicines, and the reason of varying them
according to the nature of the parts, ages, temperaments, and other
circumstances, I will easily believe that they may be able to exercise this
Art. But seeing that these things cannot be attained unto without much labor
and study, I can scarce be brought to believe that they are able to understand,
or perform what they promise. But because a Physician ought to be but little
solicitous, who, and how many they be that practice Physic, we will say no
more of Women, it suffices that we have manifested their errors to the
people: Therefore we will speak a little concerning others.

CHAP. VI. Of Mountibanks.
THere is another sort of men sprung up for a mocking-stock of art, which call
themselves Empyricks, the English and Italians call them Mountibanks; the
French Chartalans, or Ceretans; one of which called England his best Nurse. And
it is a wonderful thing that many should be so wary in the choice of
Physicians, that if a Physician settle in some place, they dare not of a long
time commit themselves unto him, and yet they presently trust themselves to a
Mountibank, that comes to stay but afew weeks, and (as I have often observed)
men of the meanest rank, that plead poverty to Physicians, can find money
enough to give to these Mountibanks.

First of all it is to be noted, Mountibanks not capable of honor in foreign
Countries.
and although they grow rich, yet they are not capable of any honor in the
Commonwealth; but if they travail the Country here, they are accounted in
great honor, and are sometimes equallized with Physicians, and are taken for a
certain sort of Physicians. Secondly, it is to be noted, that though they call
themselves Empyricks, Empyricks in former times were learned men.
For the Empyricks in times past were very learned and skillful men, whom Galen
in one place acknowledges to have been his Masters, and they understood very
well, not only the remedies, but also the rules of Physic, the diagnostick and
prognostic signs of diseases, and they followed a certain method, or rather
an order in curing, but did not search out the causes of diseases, nor the
reason of the rules of Physic. It sufficed them that these things were
observed of old, either of the Ancients, or of themselves. If we had such
Empyricks, they might be very well endured: For even Physicians do not disdain
Empyrie (the dogmaticall part of Physic comprehending it.) But they have
moreover added hereunto the reason, and knowledge of causes, not that they may
absolutely cure, but that they may more certainly cure. Mountibanks are sar
from the learning of the ancient Empiricks
But our Mountibanks now a days do show forth their tricks upon the Stage,
and far are they from being Empyricks, for they know nothing but 3 or 4
remedies. If they had remedies for the Leprosy, Gowt, quartane Ague, and other
such grievous diseases, seeing the success, we would commend their
experiments. But not any one of them, in Italy, France, and England, have more
then three sorts of remedies; that is, the Antidote against poisons; the
Balsame for wounds; and the Ointment for burnings, They sell the common
remedies at a dear rate.
to which sometimes they add a perfumed ball; and the common purging remedies
which they buy at home of the Apothecaries, do they sell at a very high rate.
Something I intend to speak touching these remedies, with this proviso, that I
exempt from their rank those manual Operatists, that cut for the Stone, whom
Hippocrates calls (...), as also such as couch the Cataract, and those that cut
for the Bupture, for they are lawful Artificers, although also some of the
Mountibanks that wander about England, dare likewise to attempt the same.

CHAP. VII. Of the Mountibanks Antidote.
THeir principal and most highly extolled remedy is against poisons, of which
they promise wonders. But first we will demonstrate the unprofitablenesse;
secondly the abuse; and thirdly the facility of that remedy.

The unprofitablenesse consists in this, The Mountibanks Antidote is of little
or no use.
that of all the diseases which happen to man's body, those that proceed from
poison, either applied outwardly, or taken inwardly, are most rare with us;
therefore there is no great need of that remedy; but if they had medicines for
the more ordinary diseases, as the leprosy, and the gowt, they might be
endured. Besides there is no part of Physic, which does more abound with
remedies, then that which treats of poisons. For if any man read the books of
them that have gathered together the descriptions of remedies, what a number,
and variety of them shall he find, in Wekerus, Andernacus, and others that
have set forth whole treatises concerning poisons. Moreover there is no remedy
that can resist all poisons: Yea, I dare be bold to say, that a draught of
Cowes milk can do more against Arfenick and Sublimate, which are the most
formidable poisons to us, than all the Antidotes of the Mountibanks. There are
also many things much better then theirs to be had in Apothecaries Shops, as
that ancient, and in all ages well approved Triacle of Andromachus, as also the
Mithridate of Damocrates, and Matthiolus his Antidote, which contains in it
almost all the Simples which serve for this purpose. Again, it is an easy
thing for any Physician that knows the matter of Physic, and the art of
compounding medicaments, presently to prescribe such things. For first it is to
be noted, that these medicaments are not taken out of those things that do
resist all sorts of poisons; for neither butter, nor milk, nor oil, or other
things which resist Arsenick, and Corrosives, are ingredients in their
Antidote, but they are selected out of the medicinal matter of Cordials; to
wit, they would only have the heart to be defended against the malignity of the
drugge, and not the violence of the drugge it self to be repressed. As some
learned Physicians write, that the poison of the plague is of such a nature,
that its proper Antidote is not yet found out. Therefore whatsoever things are
prescribed against the pestilentiall venom, they do only corroborate the
heart against the force of the morbificall cause. Hence the deceitfulness of
the Mountibanks Antidote may be observed, and that it is not universal, as
they report. Any man may conjecture the same by the price; for how can they
defray the expenses of their companions, and of their journeyes, which are many
times very chargeable, if the Antidote were of any price, A way to try the
virtue of the Antidote.
which (as I have often observed) with the ointment and balsame, they sell but
for twelve pence. That the efficacy of it may be proved (for here is a very
gross deceit, in that they do usually fore-arme themselves with the Antidotes
of the Shops against the violence of the poison) this caution should be
observed. Let a dog be kept a whole night without meat and drink, and let
neither milk, nor any fat thing, which may abate the strength of the poison, be
given him in the morning, but give him some Arsenick, and after he has taken
it, let him have as much of the Antidote as the Mountibank pleases, and so the
efficacy of the remedy shall be sufficiently proved. The same may be said
concerning men, for they make experiment of the poison upon themselves, and
take it in the presence of the people. If they will take the poison with the
forenamed cautions, having seen the effect, we will commend the remedy. But
they show themselves upon the Stage for the most part after noon, after meat,
and after the use of fat things, and such as do assuage the force of it, as
milk, and perhaps of Antidotes. For meat, especially that which is fat, and
milk, do strengthen the stomach, and weaken the poison; therefore it is no
wonder if they do then take it more boldly, which soon after they vomit forth
at home, and so all comes to nothing.

There is another experiment of theirs, which the people do very much admire,
The Mountibank will apply a Viper to his breast, A deceit in their application
of the viper.
about the left pap, and taking the Antidote will feel no harm. At this the
people stand amazed, the very naming of it is wonderful. But here is a
manifold deceit. For First, Matthiolus says, these fellows have sundry ways
to tame their vipers and serpents. Secondly, the vipers in England, in respect
of the temperature of the air, are not so venomous as they are in hot
Countries. Therefore Galen gives strict charge, that in the composition of
triacle the vipers be not taken in the height of Summer, which with them is
excessively hot, for then are they most full of venom; but with us the vipers
are less venomous by much, whose height of summer is not equivalent to the
springtime of the Italians. Thirdly, the people is deceived in thinking that
the force of the Venom is sooner communicated to the heart, if the venomous
creature be applied to the breast, because of the nearenesse of the heart. But
that is false; for the venom is carried by the Veins and Arteries, as
appears in that all the blood of them that have been bitten by a Viper does
turn into a pale greenness. And seeing that the veins in the papps, are so
very slender, and do not come unto the heart, but with a great many long
windings, I affirm, and it is more probable, that if the Viper be applied to
the feet, which are farthest remote from the heart, it will sooner infect the
heart, than if to the paps, but soonest of all if it be applied to the arms.
Cleopatra applied the viper to her arm.
And now the story of Cleopatra comes to my mind. Petrus Victorius blames the
Painters, that paint Cleopatra applying the Aspe to her paps, seeing it is
manifest out of Plutarch in the life of Antonius, and out of Pliny likewise,
that she applied it to her arm. Zonaras relates that there appeared no sign
of death upon her, save two blew spots on her arm. Caesar also in her statue
which he carried in triumph, applied the Aspe to her arm. For in the arms
there are great Veins and Arteries, which do quickly and in a straight way
convey the venom to the heart, whereas in the paps the vessels are slender,
which by sundry circumvolutions only do lead to the heart. And therefore in
Saint Paul the miracle was so much the greater, in that he felt no harm from
the Viper, which laid hold on his hand; for if it had assailed him on his
breast, he had had respite enough to take some Antidote, which on his hand he
could not do.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Balsame and Ointment of the Mountibankes.
THey seem also to do wonders in curing wounds by the help of their Balsame.
They cure only green wounds with their ointment.
Where it is to be noted, that they cure only simple wounds, for which union
alone is sufficient without a future, therefore in old Wounds their Balsame is
nothing worth. But this cure is not very hard; for oftentimes only binding up
does suffice for the cure of such simple and green wounds, Nature it self, by
the means of the blood, as with the Balsame uniting the divided parts.
Besides, there are many remedies of that nature to be found in Authors,
whereof two excellent ones are prescribed by Riolanus. The very same also is
described by Fabritius ab Aquapendente, as may be seen in his works, and is
extant in the last print of London Pharmacopoea. That the people may know that
there is nothing admirable in those remedies of theirs, nothing that Physicians
and Surgeons cannot do much better.

They have likewise an Ointment for burnings, Their ointment for burns.
for the most part made of Pomatum, or butter washed in Vinegar, with the salt
of Lead. Their deceit in washing with flaming oil or lead.
But because some of them proceed so far, that they wash their hands in
boiling Oil, or melted Lead, something must be said of that likewise, lest
the people think that these things be unknown to Physicians. Albertus Magnus
has sundry ways of doing it. First he takes Fish glue, and Alome, of each a
like quantity, let them be powered (says he) upon Wine-Vineger, and anoint
any thing with this ointment, and it shall not be burned with fire. Secondly,
take Lime quenched with the water of beans, and a little Mandrake, and
Marsh-Mallowes, mix them well, and anoint thy hand, and let it dry, it is of
that virtue, that a man may touch fire therewith, and not be hurt. Thirdly,
take the juice of Marshmallow, the white of an Egg, the seed of Fleabane,
Lime, and the juice of a Radid, mix them with the white of the Egg, and with
this confection anoint thy hand, and the fire shall not hurt thee, not though
thou should kindle natural brimstone upon thy hand. Cardanus reports, that
if one wash his hands in his own urine, the fire shall not hurt him. There are
many other things, which by their clammy and cold substance do shed all over
the hands, that Lead, or Oil, or any hot thing cannot make an impression
thereon, but it presently slides off; otherwise if it should abide on, it would
without doubt burn at length. Let us add to this the authority of Andreas
Laurentius that famous Physician. They that touch live coals (says he)
without hurt, do first anoint their hands with certain Juices, wherewith
they defend themselves from the fire for a little space. In the white of an
Egg (says Pliny) there is such force that wood besmeared therewith cannot be
burned; and wood anointed with Alome remains unconquered of the fire; an
experiment of which did Archelaus a Captain of Mithridates make in a wooden
Tower against Sylla, which in vain he endeavored to set on fire. The clammy
juices of Marshmallow, common Mallow, Purselane, and Mercury, prevail against
the sire: And therefore Albertus writes, if one anoint his hands with the juice
of Marsh Mallow, the white of an egg, and dlume dissolved in vinegar, he may
handle fire without hurt. If one wash his hands in quick silver, quenched in
vinegar, with the white of an egg, he cannot be hurt by the fire. Their deceit
in drinking of poison.
They that drink poison in the sight and presence of the common people, do
first as it were parget the inward tunicles of the stomach with oil and
butter, or else use preservatives against poison; thus do these Impostors
blind the eyes of the ignorant. Thus Laurentius. But because these Mountibanks
do sell their remedies at a low rate, and they seldom or never come into use,
though they be bought, and do not hurt Physicians, we will say no more of them.

CHAP. IX. Of them that call themselves professors of Paracelsus his Art.
THis makes me call to mind, that I have seen at London the Tables of some
that profess the Paracelsian art, and they make promise of great matters,
which they have learned by travailing, when notwithstanding an industrious man
may fish out more at home by the diligent reading of books. But these men do
cloak their wiles with Paracelsus his name, whose books perhaps they never
read, much less (which I verily believe) understood; for truly never any man
was an absolute follower of Paracelsus. At length the matter is come to this,
that these men either are, or would be accounted Chemists. Therefore in few
words I will lay open the difference between a Paracelsian and a Chemist. The
difference betwixt a Paracelsian and a Chemist.


Chynerstry is not an art of its own kind, but merely a preparation of
medieaments, and therefore in proper speaking belongs to that part of Physic
called Pharmacie, and so ought not to be treated of but in Pharmacie. Chemistry
before Paracelsus
It was not at first invented by Paracelsus, but was practiced many ages before
him, by Raimundus Lullius, Villanovanus, and many others, whose many excellent
Chymicall remedies, waters, quintessences, distilled Balsames, and the like we
have, who notwithstanding that, did profess the same art with the Galenists,
Therefore Physicians do not dislike that chymicall preparation of of remedies,
although under that title do Iurk many deceits, and almost all Impostors with
this cloak do hide and cover all their knaveries. And the Pacelsian Sect,
although it does more frequently use chymicall remedies, yet does it not reject
such as are prepared after the vulgar way, which is called Galens form, as may
be seen in many places in Paracelsus, and in his counsels, wherein he often
makes use of remedies not chymically prepared; yea sometimes he uses them
without any manner of preparation; only mixed diversely one with another. So as
concerning this part of physic, which belongs to the preparation of medicines,
Paracelsus seems not to have affected one more then the other. Nevertheless he
endeavors to overturn Galens method of physic, and brings in a new Physiologie
of his own: he tells many strange things of the beginnings of things, and man's
generation, produces new causes of diseases, which is his Pathologie,
Paracelsus a conjurer
and a new method of curing, in which he spares neither spirits, nor words, nor
conjuring tricks, for he teaches that diseases ought to be cured by any art
whatsoever, whether by the help of Devils, or of natural means; whether the
remedies be chymically prepared or no. For indeed Paracelsus was a Magician, as
appears in many of his works. But in regard that art is long and hard to be
understood, they shall scarce persuade me that they are Paracelsians. As for
those things which Petrus Severinus, Danus, Quercetanus, and others have
written of this art, they are not of Paracelsus, but the mere figments of
foolish men. But enough of them.

CHAP. X. That a Physician ought to be skillful in Surgery.
I Know not how it comes to pass, that men do more easily give credit to a
Surgeon practicing Physic, than to a Physician professing Surgery. For in many
places Surgeons are wont to arrogate to themselves the function and office of
Physicians. A physician ought to be knowing in surgery
That a Physician ought to be skillful in Surgery, I shall easily show. But
first this is to be distinguished as it is in it self, from what it is become
by the use, or rather abuse of this age. There are three parts of the curing
part of physic: One is that which cures by Diet; the second by Medicines; the
third is that which cures by the hand: They are called Diet, Pharmaeie, and
Surgery. All diseases for the most part have need of these three. In a burning
Feavor, which by general consent belongs to Physicians, the chiefest remedy is
letting of blood, yet this belongs to Surgery. The same may be said of other
diseases. In Tumors praeternaturall, and Ulcers which are thought to belong to
Surgeons, Purging, and the manner of Diet, without which they cannot be cured,
do concern Pharmacie and Diet, and so do belong to the Physician, not to the
Surgeon. There is almost no disease inward or outward, which does not require
the Surgeons art, and the physicians also. Surgery is a part of physic.
Here I speak according to the opinion of the Vulgar, who distinguish physic
from surgery, when indeed surgery is a part of physic. Whatsoever is done by
the hand is Chyrurgicall, therefore in proper speaking only manual operations
do make a Surgeon. And so it was of old; but now adays it is far otherwise.
For now Surgery does challenge unto it self five kinds of diseases; to wit,
Tumors besides Nature, Wounds, Ulcers, Dislocations, and Fractures; whereof
the three first in proper right belong to a physical consideration, and in
them a formal method of curing is very conspicuous. Therefore Galen begins
his Method of healing with the cures of Ulcers, and ends it in the cure of
Tumors. And although in times past surgeons were different from physicians,
yet they did never vindicate to themselves these parts of physic. That they
do belong to a physical notion it will appear, if we consider, that these
diseases do not only happen to the external, but to the internal parts
likewise. Tumors besides Nature of all sorts, may be in the internal parts,
the Frenzy is a phlegman or erysipelas of the Brain, the Plurisie is a
phlegman or erysipelas of the Membrane that covers the Ribs; as also the
Liver and Spleen may be troubled with a phlegman, erysipelas, or a schyrrous
Tumor. In like manner Ulcers of all sorts do happen in all the internal
parts of the body, among which notable is that in the breast, which we call the
Consumption. They that have written Tractates of Surgery, do treat of Ulcers
and Tumors, without the determination of any part. Now if a physician know not
the general way of curing Ulcers and Tumors, nor their differences, causes,
signs, and prognostics, how shall he be able to cure those that arise in the
inward parts. It is needful then that he know those things. But if he know
them, and that better many times than the Surgeon himself, Not improper for a
physician to practice surgery.
in respect of his learning, which now a days is not desired in a Surgeon, why
shall he not practice Surgery, after the same manner that he does physic, to
wit, by prescribing, not by applying remedies? Hence is it, that whosoever have
written any thing of Surgery worthy of praise, from Hippocrates his time unto
this our age, have been always physicians, except a few late writers, who have
presented nothing to us, but what we had before. Yea a physician had need to
be skillfull in that part which concerns chyrurgicall operations, because
without the advice of a physician, the Surgeon himself ought not to meddle
with those Chyrurgicall operations, as is usually observed in many countries
beyond the seas. And in some countries no man does practice Surgery, but he
that is doctor of physic, which is a very good and laudable custom.

CHAP. XI. Whether a Physician may make up his own Medicines, or no.
FUrthermore, a physician ought especially to be skillful in * Pharmacie, The
art of curing by medicines
which consists in choice, preparation, and composition of simple Medicaments.
For now adays many of our Apothecaries are to seek in this point, being
altogether ignorant of the operations that belong thereunto, and yet are so
bold, that they dare practice physic, because when they have served their
Apprentiship, perhaps under a Master ignorant enough too, they think well of
themselves, and if they have reserved some of the physicians Bills, they use
them too boldly. But some think it a thing unbeseeming the dignity of a
physician, to prepare his Medicines, and that Apothecaries were therefore
ordained by public authority, that they might ease physicians of that labor.
This custom has been in force ever since * Galens time. 7. de med. secundum
locos, cap. 3.
And Horace in his Satyrs makes mention of Pamphilus an Apothecary. ^ ejusdem.
The same * Galen does distinguish a physician from Herbarists, such as let
blood, those that make or sell sweet ointments, and others whom he calls a
physicians servants. Nevertheless that in times past physicians have
compounded their own Medicines, the history of Philip, King Alexanders
physician, does sufficiently manifest. Galen himself made a Triacle: Pachius
an * Hiera. A purging medicine.
Horatius Augenius does highly commend that physician which makes up his own
Medicaments. Plantius in the life of Fernel reports, that that great physician
was wont with his own hands to compound his Remedies. Therefore, I think times
and places are to be distinguished; for Galen did not compound at Rome,
because there were there Workmen for that purpose, only at Pergamus he did.
For whereas at first of old physicians did perform both themselves; at length
for the multitude of patients, they left that care to their servants, as now
adays Apothecaries do commit it to their servants, and Apprentices, and so by
little and little it became a profession of its own kind. Yet nothing
hinders, but physicians, when they please, may prepare their own remedies. And
that it is not unbeseeming a physician, Physicians may make up their own
medicines.
not only the forenamed examples, but even reason it self does illustrate. For
remedies do cure without a physician, but not a physician without remedies;
therefore the nature of remedies is more excellent then the physician:
wherefore it is no disgrace for the physician, who is only a Minister of
nature, to prepare and compound them. But because something must be yielded to
place and custom, which has differenced Apothecaries from physicians, the
Physician will have nothing for sale, but he may compound some special
medicines for himself, the rest are to be committed to the care of the honest
and diligent Apothecary.

CHAP. XII. Of them that are thought to have some secrets.
NOw because nothing is perfect in every respect, it may so fall out, that
common remedies, and they perhaps ridiculous ones, may be extolled by many for
great secrets, which they will reveal to no man, and wisely done too, because
they have nothing that is worthy the name of a secret. Therefore let us say
something of these secrets, for they that profess themselves to have them, may
easily obtrude them upon the people, and if any man should lay claim to a
common remedy, known to all, as proper to himself, he shall scarce be
convicted of a lie. 3 things necessary to the curing of diseases.
that there is necessary unto a cure, the knowledge of the disease, the method
of healing, and the use of indications, without which no remedy can be applied.
For remedies are the finger of God, but as a sword in the hand of a mad man,
they are good indeed to him that uses them aright, but dangerous, being
administered by him that neither knows well the disease, nor the method of
curing. Secondly, the diseases being found out, the physician ought to know the
matter of remedies, and the method of compounding, that he may answer the
Indications. If he know well these 4 things, the disease, the method of curing,
the matter of remedies, and manner of compounding, he needs not these secrets,
for he is able to prescribe as good remedies, yea perhaps better then those
secrets are, which are so highly boasted of. I have read a story of
Gapivaccius, in the Epistles of Scholtius, who being entreated by the Germans
to communicate his secrets, answered very well, read my practice, and you shall
find my secrets; in which book there is no secret, no hidden thing at all. I
remember I have heard Varandaeus, the Kings professor in the Universitie of
Monspelier, The best remedies are such as are no secrets.
say, that those remedies are the best which are no secrets, but best known,
as being confirmed with more certain experience, and he said truly. But let us
now pry into the nature of secrets: they are either simple, or compounded. I
confess indeed all the virtues of simples are not yet perfectly known, as yet
many lie hid. If therefore any man has found out by experience the virtue of
some simple medicament, What is properly to be called a secret
not yet known, that increase of art is to be commended, and deserves to be
called a secret; as he that first found out the vomiting virtue of Antimony; he
that invented the compounding, and found out the efficacy of gunpowder; he
that first brought Jalap into use, had secrets greatly to be commended; such as
these, if any man have, he is worthy of commendation, and I think no other
secrets are to be admitted. For those that are compounded of the ordinary
matter of simples, as usually they are, albeit a physician do keep them to
himself, and desire not that they be known, yet they are not to be called
secrets, for any learned and skillful physician can at his pleasure make the
like of present materials. And therefore I have observed that no man is more
unhappy than those physicians, that note their medicines out of books; and many
ignorant fellows we see do cunningly conceal their remedies, lest if they
should become known to other physicians, they should be laughed at. Hence it
appears how much many, both men and women here in England are beguiled, where
all do busy themselves in gathering receipts, (as they call them) when
oftentimes those remedies are of no worth at all, and did at the first come
from some physician, who himself had nothing that was secret. And what though
they be good, yet they are not, nor ought to be called secrets. For as good,
yea and far better remedies can a learned and skillful physician provide out
of the matter of physic diversely tempered, as different words are made out of
the letters diversely joined. I once met with a man that had a receipt of a
purge, which (as he said) a very learned physician lately dead had given him,
which I perusing, I could not hold from laughter at the foolishness of the
composition; he made it up for his Wife, but all in vain. I persuaded him to
give it to the Apothecary, and that he should give her but the third part,
wherewith she was sufficiently and abundantly purged. And I knew a Gentleman
that accounted Electuarium Lenitivum to be a great secret, who told me he paid
twenty pound for the receipt. Others I know, who have the pills of amber, aqua
mirabilis, and many other such remedies, which are to be had in every
Apothecaries Shop, and yet they account them as great secrets. So I have known
others keep for precious secrets, the descriptions of Diet drinks, which many
times they believe to be more efficacious, then those that are prescribed by
physicians, although the matter is far otherwise.

CHAP. XIII. Of Physicians that are thought to be lucky and fortunate.
Many of them that practice physic, although sometimes they are not thought to
be so learned, yet they are esteemed by the people to be fortunate and lucky.
Indeed some of them are very fortunate, to heap together so great riches, by
an art which they do not well understand. But they are unfortunate that trust
to them; for by art, and not by fortune, are diseases cured; forasmuch as to
the cure of discases, there ought to precede a certain understanding and
foreknowledge of them, and their Symptoms; how can it be, that he that is but
lightly tinctured with the knowledge of them, can ever perform a good cure,
but that after the manner of the They were a sort of people who were wont to
fightblindfolded.
Andabatae, he wrestles with diseases. It may so fall out, that he may meet
with diseases very easy to be cured, which nature it self is able to overcome
without the help of physic; of which, if a Physician be but a spectator, they
will be cured, and then he is a fortunate physician to whom such a thing does
happen. It may fall uut also that he may be sent for in the declination of the
disease, or after the principal remedies have been administered by another more
able. Aristotle calls fortune an accidental cause of those things that are
done. Now diseases are cured by a due administration of remedies, which due
administration does not depend upon fortune, but on the learning and judgment
of the physician. It Is a right administration of remedies, not fortune that
cures diseases.
Otherwise, he that uses a remedy, and has not a sufficient knowledge of the
Art, undoubtedly he aims like a blind man at a mark, which if he hit, it is
merely hap-hazard; from whence it comes to pass many times, that such men, by
their unskilful application of remedies, make diseases, otherwise easy to be
cured, to become a great deal worse. Hippocrates says well; Lib. de locis in
homine.
If the remedies of diseases be certain, what need is there of fortune,
otherwise as well remedies, as those that are no remedies, being exhibited with
fortune, will do good. But some man will say, that which we call fortune, is
none other then the providence of God, which directs the Physicians remedies,
though he be not very learned, to the health of man. But that is not enough;
for though all things depend upon Gods blessing, and are to be expected from
thence, yet he does not use to work immediately, but by the use of remedies.
For the most high from Heaven has created physic; and he says, that an
honest, learned, and faithful Physician is to be honored. So that it is not
usual with him to give a blessing to naughty remedies, ignorantly, and
unseasonably administered. But on the contrary, if any physician, whether a good
man, or bad, know well the nature of remedies and diseases, Gods covenant with
nature.
and administer every thing discreetly, that is, in due place, time, order, and
according to the rules of art, a happy event is to be hoped for, and God is
wont to bless such means, in regard of the covenant which he has made with
nature. Otherwise, although one should mis-apply remedies, if yet a happy
success were to be expected, what a miracle would it be, if bad means, which
naturally cannot attain to the end propounded, besides the order ordained by
God in nature, by his immediate benediction, should notwithstanding be directed
to the right aim? Although God can do this when he pleases, yet he is not
wont to work such miracles, or but very seldom, to his own greater glory.
Therefore we conclude, that fortune is rather esteemed so in the opinion of
the common people, and so it does often happen, or else because the diseases in
their own nature tend unto health, though perhaps sometimes at the first view
they may seem dangerous; and such men are wont sometimes to say, that diseases
are a great deal worse then they are, that the cure may procure to themselves
a greater name, or if death ensue, it may be also known, that they foresaw it,
and that the report may be, that the sick dyed not by the default of the
Physician, but through the greatness of the disease. Besides they often times
prescribe many unprofitable remedies for the curing of a very light disease, as
if it were an exceeding dangerous one, to the great hurt of the patient, who
oftentimes might better endure the disease then the remedy.

CHAP. XIIII Of Physicians which are thought to be men of experience.
THere are some, who though they be not esteemed so learned, yet because they
have been a long time practitioners in this art, are thought to have gained a
great deal of experience, and therefore the people do sometimes more freely
give credit to them then to others, yea though they be but surgeons, or
Apothecaries. Experience indeed is very commendable, and exceeding conveninient
for all that practice physic. Without learning experience hard to be gotten.
Nevertheless unless a man be learned and juditious, it is a very hard thing
to acquire it. In so much as it is an ordinary thing to see men, that have
practiced physic a good space of time, to have notwithstanding no certain
experience of any thing. Now experience is nothing else then the remembrance
and observation of that which is often wont to happen after the same manner.
Thus have the virtues of Medicaments been found out, as only experience
teaches that Agarick purges fleame, and Rubarb choler. But this not sufficient
for the discharge of a cure; for besides this, experience is employed about the
nature and signs of diseases, and order of curing. And therefore experience
alone without learning and reason is uncertain, and merely conjecturall. For
he that knows that Rubarbe purges choler, is notwithstanding ignorant when, to
whom, and in what disease it is profitable, except he be a learned and skillful
Physician. And therefore Hippocrates said well, that it is a dangerous thing to
make an experiment, in respect of the nobleness of the subject, to wit, man's
body. All that write of the matter of Physic, do teach that Frankincense does
generate flesh; but Galen says, that in respect of the nature of the parts,
the virtues thereof are diverse, that in one part it draws unto suppuration,
in another it is mundifying. The same Galen writes, that a certain Empyrick
had a mundifying plaster, which he applied to an ulcer, and when every day the
ulcer became more and more putred, he always used a stronger, and so the ulcer
became always worse and worse; now seeing he did not understand the reason of
this, but only knew the force of the remedy, it was no wonder, if he was
frustrate of his end. Therefore men should not trust to those Physicians, which
being ill practiced from the beginning, are only busy about remedies,
neglecting the other parts of Physic; and it is sure enough such can never be
experienced men, seeing that the experience of a Physician must be extended not
only to the remedies, but to all other things which concern the right
administration of them. It is also certain, that a learned and well grounded
Physician, when he does address himself to the exercise of his art, will get
more experience in one year, then any unlearned fellow in a whole age. Which
that the people may the better know, to wit, that experience cannot be gained
but by a skillful and learned man: let them consider, Experience gotten two
ways.
that it is gotten two manner of ways, either by history, when we give credit
to other men's experience, following those things which they have proved, Ones
own sight and view.
and this experience any man may acquire by study: or by * autopsie, when by
our observation, we get a certain knowledge of things. Many things requisite
to the gaining of experience.
The former without this has noe certainty in it. Now that we may gain
experience, many conditions are requisite.

First, not in one man only, but in many; for one Swallow makes no Summer, as
we said before of Frankincense, which is not sarcoticall in all, but according
to the diversity of parts and temperaments has sundry virtues.

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Fourthly, For if there should be a Fever, with an obstruction of the bowels,
and it be cured by medicaments, it is not yet manifest whether they were hot
or cold, whether they cured the obstruction or the Fever first.

Fifthly, the Medicament whose virtues we would experience,

Sixthly, in remedies these things ought to be considered, substance,

CHAP. XV. Of many that peep into Vrines, handle pulses, and prescribe purges.
HAving already spoken of diverse sorts of men that practice physic, it will
not be amiss to point out the error common to them all; for they observe the
beating of the Arteries, peep into Urines, and prescribe purges. Yea silly
women do it. And who is able to refrain from laughter, when he sees women
feel the pulse. Where it is to be noted, that such observatours take notice
only of one difference of the pulse, to wit, the swiftness and slownesse; but
there are many differences of the pulse necessarily to be considered by a
physician, simple, compound, absolute, relative, in one only pulsation, and in
many. All which if they were considered according to Galens mind, and the
Ancients, they would be more than two thousand differences. But by us, who have
rejected many superfluous things, there remain more than an hundred to be
observed. Nor is it sufficient to know the differences only; for besides the
causes of every one of them are necessary to be known, that the judgment
touching diseases may be infallible. Again, the manner of knowing them is
difficult; for every difference has its peculiar manner of knowing it, which
if one be ignorant of, he will never find out the pulse. If many should hear
only the names of the pulses, they would of their own accord abstain from
touching the Arteries, for like Magical terms they are able to affright the
ignorant, as Pulsus arythmos, ecrythmos, pararythmos, mejouros in una vel
pluribus pulsationibus, caprisans, imparcitatus, aequalis inaequaliter,
equaliter inequalis, and many other differences there are, in this place
needless to be rehearsed, out of which we take the knowledge, and
prognostics of diseases. The same may be said of Urines, of which there are
many differences, simple, compounds in color, consistence, contents, and their
causes are likewise to be known, but things that are so difficult, can scarce
be dealt withal by an ignorant man, or by a woman. Besides they are wont to
administer Cathartick and purging Remedies. Now they must know it is a very
easy thing to loose the belly; for many both simples and compounds do it, but
he alone is able to do it according to the rules of art, that is a good
Artist. For purges are for the most part troublesome to Nature, and for that
cause ought never to be administered but with great heed and discretion.
Moreover they are much mistaken, that without making any difference, if their
bellies be but abundantly loosed, do applaud it, while they consider not the
remedy by which it is done. The same likewise is to be said of other remedies,
whereof great store may every where be found. Not the plenty of remedies, but
the manner of using them makes a Physician; which does suppose a Physician to
be exercised in knowing diseases, and that he is skillful in the nature of
bodies and method of curing, which thing very many of these cannot promise of
themselves, nor others of them. Would God also some whom the Universities have
approved, fell not into the same Error, and did not at a venture collect their
remedies out of foolish books. I do not here dislike the reading of many
books, which set out unto us the wits of modern writers, and of those curious
Artists, especially that have committed their observations unto writing. But I
leave all to the judgment of the learned Physician, I chase from the hives the
sluggish drones, and do here treat only of some mongrell Physicians, which by
men's deaths make their experiments, and would indeed imitate good and skillful
physicians, but cannot attain to them.

CHAP. XVI. Of them that promise an easy cure of the French Pox.
THe last Chapter of this book we will dedicate to that disease, which they,
who are most troubled and vexed therewith, do always give to others; we will
call it by the common name of the French Pox. A most filthy disease,
accompanied with sundry and horrible symptoms, concerning which diverse
tractates of learned Physicians are extant, wherein they seek out the time,
casie and ready way of curing the disease. But a certain sort of men are crept
up, who gives out that to be most easy, which hitherto has seemed very
difficult to all Physicians, and in their Tables they profess themselves to
have a kind of method, whereby within ten or twelve days (they say) they are
able to root out this disease, although inveterate, nor do they strickly
observe any manner of diet, but leave the sick to himself alone, this is
indeed an easy, and pleasant way of curing. But how is it that Physicians now
adays are thought unable to cure this disease, but it is believed to be the
proper office of Surgeons and Mountibankes, when notwithstanding the right way
of curing this disease has proceeded from physicians, and requires a great
deal of industry, as well about sudorificks, as ointments, suffumigations, and
other preservatives against the poison of the disease. The curing of which
although I deny not but it may be performed by skillful and learned Surgeons,
yet many unskilful men in that art, perhaps against their wills, and
ignorantly bring many evils upon the sick. Yea I am sure I know some, who being
supposed to be infected with this pest, have been disquieted and tormented with
many Medicines, who notwithstanding never had contracted any such disease; for
though the knowledge of the disease be not so difficult, yet I certainly know,
that many pains of the joints, head, and other parts, have been taken for the
French pox by some unskilful fellows, but it was a gross mistake. And here
all men are to be admonished, that first they beware of Whores, and then that
they beware of such coseners. This disease not easily cured.
For this disease is not so easily cured, and being left sticking to the body
some while, it does so debilitate and corrupt the bowels, that it breeds other
incurable diseases, as the A sort of leprie.
Elephantiasis. I deny not but the cure of this disease in the beginning is
easy enough, yet such as requires the care of the Physician, the obedience and
patience of the sick, and heedfull diligence to be had in his diet. Surely it
must needs be a very light disease which any one can cure in so short a time,
without regarding any course of living, with liberal and jocund feasting,
walking abroad, and using other such recreations of the mind. It requires a
strict regiment.
Nevertheless the remedies that are convenient for this disease do not
promiscuously admit or what course of living men please; for it may perhaps be
such as does resist the remedies and abate their virtue. Again, as in other
diseases, the diversity of temperaments is to be regarded, so also in this,
and therefore a strict choice of remedies is to be made, which things if any
man do not consider and weigh, it is no wonder, if he undo many sick persons.
Wherefore he that is troubled with this disease, Cautions so such as are ^ll of
the ^rench pox.
lethim not trust himself but to a Physician that is a skillful Artist, unless
he desire to lose both his labor, and his money too, which many times men both
promise, and bestow more freely on those knaves, then on a learned and
faithful Physician. But enough of this, for it is not my purpose in this book,
to handle the manner of curing this, or any other disease, but only to show to
the people their Errors, that they may have always recourse to a Physician if
they be sick. Although oftentimes greater danger is like to happen by the
physician, then by the disease, and men presently give credit to every one that
professes himself to be a Physician. I who write these things, for my own
part, reckon not neither who, nor how many they be, that practice physic,
whether learned or unlearned, even as it is with them that be sick, if they do
but consult with some Physician in name only, they care not what he be, if he
can but stammer out a little Latin, and they falsely style him Doctor of
Physic, though he be ignorant of the very principles of physic, and never
read Galen, or Hippocrates.

POPVLAR ERROVRS. The Second BOOK. Of the Errors about some diseases, and the
knowledge of them.
CHAP. I. Of the deceitful judgment of Vrines.
NOw is the most common Error to be refuted, which first gave occasion to
this Treatise: for he is scarce thought worthy to be a Physician, who cannot
by Urines judge of diseases, and their circumstances, which Error even
Physicians do too patiently foster. It was of old very ordinary with the
Arabian sect, and it was a common custom also in France, in the times of
Valescus, and Gordonius. Plantius in the life of Fernel, relates, that that
most excellent physician was wont to look into urines that were brought from
abroad unto him, which abuse not withstanding he approves not, but reprehends
them, which like Southsayers do prophecy many things of the absent sick
party, Pisse-prophets.
by only looking upon the urine. That there was very great fraud therein, the
books which Gordonius, and others have set forth concerning the cautions of
urines do plainly show, wherein a Physician is taught how he may deceive the
people, as also take heed to himself of their subtilties. Yea to this day among
the Germans this custom is in force, even whether the Physicians will or no,
of whom many do speak sharply against it, Heurnius, Foresins, Sennertus, and
others, but most excellently Fuchsius in the beginning of his chapter of
urines, he calls Physicians that peep into urines, asses, cheaters,
pisse-drinkers, unworthy with whom good men should contend, seeing they more
esteem of the gain they get by urine, then of truth it self. But now a days
in France and Italy, the Physicians have quite abandoned this foolish custom
of divining by urine. First, urine is the whey of those humors which are in
the veins: Now the humors are causes of very many diseases, and therefore
urine will show what humors are there. But diseases are not in the veins,
they are all in the substance of the parts. Urine shows not diseases, but their
causes.
They will not therefore indicate the diseases, but the causes of them only.
But from the same cause there are many diseases: The burning fever, frenzy,
jaundice, every sort of erysipelas, and herpes, proceeds from choler. If a very
choleric urine be brought, can the pisse-prophet tell which of these diseases
does trouble the patient, perhaps he will conjecture that choler is
predominant. Secondly, as in diverse diseases, Urine varies every day.
and sick parties (as we have already said) the same urine may appear; so in
one and the same sick man it is various, and changes every day, that if to day
a sick man's urine be brought to a physician, and again to morrow, unless by
some other way he know the disease, he shall scarce judge it to be the urine of
the same disease. Yea the water is of one sort in the beginning of the
paroxisme, of another in the increase, and of another in the height. Thirdly,
the same water may appear in contrary diseases, The same urine ^n contr^ry
diseases.
even though they depend on contrary and altogether different causes. As for
example, let the pisse-prophet resolve me. If a white and clear water be
brought, is he well or sick that made the water? A man in health having drunk
much wine, or beer and ale, may make such urine as is daily seen. A sick man
may labor of a very violent burning fever with the frenzy, Diabetes is when
whatsoever is drunk is pissed out again even as it was drunk.
choler being carried up to his head, he may be troubled with the Diabetes, or
the obstruction of the bowels, or liver, or with the weakness of the stomach,
or the stone, or some other diseases; but which of these diseases will he
suppose it to be? Will he judge the frenzy to be of a cold distemper? Moreover
a bilious urine may be made in phlegmatic diseases, through the obstruction of
the passage, by which choler is carried to the intestines. Fourthly, diseases
whose cause is not contained in the veins, cannot be known by the urine, for
many diseases do not so much as alter the urine. Such are external diseases,
luxations, roughness, or smoothness of the parts, yea, the quartane ague it
self, which is an inward disease, although it be an effect of the melancholy
humor, yet it holds forth no signs of it in urine, neither in the fit, nor
out of the fit. Gilbertus an English man in his praxis, in the chapter of the
quartane ague, and Richardus a very learned man, as Arculanus reports in his
Commentaries upon the first section of the fourth cannon of Avicenne, the
second tractate chap. 65. did ingenuously profess, that by urines they could
never know the quartane fever, not the epilepsie, nor a woman to be with
child. O that in our times Physicians were so ingenuous and free. These are the
words of Arculanus, that learned Physician, in whose time this custom of
divining by waters was very rife. I do not believe (says he) that a quartane
fever can be known by the water alone, because of the great agreement of the
quartan with the quotidian in urine; and especially in the beginning. Of which
opinion chiefly was Gilbertus an English man in the first book of his praxis,
in the chapter of the quartane, reproving some ignorant habbling fellows, that
profess themselves to know all sicknesses by urine, as many Physicians in
Lombardie even at this day, mockers of men, who (as they say) by urine know all
diseases, even the putrid fever, who nevertheless when they are present, and
consider all the signs, yet know but very little; For as master Richard the
most learned and experienced of all the learned says, (looking upon these
pratlers, and boasters of their judgment in urine, that in their much speaking
are eloquent, but in reason slender and mute, in his most excellent treatise of
urines, whose singular learning to be compared with none, in many things he
says he followed, he blames them in these words.) Some prating (says he) and
arrogant fellows do exceed beyond all due bounds, and interlace learning
with rules invented by their own authority; But I call God to witness, that
neither by care, nor art I could find by urine alone a certain knowledge of a
woman's conception nor of the epilepsie, nor of a quartane fever, for it is but
a deceitful and equivocall messenger. Which things indeed do very much agree
with our times. I have often seen that opinion, which by the urine the
Physician had declared, to have been changed, when he saw the sick party:
and which is more, many simple fellows that impudently meddle with Physic,
being called to the patient, by whose urine they had before fully explained the
disease, not only to have changed their opinion, but to become less able to
judge at al of the disease, although they had both the Patient and his urine
before their faces. Fifthly the urine is altered by meats, drinks, exercises,
air sleep, washing, and diverse other causes, and so makes the judgment to be
but conjecturall; therefore Avicenne after six hours, others after two hours
would not have an urine looked into. How grossly then do they err, that rashly
judge of urines that be brought to them many miles. Hence it comes to pass
that many that are noe Physicians, but merely made to cheat the people, do
promise more then good Physicians are able to perform. Nor can I except even
ministers that practice Physic, who of all men should be most holy.

Sixthly * Galen says well, 2. proch. text 2.
or the affects of the head, for it only signifyes (says he) the distempers
of the liver, kidneys and bladder, but there be other signs and symptoms of
the diseases of the brain. Yet Actuarius says, that the diseases of the
liver, brain, neck, breast, yea and of his joints also may be discerned by
urine; and Hippocrates writes that when a man's urine is like to the urine of a
beast, it shows a pain in the head. In like manner the excrements of the
whole body have recourse (as Physicians say) to the belly and the urine, by
which it may be changed; thus thin fleame falling from the head makes a
frothy urine, 4 aphot. 73.
and Hippocrates thinks that the grievous frettings and gripings of the gutts
and hypochondres may be resolved by urine. But this belongs only to
prognostickes, for the very gripings themselves cannot be known by the urine,
and much less their solution. But the most witty Argenterius did deservedly
laugh at Actuarius, for endeavoring to point out in urine the signs of
diseases in the brain, the breast and the joints. For though the excrements of
the whole body may be evacuated by the urine, yet that happens not always, for
many parts although grievously affected do not alter the urine at all.
Moreover the excrements are but the causes of diseases, and not diseases
themselves. As for that which may be said of the headache, and the frenzy, Galen
answers it: Text 4 Sect 1. proch.
* where he says, that the signs of the frenzy are either those that are
always in the phreneticke, and in them only; or which are always in them,
but not in them only; or which are neither always in them, nor in them only;
but sometimes are apparent, and sometimes not, and happen from other causes.
From whence it is manifest (says he) that neither in urine, nor in dejections
of the belly, nor in spittle, nor in vomits are there any signs of the Frenzy:
Neither do troubled Urines, nor such as have any elevation aloft, nor frothy
Urines always betoken the aforesaid affects, but do likewise proceed from
other causes, and if at any time they declare any of these, they do it with
other signs; for the aforesaid affects may be without such Urines. From
whence it may be concluded, that those signs which do not always accompany
a disease, nor yet folely, cannot indicate any disease, but such are urines.
For Galen teaches, that they by chance may betoken a frenzy, because they
iddicate a windy blood, but not by themselves and properly. Therefore (says he
in the before cited place) what has been said of Urines, makes nothing to a
judgment of the Frenzy, yet they do conduce to the discerning whether the
sick be in any great danger or no. And therefore in all diseases it is not
amiss to consider the Urine, that the danger may be discerned. Galen teaches
in many places, that the excrements are signs of the parts affected, and of
the disease; as that the dejections are signs of the belly; the spirtle of the
breast; snot of the brain; and the urine of the liver and veins; to wit, that
they are signs of the concoction which is made in those parts, but seldom of
the diseases themselves. Therefore Urine cannot show forth all diseases; as for
example the Plurisie is known by a pain of the side, a Fever, a hard Pulse,
difficulty of breathing, and cough, without the urine and spittle; for if
these come likewise, they show the cause and prognostics of the disease
already known by other signs. For though the Plurisie and Frenzy cannot be
known by urine, yet if the urine appear very much changed, it is an ill sign;
for it hetokens a distemperature not only of the vital and animal, but of
the natural parts also: And when many parts are out of frame, the sick lies in
so much the more danger. Moreover, sometimes the Urine shows whether the
disease be joined with a Fever or no, for Galen teaches, that in the affects
of the belly, 2. De Cris. cap. 7.
if they be without a Fever, only the excrements of the belly are to be looked
into, but if with a Fever, then the urine likewise, not that we may know the
disease it self, but that we may the better judge, what will be the issue of
the disease already known.

CHAP. II. That the sex, and being with child cannot be discerned by Urine,
whereof a certain story.
THey that bring Urines to Physicians, do often ask them, whether it be a
man's or woman's water, and whether the woman be with child or no. It is
admirable to see how cunningly some in this case deal with the people, But
that neither the sex nor graviditie can be discerned, I will demonstrate. For
although the Urine of a young man and an old man, of a man and a woman, be
different each from other, yet that is only in color and consistence, which
seeing they may be changed by diverse other causes, it will not properly show,
whether it be a man's or a woman's; for a choleric woman after exercise, and the
use of hot meats, will make higher colored urine than a phlegmatic man.
Moreover, she which has a Fever, or some other disease, without doubt changes
her urine according to the nature of the disease. How shall he therefore that
looks into an urine discern the Sex, when he knows not the temperature of
them that made the urine. Therefore if a healthful man be compared with a
healthful woman, a choleric man with a choleric woman, and a sick man with a
sick woman, and no external thing happen, which may change the urine, perhaps
the woman's urine may be in some respect discerned from the man's, but
otherwhiles not at all, when oftentimes it is unknown from whence the urine is
brought to the Physician. And so it is to be understood, which some Physicians
write concerning the difference betwixt a man's water and a woman's; for because
men are said to be hotter, and are given to exercises, they make thinner urine,
and higher colored, with fewer contents, but women because colder, make whiter
urine, with a larger sediment. A whitish color (says Fernel) is a sign not
only of cruditie, but of the Sex likewise. But even the hottest man may make
such urine, by reason of the causes that change urine. Therefore in this there
is no certainty, and it is too much rashness to pronounce any such thing by
urine.

Concerning women with child, A woman cannot be known to be with child by
urine.
it is a greater doubt, and it is ordinary with women for this cause alone to
send their waters to a Physician. Avicenne teaches to know it by a sediment
like unto carded cotton, and by some other marks. But seeing experience shows
the contrary, he is deservedly to be rejected. It is not necessary for every
urine of a woman to have a sediment, but that only which is well concocted.

First, who has exactly searched out all the signs of conception, never made
mention of urines.

Secondly, manifest here no proper or peculiar thing. We see urines sometimes
of a low color, as happens frequently in obstructions, sometimes very high
colored, sometimes like to the healthful, when the woman with child is in
health, sometimes thin, sometimes thick, such as may likewise be seen in
other affects. But if the woman be sick, the urine is so changed by the
violence of the disease, that all the signs of being with child, if there be
any, are obliterate.

Thirdly, Hippocrates himself shows, who after he had reckoned up many
probable signs of it, as if those were not certain, he betakes himself to
some Empyricall signs. Aphor. 41. lib. 5.
If you would know (says he) whether a woman has conceived or no, give her
some water mixed with honey to drink when she goes to sleep, if she feels
gripings of her belly, she has conceived, if not, she has not. And in his
book of the Barren, he says, Stamp Honey and Anise well together, dissolve
it in water, give it her, let her sleep, if she feel gripings about her
navell, she is with child, but if not, she is not. So that hence it may
appear, how hard a thing it is to know if a woman be with child before the
stirring of the infant, when besides many other signs, Hippocrates has
recourse to such Empyricall signs. How foolish then are they that profess
themselves to be able, so easily to divine that by urines. Avenzoar, a
Physician of principal note among the Arabians, reports, that he was deceived
in his own wife, although he had seen her urine, and had other signs whereby
he could know a woman to be with child, if the knowledge thereof were so easy.
Saxonia relates, that he was judged by Physicians to be a * mole, Or false
conception
and that his mother did take many medicines to destroy the conception, which
yet did not prevail. And to this opinion do all the modern Physicians assent,
who have written of the diseases of women.

Hither is to be added a certain fable, A merry story.
which has been related to me as a story by men of good note; and this is it:
A certain maid did carry her Mistresses urine to a Physician, and having by
chance spilled it, not knowing now what to do, she catched the urine of a Cow,
which at that time by good hap staled, and carried it to the Physician: he gave
answer, that the patient did eat too many sallets. Indeed the Physician was
worthy to be commended for his skill, who could divine that. I say this is a
fable, because I have heard the same in diverse places of sundry Physicians; as
also because it is always ascribed to some Physician that is dead, the like to
whom is no man living. And its true indeed, no man this day is living, or ever
was, that could certainly know a beasts urine from a man's. If the urine be like
to that of beasts that are accustomed to the yoke, Aphor. 70. l^b. 4.
pain of the head is either present, or will ensue, says Hippocrates; noting,
that a man may make urine like in color, and consistence, to that of beasts.
Therefore hitherto it has been doubted, in what respects a man's urine might be
discerned from other liquors. I know there are some rules and marks prescribed
by Avicenne and others, whereby they may be discerned from each other, but they
are all false and uncertain. And nothing is more easy then to deceive a
Physician, though wary, by showing him him other liquours and urines. But if a
man may make urine like to that of beasts, how can a Physician, not knowing
from whence it comes, discern one from the other.

CHAP. III. The Solution of the arguments that seem to favor looking into
Vrines.
SOme that too much approve Ouroscopie, or looking into Urines, do use the
authority and arguments of Hercules Saxonia, a very learned Physician
heretofore among the Italians, who desired to patronize a little Ouroscopie.
For he would have not only the causes of diseases, but also their Idea's,
magnitude, and states to be known by urine, not in general only, but also in
particular, whose opinion we will briefly lay down.

First, for urine has not these colors but by the mixture of humors; hence
in a diary fever Galen writes, that the urine is made somewhat reddish through
the mixture of choler. Moreover, 1. ad Glauc. cap. 2. and 3. method. cap. 2.
and 10. de crisib cap 12.
these do only betoken a hot distemper in general, not any particular sort of
it; for a hot distemper may be Synochus, a burning fever, or a tertian; it may
also be a phlegman, or erysipelas of some part. The same Galen does aver, that
a hot distemperature of the parts may be discerned by the very same urines:
what therefore can the Diviner say, if urines do only show a disease in
general, and not in particular, how will he know by the urine rather the heat
of the reins, then of the liver, or of the whole body?

Secondly, of the contents the urine be extraordinary, as matter, dregs, or the
substance of some parts, the whey will show nothing in particular, or yet when
these are apparent, except there be other signs, can we scarce know whence
they come, unless out of the bladder it self, as bran does argue an affected
bladder.

Thirdly,

Fourthly, Galen would have the urine looked into in a plurisie, and the
diseases of the lungs. But we said before, that in such diseases, Urine notes
the event of the disease, and not the disease it self.
urines serve not for discerning of the diseases, but for the fore-knowledg of
the event. The same may be said of a cold distemper, which in general we grant
may be discerned by urine, but never in particular; for in Diabetes, in the
beginnings of fits; in an ill habit of the body, dropsy, lethargy, and other
diseases, although urines may be crude, yet they do not show the affects of
these parts more then others. Therefore he is mistaken, when he says that a
cold womb may be discerned by urine, because in respect of its vicinity, the
distemperature of it is imparted to the urine. Notwithstanding, why shall a
crude urine rather show the womb than the liver? Again, if the urine distill
into the bladder high colored by some hot cause, the womb, although cold,
shall not bereave it of the color, which it has from the mixture of the
choler, and although the womb being somewhat hot, may give some color to the
Urine, yet being cold it cannot take away the color, which it has contracted
some other way.

Fifthly, he says, and therefore the Urine will show the several diseases of
them. I answer.

First,

Secondly,

Object. But says he, there is the same matter of sweat and urine, and the
matter of sweat is without the veins. Therefore when through want of sweating
the urine is increased, the whey returns into the veins.

Sol. I answer; it is false; for the matter of sweat is only without the
veins, when we do actually sweat, but not when we are about to sweat. But no
man sweats of his own accord, unless he be not well. Again, although the
humors do return into the veins, yet they will not show the peculiar
affects of the parts; as if a matterie urine flow out, it will indeed manifest
that matter is purged out, but whether it flows from the breast, or from some
other part, not the urine, but other signs of the affected part will show.

Lastly, he uses the authority of Avi^enne, who writes that urines which have
in them a thick and clammy water, are signs of the pain of the joints, which
notwithstanding is false, for a thick humor may proceed from some other
cause; but enough of this.

CHAP. IV A Breaking of urine.
troubled urine in diseases is not always a good sign.
NOthing is more ordinary, then to hear the people hoping well of the sick,
when they see the urine which is pissed out bright and clear, It is oftentimes
an il sign.
afterward to be troubled; which notwithstanding is not always true, but
rather on the contrary it may be an ill sign; where it is to be noted, that
urines are either pissed clear, and continue so; or they are pissed clear,
and are afterward troubled; or they are pissed troubled, and remain so, or
else afterward become clear, either being set to the fire, or by laying down
some thick substance, which settles in the bottom; of the causes of which
urines much may be said, which appertain not to this place. The best urine is
that which is mean in color and consistence, Best urine.
what recedes from this is evil. Therefore if it be thinner then right, it
betokens crudity. But that which is pissed clear, A troubled urine betokens a
disease coming on in those that are well.
and is afterward troubled, in them that are in health notes some danger of a
disease, because it indicates a crude humor which nature sets upon to concoct
it, therefore it is pissed clear, but the heat and spirit being lost, it is
troubled, for heat makes all things equal. In the sick it shows an increase
of the disease.
But in the sick it betokens an increase of the disease, especially if the
substance, quantity, color, and other signs be naught; now if in them that
be in health such urine notes fear of a disease, how shall it show concoction
in the sick? When any healthful man falls into a disease, his urine does not
necessarily become thinner then right, and then again thicker, and troubled,
but it is rather troubled from the beginning, and shows a future disease.
Therefore a troubled urine is never good, for from a thin urine to a mean,
which is according to nature, the passage is not made by a troubled, for the
thin comes nearer to a mean, then to a thick urine. If therefore a yellow
and thin urine become yellow and thick, and troubled, it betokens not
concoction but danger, because of the increase of corrupt matter, as Montamus
well observes. Therefore they are to be condemned, that account thick and and
troubled urine a good sign, because the obstructions seem to be opened, and
the humor that breeds the disease to be evacuated. This happens indeed
sometimes in the stone, in critical evacuations and by virtue of medicament.
They betoken crudity.
But when such waters are made without a diminution of the disease, they argue
a crude and stubborn disease, and heat, and cruditie of humors, for all
concoction makes clear urines. But they are the worst of all, which are pissed
out troubled, and continue so, because of the very great agitation of the
humors in the veins, and the great conflict that nature has with the
disease, and as Hippocrates observes, they foretell the headache, frenzy,
convulsion, death; 7. Epidem.
Polyphantus with such an urine was distracted in his mind, and dyed in a
convulsion.

CHAP. V. That the consumption cannot be known by the urine.
IT is a familiar thing also with many, when they bring their waters to
Physicians, to ask them, whether they think the sick party is in a
consumption or no. In which particular they err two manner of ways.

First in that they do not distinguish the true consumption from other
diseases, but call every wasting of the body, by what cause soever it comes, a
consumption, as we shall treat more at large in the following chapter.

Secondly, Galen and Hippocrates taken any sign of these diseases from urine:
the reason is, because no proper nor unseparable sign of a consumption can be
drawn either from the substance, color, or contents, because urine is the
whey of the humors that are contained in the veins, therefore upon the
diversity of humors the change of of urine does depend. But in them that have
the consumption, the lungs especially are affected, and the whole body in
hecticks, and not the humors. We have said already, that the diseases of the
lungs are discerned by spittle not by urine, and though it be good to look
into urine, yet it helps not to the knowledge of the disease, but only to the
prognostication of the danger that is like to ensue, for if it appear to be
naught, it increases the danger; But the Arabians said that these urines are
fat and oily, whom also many of our late writers do follow, although they do
not agree among themselves; yet for the most part they grant that in the
beginning of a hectic, nothing certain can be known by urines, but in
process of time when the fatty humidity is consumed, such urines do appear
as we have already said. But Alexander Trallianus makes noe mention of fatty
urines, but thin and fiery, and crude, for in regard that concoction is made
by the solid parts, if they be distempered, the urine cannot be well concocted,
but be thin, fiery and crude, as in a hot and dry distemper. Nevertheless
from thence it cannot be concluded, that a Physician not seeing the sick can by
urines know a hecticke fever, for such urines appear in other affects, and
may happen through diverse causes, and therefore except other causes do
concur they note no certainty. The same may be said of oily urines, of which
much might be spoken, seeing that there is a diverse acception of this word
with Galen and other Physicians. But in this place those urines are meant,
which have fat swimming aloft, which Hippocrates will have to be a bad sign.
2. progn. tex. 35
If fat like to spiders webs float aloft, it is to be disliked, for it betokens
melting. Yet it does not from thence follow that these urines do show the
consumption, for such urines are oftentimes seen in them that be in health, 4.
de sanitat. tuenda.
as Galen observe. For seeing that grease and fatness are made of blood well
concocted, it is noe wonder if some portion thereof swim above the urine, as
is usually found in cool broths. Moreover it may come to pass by much lying
upon the back, the fat of the kidneyes growing hot therewith; and these two
cases are very ordinary, and there are few that cannot observe such urine in
themselves: But those that come from causes preternaturall, do appear in
malignant and burning fevers, which we call melting or wasting.
syntecticke fevers, seldom in a consumption and hecticke, in which no such
melting does appear, but the humors are wasted by an insensible
transpiration. 10. meth. cap. ult.
Hence Galen puts this difference betwixt syntecticke and hecticke fevers,
that in these what is wasted is resolved in form of a vapor, but in them it
flows down into the belly, for the heat of a hectic is but very little and
gentle, so as the sick do scarce perceive themselves to be in a fever.
Therefore neither Galen, nor Hippocrates; nor the ancient Physicians who
observed these urines, did ever attribute them to hecticks, but to burning and
pestilentiall Fevers only. But if any fatness do flow out with the urine in
hecticks, it argues that another Fever is joined with the hectic, to wit a
malignant or burning Fever; which case is exceeding dangerous. I have now,
while I write this, a hectic in cure, in whom such urine never appeared, which
I have often observed in others that are not sick at all. And although we
should grant that such urines appear in those that be in a Consumption, yet
because they may also proceed from other causes, how can the Physician, that
only looks upon the urine, and perhaps knows not the party himself,
certainly find out the disease. But as we have said enough of the deceitful
judgment of Urines, I will only add thus much, that it was wisely prohibited
by the College of Physicians at London, that any Physician profess that
counterfeit divination. These are the words of that order. It is a ridiculous
and foolish thing by looking into Vrines alone, Judging by urine a ridiculous
custom.
to go about after the manor of Witches and Conjurers, to divine any thing as
certain and solid, either of the kind and nature of diseases, or of the state
and condition of the sick; We admonish therefore all Physicians, that they
behave themselves for the future in this particular much more warily, than has
been wont heretofore to be practiced by many. And for this cause we forbid all
that practice physic, that they preseribe any thing in Physic for those
idiots and silly women, that carry about the urinals of the sick, except they
either first know well, or see the sick party himself, or at least be plainly,
fully, and sufficiently informed by them that ask their counsel, of the whole
disease wherewith the sick does labor, and of the several circumstances
thereof: For by this means we shall both better mainetain the dignity of the
Physician, and also more fitly and skilfully bethink our selves of those
remedies, which shall be most profitable for one that is in danger.

CHAP. VI. Of the Consumption.
BEcause in this Country the Consumption is an evil so ordinary and
tremblable, we will speak something thereof, seeing of many it is not well
understood, Every pining of the body not a consumption.
for the people under that name does comprehend every pining away of the body.
It is therefore to be noted, that if we retain the general signification of
the word, there is almost no disease, which a Consumption may not succeed. But
indeed the people do err when they speak of the Consumption, as of a disease
different from others: For it is not a disease, but an accident following many
other diseases, especially if they be long. For seeing that the substance of
our bodies does daily decay, unless it be repaired with food; if the strength
of natural heat, and of the parts ordained for concoction be impaired by
diseases, the body cannot be well nourished, and therefore necessarily the
bulk thereof does pine away. So that such Consumption does happen.

First, from external causes, Several causes of a consumption.
as a hot air, want, cares, troubles, watchings, too much evacuation, and
other emptying causes.

Secondly, Marasmus of old age; for natural heat is weakened in old men, and
radical moisture is spent; the loss whereof is irrecoverable.

Thirdly, They that are gross by nature, 2 Aph. 44.
do sooner die than they that be slender. Which is to be understood of them
that are very gross, whose veins are small, and blood little.

Fourthly, Hippocrates writes: They that die of a burning Fever, Lib. 1. de
morbis.
do all die through dryness; the extremities of the body, as the hands and
the feet, are first dried up, and then the dryer parts. And some Authors
report that all the blood has been consumed, Cap. 2. lib. ad Gla^^^.
as * Argenterius writes of Mutius Medices Captain of the Castle of Pisa, in
whose dead body not one drop of blood was found. And though the sick dye not,
yet it is usual for the body to consume away in a violent fever, whereupon it
is called a hot and dry passion, and therefore Hippocrates prescribes a
moystning diet, in the sixteenth Aphorism of his first book, that it may
hinder that drying which the fever causes. Hither also ought to be referred
those fevers which are melting fevers.

Fifthly, Febres syntectica.
Hippocrates in his book de locis in homine, and * Galen, and * Averrhoes, do
affirm, Gol. 2. de facul. not. cap. ult. Averrh. 4. Colliget. 56.
that when the spleen grows the whole body decays, therefore the Emperor did
compare the spleen to the Kings excheques, for as the Kings exchequer sucks up
the wealth of the people; so does the spleen the substance of the body. The
same might be said concerning the liver, and other the inward parts, whose
evil affects do consume the body. The dropsy The watery dropsy.
ascites or The tympany or windy dropsy.
tympanites does often succeed a hard spleen, in which malady it is usual to
see the belly swollen, when not withstanding the upper parts do very much pine
away, through penury of good blood, and it does much resemble a consumption,
thus I have seen dropsick persons whom the people have thought to be in a
consumption; and indeed one disease does easily bring in another, for as we
have said, the pining and wasting of the body is not a disease of its own
kind, but an accident proceeding from very many, both external and internal
causes. Therefore every wasting of the body ought not to be called a
consumption. But coming closer to the business we affirm,

Sixthly, Hecticke fever is a consumption properly.
in which the substance of the body is wasted by little and little, and
insensibly, for in this fever the heat at the first approach seems to be
mild and gentle, afterward it is sharp and biting; the sick perceives neither
a fever nor any other malady, and yet he feels his strength decay by little
and little.

Seventhly that word (consumption) does agree with A disease when the stomach
receives meat, and yet the body is not nourished.
Atrophia, which likewise is the consequent of many diseases, and in general
also by Atrophie, any wasting of the body may be understood. But now properly
it is, when the body pines away neither for want of food, nor by immoderate
evacuation, nor by reason of any other evident causes, nor by an acute disease,
nor by a hecticke fever, nor by the ulcer of the lungs, but when softly and by
degrees the body is not nourished, though it take food; either because the
nourishment is badly attracted, or badly retained, or badly concocted, or
lastly, the superfluities of of it not well expelled, The causes of an Atrophie.
although many that have written of Atrophie, have produced all the causes of
leanness in the body.

Eighthly, and lastly, Phthisis, Phthisis is most properly called a consumption
hard to be cured.
which is an ulcer of the lungs, consuming the substance of the body with a
gentle continual fever. It is a disease much to be bewailed and hard to be
cured, yea perhaps impossible, for three causes alleged by Galen.

First because an ulcer is cured by the voiding out of the matter; now it is
voided out by coughing, and the ulcer is made larger through a cough.

Secondly,

Thirdly, because to the cure of an Ulcer there is need of rest, but it is
necessary that the lungs do always move. Add also, that to the ulcer there is
joined a fever, which requires cooling and moystning, but the ulcer drying
remedies, for the cure of every ulcer is drying. Besides it is to be noted,
that this disease is contagious, as * Hipp. 3. Epid.
Hippocrates, Gal 1 de diff feb. cap. 2.
Galen, and other Authors have observed, and that augments the danger. Now,
that the people may not be too much deceived, they must know that this disease
is not so much to be feared in children and old men; Old men and children not
subject to the consumption of the lungs.
for according to the rule of Hippocrates, in the ninth Aphorism of his fifth
book; The consumption of the lungs is especially in those ages, which are from
eighteen to five and thirty; and in his third book, the 29th Aphorism,
Spitting of blood, and Consumptions do happen to young men: for seeing that
young men have abundance of hot and bilious blood, and at that age the body
grows but little, it comes pass, that both by the plenty and heat of the
blood, and by salt fleagm arising from choler, the vessels are corroded and
broken, as also by their immoderate exercises, and other defaults in diet. But
they do seldom happen to children or old men; to them, because of their gentle
and vaporous heat, unless the natural conformation of the body do incline to
this disease, or the contagion of another, that has the ulcer of the lungs,
do hasten the malady: and to these, because in an old man's body there is but
a little quantity of humors and heat. Therefore Celsus erred, who translating
this Aphorism into Latin, corruptly placed the 12th for the 18th, as
Mercurialis observes. Avicenne in an error.
Avicenne likewise was mistaken, who would have old men especially to be
subject to the ulcer of the lungs, except it be understood of the Marasmus of
old age, (which in a manner happens to all by reason of old age) but not of the
ulcer of the lungs. For although incurable catarhes, and distillations of rheum
happen to old men, yet the humor is not so sharp, that it can exulcerate the
lungs. Therefore he that has not contracted this evil in his youth, in old
age, by reason of his proper temperament needs not to fear it; although I deny
not but it may happen some other way, as by the plurifie, inflammation of the
lungs, corrupt matter between the breast and the lungs, and other diseases,
but not by reason of the proper constitution of old men. Which things I thought
good to add, that if at any time some of the people ask a Physician, whether
the party be in a consumption or no, he may know how to distinguish of the
diverse acceptions of a Consumption, and need not fear the principal kind
thereof in old men and children. I know, Cornelius Celsus, among the several
sorts of consumptions, reckons the Cachexie, in which the habit of the body
does rather swell than fall; and I believe, if we look unto the nature of the
thing, it is true; yet because to the sight it rather appears contrary, I was
for that cause willing to omit this signification. If I had added here the
causes of all these diseases, the signs diagnostick and prognostic, and
manner of curing, which once I was determined to do, the book had grown into
too great a volume; nor do I think that to be needful, for it is my purpose
only to demonstrate the Errors of the people, and not to teach Physic: the
people may for that advise with learned and honest Physicians. Let us now
hasten to other things.

CHAP. VII. Of the Plague, whether it be infections or no.
SOme men are so froward, Stoicall, and obstinate, as that they go about to
take away from the plague all contagion and infection. Others, although they
do admit of it, yet they think it an impious thing for a Christian to fear the
evil, or to fly from it. Touching the former sort, experience shows, and the
authority of great men does confirm, that the plague is contagious. No plague
if no contagion.
Yea, that is no true plague which wants contagion.; for though some diseases
do kill like the pestilence, yet they are not the pestilence, if they be not
contagious, but malignant and pestilentiall diseases without a plague. The
scab, or itch, otherwise a very light disease, the skall, leprosy, madness,
the ulcer of the Lungs, the Ophthalmie, or inflammation of the eyes, and the
french pox do infect those that are near, why not also the plague? And
unless it be contagious, it could not be conveyed from one City to another,
which often happens, without any precedent fault of the air. Indeed Galen,
Hippocrates, and the Ancients, made no manifest mention of contagion. Yet
Thucidides affirms, that that plague which he described, was most contagious,
and therefore he persuades unto an early flight, and a late return, of which
counsel Galen being mindful, withdrew himself from Rome; and in his 1. book
de differ. feb. 2. he observes, that it is not safe to converse with those that
be infected. For seeing that whether we will or no, we must inspire air,
there is no way to escape it, but by removing far from them into some place
where the best air is, and by late returning. It matters not therefore what
Petrus Salius, a Physician otherwise very learned, alleges to prove that there
is not always contagion in the pestilence.

First, Hippocrates, Galen, and the Ancients, neither made any mention of it,
nor feared it.

Secondly,

Thirdly, Galen and Thucidides knew the contagion of it, it is evident by what
has been already said. But yet we must confess, that they did not so exactly
search out the nature and manner of it. Aristotle in his problemes has said
something of it, but very obscurely. Galen also spoke a little of it, 1. de
differ. feb.
but darkly and covertly. The Ancients knew not all things, they have left many
things to be added by them that come after; many things to be changed; many
things to be more clearly explained. Nor ought the Turks example to move us,
Foelices errore suo, quot ille malorum Maximus haud urget lethi metus
they are happy in their own error, whom that greatest of evils, the fear of
death, does not molest. Therefore so often as the pestilence strayes among
them, it rages so cruelly, that sometimes in one City it destroys an hundred
thousand men. Nor is that which follows of more power to persuade, that we see
many men alive, who without harm have conversed with infected persons, who
without doubt had perished, if there had been any force of contagion in it. But
yet if so many thousands of men, whom this communicated disease has swept
away, and the families that have been wholly abolished, should return from
death again, they would easily refute the opinion of a few survivours. To set
on an action 3 things are required; the dominion of the agent over the patient;
the preparation of the patient; and a convenient space of time, for nothing
acts in an instant. To the dominion of the agent, not only the operative virtue
of it, but also a due quantity is required, for even deadly poisons do little
in a small quantity; a spark of fire burns but little. The preparation of the
patint is either manifest, or occult, Marsi are a people of Italy, so called
from Marsus Circes son. Psilli are a people of Libia, whose bodies are venime
to serpents.
from an inbred propriety of nature. Hence the * Marsi, and * Psilli were not
hurt of serpents, and Pyrrhus his finger was not burnt by fire. And hence it is
also that some even in a most raging plague, remain free from all hurt, and
some are infected upon the least occasion. By the same occult quality it
happens, that what is poison to one is wholesome, a remedy, yea and sometimes
meat to another. Seeing therefore that the natures of bodies are unlike, and
very different, thence it is that some are overcome, and infected presently,
but others not without much difficulty. For no cause can act without a
disposition of the patient, otherwise all that dwell together under the same
Sun, Lib. de flat.
should be alike sick of Fevers, or otherwise alike affected. Hippocrates
says, one body differs from another, one nature from another, and one
temperament from another. And for that cause the same things are not profitable
or hurtful to all. To this concurres also a moderate diet, a healthful body,
void of corrupt humors, of free transpiration, temperate, dry, rather than
moist, Lib. 7. cap. 50.
cold rather than hot. Therefore Pliny has observed, that old men are not so
soon infected with the Plague as young men, because of the coldness of their
bodies, and especially if they use a moderate diet, and exercise.

CHAP. VIII. Whether it be lawful to fly in the time of Plague, or no.
THe second was, whether it be lawful to fly, The Turks fear not the plague
and withdraw a man's self out of danger, although the Plague be defined to be
contagious. The Turks, as Prosper Alpinus relates in his first book of Egyptian
remedies, do not regard the Pestilence, because they think that God has
destinated to every one his manner of death, so as he that must perish in
war, cannot be killed with the Plague, of which opinion are some Christians
also. It is the office of Divines to enquire more diligently into that, whether
it be lawful for a Magistrate, or a Master of a Family, or Children, and such
as be bound to others by a natural or civil right, to fly, and in what cases.
I will only add thus much, that holy men seem to have feared death, because
never any man hated his own flesh: for both Elias, and Moses fled; Abraham
chused rather to expose his wives Chastity to hazard, than his own life. Yea
and it is lawful to avoid all dangers. Though GOD send a Famine for the
punishment of our sins, yet it is lawful, yea it is necessary to shun it;
for he is guilty of his own destruction, who does thrust himself into present
danger. Who will not shun the raging enemy, who will not avoid flaming fire,
who is he that in swimming, if he can will not save himself from present
drowning? Ought no man with clothes and fire to drive away cold, because it is
a punishment of God, or being wounded or sick entreat the help of the
Physician? God promises long life as a blessing; it shall therefore be lawful
by any means to preserve it from eminent danger. The end of reason.
Therefore reason is given to man, not that he may promise to himself the
immediate help of GOD, but that he may wisely and discreetly make use of those
means which he has created and ordained. What man that is in his wits, will
expose himself to a roaring Lion, and will not rather provide for himself by
flight or some other means? But the Pestilence (as Galen teaches) is as cruel
as a wild beast, L^b^de Theri. ad Pisonem.
sometimes depopulating whole Cities. Wherefore if a man's calling hinder not,
no man will suffer himself to be persuaded to stay among those that are sick of
the Plague. Which policy I see many do wisely follow, neglecting the rash
piety of some. For that Christians ought not to fear death, is to be
understood, that they must not be daunted in courage with the fear of death;
nor yet are sins to be committed that death may be avoided. And lastly, in
death, if by no means it can be avoided, they must not despair. And therefore
Hippocrates says it is the safest way, Hippocrates his counsel.
to fly soon and far, and to return late. Yet it is not expedient for all to
fly, for some are to be appointed to provide things needful for them that be
sick: But they to whom it is not granted to fly, let them take heed to
themselves by alteration of the air, and by Antidotes.

CHAP. IX. What kind of death may be prevented by the help of Physic.
THe Turks, as we have already said out of Alpinus, do rush adventurously into
all dangers, because they are strongly persuaded, that there is destinated unto
every man a certain manner of death, either by Famine, or War, or Water, or
Hanging, or by a Disease, or by Age. Yea amongst us there are some so
superstitious, A superstitious conceit.
and I have known many such, who would have a certain number of days assigned
to every man, that it is not possible for the life to be prolonged beyond it,
and if any man chance to perish by the default of the Physicians, or of the
bystanders, they excuse them; because it is impossible to save him whom GOD
calls to himself. Thus word by word I have expressed their opinion. Which
absurd opinion does very much favor some mongrell Physicians, who at hap
hazard without any art attempt the cure of diseases. For thus the choice both
of Physicians and Medicaments is taken away, nor matters it whether to a
learned or unlearned, to an experienced, or ignorant man the life of man be
committed, seeing of necessity he must have dyed, whom the rashness, or
ignorance of Physicians, or bystanders, or some other mischance has taken
away. God can do whatsoever he pleases: But because he does usually work by
the help and means of secondary causes, except a man make use of them, he
hastens his own death, as he that hanged, poisoned, or otherwise killed
himself, made his life shorter, which might have been longer. The art of
Physic does not promise any man everlasting life; for at the length we must
all yield unto Fate, as the God of Nature will have it, who therefore made the
principles of our bodies passive, that at length by causes internal and
external they may be overcome. Nor yet does it excuse the Physician by whose
default the sick does perish, but it keeps off the eminent dangers of our life,
lest it perish before the time, and before mature old age. Who knows not that
the body is shaked, and weakened by the violence of diseases, and that it is
patched up again by Physic, and that by the neglect, or unseasonable use of
remedies, it does at length sink under the burden? Who knows not that a man
by a fall, or a stroke, or, by some other way may be wounded, and that he may
die thereof, unless it be well cured, who otherwise might have lived longer?
There is a certain natural death, Natural death and its causes.
proceeding from the principles of life, exhausted in extreme old age, which
God has appointed for all men, which therefore no art can keep back. And those
terms of life are diverse, in respect of the diversity of temperaments, and
other causes; therefore some live longer, some shorter, some wax old sooner;
some later, but every one when his innate heat is spent, dies in his own time
appointed by nature, as the flame of the Lamp dies out when the oil is spent.
For there is an order of all things in nature, and every time and life is
measured out by circuit, 2. De genesis and corrup. cap. 10.
as Aristotle says, to whom all Philosophers and Physicians do consent.

There is another death violent and untimely, What kind of death is to be
prevented by physic.
which is caused by Fevers and innumerable diseases, and other chances;
against this it is that a wise, skillful, and faithful Physician goes forth,
and by the right administration of wholesome remedies, he calls back into the
breast, the life that was ready to depart. For what else is it for a sick man
to be delivered from a dangerous disease, then for death to be deferred? The
Squinancie, Apoplexy, Plurisie, Pestilent Fever, and other such acute
diseases may by their own nature bring death, unless they be driven away by
remedies. What else is it to prevent diseases, then to keep back old age, and
death which is incident to it? Natural heat weakened many ways.
How many sundry causes do weaken our naturall-heat, as a corrupt diet,
surfeiting, want, watchings, troubles, cares, which do call in untimely old
age? But a good manner of living, according to the direction of Physicians does
prevent these, that the substance of the body be not too soon dissolved, but
that it may come to extreme old age, which old age has its appointed limits
in nature, known to God alone, which may indeed be hastened from diverse causes,
but yet by taking away all the causes that alter heat, it cannot be put off or
prolonged any further; and such a death happening in extreme old age, is very
rare. For who ever led such an exact course of life, that he never harmed
himself by those six things which physicians call non naturales. For they that
do not keep a wholesome manner of life, dye sooner then nature has
appointed, as says Galen 6. de sanit. tuenda.

CHAP. X. Whether intermitting fevers, commonly called Agues, becurable or no.
MAny are of opinion, that against intermitting fevers, which they call Agues,
there is no remedy, but that they do transcend all force of Physic. But
seeing experience shows that to be false, Agues curable.
(for men may see them often cured by Physicians) we need not say much of this
matter. They proceed from diverse humors, choleric, plegmaticke,
melancholic; If they be exquisitely choleric they are easily cured. Aph 59.
lib 4.
For an exquisite tertian in seven fits is judged the longest, therefore it
will be much shorter, if it be helped by remedies seasonably administered. And
it stands with reason. For if other diseases that arise from the same humors
may be cured, why not also intermitting fevers? Only this is it that deceives
the people, because some of them continue very long, and become chronicall, as
do some bastard tertians and quartanes. Nevertheless that takes not away the
possibility of curing them, seeing that these diseases have been often cured,
although not always in all that have them, otherwise it might be said also
that al continual fevers are mortal, Diseases are of 3 sorts.
because some have dyed of them. Diseases are by some Physicians divided very
well, into such as by their own nature tend unto health, such is the one day
fever: secondly into perpetual and incurable, A sort of leprosy.
such is the * elephantiasis; and lastly into those which are sometimes cured,
sometimes do kill, of which sort are very many diseases,, among which
intermitting fevers are to be reckoned, which in some happily are soon cured,
but others do continue a long time; for all diseases of the same sort, have
not always the same times, and the same end but some do end sooner, some
later, Some diseases are longer some shorter, and why.
some are cured, and some do kill, according to the diverse disposition of the
peccant humor, in quantity, thickness, toughness, acrimonie, malignity;
according to the state of the patient, and and his strength, time of the year,
country; temperature of the weather, manner of diet, constitution of the noble
parts, diligence of the Physicians and others that be conversant about the
cure, and other circumstances, the explication of which belongs not to this
place. 4. aph. 4 3.
Hippocrates says, that Fevers after what manner soever they intermitte, are
not dangerous at all. They are therefore curable by a wise and learned
Physician, although perhaps unskilful fellows by a preposterous way of
ministering Physic may make them incurable. aph. 25. lib. 2.
Thus summer quartanes are said to be short, but Autumn long, especially those
that reach unto winter. That in some men many diseases remain incurable for
divers-causes, it is not therefore to be thought that they are such by their
own nature, nor is it to be concluded to the dishonor of Physic, that they
cannot be overcome and conquered by art. Nevertheless men should not give
credit to the boasting words of some moungrel-Physicians, who fear not to try,
and spare not to promise any thing, and yet perform but little. If they chance
with a doubtful remedy to cure a hard disease not well known of them, with
what words can the glory of so great a miracle be expressed, with what reward
can it be requited? But if the cure succeed not well, they lay the blame not
upon themselves, but upon the negligence of the patient, or the bystanders, or
on the wilfulness of the sick.

CHAP. XI. That the heat of the liver cannot be known by the heat of the palm
of the hand.
IT is an ordinary thing with many, when the palm of the hand is very hot, to
think that they are affected with a preternaturall heat of the liver, which
notwithstanding is not very certain, although some Physicians also have been of
the same opinion. For what greater sympathy is there of the liver with the
hands, then with any other part; No extraordinary sympathy between them.
Galen in Art parva writes, that if the liver be hot, the whole bulk of the
body is not likewise, unless the heart do hinder it, and in like manner the
whole body is made hot by the heart, if the liver hinder not, and therefore it
ought not to be attributed to the hands only. Again that unusual heat of the
hands does rather proceed from the heart, which communicates to the whole body
hotter spirits, and warmer blood then the Liver. Moreover Galen in his book
against Lycus proves, that there is no sympathy betwixt the stomach and the
hands, because there is a threefold reason of sympathy. A threefold reason of
sympathy.
First, of vicinitie; the second of familiarity of function; the third, by
communion of vessels; which things we may apply to the Liver and the hands: For
betwixt them there is no vicinitie or nearness in regard of situation; no
familiarity of function; if there be any sympathy, it must be of the third
kind, to wit, by communion of vessels; but the vessels that issue out of the
Liver, are not carried to the hands alone, but to the whole body. In the hands
besides the veins, there are arteries, which convey to them a greater heat
from the heart: Therefore from the hands ought not to be inferred rather the
heat of the Liver then of the heart. Besides the heat of the Liver is
perpetual, or at least of long continuance, but that heat of the hands is
fugitive, 6. Epid. Sect. 2. text. 32. Fen. 13. lib. 3. tract. 1. cap. 3. 4.
Colliget. cap 4.
often goes and comes again. Again, other Authors attribute it to the Spleen,
to wit, if the Spleen tend upwards, but if it incline downwards the lower parts
are said to be hot. * Avicenne will have long fingers to show the magnitude and
heat of the Liver; but * Averrhoes laughs at him: And the man whom thou know
says, that the shortness of the fingers betokens a little Liver, and herein
it appears that he knew not wherein the power of forming did consist, and
considered not but in the parts themselves, but let him go with the rest.
Which are the words of Averrhoes, who believed not that the signs of the
temperature, or conformation of the Liver could be drawn from the hands, seeing
there is no more peculiar sympathy between these parts than others. Therefore
Galen in Art parva, when he explicates the signs of an hot Liver, omitted
that figne of the heat of the hands, as did the rest of the Greeks, Aetius,
Aegineta, and others. Argenterius in his commentary on the forenamed place of
the Art of Physic, blames Galen, for omitting this sign. But more rightly do
others defend Galen, because that sign is nothing else then the vain
imagination of the vulgar; for not only the hands, but the whole body is
necessarily made hot, neither is that heat of the hands permanent, but
unstable, and uncertain.

CHAP. XII. Of them that complain of a hot Liver, but a cold Stomach.
IT is a common and ordinary thing for many to complain of the heat of the
Liver, and coldness of the Stomach, because they feel wind and crudities in
their Stomach, together with some running heats in the body, as in the face,
hands and feet. But these are to be admonished of some things.

First, The Stomach is naturally of a cold temperament.
but to think that the heat of the Liver can hurt it, is an absurdity: For
Galen writes, that it was fenced about by Nature on every side with hot
Intrailes, that it might more completely execute its functions: it lies in the
middle, between the Liver, the Spleen, the Caul, and the gut Colon, and is
encompassed with them on every side, that like a cauldron among a great many
fires it may be made hot by them; wherefore Riolanus in his Anthropographie
does not think it a thing probable, that the heat of the Liver should diminish
the heat of the Stomach, but rather augment it.

Secondly, it ought to be observed, Strong drinks breed cold diseases.
for cold affects to proceed from too much gulleting even of hot drinks, which
do not happen by a distemper of the part, but through the fault of him that
takes them. In the mean while the Liver draws unto it the thinner spirits of
those drinks, whereby it is enflamed, and so distributes too hot blood to the
whole body. Thence it is that they seem to feel heat in the body, and cruditie
in the Stomach at the same time. And so they falsely accuse the contrary
distempers of the parts, not blaming their own intemperance. But if they would
live soberly, and use moderate drinks, they should experience no such matter.

Thirdly, some are troubled with it, although they live soberly, and such are
hypocondriacke persons, whose They are the parts contained in the belly.
hypocondres are hot and dry, and obstructed, which evil is very common in
this country, and it arises most commonly from the aforesaid cause, namely a
disordered diet. But in them the Stomach is not made colder, by reason of the
vicinitie of the hot hypocondres, but because many melancholy and flatulent
humors are cast into the stomach, which vitiate concoction, whereupon they
think they have a colder stomach than indeed they have. Thence it is that
Physicians demand, how it comes to pass, that hypocondriake persons, seeing
they are oppressed with a hot disease, do nevertheless abound with wind and
cruditie^. The cause whereof, although some Physicians refer to the cold
Stomach, yet it is better as we have said, to refer it to the corrupt humors
weakening the temper of the Stomach; from whence proceed not only tart
crudities, which come from cold, but also nidorous belchings, which do arise
from heat, especially if the party cat nidorous meat, as fried Eggs, and the
like. Hence one says well, that the symptoms in an hypochondriake passion are
many of them cold, but the cause is hot.

CHAP. XIII. That the Husband cannot breed his Wives child.
AMong very many Errors, this seems most worthy to be laughed at, that the
husband is thought to be sick, and troubled with the same symptoms, wherewith
a woman with child is wont; yea and many will have this thing to be confirmed
by experience. I had a patient sick of a Fever, with a very high colored, and
troubled urine, who would not be persuaded of any other cause of his sickness,
then his wives being with child. I do not remember that I have read of it at
any time, nor heard it observed in any place but in England. It is certain
that women with child, in the first months of their conception, are wont to
be troubled with very many and sundry symptoms, especially they that are of
cacochymick and impure bodies: Now they do usually arise from the retention of
their Flowers. For seeing Nature is wont to use that Flux, not only for the
purging out of superfluous blood, but of corrupt and vicious humors also, such
blood being retent and kept in, they are likewise retained. That blood
retained, because for the smalnesse of the young one in the beginning of her
graviditie, it is not at all spent for the nourishment thereof, does putrify,
and has recourse either to the noble parts, or at least annoyes them with
filthy vapors which it sends forth, from whence arise the aforesaid symptoms
in the stomach, intrailes, belly, head, and the whole body, as vomiting,
loathing of meat, unsatiable longing and lusting, gripings, dizzinesse of the
head, and such like. Seeing therefore the husband has not in him the causes of
these affects, but his wife only, it stands with reason, that she only
should be sick. Nor, if any husband be sick when his wife is with child, was
he infected by his wife; for that distemper may happen through some peculiar
fault of his own body. As while I write this it raines, yet neither is my
writing the cause of the rain, nor the rain of my writing. It is no new thing
for husbands and their wives to be both sick together. But it is a wonder, and
heretofore a thing unknown, that graviditie, or a woman's being with child is a
contagious disease, and that not other women, but men only, whom nature has
freed from this travail, should be infected therewith. Furthermore it is
observed, that the same symptoms do not happen to all women, or at least not
all to every one, and yet it often falls out, that when the woman is in good
health, the husband is sick, yea sometimes being many miles off. But if he
endure that by his wives being with child, how comes it to pass that she
continues well at the same time? For natural causes do sooner work upon the
near, than upon the remote subject: And for that cause, seeing the woman
carries about her such noxious humors, she should be sooner, and more
grievously sick. I know something might be said of simpathy, antipathy,
contagion, fascination, and other such trifles. But if these things be so, why
do not maids and widows, who are very often troubled with the like symptoms,
through suppression of their flowers, infect their bedfellows and familiars,
seeing there is the same cause, and without doubt they may have a sympathy with
some of them. To cause a contagion, not only the efficacy of the agent, but
also a disposition and analogy in the patient is requisite. But who believes
not, that another woman is more prone to receive and take the symptoms of
gravidity than a man, seeing they were all created for propagation of children,
and therefore one woman ought to take great heed to her self of another.
Moreover it may happen, that a woman that is sore troubled with the green
sickness (as they call it) is married to a man, whom notwithstanding although
her flowers be suppressed, she shall never infect: why then when the same woman
is with child, and there is no other reason of sickness, then suppression of
the flowers, shall her husband be sick? Men would be in an ill case, if as
often as there were a suppression of their wives flowers, so often they, not
their wives should be sick? But because by the very relating of it, the
absurdity of this error does appear, I will add no more. Jupiter bore
Bacchus in his thigh, and Pallas in his brain; but let this be proper to him
alone.

CHAP. XIIII. Whether foreign Physicians, and Aliens can know the temper of
the sick of another Country.
TO know the temperature of the sick, conduces much to the knowledge of
diseases, and their cure, and this business requires a long and difficult
handling. I will only say thus much, that some are of opinion, that Strangers
cannot know the temperature of them of another Country, as French men of the
English: But that is repugnant to the nature of the Art of Physic, the
precepts whereof are general, The precepts of Physic are general
and may easily be applied to any Country. For every art is of universals, not
of particulars, therefore here in England, all that are skillful Artists do
practice Physic according to the precepts of Galen and Hippocrates, which if
any man do well understand, he is able to discern the diversity of men
according to their ages, countries, and the different temper of the air, and
what medicaments are convenient for them. Concerning which, Hippocrates has
written an excellent book of air, waters, and places. For the Art of Physic,
wheresoever it is taught, does lay down marks and signs which are taken from
Countries, both for the knowledge and prognostication of diseases, and
indications, which the diversity of Countries does afford, for the appointment
of a right diet, letting of blood, prescribing of purges, and administering of
all other remedies. Otherwise it were no Art, if it should accommodate its
precepts to some particular place only. Galen, who was borne and brought up in
Greece, practiced Physic at Rome: Hence 3 prognost.
Hippocrates says that his documents may be applied to any Country, either hot
or cold, to Lybia, Delos, Scythia, and the rest. Also the Arabians have
borrowed from the Greeks their precepts of curing, which are the very same with
the Galenists, which we promiscuously follow. Therefore it was wisely ordered
by the Spaniards, and Portugals, that in India, where they bear rule, Physic
should be practiced after the self same manner that it is in Europe, according
to the doctrine of Galen and Hippocrates. I know much might be said of that
variety of temperature which Countries do give to the inhabitants, for even in
one and the same Kingdom there is a great diversity of inhabitants, in
respect of the diverse situation of the Countries, nature of the soil, blowing
of the wind, and other causes, for the diligent search of all which, the Art of
Physic lays down rules. And yet whatsoever the Climate and Country be, even
in the most Northern Climates, there are men of every temper, hot, cold,
choleric, phlegmatic, sanguine, melancholic. One that without license
practiced Physic, a Surgeon by profession, that he might do me a displeasure,
was often wont to say, that Frenchmen cannot understand the nature and
constitution of the English. I once asked him what was that constitution of an
Englishman, wherein he differs from a Frenchman, by what signs he could know
it, seeing that in every place are men of every temperature, which things
seeing they cannot be known but of a learned Physician, it is no wonder if
every simple medicine-monger be ignorant of them. For it is a thing exceeding
hard to be known. Therefore Galen said, that if he could but perfectly know the
temperature of his Patients, he should be another Aesculapius. I will now only
add thus much, that what is talked by the vulgar concerning the temperature of
diverse people, is well understood but of few, for all men have their proper
temperaments differing from others, engendered in them from the principles of
generation; they cannot therefore have any thing common in which all men can
agree. That same therefore is only a certain custom, and inclination of
nature to a man's own Country, air, and usual manner of diet, which we
acquire by little and little, without changing of that proper and inbred
temperament, which we derive from our parents, from whence it comes to pass,
that some live better in their own Country air, although unwholesome, than in
another. Avicenne says, that an Indian would be sick if he were in Sclavonia.
Although that is not always true, for it may be that some Englishman may live
more healthfully in Spain, than in his own native Country.

CHAP. XV. Of them that refer almost all diseases to a Cold.
IT is a thing very frequent and ordinary, when any falls into a disease, or is
not well, to blame some external cold, from which, he has not carefully
preserved himself. And indeed this may oftentimes be the cause of many
diseases. For the air is attracted by us continually by inspiration, and
transpiration, and it does impart its qualities to us, whatsoever they be. But
it hurts most of all, when the pores being opened through heat, a cold comes of
a sudden, for it obstructs and stops them presently; from whence, by reason of
the fuliginous vapors retained, fevers do ordinarily ensue in cacochymick
bodies; but in others, pain, weariness, difficulty of breathing. Cold air
being inspired, makes the gristles of the lungs become stiff, so that the
lungs can scarce be dilated. Hence oftentimes the vessels of the lungs are
broken, and of other parts also, and the blood runs into some capacity, and
putrifies, corrupts, and stirs up naughty symptoms. But concerning this thing,
it will not be amiss to give some notice of a few monitions.

First, that all that blame this cause, of diseases. Therefore commonly they
that live in a cold air, reap not any evil thereby; but the same parties,
even in the height of Summer, and being well clad with clothes, do
notwithstanding complain that they get cold to their hurt. the same may be
said of other external causes of diseases. In one and the same City, there are
many that breath in the same air, use the same exercises, and the same diet,
yet when they fall into diseases, they are troubled with sundry, and in every
respect, different diseases. If any man shall say that he is sick through a
surfeit of meats or drinks, perhaps he had eaten or drunk as largely a hundred
times before, and without any harm to himself: which in like manner may be said
of cold air, and immoderate labor; when many a time he has endured a colder
air, and undergone the same labor without receiving the least hurt, it is a
wonder how now he should be sick thereby. So we often see the last meat, or
that exercise that one has last used, or the last cold which he has taken
before the disease, to be blamed, as also the last remedy is thought to have
procured health. Where it is to be noted, that these are called external
causes, and that they do not always, and at every time affect the body, but
then only when an inward disposition lurks in the body, and a morbous
preparation, which such causes do stir up.

Secondly, they must take notice, that those external causes do vanish away,
and continue not, but their effects, to wit, the diseases stirred up by the
inward causes do remain in the body, and therefore the contemplation of
external causes is not always necessary for the knowledge or curing of
diseases, but of the internal alone, which stir up, and foster the disease.
For we see a disease that has had its beginning from a cold air,
nevertheless not to be cured, although the temper of the air be changed, but
often to continue hard to be cured.

From whence also, Thirdly, it is to be noted, that remedies are not to be
measured according to the nature of external causes, for they indicate
nothing. For so hot things should be always good for them, in whom cold hoth
been the cause of the beginning of a disease, which is not true, for many times
cooling things do profit more. From a cool air, as we have said, many times
burning fevers do arise; as also from baths that are too cold, whereby the
pores of the body are stopped, and the fuliginous vapors retained, by which
the blood is inflamed. If the people do here (as usually they are wont)
encounter the disease with remedies that are of a heating quality, they will be
so far from vanquishing the disease, as that they will rather increase it
more. In this case inward cooling medicines, and as Galen often teaches,
letting of blood is the principal remedy: In the eighth book of Method he
lets blood in a diary, that is generated by the obstruction of the skin, lest
there follow putrefaction. For though the external cause be cold, yet the
internal, to which alone the cure is to applied, is often hot, and is made so
by reason of the corrupt humors that are kept in.

POPVLAR ERROVRS. The Third Book. Of the Errors about the Diet, as well of the
Sound as of the Sick.
CHAP. I. Of the goodness of Waters.
HIppocrates, Galen, Avicenne, and other of the principal Physicians, do so
commend the drinking of water in diseases, that next to the letting of blood,
they attribute thereunto the chiefest place in curing burning fevers, and it
is also the ordinary drink of many Nations. Yet now a days some do so much
abhor from the use thereof, that they think it almost present poison. Now
they think that the waters in England, in respect of the coldness of the
Climate, are more crude, and not so pure and wholesome as those in France,
Spain, and the hot Countries. And indeed every one ought to be solicitous of
the goodness of the waters. The best is discerned by the smell, color, taste,
levity of it in the hypochondres, and by the quick and speedy receiving of heat
and cold. So as that is best which is bright and clear to the sight, tastes
and smells of nothing at all, as also which is the lightest, thinnest, and soon
passes through the belly. Since then such water may be found every where, Good
waters even in cold climates.
even in the most frozen Countries, and I have often found such in this
Country, we may conjecture of their gross error, that do generally condemn
their own Country waters. Now this is their error, that by the coldness of
the Country they reckon the goodness or unwholsomenesse of the water; hence
they think that it is excessively cold, and therefore crude, and hard of
digestion, which Hippocrates calls (...). Which thing is not to be admitted,
for the water borrowes not its crudity or goodness from the Sun, because the
heat of the Sun cannot warm the water in the bowels of the Earth, for it cannot
penetrate so far, which scarce pierces through the roofs of our houses unto us.
This do the cellars under the Earth manifest, which in the height of Summer
are exceeding cold. But if the Sun be not the cause of this, much less can
the parts of the world, which are hot only because of the propinquity, or
remoteness of the Sun. Therefore others do more rightly blame the cold or
heat of the earth it self: for if the heat of the earth be moderate; the water
is well concocted; but if there be burnings in the earth, it breaks out either
hot, or warmed, so as all sorts of water may spring forth in any part of the
world, which is especially to be understood, if they be drawn out of the
fountain it self, before they be altered by the cold air. To this add the
manner of transcolation; for that is the purest, What water is the best.
not which lies open toward the Sun, or runs Eastward, but that which is
best strained. For in its own nature it is a simple body, which unless it be
tinctured with some other mixture, will always in every place be of equal
goodness. Therefore that which is well strained, and so purged from dregs, is
the best, in as much as it comes nearer to the integrity of its own nature,
and is free from the mixture of another matter. Therefore seeing this is done
by the transcolation and thorough-straining, there is no doubt but every where
good and evil waters may spring forth, as the straining through is made better
or worse. Now this depends upon the nature of the earth. On this Error hangs
another; An Error in not boiling beer well.
that they do but lightly boil thin beer made of water ofttimes impure
enough; for by a light boiling it cannot be amended, nor the cruditie taken
away, and hence do happen the evils which Authors attribute to crude waters,
that they are thick, heavy to the belly, stick long in the bowels, cause
swimmings, are easily corrupted, and do not distribute well the nourishment;
for drink should be very light and passible: They do worse who drink it very
new, as many are wont, especially in the North parts of England; for so it does
neither please the palate, nor is wholesome to the body; for it is heavy in the
hypochondres by reason of the abundance of dregs, and it causes obstructions,
the mean thereof is the best, being well boiled and thoroughly purified.

CHAP. II. That the linen of the sick ought often to be changed.
IT seems to the common people to be a heinous offense, often to change the
linen used about the sick. For they think that the sick are enfeebled and
weakened thereby. This Error Hollerius in his chapter of the burning Fever,
and Rondeletius in his chapter of the Fever Synochus, have noted among their
countrymen, and reproved, but they give no reason for it; yet they bid that the
linen about the sick be often changed: For by long keeping of them, three
inconveniences do happen to the sick: To wit, 3. Inconveniences by foul
linen.
the transpiration of the body is hindered; sweat and filth are hept in their
shirts, which do putrify and contract an ill favor; the sweat and filth do
obstruct the body, and so double the heat: Which three things what great hurt
they bring to the sick, and the healthful also, all Physicians know.
Hippocrates bids that all things be kept clean about the sick, and Galen
studies by all means to preserve transpiration free, that the cold air may be
attracted, and filthy vapors excluded, especially in continual Fevers, in
which for the most part the Fever comes by the obstruction of the pores of the
skin. Therefore these being obstructed, both by the filth and the sweat,
there follows a retention of the fuliginous vapors, and thereby the Fever
which was before, is increased, or is kindled afresh. On the contrary, it can
scarce be, that he whose body does transpire well, and so is free and open,
should fall into grievous and dangerous diseases. The Ancients that did not use
linen, did keep a frequent use of baths and frictions, whereby the body was
opened, and cleansed. Add to this, that the excrements being retained do
putrify, and the sweat stinks, from whence succeeds an increase of the
feverish heat, nor does that evacuation by the pores of the skin commodiously
ensue. Therefore it is very good often to change the linen about the sick, and
when they sweat diligently to wipe or cleanse their body.

CHAP. III. Of Lessius his Diet-booke.
LEssius the Jesuit, a most learned man, in his Eloquent Diet-booke, has so
endeavored to mote out every man's course of Diet, that he would have twelve
ounces to be a sufficient quantity of meat for any man, and fourteen of
drinste, which he that will observe, ought to refuse no kind of meat which the
people uses, nor shall he easily fall into diseases, through fullness or ill
humors, but shall always be furnished with a lively body, and cheerful mind.
All which is true of sobriety in the general. 6. Epid. Sect. 4. aph. 20.
For the study of health is not to eat too much-meat and to be quick to labor.
But that quantity of meat seems to me not to be agreeable with the opinion of
Physicians; for the same quantity of meat cannot be sufficient for all men,
but it must be diverse in respect of times and places, kinds of meat,
exercises, labors, and nature of him that takes it. He seems to have
accommodated that course of diet principally to religious men. In Summer a
less, in Winter a greater quantity of meat is convenient, because the * belly
is hotter, 1 Aph. 19
and sleep longer, as says Hippocrates: Because therefore one body differs
from another, one nature from another, and countries differs, times of the
year, ages, and the nature of meats are diverse, a certain measure cannot be
prescribed. Some meats are very nourishing, of which a small quantity does
suffice; some nourishing but little, which ought to be given in a greater
quantity. Therefore Hippocrates in his book de veteri Medicina said well, that
neither the measure, nor weight, nor quantity can be known, nor any other
certainty be found, then by the sense of the body. So Galen teaches, 2 Aph. 27.
that such a quantity is to be administered, as may not burden the stomach. 1
Aph. 5.
And Hippocrates is plain, that a slender diet is more dangerous for those
that are in health, than a full diet. To whom Celsus does assent, who persuades
to meat twice a day, Capa. lib. 1.
rather than but once, and always to eat liberally, so that it may be well
concocted. The same Celsus writes, that a man in health, and that is at his own
liberty, ought to tie himself to no laws; yea, that sometimes he should eat
and drink liberally. Diet is indicated by the strength, now the strength
indicates a preservation of it self; but such a diet does not preserve but
diminish strength, Diet is threefold.
and exhaust natural heat. Physicians make a threefold difference of diet;
Slender, which impaires strength; moderate, which preserves strength; and full,
which increases it. Now a slender diet is never convenient for the healthful,
but for the sick only. Lib. 7. aph. 65.
For as meat is strength to the healthful, so to the sick, it is a diseases
Lib. 2. aph. 10.
and impure bodies, the more you nourish them, the more you hurt them. But in
them that be in health, the strength of nature is always to be preserved, or
to be augmented by food, not to be impaired: Now a full diet does increase
strength, a amoderate preserves it, and a spare diet does diminish it,
therefore in health, it is always good to avoid this spare diet: But it will
not be amiss to use either of the other, whether it be a full diet, or it
concern the upholding or maintaining of strength by a moderate diet, as the
present state shall seem to require; as Galen teaches in his Comment upon the
fourth Aphorism of the first book. But if there be any found among the holy
Fathers, that have lived to the hundredth year of their age in continual
fastings, and extreme abstinence from meat and drink, that is rather to be
attributed to a miracle, than to any natural cause, Ad aph. 4. lib. 1.
says * Mercurialis. Notwithstanding Lessius himself says well, that this
was no miraculous thing, but possible to nature. In the general, such a spare
diet creates but few spirits, and those not so quick and agile, and makes the
body unable to endure labor, and external injuries; for where there is
hunger, Apha 6. lib. 2.
labor ought to be abandoned. It may perhaps be good for moist bodies, and
such as are accustomed to it, as also old men, and such as live a contemplative
life: 7. Aph. 59.
* for hunger dries the body, Aph. 13. lib. 1.
and * old men easily endure fasting. Therefore although I do very much
approve of this book of the most learned Lessius, and think it very fit for
religious persons that lead a contemplative life, yet it is not so convenient
for others, that follow another course of life. In general only, any one may
learn out of it, that sobriety is a virtue highly to be commended, and very
profitable to the body, for the preservation of the health of the body and
mind, and for prevention of diseases.

CHAP. IIII. That not a full, but a slender Diet is convenient for the Sick.
HIppocrates said well in his first Aphorism, that not only the Physician, but
the bystanders, and the sick himself also ought to do their duty, otherwise
remedies cannot be fitly administered, if what the Physician has rightly
prescribed, the bystanders do either omit, or use unseasonably, or attempt
any thing about the sick, which afterward may prove hurtful to him, without
the advice of the Physician. And therefore in this Chapter we will speak
somewhat of the bystanders. For those women that serve the sick, as also the
kinsfolks and friends that come to visit the sick, do usually obtrude upon his
abundance of meat, and that very often, as they say, to uphold his strength,
always fearing lest he dye with hunger. Their intention truly is very good,
for the integrity of the strength is the conservation of the whole man. Now the
diet has especially regard unto the entire safeguard of the strength, and by
accident unto the cure, in as much as it ought to resist the disease and its
cause. Athreefold error in the point of diet.
But they commonly err in quantity, quality, and time, wherewith the
circumcumstances, not only of meats, but of all remedies are wont to be
determined. As concerning the quantity, (for we will begin with with it) it is
to be noted, that the sick have the causes of diseases lurking within them,
which do impair their strength; now meat, although it does by its own nature
preserve strength, yet it does not subdue the causes of diseases, from whence
it comes to pass, that the disease oftentimes forbids the meat, which the
strength requires: therefore the more more you nourish impure bodies, Ach. 10.
lib 2. A good civeat.
the more you hurt them, says Hippocrates. Which thing all they ought to
consider, who who while they busy themselves to help the sick, do thrust them
into a sure destruction, and whether the Physician command or forbid any thing,
yet they do of their own accord what they please. It is an ordinary thing for
the sick, especially such as be sick of fevers, for whom principally keepers
are provided, to refuse meat, by reason of ill humors that oppress the
stomach, by which, as Galen says in his Commentaries, the meat is corrupted,
and so the ill humors are increased, and their quality not amended at all;
hence it is so far from increasing the strength, It is not the eating of
meat, but the concocting of what is eaten that nourishes
as that it is rather impaired thereby; for as the same Galen said well in
another place, the body is not nourished by those things which are taken into
it, but by those which being taken, are well concocted, which is not usual in
sick persons. For a weak stomach does not well concoct meat, but it is rather
corrupted by the abundance and contagion of vicious humors, 7 Aph. 65.
and so it nourishes the cause of the disease. Therefore Hippocrates said
well, If any give meat to one in a fever, as it is strength to the healthful,
so it is a disease to the sick. In Hippocrates his days, as well as in our
age, they erred in their manner of diet, as he complains in his first book of
the diet of Acute diseases. And therefore after his counsel it is best to use
a slender diet, which if it may suffice them that be in health, as we said in
the former Chapter, much more the sick; therefore more ought not to be given
to them then their strength can digest. Here also the nature of diseases is to
be observed, for some are Chronicall, in which it is lawful to nourish more;
others Acute, in which a spare diet is very convenient. 1 Aph. 7.
When a disease is very acute, the patient has exceeding great labors, and an
exceeding spare diet is to be used; but when it is not acute, but it is
convenient to use a full diet, so much meat is to be taken as the disease
abateth of extremes. And in the following Aphorism, When the disease is in
the height, then the patient must use a very spare diet; because, as Galen
says in his Comment; nature must not be withdrawn from the concoction of the
humors to the concoction of meat: Therefore seeing that according to the
strength of the party, and nature of the disease, the quantity of food is to
be judged, and that a great part of the remedy does consist in food seasonably
administered, the bystanders ought not importunately to obtrude it, especially
women, who are always afraid lest the sick dye with hunger. Yet I do not
altogether disallow of meat, for by it alone is the strength preserved. But I
have in this Chapter insinuated, that the quantity, quality, and time of using
it, ought to be prescribed by the advice and counsel of Physicians.

CHAP. V. Of the quality of meats about the Sick.
IT is an usual thing likewise for them to err, not only in quantity, but in
quality also. For they are often wont to offer to the sick, yea to such as be
sick of fevers, diverse strengthening meats, as they call them; as ale boiled
with eggs, mace, nutmeg, and cynamon, and other meats which they call by sundry
names; yea, and they urge them sometimes to take solid meats; but all this very
foolishly.

And first, it is certain, that solid meats are unfit for the sick, seeing
they cannot be well concocted by the stomach. Supping meats sooner nourish then
solid meats.
But those meats that are to be supped, are more easily overcome by the
stomach, and do soonest nourish; and therefore Hippocrates in diverse places
persuades to nourish the sick with supping meats, rather than with solid meats.
For by such a diet nature is sooner strengthened, and is not hindered from the
conflict which it has begun with the disease. Aph. 11. lib. 2.
It is more easy to be filled with drinks than with meat: where by drinks
he means whatsoever is taken by supping, as interpreters observe.

Secondly, it is to observed, that in the healthful, meats ought to be alike,
because the natural state does require to be preserved, but every thing is
preserved by things that are alike: But in the sick, the quality of meats ought
to resist the disease, that there may be medicine in meat, for to every disease
its contrary must be applied: To a hot nature, 6 Epid. sect. 6.
cooling, drinking of water, rest; From whence it comes to pass, that they
that go about to strengthen the sick with such a diet, do oftentimes more
hurt to them, and more increase the cause of the disease, and so the strength
is more impaired. Therefore the judgment of a Physician is always to be used;
nor ought the bystanders rashly to exhibit any thing, which otherwise is
profitable to the healthful, for the same does prove many times very hurtful
to the sick. And let this suffice to be said in this place; for the larger
explication of this subject, belongs to them that write of the matter of
Physic. For it is not my purpose to teach Physic, but only to show to the
people their errors, as I have said in another place.

CHAP. VI. Of the time of using meats.
A Physician ought also to be consulted withal, at what time meats may most
fitly be administered, otherwise a pernicious Error may happen to the sick, and
at this day this Error is too familiar. For the Bystanders, especially the
women, do usually offer meat to the sick at inconvenient seasons. Where they
must know, Not good to easin fit.
that in the fits they should altogether abstain from meat, as Hippocrates
teaches. In the fits it is good to abstain, Aph. 11. lib. 1.
for to give meat then is hurtful; and they to whom the fits do come by
circuit, must abstain in the fit. And in the nineteenth Aphorism of the
second book, It is good to give nothing to them that have fits by circuit, nor
to compel them to eat, but to withdraw from their ordinary diet, till after
the crisis. Wherein they erred not a little in Hippocrates his time, as also in
this our age, in which there are many, that without difference do feed the
sick, having no regard to the time. Now he does not here only forbid to give
meat in the fit, but also to compel the sick to take it; for it is the fashion
of many to urge them to eat. For while nature in the fit wrestles against the
disease, it is but little intent upon digesting the meat, whereby it comes to
pass, that it being unconcocted does increase the disease, and the symptoms
thereof. Now what what harm comes by the unseasonable eating of meat, 4. De
acut.
the same Hippocrates teaches.

The First is,

The Second, In what case it may do good to nourish the sick.
but also necessary to nourish the sick in the paroxysme, to wit, when the sick
is of an hot and dry temper, has the mouth of of his stomach feeble, and of a
most exquisite sense, so that it is easily offended by every humor, and causes
danger of swouning. At that time to nourish with those things which corroborate
the stomach, Galen judges it to be most profitable; 10. Method. cap. 3. where
he tells the story of a young man, who in Summer lying sick of a Tertian,
unless he did eat meat in his fit, he fell into a Syncope. But this case is
very rare, and requires not a little skill and judgment in the Physician, and
exceeds the capacity of the vulgar, and therefore it is not safe to imitate
this without the advice of a prudent Physician. All which I have said, that men
may seriously consider, that they ought not adventurously to use those
remedies, which otherwise seem to be most familiar with nature; for in the
application of every remedy, many things are to beloonsiderect, which the
skillful Physician alone does know. But many that adveaturoufly practice
Physic are ignorant of them, who take care only that they may get popular
applause, and please the people, that they may seem to be solicitous for the
strength of the sick, the confervation of which nevertheless does not depend
on words, but on the seasonable administration of remedies. Let all men know
therefore, that the sick ought not always to be obeyed, as if he desire that
which is hurtful to him. 6. Epid. sect. 4. text. 7.
But in these things (says Hippocrates) the sick are to be obeyed. Namely,
that their meat and drink be cleanly dressed, When good to obey the sick.
that those things be pleasant which they see, and soft which they touch,
provided they hurt not too much, and that they be easy to be amended, as the
administering of cold water when there is need, and such like. So Avicenne in
the third Section of his first book, wills that those things which are desired
of the sick be granted, so as no harm come to the body. aph. 38. lib 2.
And Hippocrates says; Meat and drink a little worse, but pleasing, is to be
preferred before better, but less pleasing. where he does not grant corrupt
meats, but only such as are a little worse, so that the sick be very much
delighted therewith, and prefers them before such meats as the sick does
utterly abhor, which are never to be given to the sick. Thus Galen did yield
to some that were sick of Fevers to taste simits. 1. ad Glavcon.
As therefore I do not approve of too austere Physicians, Too much indulgence
in a physician not good.
yet they that be too indulgent are worse, such in times past was Asclepiades
at Rome, who granted to the sick, bathes, wine, flesh, and whatsoever was liked
and wished for by the sick, and so with a wonderful craft he drew unto him the
minds of men, doubtless not without the apparent danger of many. From what
has been already said another error is conspicuous; for in Agues, when the
sick are cold all over their body, they give them drink both actually hot, and
very heating, that they may drive away the cold fit, which is contrary to the
judgment of Hippocrates, 1. Acut.
and of the ancient and modern Physicians, who forbid to administer any thing
in the fits, and persuade rather to lessen the quantity of their meat and
drink. Hence Hippocrates commands when the feet are cold, to abstain both from
supping meats, and drink; for drink, especially if it be hot, is soon
corrupted, and exasperates the aguish heat; therefore in the beginning it is
best to give nothing at all, but when the heat has descended to the feet (as
the same Hippocrates says) something may be given, but it must be such as is
not hurtful for the disease, as those hot drinks usually are.

CHAP. VII. Of the drink called a Posset.
IT is an ordinary thing to preseribe for the sick a Posset to drink; now it is
made of curded milk, which I do not disallow, in that it has the virtue of
whey, which is opening. But I will here only note some abuses.

First,

Secondly, Galen prescribes cold water to temper the heat. As therefore in some
diseases I do not dislike this drink, so in acute and choleric Fevers
especially, I think it not fit. But if at any time the bystanders would
administer it to such as are in Fevers, or the sick themselves desire it, let
the boiling milk, be coagulated either with the juice of Lemons, or a little
vinegar, adding thereto a little sugar; taken take away the curd, and so there
remains the whey alone mixed with the acide juices, an excellent remedy to
cool Fevers and to open obstructions. As for the healthful, they may use it
prepared any way even as they please. Also if the milk be curdled with thin
beer or small ale, it will not hurt the sick, for it is of a cooling and
opening quality, and may do very much good to the body, for small beer is of
the same virtue with barley water, which Avicenne and others do highly
commend. I find in Dioscorides a dark manner of making a Posset, Dioscorides
his way of making Possers.
under the name of Lac Scissile; The milk, says he, must be boiled in a new
earthen pot, and stirred with a green fig tree branch, and after it have
boiled up twice or thrice, so many cups of vinegar mixed with honey must be put
to it, as there are pints of milk, and so the whey is separated from that which
is congealed into curd. Although now adays so much art be not used, yet the
manner of preparing it is the same; for first the milk boyles up once or twice;
then by pouring thereinto Wine or Ale, there is made a separation of the whey
from the thicker substance; Lib. 1. cap. 88. Cap. 96. lib. 2. tetrab. 1.
and Dioscorides approves of this kind of drink, to whom assents * Paulus
Aegineta, and * Aetius.

But more plainly Galen makes mention of a whey made with Oxymel, which he
commends for those that are in Fevers, to purge choler, and loosen the belly,
Com. 4 de tict. cat. in acut.
and he teaches the form of making it. It were therefore better if in
imitation of Dioscorides, Galen, and the Ancients, our possets, which are at
this day so common a drink in England, were made with acide juices, or oxymel;
for so they would be more convenient for Fevers, and choleric diseases.

CHAP. VIII. That the decoction and broth of an old Cock is not well prescribed
for nourishing of the sick.
IT is confessed of all, that meats that are easy to be concocted, and of good
juice, and quickly nourishing, should be prescribed for the sick, and therefore
very well are gellies, and restorative broths made for them. But many times the
flesh of which they make these broths is not so fit and proper. Among others,
its ordinary to make these sorts of broths of the flesh of an old and fat Cock.
This practice has drawn its original from the counsels of Physicians
misunderstood, among whom the decoction of an old Cock is in singular esteem.
Of this did Dioscorides a very ancient writer make mention, and it is also in
frequent use among our modern writers in Physic; but not to nutrifie:
forasmuch as all old flesh is of hard digestion, and makes thick chyle, and and
yields but little good, and alimentary luice, and therefore it is in no wise
convenient for the sick, to whom nothing ought to be given but that which is *
easy of digestion, (...)
and which * yields good juice. Lib. 2. cap. 43.
Dios^o^ides teaches that; for says he, Broth made of an old cock loosens the
belly, draws down gross and raw humors, black choler, and excrements, is
good for long fevers, sighings, the diseases of the joints, and wind of the
stomach; and he teaches the manner of preparing it, and Galen in his 11.
Simpl. says, that Hen-broth has the virtue of binding the belly, as that of
old Cocks has the force of loosing; where likewise by the way take notice,
Hens broth not good in purges.
that the broth of a Hen is not to be administered to them that have taken a
Purge, before complete evacuation; for although it does nourish, yet it stays
the belly. But the broth of a young Cock does nourish very well, and tempers
the humors, and therefore is very good for them that be sick. I read in the
old copies of Dioscorides, and others, except that Translation of Ruellius, as
Mathiolus reports, That the broth of a young Cock especially is given to temper
vicious humors, and in the heats of the stomach simply prepared. But Mesues
says very well of this business, Cap. 23. de simpl. purg.
where after he had reckoned the flesh of young Cocks and Hens among the best
meats, he adds, as Silvius interprets: The nitrous and salt flesh of old
Cocks especially, unfit for meat, is Physical, chiefly in the broth thereof,
but principally of hazled cocks, which are quick for motion, hot for
copulation, strong to fight, mean betwixt fat and lean, and the elder they
be, the more Physical they are, says Galen. This broth, in respect of the
nitrous and salt substance of it is hot, it cleanses, detergeth, attenuateth,
discusseth wind, being boiled with the seed of Dill, or wild Carrot,
Polypodie, and Salgemme; it asswageth the pain of the stomach, colon, small
guts, and reins, arising from wind; opens obstructions, purges fleagme with
Turbith and Carthamum, and therefore it is good against the pains of the gowt
that arise from thence, etc. From whence it is manifest, that an old cock is
not used for to nutrifie, but for the Physical virtues thereof: wherefore for
the future they shall do better, that shall administer young cock-broth to the
sick for to nourish them. For the opinion of Hippocrates, Galen, and of all
Physicians is stable, that old flesh is not fit for nourishing, and therefore
we must conclude, that it is not convenient for the sick.

CHAP. IX. That gold is in vain boiled in broth for them that are in a
Consumption.
IT is usual with some to put gold into the broth of the sick, especially for
them that are in consumptions, which although I do not hold to be hurtful, or
any way pernicious to them, yet I think it is altogether unprofitable.
Touching the virtue of gold, there is indeed no small controversy among
Physicians. The virtues of gold.
For many excellent Physicians are of opinion, that it is good for the affects
of the heart, to renew the sight, to cure the palpitation, syncope, leprosy,
epilepsie, and being quenched in wine, to cure the pains of the spleen, to
help those that be melancholic, and to hinder putrifafaction. Fen 5. cap. 7.
Avicenne says, that in gold there are hidden qualities, which are good
against poison; if a newborn child hold it in his mouth he need never fear
the Devil; if a woman with child drink it, she shall not bring forth an
abortive. But in his book de medic. cordialibus, he places gold betwixt silver
and the hyacinth, and he will have it to be of more virtue than silver, but
less than the hyacinth. The filings of gold is an ingredient in the remedies
against melancholy. But he adds that silver is somewhat cold and dry, Of
Silver.
and that the operation thereof is like to the hyacinth, save that it is
weaker. Of the Hyacinth.
Now to the hyacinth he attributes the virtue of cheering and comforting the
heart, and of resisting poison, which virtues (says he) does flow from the
hyacinth, as the virtue of drawing iron from the loadstone; neither can gold be
dissolved and overcome by our heat, as vegetables are; for (says he) the
substance thereof does not yield thereto, but only our natural heat helps the
penetrating quality thereof. Fernel himself highly commends it, in that it
partakes not of the malignity that is in most metals: Also Paracelsus contends
that all diseases, even the leprosy, and the gowt may be cured by the use of
it: And them do many modern Physicians follow, and mix gold in sundry
medicaments. But others deny all these things; Antonius Musa Brassavolus,
Andreas Baccius of Baths, Fallopius, Erastus, Rondeletius, Duretus, and other
excellent men. Savanarola extolls aqua vitae above all gold, as being drawn
out of a vegetable, and so a cordial familiar to the nature of man.

This controversy I will not make mine in this place; for though gold may
seem to be an excellent cordial, and a strengthening medicament, though it be
not hurtful to sees it in broths, yet it does no good at all, for nothing is
dissolved from it, nor passes into the liquor, except some dross, because of
the substance, which is so very compact, as it can be dissolved with no fire,
with no boiling: Again, it is not easily (...)
consubstantiated with us, it cannot be overcome by our heat, nor does it turn
into blood, nor can it repair the loss of spirits, seeing it is so different
from our nature, and cannot be converted into it: for the substance of metals
is so different from the nature of man, that after what manner soever they be
prepared, they can never become aliments; and for that cause gold can never
cure the leprosy, nor a hectic, nor a consumption, nor diseases that are
caused of evacuation, which diseases need not only alteration, but also
addition of some substance, which no metal can supply. Seeing then that those
that that are hectic do not require to be corroborated in quality alone, but
to be repaired by a substantial moisture, in vain shall gold be sodden in
their broths, for verily it cannot repair the loss of radical moisture,
seeing it it is not converted into aliment, but is voyded as it was taken, or
boiled, without any diminution of the weight. Yet all this does not take from
it the cordial virtue which perhaps is in it, to conquer poisons, and
melancholy diseases, but only proves there is no virtue in it for nourishing.
Gold nourishes not. Sennertus cheated by a Germane Impostor.
Not long since, the good man Daniel Sennertus, in the preface of his book de
consensu Chymicorum, being deceived by a Germane sycophant, wrote that a hen
being crammed a whole month with leaf gold, does so perfectly turn the gold
into her own substance, that three pure golden lines, as if they were drawn
by a workman, may be seen in her breast, which is indeed an extraordinary
manner of nourishing, to wit, for the food that is taken, so to retain its
own nature even to the third concoction, that it should be altogether
unchanged; this is plainly repugnant to the nature of the body nourished, that
it should notwithstanding be turned into the substance thereof. But they that
have made trial, can testify that this experiment was false, as that learned
man, and heretofore well known of me at Montauban, Petrus Laurenbergius (under
whom at that time I studied Philosophy) does profess of himself in his
examination of the Aphorisms of Augelus Sala. But this is not the only deceit
of the Chymicall Impostors, who to one true experiment do use to annex a great
many false ones, and extol such virtues of things which they can no where make
to appear.

CHAP. X. That milk mixed with water is good for those that are in consumptions.
BEcause among the remedies for those that are in a consumption, (of which we
have spoken in the precedent Chapter) milk does not challenge the last, but the
chiefest place, we will speak something of it, it being for this purpose much
better than gold, for it nourishes, refrigerateth, and confolidateth ulcers,
and it is profitable for many other things. Yet in administering it, diverse
eautions are to be observed, Cautions in using of milk.
which the Physician ought to consider, lest he do more harm than good, for
it is soon corrupted in the stomach. For sometimes it turns into a nidorous
and burning savor; sometimes it grows tart and sour, or curdles in the
stomach. When it becomes tart and sour, a little honey or sugar may be boiled
in it; for the coldness of the stomach is the cause of the tartness; but if
it turn into a burning savor, it is corrupted through heat, and then it is
good to put thereto a good deal of water. But the people like not this
mixture. Yet most excellent Physicians have allowed of it, for it moderates the
heat, hurts not the milk it self, and is good for hecticks, and such as are in
a consumption, in respect of its cooling and moystning, especially if it be
Cows milk, which at this day is most ordinary of all. 7 Epid.
Hippocrates ministers Cowes milk with a sixth part of water, both because this
milk is by its own nature somewhat thick, and also because it quickly turns
into a burning savor. 5 Epid. tex. 56.
And he tells a story of Pythocles, who ministered to the sick milk mingled with
much water: (...). And there is the same reason why Avicenne and others do
prescribe butter-Milke, because it is more watery, and so does refrigerate
more. So Galen commends Asses Milk, because it is very thin, full of whey,
and has very little curd, therefore it is most fit to amend dryness, and to
temper heat. But if such milk cannot be gotten, it will not be amiss to bring
Cowes milk to the temper and consistence of Asses milk, which a mixture of
water does most fitly perform. This not only the Ancients, but the modern
Writers do observe, Gordondus, Ioubertus, Hollerius, and others. Hollerius in
his chapter of Phthisis, and the Hectic, says, If belching do * savor of
burning, Nidorous.
a little water must beboyled with the milk. Which counsel if many would
follow, they should perceive more benefit from the use of Milk than they
usually do.

CHAP. XI. That the common proverb is false, Milk must be washed from the
Liver.
BEcause this so familiar, and ordinary Proverb is not of any great moment, we
will speak but little of it. Many when they eat Milk, do presently drink Beer
or Wine, and say that Milk must be washed off the Liver.

For which saying there is no reason;

Secondly,

Thirdly, The evil effects of curdled milk.
and so is afterward more easily corrupted, more slowly concocted, and burdens
the stomach; for Milk curdled in the Stomach, is reckoned among poisons, and I
knew a man, that by this means dyed suddenly. Let them therefore observe it,
that use to eat milk, that they do not unadvisedly drink Wine or other
liquours that dissolve milk, seeing that by the use of them milk is soon
corrupted in the stomach, waxes sour, and becomes hurtful.

CHAP. XII. That strong Beer or Ale should not be drunk in the morning fasting.
THis is the most usual custom of all, that in the morning, after they are
risen, they must have their morning draughts of strong Beer or Ale, and
sometimes of Wine. I know that by very many Physicians, that custom of
drinking in the morning any sort of drink whatsoever it be, is by no means
approved, because that moystning does dissolve the strength of the stomach,
loosen and debilitate it, so as that the body becomes afterward more replete
with crudities. But I am not of their mind at all, for a mornings draught, so
that it be not of strong drink, helps forward the distribution of the meat,
Small beer best for morning draughts.
purges the stomach (and as they say well) cleanses it, tempers natural heat,
moystens the body, and which I think most true, hinders the generation of the
stone; for it tempers and moystens the Kidneyes; as many of our ancient and
modern Writers prescribe broths of Butter, Mallows, and other such things for
to temper the Kidneyes, why not by the like reason small Beer, which does
cool, moysten, and is diuretic. But yet singular heed is to be taken, that in
the morning while the stomach is empty, The evil effects of strong drink in
the mornings.
strong Ale, or other such drinks be not powered in, for they hurt the nervous
parts, from whence the Gout, pain of the joints, inflammations of the bowels,
and other grievous diseases may arise; for by reason of their subtlety, and
great force of spirits, these drinks do insinuate themselves into the nervous
parts, insomuch as they are usually troubled with pain of the joints, that are
eagerly delighted with such drinks, and therefore advisedly is wine forbidden
them that are Gouty. Nevertheless the diversity of natures is to be
considered here; for they that are of a temperament somewhat moist, because
they need but little drink, ought not to drink in the morning fasting. But
they that are of a dry constitution both may, and ought to drink fasting, but
not strong drinks; for by them the nervous parts are sooner offended and dried.
Galen confirms this in his Comment upon the 21. Aph. lib. 2. where he says,
that if before the use of meats, any man use a liberal drinking of Wine, he
is very much troubled with Convulsions, and taken with Frensies; and in his
Comment upon the 20. Aphorism, lib. 6. Among the causes why so many are vexed
with the Gout, and pain of the joints, he reckons this, that they drink strong
drinks before meat; for they do very soon offend the substance of the nerves,
as does carnal copulation. Also Plutarch in his Symposiacks, disputing whether
new diseases may breed or no, produces this as a cause of new diseases, that
they use to drink strong wines before they have eaten any meat. There is the
same reason for strong Beer or Ale, which may bring the same, yea greater
evils. Therefore as I do not dislike the drinking of small beer, though
indeed it is not fit for all, so I think men should abstain from strong
drink, for fear of very many diseases.

CHAP. XIII. That strong waters are ill taken after gross meats to help
concoction.
THis likewise is the custom of many, that if at any time they eat meats of
hard digestion, as are Venison, Beef, Salt-fish; or that soon corrupt, as
Summer-fruits, they presently drink after them strong distilled waters, as Aqua
vitae, Cinnamon water, Rosa solis, and other such like, namely, to help
concoction. But that is not done without hazard of health; for seeing that the
forenamed meats are not wont to be concocted but by a long stay in the
stomach, The evil effects of strong waters.
these waters being of a penetrating and piercing quality, draw the meats down
into the veins, not yet fully concocted, from whence proceed cudities and
obstructions. Thus Physicians do well forbid to use diuretics with meat, or
presently after meat, lest they carry the cruditie of the stomach to the
passages of the urine, and make the evil worse. So likewise they forbid to use
them, when there is abundance of vicious humors, or when some corrupt humor
is lodged in the first passages, before that purging be premised, otherwise
there is fear lest obstructions in the passages of the urine, or in the bowels
be either made or increased.

There is the same reason of waters, which they take to further concoction, for
that great virtue of opening with which they are endued. And this have many
Physic authors observed: Rondeletius in his Chapter of the Palsy, prescribes
a water for the Palsy, which he will have taken into an empty belly. Those
things (says he) which are very hot and attenuating ought to be taken with an
empty, and first purged Stomach, and are not to be mixed with meats, for they
would force the meats not yet concocted to go down with them, and so would
breed obstructions. And in the 31. Chapter he tells a story of two Physicians,
whereof the first, when he would have provoked the flowers with the use of
opening and attenuating syrupes, he brought the woman to a palsy, by reason
that the crude and glutinous humors which were in the passages, by force of
the Medicaments were drawn down to the parts, and lying upon the finews caused
the Palsy. The other, while he went about to cure the * pale colors, Or
Greensickness.
by the same way brought the Maid to a palsy of the legs. But most
excellently in his Chapter de Palpitat. Let those things be taken inwardly
(says he) which heat the stomach, and discuss wind. To which thing special
heed is to be taken, for three or four hours before meat we may give those
things which do strongly heat, and dispell wind, so that the Liver be not
very hot, such as are Diatrion pip. Diacim. Dianis. Aromat. Rosat. Diagaianga,
and such like. These ought not to be given immediately after nor before meat,
because by their heat and raritie, they would presently carry along with them
the halfecrude meat to the first passages: Hence it appears that they err
that minister very hot powders after meat, which ought to be but moderately
hot. Which counsel is also approved by others, to wit, that those things which
help concoction must go before, not follow meat, as says Riolanus, Gordonius
in his praxis, and Fuchsius in his Chapter de Cruditate.

The aforesaid waters do seem at the first to heat very much, but afterward,
especially if there be a familiar use of them, they do very much harm.
Savanarola a famous Physician in his time, tells a story of Franciscus Gonzaga
Marquess of Mantua, who when for the curing of the weakness of his stomach,
by the advice of Physicians he used Aquavitae, he fell into so great
feebleness, that all his meat turned into wind, and but that he used a very
good diet in the six things called Non naturales, he had soon perished. And
Rubeus observes well, that they do very ill, who when they feel their stomach
much surcharged with yesterdayes gulletting, do drink strong waters, for hence
do palsies, tremulations, and other evils arise, for in that they are of thin
substance, and do soon penetrate, they carry up presently to the head the
lighter parts of the humors, and wind themselves into the beginning of the
nerves, from whence come palsies, tremulations, and sometimes apoplexies;
therefore he advises, that they be not taken when the stomach is repleat with
crudity, and that they be drunk at least 3 or 4 hours before meat, which may be
a rule also in other remedies that are prescribed to help concoction. Of the
same opinion is Aetius, describing remedies for crudity. Lib. 3. Sermon. 1. cap.
24.
After meat (says he) never let this, nor any other remedy be taken, which
does vehemently penetrate; for some of the crude meats is distributed and
carried along with it, and it causes stopping. It is good to use it after
morning friction, two hours before exercise and the bath. Thus Aetius.

What we have said of meats hard to be concocted, may be likewise said of those
which are easily corrupted, as are Summer fruits, for those things that are hot
and opening, should not be taken after them, as the learned Valleriola does
well observe. Lib. 2. locor. com. cap. 7.
Neither after the eating of fruits or bad meats, is drink to be poured in,
especially much, and of strong wine, for it makes that by too swift a course
the vicious humor passes into the vessels, and so being unconcocted, it does
contract putrefaction, and an ill condition. Then he adds. Wine after (...)
not good.
If after evil meats, especially fruits, a man must needs drink, I think it
more wholesome to use water than wine, lest by the drinking of wine, heat and
ebullition do ensue, and a too quick passage of the meat into the bowels, and
so putrefaction, obstruction, crudity, and corruption do follow thereon, which
are the usual effects of wine. In like manner they err, who when they feel
wind and crudities in their stomach, do use to drink these strong waters to
heat and strenghen the stomach. These men do seem indeed to feel some
benefit thereby, as long as these waters do heat the orifice of the stomach;
but by reason of the rarity of their substance, they do soon penetrate into
the bowels, and increase their distemper, whereby afterward the pain grows
greater, and the more they drink these waters, the more their their bellyes
seem to be refrigerated, and enfeebled. For those things which do heat too
much, are so far from heating and strengthening the stomach, as that they rather
cool, by rarefying, or by driving the inward heat from within to the
circumference; as Rondeletius says in his Chapter of palpitation. Therefore
Mercatus counsels, that with exceeding great caution we use the helps which
further concoction, or discuss wind. For we are often deceived (says he) by
windiness, and we are enforced to discuss it, not without the great hurt of
the sick. These things are especially to be observed of them that abound with
hypochondriack windiness, whose bowels do boil with heat, but stomachs seem
to be somewhat cold. Some perhaps will object that Physicians do prescribe
pepper grossly beaten; and Aetius commends the use of wormwood for this
hypochondriack windiness. Gross pepper commended.
But as Amatus the Portugal, a most skillful Physician, observes, pepper
grossly beaten is good, because it goes not to the bowels, but only
strengthens the stomach, and so it heats not the liver. Again, the heat
thereof is extinguished in the first passages, and is soon dispersed. Lastly,
it detergeth and casts out sharp humors. Wormwood commended.
Also wormwood is good, because as Galen teaches, it binds the stomach, it
helps by its detersion not against phlegmatic, but adust choleric humors,
which foment this disease, and purges them out by siege and urine.

CHAP. XIV. That Midwives do ill, who give to women in Childbed nothing but
hot drinks.
I Have often heard women in Childbed complain of a grievous thirst, and heat,
because it is a maxim received by evil observation, that they may take no
cooling thing, but only drinks actually and potentially hot, as burnt wine
(which drink is too common in England) brewed with hot spices, cinnamon water,
and the like (to wit) to strengthen and comfort them, for ever the bystanders
are solicitous of those strengthening meats and drinks, as also that the cold
may not hurt them, for by reason of cold, gripings in their belly do often
happen, especially afthe birth. But this is a very great error, and often
pernicious to women in Childbed, but always very tedious. Now there are
diverse conditions of women in Childbed, for some of in them a morbous
preparative, and the sickly humors being moved with the travail of the birth,
do bring forth in them diverse diseases; but others enjoying a more perfect
health, do quickly return to themselves, and by little and little grow well
again without any dangerous symptom: To the former, those strong and hot
drinks are very hurtful, for they inflame the inward parts, and amend not the
morbous humors at all, but increase and corrupt them; And to the latter sort,
which otherwise would recover their health, they may cause fevers, and such
like diseases. Now, although I do not approve of very cold drinks, but rather
would have them to be somewhat warm, yet I cannot allow of hot drinks for the
forenamed reasons. If there be a fever, Physicians do prescribe altering and
cooling syrupes, why not also cooling drink? Therefore I have oftentimes
permitted drink not so strong, and somewhat cool, to women in Childbed,
burning and thirsting after small beer, by which they have felt themselves
much refreshed; much more will such drinks be convenient for them if they be
in a fever.

So likewise they do ill, who feed them with much meat, and very nourishing,
for in the beginning their diet should be slender and sparing, as in them that
have been wounded, because nature is weak, and not able to digest a great
quantity of meat. 2 acut.
Thus Hippocrates teaches, that after a large evacuation we must not presently
hasten to a full diet, for hereby there is fear lest the excrementitious
humors be multiplied, a fever ensue, and other symptoms happen. But let
them be fed sparingly, as with broths, till all fear of a fever, and other
symptoms be quasht, and she be well purged from her flowers, and then by
degrees they must pass to a fuller diet, and thus without any danger their
strength is renewed in them.

This error do almost all observe, that have written of women's diseases.
Rodericus a Castro says. Cap. 1. lib. 4.
It has been always a vexation to tolerate women, that have the charge of
keeping a woman in childbed, for unless they cheer her up with delicate meat
and wine, they think that they do no good at all, for they have I know not
what laws and rules, exceeding hurtful to the poor women, but sacred to
themselves, which being neglected, a prudent Physician may give order to
provide those things which he shall judge to be needful. So Petrus Salius does
very much reprove the same error among the Italians. As concerning their diet
(says he) know that it is a common error almost of all women, to think that
women in childafter the birth, must presently be refreshed and nourished with
the best meats, and therefore presently proceed to capons broth, and their
flesh; to spices, and strong wines, except a disereet woman be by, or a
skillful Physician be sent for, who may correct such errors. He bids
therefore that they abstain from flesh, wine, spices and other things which
are apt to breed, or augment a fever.

CHAP. XV. Two Errors about the choice of Nurses.
THose Gentlewomen that will not undergo the trouble of nursing their children
themselves, do sometimes even by the advice of Physicians, (unless necessity
enforce them otherwise) reject those Nurses whose milk is old, that is to say,
which have given suck a long time, to wit, a year, or two: for they think
that milk is not so wholesome for a new born child. And therefore they
sometimes prefer a Nurse, although elder, which has but lately given suck,
before one that is young, if she has given suck longer. But I think they are
in a great error, The breast does every day afford fresh and new milk.
who suppose any milk to be old, seeing that every day the breasts of Nurses
do afford new and fresh milk. If therefore you suppose a Nurse to be young,
well behaved, of a good constitution, using a good and wholesome diet, and
abstaining from venery, it matters not how long she has given suck. For seeing
that the milk does participate of the nature of its material and efficient
causes, and is generated out of these causes only; if the Nurse be healthful,
and free from care, anger, and sorrow of mind, and feed on good and wholesome
meats, there is no doubt but she gives always good and wholesome milk. For the
milk does partake of the nature of blood of which it is made; Milk is made of
blood, I which if it be good, the milk cannot be bad.
but in a healthful body, nourished with wholesome meats, good blood is always
made: And of good blood is not wont to be made bad and unwholesome milk, if the
body be in health. Nor can giving suck it self alter or vitiate the milk,
forasmuch as nature ordaines nothing that is evil, and it would be ill for the
child, if every day the Nurses milk were made worse by giving of suck. It is
not worse for giving suck
Experience shows in women of the meaner rank, who are not so curious in their
choice of Nurses, that their children are as well fed, and as healthful as
others. When therefore occasion is offered of choosing a Nurse, let only her
constitution, healthfulnesse, and age be considered; for if these be right,
there is no doubt but using a commendable diet, she shall always give good and
fresh milk, because every day new milk is made, and has the same causes of
generation after five years, which it had the first month.

There is another Error of some, no less superstitious than the former, and
that not only of the people, but some Physicians also; namely, that they are
very cautelous, even more than needs, in observing whether the Nurse has
brought forth a male or a female, and they will have the Milk of her that has
borne a Male, to be better for nourishing a Female, and contrariwise the milk
of her that has brought forth a female, to be more proper for the nursing of a
male, because the milk of her which has born a boy, is thought to be hotter,
and therefore more fit for a girl, which is thought to be of a colder
temperament, because it does moderate her coldness; and contrariwise, because
a male is hotter, the milk of her which has borne a female, does temper his
heat. Some women are hotter then some men.
But these are all false.

For First they suppose amiss, that a female is always colder than a male,
when as indeed experience testifies, that some women are hotter than some men.
Nor can a choleric woman, without error, be thought to be colder than a
phlegmatic man, which I shall prove by diverse reasons in another place:
Nevertheless, although we should grant this, yet our opinion will stand
stable and unshaken.

Secondly, they err in supposing that the child's sucking can change the temper
of the milk. A child's sucking cannot change the temper of the milk.
For seeing (as we have said) the nature of the milk does follow the nature of
the efficient cause, and of the meats of which it is made, what can the child
do against these. For while it sucks, it cannot by contact alone change the
constitution of the mother, nor the temper of the meats which she eats. Perhaps
some will think, that the child, so long as it is in the womb, does
communicate its temperature to the mother, by heating her, if it be a male, or
cooling her, if a female. But that is very doubtful, for a female should also
heat the mother, because infants are always hotter than those that are of
riper age. But besides, we know how hard a thing it is to change the natural
constitution, so as it can scarce by any long use of meats or medicines be so
weakened, but it does easily return to its pristine condition. And we see the
mother, when she has brought forth her child, does retain her old temper of
body, and we can discern no footsteps of any new temperament which she has
taken from the child. And if there were any, it might nevertheless be easily
lost in process of time, and by change of diet. It is therefore the surer way
to consider the nature not of the child which the nurse has born, but only
the constitution of the nurse her self, and the diet which she uses.

CHAP. XVI. That strong drinks are ill permitted to children.
THat the people do err much about the education of children, it is certain,
whereby they come to be troubled with many grievous evils, and so many die,
whereof an ill diet is not the least cause: For I have seen some frequently to
give their children Wine, Ale, or strong Beer, which is indeed very hurtful
for them, 1. and 5. de fanit. tuenda.
and is repugnant to the counsel of the ancient Physicians. Galen does not
permit wine to children before the fourteenth year, The evil effects of strong
drink in children.
because it heats too much, and moistens, and fills the head with vapors, from
whence ensues harm, not only to the body, but the mind also. Paulus likewise
denies it to them before the 21. year of their age, because it heats, dries,
quickly stirs up to anger and lust, fills the head with vapors, debilitates
the nervous parts, so that afterward they are subject to be troubled with
convulsions, the gout, and other the like affects of the sinnewes; it weakens
the inward parts, especially the Liver, overthrowes a good constitution of the
Brain, causes a weakness of the sinnewes, calls in cold diseases, and all
these sooner in children, whose nerves are somewhat weak by nature. Moreover in
the opinion of Plato, 2 De legibus.
Wine is not good for them, because it makes them fiery spirited, and dulls and
troubles the mind. For seeing that children are of a temperament somewhat hot,
a moist diet, and somewhat temperate is convenient for them, lest by such
drying drink, untimely old age be procured, and by the many sharp vapors
carried up to the brain, convulsions, and the diseases of a distempered brain
and sinnewes do ensue. But if there be some urgent necessity to administer
strong drink, let but a little, and that allayed with water be administered
according to the counsel of Hippocrates. Lib. de victu idiotar. tex. 23.
The like may be said of strong Beer, or Ale, for the same, yea and greater
evils do proceed from the use thereof, then of wine, in respect of the
thickness of the liquor and the impurer spirits. But thin and small beer well
boiled and fined, is most fit for them.

CHAP. XVII. That solid meat ought not to be given to children before the
coming forth of their teeth.
I Have also observed flesh, and other such solid meats to be given to
children, before they breed their teeth, which is likewise a thing very
hurtful to them; for verily Galen says well, Cap. 7. lib. 15. de usa part.
that nature does then give unto children their foreteeth, when they have need
of solid meat, which also he does elegantly explicate in his first book De
sanitate tuenda. cap. 10. That children are to be fed with nothing but milk,
Milk best for young child, n.
before that they put forth their foreteeth; and in very deed solid meats are
but badly concocted in their ventricles, they oppress the stomach, corrupt
with their mixture the Nurses milk, hurt their tender gummes, and makes them
cry out and become unquiet. And it stands with reason, for Nature is never
deficient in necessaries; wherefore, if such meats were good for them, it had
never denied them teeth to chew them: But because for some months space it
has denied them teeth, it is a sign, that nothing but supping meats is fit
for them, and especially milk, which nature has afforded to all young
creatures, as the most familiar food. Therefore during the first months, Good
counsel.
let the infant eat only milk, a little after, being grown somewhat greater,
pulse also, which nevertheless is not in familiar use in England, but is used
by other Nations, as the only and most convenient food for children. After the
foreteeth are come forth, let the child by little and little be accustomed to
chewing, and use flesh minced very small, and bread which with a little chewing
it may swallow easily down.

CHAP. XVIII. That a man may drink liberally for health sakes.
I do not desire here to be thought a Patron of Drunkenness, being a vice
which I hate exceedingly; I commend and approve of Sobriety as a Virtue
beseeming a man. For I know how many evils drunkenness does bring upon the
body and mind. Nor do I like the custom of some of the Ancients, who thought
it wholesome for the body, to be drunk once a month. I will only intimate
thus much, that there are some cases, in which it is very profitable, according
to the opinion of Physicians, for a man to drink wine liberally. As for that
ordinary drunkenness, which is too familiar with many, although it be
commended by the Ancients, to wit, the Grecians, who loved drinking and
fuddling, it is very dangerous, and not undeservedly reckoned among the causes
of diseases: Concerning that we speak not in this place, but of the
extraordinary use of Wine, profitable for the curing of diseases, 1. Probl. c.
2.
Aristotle demands the reason why diseases are cured through excessive
drinking, and in the cited place he gives the answer; whereupon many think,
and write, that a Quartane may be cured by drinking of wine, which thing
experience sometimes confirms, because the causes of diseases and their
remedies are contrary to one another, hence it comes to pass that by the
excess of one, another may be reduced to a temper. Moreover Amatus the
Portugal gives the reason, because nature is stirred up to cast out the matter
already concocted, by vomit, sweat, or siege. Furthermore Hippocrates writes,
Aph. 21. lib. 2.
that a Dog-like appetite is cured by the drinking of Wine: He call it (...),
by which word is signified sometimes the only drinking of strong Wines, as
also a liberal drinking of them, even to entoxication, and Galen in his
Commentaries writes, that he has cured that disease by the liberal pouring
in of Wine; and they will have this word to be derived from (...) Pectus,
because the breast is made hot with wine liberally taken; as the valor of
great Cato is said to have been enflamed by wine. They are said to be (...),
that have drunk largely, and yet are not drunk, but have their memory, reason,
and ability of discerning still free. Clemens Alexandrinus allows wine to
Christian old men, 2 Paedag.
so as they do not exceed the bounds of these (...) Therefore Hippocrates in
the aforenamed Aphorism, prescribes a somewhat liberal drinking of strong and
pure Wine, because by its heating, it cures hunger proceeding from a cold
cause, and refreshes the spirits, and revives the strength. And in another
place he writes the very same thing of the Strangury. The liberal drinking of
Wine, Lib. 7. aph. 48.
and letting of blood cures the Strangury, and difficulty of pissing, to wit,
when it is generated of windiness, or a cold distemper, or of some
obstruction. And in many places he commends a liberal drinking of wine for
diverse diseases. Lib. 1. cap. 95.
Paulus Aegineta allows it, because it, provokes urine and sweat. the
intoxication follows by accident in respect of the Physician, seeing that some
men are inebriated at the first or second draught, others not, but with many
reiterated. Therefore the Physician does not command drunkenness, although
sometimes he persuade to a liberal drinking of wine. Moreover it is the part
of the same Artist, to prescribe the remedy, and its quantity, but if the
remedy may lawfully and without sin be used, the quantity also may be used
without sin, otherwise the remedy would be in vain and unprofitable.
Lastly, he that does use such a remedy, not with a lust to sin, or for
pleasure, but for his healths sake only, does scarce seem to have committed
^asin.

CHAP. XIX. That red cloths are not to be preferred before others, for the
voyding of the measils.
THat in the measils and small pox, the endeavor of nature, purging out the
humors into the habit of the body, is to be assisted, it is manifest by the
verdict of Physicians, and seeing that Nature it self teaches it, therefore
every one, even the most ignorant among the people knows it. And therefore the
ambient cold is diligently to be avoided, lest the noxious humor return back
again from the habit of the body to the inward parts. Wherefore many do use to
cover the sick with red clothes, for they are thought by the affinity of the
color to draw the blood out to them, or at least some suppose that it is done
by force of imagination. And not only the people, but also very many
Physicians use them.



Secondly,

Thirdly, Amatus the Portugal, Valetius, and others, that according to the
custom of the vulgar do approve of red clothes, do yet straightly charge, that
they touch not the body, because they have in them a certain astringent
quality, from the tincture and mixture of allome. And therefore, although I do
not altogether disallow them, yet I think it a vain thing to regard the
difference of colors. Yea rather I would commend the whitest, White color
preferred before red.
because that color does dissipate the sight, and call forth the spirits to
the external parts, and so by consequence further the springing forth of the
humors into the skin.

CHAP. XX. That they err who think to drive away a disease beginning, by
labor.
IT is the custom of many, when they feel themselves begin to besick, to
labor to shake off the disease by walking, exercises, and labors, following
herein the old saying; Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito.
Unto diseases give no way,
Be bold and let them bear no sway.


And sometimes it succeeds well to them, not always, except the cause of the
disease be very light. For exercise is troublesome and hurtful to the sick, in
regard of the agitation of the morbous humors thereby. Prodicus was wont to
molest those that were in fevers with much walking abroad, coursing about,
wrestling, and dry fomentations; but he is blamed by Hippocrates, 6 epid. sect
3. text. 23.
because (says he) a fever is exasperated by hunger, wrestling, walking
abroad, coursing, and frictions; for from thence did happen a redness of the
veins, palenesse of the face, and some gentle pains of the sides. This
custom of walking to and fro in diseases; Plato attributes to Herodicus in the
beginning of Phaedrus: So Asclepiades in the beginning of a burning fever
would have the Patient to use violent exercise; but he is blamed by Celsus: He
thought (says he) that the strength of the sick was to be disquieted with
labor, light, lib. 2. cap. 4. and 15.
watching, and vehement thirstinesse, so as that for some few days; in the
beginning of the fever, he would not suffer their mouths to be washed. It is
not therefore always safe to strive against the disease with such violent
exercises, for many times the Patient becomes far worse after them than the
was before.

POPVLAR ERROVRS. The Fourth BOOK. Of the Errors of the People about the use
of Remedies.
CHAP. I. Of them that despise those Remedies that are Chymically prepared.
THE principal part of Physic concerns the use of remedies, for it is an Art
ordained for the vanquishing of diseases: Now diseases are vanquished by the
proper and right administration of remedies: Therefore in this Book, we will
take notice of certain errors of the people, about the administration and use
of remedies.

And first the opinion of men concerning remedies is two fold. A twofold error.
Some do neglect, and greatly fear to use any remedies that are chymioally
prepared. Others on the contrary do extol them beyond measure; but those of
Galens method, (as they call them) to wit, which are prepared after the vulgar,
and long since received manner, they basely account of, and contemn. We will
say something of them both, but they are wise that keep a mean. Medium tenuere
beati.
And as almost all the errors which are rife among the people, have heretofore
at first proceeded from Physicians, whose meanings the people have not well
understood, so this also among the rest: Wherefore something is to be said of
the aforesaid errors. Chymicall remedies not to be rejected.
-- Now in this Chapter, I will plainly manifest, that chymicall remedies ought
not to be neglected, being administered by a prudent Physician, and an honest
man. As touching this manner of preparing medicaments, it was not invented by
Paracelsus, as we have already said, Chemistry not invented by Paracelsus.
but was practiced many ages before Paracelsus was borne, even by those
Physicians which followed Galens method, as Raimundus Lullius, Villanovanus,
and many others, who have left behind them for us some excellent remedies
chymically prepared. And after Paracelsus his time, many learned Physicians
judiciously distinguishing the chymicall preparation of remedies, from the
doctrine of Paracelsus, have followed that, and disallowed this. Fernel, the
chief of the modern Physicians, did frequently practice that art. Matthiolus
used the spirit of vitriol and antimonie prepared chymically; and in his
Epistle to Andrew de Blaw, being the last of his fourth book of Epistles, he
does not only approve of this art, and commend the admirable operations of it;
but he thinks that no man can be an absolute Physician, The knowledge of it
necessary for a Physician.
no not an indifferent one, who is not of good experience in this most noble
science. Crato, a Physician to 3 Emperors, in his counsels set forth by
Scholtzius, does highly commend chymicall remedies, and professes that he
himself used them. Yea Erastus himself, the great Antagonist of the
Paracelsian Sect, in the preface of his works against Paracelsus, confesses
that he does not implead, or dislike this chymicall preparation of remedies,
but commends and approves of it very much. Ioannes Riolanus, a most excellent
Interpreter of Physic, whiles that at the appointment of the College at
Paris, he had abolished all the deceitful figments of the Paracelsians, writes
that this College, wherein are the most excellent Physicians of Europe, does
leave free the use of Chymicks, so as the old manner of curing, according to
the precepts of Galen and Hippocrates, remain in force. Indeed that art in
Galens time was not practiced nor known, Chemistry not known in Galens time.
nevertheless it is not therefore to be rejected. For it has been, and ever
will be free for posterity, to add something for use and ornament, to an art
already well established. Thus we use many remedies which our ancestors were
ignorant of, as Seen, Rubarb, Cassia, Tamarinds, and other things far better
than peplium, coloquintida, and the like. Moreover, the Rudiments of the
chymicall art do appear even in the vulgar preparation of medicaments: Now
according to them, all remedies are prepared, either by addition, detraction,
or immutation; for either the matter of the medicaments is required, or else
the faculty and virtue separate from the matter, the matter in thickning,
astringent, and drying remedies; but the virtue alone in attenuating,
dissolving, and purging medicines, because the grosseness of the matter hinders
their efficacy. For this intention Mesues makes 4 kinds of operation;
decoction, dissolution, infusion, trituration, or grinding to powder. What is
infusion but an extract begun? What is decoction, especially roasting with
fire, but the beginning of calcination? But in this manner of separation which
they so much wished for, and the Ancients accounted so necessary, the chymicall
Art does excel, for by diverse ways it severs the pure from the impure, and so
extracts and stirs up the diverse virtues of medicaments, which otherwise had
been hid under the gross matter, and could never have been drawn out by
natural heat, as especially may be seen in minerals. Besides, it concocts, and
attenuates the earthly parts; alters, or else quite takes away the malignant,
venomous, and corrupt qualities, and increases the virtues; for there is more
virtue and efficacy in cinnamon water against the Syncope, and other diseases,
than in whole cinnamon. The same may be said of distilled and extracted oils;
the oil of thyme, brimstone, or cloves, is more efficacious, and powerful,
than the simples out of which it has been extracted. Again, it makes many
things to become more pleasant, and familiar to Nature, and contracts many
virtues into a small lump; as in extracts, waters, distilled oils, sundry
kinds of salt, and such like. Now seeing that it is the duty of a Physician to
cure quickly, safely, and pleasantly, without doubt he shall be able to do it
more completely, being well skilled in chymicall remedies, whose efficacy being
greater does sooner work, whose small dose, and neatness of preparation help
unto pleasantness.

Object. But some perhaps will object, the whole age of the Ancients wanted
Chymicall remedies, who notwithstanding cured better than we do, and it
happens yet daily, that without them Physicians do perform many wonderful
cures.

Sol. That no man denies, so men in old time did feed on Acornes, and lived
long, yet having found out the use of Corn, we reject Acornes and leave them
for Hogs. But if the Ancients themselves (the ancientest of whom was in his
time a new Physician) had added nothing to the inventions of their Ancestors,
we should have all the Arts to be only begun. Again, if they did perform such
cures, yet they did them but slowly, and unpleasantly. Therefore Chymicall
operations were added for the solace of the sick, honor and ornament of Art,
not that Physicians might cure absolutely, but better and more commodiously.
But there are some things which do terrify the sick from the use of those
remedies. The first is, because they think that all the remedies of the
Chemists are very strong and violent, do presently either kill or cure, and
are (as they call them) desperate Medicines, that they do operate quickly and
pleasantly, but not safely, and that they leave behind them a stain in the
bowels, which can seldom or never afterward be washed out. Now they think it
better to be cured slowly, so that they be safely and surely cured: Soon
enough (says the Proverb) if well enough. Sat cito, si been sat.
But these things have their original from their ignorance of that art, and
the audacitie of some knaves, who use only the most violent, and such as are
prepared by a preposterous operation; for every chymicall preparation is not
convenient for every remedy; we use Mercurius Dulcis with good success, but
Mercury sublimate, or precipitate, not without hazard of life. For the Chemists
have many Medicines which are very gentle, and not at all violent. And indeed
the Chymicall Apothecary and common likewise have the very same matter of
Physic, out of vegetables, animals, minerals, and all other things as well
gentle as violent which are used in Physic. But the chymicall preparation does
amend or quite take away what is hurtful in the violent, and makes them more
safe and pleasant for man's use. Besides the Chemists have very many cordial
and strengthening remedies, oftentimes much better than the vulgar. But many
times diseases do require verystrong remedies, resisting the force of the
weaker Medicines: Yea Hippocrates, Galen, Malo nodo malus cuneus. Aph. 6. lib.
1.5. Meth. Cap. 15.
Aetius, and other of the Ancients did use stronger remedies than many Chemists
do; For unto desperate diseases themost forcible remedies are to be applied,
was Hippocrates his counsel. And Galen himself blames Erisistratus for using
only mild and gentle remedies, which he will have to be hurtful in great and
dangerous diseases, in which if opportunity which is very speedy be
pretermitted, either the patient dies, or the disease becomes incurable. It is
therefore more ordinary with the Galenists, to wit, those Physicians that
follow the old way, to use violent Medicines, which Chemists do either better
make use of, or at least better prepared. Nor is it true, that the Chemists do
prepare all their remedies with the most violent heat of fire; for most
commonly, a gentle heat is used. Yet Galen affirms, that by a violent heat of
fire many Druggs do lay aside all their acrimony and sharpness. And it is
certain, that by this spagiricall art, the most unruly medicaments are made
serviceable, and many that are otherwise poisonous, their deadly qualities
being corrected, do become cordial.

CHAP. II. That the use of Mineralls is not to be rejected.
ANother cause why many are so fearful of these Chymicall remedies, is because
the Chemists are thought to use Mineralls. And indeed it is certain enough,
that many that cloak their knaveries with the title of Chemists, do often use
Mineralls, both ill prepared, and wrong applied. But as we have said before,
the matter and subject of operation is the same, of both the Apothecaries as
well Chymicall as vulgar, nor does the Chemist less use vegetables than the
Galenist, and it is an easy thing for him to administer vegetables alone to
his patients, if they do much impugn Mineralls. Nevertheless the use of
Mineralls was more familiar among the ancient Physicians, before the invention
of the chymicall art, than now it is: For I know many Chemists that seldom use
them, but rather make choice of vegetables alone. But the writings of the
Ancients do testify, that they were wont to use steel, burnt brass, the
flower of brass, and such like, either not at all prepared, or but very
slightly. The flower of brass whole does purge vehemently. Some give it,
says Dioscorides, Lib. 5.
kneaded in dough, and made up in a pill. Burnt Brass (says he) being drunk
with honey and water, does provoke vomit: the flower of Brass given in the
weight of two scruples drams out gross humors. Very many use the Armenian
stone not prepared at all. Is not that art highly to be commended, which, if at
any time it use these things, does exhibit them diversely and elegantly
prepared, not whole? Dioscorides writes, that Silver is good against the poison
of Wolvesbane; and Avicenne will have it to be excellent against the trembling
of the heart. If therefore the authority of the Ancients be of any moment with
us, it must not be imputed to Chemists as a fault, that sometimes they make use
of Mineralls, seeing they whom they call Galenists are guilty of the same
error, if it be one, but herein they are excelled by the Chemists, in that
they prepare them better, insomuch as they may be administered with less
harm. Matthiolus in his fore named epistle, says well, that great and
chronicall diseases can scarce be overcome without Mineralls, but those
Mineralls are not to be administered without the knowledge of the Chymicall art.
And the use of Bathes is ordinary, all which do partake of the virtue of some
Mineral.

Object. But perhaps some will object, that Mineralls are altogether poisonous
and hurtful to nature, and cannot be brought into action.

Sol. Which although it be after a sort true of many Mineralls, yet that
hinders not, but they may be made good remedies in stubborn diseases, that
stand in need of strong Medicines, and it is the nature of all Medicaments,
that they alter our body; for as we have said, forcible remedies must be
applied to extreme diseases; hence sometimes it comes to pass, that some
Empyricks through their adventurous rashness do cure diseases that are given
over by others, to the disgrace of Physicians. If therefore the Ancients
without scruple or doubt did use them whole, how fortunate are our times, in
which we are wont so curiously to prepare and dissolve them, so as they may by
our heat be more easily brought into action, although to confess the truth,
there are many of them, which do not require any great labor to reduce them
into action, as the flower of brass whole (as the Ancients did prescribe it)
though unaltered by our heat, does nevertheless purge vehemently. Avicenne
when he makes Gold a mean betwixt Silver and the Hyacinth, attributes to them
the virtue of corroborating and cheering the heart, and of resisting poison,
which virtues (says he) do flow from the Hyacinth, as the power of drawing
Iron from the Loadstone, and cannot be dissolved and overcome by our heat, as
vegetables are; for that (says he) the substance thereof does not endure, but
only natural heat helps forward the penetrating quality thereof: Therefore
according to the judgment of Avicenne it does not appear, that the Hyacinth
or Gold, or Silver are reduced into action, or that they are changed and
dissolved by our heat. Also there are many such things which do help by contact
alone, as Galen commends Peione hung about the neck, and Monardes, the stone of
Kidneyes bound to the arm, which help only by the diffusion of their quality
like light; and many such things have been observed by diverse, which would be
too tedious to rehearse. Moreover not only Minerals, but also some vegetables
are poisonous, which nevertheless are profitably administered, at least in such
a dose, Mineral's may be taken inwardly.
as nature is able to resist. Seeing then it is manifest that Mineralls are
prepared by Chemists, and that the oils, quintessences, and tinctures of them
are extracted, it is also as true and manifest, that they may profitably, and
without danger be conquered by our heat, and taken inwardly.

CHAP. III. Of them that attribute too much to Chymicall Remedies.
ALthough I have already in the general allowed, and approved the Chymicall
preparation of remedies, yet we must know, that not all remedies prepared
chymically are good and wholesome, for many questionless are badly prepared,
which perhaps required another kind of preparation; it will not therefore be
amiss to endeavor to repel and root out that self-love, through which they
extol their own medicines with innumerable commendations, and prefer them
before all others. For they are not sparing in promising great things, going
about to persuade us that they will work miracles, and they forcibly obtrude
remedies on us, which (if they may be credited) are good for all sorts of
fevers, and do cure diverse kinds of diseases, which even contrary causes have
produced. Which of them does not highly commend the dissolving of gold, Aurum
potabile a deceit.
which they call. Anrum potabile, teach, extol, and admire the diverse ways of
making it? Verily, if all the ways of preparing this one remedy were written
down together, it would make a large, and full volume, and yet they are all
fabulous, and mere deceits; nevertheless for all this, they do audaciously
and impudently brag of the efficacy of that not yet invented remedy. The same
may be said of other remedies much more easy, for they set forth many things
for tinctures, oils, salt, and the like, which are nothing less then what
they avouch them to be, as might be manifested of many things in particular,
but so this tractate would be too long and tedious. Nevertheless let us hear
their reasons, which we have touched in the first chapter, we will here briefly
repeat them. The vulgar, or common Medicines (say they) are usually poisonous,
as are almost all Catharticks, or purging remedies, and very many altering
medicines, as saffron, hemlock, coriander, if they be taken in too great a
quantity. But the Chymicall are altogether free from any poisonous quality, and
from all impurity, which may weaken the force of the remedies; whereas in the
vulgar this same impurity does remain, which is no more amended by the mixture
of other things, then if birds should be boiled with their nests, guts, dung
and all, only a little cinnamon and sugar added thereunto. So pills,
electuaries, lozenges, opiats, have in them as well hurtful as profitable
qualities; wherefore they cannot commodiously be brought into action by our
heat. But in chymicall remedies, the noxious qualities are severed from the
wholesome, and so they are more easily brought into action, and are of greater
efficacy and certainty. Honey and sugar, which are ingredients in diverse
remedies, because they are of quick spirits, and abound with sharp, and filthy
vapors, are ill mixed therewith. In like manner they like not decoction,
because thereby many of the virtues are lost, the remedies become of an
unpleasant relish, and the efficacy is dulled by the mixture of a strange
liquor. Thus they commend their own remedies, for their purity, safety,
efficacy, pleasant relish, and small dose. And indeed this is true in the
preparation of many of them, especially minerals, yet not always in all.

And First, they falsely suppose that they have all some venomous quality in
them, for they do ill to call that poison, which is only somewhat gross in
substance. For there is scarce any mixed body which is not heterogeneall, and
consists not of diverse parts, every one of which severally have in them diverse
wholesome and profitable virtues, as the chymicall resolution it self does
demonstrate. We must confess, that many things that are poisonous, are by the
chymicall art made harmless: But forthwith to call that hurtful and
poisonous, which is, or seems to be less pure, is too much rashness, seeing
that the mixture of diverse parts is not made without the special providence of
nature. This do meats and drinks show, in which God has not without cause
mingled the wholesome part with the unwholesome, for the good of man's body. Do
not we more commodiously use wine, than the spirit of wine, the ordinary
drinking of which does rather harm than good, whereas wine it self does yield a
profitable, pleasant, and comfortable drink to the body? Therefore one said
well, they that do so much dislike the earthy parts, should be nourished with
nothing but spirits, as the spirit of wine, oil of corn, and extracts of
flesh. Not that I deny preparation to be needful, though not always a
chymicall preparation. So we prepare wheat for the making of bread, by
grinding, fifting, kneading, baking: and flesh, by washing, and boiling; which
if they should be chymically prepared, would become hurtful, and utterly lost.
Wherefore is the separative faculty given to the body, but for the separation
of those things that are unprofitable? And therefore Faber, a late writer, one
that makes large promises, Fabers Error taxed.
after the manner of the Chemists, seems to me to be injurious to the God of
nature, in saying that the mixture of pure, and unpure, that is to say, of
different parts in one and the same mixed body, does proceed from the Creators
curse for sin. As though if man had never sinned, God had created only
spirits, and not corporeal substances; oil of cinnamon, and not cinnamon,
which is an absurd thing to suppose. And therefore he does falsely define a
medicament to be a purity of nature, which does by altering help and succor
our nature, when it is violated and oppressed with a disease, and he will have
only that which is pure, and without mixture, to be a medicament, because that
alone is capable of action, and efficacy. O fine pate! Are not remedies
compounded out of the dross of things, excrements, dregs, things of least
reckoning, out of use, and in a manner nothing worth? Who ever denied the power
of working, and of altering the body, even to those excrementitious parts?
which of the Chemists does not make use of excrements for Medicine? Verily
there is no part of the drugs, which has not in it some virtues wholesome for
man's body, either for external, or internal uses. But let us look back to our
own task. Not only in aliments is this mixture of gross and subtle parts
profitable, but in medicaments likewise. We often give Rubarb with good
success to purge, but powdered, this is a kind of preparation; but more
commonly we administer it being infused, when we do not stand in need of the
grosser part, for the virtue thereof is kept in the infusion: But in the
extract, which is a Chymicall invention, and is exceeding profitable in many
things, part of the virtue is exhaled. Therefore the infusion of the Galenists,
is better than the extract of the Chemists. Prepare Rubarb chymically, by
distilling, drawing out the salt, and extracting the spirits, and it will then
be good for nothing, all the virtue of purging will perish quite, although the
Chemists will have the salt thereof to be cathartick likewise. Moreover, as we
said in the first Chapter, in thickning, binding, corroborating, and drying
medicines, the matter and substance is requisite; thus experience shows, that
the conserves, preserves, and powders of the Galenists, are oftentimes more
safely given, than the oils and spirits of the Chemists, for there is often
need of whole medicaments, nor ought all things to be chymically prepared. And
therefore many times the Chemists are forced to cloth those their medicaments
with another body, which but a little before they had separated from their
own; for who dares taste of oils of Origanum, Brimstone, Vitrioll, by
themselves, without mixing them with another liquor; and therefore they add
these same to opiats, lozenges julips, apozemes, in a very little dose,
otherwise they would scarce work without a great deal of danger and harm to
the body; for that part which first they should but touch, they would alter not
without apparent hurt. Therefore not every separation of the gross parts from
the subtle is wholesome for the body, but sometimes pernicious and deadly.
Wherefore there is no reason, that for this cause the Chemists should prefer
their own, except in some few Medicaments, nor is there the same virtue in the
whole, that is in the dissolved parts.

Secondly, the thick substance, but oftentimes in that thin substance which
is extracted. The Trochisks Alhandal do purge very well, the extract is as
hurtful, and the sediment which remains from the extract, does loose in a
manner all the noxious quality of the Colliquintida, because this together
with the purging quality goes all into that liquour, out of which the virtue
is extracted, which, as usually they do in other things, they call by a fond
name Menstruum, whereupon the Chemists do no less use correctives with those
extracts, than the Galenists. Admirable with them is the extract of Opium
called Landamum, the Opium being prepared with diverse mixtures to correct it,
which, after they have used all their art in preparing and changing it, they
dare not yet administer without correctives, as they call them. Whether then
has this chymicall preparation taken away the violence from the catharticks,
and the noxious quality from the Opium or no?

Now as concerning the small quantity, and pleasant relish, these do not
always accompany Chymicall Medicines. We will exemplify in purging extracts,
and other things which are exhibited in a large Dose, and are no less
unpleasant, for the purging quality is a little exhaled. If some things by
their too great quantity be noxious, they have it common with all meats, yea
and Medicines, though chymically prepared: neither if strong Catharticks be
hurtful, are they therefore to be rejected, seeing that all remedies if they
be ill used may do harm. Therefore chymicall Medicines are not always the
more pleasant, the extracts of Colliquintida, Rubarb, and Aloes, are no less
bitter and unpleasant, then they are whole, and yet they are administered in a
greater Dose, yea if a Drugge have an unpleasant relish, it can scarce be taken
away without loss of the strength. Take away the bitterness from Aloes and
Wormwood, and you take away their virtue. What I pray is the extract of Rubarb,
but the infusion of it vitiated; for when the infusion is by a gentle
decoction, brought to the consistence of an extract, the subtle parts, in
which is contained the purging virtue, do evaporate, insomuch that the
infusion of two Drammes of Rubarb will purge better than the extract of four
Drams. Thus the juice of Roses purges excellently, the distilled water not at
all. The extract of Coloquintida is exceeding bitter, although it be a
chymicall preparative, and notwithstanding that it is administered in a greater
dose than the Trochisks of Coloquintida called Alhandal. And indeed in respect
of cathartick vegetables, the chymicall preparation must give place to the
ordinary and common, but in purging Mineralls, especially those that provoke
vomit, the chymicall has the pre-eminence. The smalness of the Dose renders it
suspirious.
Now the smalnesse of the dose alone, whereof the Chemists make great bragges,
ought many times to be suspected, seeing it is not always requisite, and
argues a certain venomous quality, or at least not so benign, as appears in
the aforesaid oils of Vitriol, Brimstone, Gloves, Origan, and other such like,
which whether they may be taken alone without any danger, or no, they shall be
able to testify, who like fools are desirous to make experiment; and
therefore they administer but a few drops of them, dissolved in other mixtures.
It is better therefore to administer some things in a larger dose with their
own substance, than their spirits in the least quantity, although in many
things, we do not dislike the contracting of good virtues into a small body, so
as it be used with right reason, to wit, those things being observed which the
Medicinal art of Galen and Hippocrates teaches to observe.

In the next place they disallow of decoction, because much of the strength
does perish thereby, the unpleasant relishes remain, and the virtues are
dulled by reason of the mixture of a strange moisture. But first, the
inconvenience will be avoided, if the decoction be made in a double vessel,
that the spirits evaporate not; as for the relish, they themselves do more
correct it than the Galenists do; and in like manner they use water as a
vehicle to the spirits. Now it is certain that decoctions are many times far
better than distilled waters, and extracts, because the virtue of the simples
passes into the liquor, without altering of the temperament at all. The
decoction of Anise good against the colic.
Thus Heurnius observes; that he did more successefully cure the pain of the
Colic with the decoction of Anise, than with the spirit or oil of it. The
same thing have I also often observed, the reason whereof may be this, because
the Decoction drinks the virtue of the Anise into every part of it, whereas
three or four drops of the Oil do most vehemently affect the part which they
first touch, but do not diffuse their virtue any further, neither if they be
administered in broth, or any other liquor can they be thoroughly mixed
therewith. The temperature of many things is sometimes lost by distilling, and
Paracelsus himself does often confess as much, yea that somethings which in
substance may safely be taken, by distilling do become hurtful, as honey,
which (says he) being thrice distilled turns to poison.

We infuse Medicaments, when we stand in need of the subtle parts, but if
there be no need of them, then they are administered either whole or prepared
some other way, neither are infusions made in water only, but in diverse other
liquours also. They seem also too much to fear the addition of honey and
sugar, because (say they) they have venomous and deadly spirits. Paracelsus
averres it of honey thrice sublimated. But being taken whole, they do not send
forth such noxious spirits, whereby we know that the separations of Nature and
the Chemists are not alike: Who would believe that the hot spirit of Wheat can
be drawn out by our heat, as it is by Art? Nature of meats does create chyle,
blood, choler, but Art spirits, oils, and quintessences, which do very much
differ from the nature and temperature of their matter. Although therefore I do
not think that the operations of nature, and the chemical art are not alike,
yet it is sufficient if those things which do result from the chymicall
operation, be made convenient for man's body, to withstand the diseases of it;
and that art in my judgment is praise worthy, which in imitation of Nature
does so diversely change bodies for the use of man. Therefore it is manifest
from what has been already said, that chymicall remedies are not always to
be preferred before the other. Now though the Galenists do justly refuse the
doctrine, of Paracelsus, yet they do not disallow of chymicall remedies, but
leave them their own place in Physic. And the Chemists themselves cannot be
without remedies prepared after the vulgar way, Chemists are not without vulgar
remedies.
as is evident in Quercetanus, and others, yea and Paracelsus himself, who
prescribes many decoctions and infusions, and uses many things whole, not
changed at all by any chymicall art. Therefore to both of them their own praise
is due; for sometimes there is need of using chymicall remedies, sometimes,
yea, very often the other. Most indifferent therefore are the Galenists, who do
not reject chemical remedies, but the Chemists are blame worthy, in that they
never use other then their own, whereby it comes to pass, that oftentimes they
promise wonders, which as experience shows they are not able to perform. It is
a sign of an unskilful man always to use Quintessences. Frankincense being
whole cures wounds, which can never be cured with the oil thereof. Conserve of
Roses performs that in corroborating and binding, which the spirit, water, or
salt thereof shall never be able to do; for distilled oils; and sharp Spirits
do violently and speedily assail natural heat. Therefore in regard of diverse
circumstances, sometimes a spirit and extract is to be used, sometimes a
Conserve, Electuary, and Decoction. For all remedies do not need a chymicall
preparation, many thereby being utterly annihilated. Now some things cannot
conveniently be used, except they be chymically prepared, especially
mineralls, and some things perhaps are prepared after one manner, which ought
not to have been prapared after another. An error in Chymicall remedies more
dangerous then in the other.
In general it is to be noted in Chymicall remedies, if at any time there be
an error, it is more dangerous then in the common medicines. Which things have
been said not in disgrace and contempt of the spagiricall art, but because of
empiricks and others, who too adventurously, and without judgment minister
remedies, which they take out out of lying books, and if something has been
chymically prepared, although perhaps badly enough, they highly commend and
admire the same.

CHAP. IV. That the remedies are not to be changed, although the cure do not
presently follow.
BEcause (as we have said) there are many stubborn diseases, very hard to be
cured, which do not yield to remedies, unless often reiterated, therefore
some that have undergone a long and tedious cure, desire to make trial of
other remedies, which they hear have done good to others, or else do
altogether lay aside the use of Physic; but they err in both particulars,
for as Hippocrates says well, 2 Lib. 52. aph.
One that does all things according to right reason, if it do not succeed
according to reason, should not pass to another thing, so long as that
remains which was seen from the beginning. Which although it be principally
meant of the Physician himself, that he must not slightly, and without cause
change his course of Physic, yet it may also be fitly applied to the
patients. For as Galen says well in his Commentary, it is a point of sound
discretion, not to receede from those things, which have seemed to be right.
As water drops are a long time in penetrating a stone; so in diseases that are
crude, and hard to be concocted, if a man have once found out what is needful
to be done, he ought not to recoile from it. That Physician goes wisely to
work, who having fully found out the diagnosticks, and prognostics of a
disease, does apply remedies convenient in quantity, time, manner, and place.
But if he be mistaken in the knowledge of the disease, as sometimes it
happens, it is lawful to change not only the remedy, but also the Physician
himself, or at least to call another to him, that consulting together, they
may diligently seek out the nature of the disease, which when they have well
and perfectly found out, the patient committing himself to them, ought to hold
on in the use of remedies. How to know when remedies are to be charged
Now that he may know when the remedies are to be changed, this is to be
noted. First, if the remedies that have been administered, Cures (says
Hippocrates) do show the natures of diseases. Cornelius Celsus in the
beginning of his third book says that, in acute diseases, remedies that help
not ought presently to be changed, but in long diseases (of which we speak in
this chapter) not so: for we must persist so long in the use of remedies,
until their operation being often frustrate, we perceive that the nature of
the disease was not well known. Secondly, if by the administration of the
remedies the symptoms be exasperated, it is a sign they were contrary to the
disease, and are therefore to be changed, to wit, in cronicall diseases, for in
acute diseases, if the exasperation of the symptoms do happen with signs of
concoction, it is a token of a disease tending to a crisis. Thus Antonius Musa
Physician to Augustus Caesar, when he perceived the pain of Caesar's stomach
to become worse by the use of hot things, he applied cold remedies, and so
cured him.

But some will say,

I answer, used perhaps a good Physician, if the success which he expects does
not presently follow, abjuring the Physician, consults with empiricks and silly
women. Now those medicine-mongers do after the manner of the Andabatie (that is
to say blindfold at adventure) fight with diseases, try diverse remedies, and
never hold on in the use of that, in which they should have persisted. Usually
the last remedy is applauded, and those that went before are of no moment with
the people, as letting of blood, purgation, alteration, and the like, which
notwithstanding subdued the greatest part of the disease. It falls out also
many times, that the Physician himself being overcome with the importunity,
and complaints both of the sick and the bystanders, is forced to make too
much have with his remedies, and contrary to reason to change them: wherefore
those that be sick ought patiently to wait for the time of the cure, which
cannot be the same in all diseases.

CHAP. V. Of them that reject all remedies, if they be not presently cured.
OThers, (as we have said in the foregoing Chapter) do utterly reject the use
of Physic, if they be not cured by the first or second remedy, who, besides
the wrong that they offer to nature it self, which will have all things to be
done in time, do injure themselves most of all; for diseases neglected do
take deeper root in the body, and become at length altogether incurable, and
past all help of Physic. Or others that by their proper nature do usually
tend to health, of which sort are intermitting fears, which (as Hippocrates
says) are not dangerous at all; for Fevers after what manner soever they
intermit, aph. 43. lib 4.
are void of danger, those diseases (I say) continuing long, and being
neglected, do stamp such a blot upon the bowels, that they leave behind them
perilous diseases, although they perhaps went away of their own accord. Galen
in diverse places teaches, that the cause of a tertian is seated in the liver,
of a quotidian in the stomach, and of a quartane in the spleen; nor is it any
wonder, if the parts by whose oeconomie the whole body is served, be at length
enfeebled, and therefore many times very grievous diseases do follow in those
parts, after fevers that have been neglected, as gross obstructions,
putrefaction, scyrrhous swellings, scurvie, dropsy, and others, which because
the temperature of the bowels is quite overthrown, are altogether incurable,
as too frequent experience manifests. Physic preserves the inward parts though
it perfect not a cure.
But this is the excellency of the art of physic, that though it does not
perform the cure, yet it preserves the inward parts, and does so weaken the
causes of diseases, and dull their force, that the noble parts are not harmed
thereby, and so those great and perrilous diseases are prevented. Yet what has
been said, ought not so to be understood, as though there ought never to be an
intermission of the use of remedies; for Physicians do in very long diseases
wisely allow some respit to nature, after they have for a few days together
administered preparing, evacuating, and corroborating medicines, and other such
which they thought convenient, and afterward they return again to the cure;
thus they provide for the preservation of strength, which might have been
wasted with a constant use of Physic.

CHAP. VI. That remedies are not to be rejected for their unpleasantnesse.
WHen I read the writings of the ancient Physicians, who have bequeathed unto
us the virtues of remedies, and their precepts of Physic, I cannot but wonder
at the multitude and abundance of remedies wherewith they pestered their
patients, as also at the unpleasantnesse of them, so bitter, unsavory, and
ungrateful to all the senses, yea and many times rudely prepared were many of
them: it being a familiar thing with them, to dissolve those things, and give
them to be drunk, which we take in pills to deceive the taste, and prepare
more finely; for a Physician should endeavor to cure quickly, safely, and
pleasantly. Cito, tute, factle curandum Thysick is neatlier, administered now
then heretofore.
What shall we say then of the frowardness of the sick in this age, who though
they have more toothsome and pleasant remedies administered to them, then our
forefathers had, do nevertheless detest Physic for its unpleasantnesse, and
had rather lie long under a disease, then be cured with a very few remedies.
We must confess indeed, that very many remedies have by the care and
diligence of modern Physicians, been made more neat and pleasant, then
heretofore they were, but yet all unsavorinesse is not taken from them. In
which particular we may admire Gods wonderful providence; for if he had put
the like relish into medicine that he did into meare, mankind had long since
either utterly destroyed, or much weakened it self therewithal. For all
remedies have in them a nature in some measure contrary to our body, because
they after it, otherwise they were not remedies, and so they may also do harm.
We use them, that we may reduce the body from a preternaturall to its natural
state again. But if the sick use them either preposterously, or longer, or
oftener than is meet, of healthful causes they may at length be made the causes
or diseases, and imprint on the body their qualities, which are so different
from the nature thereof, and therefore it is well said in the Proverb, Qui
medice, misere.
They live miserably, that live Physically. Wherefore it were not amiss, if
many both men and women did take Physic more sparingly, for they prejudice
their health, and they that are ever and anon taking Physic, do seem almost
always to have need of it. In like manner others that are sometimes sick are
to be admonished, that they do not for a little unpleasantnesse of taste or
smell, perversely reject wholesome remedies, that are discreetly administered by
an able Physician.

CHAP. VII. Whether home-growing Remedies can be sufficient for any Country.
IT were to be wished, that England were as well able to furnish it self with
Remedies, as it does with food and raiment. There were in times past, and even
at this day are very many, that have endeavored to reduce the whole body of
Physic to common, and home-growing remedies, rejecting such as are brought
from Foreign Countries. Pliny, the great Antagonist of Physicians, was of
that mind, blaming Physicians that call in the Indians, Aethiopians, and
Arabians for help. At length (says he) the craft and subtilty of men invented
those shops, in which every man's life is proffered to be sold to him; then
presently compositions, and unutterable mixtures are provided, Arabia and India
are brought in for aid, and for a little ulcer, Physic is fetched from the red
Sea, when every poor man eats daily to his supper the right remedies. But
that could never yet be brought to perfection, nor has ever any Nation been so
happy, that it could be sufficiently furnished with its own remedies, India
sufficiently furnished with its own remedies.
except the Indians. For seeing that the same things do most commonly grow in
diverse Countries, it is certain that they cannot every where be of the same
virtue and goodness. It is therefore lawful to fetch them out of those
Countries where the best do grow, for the virtue of plants does vary according
to the nature of the places. The Arabians say, that some plants are hot in the
third degree, which the Grecians will have to be hot but in the second, the
Germans in the first. Wherefore Galen, who lived in a most temperate Climate,
did not think his own Country remedies to be sufficient, but received Lemnian
earth out of the Isle Lemnos, approved of Candy dittander, Macedonian parsley,
and such like. And in purging medicines, it is most manifest, for they do not
grow at home, but it is necessary that they be brought from foreign
Countries, as Seen, Rubarb, and many others, some whereof being transplanted,
although with good dressing they be made to grow in our Gardens, yet not
without a manifest wasting of their strength, nor in that plenty which may be
sufficient for the whole Country: Thus we daily use sugar, pepper, spices,
wine, which are supplied unto us from other Countries. The Lybian Iris (says
Galen) does differ as much from the Illyrian, as a dead body from a living, no
smell at all proceeding from the Lybian, but the Illyrian yielding a very
pleasant savor. God would not that every Country should abound with all
things, nor always, that humane society might be maintained. For as in every
Country, one City supplies necessaries to another, so one Country to another.
If one City do stand in need of the help of another, why shall not one Country
supply the defect of another? But they think that those remedies which grow at
home, have a greater affinity with the temperature of the Inhabitants, than the
other. But experience shows that we do use profitably, and without any hurt,
wine, and spices that are brought from abroad. Again, Physic is not agreeable
to nature, but after a sort contrary, because it alters nature, and therefore
it is necessary for a Physician to use those remedies which can most fitly
perform it; and seeing that the same medicament, even in the same Country,
does changes it virtues according to the situation, and nature of the places,
it ought to be gathered there where the best grows, and therefore sometimes to
be fetched from foreign countries. But if this can be done with equal
commodity, let the home-growing remedies be always preferred before the
foreign.

CHAP. VIII. Of them that fear to be let blood, and purged, lest they
accustom themselves to it.
THere are many that do willingly use purging and blood letting every year,
to wit, in the Spring, and Autumn, for the voyding of ill humors, lest
afterward, namely, in Summer, and winter, 47. Aph. lib. 6.
they fall into diseases; which Hippocrates persuades unto; They that find
bloodletting and purging to do them good, ought to purge and let blood every
Spring; which words he repeats again in another place. 53. Aph. lib. 7.
Yet some are so timorous and fearful, that though they stand in need of these
remedies, yet they refrain to use them, lest they accustom themselves
thereunto. For they think that if they should use them once or twice, and
afterward leave off, A gross Error.
they must either of necessity be sick, or not be in sound health, whose Error
it is my purpose in this place to declare, although some Physicians have been
also of the same opinion, forbidding any man adventurously to accustom himself
to such great remedies, as letting of blood, and purging, lest by intermitting
or leaving off that custom, he fall into dangerous diseases. But herein they
are mistaken; for it is an Axiom of Physicians; One thing is indicated or
betokened by one. And custom it self does not properly indicate any thing, but
together with other signs it indicates somewhat; for it has reference to
nature, being also called a second nature; whatsoever indicates any thing, does
indicate either the conservation or removeall of it self; conservation if it
be according to nature, and removeall if it be besides nature, as a disease,
and the cause of a disease. Seeing then only the cause of the disease does
indicate evacuation, either by blood-letting, or by purging, it cannot be that
custom should indicate and betoken these remedies, because (as we said) it
has reference to nature, but one and the same remedy cannot be betokened by
diverse things. If in any man abundance of blood, or some other such cause
require blood-letting, lest he fall into some grievous disease, Nature will not
necessarily the next year require the same remedy, unless he labor with the
same disease, unto which nature custom has reference, because only the cause
of the disease, and not nature does indicate this remedy. If therefore he must
be let blood again, it is in respect of the cause of the disease, not because
of custom. Nor does it follow, if this year Socrates his blood be so faulty,
that there is need of evacuation, that there shall be the like faultines the
next Spring; for both the temper of the man, and of the air, and his manner of
diet may be changed: Otherwise diseases should never be perfectly cured, if he
that has been once abundantly vacuated, must necessarily relapse into the same
disease. Therefore custom it self does not urge unto a reapplication of a
remedy, but permit the same, because accustomed evacuations are less hurtful,
and they that are accustomed to it may more boldly admit of evacuation. Thus
custom alone makes nothing unto future evacuations, unless there be the cause
of a disease with it; but if some diseases use to return every year, as the
Gout, pain of the joints, melancholy, and the like; because the causes of these
diseases do lurk in the body, it is very good to prevent them with convenient
remedies, (as Galen says he did, in his Comment upon the forenamed Aphorism)
which remedies are convenient to be applied, not for assuefaction and custom,
but in respect of the causes of the disease, which, so often as they appear,
ought to be corrected with such remedies. But all diseases are not of that
nature, that there is eminent danger of them every year, and therefore there is
no fear of accustoming a man's self to Physic, except the disease also be made
accustomary and familiar. The remedy that cures the disease, is not the cause
of the return of the disease afterward, which it should be, if use should
enforce a necessity of the remedy, because only the cause of the disease
requires evacuation; from whence it would necessarily follow, that the use of
evacuation does afterward increase the cause of the disease unto the
administering of the like remedy.

CHAP. IX. That no regard is to be had of the Stars for letting of Blood and
Purging.
IT is an usual thing with many in taking Physic, to observe the Signs, to
wit, whether the Moon be in this or that Sign, which is thought to govern
this or that part. Others take notice of the Conjunctions and Oppositions of
the Stars, when they must Purge or let Blood; as when the Moon is in
Conjunction with the Sun, they think it to be a dangerous thing to use these
remedies. 4. Fen. lib. 1.
Some do advertise ( says Avicenne) that Cupping-glasses be not applied in the
beginning of the month, because the humors are not yet swelled up to the
height, nor in the end of the month, because then the humors are lessened,
but in the middle of the month, when the humors are in their height,
following the increase of the Moon, at which time also the brain is increased
in the Skull, and water in the rivers that ebb and flow: Which his
interpreters do refer to other of the great evacuations, during the same
cause. And here two opinions are to be weighed, the one of Hippocrates and
Galen, the other of Astrologers. Hippocrates in his Book de aere, aquis, and
locis, advises to observe the great changes of times and seasons, and the
Solstices, that we neither administer Physic in them, nor Cauterize the parts
about the belly, nor make any incision, till at least ten days after. Now by
those great Changes, he understands the variations of heat and cold, which
happen at the Solstices, Equinoctials, under the Dogge-starre, and before the
Dogge-starre, and at the rising and setting of some Constellations. For he
adds, Both the Solstices are very dangerous, but especially the Summer
Solstice; so both the Equinoctialls are perilous, especially that in Autumn;
the rising of the Stars are also to be observed, principally the rising of
the Dogge-starre, Arcturus, and the setting of the Pleiades: Because at those
times diseases do either end, or else are changed. These things therefore
according to the opinion of Hippocrates are to be known, in respect of the
sudden changes of the air, which are wont to happen at the rising of some
Stars. Some to the forenamed Constellations do add the Moon, which has
great dominion over these inferior things, and experience shows that it has
much soveraigntie over the humors of the body, and * Galen also acknowledges
the same. But Astrologers have gone further; for they attribute the signs of
the Zodiac to the several parts of the body, and when the Sun and Moon are in
those signs, they hold it a dangerous thing to use remedies which concern
those parts, over which those signs are thought to have dominion; and the
common people in reading of Almanacks which come forth every year, are very
cautelous in observing them, whereof we will treat more at large in the
following Chapter. But if all these observations of Galen and Hippocrates be
true, there will scarce any time remain for administering Physic; for in both
the Equinoctialls, Solstices, at the rising and setting of Arcturus and the
Pleiades we must forbear ten days, and before and under the Dogge-star at
least forty days; so likewise according to Astrologers we must abstain from
Physic in all the Oppositions, Conjunctions, and Quartile aspects of the Moon:
All which if they should be superstitiously observed, there would be no time
left for Physic, although we neglect those Stars whose influence is not yet
observed; some of which may perhaps hurt as much as the rest.

The Stars are not to be considered in the curing of diseases, as they are in
the Firmament, but for their influences, and those alterations which they make
in the Air; as Hippocrates forbids purging under the Dog Star, only because of
the heat of the Air. Nevertheless whatsoever the alteration of the Air be,
the same cannot be equally good, nor alike bad to all, for evacuation, but to
some it will do good, to others harm, according to the different constitutions
of men, nor was there ever such a temper of the Air and Weather, which was not
more or less healthful, or hurtful to some. For some Natures in Summer, 2.
Aph. lib. 3.
some in Winter, are better or worse ( says Hippocrates) so likewise some
diseases are made better or worse in regard of other accidents; 3. Aph. lib. 3.
and so are some ages according to times, places, and manner of diet, because
the influences of the Stars, which evermore are universal, do act after the
same manner only, and do hurt to some, and good to others, according to the
different nature of diseases and the patients, as also according to their age,
country, time of the year, and other such circumstances, which do limit the
operation of universal causes. Again, the concourse of the Stars is only a
procatartick and universal cause, which moves and stirs up the internal
causes. Now these are known by their proper signs. Nor is there any necessity
to consider the stars, but only the motions of inward causes, which make the
times of diseases. But as concerning Astrologers, they do with a vain conceit
attribute all the parts of the body to the stars, to wit, to the Planets, and
the signs of the Zodiac. And because the Planets, and the signs of the
Zodiac have not one and the same motion, some of the Planets having a swift,
others of them a very slow motion, but the Signs, the same motion always
equal, it will seldom happen that the Planets concur with the Sign that is
referred to the same part. For the Moon runs through all the signs every
month, and therefore is often conjoined with them all: But Saturn which they
set over the Spleen, does very seldom meet with the sign that is dedicated to
the same part. The Stars therefore which are said to have dominion over the
several parts of the body, have influence either into the substance, or into
the conformation of the parts; but not into the substance, because there is no
organicall part in the body, which is not made up of sundry parts, which are of
a diverse nature, as the hands and feet consist of bones, nerves, arteries,
muscles, which cannot be equally subject to this or that Star. And seeing the
like parts for substance are in the other organes likewise, as bones in the
feet, hands, breast, head, why shall not one and the same Star bear rule over
them all? It remains then that they have influence into the conformation
only, which is accidental to all the parts, for every part severally may be
without the same conformation, as bones may be as well crooked as straight, and
be well nourished too. The conformation of every part depends on number,
magnitude, situation, and figure. The influence cannot be made into the
number of the parts, because number in respect of it self, is not ens reale,
that is, has no real existence, as also because one particle being added or
taken away, the influence into the part, is not thereby changed, as if one
finger of the hand be wanting, the influence ceases not. In like manner not
into the magnitude, for then the influence into an infant should differ from
that into one that is grown up to ripe age: not into the situation, because so
the situation being changed, the influence should also be changed, as into the
hand stretched out, and laid upon the head, or on the feet. Lastly not in the
figure it self, because in like manner the figure being changed, the force and
efficacy of the signs into the part is still the same. Hence it appears,
that the attribution of this power and dominion to them over one part rather
than another, is nothing else then an idle fiction. But if any such thing be
granted, it is likely that that same influence will extend it self only to
those parts, which have their proper substance distinct from the rest, as the
Heart, the Brain, the Liver, etc. and not to the Hands, and the Feet, and other
such like parts, whose similar parts are the same for substance, and differ
only in conformation. In very deed, many Physicians seem to have given but
little regard to those Astrologicall observations. I have seen many sick in the
Solstices and Equinoctials, to whom the forenamed remedies were applied with
good success, which if they had been omitted, peradventure the sick had died.
And therefore in acute diseases, as the Apoplexy, Squinancie, Pleurisy,
burning Fever, and the like, it is very dangerous to omit, or defer
necessary remedies for the disposition of the Heavens, but we ought rather to
have regard to the times of diseases, and natures working, and according to
that observation, prescribe sometimes one, sometimes another remedy, as at
sundry times the disease requires. But when a Physician prescribes Purging or
Blooding, only for prevention of diseases, he may observe the four quarters of
the Moon, and use the forenamed remedies rather in the first, than in the last
Quarters, because the Moon having a manifest power over the humors, when it
increases they are augmented, and it decreasing, they are diminished. In like
manner he may avoid the Equinoctials and Solstices. But in the sick, these
cannot be observed without danger, seeing that diseases do not permit such
great delays. But the figments of Astrologers, touching the dominion of the
signs over all the parts of the body, are altogether to be rejected as feigned
subles; for it is an absurd thing to suppose that one Star rules over this
part, and another over that, seeing that all the Stars do rule over all the
parts, and act not immediately, but by the alterations of the air, by which
the whole body is changed and altered.

CHAP. X. Of the ridiculous Physical observations of Almanack-makers.
WHo can hold from laughter at those Caveats, whereof Astrologers do every year
warn the people in their Almanacks, about the taking of Physic, among which
that is not the least, of which we have already spoken, that they attribute the
parts of the body to the signs of the Zodiac: We will now prosecute the rest.

And First, Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces.

Secondly,

Thirdly, in such a sign purge Choler with Electuaries, Aries, or Sagitarius;
the Melancholique, when it is in Libra, or Aquarius; the Choleric, in Cancer,
or Pisces; and so the Sanguine when it is in either of these. But it is to be
noted, That any kind of diseases may happen at any time; Aph. 19. lib. 3.
and be exasperated, as says Hippocrates. Because as Galen teaches in his
Commentaries, not only the Air is the cause of diseases, but also the proper
temperament of the sick, and the peculiar manner of every man's diet, whereby it
may come to pass, that even in Summer any man may be taken with cold and
phlegmatic diseases. Seeing therefore at one and the same time, many men may be
sick of sundry diseases, all neither can nor ought to be purged after the same
manner, and in diseases that are acute, there may be danger in delay, while we
stay till the Moon has run through such and such Signs, in the mean while the
opportunity of helping the sick (which is said to be swift and variable, in the
first book of Hippocrates his Aphorisms) will be lost, so as perhaps the like
will never after offer it self again, because as Galen says in his
Commentaries, occasion is said to be very quick, and soon gone, in regard that
our bodies are daily changed, not only by external causes, (as the Air and
Stars) but also by internal. From whence it comes to pass that they that fall
together into diseases at the same time, ought notwithstanding to be purged on
diverse days; for although there be the same aspects of the Stars and the Moon,
yet the inward temperature of the body does diversely alter, concoct, and expel
the humors, which the Physician, who is a Minister of Nature, not of the
Stars, ought to consider, that he may administer all things to the sick in due
season. For the curing of diseases is varied according to their different
times. Now seeing that the times of diseases, are in some longer, and in some
shorter, if we wait for the aspects of the Moon and the Stars, we thereby lose
that healthful indication, which the times of diseases do afford unto us. For
in some diseases we do not purge until a perfect concoction of the matter be
made, but in others in the beginning; now in some diseases the beginnings are
sooner gone, and they quickly come to their height, whereas in others they are
very long. Wherefore the same time of purging cannot be seasonable for all,
which it should be, if the aspects of the Moon were to be observed; for so it
may fall out, that when Nature requires purging, the Moon may hinder it, and so
all were to no purpose; and therefore have the most learned Physicians, as well
ancient as modern, with good grounds rejected these observations.

But it is more absurd and frivolous which they talk concerning the forms of
remedies; An absurd opinion of Almanac makers.
for seeing that the very same remedies may be prescribed by a Physician in
form of a Potion, Electuary, or Pills, even as he pleases, in vain is the
Moons influence regarded. For it is an easy thing for a Physician to
administer the Electuarie Hamech, Diasenna, Catholicon, or the like, in form of
an Electuary, or to dissolve it in broth, distilled waters, or some other
liquor, to make it a Potion. It seems those Astrologers do not know what
Electuaries or Potions are; for although all Potions be not made of
Electuaries, yet Electuaries may be changed into Potions; yea we commonly use
the same purging Simples, Seen, Rubarb, Polypodie, etc. both for Potions and
Electuaries. Physicians do prescribe a diverse form of Physic, sometimes to
please the sick, of whom some do more willingly take solid Medicines than
liquid, others the contrary: Sometimes for the better purging of the remote
parts, or because of the toughness of the matter, and other the like
intentions. The same may be said of Pills, for even the ancient Physicians
Aetius, Paulus, and others did dissolve Aloes, Coloquintida, and whatsoever we
take in Pills, even what is most untoothsome of all, and gave them to the sick
to be drunk, which we administer in a solid form, because of their too much
bitterness; and that they may stay longer in the stomach, when we would draw
from the head, and the remote parts. Lastly, it is to be observed, that what
remedies soever are taken in a solid form, do melt in the stomach, before they
put forth their strength into the body, which is all one, as if the Apothecary
had dissolved them in some liquor; for both Nature and Art do the same thing.
Yea those things that are administered in a liquid substance, do sooner begin
to work than the other, because they being already dissolved by Art, are more
easily overcome by Nature; and therefore in Apoplexies, and other cold
diseases, Physicians do dissolve Pillulae Cochiae which are very bitter, in
Aqua vitae, or some such like water, that they may the sooner put forth their
strength. In like manner, Another gross Error of Astrologers.
that which Astrologers talk of bloodletting, is but vain and frivolous, for
whatsoever the influence of the Moon be, bloodding is never good for a
Phlegmatic man, or for one that is sick of any disease that arises from Fleame,
except together with the Fleame there be also an abundance of blood. Galen
likewise forbids to let melancholy men blood, unless the blood which is
voided do appear to be melancholic. It is good only for choleric and
sanguine complexions; let the Moon be in what sign it will, if the disease,
age, and strength of the party do permit, and that for the reasons already
alleged. And therefore Galen says well in his book de venae Sect. that we may
let blood at any time of the disease, if the indications of bloodletting do
appear, yea though it be on the twentieth day from the beginning of the
discase. Now the indications are these, to wit, the greatness of the disease,
and the strength of the party, and not the disposition and aspect of the Stars,
which if we should observe, (as we have already said) we should lose the
opportunity of using convenient remedies, to the great hazard of the sick.

CHAP. XI. That it is not hurtful to purge in the Dog-dayes.
SOme perhaps may be found, who slight, and laugh at the aforesaid observations
of Astrologers; but who is he at this day that takes not notice of the
Dog-dayes, A gross error.
and fears not to take a purge at that time of the year, grounding that their
conceit upon the 5th Aphorism of Hippocrates his fourth book, where he says,
That under the Dog, and before the Dog, cures are difficult. So that many,
although they be at that time sick of those diseases which have need of
blouding or purging, do nevertheless abhor from the use of these remedies,
not taking notice of these two things.

First, that in so doing, they leave the diseases to nature alone to be cured,
when it stands in most need of the help of Physic.

Secondly, if in the Dog-dayes diseases may be cured without Physic, why not
also at any other time of the year, and so the use thereof might be quite
abandoned in curing of diseases? But let us weigh the reasons why Hippocrates
said that purges are difficult in the Dog-dayes, which according to Galens
Commentary seems to be threefold.

First, because the body being inflamed through the heat of Summer, cannot
endure the sharpness of Medicines.

Secondly,

Thirdly, Kingston upon Hull.
Northern parts of England, where I write this, where neverthelss they fear
the biting of this Dog as much as in Spain) and therefore there is no cause to
fear that our bodies should be too much inflamed, or that they should be
weakened, or that the humors should be too forcibly drawn into the skin.

Again, our remedies are much more gentle than those which Hippocrates used,
Our remedies are moregentle than the Ancients.
as are Cassia, Tamarinds, Seen, Rubarb, and the like, which do neither
inflame the body, nor trouble the humors.

And Lastly, because though we should use strong remedies, And our
preparations better.
yet we can so prepare them, and administer them in such a quantity, as shall
offer no violence to the body. But seeing that Hippocrates his Country was
exceeding hot, and that all his drugs that he used were very violent, and hot,
it is no wonder that he was so wary of that time of the year. But in this
Country those days are not so hot. Besides Hippocrates did not say absolutely
that we must not purge at all in the Dogdayes, but only that purgation is
difficult, not impossible; and therefore seeing that at this time of the year
there are very many acute diseases, which cannot be cured without bloudletting,
and purging, the Physicians of hot Countries, as Spain, Italy, the South parts
of France, and the like, do very wisely use purging remedies, but not so
frequently, nor violent.

But some are of opinion, that we should abstain from purgation, not only
because of the violent heat of the weather, but for the malignant effects of
the Star; and the Ancients did attribute so much to this Star, It is accounted
the most principal star of the first magnitude.
that for eminency sake they called it the Star, as having some more than
ordinary power above the rest, not only over the body, but the mind also; so
that both men and beasts, especially dogs, are then more sick than at other
times, and dogs are thought to go mad through its influence. Wherefore Galen
also forbids blouding at this time: But all the mischiefs which Pliny reckons
up to proceed from hence, are not of infallible credit, for they are seldom or
never observed to happen here in England. Again, it is an absurd thing to think
that any of the Stars are mischievous, for they are all benign and propitious
to man, and those things which the Ancients have written concerning this Star,
do not correspond to experience. We see every year there are diverse degrees
of heat, and not always the same, because the power and influence of the Star
is altered by the diversity of Conjunctions, and Aspects, so that those
malignant effects (if there be any) of the Dog Star, may be hindered by the
aspect of other Stars. Nor does it necessarily follow, if there be a great hear
this year, that there shall be the same the next year. Wherefore there is no
cause always to fear purgation under the Dog Star, or all the Dog-dayes; for
if this day be exceeding hot, peradventure to morrow the weather will be more
temperate, only at this time of the year we must use remedies more sparingly,
and those not so strong as at other times; for even those remedies which
Hippocrates did ordinarily administer to his Patients, are scarce at any time
prescribed by us, no not in winter. To this our opinion do assent Ioubertus in
his Popular Errors, Mercurialis, Argenterius, Hollerius in his Commentaries
upon the forenamed Aphorism, Fernelius, Fuchsius, Valleriola, Claudinus,
Vallesius, and all that have written of this subject. It shall suffice us to
conclude this Chapter with the testimony of Iacobus Hollerius, a most judicious
and learned man. This precept (says he) takes place in Hippocrates his
Country, and such like places, which are very hot, but not in these Countries,
(now he speaks of Paris in France where he lived) for besides that we have
gentle and easy medicines which we use, as Cassia, Catholicon, Asses milk,
etc. We do here experience no time of the year to be more wholesome and
temperate (especially when the East-winde blows) then the Dogge-dayes; so as
experience shows, that diseases begun in June and July, are wont to
terminate in August, even under the Dogge-starre. Wherefore if a disease happen
in those days, we do not fear many times to open a vein, and to administer
strong Physic. Nevertheless if there happen a vehement and canicular heat of
weather, as we have in France oftentimes, even in the months of May and June,
we follow the advice of Hippocrates, both in letting blood, and prescribing
purges. Where he shows that that very number of days is not to be regarded,
but only the heat of the weather is to be observed, which if it happen in the
Month of May, before the Canicular days, yea what time soever it happens,
Hippocrates his rule is to be observed. I might add here, that there are
diverse opinions concerning the rising of the Dogge-star; for with the Ancients
it rose sooner than now it does, but with us it rises at those times when it is
not wont to be so hot, and therefore at that time purgation ought less to be
feared, concerning which thing we may see more at large in Dionysius Petavius a
most learned man.

But that it may appear what great difference there is betwixt England and
Greece, which was Hippocrates his country, we may observe what Hesiod says,
Lib. 2. operum.
to wit, that their Harvest did begin at the rising of the Pleiades, at which
time the Spring is scarce begun with us. For the Pleiades do rise in the Month
of April, after the old account, or not long after the beginning of May.

CHAP. XII. That Purgations are often to be reiterated.
BEcause Physic (as we have said) is tedious and irksome, many do expect a
perfect cure by one only purging medicine, and they think the disease exceeds
the capacity and skill of the Physician, and if after a Purge once taken, it
be not cured. Nor are they willing to hear that the remedy is to be reiterated,
little knowing for what causes Physicians are forced to renew Purgations. It
were indeed to be wished, that diseases could be cured with one cathartick
alone, which thing although it sometimes happens, yet it is not always so; and
truly a Drugge that makes a full and perfect purgation, Cachexie is an evil
state of the body, when all the nutriment turns to ill humors. Aph. 51. lib. 2.
Cachexie draw all the vicious humors out of the body at once: And therefore
Cachexie is an evil state of the body, when all the nutriment turns to ill
humors. Aph. 51. lib. 2.
Hippocrates thought it to be a very dangerous thing to evacuate very much at
once, and suddenly. For if when Empyricks and Hydropicks are cauterized, or
scarifyed, the matter and water should flow out all together, 27. Aph. lib. 6.
they would dye assuredly, says Hippocrates. If the letting of blood even to
swouning does not evacuate all the noxious humors, 8. Method.
as the dejections of the belly, vomiting of choler, and sweats which follow do
testify; much less may we by a purgation, void out all that which is noxious
and hurtful to the body. It is therefore more safe to purge by little and
little, according to the strength of the patient, condition of the part
affected, nature and place of the humor offending, because all the humor is
seldom after the same manner, and in the same place of the body, but is
diffused through diverse parts. Many times one part of it is concocted, another
crude, one thin, another thick, one quiet and still, another boisterous and
in motion, all which cannot be thoroughly evacuated at once.

CHAP. XIII. That purging pills should not be taken after Supper.
THis is no new error, but has been excellently refuted by many that have
written of Physic, although some Physicians do maintain the custom. For many
think, that when the head is to be purged, it is best to take Pills after
supper, for so their virtue and strength is most commodiously carried up to the
head, The humors drawn from the head to the stomach by the veins, and not by
the throat.
together with the vapor of the meat, which is false, namely that the humors
are drawn from the head to the stomach by the throat and jaws and not by the
veins, for so they might, if not altogether, yet for the most part be easily
voided by spittle, neither does the sick any time perceive any such deflux of
the humor in the time of purgation, as Julius Caesar Claudinus well observes,
Cap. 9. lib. 2.
in his most learned and excellent book, de ingressu ad infirmos. For in very
deed there is the same time for administering Pills, that is for other
Medicaments, namely the morning, after perfect concoction; for otherwise the
force of the Medicine is dulled, and quite overwhelmed by the abundance of
meat, and the meat it self is corrupted; for the Medicament draws ill humors
to the stomach, and mixes them with the meat, and besides it twitches the
superior orifice of the stomach, and so it may provoke vomit, as Galen says;
4 De sanittuend.
And Paulus blames them that use to administer Aloes in the evening, Lib. 7.
cap. 4.
and after meat, because it corrupts the meat, and does not purge out choler at
all. If therefore Aloes, Aloes not to be used after meat.
which is such a gentle cathartick, may do so much hurt being taken after meat,
what harm will ensue thereon, if strong purging Pills be taken before the meat
be concocted? Therefore Pills are to be administered rather in the morning than
at night. I know they may be given at other times for diverse intentions, as at
noon, and in the evening; but always long after meat. Thus Galen in the
evening did administer Pills made up of Aloes, Seammonie, and Coloquintida, but
not after meat; for it is likely the sick had not then supped, both because his
tongue was swollen, and he was sick, for they that be sick do seldom eat meat,
unless by constraint. Concerning this subject, Fuchsius in his Paradoxes has
written more at large, and therefore thus much shall suffice in this place; for
the sick do in this particular more easily and willingly obey Physicians, then
in any other thing of as great consequence.

CHAP. XIIII. That Rhysicall potions may not only be taken hot, but cold also.
MAny are wont when they take purging potions, to warm them before they drink
them, as if there were the same reason of medicines and broths, which custom I
do not speak against, for so they seem to work sooner, and more quickly to be
reduced into act.

But yet they are to be informed, that they may as commodiously be drunk cold,
in Summer time, into a hot stomach. For many of the Catharticks, which are
ingredients in the composition of these Potions, do not well endure the fire;
for their virtue exhales with a gentle heating, which if it does not all
perish, yet some part of it is abated, as may be seen in Rubarb, which being
put to the fire, becomes slower in operation, as the extract thereof does
manifest, which is first made by infusion, whereby the tincture and virtue of
the Rubarb is drawn out, and afterward by a gentle drying, it is brought to the
consistence of an extract, so that a few drammes which are sufficient for many
infusions, are scarce enough for one extract, because by drying the infusion,
the purging virtue does likewise evaporate.

Secondly,

Thirdly, being drunk cold,

CHAP. XV. That it is not hurtful to take cold drinks on the day of purgation.
ALmost all men do think it to be a heinous crime to drink cold drink on that
day wherein one has taken a Purge, but only hot drinks, as Possets, which are
the only drinks now adays in request, which custom I do not dislike, for they
further the working of the purge, and deterge and cleanse the stomach from
humors. Thus I read among the Ancients, that hot water is good after the
taking of a purge.

First,

Secondly,

And Thirdly, Cold drinks good in some cases during purgation.
for without harm, yea with very much profit they may be sometimes drunk. But
some Physicians command cold water, if the stomach be hot, that the acrimony of
the drugge may be taken away. So says Aetius, Terrab. prim sermon. 3. cap. 133.
If they be easily purged, after they have drunk the medicine, we will give
them cold water to drink. John de Vega Viceroy of Sicilie being sick, took a
purge which wrought but slowly: His Physician offered to the Viceroy the broth
of a chicken without salt, but Philip Ingrassias that learned Physician coming
to visit him, gave him a pint of cold water, with a little sugar, presently his
disposition to vomit, and the gnawing of his stomach was stayed, and the purge
wrought very well; then together with great thanks to Ingrassias, he gave him
the silver bowl worth fifty Crowns, wherein he had drunk the cold water, as
he himself relates in his book concerning the drinking of cold water after
Physic. And Sanctorius has the fame story in his comment upon the Art of
Galen. We need not therefore so much fear cold drinks, as Beer or Ale, in them
that are purged, especially at meals; for seeing it is permitted to take a
little meat 4. or 5. hours after the Physic, why should cool drink be denied,
especially if he that is purged be not actually sick, but took Physic only to
prevent diseases. But let us hear what Mesue a most excellent Writer says. He
in his third Theoreme, treating of the causes that hinder the working of a
purge, says that if it happen through the weakness and debility of nature,
the working of it may be furthered by the drinking of a little cold water. If
the expulsive faculty be feeble, or the operation and working of the
medicament be remiss and weak, give the sick a little water moderately cold,
and an hour after some astringent thing, and thereby the Medicine will work
effectually. And in the same Chapter: If the Physic do not work, but cause
grievous symptoms in the body, besides the forenamed helps (says he) the
drinking of very cold water (as Rusus says) takes away the malignity and
acrimonie of the Drugges. And in another place he blames them that drink fat
broths too soon after they have taken Physic, Theor. 4. cap. 5. canone. 1.
because they do loose, soften, and fill the stomach, and so beget loathing of
meat and nauseousnesse, although he confesses that there is a time to use them,
and therefore he commands rather to use strengthening drinks, among which he
reckons thin wine, of a pleasant smell, and quick, allayed with water warmed
a little with the sun or the fire. (Then he adds) but let him beware of sweet
wine, thick and troubled, as also of water both exceeding hot, and extreme
cold; for the hot water looses the stomach, and dissipates the strength
thereof, and the cold extinguishes the feeble and gentle heat of it. From
whence it is evident and clear, that after one has taken Physic, it may be
sometimes lawful to use cold drinks, and not to limit themselves always to
the use of their hot possets.

CHAP. XVI. Of them that will never be purged but in the beginning of the
Spring.
MAny that are wont to be sick of an anniversary disease, to whom therefore some
remedies are made familiar by custom, do nevertheless only use them in the
beginning of the Spring, fearing greatly the end of the Spring, as being too
near the Summer, but herein they err exceedingly. For these remedies are
prescribed to preserve from diseases them that are yet in health, but would be
sick, if it were not prevented with the use of Physic. Now this ought to be
done especially during the Spring, because at that time of the year, the body
is in its vigor and strength, and it is the most temperate season, and the
humors which are as it were asleep in Winter, are stirred up by the heat of
the Spring, whereby they do more easily yield to Nature and Physic also. But
the same humor is not predominant in all, but diverse in diverse men, either in
respect of their peculiar manner of living, or in regard of the particular
natures of men; for some are Choleric, and others Phlegmatic, hence it is
manifest, that neither the same evacuation, nor the same time of evacuation is
convenient for all.

Secondly, England, when the Sun enters into Aries, in the beginning of March,
at which time Astrologers make the beginning of the Spring. Wherefore they that
stand in need of the forenamed evacuations; let them take care that they be
prescribed, not according to the computation of Months, but according to the
temperature of the air, yea though it were the end of May, May the best month
for taking physic.
which I account to be the safest and fittest Month for that business,
because then the weather is most seasonable and temperate, most like unto
natural heat, and the strength of the body is most vigorous, like as in
Countries that are much hotter than England. Physicians do prefer this
Month. But Galen according to the diverse constitution of men's bodies, would
have some to be purged in the beginning, others in the end of the Spring. Best
to purge the phlegmatic in the be ginning of the Spring
They in whom Fleame is predominant, must be purged in the beginning of the
Spring; for the humors that are gathered together in Winter, are melted by the
temperature of the Spring, so that except they be purged out, they are easily
diffused throughout the whole body, and cause grievous diseases. But as for
them that are choleric, And the choleric in the end.
it is best to purge them in the end of the Spring, lest the hot humors be
inflamed by the heat of the ensuing Summer, and so putrify, and beget Fevers:
Ad chap. 47. lib. 6.
So says Galen in his Commentaries. One that was wont every Spring to be sick
of a Tertian, has not been troubled with it these many years, I having purged
him from choler in the end of the spring; for at that time it is best to purge
such; but as for Epilepticks, Apoplecticks, Arthriticks, and Melancholicks, and
as many as are sick through the grossness of the humors, are most fitly
purged in the beginning of the spring.

CHAP. XVII. That purging ought not to be rejected, although the sick do eat
no meat.
IT oftentimes happens to Physicians, that when they prescribe a Clyster, or a
Purge for their Patients, the bystanders (especially women, and such as keep
the sick, whom nothing can please, but they desire always to dissent from
Physicians) these, I say, do intercede for the sick, that he is weak, and
takes nothing at all, when notwithstanding in secret, they do preposterously
urge him to eat meat, and do even glut him therewith. Yet it has been often
observed, that such as have so much loathed meat, have with a very gentle
Clyster, voided many excrements dried and hardened with the violent heat of the
Fever. And it is to be noted, that purging is not prescribed only for the
emptying of the belly, but to purge out morbous humors, for that want of
appetite to meat, wherewith the sick are usually troubled, does arise from
vicious humors, which requires purging out, which being evacuated, the
appetite and stomach to meat does come again. For the loathing of meat,
bitterness of the mouth, and other the like symptoms, do manifest that
purgation is necessary, says Hippocrates: Aph. 17. lib. 4.
Loathing of meat, pain of the heart, dizzinesse of the head, and bitterness
of the mouth in one that has a Fever; do note that there is need of a vomit.
For these symptoms are caused by the humors which lay about the mouth of the
stomach. Therefore though the sick take nothing, yet they have lurking within
their bodies many vicious humors, which unless they be voyded out by a
Cathartick, the appetite will never return of it self, but the disease
becomes every day worse than other, and perhaps at length is made incurable.

CHAP. XVIII. That a Purge is not much to be disliked, because sometimes it is
cast back by vomit.
I Have sometimes heard the sick complain, that when they have a Cathartick,
whereby they should have been purged downward, a contrary effect succeeded, and
they were purged upward, to wit, by vomit, which manner of evacuation is indeed
very troublesome; for vomits do usually offer much violence unto nature. Now
they must know, that it may often come to pass, that the working of the
Physic may be changed, and a purge become a vomit, and a vomit a purge. The
body indeed by an ordinance of nature, is emptied rather by siege than by the
mouth; for the belly seems to have been created for that purpose, as also the
humors by their proper inclination do flow to the belly, and there are a great
many Mesairaick veins that carry the humors unto the guts. Now a purging
medicine becomes a vomit, either by reason of the medicine it self, or by
reason of the sick.

Of the Medicine; First, if it be strong, and do greatly provoke and pull the
mouth of the stomach.

Secondly, if it be very unpleasant,

Thirdly, if it be light, thin,

Fourthly, if it engender windiness,

Fifthly, Physicians speak) is brought into act, and so does diffuse its virtue
throughout the whole body, whereby it purges no less than if it had been all
kept in the body, It is sometimes good to vomit after one has taken a purge.
Yea many times it is very good to vomit it up; for it carries out with it
gross, phlegmatic, and other such humors, that stick fast to the stomach,
which happily it had never purged out by the stool. Wherefore it is not to be
imputed as a fault, to the Physician, or the Apothecary, if the Physic do
sometimes work the contrary way, for thereby no harm at all, but many times a
great deal of good does come to the sick.

CHAP. XIX. That purging ought not to be feared, though there be a flux of the
belly.
THe common people many times wonder at it, and think it a needless thing, yea
and dangerous, when one has a flux of the belly, that Physicians do sometimes
prescribe a purge, which is rather a means to increase the flux, and to weaken
and spend the strength of the sick: But the thing is quite contrary; for
nothing does stay the belly like to a purge. In health it is good sometimes to
be loose in the belly, so as it be not too great a laske, nor impair the
strength, if so be (as Celsus says) it stay within seven days; But in them
that be sick, it is sometimes good, sometimes evil to have a laske, in respect
of the diverse nature of the disease, constitution of the sick, and time, as if
it be a critical flux, if such things be voided as ought to be, and it be
such as the sick is well able to bear. Therefore sometimes it is to be let
alone, sometimes to be stayed; but if it be stayed by astringent remedies, the
noxious humor being retained in the body, is oftentimes the cause of a greater
evil to the body, and corrupts and infects by its contagion the rest of the
humors, whereby afterward the noble parts are hurt, or else the flux returns
worse, and is more malignant than before. It is a common proverb among
Physicians, The causes of diseases must be taken away, before the diseases
themselves can be cured. So likewise in such a flux, the safest way to cure it,
is by taking away the cause, which thing purging among other remedies does most
fitly and safely perform, so that the working of it, the flux either stays of
its own accord, or if it do not stay, yet it may more commodiously, and
without danger be stopped by astringent remedies. I have often seen the sick,
which by reason of a lask went to the stool many times every day, whose
looseness was stayed by a purge of Rubarb, to which, though sore against their
wills, I had persuaded them, which nature of it self could scarce have cured.
Therefore it is a common axiom among Physicians, one flux is cured by another,
and one vomit by another, not that all diseases are cured by their like, but by
accident only, insomuch as the causes of the flux being voided out, the flux
stays of its own accord.

CHAP. XX. That the use of Clysters is void of danger.
MAny reject clysters, as being perilous and dangerous Physic, but they are
grossly mistaken, for clysters are the most gentle and innocent Physic of
all, for they never touch any noble part, in that they go not beyond the great
guts, and therefore if the disease require it, we sometimes add to them very
sharp remedies, which another part of the body cannot endure, and yet they are
administered without any harine to the body at all. Much less can mollifying
and cooling clysters hurt the body, which we prescribe in fevers, and other
diseases, in which there is nothing, except the quantity, which might not be
taken by the mouth. Clysters good in many respects.
Now a clyster is profitable for diverse parts of the body, as the brain, the
eyes, the stomach, and all the inward parts; for it does not only loosen the
belly, but also by its liquid substance, it does deterge and cleanse the
tunicles of the bowels from many gross and viscous humors which cleave
thereto; and besides, it lies like a fomentation upon the kidneys, and the
bowels, and therefore it oftentimes brings that out of the body, which a
reiterated purgation can never do. Galen experienced this in himself, who
being grievously tormented with the cholick, with a clyster made of the oil of
Rue, purged out gross, tough, and viscous fleagm. Seeing then the use of
clysters may be so profitable, they need not for the future be feared, but
ought rather to be more familiarly used. 3 things necessary to be conside^ed.
Therefore I would admonish the people of three things.

First,

Secondly, within the bowels, cause gripings, the pain of the colic, vomiting,
frenzy, dizzinesse of the head, and many such symptoms. Hippocrates seems to
have pointed at this, when he says, Aph. 9. lib. 2.
If one would purge, let him first make the belly soluble. Now seeing that by
many ways the belly may be made soluble, this by preparing clysters is not to
be neglected, and Galen commends this counsel. Sect. 4. d^ victu acut. * Et
aph. 72. lib. 7.
And in another place Hippocrates says; When one would purge the belly, it is
good to make it soluble; and if thou would make it fluxive upwards, it is
good to stay the belly; if downwards, to moisten it. Now the belly cannot be
more fitly moistened than with a clyster. Thus Galen showing for whom purging is
convenient, among the causes through which evacuation succeeds not well, when
one has taken Physic, reckons this for one: Oftentimes (says he) hard and
dry ordure in some of the guts, hinders evacuation.

Thirdly, not only before purgation, but also after, it will not be amiss to
inject a gentle deterging clyster, (as the best Physicians do advise) for to
wash away the relics of the humors, which sometimes stick to the bowels. For
a clyster cleanses the guts, and takes away whatsoever noxious matter is left
after a strong medicine, especially if it be of that sort of medicines which
have Scammony for an ingredient; for it by the sharpness and acrimonie
thereof, does corrode the intestines; and there is the same reason concerning
all other strong medicines, as among others, Valleriola says well in lib. 3.
locor. com. cap. 16.

CHAP. XXI. That Clysters are not well injected by bladders.
SEeing then the administering of Clysters is such wholesome, facile, and
harmless Physic, we will in brief observe somewhat touching that manner of
injecting clysters by an oxes bladder tied to a pipe. This I confess is no
very gross error, for we see it many times well enough injected this way, and
it seems to be the ancientest custom, for I read in Galens fifth book of
Method, that the use of such bladders was very frequent in old time: But now it
is left off in many places beyond the Seas, and that manner of injecting is
altogether unknown, but they use a Syringe, or a hollow pipe of tin, or
brass, and that with better conveniencie, for it is both more easily injected,
and also more safely, A near way for injecting Clysters.
and sooner, and which availes very much in this business, it goes higher, and
passes into all the great guts. For seeing naturally a clyster does not go
beyond the great guts, by reason of a certain valvule placed in the beginning
of the gut Colon, and the end of Ilion, it would be much to the commodity of
the sick, if a clyster could but go so far, for so a great benefit would
accrue to them by the washing of the guts. But a clyster that is injected by a
bladder does not ascend so high, but stays in the strait gut, and in the
beginning of Colon. It were well therefore that these Syringes were brought
into use, of which almost all our Apothecaries, except those of London, are
destitute. But sometimes it happens that a clyster is vomited out of the mouth,
although but seldom; I do not remember that ever I observed it, save twice in
two patients, which happens when the forenamed valvule is loosed by reason of a
vitiated and corrupted peristaltick motion of the bowels, which opens an
unwonted passage to the liquor, yet how this can be done, I do not conceive. I
would rather think it comes to pass, because the aforesaid Valvule is broken
by some preternaturall cause, and cannot any more execute its office. Therefore
if any man that is ignorant of the art of Physic, chance to observe such a
thing, let him neither blame the Physician nor the Clyster, seeing that no
Physician can foreknow this, but let him accuse the particular constitution of
the sick, and know that nothing happens then, which has not been heretofore,
nor let him be troubled at such an event.

CHAP. XXII. Of vomits, that possets ought not to be drunk immediately after
one has taken a vomit.
IT is not my purpose in this Chapter to treat of the commodity and
profitablenesse of vomits to the body of man, I will only give notice of thus
much about the use thereof, that there are some Vomitories which do only cleanse
the stomach, and others which draw humors from all the parts of the body,
which in sundry diseases are more profitable than the former. When therefore
one has taken a vomit, let him not hasten as many do, to the use of possets;
for by filling the stomach, they do too soon stir up the working of the
vomit, which is thereby cast out of the stomach, before it has diffused its
virtue into the whole body, and so it does not at all attract the noxious
humors, and yet molests the stomach not a whit the less. But let him rather
rest awhile, till it be reduced into act, and work twice or thrice without
taking any drink at all: Thus we shall be sure, that only those things which
be hurtful in the stomach and body, shall be voided out.

Where it is to be noted, that posset drinks are not prescribed by Physicians
that they may further the operation of the vomit; For what posset drink is
prescribed in vomits.
for in the beginning they rather dull and diminish the strength and virtue of
it, but only to take away the irksomeness of vomiting, namely, that the stomach
may be more easily overwhelmed, for many times repletion alone does cause
vomiting, otherwise it were better to take nothing at all, that the Physic not
being altered by any mixture of meat or drink, might draw nothing but the
noxious humors into the stomach. But perhaps some say, that Paulus and Aetius
two famous Physicians did prescribe a vomit after meat, when there is a fever
of a long durance: And Avicenne is also of the same mind, speaking of the cure
of an impure Tertian. And know (says he) that nothing helps them more then a
vomit after meat. Canon. 4. tract. ^. cap. 40.
Galen likewise prescribes a vomit after meat, but Alexander Trallianus blames
him, because it is better to provoke vomit before meat, which is true for the
forenamed reasons. For a vomit after meat purges the stomach only, and the
humors contained therein, and not them which are in the veins, unless with a
very great forcing of nature. I must needs comfesse therefore that the patient
does vomit the easier after meat, but with less commodity: But if the sick be
prone and apt to vomit, it is better to provoke vomit fasting, and before meat
or drink; for so the Physic draws the humors better out of the veins.
Gentilis and Ar^ularius two most excellent interpreters of Avicenne, are of
this opinion, in the Chapter of the cure of a quartane Fever. If the patient
vomit easily, it may be administered before meat, to draw melancholy from the
Spleen to the stomach: But if it come difficultly, it is better to give it
after meat, that he may vomit the easier, which may also be applied to drink
taken presently after. If therefore the vomit be prescribed, only for emptying
the stomach from gross humors, it will not be amiss first to eat or drink,
or at least presently after. But if the whole body be to be cleansed, it must
be taken fasting, and the patient must not eat nor drink any thing after,
until the virtue of the Medicine brought into act, has penetrated the whole
body, because immediately after the taking of drink, the attractive virtue of
the remedy is dulled. Therefore those possets should not be taken before the
patient has vomited once or twice; Best to vomit once or twice before one take
the posset drink.
but afterward they may be taken, that the sick may vomit the easier, and the
gross humors be better dissolved, and cast out. The same has Hartman a late
Chymicall writer in his Notes upon Crollius observed, who forbids to drink
immediately after the taking of a vomit, until the patient has vomited two or
three times; for otherwise it dulls the force of the medicine, but when the
humors have been sufficiently moved, he permits a good draught, and in the
end for to cleanse the stomach, and evacuate the relics.

CHAP. XXIII. That old men may be blooded without danger.
THe common people most commonly are disposed to thwart and contradict
Physicians, which as in many other particulars may be seen in this, that if
one be sick of a Fever, wherein it is profitable, yea necessary to let blood,
they are ready to excuse declining age, as not able to endure this remedy, and
this I have often heard of some not fifty years old, and otherwise very
strong, and vigorous. Indeed in the administration of all remedies, the
strength of the patient ought especially to be regarded, insomuch as if it be
defective, we must withhold strong remedies even from a boy, or a young man.
But because there is not the same duration and continuance of strength in all,
but some at threescore and ten are more cheerful and vigorous than others at
fifty, the Physician regards not so much the number of years, Physicians
regard not the number of years but strength.
as the strength and vigor of the sick. Therefore if a strong old man be
troubled with the Pleurisy, inflammation of the Lungs, burning Fever, or other
such diseases, there is no doubt but he may, and ought to be let blood, for
these diseases can scarce be cured without this remedy; but if the sick have
not strength to endure the remedy, he must of necessity perish, and so all
diseases in old men should be mortal. Galen himself in his book of
Phlebotomie prescribes blooding for old men of threescore and ten years, and I
my self have seen a man threescore and thirteen years old, who was let blood,
four times within the space of three days, and had thirty ounces of blood at
the least taken from him. Rhazes also did let blood in a decrepit old man,
which was sick of a grievous Pleurisy. Therefore age is not to be measured by
the number of years, but by the strength of the patient, which if it be
vigorous in very old men, why shall remedies, necessary for their diseases, be
denied them? It is indeed certain, that every old man is weaker than when he
was young, and therefore he must be let blood more sparingly than if he were
yet young, neverthesse it may be that if he were compared to another young
man, he would be found stronger than he, and more able to endure physic.
There is then no age, except decrepit old age, but it may endure some
evacuation. Now decrepit old age, because it has but little blood, and very
many raw humors, is unfit for this remedy. But the other ages, that are in
the middle betwixt the first and the last, have their degrees of strength, and
therefore do admit of some sort of evacuation. This did Cornelius Celsus teach
very well. Lib. 2. cap. 10.
It is no matter (says he) what the age is, or what is within the body, but
what the strength is. Seeing then this is a thing not doubted of among
Physicians, the sick ought not to gainsay, if at any time a Physician command
blood-letting, for any man though he be well stricken with age. The same may
be said of children before they be fourteen years old; for even childhood has
its strength, Children may be purged or blooded.
for even childhood has its strength, and vigor, according to the proportion
whereof, why shall it not be lawful to evacuate, especially if he be a boy of
a good habit of body, with large veins; well and freely educated. They endure
purging, why not also blouding? They are wont sometimes to be wounded, and to
bleed very much, without any harm at all to them, why may they not also abide
artificial emission of blood? There is therefore no age which may not endure
some measure of evacuation. Wherefore seeing that properly the disease and
strength only are necessary marks to direct unto this remedy, they alone are
to be considered, and not the age, except as it does concur with them.

CHAP. XXIV. That it is but a vain thing to be so curious in the choice of
the veins in the arm.
SEeing that the veins in the arm are wont to be opened, either for
preservation from diseases, or for curation of diseases, therefore the sick do
many times ask what vein is to be opened. For they have heard something
touching the distribution of the veins in the arm, one of which they depute
to the head, another to the liver, the third they make doubtful, available for
either of these two regions of the body; which opinion not Galen nor
Hippocrates, but the modern Physicians did set abroach, before the clear
knowledge of Anatomy, which at this day the people do follow, and not they
only, but also very many practitioners in Physic are still in the same error,
merely out of their ignorance of Anatomy. It is manifest enough that all the
veins of the arm, in that they proceed from one and the same trunck, do
evacuate from the same parts, and that which is called the cephalic vein, and
is referred to the head, does no less evacuate from the liver, than that which
they call the basilick and liver vein, although this same cephalic vein,
because it sometimes receives a little branch from the head, is thought to be
more profitable for the affects of the head, yet both of them do equally help
the diseases of the inward parts, and draw blood alike from the hollow vein.
And in very deed these terms basilick and cephalic, although they be Greek
words, were nevertheless unknown to Galen, Hippocrates, and others, but were
invented by late writers, which did ill in bringing in this opinion concerning
the choice of veins. Which thing, that it may more plainly appear, we will
describe the original and beginning of the veins in the arm.

The hollow vein ascending out of the Liver to the upper parts, An anatomicall
difcourse of the distribution of the veins in the arm
as soon as it comes to the channel bones, is divided into large branches,
which take their name Subclavij, from the situation of the part, because they
lie under the throat, and channel bones, which are called Claviculae. One part
of these branches sends out many veins within the breast; the other part,
springing forth of the breast, is carried to the arme-holes, which are called
in latin Axillae, from whence it has the name Axillaris, and in the beginning
of the arm, is divided into two great branches, called the cephalic and
basilick veins, in bruits the cephalic has its beginning from the jugular,
but in men always from the axillar vein, nevertheless it does receive a
little small branch from the external iugular vein. From these two branches
do all the veins of the arm arise, which are carried unto the extremities of
the fingers, which now to describe is altogether needless, it being sufficient
for our purpose to have shown their beginning. Seeing then all the veins which
are in the arm do proceed from one and the same trunck of the hollow vein in
the throat, in vain is one chosen rather than another, for they all draw blood
from the same fountain. And lest it should seem to be only our own private
opinion, know that even the best Anatomists do assent thereto. Vesalius, the
chief of all the Auatomists that ever were yet, Lib. 3. Anatomes. cap. 8.
although he seems to derive the cephalic from the external jugular, yet he
says, our Aesculapij (forsooth) do ridiculoufly contend, whether the shoulder
vein, or the common, or the axillar vein must be divided in the hand, as if
some peculiar vein from every affected part of the body, might be found in
the arm, when indeed from one only trunk of the hollow vein divided in the
throat, all the veins of the arm do proceed, as in that place he declares
more at large. To him assents Boehinus in his Theater of Anatomy, where he
affirms, that it is but a trivial thing to be so curious in the choice of
those veins, seeing that each of them have the same beginning, Quae magis
turget magis urget.
wherefore he counsels always to take that which is most * conspicuous. Of the
same opinion is Riolanus in his Anthropography; Gabriel Fallopius in his
institutions of Anatomy; Bartholinus, and other Physicians that excelled in the
knowledge of Anatomy.

CHHP. XXV. That it were better to observe the quantity of blood by measures,
then by ounces, pounds, and weights.
IT is an ordinary thing, not only with the people, but also with Physicians,
when they let blood, to define the quantity thereof by ounces and pounds, which
also was Galens custom, who sometimes drew blood even to many pounds. If this
be a commendable custom, then they should always have weights at hand, that
the weight of the blood that is drawn out, may be certainly known, which they
have not, but both the Physicians, and the bystanders do guess thereat.
Bloodletting (says Hippocrates) is comprehended under the head, called the
emptying of the vessels, 2 aph. lib. 1.
and is not used but when the blood is faulty; now the blood is not faulty in
weight, but in quantity, or quality. And though it be heavy, yet it is not
drawn out for that, but because of the quantity, or some other fault: now the
quantity of liquids is better discerned by measures than by weights, for one
blood is heavier than another. As for example; let us suppose Titius his blood
to be heavy, he having a plethore, or fullness thereof ad vasa, and Sempronius
his blood to be light, he having a fullness thereof ad vires, if you take six
ounces of blood from each of them, Titius his blood, because it is heavier,
will be contained in fewer vessels, and Sempronius his blood, because it is
lighter, will fill more vessels. So that if from each of them the same weight
of blood be taken, yet the latter has bled more than the former. The blood in
the veins and arteries is contained as it were in vessels. Now repletion, or
inanition, has reference to vessels. A pitcher that is half full of iron, or
heavy stones, is not so full, as if it were filled to the top with the most
light spirit of wine, although the former weigh heavier. So likewise in
emptying a vessel, he takes more away, that out of one vessel draws a pottle
of the spirit of wine, than he that out of another takes half a pottle of
stones, although perhaps this weighs heavier. Seeing then there is the same
reason in blood, because one is more ponderous than another, if in letting
blood we only consider its weight, we shall never define well the quantity
thereof; for it is contained in the veins not as heavy, but as filling, unless
one imagine the same ponderosity and weight of blood in all men, which I think
no man will dare to affirm. The quantity of blood (says Galen) is indicated by
the more or less faultiness of it, and by the strength of the party, and
according to these two, is more or less blood to be drawn. So that in a great
distemper of the blood, the strength being vigorous, we must use a larger
evacuation; but in a light distemper, the strength being feeble, we must let
blood more sparingly. But if you judge of the quantity by the weight, it may so
fall out, that when the sick is feeble in strength, you may draw more blood
than when he is most lively and vigorous, which is a gross trespass against
the rules of Physic. For if in debility of strength the blood be lighter, and
in validity of strength it be heavier, if in this latter case you take half a
pound of blood, and in the former but four ounces, the vessels into which
these four ounces are taken, will be as full by reason of the levity of the
blood, as those vessels which receive the half pound of the other ponderous
blood, and so the same quantity of blood is taken from them both, which should
not have been done. Nor do I see any reason, why the drawing of blood should
be defined by weight, more than the dejections of the belly in a purgation,
seeing that out of the veins the humors also are purged; for under the
manition of the vessels is purging contained, as faith Hippocrates. 2 aph. lib.
1.
Seeing therefore the vessels are not replete with any thing, as heavy, for the
capacity of the vessels is not varied, although the weight of the contents be
different; and it is apparent, that a greater quantity of oil than of honey
goes to an ounce; it will be better for the future, if the quantity of blood be
accounted by measures, and not by ounces, and pounds, seeing the judgment
thereof may be so deceitful. I know there were among the Ancients as well
pounds in measure, as in weight, for their vessels were drawn about with lines,
whereby the pounds and ounces were marked out, and whatsoever they measured
after this manner, they called Mensurall: As for example, a mensurall pound of
oil or wine, which perhaps Galen meant, when he drew blood according to ounces
and pounds. But because the things that were measured were of diverse weight,
the pound in weight did seldom countervaile the pound in measure: for though
there may be the same measure of oil, wine, and honey, yet there is not the same
weight, and therefore that manner of measuring was very uncertain, and we now
adays have no such vessels as do mark out ounces and pounds, nor if we had
plenty of them, could we use them, without a manifest error, in respect of
the different weight of the blood. Therefore though I do not disallow the
received custom, yet I think it safer to judge of the quantity of blood by
measure, than by weight.

CHAP. XXVI. That Sleep and Drink ought not to be wholly forbidden after
bloodletting.
AMong many observations of the people, this is not the least, that they are
very wary lest the sick sleep, or eat and drink presently after he has been
let blood, which was also the opinion of some Physicians, because they think
the blood returns to the heart, which nevertheless is not always true,
except there be an immoderate evacuation of blood, or timorousness, which may
cause swouning. However, no reason enforces that that return of the blood
should be so pernicious.

And first concerning sleep: the blood is wont in sleep to recoile into the
inward parts, to the exceeding great refreshment of nature: The benefit of
sleep to the sick.
Now in them that be sick, who have not slept for many nights, all men know
what great benefit a little sleep affords, for it repaires the strength,
concocts the morbous humors, and corrects them; wherefore we are oftentimes
forced to apply remedies to provoke sleep. Therefore if immediately, or a
little after bloudletting sleep do ensue, it may be good, both as a sign, and
a cause. As a sign, because it shows that nature which was oppressed with the
morbous humors, is now refreshed, and so does perform its natural functions.
As a cause, it may be good, because when once sleep ensues, nature does concoct
the remainder of the morbous humor. In what cases sleep is forbidden.
I know in some diseases sleep is not good, as in the inflammations of the
internal parts, in the beginnings of fits, and in pestilentiall diseases.
Therefore in those diseases, it is not good to sleep immediately after
bloodletting; but in other diseases, I see no reason why the Patient may not
sleep. Galen says, that if the sick after long and tedious watching do fall to
sleep, it indicates a perfect crisis, for sometimes it falls out, Ex 2
Prorhetic.
* that the sick after the crisis sleeps a whole day, especially when he has
not slept, of a long time before, and that to the great solace and refreshment
of nature. Yea sometimes it happens that the sick sleeps in the very crisis. If
therefore sleep be good after other evacuations, why not also after bleeding?
Moreover, sometimes it falls out, that in some fevers, such a preternaturall
sleep possesses the sick, that he can scarce be awakened, and yet many times in
such fevers it is very good to let blood, as of late I did to a woman that lay
in an acute fever, possessed with an heavy sleep, who otherwise had scarce
recovered, being adjudged of all as a dying woman. If therefore with good
success blood may be drawn from one that is actually asleep, why shall sleep
be hurtful immediately after blouding? Galen seems to account it a good thing,
9 method. cap. 4.
that the sick after blouding falls into a sound sleep. Two hours (says he)
after he was let blood, having given him a little meat, and commended him to
rest, I departed: And returning at the fifth hour, I found him lying in a
sound sleep, insomuch as he did not feel me when I touched him. Then coming
again at the tenth hour, I found him still fast asleep; Afterward having
been abroad to visit some other Patients, I came again in the fifth hour of
the night, not being silent as before, but of purpose with a loud voice to
awake him from his sleep. But perhaps some will say Galen did not command
sleep, till two hours after bloudletting. I answer, it had been well, if the
sick could have slept immediately after he had been let blood; and in no place
does Galen disallow that, for we know we cannot always sleep when we desire
it. But seeing the aforesaid sick man could not sleep, coming again two
hours after, he bade him lie still, that he might sleep, which Galen had not
done, if he had judged sleep to be hurtful after blooding. If any man object,
that sleep is prohibited lest the ligature should be loosed, and the patient
bleed again; that is nothing; for that may be prevented by the diligent care
of the bystanders, and the sure binding of it. As touching drink, Good to
drink after bleeding.
Amatus the Portugal proves that it is not hurtful immediately after
blood-letting, but very wholesome, commanding that the patient do presently
drink a little cold water; for in regard that the veins are emptied, it is
instantly distributed into the whole body, and does both easier, sooner, and
safelier cool the body.

CHAP. XXVII. That blooding and purging is not hurtful for women with child.
ANd this Error is none of the least, that if a woman with child be sick,
they will not suffer her to take Physic, nor to be let blood, for fear of an
aborsement; which is contrary to reason, the authority of the Ancients, and
daily experience.

To reason, says Hippocrates, Aph. 30. ib. 5.
* it is mortal for a woman with child to be taken with an acute disease.
Fevers in women with child are most dangerous.
Therefore no delay is to be made in applying remedies. Again, in respect that
the child is nourished with the mothers blood, if she be sick, there is danger,
lest through that sickness, and the corruption of the blood, the child
perish, which if it happen, as sometimes it does, then is the mother in danger,
both by reason of the disease, and of the dead child, namely, lest she being
weakened by the disease, the child dye through putrefaction of the blood, and
she be not able to bear the child; at least never does an aborsement happen
without danger. Now it is evident enough, that these evils cannot be prevented
without taking away the cause (for indeed no disease can be cured otherwise)
and the cause cannot be taken away without blood-letting, The disease is not
cured till the causes be taken away.
or purging. They that think it such a dangerous thing for women to use these
remedies, and thereupon do not admit of them, let them seriously consider this:
when she is not with child, and so the use of them might be quite abandoned.
But if he cannot cure her not being with child without those remedies, he
cannot then cure her being with child, and sick of the same disease. For the
same disease indicates the same remedy, and the being with child does not take
away the indication of the disease, but only after a sort alters the quantity
of remedies, and the manner of using them. Yea much rather are these remedies
to be used in women with child, inasmuch as they stand in greater need of help
than others. But they think that all the nourishment is drawn from the child
by blood-letting, and that there is danger of abortion by purging, and other
remedies: The danger to the child is from the disease, not the remedy
All this while not knowing that great danger hangs over the child, by reason
of the blood being corrupted, to wit, lest it die, and kill the mother, who is
already weakened with the disease, so that there is more danger of abortion
from the disease than from the remedy. And first we must never take away such a
great quantity of blood, as that thereby nourishment should be withdrawn from
the infant, but rather we observe, that the infant becomes more lively after
the corrupt blood is taken away; The child becomes more lively after bleeding.
for there is blood enough left behind to suffice both the child, and its
mother. Again, a purgation, especially a gentle one, although reiterated if
need stand, can do no hurt, A woman with child may take a purge, being given by
a discreet Physician.
but rather good, for the strength of the Physic does scarce reach unto the
child, or at least in such a long circuit, the noxious part of its strength is
lost. But what if it should attain to the child, yet it cannot kill it, if it
be exhibited in a moderate quantity. Only the blood comes unto the the child,
which by virtue of the Physic is purged from noxious humors. Also in women
with child the womb resists it much, for the safeguard of the infant; for in
them the retentive faculty is more busy then the expulsive.

This Error Secondly oppugnes Authority, Hippocrates commends purging for
women with child, from the fourth Month till the seventh. Women with child
may take Physic, if there be an ebullition of humors in them, Sect 4. aph. 1.
from the fourth month till the seventh, only they must be more gently
dealtly withal than others, but when the infant is younger than this, or
elder, it is best wholly to abstain. Which if it were Hippocrates his opinion
notwithstanding the vehemence of his remedies, Our purges more safe then the
Ancients were.
much more is it true of ours which are far more gentle; for the purgations
of the Ancients were more dangerous than ours.

Again, Experience testifies, 7. Epid.
as the history of Harpalaus his sister manifests, who being four months gone
with child, and sick of a Dropsy and Asthma, the infant being so weak that it
had not stirred of a long time, took Ethiopian Cumin with honey and wine,
which though it was exceeding bitter, diuretic, and therefore of great force
to provoke the flowers, yet being discreetly used did her good, and neither
hurt the child nor provoked her flowers; intimating thus much, that the child
is not always killed by taking Physic, unless the Physic be very strong,
and constantly used. There is a notable story out of Avenzoar, whereof we have
made mention in another place, who not knowing that his wife was with child,
did administer unto her exceeding strong physic, and yet the child was not
hurt thereby. I will (says he) relate what befell me while I was in the prison
of Haly, my wife was with child, and I knew it not, and she was troubled with
such a discase, that of necessity I was to give her a purge, and such an one
it was, that none would think, that a woman with child taking it, in but a
small quantity, could save her child unhurt, and yet she took it without
any harm to her self or her child; but when afterward I perceived that she
was with child, I was sorry for that mistake, and craved pardon for it of God,
and she brought forth a son, whom I have now at home with me. Thus Avenzoar
a Physician of principal note among the Arabians. Hercules Saxonia writes,
that while he was as yet in his mothers womb, and Physicians thought him to be
a Or false conception
Mole, they administered very strongremedies to cast out the Mole, but all in
vain; for the infant remained unhurt, and afterward became a most excellent
interpreter of Physic. This happens oftentimes, because the force of the
Physic is much weakened before it come to the infant, and the womb endeavors
to its utmost to keep in the child, and but with great violence will not part
with it before the time. There is another reason taken from the birth; for when
the womb endeavors to put forth the perfect infant, then do these remedies
help the travail, but they avail little or nothing when the womb strives to
retain the infant. I have often seen blooding and purging, even in the eigth
month, prescribed with good success, for women that labored with an acute
disease.

CHAP. XXVIII. That Physic is good for women in childbed.
WHat we have said of women with child, may be said likewise of women in
childbed, if they be sick of acute diseases, as a Fever, Pleurisy, and such
like; for they are wont to be troubled with many diseases, in that very
respect that they are in childebed; but there is a different reason between
them and women with child; for in women with child their flowers are stopped,
and do never flow without danger to the infant; but in women in childbed, the
humors that were gathered together in the matrix do flow out, and are never
suppressed but with very much danger, and thereby they fall into grievous
diseases, for the curing of which Physic is to be administered, Speedy help is
to be procured for women in childbed.
and by so much the more speedily, as in them all things are most dangerous.
For besides this, that the secundine, or after birth sometimes stays behind;
their flowers also do either flow too fast, or are suppressed, or flow but
slowly, from whence diverse great and perilous diseases, as continual Fevers,
The diseases to which they are usually incident.
burning Fevers, Frenzies, vomiting, loathing of meat, Epilepsies, inflammation
of the bowels, Plurisies, and other such diseases do arise. So likewise it may
fall out, that by an ill regiment of body alone together with corrupt humors
lurking within, exagitated and stirred up in the birth, as also by an erroneous
diet, although neither the flowers be suppressed, nor flow immoderately, such
diseases may happen. These cases are difficult and dangerous, and can scarce by
natures strength alone be amended: For if they come by suppression of the
flowers, they cause grievous symptoms, and fevers, with watchings, and
frenzy, but if they arise from an (...) wholesome regiment of body, they are so
much the more dangerous in women in childbed* because they betoken a great
putrefaction of humors within the body, which the expurgation of the flowers
could not take away nor amend. When these things happen, it is necessary by the
consent of all Physicians, to attempt something by blood-letting, and purging,
and other altering remedies, which the Physician shall think convenient. But
what vein must be pierced, when, how, and with what remedies she must be
purged, is not my purpose to explicate in this place, in that I am not now
reading a Physic Lecture, but only discovering to the people their Errors in
Physic. Only thus much I will add, that it is not safe to open the upper
veins, lest the flowers be thereby suppressed, and drawn back again into the
body.

CHAP. XXIX. That it is not hurtful to take Quicksilver by the mouth.
THis Error is to be pardoned in many, because it is maintained by the
suffrage and consent of ancient Physicians. Lib. 5. cap. 7.
* Dioscorides says that Quicksilver drunk has a deadly quality, and that by
its ponderositie, it gnawes the internal parts; Lib. 6. cap. 28.
and in * another place he says, it causes the same symptoms that the spume
of Silver does. Tetrab. 4. sermon. 1. cap. 79.
With whom assents * Aetius. And Galen himself reckons it among the poisons.
And so does Avicenne, although he differs from himself, when he writes
concerning the qualities of it; Lib. 1. tract: 2. cap. 47.
for in * one place he says it is cold and moist, but in * another place, Fen.
6. lib. 4. tractatu 1. cap 3.
he reckons Quicksilver among hot and sharp poisons. Some will have natural
Quicksilver to be cold, and the artificial hot: which controversy in this
place we will not spend time to decide. Also some modern Physicians will have
it to be a poison. If it be taken in too great a quantity, it congeales the
blood, says Conciliator, producing the example of a certain Druggist, who
being in a burning Fever, instead of a glass of water to quench his thirst,
unhappily chanced to light on a glass full of Quicksilver, and drinking up a
great quantity thereof, he dyed congealed, insomuch as when his dead body was
opened, the Physicians found the blood about his throat congealed and frozen.
Fernel likewise is altogether against the using of it. But others more rightly
taught by experience, do affirm that it is not so hurtful. As for
Dioscorides, he says that it hurts only by reason of its weight and
ponderositie, which it cannot do, unless it be taken in a great quantity.
Galen confesses, that he never made trial of it, whether it kills or no, being
taken by the mouth, or applied outwardly, so that if at any time he reckoned it
among the poisons, he seems to have done it according to other men's opinion,
not out of his own judgment and experience. And the modern Physicians have
found by experience, that it may safely be administered, if it do not exceed
due measure. For no medicine is taken in excessive quantity without hurt to
the body. And therefore if it did congeale the blood, as Conciliator speaks,
that was only by reason of the too great quantity, and for that cause it must
not be thought to be of a more noxious quality than other medicaments.
Nevertheless Rorarius tells a contrary story; 9. simpl. In contrad. Galeni. 20.
I knew (says he) a Germane, who being drunk, and sleeping in a Goldsmiths
house, he awaked out of his sleep being very thirsty, and groping about for
drink, by chance he lighted on a vessel, in which was three pound of
Quicksilver, and pouring out that cold and moist liquor, being half asleep he
drunk up all the quicksilver, and forthwith cast himself again upon his bed,
and awaking in the morning, and feeling in the linen some cold humor near
him, he found quicksilver. So Avicenne in his second Chapter concerning poison
writes, that many of them that drink of it, are not hurt at all, for by its
natural disposition, it comes forth by the lower region. And therefore it
cannot be poison in any respect, unless by its gravitie, not by any deadly
quality. Quicksilver used to facilitate the birth, and to cast our the after
birth.
Rorarius in the forenamed place reports, that he knew very many women, who
without any bodily harm used it to facilitate the birth, or to cast out the
secundine or afterbirth. Some likewise affirm, that they have administered
Quicksilver to children half dead through worms, Good against worms in
children.
who were thereby presently restored to health. The same writes Brassavolus, a
famous Physician in his examination of Simples, namely, that he has given it
to children, in the weight of a Scruple, but if to children, much more safely
to them of riper age. And many do assent to Brassavolus. The same Contrad. to
Avicen.
Rorarius reports, that natural Quicksilver has not any venomous quality in
it, but that that it kills by its weight alone, so as he has not only heard of
it, but also seen it safely administered by some Physicians, and women likewise
to children half dead through worms, and to women in childbed, to facilitate
the birth, and to bring down the afterbirth. Amatus the Portugal upon
Dioscorides, calls all them that speaks against it, unexperienced Physicians,
because it is deadly only by reason of its ponderosity, as says Dioscorides,
and he says that it is prescribed by the Spanish Physicians, as a most
excellent Antidote, Used against fascination.
for children that are bewitched, and for such as are troubled with worms,
even with good success, and without any evil symptom at all: And he tells a
story of a certain boy ten years old, which drunk up more than a pound of
Quicksilver in stead of wine, and felt no symptom from it, except the weight
thereof, and by the help of Clysters purged it all out again, and remained free
from all further harm. Also Matthiolus a famous Physician, seems in diverse
places to be of the same opinion, as in one place he says, Cap. 28. lib. 6.
unless it be drunk in a great quantity, it kills not, because that both by
its weight, and fluid substance it quickly passes out by the inferior parts,
without making any stay at all in the stomach and guts. Wherefore it is no
wonder what Avicenne wrote, that there are some who drink Quicksilver, and
feel no hurt thereby, for it quickly slides through the body, if so be they
that have drunk it, do but walk to and fro for a good space. The women of
Goritia do for their last remedy, administer a scruple of Quicksilver to be
drunk of women that have hard labor in childbirth. Nor are they wanting that
give it to children to kill the worms of the belly, to the quantity of two
seeds of millet, without any harm to them at all. Cap. 70. lib. 5.
And in * another place, he says, that for such like examples, he is easily
persuaded, that Quicksilver is not so deadly, except it exceed due weight or
measure. But most clearly in his Epistle to Stephanus Laureus, Lib 4. Epist.
in which he permits children to take Quicksilver, seeing that there is no
other deadly quality in it, save that it hurts the intestines by its weight,
as may be seen more at large in his works. Me thinks the authority of so many
excellent Physicians might suffice to convince men of the truth hereof; but
besides these, many Physicians even of our days have found the same true by
experience. Its best for the phlegmatic.
I my self who write these things have often given it, and never but with good
success, especially in the phlegmatic, in whom it works much better than in
others. Therefore whatsoever evil symptoms Fernelius, Palmarius, and others
do affirm to arise from it, as Stupefaction, Convulsions, Tremulations,
Lethargy, pain of the Guts, and such like, are true of it, being either ill
prepared, or being administered in too great a quantity, for nothing is
absolutely, and in every respect perfect it were not a medicament, if it should
never hurt in what dose soever it be given. Experience alone shows the
strength of medicines, which has likewise manifested, that there is not in
quicksilver that noxious quality which the Ancients have attributed thereunto.

CHAP. XXX. That quicksilver even without any preparation, is unhurtfull.
SOme man, although convinced with the forenamed testimony, will
notwithstanding think that it ought to be exactly and diligently prepared, and
indeed the name of preparation seems to point at some notable thing. But it is
plain enough, that what we have said, is to be understood of crude and
unprepared quicksilver; for even this did Brassavolus, Matthiolus, Amatus the
Portugal, and others, administer to children, and women in childbed. It is
administered quick, says Matthiolus in his Epistle to Laureus, and not quenched
or dissolved, as so me think. For that which is quenched, does stick to the
stomach and bowels, and stirs up grievous symptoms. Where it is to be noted
that quicksilver is prepared diverse ways, both for purging, and for provoking
of sweat. But in none of these preparations is the nature thereof taken away,
but only hidden; and though it be diversely commixed, yet it remains entire,
and with a little art returns to its own nature. Mercury sublimate and
precipitate most dangerous poisons.
But especially it is fixed by the mixture of salt spirits in sublimate, and
precipitate, so as that which before might be used without danger, is now
become a most violent poison; for seeing that of it self it is of a quick
operation, those sharp spirits, one drop whereof does burn whatsoever it
touches, do the more increase it. I know some have been so bold, as that they
have put a grain or two thereof into the pills entitled Barbarossae, which is
too gross adventurousnesse. But yet from thence it is manifest, that the crude
(as they call it) is not so hurtful as that which is prepared after this
manner, Crude Mercury safer then any preparation of it.
because the crude Mercury holds faster together, and is very moveable, and
therefore is quickly voided out of the belly. Some therefore have ingeniously
invented a sweet Mercury (as they call it) which they pretend may be given
without harm, Mercurius d^lcis.
which thing I have found true by experience; and thus the people that are
otherwise terrified with the very name of quicksilver, under color of a white
powder, are beguiled with a profitable deceit. Nevertheless I do not believe
that it may be more safely used than the crude; for this sweet Mercury is made
out of sublimate, which is a most violent poison, whereunto they add some
crude quicksilver, which is sublimated the second time, and so by the mixture
thereof, the corroding virtue of the spirits of the salt, and vitriol. do
vanish away, and it is made a sweet powder, which before was very sharp. Here I
do not see any preparation at all, but only a certain mixture and addition of
quicksilver, the nature of which does for all that remain whole and entire,
and with a slight art is brought to its former temper. But if Mercury sublimate
be such a deadly poison, the ensuing addition of live Mercury does not take
away the force thereof, but only allay it, and so the strength being dispersed,
it is weaker than when it was united. And it is manifest for this reason: to
wit, because there is the same reason of natural things of the same kind.
When it is first sublimated, the mixture of the salt spirits with the
quicksilver, makes it to become noxious, yet the quicksilver it self does
not take away from those spirits their force and violence, but rather friendly
unites it self with them: Afterward, when fresh quicksilver is added
thereto, to make it sweet, in regard that it is of the same nature with the
former, it does likewise conjoyne it self with the forenamed spirits, and can
no more abate their violence than the former quick silver. But because there is
a greater quantity of quicksilver added than was in it before, although the
aforesaid spirits in their own nature, are no less forcible than they were,
yet they cannot do so much harm, because they are allayed and corrected; as a
few drops of the spirit of vitriol mixed with water, may be drunk, which
otherwise is a corrosive medicament. And therefore this sweet Mercury is not so
safe as that which has not been sublimated. But if crude quicksilver, being
mixed with mercury sublimate, does take away the poison thereof, Nihil dat quod
non habet.
and makes it harmless, much more shall it self be harmless: Nothing gives
that which it has not. If therefore it does give relish and sweetness to that
most strong poison, without doubt it has it in it self; for propter quod
unumquodque est tale, illudest magis tale. If then the only commixture of the
crude quicksilver does make the sublimate to become wholesome and profitable to
man's body, much more shall it self be wholesome and profitable. The stories
recited in the precedent Chapter, do manifest as much, from which it plainly
appears, that quicksilver even unprepared, has been administered with very
good success. We must confess indeed, Cautions in using of quicksilver
that if it be taken in too great a quantity, or if there be no corrupt
humors in the body for it to work upon, it may do harm; as also it is not so
good for the choleric and melancholic, as for the phlegmatic. But if for
that cause quicksilver were to be rejected, in like manner almost all remedies
should be abandoned from any use in Physic. For they are never so good for
one, but they may hurt another, yea even all, if they be taken in too great a
quantity, or unseasonably.

We will add here the testimony of a late writer, and a most excellent
Chemist, to wit, Hartmannus, one that taught diverse ways of preparing Mercury,
yet treating concerning the curing of worms in the belly, he says, The most
excellent remedy of all is quicksilver, either taken crude by it self, from a
scruple to a few drammes, or else first quenched with the juice of Lemmons, but
then the dose must be less, because being quenched, it stays longer in the
belly. Where he seems to prefer the crude before that which is quenched, as
we have already sufficiently manifested.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Tobacco.
BEcause Tobacco is grown so familiar in use, that there are few or none but
take it, something must be said concerning it; and first of the nature of it.

Many think, yea, and some have written, that Tobacco is Stupefactive.
Narcotick, and therefore they call it Henbane of Peru, whose opinion
experience seems to confirm, for it provokes sleep, and asswages pain. Which
opinion, although it has learned men for its Authors and Abettors, yet to me
it does not seem altogether agreeable to verity. For that which provokes
sleep, does it by a vapor either stirred up in the brain, or carried up
thither, or by furthering concoction, for then do we sleep most soundly, when
the stomach is not overcharged with meat. It asswages pain, because it either
takes away, or alters the cause thereof, but it does not benumme the part
affected by any narcotick quality; thus I have seen inveterate headache cured
with Tobacco. Tobacco is not narcotick.
That it has not any narcotick quality may be known by diverse tokens.

First,

Secondly, cures a distemper of vomiting.

Thirdly,

CHAP. XXXII. Of the right use of Tobacco.
ALlthough I never yet took Tobacco, nor do I desire to take it, yet I have
observed very many of every sort of men to use it, as the slender, gross,
choleric, phlegmatic, and others, who receive no harm thereby, insomuch as I
cannot approve of their opinion, who think it to be very hurtful, unless when
it is immoderately used, and thus the Proverb is true, Too much of one thing is
good for nothing. The Indians do think so reverently of this plant, that they
believe it to be the most wholesome and sacred of all other: and I have
commended it to many, who by using it have been very happily restored to
health. Jews Mercatus, a famous Physician among the Spaniards, does in sundry
places highly extol it, and he commends it in diverse diseases.



First,

Secondly,

This is true indeed, the use thereof should be repugned, I see no reason.

Yet they must know, First it must be used moderately, Cautions in taking
Tobacco.
which as in all other things, is true also in this particular, although indeed
I have observed little hurt to happen through the immoderate taking of it. It
must be used moderately.


Secondly, Best for such as are fat and phlegmatic.
and for such as are troubled with defluxions, by reason of its heating and
drying quality. Nevertheless although the slender, hot, and melancholic do
use it moderately, it does not hurt them much, for there is scarce any man of
such an exquisite temperature, which is not often troubled with vapors
ascending up to the brain. Nor have I yet seen any man too much dried by using
it. And I wonder at them that have written that it is narcotick, and yet deny
it to the hot, and choleric, seeing that narcoticks are more proper for them
than for the phlegmatic.

Thirdly, Tobacco is not good in consumptions of the Lungs.
yet I do not think it to be convenient for them, whose consumption happens
from a defluxion of rhewme upon the Lungs. For though it draws the pituitous
humors from the brain, yet it inclines nature at other times to send down the
humors into the breast. Therefore because according to the rules of Physicians,
we should never draw toward the affected part, but rather draw back, or divert
the humors from it, those things which purge the head by the mouth should not
be used; I commend rather evacuation by the nostrils, as more convenient. So
Galen in this very case applied to the head shaven, a very strong
metasyncriticall plaster, to prevent the defluxion of humors, and draw them
another way.

Fourthly, Not good to drink with Tobacco.
in that when they take it, they are continually drinking, yea and some make
themselves drunk, hereby bereaving themselves of that benefit, that would
accrue to them by the right thereof. For though it may seem to resolve the
humors, to heat, and dry the brain (and a hot and dry brain does generate
fewer excrements, In art medic cap. de signis catidi and fitri cerebri.
says Galen) yet a brain of that temperature does draw unto it more forcibly,
and is more subject to be replete with vapors arising from the inferior
parts, so that afterward being every day filled with fresh vapors, it becomes
less sensible of that benefit of drying, as Galen says in the aforesaid
place. When the brain is hot and dry (says he) the head is more then
ordinarily filled with vapors (for evermore some such thing befalls those men,
especially when they keep not a good diet) they are troubled with more
excrements, but not so crude, their heads are filled and oppressed with vapors
after the use of hot meats, drinks, smells, and all such things as happen from
without. And this is agreeable to reason, for vapors do quickly ascend to any
part that is made hotter than ordinary. Seeing then by the taking of Tobacco
the brain is made hotter, if men observe not a good diet, but pour in
abundance of Wine, Ale, and such vaporous drink (as indeed they use too
frequently to do) the head is the sooner filled again, so that it is
observable, that they that take Tobacco, do spit forth more excrements by the
mouth and palate, than they that take none at all, by reason of drunkenness and
intemperance, which is too common with many.

Fifthly, Tobacco not to be histily lest off.
ought to be very cautelous, that they do not rashly afterward leave it off,
except they keep a very temperate diet; otherwise they shall feel their heads,
yea and their whole bodies oppressed with abundance of humors, which the daily
taking of Tobacco was wont to evacuate; as also their sleep will be short and
troubled through the defect of vapors, which the Tobacco did raise up, nor
shall they find their Stomachs concoct their meat so well as formerly, and
many the like evils may arise from thence: And therefore our counsel is, Good
for old men and cold stomachs.
that old men, and others, whose Stomachs are by nature somewhat cold, do take
Tobacco, although that they have not formerly been accustomed thereunto; for it
may preserve them from the Gout, and likewise from diverse other cold affects.

CHAP. XXXIII. That Tobacco does not go up into the Brain.
THat Tobacco is good, and in no wise hurtful, we have already shown, and
the whole Nation of the West-Indians does witness as much, among whom there is
scarce one of a thousand, that does not take it, and yet they live there very
long. Now when it is taken into the mouth, it is easy to be observed, that as
much smoke is puffed out again, as was sucked in; for it is all contained in
the mouth that is taken. Wherefore I have thought it false which some imagine,
namely, that it goes up into the Brain. Nor is it necessary that it be carried
up thither; for Masticatories, and Gargarismes, which are appointed for drawing
of humors out of the head, although they be holden in the mouth, do
nevertheless extend their force to the Brain, and it is not absurd to think,
that this attenuating and drying fume is of the same operation. But besides it
is easy to prove that the smoke of Tobacco taken into the mouth, is not
carried up to the Brain.

First, in that we only perceive the taste, and not the smell of it.

Secondly, because we receive the smoke by inspiring, keep it by holding the
breath, and puff it out again by expiring. Indeed when we inspire by the
nostrils, the air goes to the brain, but when we inspire by the mouth, it is
carried only to the Lungs and the Stomach. Seeing then the aforesaid smoke is
attracted by inspiring by the mouth, it does not go into the Brain. When we
expire, or when we hold our breath ( says Galen) we never smell, although
the sent be in the very nostrils; for in expiring we repel the smoke together
with the air. Again, in holding the breath, we do not admit it into the
brain, because when we hold our breath no air passes to the brain of its own
accord, seeing the brain is already full of the air that was inspired; and
this is the reason why we do not perceive the smell of those things that are
holden in the mouth, and the stomach, (otherwise a man were not able to endure
himself) because the perception of smells is made by inspiration only; but by
the mouth we do not inspire into the brain. From whence it necessarily
follows, that the smoke of Tobacco taken in at the mouth is not carried up
thither. Besides if it should pierce so far, in that these vapors are very
sharp, they would vehemently disaffect and pull the brain, and provoke
sneezing, and other affects which are not usual. As we see that if the same
smoke be inspired by the nostrils, immediately it causes sneezing, because then
it is indeed carried to the brain. Let it therefore remain established, that
the head is affected only with the virtue of it, and not that the substance
thereof does pierce into it.

Object. But some will object, that by long using it, a heaviness in the head
is caused, and dizzinesse, and the brain is as it were intoxicated.

Sol. But I answer, that it comes to pass only by the frequent and daily
taking of it, which would quickly happen, if the sinoke should fill the
ventricles of the brain: For dizzinesse is not always caused by vapors, but
may proceed also from the spirits, when they are too much heated, and agitated,
or from the vapors of the humors, that are stirred up by the immoderate heat
of that smoke, and from diverse other causes, which would be too tedious to
recite here. Yea some have such weak heads, that they are soon taken with
dizzinesse, through any light external cause, so as they may be also taken
with it by the smoke of Tobacco, although it enter not into the head, namely,
through some inward cause stirred up by it. Again, many times a great purgation
may cause dizzinesse, 2. Aph. 37.
as Galen witnesses in his book concerning them, for whom purging is
convenient. Wherefore it is no wonder, if the brain be too much purged by the
immoderate use of it, and the spirits exceedingly heated and inflamed, do draw
unto them corrupt humors from the lower parts, which cause heaviness of the
head, and dizzinesse, although the substance of the smoke does not reach
thereto.

CHAP. XXXIIII Whether Tobacco be a preservative against the Plague or no.
I Have heard some aver that Tobacco is a preservative against the Plague.
Monardes commends it against poison, but especially against wounds that are
made by poisoned weapons, and venomous beasts. Which those that write hereof,
do understand of the green herb, or of the juice thereof applied to the
affected part, and not of the smoke taken as now adays they use it. Yet it may
be that the smoke may do good against the Plague, but not as many think,
Tobacco ha^h not any Antidotary quality against the plague.
by any antidotary quality that it has against poison, but for other causes.
For those things that preserve from the Plague, are either such as cleanse the
body from excrements, or that dry it, whereby it does not so easily receive the
poison. Now that the smoke of Tobacco does dry the brain and the body, and
void out the humors by the mouth, and sometimes by vomit, it is evident
enough; and thus perhaps it preserves from the Plague. But no peculiar virtue
of effecting that after this manner is found in the smoke; for those things
that do evacuate, do only by accident preserve from the Plague, as purging,
bloodding, etc. Therefore no reason enforces that we should attribute to the
smoke any peculiar virtue of preserving from the Plague. But besides many
observe that in the Plague a man ought to abstain from all strong purgers,
because the humors are then soon disturbed by any light cause. I know very
many have promised that they would cure the plague, or preserve men from it, by
vomits of Antimony, when perhaps they could not defend themselves from it. As
Platerus in his observations reports of one Adam of Bodenstein a famous
Chemist, who in his writings professed a most certain manner of curing or
preventing the Pestilence, who nevertheless got it himself at Basil, when it
was almost quite ceased, and died of it. So infirm and uncertain are all
those things which are prescribed against this sort of poison, but especially
vomitories who do debilitate a noble part, and offer great violence to Nature.

There is another manner of preserving from the Plague, to wit, by Antidotes,
which have also a virtue of curing it; for the very same things in a manner are
good both against eminent and present diseases. But as yet we have no
experience of any such virtue in Tobacco, for so many thousands of men, whom
that great plague at London, and in other places in this Kingdom have swept
away, the greatest part of whom did without doubt take Tobacco, are as so many
witnesses to testify, that there is no such virtue therein, and none of them
that recovered, can attribute any thing to Tobacco as a means of their
recovery. But if it has no curing virtue, it has no preserving quality
neither.

Moreover they must know that other poisons have their proper Antidotes, The
Pestilence has no proper Antidote.
but the Pestilence has none at all, only Physicians use cordial remedies,
not whereby the poison is extinguished, but only Nature fortified against the
force of the poison, which it afterward expels by sweat, or some other
emunctories of the body. But that there is not any cordial virtue in Tobacco,
the dizziness, swounings, cold sweats, vomiting, and other symptoms that are
caused by it do manifest, which rather betoken a venomous than a cordial
quality. Therefore although I do not believe that it does any hurt, yet I
think it does not much good. Moreover the brain (as Galen says in Art
Medica, in the chapter concerning the signs of an hot brain) is easily
offended with the ambient air; Those that have hot brains (says he) their
heads are very subject to be distempered with hot meats, drinks, and smells,
and all those things that do occur from without, among which the
circumjacent air may be reckoned. And therefore seeing by the use of Tobacco
the brain is very much heated, there is danger, lest it be offended with the
Pestilentiall air. Hence it is that old men are not so soon infected with the
plague as young men are, because of the coldness of their bodies, as also
Pliny observes.

But in that this plant is said to be good for poisoned wounds, and the bitings
of venomous beasts, it follows not therefore it must have an antidotary
faculty; for the Spaniards did first use sublimate for such wounds, and we do
usually prescribe diverse things which in their proper nature are not
preservatives against poison, but are either such as draw out the venom, or
that extinguish it, as an actual cautery, and such like. And it may be that
Tobacco may likewise be good for that too, although it has no proper or
peculiar virtue for to resist poison.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the unseasonable use of Cordialls.
BEcause in all diseases special care ought to be had of the strength of the
patient, it is no wonder if the sick be so desirous to have their strength
preserved, from whence arises such a frequent use of cordial remedies.
Therefore it is that some are often blaming Physicians because they do so
seldom prescribe Cordialls and Antidotes for them, especially at night and
when they lie down to sleep. Notwithstanding the unseasonable use of them, does
most commonly more hurt than good, as does Triacle, Mithridate, and the like.
For not every thing that is said to be cordial does by and by strengthen
nature, nay it may destroy it, and thus the drinking of cold water does more
help one that is in a Fever than Aqua caelestis, Imperialis Triacle water, or
any other strong water whatsoever. And it is to be observed, that the
imbecillitie of the heart, and the decay of the strength which depends upon the
spirits in the heart, may proceed from diverse causes; now every sort of remedy
is not convenient for causes so different. But if the cause of the disease be
increased by some kind of remedy, although it may be said to be a Cordial, the
Cordial is no better than poison to the sick; as if an hot remedy be applied
in an hot discase, the diseaseis increased, and the sick is not a whit
strengthened, but made weaker. Therefore they are too blame, who without
judgment and skill do prescribe these cordial and strengthening medicines.
Moreover it is observable, that it is possible that Triacle, Mithridate, and
other such like, which are in most frequent use, may do much hurt: For as
Galen says, 5. Simpl.
they are a mean betwixt the body and poisons, so that there is the same
proportion betwixt the body and the Antidote, that there is betwixt the
Antidote and the poison; and therefore he says, that all those things that
are of the nature of Triacle, Cordials do hurt if there be not matter within
to work upon
and Mithridate, being taken in too great a quantity do hurt the body, as also
unless there be some poison within, upon which they may work. I know this
comparison of Galen does not please Averrhoes that subtle Physician and
Philosopher, 5. colliget. cap. 23.
who notwithstanding confesses that they do the body no good at all, unless
they be taken in a stomach, that has in it some poisonous matter for them to
work upon, and therefore (says he) they are not good for them that be in
health, but become as poison to them, as likewise do all those things which are
commonly called Bezoarticks. For by their forcible working, unless they be
discreetly administered, they hurt the body like poison; and therefore Galen
forbids Triacle to them that are hot and dry, as also to children.

Although therefore I do not absolutely dislike the using of these sorts of
medicines, nor judge them to be venomous or pernicious, yet hence it follows,
that they are to be used very warily; for they have qualities in them that are
many times very hurtful to the body, except they meet with an object in the
body for to work upon. And therefore corroborating and cordial remedies are
to differ according to the variety of diseases, hence it is that some of them
are cold, some hot, some temperate, some corroborating the heart with an
occult, and unexplicable property, some resisting poisons which cannot be fit
for all those different causes, from whence a decay of strength may come. And
therefore those things may very fitly be numbered among Cordials, which do
relieve nature by evacuating the causes of diseases, and by altering, which
thing many of our ordinary Cordialls do not perform, and such remedies ought
to be called Cordialls by accident only, nevertheless they are the most
certain of all others. Lib. de viribus cord.
Therefore Avicenne says very well, that in seven respects a medicine may be
said to be cordial.

First, Seven kinds of cordial remedies.
eggs, broth, and those meats that are easy of digestion, and of good
nourishment: And indeed the strength is much augmented by meat seasonably
administered, but if it be unseasonably taken, it is much impaired by it, as
we have said already.

Secondly,

Thirdly, Garrabe, terrae sigillata, Bolearmoniack, but these are not good for
all, because they are astringent remedies, which in some cases may do much
harm.

Fourthly, heart, as are sweet things, and odiferous, as Aqua caelestis,
Imperialis, and Maria.

Fifthly, Borage, Buglosse, Gold.

Sixthly, Myrabalanes.

Seventhly, Hyacinth.

But all these several things cannot be proper for all causes, but now adays,
when the people desire comforting and cordial medicines, they do not mean
broths, or bloodding, or purging, but Triacle, Mithridate, Strong waters, good
Ale, burnt Wine, and such like, which oftentimes may not only do harm to the
sick, but to such as are in perfect health too.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Errors about the Bezaar Stone.
BEcause we have been treating in the precedent chapter concerning Cordialls,
something is to be said of the Bezaar stone, which is now adays had in such
familiar use, being thought by many to be endued with an admirable virtue of
corroborating the heart, and a very strong Cordial, to which, neglecting all
others, they fly as to some sacred anchor. But they err in three particulars.

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly, Paser, What the Bezaar stone is.
which among the East-Jndians is said to signify a kind of goat, in which
that stone is found. Some would have it to be called Belzaar, which word in the
Moors language does signify the Lord of poison, and it is a common name with
them, for all those remedies which we call Antidotes, and preservatives against
poison. So * Cap. 23 l. 5. colliget.
Averrhoes after he had been treating of poisons, in the presedent chapter, at
length he discourses of Bezaar, which is as if he should say, an Antidote. The
Medicines (says he) which are called Bezahar, which preserve from poison, Lib.
2. fen. 1. cap. 4.
etc. And Avicenne says, Albezaar is a remedy, which by his own property does
preserve health and vigor in the Spirit, that it may expel from it the
malignity of poison. Where it seems to be a general name, for all such
remedies. But among us, it is peculiarly taken for that stone so much in use,
which is taken out of some creatures, and brought to us out India. Now such is
thought to be the excellency of this stone by some, that they prefer it
before all others, for the Arabians do highly commend it against poisons, the
plague, jaundice, and all obstructions of the body and bowels. Avenzoar in his
book Theisier, says that he saved one that had taken most deadly poison, with
three grains of Bezaar, dissolved in five ounces of the water of Gourds. But
if we consider well what Avenzoar writes concerning that stone, we shall
find that it is not our stone which is brought unto us from the Indies, but
the tear of an Heart, A precious stone dropping from the eye of a Heart.
of which he talks so much. The Heart, as Pliny also testifies, by the breath
of his nostrils draws serpents out of their holes, and eats them, immediately
he is taken with a grievous thirst, for the quenching whereof he runs to some
standing poole, in which he plunges himself up to the neck, but through natures
instinct he drinks not; for if he should, he would fall down dead presently.
Then a certain humor distills to his eyes, which by degrees, thickens, unites,
and compacts together, and grows to the bigness of an acorne, which afterward
being come out of the water the Heart shakes off, and is sought for by men,
which some call the Bezaar stone, being as they say broad, tending to a
Pyramid, of the color of honey, Comment. in Dios. or. cap. 39. lib. 2.
which * Amatus the Portugal says he has seen. And Scaliger in his 112.
Exercitation to Cardanus tells the same tale, and says that he had the stone,
let them believe him who list. But this stone of ours is not the tear of the
Heart, which is too rare, if ever there were such a stone: But this stone which
we use is very common. Now it is, Several sorts of Bezaar stones
as writers testify, of diverse sorts, yellow, duskish, whitish,; but the
yellow is the best, then the duskish: Rhazes writes thus of it, it is a soft
stone, of a yellow color, without any taste, which he says, he used with good
success against the poison of Wolvesbane. Now it was of a yellow color,
tending to white, light, and glistering like light. But Garcias ab Horto
Physician to the Viceroy of India, describes it otherwise, who nevertheless
confesses, that he had only heard, that some by the use thereof had been
preserved from deplorable diseases, and he will have it to be of a dark green
color; and he says that they must all of necessity be brought to the King of
the country, and that they cannot without much difficulty be had from thence,
and therefore seeing they are now so common, much doubt is to be made touching
their goodness. And here Matthiolus notes well, G^^^^^ cause of jealousy
concerning Bezaar.
that there are many adulterate stones of this sort, in show very like it, but
accompanied with no such virtues, And in his third book of Epistles, in his
Epistle to Quacelbenus, the stone (says he) which the Moors call Bezaar, did
the most noble Prince reserve for his own use. I saw long since many stones
like to it, but whether they were true or adulterate, I know not: But if we
consult with Serapio and Rhazes, I see not why I should allow of this stone to
be legitimate. Where he ingeniously confesses, that he knew not whether the
Bezaar stone of the Emperor were true or no, and he rather thinks that it is
adulterate. Now there are two sorts of this stone, Two sor^s of Bezaar stones.
one brought out of the East, from Persia, and the adjoining countries, which
is found in a certain kind of Goat; the other brought out of the West, from
America, which is found in diverse creatures. Concerning which it is to be noted
out of Josephus Acosta, Bezaar is found in the stomachs of certain beasts.
that this stone is found in creatures which are called Vicugnae, which are a
certain sort of Coats, as also in a beast called Taruga, and in all those
creatures which are proper to the country of Peru alone, it is found in their
stomach and belly, sometimes but one, sometimes two or three, and sometimes
more. Now these stones differ from one another, in magnitude, form, and
color; for some are not bigger than a hazell nut, but others are as large as
walnuts, pigeons eggs, and hen eggs, yea sometimes they are as great as an
Orange, as Acosta reports he has seen: The form likewise is diverse and very
different; so for color, some are black, others green, white, of the color
of Gold, gray. Therefore neither the color, nor the figure can be certain and
infallible signs of their goodness. In Peru they are taken out of several
sorts of creatures, both wild and tame, as the Ganacus, Pacus, Vicugna, Taruga,
which creatures he describes; the Ganaci, and Paci. are a sort of Rams, they
have but little stones, and blackish, inferior to the rest for use in Physic.
Those that are taken out of the vicugnae, are larger than these, and better,
being green and somewhat white. But the best are those that are taken out of
the Tarugae, they are thick, white of color tending to gray, having thicker
shells than the rest. In new Spain they are found also in Stags. But those that
are brought of the East Indies are more excellent than these, being of an olive
color: the next in virtue are those that come out of Peru, and those that are
found in new Spain are to be put in the third place for use in Physic. The
Indians expert in counterfeiting these stones Lib. 4. cap. 42.
But the Indians do counterfeit them with a notable sophistication, as *
Acosta explicates at large

From what has been already said, it is manifest that too much credit ought
not to be given to this stone.

First, Bezaar not to be relied on.
because the effects of the stones that are brought to us, are not answerable
to those which Authors write of them. any of those effects which are attributed
unto it. The same have many of our modern Writers observed; Hercules Saxonia,
a famous practitioner among the Italians, does ingenuously confess, that he
could never observe any remarkable effect of them, although those stones which
he had, were thought to be the best in Venice. Cap defebpestiferis.
* I (says he) to confess ingenuously, while I practiced at Venice, spent a
great quantity of this Stone, and yet never could perceive any notable
operation of it; I know many to whom I administered it were cured, but I did
never attribute it to the Stone, for this cause, because I find in Writers,
that after the taking of it, a great sweat ensues, after which they presently
find much ease. But I never saw any sweat break forth, or if it did appear,
it was a very imperfect sweat. Therefore for my own part, I abandoned all hope
of any good by this Stone in fevers; It may be I chanced on a sophisticate
and adulter ate Stone. But when I administered Physic in the Noblemens houses
in Venice, they persuaded me that they were the most excellent of all others.
Notwithstanding Matthiolus, and other Physicians do commend this Stone, but it
is likely they had some true stones, which are very rare with us; yea, and he
himself in his Epistle before cited, conresses that those stones which the
Emperor had, were not natural, but sophisticate. Vallesius, Neither the
Emperor, nor the King of Spain had any true Bezaar. lib. 4. method.
a most learned man, chief Physician in ordinary to Philip the second King of
Spain, thinks that there is not a true Bezaar in all Spain; but if the King
of Spain had not a true one, much less is it likely that a true one should be
sold among us.

Secondly, Its very probable ours are all sophisticate.
this is not the least ground for suspicion, that they are taken out of
creatures that are slain and eviscerated; and it can scarce be that one
Country should afford so many creatures, but at length the species would become
very rare. For such a number of these stones are in England alone, that it
seems a wonder to me that they are not more rare. And if we consider the other
Countries of Europe, we shall find abundance of them every where. Nevertheless
the Physicians which have practiced Physic among the Indians, do confess
that these stones are very rare there, and wondrous dear; and that the Indians
do keep them carefully for their own use: from whence then have we such a
continual supply of them in such plenty, if they be not counterfeit.

Thirdly, Paris, who made them so cunningly, that he himself could not
distinguish them from the other, but by certain marks which he set on them.
Saxonia confesses that he could never find an infallible token whereby to know
this stone. Some say there is a tender sprig of some plant in the middle of it,
or a little sand, I have seen a pin, Acosta saw a straw in one; but these, and
other such like things do these jugglers know how to put into their
counterfeit stones. Rodericus a Castro, in his Second Book of Women's diseases,
teaches to know them thus. That which we have (says he) from East India is the
best of all others, which is smooth, transparent, coated like an onion, of a
dark green color, without taste, the powder whereof, if you mingle with water
and chaulk, it yields a pale green color, and being cast upon the fire, does
presently vanish all into air. But neither are these things very certain.
Authors write that these stones are of diverse colors, but almost all ours are
of the same color, somewhat blackish, but the yellow are said to be the best;
therefore the most excellent are seldom found with us, because we have seldom
any that are yellow. Acosta confesses that the Indians do counterfeit them,
which is very likely, seeing that is usually done in medicaments of much less
price and moment. If any man therefore have a stone, which he certainly knows
to be true and natural, I am not against his using of it, if he has once
experienced the virtues thereof; only I would advertise thus much in this place,
that men should not give credit to all stones of this kind, that the true
Bezaar is very rare, and which is worst of all, that there are no sure and
infallible tokens, whereby the true may be distinguished from the false. And
there are stones sometimes very like to the Bezaar found in diverse creatures,
as in horses, swine, and others, consil. 1.
which are of no virtue at all. Andreas Laurentius commends the Bezaar against
melancholy, so that it be natural and true, not counterfeit and adulterate,
such as at this day the pedling Quacksalvers, Mountibanks, Confectioners, as
also the fraudulent and covetous Apothecaries almost throughout all France do
usually fell, a hundred grains of which counterfeit stone can never procure
the least moment of health.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the temperature, and dose of the Bezaar Stone.
I will suppose in this Chapter, that the true Bezaar is familiarly found,
because the people do so confidently believe it. Nevertheless many are very
much afraid of the quantity of it, as if it were a very hot, and strong working
medicament; and I have often seen women, which give the sick hot remedies to
comfort them, as cinnamon water, burnt wine, and the like, to be
notwithstanding very fearful of the omantity of this Stone, and to contradict,
and thwart a Physician, if any time he prescribe more than two, or at the most
four grains at once. And indeed reason it self seems to favor their
opinion, for they say it provokes sweat. Now sudorificks do seem to be hot,
because they attenuate, and cut tough humors, and expel them to the skin.
Therefore this Stone seems to be so much the hotter, in that it performs
this thing, being exhibited in a small dose.

But First, it is to be noted,

Secondly,

Thirdly, to take it, yet it does no good.

Fourthly, Avenzoar gave it unto three grains, which is the common dose, but
his Stone was not this Bezaar of ours. But Matthiolus prescribes it unto seven
grains at the least, Garcias ab Horto unto thirty grains, and confesses that
yet more may be taken without any hurt at all. I have heard some famous
Physicians attribute very much to this Stone, who alleged this as the only
cause why it is not so efficacious, namely, because it is taken in too little
quantity. But moreover, I have read that Edward the Confessor had a dram of
Bezaar, that is threescore grains given him, as may be read more at large in
Monardes, Fumanellus, Abra, Conciliator. Now because as we have said, the right
Bezaar is seldom found, Bezaar only for the rich, and in a large quantity.
and that which we have is sold at too dear a rate, my counsel is, that it be
prescribed only for rich men, and not for others that are not able to undergo
the charge, and that it be always admininistred in a large dose, for else it
will be altogether unprofitable. Yea, I verily believe it may be safely taken
to a dram, it is such a gentle and innocent remedy. Fumanellus in his book
of the Plague commends it unto a Dram, and Garcias ab Horto reports that it
is usually taken in India unto thirty Grains, too great a quantity (says he)
for although it a have no noxious quality, yet it is more safe to take it in a
little quantity. But if this stone be unhurtfull, a great quantity is likewise
unhurtfull, as some have observed. Therefore there is no cause to fear to give
some children three or four grains thereof. For although Galen forbids to give
children Triacle, yet there is a great difference between it and the Bezaar
stone; for Triacle is a very hot medicament, and consists of diverse simples,
which may injure, and offer violence to the natural heat of children, whereas
Bezaar is not hot, but only corroborates and comforts the heart, by an occult,
and not a manifest quality.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Unicorns Horn.
IT can scarce be said, whether to the Bezaar stone, or to the Unicornes horn
the common people attributes greater virtues, for those are thought to be the
prime Antidotes of all, although the Unicornes horn is not so common as the
Bezaar. Yet many brag, that they have great pieces of it. But it is a thing
doubted of by many not without good reason, Doubts concerning the Unicorns horn.
whether there be any such horn or no. That there are diverse sorts of
creatures which have but one horn in their head, the writings both of ancient
and modern Authors do sufficiently testify. There are four reckoned up by
Aristotle, Aetian, and Pliny: Aristotle names only the Oryx, and the Indian
Ass; others to these do add the Rhinoceros, and that which is properly called
the Unicorn, of which is our present discourse. But it is not yet manifest
what this Unicorne is properly, seeing hitherto it could not be certainly
found out in any Indian voyages. And they that do report that they have seen
such a creature, do much differ in their description thereof, as that they
seem in a manner fables, whatsoever they relate. Pliny and Solinus, who never
saw such a creature, do notwithstanding thus describe it, without doubt from
other men's relation; Plinies description of the Unicorn.
Pliny describes the Unicorne to be a very fierce beast, in other parts of his
body like an Horse, in his head like to a Stagge, in his feet to an Elephant,
in his tail to a Bore, with a terrible voice, having one black horn in the
middle of his forehead two cubits long, and they say this wild beast cannot be
taken alive. Cap. 60. Solinus his description
* Solinus describes him thus. The Unicorn is a most fierce creature, with an
horrible voice, having the body of a horse, the feet of an Elephant, the tail
of an Hog, the head of an Heart, his horn stands forth of the middle of his
forehead four foot long, stately to behold, so sharp, that against whatsoever
he pushes, it easily pierces it. Being alive he is not subject to man, he may
be slain indeed, but cannot be taken. But Ludovicus Vartomannus, a famous
writer, Scaligers description
reports, that he saw two Unicornes in his travailes, as Scaliger relates in
his 205. Exercitation: The Unicorne (says he) is as big as an horse, has
the legs, feet, and head of a Stagge, his hair of a bay color, his maine
thinner and shorter than an horses, his hips rough with hair; at Nice we saw
one whole horn, others elsewhere, one of a tawny color, another yellowish,
coming near to the color of box, another of a reddish and we have some with a
white crest upon them. And he differs much from Plinies description; for he
says, that he is a gentle and meek creature, and he attributes to him the
feet and legs of a Stagge; but Pliny the feet of an Elephant, and others in
their descriptions do vary from these. Yet Amatus the Portugal in his 52.
Narrat. upon the second book of Dioscorides acknowledges, that the Portugal
Physicians, and others that have travailed through the inland of India, do
make no mention of any such creature, save that it is held in great account
among the Indians against poisons, Unicorns horn is of a blackish color.
and pestilent Fevers. And the same Amatus notes, that the right Unicornes
horn is of a blackish color, or at least of an ash color; as also that if it
be too old it is of no virtue, as it falls out in other medicaments, and
likewise that there are many counterfeit and adulterate ones, made up of
chaulke and other things after the form of a horn; and that others do sell the
bone of a Whale for it; yea, and I have heard that Seahorse teeth, and
Elephants teeth have been taken for it: These things do seem to raise a doubt
touching these horns. But some will say, the holy Scripture does in sundry
places make mention of that creature as the most fierce of all others. But
perhaps that word which Interpreters have translated Unicorne, is not properly
known what it is; for as Morinus Blesensis a most learned Clerk observes, the
Jews do confess, that they do not understand many of the names of Birds,
whereof Moses makes mention in Leviticus, and why may it not as well be, that
that word is not understood; which nevertheless Interpreters have translated
Unicorn in general. But it is likely that it was not the Rhinoceros; for this
beast may rather be said to have two horns than but one, and is not nimble, but
slow, having a very short horn, but the horns of the Unicorne which are
brought unto us, are for the most part very long, and taken from that creature
which the Scripture says is very nimble; and therefore Scaliger blames
Cardanus, for describing the Unicorne under the name of Rhinoceros, whose
picture the same Scaliger says he saw, namely of that Whose dead carcass was
cast upon the coast of Tuscanie, with the head of a Bore, a scaly back, two
horns, the one very little in the forehead, the other very strong in the
snout, wherewith he sights adventurously, and overcomes the Elephant. And this
seems to be the very same beast of which Amatus the Portugal made mention,
which Emmanuel King of Portugal sent to Rome, but the ship being cast away
near unto Marseille, the wild beast perished in the sea, the skin whereof
the adjoining borderers brought unto Francis King of France. But whether by the
name of Unicorne the Indian Ass ought to be understood, it might perhaps be a
doubt, but that Aelian has distinguished them. Therefore I do not say that
the Unicorne is a fained creature, but it is very rare, and not yet certainly
known. But furthermore Caesar in his sixth book of the French War, makes
mention of an Ox that has but one horn, and there are also such in India as
Historians report. And not only the earth, There are Sea unicornes.
but the water also has its unicorne Monsters, which perhaps live both in the
water, and on the land, as Garcias ab Horto reports of a certain Monster that
lives both in sea and land, about the Cape of good hope, which has but one
horn in the forehead, wherewith he boldly fights against the Elephant; Two
Unicorns horns found in the sand in Greenland were brought to Hull.
so likewise out of the Northern countries, as out of Island, and Greeneland
are brought horns, which are thought to be the horns of Sea-Unicorns. Not
many years ago, there were brought into this town of Hull (where I write
these things) out of Greenland two heads of Sea-Unicornes that were found upon
the shore, with large horns in the foreheads, some pieces of which I have seen.
From whence it is evident that there are many creatures which have but one
horn, as well in the sea as on the land. But besides all this, Daniel
Sennertus a very late writer, in the fifth book of his natural Philosophy,
makes mention of a certain horn that is dug out of the earth, Horns dug
out of the earth.
which is found in Thuringin, Bohemia, and other places of Germany, which is
taken for the Unicornes horn, to which they ascribe a virtue against the
Epilepsie, and malignant diseases, and he teaches to distinguish it from the
natural, in that the true horn is very hard, but that which is dug up out
of the earth is not hard, but is easily bruised and broken, and being applied
to the tongue cleaves to it, like unto terra sigillata; or some kind of Marle.
Also Gesner, Fallopius, Agricola, and others that have written of Minebills
have made mention thereof. There are therefore diverse forts of Unicornes, but
yet they have not all virtue against poison. And Aelian who describes the
Unicorne, does not attribute any Antidotary faculty thereunto, but only to
the Indian Ass; for he writes that the wealthier sort among the Indians are
wont to drink out of these homes, and that whosoever drinks out of them is
healed of incurable diseases, nor is he taken with convulsions (say they) nor
the Falling Sickness, nor hurt with poison. Moreover if he has drunk any
deadly thing, he vomits it up, and returns to his health again. Lib. 3.
And the same does Philostratus write in the life of Appollonius Thyaneus. But
the horn of the Indian Ass is very rare, the upper part of it is reddish, the
lower white, and the middle black, but the Unicornes horn is all black, as
says the same Aelian. Ambrosius Pareus, and other most famous Physicians have
found no effect at all of this horn, and he does not approve of that custom
of touching the Kings meat with the Unicornes horn; which custom I hear he
has abolished who is the chief Physician in ordinary to the King of France.
In like manner Aelian attributes to the horn of the Indian Horse a virtue
against poison, and Garcias ab Horto relates the same of the horn of the
Rhinoceros, it is but short, very strong, black, some say that it is within of
dark yellow color, and being wet with the tongue, it yields the smell of some
burnt matter. Garcius also reports of his Monster at the Cape of good hope,
that lives both in the sea, and on the land, which resembles a Horse in shape,
that the horn thereof is very much commended for a counter-poyson, an
experiment thereof being made on two Dogs, the one of which that had drunk a
double quantity of poison, taking the powder of this horn was well again:
but the other which had none given him, dyed presently, although he had a less
quantity of poison given him. So likewise the horns which are brought out of
the North countries, and which are dug out of the earth, are reported to
have no small virtue against poison, although some deny it, Those that are
digeed out of the earth are the best.
and these are the horns for the most part, which many show for the Unicornes
horn, although the color corresponds not, which is black in the true
Unicorne. But all that have written of them, do prefer those that be dug
out of the earth, as Gesner, Cesalpinus, and others, for they have an
antidotary and preservative faculty, and do mightily provoke sweat, like Terra
Lemnia. Therefore that I may conclude this Chapter, seeing the virtue of these
Medicaments can be found out no other way but by experience only, it will be
easy for any one that has a piece of such horns, or desires to make trial
of them, How to make a trial of the virtue of our Unicorns hornea.
to give some poison to a Dog or a Chicken, and if it be preserved by taking
some of the powder thereof, he may keep it as an excellent Antidote. For
though it be not known from what creatures they are taken, yet their virtue is
not to be denied, seeing the original of Exoticks has not yet been fully
known. If we allow of Hearts horn, why shall not other horns have the same
virtue, yea there are some, that will have a certain wholesome quality to be
in all horns, even of Oxen, and therefore the Ancients did drink out of
horns, hence are those words (...), (...) ad potum miscere, and (...) poculum,
a (...) cornu.
to mingle for drink, and (...) a cup. Seeing therefore the horns which are
carried about for the Unicornes horn, are diverse in color, magnitude, and
figure, it is probable that they come from diverse creatures. Therefore whether
it be the horn of the Indian Ass, which Aelian commends, or of the Rhinoceros,
or of some water creature it is all one, so there be experience of the virtue
of it. Wherefore I would not curiously enquire, whether it be an Unicornes
horn, or some other creatures, so it be good and efficacious, yea and it is no
matter whether the creature has two horns or but one. Yet it is most
certain, as we have said before, that Elephants teeth, and Whale-bones, and
Seahorse teeth, and common horns burnt, and those which are dug out of the
earth, which we have spoken of, and other counterfeit and artificial horns,
Elephants and Sea horse teeth commonly sold for Unicorns horns.
are commonly sold for the true Unicornes horn. Cardanus says that Elephants
teeth may be made so pliable by art, that they may be made straight like
horns, and so set out for the Unicornes horn. Neither give ear to them (says
Amatus the Portugal) who when they go about to try an Unicorns horn, do
infuse the scrapings and powder thereof in water, which they say forthwith is
troubled and bubbles up, for you may perceive the same to happen from the
scrapings of any bone infused in water, as you may make trial in Ivory. So
likewise we must take heed that we do not give credit to other such
experiments, which some use to prove the goodness of the Unicornes horn; for
they say that if poison, or some venomous creature be near unto it, it sweats,
as if it did suffer, and were affected with the poison; as also they bid make a
circle of the powder of it, into the middle of which, or into an hollow horn
they put a spider, which if she pass over they will have it to be a
counterfeit horn; but if she burst and die, it is natural, all which are
false: but enough of this.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of certain distilled waters ordained amiss for to drive away
fevers.
BEcause it is such an usual thing here in England, both for men and women to
hoard up remedies for diverse diseases, and to communicate them to one another
for secrets, we will speak somewhat of certain fever curing waters, which many
use especially for agues, the which although sometimes they may do good, yet
many times they are hurtful and pernicious. In some Physick-Authors also such
waters are found described. Quercetanus in his Pharmacopoea restituta, as he
calls it, names two, which he says are special waters for all sorts of
fevers, especially agues, but principally for bastard, and exquisite tertians,
so confidently do these Chemists make promises of health. 1 ad Glauc. and 3 de
simp. med.
Galen himself prescribes wormwood a very hot plant for Tertians, and in
another place he commends cammomile for the same. There are some that will
provoke sweat with such hot things. And in general all those waters that I
have seen, were distilled out of hot simples, which adventurously they will use
in any intermitting fever, many times to the great hurt of the sick.

First therefore it is to be noted,

Secondly,

Thirdly, mesentery veins, the panereas, and other the first passages, which
dregge it is too dangerous to bring into the habit of the body by such
remedies, lest the blood of the veins be polluted, especially in choleric
fevers, whose cause is for the most part thin, and very moveable.

Fourthly, forbids to use vehement and hot remedies in the beginning of a
quartane ague, which is caused by a cold and dry melancholic humor, and he
tells a story of Eudemus, a Philosopher, who in that he did unseasonably use
triacle for a quartane ague, of a simple, it became a double quartane, whom
nevertheless Galen cured with the very same remedy seasonably and rightly
administered. Therefore these hot things are good in those fevers only, which
are procreated by cold humors, or in a bastard Tertian, in which there is a
great quantity of phlegmatic humors mixed with the choleric, Aguish waters
not to be used till the humor be concocted.
or when there are very gross and stubborn obstructions, and the bowels very
feeble, and weakened, but not before the concoction of the humor; thus Galen
for a quartane prescribes a medicine of succus cyrenaicus, but not until the
humor is concocted. So he commends wormwood in a Tertian, but utterly
dislikes it before concoction. In like manner, and by the same reason, these
hot waters are to be rejected, but after the concoction of the morbous humor
in a stubborn disease, they may be profitable. Therefore these hot things are
not to be rashly, administered in fevers, for one that had adventurously used
them in a quartane fever, of a simple, made it a double quartane, as we said
before. And there is the same cause of fear likewise, lest the same happen by
the use of these waters. The advice of a learned physician ever requisite.
Therefore let the advice and counsel of a skillful, learned, and faithful
Physician be always taken, who may appoint convenient times for all remedies.
Nor let the people rashly trust to their Receipts, as they call them, for they
are even the hand of God when they are administered by a skillful Physician, but
as it were a sword in the hand of a mad man, when one meddles with them, who
does not well understand the rules of Physic.

CHAP. XL. That Iuleps, and other cooling Potions are to be administered in a
large dose.
I Have often observed, when Physicians prescribe Apozemes, Juleps, and other
cooling potions for them that be sick of fevers, that the bystanders do
usually administer them in a very little dose, as but 2 or 3 spoonfuls. But
here is to be noted, that those remedies that are prescribed to prepare the
humors, are not of the nature of them that contain much strength in a very
little quantity; but contrary wise seeing they work by the first and second
qualities, unless there be a proportion in quantity betwixt the humor that is
to be altered, and the Physic, it is but in vain prescribed, for if they do
notovercome the humor, they are overcome by it, and corrupted. In a very hot
fever, if the aforesaid Juleps be either altogether denied, The necessity of
cooling and altering juleps in fevers.
or but sparingly administered, the body is dried by the heat of the fever, and
decaies, so as no small damage is like to befall the sick. To such therefore
they ought to be given more liberally and frequently, for to temper the
feverish heat, and to refresh nature, and the more boldly, if concoction be
already made, for it helps the critical evacuations of nature, by sweat,
siege, and vomit; and therefore in this case Galen allows as much cold water
as the sick can drink; And Avicenne, till the sick be wan, and shake with cold.
Nevertheless, in the beginning of the Paroxismes in intermitting fevers, the
best Physicians, according to Hippocrates his counsel, think that nothing is
to be taken. For Hippocrates says, When the feet are cold, 1 acut.
the sick must abstain from supping meats, especially from drink; but when
the heat is descended unto the feet, then it is good to take it; for then the
heat which in the beginning was as it were suffocated by the morbous humor,
enjoyes a pleasant bloome, and is diffused into every member of the body, and
so is better able to encounter the cold drink, yea the drink does then further
evacuation by sweat, which is wont to be made in the end of the paroxisme.
Hollerius lays it all open in few words. Lib. 2. cap. de s^i.
We must not permit them to thirst long, especially in fevers, and where the
body is dry; yea in the declination they must be compelled to drink; in the
beginning and increase of the fit, drink must be withholden from them, lest as
by water, or other liquor cast on a Smiths forge, the heat of the fever be
more inflamed. In the height they must use washing of the mouth, and
gargarismes, but when it asswages and declines, and they be exceeding thirsty,
they must drink as much as they can, for so it comes to pass, that by the
sudden motion and contrariety of the drink the heat is stirred up, and
dispersed to the extreme parts. Mercurialis also wrote well in his Comment
upon the ninth Aphorism of the second Book. Many (says he) think it enough
to take their syrupes at the most to the weight of six ounces; but I have
learned by reason and experience, that it is better to take them always in a
greater quantity, yet with respect to the condition and nature of the sick, and
the sick to persist long in the use of them: For so the vessels being somewhat
moystened, do yield better to the attraction of the humors, and the humors
themselves being better prepared, do more easily come forth. I know Aristotle
demands why drink should be given but a little at once, 1 prob. 57.
and often, to them that are in fevers, because (says he) a little drink,
and often given, does sink, and insinuate it self more into the body, then a
large draught taken altogether. Arist^s'e and Hippocrates differ in their
judgments.
Now the Philosopher in this place will have a frequent taking of drink to be
equivalent with a great qualitity taken at once; but Hippoorates says
otherwise, that water drunk too sparingly, turns into choler; and in his book
de locis in homine, he says, that in fevers waters should be administered hor,
mixed with honey, and vinegar, and that it is thus to be drunk in a great
quantity. But besides Juleps, of which we now treat, are not simple drink,
but have also a Physical quality, as opening, strengthening, or such like,
according to the diverse intention of the Physician that prescribes them. So
much therefore ought to be drunk, as may suffice for concoction, and to quench
thirst, but not to increase the causes of discases, in which particular they
do err grossly, who do either kill the sick by being too sparing in
affording them drink, To deny drink in in fevers destroys the sick. In libris
epid. 1 acut. 43.
(which thing Galen in diverse places blames in the Physicians of his time) or
who by too much humidity oppress the body, and increase the humors. Galen
writes, that if water be given to abate thirst, so much thereof is to be taken
as the sick can drink with one breath; but if to quench heat, he may take as
much as he will, (as he teaches also in * another place) and that altogether,
or at once, as Amatus * the Portugal teaches more at large. 9 meth. 8. curat.
11. Cent. 1.
Thus Galen gave in the first fit two pints of water, to a young man sick of a
fever through anger, in the dog-dayes.

CHAP. XLI. That the Stone of the Bladder cannot be dissolved with Remedies
taken by the mouth.
THey likewise that are grievously tormented with the Stone of the Bladder, are
likewise to be admonished, that they do not too easily give credit to every one
that makes large promises. For I know, not only wandering quacksalvers, but some
Physicians also, do prescribe not a few remedies for to break the stone of the
bladder. And indeed Monardes, Augenius, and others do report, that the stone
of the bladder has been cured. Augenius commends a remedy made of Hog-lice
prepared, with which Laurembergius in a peculiar treatise reports he was cured.
Notwithstanding, others who have made trial of the same, have found no help
thereby. Quercetanus in his Pharmacopoea restituta, describes a water to break
the stone in the bladder; without any pain at all; Chemists promise mountains
but perform mole-hils.
but these Chemists do many times promise more than they are able to perform.
For if the stone of the kidneyes be so hardly dissolved, much more the stone
of the bladder, which is further off, Galen in his Chapter de lapide Iudaico,
laughs at Dioscorides for commending this stone for the stone of the bladder.
The virtue of medicine is lost before it can come to the bladder.
A Medicine (says he) cannot come to the bladder in perfect virtue, and though
we should grant that it may come so far, yet the force of the medicament is
abated, both by the spaciousness of the bladder, and by the urine in which it
swims, and by the hardness of the stone, and by that which involves it, and by
the great quantity of fleagm wherewith it is encompassed. Hippocrates himself
in his oath, although at other times he would exercise Surgery; I will not cut
(says he) them that are troubled with the stone, but will leave it to the
skillful operatists of that art. For he had not a remedy to break the stone.
Men should not therefore give credit to them that prescribe remedies for it.
Duretus upon Hollerius, reports, that he saw the bladder exulcerated with such
remedies, and death ensue, the stone not being worn at all. A certain man (as
Duretus reports) fearing the extreme pain of cutting, by the advice of some,
drank juice of Limmons for 3 months together, and died with exulcerations in
his stomach, caused by that juice. For sharp medicines must of necessity
molest, and exulcerate the parts through which they pass, with their
sharpness. Sanctorius, in his Commentaries upon Galens Ars parva, tells a
story of an Italian Physician, who while he used Electuarium de vitro to break
the stone of the bladder, in stead of lessening the stone, brought in a mortal
dysenterie flux. He tells also of another, who by the advice of a certain
quacksalver, used very forcible diuretics, which when by their abstersive
quality they had evacuated very much fleagm, insomuch as the sick seemed to be
more at ease, yet the stone being made sharper, began to prick the bladder more
vehemently, and made a Gangraenous Ulcer, as was seen when the body was
dissected, and so the sick died miserably. Capivaccius also confesses, that he
knows not any remedies, which can break the stone of the bladder. Cap. 94.
text. 3.
And Galen in Art parva reckons only cutting among the remedies for the stone
in the bladder; where Argenterius observes well, that even from hence is their
opinion refuted, which think the stone may be cured with remedies taken by the
mouth.

CHAP. XLII. That the worms of the belly are not presently to be killed in
Fevers.
IT falls out sometimes, that both children and young men are grievously
troubled with worms, and that diverse diseases in the body do arise from thence
among which a Fever is not the least, which is of a double nature; for either
it is caused by the worms themselves, and then it is a very gentle Fever, or
it comes from other causes, Dangerous Fevers from worms.
and concurres with the worms, and this is usually a malignant and violent
Fever, which is thought to have been sometimes called by Hippocrates (...)
fierce and wild as a beast. In the curing of these worms the people many
times do err much.

First, Aetius teaches, Cap. 39. lib 1. tetrab. 3.
if they breed about the beginning of the disease, they take their substance
from the corrupt matter, if about the height, from the malignitie of the
disease, if about the declination, from the change to a better, which also are
quickly voided. Therefore in the beginning of acute diseases, they betoken a
malignitie of the disease; for when worms are the cause of a Fever, that Fever
is never violent and acute; but most commonly they appear in a malignant fever,
which is to be noted, for in the former case, the cure of the worms is the
cure of the Fever, but in this latter, when the Fever is cured, the worms are
wont to be cast forth by nature it self, the disease tending to a crisis, as
Hippocrates teaches in diverse places, as in his Prognostics, and in his book
de crisibus.

Secondly, they consider only the worms, and presently direct their cure to
them, neglecting the disease on which they depend, or making it worse with
their remedies undiscreetly administered, for oftentimes those things which kill
the worms do increase the fever.

Seeing therefore worms, etc. And there are scarce any Cordialls which are not
good against worms, although not always; hence it is that we see many of
those remedies which are said to be good against worms to do no good at all,
namely because they are used after the manner of Empyricks, without any
difference of causes, and regard of the other circumstances which ought to be
respected. Let us hear what Rondeletius says excellently concerning this
subject in his Chapter of Worms. When Worms (says he) are voyded in acute
diseases, as burning Fevers, and other diseases of old men and children, we
ought not to convert our whole intention against them, as women do, and
Physicians that study to humor them, whereby it comes to pass that the sick
do perish, in that the disease is neglected, or because they bend themselves
more to the curing of the worms then of the disease; as if one be holden with
a continual Fever, or some other Choleric disease, or a flux of the belly, or
if in the beginning of acute diseases one chance to void worms, they commonly
give Wormeseed, which does inflame the Fever more, or else they are wont to
administer Coral, and other things which are astringent to kill the worms,
all which are very ill for the principal diseases, as very bitter things for
the Fever and flux of the belly, and astringent and drying things for Fevers.
Wherefore the Physician ought diligently to distinguish whether the Fever
depend upon the worms, or whether the worms which are always within the
belly be cast out by some other cause. And if one perceive that the Fever does
proceed from another cause, because it is a Quartane or a Tertian, or a true
Quotidiane, and that there is no other ill symptom, they must be let alone, or
only those medicaments prescribed, which are good against the principal
disease, and the worms. Which words of his we have set down at large, because,
they do so plainly explicate this whole business. Forestus also in his
observations, and Mercatus in his Chapter of the worms, and others do observe
the same.

CHAP. XLIII. That Cinnamon is not well prescribed to stay women's fluxes.
IT often falls out, that women are troubled with an immoderate flux of their
flowers, or of their courses, or other humors, for the curing of which, I have
oftentimes known Cinnamon to be prescribed by other women, as a very astringent
remedy. Indeed in a Diarrhaea, and the fluxes of the belly, I deny not but it
may sometimes be good, for it corroborates and strengthens the stomach and
bowels, whose weakness is many times the cause of a flux of the belly, but it
is to no purpose at all to use it for the staying of the flowers, for it rather
provokes them more violently. For it is an hot and dry spice, and withal
opening, and therefore very fit to provoke the flowers, as says Dioscorides in
his chapter de Cassia, which according to the judgment of Matthiolus, and
Dodonaeus is no other then our Cinnamon, called by the French Canelle; it has,
says he, a heating quality, as also a virtue of provoking urine, drying, and
of a gentle binding, it draws down the flowers, and a little after he adds,
that it produces the very same effects that Cinnamon does, concerning which
he writes thus in the following Chapter. All Cinnamon heateth, concocteth,
mollifieth, provokes urine, being drunk or applied with Myrrh, it expells
both the flowers and the birth. If these things be thus, then it necessarily
follows, that they are in a great Error, who prescribe Cinnamon to stay
women's fluxes. But this is a matter of no great moment.

The same might be said of some knowlittles that practice Physic, and are
ignorant of the virtues of remedies, railing on them that that are better than
themselves, and yet taking no care to get more learning. Some are so skillful,
that they think that Syrupus de Artemisi^, is only fit for women, that Syrupus
de Stoechade, is only a cephalic medicine, yet Philonium ought to be
prescribed only to provoke sleep, and diverse such things do sometimes occur
which they are ignorant of; nevertheless if any man do but seriously consider
the simples, of which the aforesaid remedies are compounded, The virtue of
Mugwort, and the syrup made of it.
they ought to be esteemed no less profitable for many other things; as for
example, in Syrup de Artemisia there are many simples very good for diverse
affects. Mugwort does not only provoke the flowers, and help forward the
birth, but also heats, dryes, opens obstructions, and is good against the stone
of the Kidneyes. It extenuates (says Bondeletius) and heats fleame, and dries
the nervous parts and the womb, and is good against old and inveterate
Catarrhes, and performs the same that Syrupus de Prassio does. The same may be
said of Syrupus de Stoechade, which is good against all the diseases of the
bowels; as also Philo's Antidote, which Philo and Mesue affirm to be good for
all cold diseases. And so of many others.

CHAP. XLIIII. That Opium rightly prepared ought not to be feared.
SEeing sleep is the strength of the inward parts, and that nothing is thought
to be sweeter, and more effectual than sleep, for repairing of the strength
and furthering the concoction of the humors, it is both profitable and
necessary by all means to provoke it, in many sick persons which spend a great
many nights without sleep, yet many times it is not so easy to do; for
sometimes the causes of diseases are so vehement, that they will not suffer the
body to be brought to sleep, scarce with indifferent strong somniferous
Physic. Now to provoke sleep sundry sorts of remedies both internal and
external are used.

Diverse internal medicines are prescribed, although commonly to little
purpose, as Almond-Milk, Poppy-seed, which the people in many places do use to
eat, the oil of which they ordinarily use instead of Olive-oyle. But Opium is
now brought into use, the rest being laid aside. Yet the people do abhor
from the use thereof, and avoid it as present poison, Opium in the hand of a
discreet Physician is a harmless thing.
when notwithstanding being rightly prepared, and administered in a convenient
dose, it is a very harmless and wholesome medicament. The Ancient indeed
thought it to be poison, but that is only when it is taken in too great a
quantity. But thus nothing is so wholesome, which by corrupt use may not become
hurtful, and nothing so hurtful which may not be made wholesome. Now there
are diverse sorts of poisons, Diverse sorts of poisons.
some are poisons in their whole substance, which can do the body no good,
after what manner soever they be taken; although they be given in so small a
dose, that they cannot kill, as Arsenick. But the nature of others is contrary
and different from these, in that they do not hurt the body but in a certain
quantity, otherwise they may do much good to the body, such is all Physic,
especially purging medicines. For whatsoever is administered in such a
quantity, that it overcomes nature, it does assume the nature of poison, thus
milk curdled in the stomach, and the juice of Lettice, are thought to be
poisonous, which nevertheless may do good to man's body, being rightly and
moderately used. Moreover we find in history of certain maids that have fed
upon Monkes-hood, and Hemlock. But it is to be noted, that among those things
which cause sleep, Opium is the most innocent for diverse causes.

First, that Opium which we use, is for the most part, Meconium of
Dioscorides, which is made of the strained juice of the leaves and heads of
Poppy, but the right Opium is a Or gum.
Lachryma. Now Meconium is far weaker according to Dioscorides than Opium, and
Matthiolus in his Epistles is of the same opinion likewise. Wherefore if it
hurt, it must be administered in a greater dose than Opium. And Dioscorides
says that Opium taken in the bigness of a Vetch does assuage pain, concoct,
and provoke sleep, but if it be taken in a greater quantity, it does harm. And
he writes of one Mnesidemus who approved of the use thereof only in smell,
because it would so procure sleep, but disallowed it otherwise as hurtful; but
Dioscorides adds, Experience shows that these are but idle fictions, for the
effects of the virtues of this medicament do beget credit.

Secondly, it is to be noted according to Galen, that there are diverse sorts of
Narcoticks; for some do moisten, others dry, Moist narcoticks are dangerous.
those which do moisten, as Hemlock, Mandrake, and the like are hurtful, as
also those that are poisonous in their whole substance, as sleepy nightshade,
which things are never wont to be used by Physicians to provoke sleep. But
those things that are taken inwardly without harm to the body, ought to have a
drying quality, as * Galen teaches, 5. Simpl. 18
where he says, those things which cause sleep do refrigerate the body, and
drying medicines are the fittest for that intention. And in his first book of
the causes of diseases, he says, that those things which do refrigerate and
moysten do not cause a sweet sleep, but a long and dead sleep, and
stupefaction; but those that are of a drying quality, as Opium, are not so
hurtful. Therefore according to the judgment of Dioscorides and Galen, Opium
moderately taken, is not so much to be feared. Besides many compositions that
are to be sold in shops have Opium in them, as Triacle, Mithridate,
Dioscordium, Philonium, and the ancient Physicians were wont to put it into
almost all their Antidotes, and they used it familiarly in diverse diseases, yea
sometimes they made use of worse than it. Hippocrates 2. de morbis, uses
Henbane, and Mandrake for a Quartane Ague. Aetius for the same purpose
prescribes Opium with an equal quantity of Myrrh, Pepper, and Castoreum. But
we now adays do with more security use Opium, better prepared, and
corrected by chymicall Extractions, as Landanum, two or three Grains of which,
or at the most four, are a sufficient dose, where notwithstanding there is not
so much as one grain of Opium, although it be rightly prepared. Opium the same
with Meconium of Dioscorides.
Seeing then our Opium is for, the most part no other then Meconium: of
Dioscorides, which is far more slow in operation then Opium, and therefore
may be preseribed in a greater quantity, the quantity of one or two grains can
do no harm. Dioscorides prescribes Opium to the bigness of a Vetch, whereas we
give a pill of Laudanum to the bigness of a Vetch, a third part whereof is not
Meconium. I see no reason why Opium should be so much feared, If due
consideration be not had, there may muchharm en^ue from sleeping medicines.
so that it be rightly prepared, and all the other things diligently observed,
which Galen would have to be observed in administering Nareoticks, otherwise
without doubt it may do harm. Here by the way take notice, that there are
diverse descriptions of that Laudanum, and many of them very foolish ones; in
one Laudanum the Opium is dried by a gentle fire; in another there are other
narcoticks besides Opium, as Henbane, and such like, far more dangerous than
Opium it self: in another there are many correctives added, as the falt of
pearls, coral, the tincture of gold, and many such unprofitable things, which
add to the price, not to the virtue of it: As may be seen in that large
description of Laudanum, which Quercetanus has indiscreetly committed to
writing. But in that which I have spoken of it, I understand that Laudanum
which is prepared according to the description of the dispensatory set forth by
the College of Physicians at London, which is not so large as the other, and
withal the best.

CHAP. XLV. Of Remedies that provoke sleep, being applied to the head.
THey that are so fearful of Opium, do think it enough, if to provoke sleep
they use external remedies aplyed to the head and nostrils, frontlets and
ointments. Mnesidemus (says Diofcorides) as we intimated before, does only
allow of Opium to be smelled at, not to be taken inwardly. Outward applications
many times not forcible enough.
But here they must know, that these external remedies do not always produce
the wished for effect, because they can scarce convey their virtue and strength
to the brain, being only applied to the forehead.

First, The often do hinder sleep.
and therefore Galen gives good counsel, in diverse places of his books of
Method, that these refrigerating and cooling topics, be often renewed, lest
when they are once heated by the body, they again make it more hot than it was
before.

Secondly, Lib 2. de medie. secundum ^o^os.
wherefore * Galen more highly commands to apply topics, not to the bone of
the forehead, but to the coronall suture which is covered with hair, whether it
be for to cool, or to heat the brain, Topicall remedies best applied to the
coronall future.
because the bones of the forepart of the head are thinner, and their juncture
and coarticulation more loose than the rest.

CHAP. XLVI. That fomentations made with bladders, are but of small efficacy.
AMong topicall remedies, the use of fomentations is of great esteem among
Physicians, which are made of some kind of liquor, that is applied to the
parts of the body for diverse intentions, as to heat them, open obstructions,
dissolve hard tumors, assuage pain, and to digest and discuss humors. Now
they are made of some convenient liquor, especially of the decoctions of many
simples, or of oil, milk, and the like; which liquor many put into a bladder,
lest the linen of their bed be wet therewith, which afterward would be very
tedious and irksome to the sick. But thus the aforesaid preparation, to wit,
the mixture and decoction of the diverse simples is made unprofitable: For their
virtue does not penetrate through the bladder into the body, but only the heat
works, so that if some part stand in need of heating only, the fomentation may
be made with a bladder, what liquor soever be put therein. Also if there be
need to assuage pain, and digest humors, heat by its own quality will effect
it. But if obstructions be to be opened, or something in the body is to be
mollified, the bladder is of no force; but we must either use linen clothes,
or felts or woollen clothes, or spunges wet in some convenient liquor, and so
the strength of the remedy being applied to the part, does sink deeper into the
body, through the pores of the skin, and there it puts forth its virtue, and
sometimes draws the humors from the center to the circumference; as they that
bathe themselves in a hot bath, do feel the effect of it in the internal
parts. Therefore although I do not dislike the applying of bladders to foment
the body, yet I have thought it not so profitable for the aforesaid reasons.

CHAP. XLVII. Of the applying of young whelps and pigeons to the soles of the
feet.
NOt only the common people, but also very many Physicians, have used to lay to
the soles of the feet young pigeons, or whelps cloven through the middle of the
back, which custom I do not in this place speak against, for I know it has
been oftentimes done, to the exceeding great commodity of the sick. But
because they are very seldom wont to be applied to the head, we will treat a
little in this Chapter of this subject. For the Ancients, The Ancients were
wont to apply them to the head.
and also modern Writers, do often prescribe them to be applied to the head,
seldom or never to the feet. This remedy is ordinarily used in the diseases of
the brain, as the frenzy, and madness. Now the frenzy is an inflammation of
the brain, or its membranes, the manner of curing whereof, The cure of the
frenzy.
by the common consent of Physicians, is this: that in the beginning the
Physician use all kinds of revulsions, and diverting remedies, and appy to the
head those things that have power to repel, and drive back the hot humors
from the head. But if by these means the disease cannot be cured, then in the
increase and height of the disease, he must proceed to resolving remedies,
which during the increase may be first mixed with repelling; but in the height
of the disease they must be merely resolving medicines. 13 method. cap. 2.
To which purpose Galen uses cowparsenep, thyme, wild thyme, and other such hot
things boiled in oil; and he teaches, that the frenzy in the height, and the
lethargy, have the very same manner of curing, because in both of them the
same resolving remedies are to be used, where also he commends mustard, and
castoreum, both which are very hot. And these hot things in the height, and
also in the declination of the disease, do not heat, but resolve. For this is
the right manner of curing any inflammation, that in the height, and in the
declination, we use digesting and discussing remedies, 1. sim^l. cap. 4.
for as Galen teaches, Digesting remedies do by accident refrigerate and cool
an inflammation. Wherefore in 1. ad Glaue. cap. 15. and 2 do Medic. 2. locor.
two several places, for the pain of the head in fevers, he uses the se
digestives, to wit, after universal evacuations. But the modern Physicians
use young pigeons, and whelps cloven down the back, and the lungs of a Ram
yet warm, which remedies, although the Ancients were ignorant of, yet they
performed the same with other things answerable to these in operation. Now when
dogs, or pigeons are applied to the soles of the feet, that is either done for
revulsion, or else for resolving the matter of the disease. Not for revulsiou^,
because the people seldom or never use them but in the height, and in the
declination of the disease; now the revulsion should be made in the beginning,
both because their heat is but very gentle, and because it does draw but very
weakly; for these things which draw unto the most remote parts of the body,
must be exceeding hot: Therefore Galen in his Book de revulsione, says, that
they must be sharp medicines, which draw back humors from the head and
bowels: 8 collect. cap. 19.
And * Oribasius is of the same mind. For they draw by their heat and pain.
But young pigeons do resolve without much heat; wherefore though I think they
do draw something, yet it is but weakly, and not from the far distant parts,
in respect of their so gentle heat. Nor are they available for resolution of
humors; for who will believe that remedies are to be applied to the feet, that
they may resolve the humors infolded in the brain. And this is the opinion
even of all Physicians, who have written of the diseases of the head.
Nevertheless I do not absolutely speak against the applying them to the
soles of the feet, because it may do a little good, and cannot do hurt. It is
an usual thing with them of Monspeliers, In France they are applied to the
heart.
to apply young pigeons cloven through the middle, together with some cordial
powders, to the region of the heart, after the manner of an Epitheme, to
comfort the heart, and refresh the spirits, because they have a mild heat,
familiar and agreeing with our natural heat.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the Weapon-salve.
BEcause the weapon-salve, otherwise called the sympatheticall, magneticall,
and starry ointment, is held in so great account by some, that they think it
cures wounds, being applied not to the affected part, but to the weapon that
makes the wound; we will not pass it over in silence. For now adays it begins
to be much in use. This was the invention of some Germans, especially of
^heophr^stus Para^^^sus, whom Goclenius followed, and also Crollrus, (who has
a description of this ointment different from that of Paracelsus) and others;
some of whom followed Paracelsu^, and others Crollius his description. Now some
will have this to be a wonderful gift of God, that wounds should be cured
with so much facility, and it is only an abridgment of the art of Surgery, so
that for the future Surgery need not to be regarded, seeing ve^unds and ulcers
may be cured with one only remedy. But yet nature seems worthy to be blamed, in
that she so long kept close such an excellent remedy, and revealed it not to
Adam, the Patriarchs, holy men, Jews, the primitive Christians, and the most
learned men; but has revealed it to drunkards, Paracelsus charged.
whoremongers, dicers, such as the report goes Paracelsus was, his only
Countrymen writing, and confessing the same. The rest of them in my judgment do
so obscurely explain themselves, that it is very likely they knew not what they
would say; nor ought it to move any man, that Goclenius says, that he could
name Emperors, Kings, and Princes, who give testimony of the virtue of this
ointment, for perhaps some Impostors with their counterfeit gloss have
beguiled them, which is a thing not impossible; but I verily believe Goclenius
himself was never known to Kings and Emperors.

But to pass by these things, it is to be noted in the first place, that this
ointment is compounded of moss that grows upon a man's skull, A principal
ingredient is the moss that grows upon a man's skull that was hanged.
(which they call usnea) because this is as it were the pure quintessence of
the skull, and a spiritous substance, as one of them better learned than the
rest was conceited. Crollius makes choice of a man that has dyed a violent
death, and Hartman his Commentatour preferres one that has been hanged.
Because when they are strangled, the natural and vital spirits are carried
upwards; and seeing that by reason of the hardness of the skull, they cannot
get out, they are coarcted together with the animal spirits, and in process
of time grow into one, and break forth unto the circumference of the skull,
then by the access of Mercury, or the spirit of the World, conveyed into these
inferior things by rain, dew, snow, and frosts, is made usnea, which
contains in it all the natural, vital, and animal virtues, which afterward
it communicates to this ointment. Who can but admire at such gross ignorance
of natural Philosophy in Hartman? For he is in a palpable error, in saying
that in them that are strangled, the natural and vital spirits are carried
upwards, when the vessels, to wit, the veins and arteries through which these
spirits are carried, as all men know, are intercepted and stopped. Moreover,
although they should be carried up then more than at other times, why shall
they rather be coarcted and united in one that is hanged, than in a living man,
in whom the spirits are so easily wasted, and how is it that before this moss
and hearinesse grew upon the skull, they are not quite dissipated and
dissolved? But how knows he that those spirits are carried up to the brain,
in them that are hanged, do settle rather in the skull, than in the substance
of the brain? For in a living creature they are for the most part in the brain
it self. Now these spirits do either flow into it, or they are naturally
seated and placed there. If they do only flow thither, it is most cartaine
that they do all vanish after death, because they are not parts of the body,
nor are they kept in by the strength of the living body, for it is also
consumed and wasted. Hence even in the living there is continually need of a
fresh supply of spirits, because such abundance of them is consumed: Much more
when the corpse is rotten, perhaps some years, before the skull is made quite
bare, and is fit to contract mossinesse. That they are not insite and naturally
placed there, it is evident, because then they should be immovable; but these
spirits in the very act of suffocation are presently lifted up to the brain.
Nor is it a thing credible, that after death, or in death they are seated
there, (which Hartman seems to have meant, when he says, that in process of
time they grow into one) for those spirits that are infite by nature, are made,
or at least repaired, and maintained by those that flow into the brain, by an
act of nourishment, which is not in them that are hanged, and though it were in
them, yet it should be rather in the brain, than in the skull. Besides the
substance of spirits is very thin, and apt to evaporate; how is it therefore,
when they break out unto the circumference of the skull, and are no longer
enclosed within its hardness, that they do not vanish away, but turn into a
gross and filthy moss? Their spiritual substance will nor endure that. And
therefore it is manifest that he erred, in saying that this moss contains in
it all the virtues of the body, it is a wonder that it has not also
nourishment, sobset, and reason. I waved that which he babbles concerning the
spirit of the World, which he calls Mercuriu^ Leandi. But if there be any such
spirit of the World, it must of necessity be diffused through the whole World,
and not fall down to us by the interchangeable courses of rain, show, and
tempests. On these absurdities is the very groundwork of that medicament
seated. The foundation of the ointment shaken.
But I had almost forgotten, that of this moss, the foundation of such an
excellent remedy, Crollius mixes in his ointment but the weight of two hazell
nuts, which is (as Hartman interprets) one dram; but Paracelsus deemed two
vounces little enough, although Paracolsus his whole description is but of nine
ounces; but Crollius his description is of thirteen ounces, so large a
structure stands on such a slender foundation.

Secondly, Paracelsus his description, there was the blood and fat of a man;
but Crollius omits them, and not amiss, if the moss by it self have all the
virtues in it, which thing Paracelsus seems not to have believed, in that he
added these unto it, but in defect of them he puts therein the fat of a pig, a
bore, and a bear. And Hartman gives the reason why Paracelsus did add blood
thereto, because although the spirits do vanish away, yet those spirits which
adhere to the salt of the blood, are retained. But first he thought it
requisite that those spirits should be carried up to the skull, whereas
Crollius thought them to be altogether unprofitable. Furthermore Paracelsus and
Crollius do add thereunto Mummy, by which my Author Hartman thinks is meant
Egyptian Mummie. Which nevertheless is the most unprofitable remedy, being
made in Egypt by cousening fellows, of the flesh of elephantick and leprous
persons, and of such as dyed of the French Pox, or some such filthy diseases,
and of the flesh of slaves which they buy, which they enbalme with Pitch and
Bitumen. But Paracelsus does in sundry places highly extol Mummie of the
Gallows, as he calls it, that is to say, the flesh of a man that was hanged,
the which it is probable Crollius meant, because he left out the fat and blood
of a man, which Paracelsus did put in. Then other simples are added, such as
may be inserted in other ointments and plasters; for Paracelsus added
thereunto Lineseed oil, oil of Roses, and Bole-armoniack; And Crollius
earth-wormes washes, the brain of a Bore, read Sanders, and the boodstone.
The descriptions very different.
Here the reader must consider, that these are two several kinds of ointments
really differing, and have nothing common but the Moss, which Crollius added
but in a very small quantity, and yet these two ointments are both of them
said to be of the same efficacy, although Crollius left out those things to
which the Paracelsians do attribute the whole magneticall virtue: Yea some have
left out the very Moss also.

Thirdly, Crollius scrapes off the Moss, the Moon increasing, being in the
house of Venus, or some other good house, not in the house of Mars, and
Saturn, and he will have the ointment prepared the Sun being in Libra. But
some more rightly do wave these things: For if the ointment have in it a
magneticall virtue, that is to say, if it do cure wounds by the same quality
by which the Loadstone draws Iron to it, there is no need of the concourse of
the stars, seeing that virtue is in it by nature, as the Loadstone at any time,
and under any star draws iron, and tend to the Pole.

Fourthly, Paracelsus requires only.

Fifthly, Crollius, or a tender sprigge of some tree, or some such thing, and
besmeare it over with blood that flows from the wounds, and so apply the
remedy unto it.

Sixthly,

Seventhly, would have it observed, whether it be a deep prick or no, for then
the weapon must be anointed upwards, and not by descending downwards, although
Paracelsus seems not to have regarded that, who commended the only dipping of
the weapon into the ointment.

Eighthly, it is to be noted,

Ninthly, are in the blood, are by reason of sympathy joined with the spirits
of the ointment, being both of the same kind, and so does take the virtues of
the ointment, and carry it unto the party wounded. And not only the virtues of
the ointment, but also the affects which follow the administration of
ointments, which are such as happen either by a too strait, or too loose
ligature, as also those which may ensue, if a wound be left uncovered in a
place that is either too cold or too hot. And there is so much force in these
spirits, that they are able to conveigh the virtue of the ointment from the
East into the West, from the North to the South. And Crollius calls them all
fools, who think that this cure is Magical, and he will have it to be done
by a magneticall, and attractive virtue, caused by the stars, which is
carried unto the wound by the Air being the Medium, and that by reason of the
sympathy of Nature and Balsame of blood, which is in every man, and by reason
of the influence of caelesticall bodies. And thus Hartman explaines it, when
the weapon is anointed, the salt of the blood which is on the weapon does by a
magneticall virtue draw the animal spirits out of the ointment, which two
spirits by the concurrence of the spirit of the world, are friendly united into
one. But if the spirit which is in the blood of the weapon cannot attract the
spirit of the ointment without the anointing, that is to say without real
contract, how can it be said to draw it with a magneticall virtue? Now this
spirit of the world he will have to be diffused throughout all things in the
world, to be that which carries the forms of seeds, and all proportions, which
knits all things together, and which applies actives to passives. Hence it
comes to pass, that what commodity or discommoditie that blood congealed
without the veins does receive, it is presently by sympathy communicated to
its connaturall blood that resides within the veins. Thence it is that the
party is in pain if the weapon be held to the fire, or exposed to the cold
air, and contrariwise if the patient chance to eat Onions, Mustard, or
Garlic, it may presently be perceived in the weapon, namely, because those
spirits do communicate their passions one to another.

From what has been premised, it will be very easy to demonstrate the vanity
of that manner of curing, The vanity of curing by the ointment.
of which I confess, I never did, nor yet desire to make any trial. Yet I
doubt not, but I shall plainly show the frivolousnesse of it, even from their
own principles. For instead of the groundwork, they lay down many things
that are very dubious and uncertain, as that which Hartman talks of the
spirit of the world, which, what, or where it is no man as yet has been able
to demonstrate, which (says he) is diffused throughout all things, when but a
little before he had said, that it is conveyed into these inferior things
by rain, dewes, and frosts, and so in a clear and caime air this spirit may
be to seek, when perhaps there would be most need of it. And lest we should
conceive it to be a spiritual and incorporcall substance, he calls it
Mercurius Mundi, and questionless it must be corporcall, which stands in need
of corporeal means to carry it: also he supposes the spirits to be perpetual,
and unalterable in the blood although it be corrupted when notwithstanding the
blood even in the body and veins may be so corrupted, that it may lose its
form, much more without the veins, and doubtless the blood that is in the
ointment, has quite Jost its form, and the efficacy of its spirits; and so
the analogy and sympathy of the spirits of the party wounded, and of the
ointment, is much weakened. Now that some do call this a magical form of
curing it is not improbable, Probable arguments to prove it magical.
seeing that virtue of curing, which is said to be in the ointment, does stand
in need of the spirit of the world to carry it, that is to say, the Devil, who
is called the Prince of the world. But I rather think this manner of curing is
false than magical, because many follow it, which are very far from that
impious and detestable crime. Nor matters it that experience confirms the
truth of this form of healing; for only such wounds have been healed, which
might have been healed by natures endeavor alone, without any help of Art, and
therefore it may yet be questionable, whether the cure were performed by virtue
of the ointment or no, as we shall manifest afterward.

First, then it is false, Its not a special gift of God as is pretended.
seeing by their own confession the whole cure is done by natural means. We
must needs confess, that every thing is the gift of God; whatsoever, we eat,
drink, or use for the health of man's body. But in this sense they call it not
the gift of God, but (...) because God has miraculously taught it men, as if
every Science, Art, and all knowledge of remedies were not from God, who has
created Medicine out of the earth. But let us see whether this cure be possible
or no. That there are great and diverse sympathies, and antipathies of things,
experience it self shows, the reasons whereof it is impossble to render. Yet
all things are contained and terminated within a certain sphere of activitie.
We daily see that the Loadstone draws not iron, but within a certain
distance. I knew one that could not endure Cat to be in the room, although he
saw her not, but being put out of the chamber, with a wall or door between,
he returned to himself again; and so of all others. There is no stronger
antipathy then that which is betwixt the heavens and these inferior things,
because it comprehends all things within its circumference, and being of great
force to act, is able to dilate its qualities and virtues every way, so that
this inferior orb, and every parcel thereof, is within the sphere of the
activitie of those caelestiall bodies; yet we see that sympathy to languish by
the distance of places. The Loadstone tends to the Pole Artick, but the further
it is from the Pole, the more it declines from it, and so by little and little
it tends not to the Poles of the world, but to the Zodiac, and perhaps rather
to some other part of the heavens then to the North. If this be true of the
Caelestiall bodies, it must needs be more true of these inferior things.
Therefore how can the virtue of that ointment be carried so far, as sometimes
it must be, and not be hindered by the interposition of buildings, seas,
mountains, walls, winds, and of the chest in which with the weapon it is laid
up, especially when those things which carry the spirits are corporeal, which
may be let by the interposition of other bodies; or at least by how much the
further distant the object is, by so much the more is the virtue thereof
diminished, and there is good cause to fear, lest in a great distance of
places, the force of the medicament do perish quite. Hartman writes, that this
communication is made by a magneticall virtue, even so as the sent of the
carcass is communicated to the Vultures many miles distant. But smells are not
diffused in any unlimited space whatsoever; and besides they may be diversely
hindered, as by rain, winds, and such like. To no purpose also was it, that
Goclenius alleged exampies of many sympathies; for it follows not because
there are sympathies in other things, that therefore there is a sympathy in the
ointment. Besides the sympathy which is said to be in this ointment, is far
different from the sympathy of other things, which do insensibly diffuse their
virtue into the air, and need not the spirit of the world to carry them, and
do never work unless the object be present, and are terminated and limited
within a certain space. But that there are some cessations and fallings off
from this sympathy the Loadstone shows, which being rubbed over with Garlic,
does not draw iron, which manifests, that there is not an efflux and wasting of
the quality only, but of some thin substance also.

Secondly, needs not to be cured. Therefore one said well, he that binds the
weapon that the wound may be cured, does as if one should cover a stone, which
has made the hand cold, that the hand may be made hot thereby. Nor let any man
say that there is a vertuall contract, the spirit of the world carrying the
virtue of the ointment to the wound; for this spirit of the world, if there be
any such thing, is common to all things that are in the world; otherwise it
were not the spirit of the world. And yet it operates not in other sympathies;
for unless the object be present, there are none at all. Moreover this
sympatheticall virtue of the ointment, which is joined with the spirit of the
world in such a friendly society, is not seated in any artificial thing, as
artificial, but in something that is natural, and they might do well to tell
what is that natural thing in the ointment, which peculiarly has so much
familiarity with the spirit of the world. As we Galenists say, that in every
organe there is some particular part, which is the seat of the faculty, and on
which especially depends the action: without doubt there ought to be the same
thing in this ointment, for all the simples which are put into the composition
of it, cannot so equally agree with the spirit of the world, that it should
carry their virtues from place to place, at the will of him that anointed
therewith. Therefore the cure shall result either from the similitude of the
weapon to the wound, but that cannot be; for in relations there is no power of
acting, but there should rather be antipathy betwixt the weapon and the person
wounded: Or else some virtue flows from the ointment to the wound; (for
according to Crollius the ointment is of a conglutinating and drawing nature)
but they do not touch one another. Nor is that sympathy of nature sufficient,
which Crollius with natural Balsame makes the cause of the cure; for if there
be any such sympathy, the anointing is superfluous; for the virtues which are
carried after a magneticall manner, through so great distances of places, do
not need a corporeal application. But in this ointment the contrary is
apparent; for nothing is done without the anointing of the weapon: Therefore
its working is material, and after the manner of other unguents, it cannot
operate without a corporeal contact, as appears by the anointing; for if it
may work magnetically without a corporeal contact, the anointing is in vain.
And in vain also does Grollius observe a form of anointing, on the upper or
nether part of the weapon, for the vulnerary virtue thereof might out of the
box wherein it is, be diffused even to all that are wounded, for it has a
sympathy with all. Seeing then it does not operate without real application,
and a certain and determinate manner of anointing, it is plainly manifest,
that it can act only after the manner of other remedies, upon that thing to
which it is applied, and no further.

Thirdly, why is blood, fat, moss, or else in the other natural remedies
which are ingredients also in the ointment, to wit, oils and powders. If the
virtue of the ointment depend upon the former, the ointment is unprofitable,
because in the body of the party wounded, there is already both a greater
plenty of them, and they are of a more forcible operation. But if it flow from
the other simples, which are put into the composition of the ointment, the
former things, to wit, the blood, fat, and moss, are added but in vain,
because they give no virtue to the ointment. So any vulnerary remedy, if the
blood of the person wounded be applied thereunto, shall be able to cure the
wound by a magneticall quality, to wit, the spirit conveying the virtue of the
ointment to the part affected. And indeed there is no reason, if this
sympatheticall ouring be naturally possible, why it may not be good in all
ointments, that moss and blood be put into them, not for their virtue of
healing, but for their sympathy only; as, if a wound be to be deterged, take
the blood of the Patient, to which add a deterging ointment, and the spirits
which are in the blood, by reason of sympathy, by means of the spirit of the
World, will carry the virtue of that ointment to the person wounded, and so
perform the cure. In like manner any remedy may be made sympatheticall; thus
purges may be instituted, or other intentions of Physicians perfected, by
adding to some convenient remedy a little of the Patients blood, whose virtue
may be afterward carried to the sick, by means of the spirit of the World. But
if the spirits themselves have in them the virtue of curing, seeing there are
more spirits left behind in the body, in vain is the virtue of the ointment
implored.

Fourthly, it appears from the circumstances, that this is an unprofitable
manner of curing. For they say, that from the too loose, or too strait binding
of the weapon, the same symptoms do happen in the sick, which are wont to
come by such tying, when it is used to the body. Now these symptoms do
proceed either from the ointment, or from the binding. Not from the ointment,
because it has power to heal, but not to hurt. Nor from the binding, because
an artificial thing has no power to work at distance, and upon another
subject then to which it is applied. And therefore because Crollius prescribes
sundry forms of applying it, the ointment is to be subspected; for in natural
things, that curious manner of anointing cannot change the property, and of
beneficial, make it to become hurtful, as likewise appears in the Loadstone.
Nor does it depend on them both, because the magneticall virtue of the
ointment, seeing it is defined to be merely natural, and is seated in the
ointment, does proceed from means that work naturally, as are the simples of
which it is compounded, and not from artificial means, which depend merely
on the will of him that anoints with it. Furthermore they say, that whatsoever
commodity, or discommodity, that spirit which is in the blood of the weapon
does receive, it communicates the same by sympathy to that which is in the
veins, thence it is that the Patient is in pain, if the weapon be exposed the
heat of the fire, or to the cold air. But thus not only the vulnerary virtue
of the ointment, but also the external cold shall have a magnetic quality,
which is an absurd thing to suppose. So that noxious cold might be carried from
the weapon to the Patient through a hot medium, as in the greatest heat of
Summer. As if the weapon should be anointed in a Northern Country, and the
Patient be in Africa in a hot Country, suppose the weapon to be cold, the
Patient likewise shall be cold in Africa, yea perhaps being near the sire. Now
seeing that cannot be done but by the air, as Crollius confesses, the air of
the Northern Country shall have power to refrigerate the air in Africa,
which who sees not to be a gross absurdity? But I would demand further, seeing
there is such a mutual sympathy of spirits, and the maintainers of this
magneticall cure write, that on the contrary, if the sick shall observe an ill
diet, and eat garlic, onyons, and mustard, it is presently discerned in the
weapon: If the Patient do lie near the fire in Africa very hot, and the
weapon be exposed to the cold air in the Northern Countries, why shall rather
the person wounded be made cold, than the weapon be made hot, because they
will have the spirits to communicate their passions one to another. These
external accidents, cooling, or heating, do happen to the spirits either from
the ointment, or not. If not, then they will not affect the party, because the
ointment is necessary for the magneticall virtue that is in it, and not in the
ambient air, or other external things, and through the ointment alone is the
communication of the virtues from the weapon to the wounded. Nor from the
ointment, for it has neither power to cool nor heat; they are therefore
nothing else but external things, not permanent, but are changed according to
the alteration of the ambient air, for in a hot air, the weapon being well
covered and bound, both the spirits and the ointment will be hot, and the
contrary. Then I demand how it comes to pass, that they are not again
refrigerated in the way by the air, for they may be carried through such such
a medium which is cold, as the winds which are by nature cold, passing through
hot climates, do become bot, as the South winds. In like manner if one loose a
few ounces of blood by a wound, or bloodletting, or bleeding, or by some other
me^^es, it is a woulder, that blood being changed and cooled, that the person
does not feel such effects, if there be such a great sympathy of the spirits
among themselves, that what commodities or inconveniences they receive from
external causes, they communicate them to that within the veins; and so those
spirits being refrigerated, have power to refrigerate and cool that body out
of which they issued. If one or two drops of the blood on the weapon, by the
anointing of the ointment, be of power to heat the wounded body, if it be kept
in a hot place, by reason that the spirits themselves are hot, it is a wonder
that the rest of the blood that was spilled, which has more spirits than this,
being left behind, and exposed to the open air, does not likewise at the same
time refrigerate the body, seeing that in a greater quantity there is always
greater virtue; if that blood be cast into the fire, why shall not the Patient
feel the heat of the fire; or if that blood be putrified, how is it that the
body also does not putrify, if there be such a great affinity betwixt the
spirits, and the body out of which they issued? In like manner, if the weapon
cannot be had, they say it suffices to besmear another weapon, or a willow
stick, with a drop or two of the blood that comes out of the wound: I demand
therefore, if when this viceweapon is anointed with the ointment, that weapon
which made the wound, be first cast into the fire, or water, why shall not the
sick be in great pain, be cold, or hot? For there is no reason why it should
suffer rather from one part of the spirits than another. It is absurd therefore
to imagine, that this heating or cooling is communicated by any magneticall
power. Hence the Reader may observe, that whatsoever they say of the sympathy
of the spirits among themselves, is true with them only of that part of the
spirits which they feign to be united with the spirits of the ointment by the
aanointing, and all these symptoms, whether good or evil, which they say do
happen to the wounded, do arise from thence; But the spirits which are in the
remainder of the blood that was spilled, do neither hurt nor good, and so
their sympathy is vanished, when nevertheless they are of the samekind with
the other spirits. And who can but think these things are magical, especially
if the actions of Magicians be compared therewith. A comparison betwixt
Magical operations, and this salve.
Who knows not that it was an ordinary thing with Magicians to make waxen
statues, by the help of which they did much harm; and especially which concerns
this heating at distance, Virgil writes in his Pharmaccutria.

Limus ut hic durescit, and haec ut cera liquescit,
V^o eodemque igni, isic nostro Daphnis amore.
In English thus.

As clay grows hard by fire, and wax grows foft,
So Diphne for my love feels changes often.
Thus Hector Boethius, and others do report of some, that have been roasted
with a gentlte heat by an im^ge of wax laid to the fire, as Duffits King of
Scots. So they cause heat or cold, and other affects when they list, upon them
that are absent, the which all men grant cannot be done by natural causes.
Who have not heard that Witches which have anointed themselves with a magical
ointment, have been carried through the air? But that which Paracclsus writes
in his Chapter of Invisible diseases makes much for our purpose, if any man be
hurt, a foot, or hand, or some other member, is to be drawn after the form and
shape of that which is hurt, or (if you will) a pourtraicture of the whole
body, and it must be anointed and bound up, and the man shall be free from
pain; yea, and he says, that some who have been sick of other diseases, have
been cured after the like manner. Who can believe that this is done by natural
causes, and yet it is as easy in this to have recourse to magnetical virtues,
and sympathies, and the spirit of the World, as in the weapon-salve. Here are
examples of Magical cures at distance, which are in all respects like to the
anointing of the weapon; for as the image is anointed and bound up for the
curing of the wound, so is the weapon; and as the Image laid to the fire, or
exposed to the frost, does burn, or congeale him that is absent; so does the
unguent laid upon the weapon, and as the King of Scots in Boethius was almost
consumed in the waxen Image, so the same may easily, from the anointing of the
weapon, happen to him that is wounded, if he that annoints, it, do maliciously
lay it to the fire, or in some place that may communicate its harm to the
person wounded, and who sees not that this may be also a sort of Witchcraft? If
he that does this by the help of the image douse the Devil (who is the spirit
of this world) as an instrument to set on the charm, it is likely, that this
magneticall cure (as they call it) has the very same Author, which they call
by this name, that they may cloak their knavery, with a seeming show of
natural actions. And deservedly may the remedy be suspected, even because of
the Authors of it, who were suspected for Magic. For Paracelsus and Crollius
do in diverse places commend Magic, and will have it to be a thing very
needful for a Physician. But suppose we that there is nothing magical in it
at all, yet we will further prove it to be false, and altogether a frivolous
form of curing.

Fifthly, and the balsame of blood? For Crollius confesses that the cure is
made by the balsame of blood; and indeed the spirits and the virtues of the
balsame in the body do perfect all the cure.

Sixthly, Hartman, the fixed salt of the blood would not draw the spirit out of
the ointment without the anointing, it follows, that there is no magneticall
virtue in it at all, because a corporeal contact is necessary, and from hence
it will follow likewise, that without the corporeal contact it cannot work at
distance, nor diffuse its strength so far as to the person wounded. The blood
has the virtue either in it self, or from the ointment: If in it self, then
is the ointment in vain. Not from the ointment, because what sympathy with the
spirits of the party is attributed unto it, it has it from the blood, flesh,
fat, and moss, which are ingredients in the composition, by reason of the
spirits which are thought to be in them, it follows then that the ointment
has no virtues in it, which did not lie before in the spirits, and so we
conclude that the ointment is in vain also.

Seventhly, the blood, fat, and moss, are either of a diverse nature, or of
the same. If they be of a diverse nature among themselves, without doubt they
are also of different operation, and have not the same manner of sympathy with
all the parts, but the spirits of blood, have a greater affinity with the
blood, the spirits of flesh with the flesh, and the spirits of the Moss with
the Skull. And therefore that the cure may succeed the better, and sympathy be
preserved, besides the blood of the person wounded, both his fat and his bones
ought to be mixed with the ointment on the wepon, that a complete cure may be
performed, and the magneticall virtue be without fail carried to the affected
parts; for verily there is not the same sympathy in the aforesaid spirits. But
if those spirits be all of the same nature, that curiosity in adding thereto
blood, fat, flesh, and moss, is in vain, and superfluous, when only the
blood, which contains in it all those spirits may suffice.

Eighthly, I have read a story of a horse, A horse shod in the quick cuted by
this salve.
for the cure whereof the nail was aunointed with the aforesaid ointment, and
so the horse became sound again: And Crollius also relates the same. From
whence it follows, that there is a certain sympathy and familiarity betwixt
that ointment and the spirits of a horse; and a certain learned man confesses,
that there is the same virtue of healing in a man and in an horse. Which if it
be true, in vain is man's blood preferred before an horses blood, for those
things which are the same to one third, are the same among themselves, yea
Crollius faith, that not only a horse, but also all creatures that have flesh
and bones may be cured with this ointment. And in very deed if this manner of
curing were certain and infallible, even any vulnerary ointment would be as
fit as this; for the virtues thereof might be conveyed to the sick by means
of the spirit, as well as the virtue of this ointment.

Ninthly, Crollius confesses, that natural Balsame does work in this
magneticall cure) it is a wonder why that liniment is not rather applied to the
sick himself, why it cures not ulcers, seeing every wound does at length
become an ulcer, and seeing blood may flow also from ulcers, and the principal
indications of a wound, are found likewise in an ulcer: Why is it not also used
for the curing of wounds made by Pistoll-shot, and for such wherein there is a
loss of substance? Why has Crollius excepted the wounds of the Nerves,
Arteries, and principal Members? It is because it is good only for fimple
wounds, and such as are only in the flesh, which nature by binding alone does
conglutinate, with the help of natural Balsame, that is to say, of the innate
heat of the body; hence it is easy for the wound being wrapped every day in
clean clothes, and washed with warm urine, to grow together again of it self,
without the use of any ointment at all. Therefore that ointment is altogether
unprofitable, nor availes that any thing which they talk of experience; for
without doubt those wounds might have been eured without the ointment. For that
ointment does neither dissolve, nor purge away the excrements of the wounds,
nor preserve the temperature of the parts; for the parts of the body which may
be wounded are of diverse sorts, as Sanguine, Spermatick, Nervous, Membranous,
fleshy, and men themselves may be Choleric, or Sanguine, Melancholic,
Phlegmatic, Plethorick, Cacochymick, and be troubled with some other diseases
also, for all which one and the same remedy cannot be so convenient. But
enough of this.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the curing of the Kings-Evill by the touch of the Seventh-Sonne.
BEcause of late I have heard of some, who reporting that they are
Seventh-Sonnes, do promise great matters about the healing of the Kings-Evill,
which they profess to do by touch alone, and so beguile the too credulous
people, something must be said concerning them: This chapter I have added at
the request of some Physicians of principal note. That some diseases are
sometimes cured only with the touch of some remedies, it is plainly manifest by
the authority of the most excellent Physicians. Such are those which are called
amuleta, and periapia, being remedies that are hung about the neck, or laid to
the body. Thus Galen commends the root of Peionie hung about the neck for the
Epilepsie, others the stone called aetites bound to a woman's Thigh; to
facilitate the birth, and diverse such examples are found in Authors, which many
say they have observed, although I, have sometimes made trial of peionie, A
stone which is found in an Eagles nest, without which (as it is thought) she
cannot lay her eggs.
and the stone aetites for the aforesaid affects, without any success.
Nevertheless I deny not but there are occult sympathies, and antipathies; nor
do I go about to thwart experience, and the authority of able Physicians. But
it is far more which these men profess they can do, namely, cure the Kings
evil by their touch alone, and that because they are Seventh Sons.

That this is natural, I think scarce any will believe. For whatsoever is
natural, does depend on inward principles, and may be done by every
individual of that kind, so it be entire, sound, and according to nature in
every respect, as all Rubarb parges choler, and every man is risible. Nor does
it depend on number, for number according to Philosophers is of no force to
act, for actions are of the things themselves, and do depend on the forms of
things. But this seventh Son is said to have some peculiar power, which is
denied to the six former brethren, to wit, because he is the Seventh. It must
needs follow therefore, that that power must arise some other way, since it
proceeds neither from the form, nor the number. It depends not on the Touch,
for Touching as Touching has only the power of Touching. Indeed if there be
either any noxious or salutiferous quality in the body, it is communicated by
the Touch. But the Touch it self has no such force. Furthermore, seeing that
all diseases are cured only by the taking away of their cause; those
Wondermongers cannot take away the Kings evil, unless they first take away
the cause. Now seeing that the cause of the Kings evil is fleagm, as
Physicians say, settled in the kernels, which in other parts breeds other
diseases, he might be able by the same touch, and by the same virtue, to cure
other diseases that come from the same cause, which thing seeing he cannot
do, it must necessarily follow that the cure is miraculous, or else that it
depends on the imagination of the sick. But seeing the imagination of the sick
is so different, being in some stronger, in others weaker, an uncertain event
must be looked for from an uncertain cause. Therefore it must of necessity be
either miraculous, or false, or diabolical. I scarce believe that it is
miraculous. The Apostles and Primitive Christians did heal by touch alone; to
the greater glory of God, and the propagating of Christian Religion. But God
will not have miracles to be wrought at every man's private pleasure; thus
whatsoever the Apostles did, they professed that they did it not by any power
of their own, but in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore those
seven Brethren, the Sons of Sceva a Jew, who went about in the same name to
conjure the unclean spirits, were beaten by the Devil, and suffered the
punishment of their rash boldness. Thus it is not lawful adventurously to
attempt the working of miracles. In like manner, the power of curing the Kings
Evil, is by the blessing of God granted to the Kings of great Britain, and
France, which is denied to other Christian Kings: And so Edward the Confessor,
for his singular piety, cured not only the Kings Evil (which prerogative
redounded to his Successors after him) but also other ulcers by touch alone,
which his Successors could not do. Seeing then this privilege is only
vouchsafed to the aforesaid Kings, and is wholly performed in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, if other Kings should attempt the same, it were too much
rashness, and a gross tempting of God, who has not given any such power to
them. Therefore in Spain, where this disease of the Kings Evil is epidemicall
and popular, Francis the first King of France being taken Prisoner by the
Spaniards, cured it by his touch alone, as he was wont to do France,
concerning which Lascaris has this Epigramme.

Hispanos inter sanat Rex Choeradas estque
Captivus superis gratus ut ante fuit.
Indicio tali, Regum sanctissime, qui te
Arcent, invisos suspicor esse Deo.
In English thus.

The King in Spain though Captive, heales their sore,
And is as dear to God now as before.
Thus they, who by his goodness are relieved,
Are but unto a greater vengeance reprieved.
Moreover it is to be noted, that the aforesaid Kings on whom God has bestowed
that favor, have it upon a certain condition, nor is it derived unto their
successors, unless they be lawful heirs, and abide in the Christian Faith.
For if an Usurper (as there have been such in times past, and God knows what
shall be the destinies of Kingdoms) should depose a lawful Prince from his
Imperial Throne, he should not with the Kingdom obtain this prerogative to
himself. Nor if any King, though a lawful Successor to the Crown, should
renounce the Christian Religion (as men's dispositions are variable) and revolt
to another, should he retain that privilege. For Beatus Remigius, with whose
anointing this power redounded to the Kings of France, doubtlesser an
excellent Expositor of this thing, has declared, that this power was granted
to these Kings, so long as they should abide in the Catholic Faith,
insinuating thus much, that it should cease, if at any times they revolt from
this Faith. Seeing then it is thus, who will believe that such power is given
to men of no account, to be perpetual to them, simply and absolutely from
their birth, which Kings alone do obtain only by unction, and on condition
that they constantly remain in the Christian Faith, seeing that God works no
miracles but to his own greater glory, and for the confirmation of the Faith.
Nor is it probable that God would give this gift unto Kings as a pledge of his
favor, in token and testimony of their piety, which he had before vouchsafed
to such fellows; and therefore so common (for a Seventh Son is ordinarily
found) and which others also enjoy, who have sometimes no religion at all in
them. For that which God has bestowed on Kings, ought to be such a thing, that
for the rarietie and singular privilege thereof, it must manifest more the
glory of God, which it would not do, if he had already bestowed the like on
others by their birthright. Nor is there any promise to be found made from God
to the Seventh Son; either before the foundation of Christian Religion, or
afterward, and it is a wonder that there were no Seventh Sons in the
Apostles days, that contended with them for the power of working miracles,
when questionless many families did abound with plenty of children. Therefore
it is manifest that this kind of curing, if there be any such is diabolical.
For we know that the Devil Gods Ape, that he may detract from Gods glory,
does imitate the same things which God, thus by his deceitful craft he turned
the Magicians Rods into Serpents, and by the confession of some modern
Magicians, he goes about mimically to represent and counterfeit the venerable
rites and ceremonies of the Church, in their Magical meetings: And so
likewise, that this admirable prerogative, which God has granted unto Kings,
may be had in contempt, he presumes to attempt the same by his cursed
Emissaries. But God will not give his glory to another, neither will he suffer
true miracles to be wrought by the Devil but false and counterfeit only.
Therefore questionless these fellows do either not at all cure this disease
of the Kings-Evill which daily experience testifies, or else the Devil (as he
uses to do in other diseases) does incontinently cure it with natural means,
whose virtues he is not ignorant of, which thing Physicians might be able to
do, if they did certainly know the whole power of Nature. Yet it is to be
noted, that this disease is more ordinary in children, and does arise from
fleam, which as they grow in age, is dissolved by the increase of heat, and the
disease goes away of it self, which is usual in many diseases that appertain
to children, which if it happen, it ought not to be attributed to the uncertain
virtue of him that touches it, but to Nature, which Hippocrates calls the Curer
of diseases.

CHAP. L. The Antimoniall Cup, showing the abuse of it.
THere is come not long since into use a Cup made of the Regulus of Antimonie,
so called by Alchymists, which is sold at a very high rate, and is reported to
be good for many things, and diseases, both by him that makes it, and by the
people who are always eager in their pursuit after Novelties, and it is
thought by the people to be a thing of great value, and heretofore not known
to Physicians; when nevertheless, it is very well known of all them that have
any skill in the Chymicks; for the way of making the Regulus out of Antimonie
is very easy, ordinary, and ancient. But that we may explicate to the people
this error so pernicious, we will first speak of the Cup it self, and then
of its force. Now the Cup has not its virtue from the Artificial form
thereof; for so any Cup made of Silver and Gold should do the same. But it
has all its virtue from the Antimonie: Now they that pry into the nature of
Minerals and Metals, are of opinion that Antinomie does consist of crude and
very impure Sulphur, Mercury and Arsenicke: And therefore it is so contrary to
our nature, that after what manner soever it be prepared and corrected, it
does even in the least quantity that may be given, offer great violence to the
intralls, and does retain its malignant quality, which can scarce be taken
away by any infusions. If by chance some man of a strong constitution be able
to endure the force thereof, he expels it upwards and downwards, with abundance
of humors; but them that does wonderfully gripe and torment; For howare weak,
and such as do vomit hardly it soever it be prepared, it never lays aside its
malignant and deadly quality.

Hence many grave Physicians, as Fernelius, Riolanus, Gesnerus, and the whole
College of Physicians at Paris, do utterly dislike the internal use thereof,
in respect of its deadly quality. Nevertheless to satisfy the people, we
will grant, that it may safely be used, so it be rightly prepared, and
discreetly applied. I know it has been diversely assayed to be prepared by the
art of the Alchimists, that though not altogether, yet at least in some measure
the malignitie thereof might be abated, but that art is not yet fully found
out, which can quite take away the force of that Medicament.

Now the common and more ordinary preparations, which are to be sold even in
all shops, are the regulus of Antimonie, of which the aforesaid Cup is made;
the glass of Antimonie, which the people call Stibium is indeed the true name
of Antinomie it self, and of this Glass, not of the Regulus ought this Cup to
be made, says Sennertus in his Institutions, and Hartmannus in his notes upon
Crollius. Moreover there are made of it Crocus metallorum, or the Saffron of
metals; Pulvis emeticus, Mercurius vita, a Tincture and an Oil.

And all these preparations are indeed with one and the same quality, to wit,
vomiting and purging, which manifests that in none of the aforesaid
preparations was the deadliness of the Antimony taken away. Now seeing that in
all things; yea even in the worst of all there are some degrees of pravitie,
the people must know that in all Minerals, that preparation is accounted the
best, and least dangerous, in which the form of the Metal is lost; for then
there is made a greater separation of the pure from the impure: And therefore
all Alchymists do endeavor so to dissolve Gold, a harmless medicament in it
self, that the form of the Metal being laid aside it may be made potable,
and they do not approve of any dislolution thereof, in which it can return to
its own nature; which is indeed much more true Minerals that are of a
mischievous nature. It is therefore to be noted that that Antimonie which we
call crude, to wit, unprepared at all, is of no force to move the body, and
therefore the Ancients who were ignorant of Chymicall art, knew no inward use
thereof. Now the first and easiest preparation of all, is that, which we call
the Regulus, in which the form of the Metal is not taken away, but does melt
into to a certain form of Lead. Hence Dioscorides says, that Antimonie
melted turns to Lead, having some light knowledge of that Regulus. for it is
made of it being melted only, and so a little refined, and it does retain all
malignity of the Antimonie, which laid as it were asleep before, under the
earthly excrement. This do Mettall-men use, and mix in Guns, Bells, and other
the like engines: but seeing it does yet possess all the naughty and
mischievous qualities of Antimonie, it must necessarily follow, that the Cup
made of it is most dangerous. Therefore the best Alchymists have quite
abandoned it from any use in Physic, save that by a further preparation may
be extracted out of this Regulus the glass of Antimonie, and many other such
things far better then the Regulus it self. Wherefore some in the stead
thereof have used the glass of Antimonie, as did frequently that most
excellent Physician Matthiolus; the people call it Stibium, and are sore afraid
of it, whereas indeed it ought to be preferred before the regulus.
Nevertheless Quercitanus, Hartman, and some others of principal note among
the Alchymists, who do highly extol the virtue of Antimonie, do think this
preparation of the mixture of impure Sulphur, which is not yet taken away. And
therefore waving those two as not safe, they do familiarly use the Crocus, or
Hepar Antimonij, Saffron or liver of Antimony; Puluis emiticus, the vomiting
powder; and Mercurius vitae, Mercury of the life: Which preparations the
College of Physicians at London has inserted in their dispensatory, and there
is almost no shop, in which both the substance and infusion of them is not to
be sold. From whence they that do so much extol this Cup, may gather, that
they use a pernicious and dangerous remedy, whereas the same much better
prepared is every where obvious, and to be sold, yet at a very easy rate

Of the force of the Cup.
AS touching the force of the Cup, it does not gently but mightily provoke
vomit and stools; now every vomit although it be caused by the most gentle
Medicines of all, is nevertheless always more harsh to Nature then any
Purgation by the inferior parts, because the stomach was not made for
expulsion, but for reception; for it is one of the noble parts, and of
exquisite sense, and has a very great sympathy with the Brain and the heart,
in so much as when it is affected, the people think and complain that their
heart aches. It is therefore not good to strain such a noble part with such a
violent medicine. But besides, a vomit does offer much violence to the strength
of the whole Body, strain head, brain, muscles of the belly, the breast, and
all the intrailes which are contained in the lower belly, and sometimes in
gross bodies breaks the veins, and lets out the blood. Wherefore if we must
not use other purging medicines, but with a great deal of care and
premeditation, much less vomitaries; for of all evacuations a vomit is the
most grievous and dangerous. And therefore many things are to be regarded in
the provoking of vomit. First, the nature of the Patient, and his aptness or
difficulty for vomiting, for in them that vomit hardly, there is a great deal
of danger, although they be sick of disease which might be cured by vomit.
Such are they that are fat, those that are strait brested, many slender
persons, who have weak stomachs, such as are subject to a Cough, or difficulty
of breathing, which have Tumors or Ulcers in their breasts, they that have weak
heads and eyes, and such as are troubled with the inflammation, or pain in the
Midriffe. Secondly, the time of the year is to be considered, for it is not
convenient at every time of the year. Thirdly, the nature of the diseases; for
in some diseases it does more hurt than good, and in those wherein it may do
good, it must not yet be always used; and therefore the founder of the Cup is
mistaken, when he says that, that the Cup is good for all the diseases which
stand in need of purging, as we shall manifest afterward. Fourthly, the
constitution of diseases; for it cannot be administered at all times of
diseases without danger to the Patient: The Physician must consider in all
Evacuations the beginning, increasing, state of the disease, much more in a
vomit. Fifthly, great care is to be had of preparing the body and the humors,
and many things are to be regarded both before the vomit, and in the very act
of vomiting, which are not to be handled in this place. So as there is no
evacuation which requires so much consideration, as that which is done by
vomit. Now seeing these things can be known only by a Physician, and that not
every one, but by a very learned and skillful man, I cannot but wonder at the
adventurous rashness of some men, yea and women, who being unread in the rules
of Physic, grossly ignorant both of Diseases and their causes, their times,
and not knowing the method of Curing, dare nevertheless vex and torment such a
noble subject as Man's body with variety of medicines. Secondly, persuade unto
vomit, the most dangerous and difficult evacuation of all other. Thirdly,
provoke it with a Mineral, which is most contrary to nature. Fourthly, To do
it with Antimonie, then which no Mineral is more churlish. And Lastly, to use
that preparation of it, which is the very worst of all. Not that I do
altogether dislike the use of Antimonie, for I have often used it with good
success, but better prepared. But especially the founder of the Cup is to be
blamed, for selling such a cheap medicine at so dear a rate, the right use
whereof he does neither teach the people, nor I think he himself knows: And
therefore I have known many, who by taking the infusion of it, have been
grievously tormented, and some that have dyed, who despising the counsel of
Phisicans have preposterously used it. For Physic although it be in its own
nature very good, and is the hand of God, yet it is but like a sword in the
hand of a mad man, as we have said in another place out of Herophilus.

Of the Founder of the Cup, and the Authors cited by him.
AS for the Founder of the Cup, he professes himself a Minister, and Preacher
of Gods Word, that is, a man that will scorn to deceive any body, and will not
meddle beyond his knowledge, and therefore without question he has brought us
a very Sovereign Medicine, which he made conscience to conceal any further,
though before he was born the thing was in use in another name; as appears by
those Authors whom he does cite for the patronizing of his gains, though they
are men of small note, and hardly worthy to be cited. First, he has a great
commendation of the Antimony it self, extolling it above all medicines in the
world; So do they that commend aurum potabile, and so all the Alchymists, till
this Minister have preferred the Gold before it. It is (says he) a Mineral
according to Paracelsus) consisting of Mercury, Sulphur and salt; So is my
glove according to the said Paracelsus. It was first discovered (says he) by
Geber King of Arabia; and yet Dioscorides, Galen, Hippocrates, and ancienter
Authors before Geber do speak of it: And he called it Magnesia, as if Geber
spoke Latin, but Quercetanus calls it so indeed. Secondly, amongst all the
medicines that are prepared out of this mineral, he disclaimes from all except
the Regulus, in which he shows his weakness, for the Rugulus is the weakest,
easiest, and coursest preparation of all others; therefore he adds, and what
may be conveniently prepared out of the same; and that I like well, for out of
the Regulus may be drawn the flowers, the glass of Antimonie, the Crocus
metallor, and many other preparations; and herein I adhere to the authority of
Bornettus, and Mylius, cited by him; who do not say, that it is to be used in
Physic, but that it is the chiefest examination of Gold, and the true matter
of all flowers, and medicinal tinctures contained within Antimonie, which is
true; for the flowers and other Antimoniall extractions must be properly drawn
out of the regulus and the worst of them is better then the regulus it self:
Then he brings in Paracelsus with the Titles of Oriental Star, of Natural,
Spagiricall, and Magneticall light and knowledge. Now I am sure no learned and
honest man will approve of such an illiterate man as Paracelsus was, approving
and practicing Magical Arts, which he calls the Syrupes and Electuaries of the
Devil. But let us hear what he says, in his Book de vita longa, page 167.
cited by this Writer, not a word of the Cup, but only of the praises of
Antimonie, as Alehymists use to do, that is, beyond the deserts thereof, and
that it cures the Leprosse, which notwithstanding Paracelsus never performed
therewithal, but howsoever he never used the Regulus, or the Cup, but has
many better preparations of Antimonie then that Cup is, as appears by the next
authority cited by him out of his 6. Book, page 22. Where he attributes all
these virtues to the quintessence of Antimonie, the Regulus being not the
essence of it, but amongst all preparations the coursest and unsafest; and all
the passages alleged out of Paracelsus do intimate no more, but only that
Antimonie is an excellent medicine, that cures (says he) the Leprosy, besides
many other diseases; but for these two I am sure it is false, for neither by
the Cup, nor by any other Antimonial preparation can it be performed. And I
believe Paracelsus spoke he knew not what, when he says, As that Antimony
refined Gold, so by the same reason it purifies the body of man. He must be
void of reason, who will think this comparison true and right, as if there
were the same reason for Gold a Mineral, having some convenience of principles
with another Mineral, and the body of man, with which it has no convenience
at all: For the same might be as well said of all purging medicines, that
cleanse the body of man from all its impurities; but howsoever the Cup is not
the right preparation of it to give to cleanse man's body. He brings a second
authority of Martinus Rulandus, who calls his Aqua-benedicta the infusion of
this Cup, which is absolutely false, and Quercetanus, Labavius, Sennertus, and
Hartmanus upon Crollius, yea his own Son Rulandus says otherwise; namely, that
his Aqua-benedicta which he commends so much was made of Antimonie indeed, but
not of the Cup, but of the Crocus metallor, otherwise called Hepar antimonij,
the liver of Antimonie, or some other better preparation; as if he did say,
that it was the infusion of this Cup, yet it is not to be used by every one,
except they have the same knowledge and judgment that Rulandus has;
nevertheless he used other medicines as bad as this, which he does commend as
much, as his Extractum Esula, which is absolutely preferred by him before all
other medicines, and Antimony it self, showing that no medicine is good for
every body. But Alchymists have that property, to extol things to the skies,
but when they come to the trial, they are found false, or else lose their
virtues in other folks hands: As for example, that it cured the frenzy, it is
false, for in the diseases of the head, vomiting is very hurtful, by the
consent of all Physicians: That it cured the Falling sickness, it were to be
desired, but it does not prove so, except that come from the stomach, the head
being only affected by the sympathy of the said stomach. That it heals
Impostumes in the Lungs, and cures the Pleurisy, it is most untrue: For
breaking the Impostumes in the Lungs, if it be given when they are at maturity,
perhaps it will, because of the great straining of the upper parts of the body,
but another vomit may do the like, if the man can bear it. The truth is, those
that have Impostumes in the Lungs, are so short winded, that they cannot bear
the straining of a vomit; but howsoever for an Impostume to be broken, and to
be healed, are two several things, a vomit may do the former, but not the
latter. Concerning the Pleurisy; the Physician that gives such a purging
medicine, that works upward as well as downward, in such a disease, is much to
be blamed, for working against the rules of Physic. Quercetanus is so bold in
his Pharmacopoea, as to speak of such a cure, but not in a right Pleurisy, but
because that Book is full of lies, I will say no more but this, namely, that
neither he, nor Rulandus ever used the Antimoniall Cup, or the Regulus out of
which it is made, nor was Quercetanus his Aqua-benedicta made of it; for he
himself says plainly the contrary. Thirdly, he brings the book called
Basilica Antimonij, commending Antimony, but not the Cup: And to show how
largely these Alchymists speak, he says it cures the French Pox, Leprosy,
Gout, and Falling sickness, which never a one of them ever performed, and yet
the Basilica speaks of that preparation of Antimony that provokes sweating, as
well as of others. So I may say the like of Crollius, who commends the
Antimony, but not the Cup, and so Mylius, and Bornettus, who commends the
Antinomy, but not a word of the Cup. As for Mylius he is but a transcriber of
other men's works, and has compiled a mighty great volume without any judgment,
word by word out of Paracelsus, Quercetanus, and others, and has indifferently
put in true or false, whatsoever he found written, so I will not give a straw
for his opinion, when he commends the Antimony against diseases, which none of
them did ever cure. For Bornettus, I know him well, he wrote his Book, being
very young, and I do not think he believes, that the French Pox, and the
Leprosy may be cured by those means. Thus I have sifted all the authorities
of this man in the behalf of his Cup, which prove only that Antimony is an
excellent Medicine, powerful in operation, and too powerful in deed, but that
the Cup is the pure essence of it, none of them say, nor will any man that has
any skill in Chemistry ever affirm. Besides he brings some Physicians living
(and some very well known to me, but the greatest part I know not) who (as he
says) have approved his Cup: I will make a good interpretation of their
judgment, for without question the infusion of his Cup will will work, and
such bodies might be met withal, in which it has so powerfully wrought, that
being able to bear it, they have received much good by it, but that they have
said that his Cup was better and safer then other preparations of Antimony, or
then other purging medicines, and that a woman having bought it, has also
gained knowledge when, and in what diseases to apply it, I will not wrong their
judgment so much as to believe it.

Of the virtues of the Cup.
NOw to come to the virtues of the Cup, he makes a great list of all the
diseases for which it is good, naming almost all diseases that have need of
purging from head to foot, without distinction of the several causes of them,
the Cup is good for them, because it purges, and by the same reason all purging
medicines may do the like, and are good for the same diseases, for nature has
provided variety of remedies, some strong, some weaker, of all sorts, that the
Physician may choose what he thinks most fit for his Patient, for one and the
same remedy, in the same disease, is not fit for every one. When we read the
Books of Alchymists, they commend other remedies as much as Antinomy for the
same diseases. But let us a little consider some particular diseases named in
his Pamphlet, which I do except against; It cures perfectly the French Pox,
the Kings evil, the Falling sickness, as he says in the 9, 10, and 13th Mark,
which is false; nay I say more, it is a very gross mistake, and rash boldness
in him, or any man, to prescribe the infusion of this cup in the Plague, small
Pox, spotted Fever, and Purples; for all violent medicines that draw the
venomous humors of these diseases within the body, which nature does expel to
the circumference, do work against the rules of art. It is also false that any
vomit is good for the Pleurisy; and so I say the like of a Consumption: If the
Founder of this Cup had well known the nature of these diseases, he would
never have said so. Indeed where nature has need of purging or vomiting, this
Cup may serve, observing all that is to be considered in the use of those
evacuations; for we do not deny that it will work, but this we say, that it
being the worst and unsafest preparation of all others, it is better to use
some other then it, and all those diseases that he brings experience for,
(leaving out those that have been killed by it) might have been performed by
other vomits, made out of the Antimony, or other simples working the same
effect.

Of the manner of using the Cup.
NOw the manner of using the Cup shows the weakness of the man, he bids to
put the Cup into a pot, and cover it with liquor, to be above the Cup an inch
or two, then to boil it gently for two hours, and so to keep it warm for
twelve hours, then to take a cup full of it or more, and the quantity of his
liquor is a pint of wine for two, yet it works better, says he, if two or
three cup-fuls be taken; and he is bold to say, that it works without any
violence, gives counsel if it should work three or four days together, not to
stop it, and in the end to beware of counterfeit Cups. Here are as many errors
as words; First, it is needless to shape the Regulus into a Cup, seeing the
Wine is not to be infused in the Cup, but the Cup in the Wine in an earthen
pot. Is not a little lump of the same Regulus without any particular shape, as
good as a Cup of it? And if one do steep it, will it not think you infuse its
virtues into the liquor, as well as the Cup, and best of all if it were in
powder? But thus the Regulus had been bought too cheap, but we must have it a
Cup or a Ring (forsooth) to make the people believe it is not an ordinary
thing. Secondly, being thus prepared by boiling, makes the drink look so
distastfully, and makes it to lose its virtue, so as if a child has need of
half a pint, a strong man of two or three, as he says. Let the Reader go to
an Apothearies Shop in any part of the Kingdom, there he may find Stibium,
which is Antimony in glass, of this let him take six grains weight, let them
steep closely in two or three spoonefuls of white wind, and it will be every
whit as pure as it was without any taste, and it will work as well, and more
safely; but if you fear the Stibium, (not without cause) take as much of the
Regulus out of which he makes his Cup, use it as I have said, and it will work
in as little quantity. Yea steep the cup in a quart of wine close without any
fire, for a fortnight, give but two or three ounces of that Wine, and it will
work with a better effect. Thirdly, that it works without any violence, it is
not so, for I know many that have taken it, who have been grievously tormented
with it, and this is common to all vomits, yea even when they are provoked by
the strength of nature. 4ly, it is a pernicious counsel to suffer a
superpurgation, and Physic to work so long, if it happen well in some strong
bodies, it is not to be thought that it will do so in every one. The Last, to
beware of counterfeit Cups, is to keep the people continually bound to him; for
(says he) if it be broken, bring it to him in weight, and for ten shillings
he will give you a new one. This is the best trick of all his Book, a pound of
Antimony unprepared is hardly worth above six pence in the Druggisters Shop,
for 12 pence, or 18 pence more, of that pound one may have half a pound and
more of this Regulus, what at the casting of it into a Cup is worth, let any
body judge; in very deed three Cups of 4 or 5 ounces a piece, do not stand the
maker to above ten shillings. Besides when the Cup is broken, the virtues are
not broken, the pieces being steeped do retain the same virtue, and will work
the same effect, as when the Cup was whole. The metal then being so good
cheap, and the preparation of it so easy, there is no great fear of
counterfeit ones, for a counterfeit one is like to cost more then a right one.

To conclude, I say, though this Cup should be so admirable, yet it is beyond
the capacity of any that is not a Physician, to adapte the right use of it to
every person, for all diseases, times, and places, as we have said already; nor
do I think the Founder himself has the knowledge of these things.

COurteous Reader, Had I not been at too great distance from the press, these
errors of the Printer had been corrected in their several pages; my earnest
request is, that what I have here noted, being some of them such as do break
the sense, may be by thy pen corrected in their places, before thou set upon
the reading of the Book, as for his mistakes in the poynting, they may be more
easily amended in the perusal.

Errata.

IN the second paper of verses read (...) in the third paper of verses, for
paret read parat. p. 5. l. 8. r. Italy. p. 8. l. 4. r. from them that. p. 21.
l. 28. r. charlatans. p. 31. last line r. Radish. p. 48. l. 1. r out. p. 55. l.
19. for birth. r. growth. p. 70. l. 28. r. of the joints. p. 82. l. 1. for of
the contents r. the contents of. p. 87. l. 1. r. Montanus p. 91. l. 25. leave
out as. p. 94 l. 20. for there r. the p 95. l. 11. r. are called melting. p.
96. l. 29. for now r. more. 104. l. 13. r. patient. p. 115. l. 20. for not r.
hot. p. 136. l. 24. for thereof r. therefore 143. l. 20. for his r. him. p.
157. l. 26. r juice. p. 166. l. 15. r. Gordonies. p. 178. l 6. r. some have in
them. p 208. l. 14. for stone of the kidneys r. the nephriticall stone. p. 217.
l. 9. for out of r. with. p. 220. l. 16. r. do not more. p 222. l. 10. leave
cut not. p. 224. l. 6. leave cut not. p. 229. l. 17. for fears r. fevers p.
236. l. 12. r. chenge its veitues, p. 261. l. 19 leave out and. p. 276. l. 6.
r. have taken a Cartharticke, p. 279. l. 29. r. after the working. p. 295. l.
7. r. into two large. p. 332. l. 20. leave out that. p. 336. l. 13, for be r.
being p. 338. l. 15. for who, r. which. p. 338 l. 22. For eminent, r imminent.
p. 346. l. 15 r. pracedent. p. 361. l, 28. for crest, r. crust. p. 387. l. 2.
for yet Philonium r. that Philonium p 389. l. 5. read the Ancients p. 407. l.
13. r washed. p. 419 l. 20. r. because of the spirits. p. 448. l, 17. r rarity.
p 441. l. 6. r which God works. p. 444. l. 7, 8, 9 r. thus, but them that are
weak and such as do vomit hardly, it does wonderfully gripe and torment, for
howsceven it be prepared, it never lays aside its malignant and deadly quality
p 415. l. 6. r. Mercurius vita. l 24. r. more true in mineralls. p. 446. l. 27
r. Quercetanus p. 447. l. 15. for yet r. yea. p. 448. l. 4. r. strains the
head, etc. p 451. l. 24. for Rugulus r. Repulus. p. 454. l. 3. for as. r. or l.
6. for has r. had. p. 455. l. 23. and 24. r. never a one of which it ever
performed, p. 456. l. 8. and 9. r. none fo which is did ever cura.

The Table of the Contents.
The first Book. Which concerns Physicians.
OF Physicians in general. Chap. 1. Of Doctors of Physic chap. 2. Of the
servants of Physicians, and of Apothecaries that practice Physic c. 3. Of
Ministers that practice Physic c. 4. Of Women that practice Physic, and
Chyrurgery. c. 5. Of Mountibanks. c. 6. Of the Mountibankes Antidote c. 7. Of
the Balsom, and of the ointment of the Mountibancke. c. 8. Of them that call
themselves professors of Paracelsus his art c. 9. That a Physician ought to be
skillful in Surgery. 10 Whether a Physician may make up his own medicine or no
c. 11. Of them that are thought to have some secrets. 12. Of Physicians that
are thought to be luckey and fortunate c. 13. Of Physicians which are thought
to be men of expeperience c. 14. Of many that peep into urines, handle pulses,
and prescribe purges c. 15. Of them that promise an easy cure of the French
pox. c. 16.
The second Book. Of the Errors about some diseases, and the knowledge of
them.
OF the deceitful judgment of Vrines chap. 1. That the sex, and a woman's
being with child cannot be discerned by urine; whereof a certain story c. 2.
The solution of the arguments that seem to favor looking into Vrines c. 3. A
troubled urine in diseases is not always a good sign c. 4. That the
consumption cannot be known by the urine c. 5. Of the Consumption c. 6.
Whether the Plague be infections or no c. 7. Whether it be lawful to fly in
the time of plague or no. c. 8. What kind of death may be prevented by the help
of Physic c. 9. Whether intermitting fevers, commonly called Agues be
cureable or no c. 10. That the heat of the liver cannot be known by the
heat of the palm of the hand c. 11 Of them that complain of an hot liver,
but a cold stomach c. 12. That the Husband cannot breed his wives child. c.
13. Whether foreign Physicians and Alieus can know the temper of the sick of
ano^^ey Country. c. 14. Of them that refer almost all diseases to a cold. c.
15.
The third Book. Of the Errors about the Diet, as well of the sound as the
Sick.
OF the goodness of waters c. 1. That the linen of the sick ought often to
be changed. c. 2. Of Lessius his diet-booke c. 3. That not a full but a
slender diet is convenient for the sick c. 4. Of the quality of meats about
the sick c. 5, Of the time of using meats c. 6. Of the drink called a Posset
c. 7. That the decoction and broth of an old cock is not well preserved for
nourishment c. 8. That gold is in vain boiled in broth, for them that are in a
consumption c. 9. That milk mixed with water is good for those that are in
consumptions c. 10 That the common proverb is false, that milk washed from the
liver c. 11. That strong beer or ale should not be drunk in the the morning
fasting c. 12. That strong waters are ill taken after gross meats to help
concoction c. 13. That Midwives do ill, who give to women in childbed nothing
but hot drinks c. 14. Two errors about the choice of Nurses c. 15. That
strong drinks are ill permitted to children. c. 16. That solid meat ought not
to be given to children, before the coming forth of their teeth. c. 17. That a
man may drink liberally for healths sake c. 18. That red cloths are not to be
preferred before others for the voiding of the Measills c. 19. That many do
ill, who endeavor to drive away a disease beginning, by labor c. 20.
The Fourth Book. Of the Errors of the People about the use of remedies.
OF them that despise those remedies that are chymically prepared chap. 1. That
the use of Mineralls is not to be rejected. c. 2. Of them that attribute to
much to Chymicall remedies c. 3. That the remedies are not to be changed,
although the cures do not presently follow c. 4. Of them that reject all
remedies if they be not presently cured c. 5. That remedies are not to be
rejected for their unpleasantnesse c. 6. Whether homegrowing remedies be
sufficient for any Country c. 7. Of those that fear to be let blood, and purge
least they accustom themselves to it c. 8. That no regard is to had of the
Stars for letting of blood and purging c. 9. Of the ridiculous Physical
observations of Almanacke-makers c. 10. That it not hurtful to purge in the
dogge-dayes. c. 11. That purgations are often to be reiterated. c. 12. That
purging pills should not be taken after supper c. 13. That Physical potions
may not only be taken hott but cold also c. 14. That it is not hurtful to
take cold drinks on the day of purgation c. 15. Of them that will never be
purged but in the beginning of the spring c. 16. That purging ought not to be
rejected, although the sick do not eat no meat c. 17. That a purge is not
much to be disliked because some times it is cast back by vomit c. 18. That
purging ought not to be feared, although there be a flux of the belly c. 19.
That the use of Clysters is void of danger. c. 20 That Clysters are not well
injected by bladders. 21. Of vomits, that possets ought not to be drunk
immediately after one has taken a vomit. c. 22. That old men may be blouded
without danger c. 23. That it is but a vain thing to be so curious in the
choice of the veins in the arm c. 24. That it were better to observe the
quantity of blood by measure, then by ounces, pounds, and weights. c. 25. That
sleep and drink ought not to be wholly forbidden after bloodding c. 26. That
bloodding and purging is not hurtful for women with child c. 27. That Physic
is good for women in childbed. c. 28. That it not hurtful to take quickesilver
by the mouth c. 29. That quickesilver even without any proparation is
unhurtfull c. 30. Of Tobacco c. 31. Of the right use of Tobacco c. 32. That the
fume of Tobacco does not go up into the brain c. 33. Whether Tobacco be a
preservative against the plague or no c. 34. Of the unseasonable use of
Cordialls c. 35. Of the Errors about the Bezaar stone c. 36. Of the the
temperature and dose of the Bezaars stones c. 37. Of the Unicorns horn c. 38.
Of certain distilled waters ordained amiss for to drive away fevers c. 39.
That julips and other cooling potions ought to be administered in a large dose
c. 40. That the stone of the bladder cannot be dissolved taken by the mouth c.
41. That the worms of the belly are not presently to be killed in fevers c.
42. That Cinomon is not well prescribed to stay women's fluxes c. 43. That Opium
rightly prepared ought not to be feared c. 44. Of remedies that are applied to
the head to provoke sleep c. 45. That fomentations made with bladders are but
of small efficacy c. 46. Of the applying of young whelps and pigeons to the
soles of the feet c. 47. Of the Weapon ointment c. 48. Of the curing of the
Kings evil by the touch of the seventh Son c. 49. Of the Antimoniall Cup
c. 50.
The End of the Table.
These Books following are printed for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at
the South-Entrance of the Royal Exchange.
1. BIshop Downame of Justification, in fol.

2. Survey of London, in fol. containing the Original Increase, Modern
Estate, and Government of the City, Methodically set down.

3. Clavis Mystica, a Key opening diverse difficult and mysterious places of the
Holy Scripture, in 70. Sermons, by Dr. Daniell Featly.

4. An Explanation of the general Epistle of Jude, in 41. Sermons, by Samuel
Oats.

5. The Surgeons Mate, or Military, Domestique Surgery, by John VVoodall.

6. The Merchants Mirror, or Directions for the perfect ordering and keeping
his Accounts, framed by way of Debtor and Creditor, as likewise a complete
Journall, and Ledger appertaining thereunto, as likewise two other waste books,
by Richard Dasforne.

7. Perkins on the Revelations, on the three first Chapters, in fol.

8. Monroses Expedition for War, in fol.

9. Apprentices Time Entertainer, or the Art of Accomptantship, by Richard
Dafforne.

10. Beams of Divine Light, by Dr. Sibbs, in 21. Sermons.

11. Light from Heaven, discovering, The Fountain opened, Angels Acclamations,
Churches Riches, Rich Poverty, by Dr. Sibs, Dr. in Divinity.

12. Evangelicall Sacrifice, in 19. Sermons, by Dr. Sibs.

13. The Dippers dipped, or the Anabaptists ducked or plunged over head and
ears, at a disputation in Southwarke. The sixth Edition, by Daniell Featly D.
in Divinity.

14. Vertumnus Romanus, or a discourse penned by a Popish Priest, wherein he
endeavors to prove, that it is lawful for a Papist in England, to go to the
Protestant Church to receive the Communion, to take the Oath of Allegiance and
Supremacy: Answered by Daniell Featly Dr. in Divinity.

15. The Saints Qualification, or a Treatise of Humiliation in 10. Sermons. Of
Sanctification in 9. Sermons. Whereunto is added, a Treatise of Communion in
the Sacrament, in three Sermons, by Dr. Preston.

16. Golden Scepter, the Churches Marriage, and the Churches Calling, in three
Sermons, by Doctor Preston.

17. A godly and learned Treatise of Prayer, which both contains in it the
doctrine of Prayer, and shows the practice of it, in the exposition of the
Lords Prayer, by George Downame Dr. in Divinity.

18. A Treatise against Lying, by John Downame.

19. A Commentary upon the first and second Chapters of St. Paul to the
Collossians, by Paul Bayne, Batch. in Divinity.

20. The Treasure of Traffic, by Lewis Roberts Merchant.

21. The Faith of the Church of England, by Francis Tailor.

22. The Ecclesiastical discipline of the reformed Churches in France.

23. The Circle of Commerce, or the Balance of Trade by Edward Miselden
Merchant.

24. A relation of the Christians in the world, by Ephraim Pagget.

25. Englands Safety, in Trades increase, by Henry Robbinson.

26. Englands Royal Fishing revived, a computation as well, of the charge of a
bushel of Herring Fishing, as the profit thereby, by Edward Sheep.

27. A true Narration of the Royal Fishing, by Simon Smith.

28. The Abridgement of D. Prestons Works, contracted for the comfort and
benefit of weaker Christians, by William Jennet.

29. The cure of the Plague by an Antidote called Aurum vitae.

30. Circles of Proportion, by William Butread.

31. Websters Tables for Interest direct, and to rebate, at 8, 7, 6. per
centum, with the valuations of Annuities and Leases.

32. Handmayd to Devotion, by Dr. Featly.

33. Dr. Featleys Catechism.

34. Dr. Preston of Gods All Sufficiency.

35. Dr. Preston of Faith and Love.

36. Dr. Preston of Prayer.

37. Dr. Prestons Golden Scepter.

38. Dr. Preston of the Attributes of God.

39. Spencers Logic in English.

40. The Phrygian Fabulist, or Esops Fables in English.

41. Concordance, to bind with the Bible in all volumes, fol. 4o. 8o. and 12.
for the small Bible.

42. Anatomy of Play, or the hatefulness of it manifested.

43. A volume of Funeral Sermons, set forth by Dr. Featley, Dr. Day, Dr. Sibs,
Dr. Tailor.

44. Threefold resolution, Earths vanity, Hells horror, and Heavens felicity,
by Dr. Denison.

45. Oats on the whole Epistle of St. Jude, in fol.

46. Annotations upon all the Bible, now almost finished, by diverse Reverend
Divines, with large Additions.

47. Sutton on the Romans, 4o.

48. Sutton on the Sacrament.

49. Suttons Learn to live and dye, in two volumes.

50. Mr. Yates Saints sufferings.

51. Youth Guide.

52. Done against Atheism.

53. Covenant of Grace.

54. Wishart on the Lords Prayer.

55. Dr. Primrese on the Sacrament. 12o.

56. Hudsdon on the Creed, 12o.

57. Bills of Lading for Merchants, English, French, Dutch.

58. Bills of debt.

FINIS.

