THE PROCTOR AND PARATOR their Mourning: OR, The lamentation of the Doctors
Commons for their Downfall. Being a true Dialogue, Relating the fearful abuses
and exorbitancies of those spiritual Courts, under the names of Sponge the
Proctor, and Hunter the Parator.



Printed in the year 1641.

THE PARATOR and the Proctor.
Hunter the Parator. MAster Sponge, how goes the world with you now-a-dayes?
What? have you good store of gain come in? Do Clients flock about you, as
Bees about a Tarre-pot? Its now full Term, you may line your pockets with
Cash; make them pay deerly that come for your help: for I think it is the
only way to make men live in quietness, to beggar them with long suits and
large fees.


Sponge the Proctor. Well, well mad Hunter, we have had brave times, I
confess, and I have not spared to cut large thongs of other men's hides: we had
almost gotten the whole power into our own hands; but now I protest, the
Devil I think owed us a mischief: for these times are worse for us then
Dog-dayes be for sick folks; but how rides the rack with you? for you keep
compassing the City, as the Devil does the earth, to torment poor men.


Hunter. Compassing, say you? I compass ground enough, I confess; and not
long since have gotten good booty from transgressors against holy days, of
Chandlers, Alehouses, Tavernes, Tobacco-shops, Butchers, Comfitmakers,
Gunsmiths, Bakers, Brokers, Cooks, Weavers, and diverse other malefactors
against our terrible Canons and Jurisdiction: for had I but given them a severe
look, I could by that means have made them draw their purses, or else they
knew whither they were to be fetched up with a Coram Nomine. I have put 80 of
these fearful Birds into one net, and I always held correspondency with the
Clarks of Parishes, so that I could stand by a pillar in the Church, and hear
them all excommunicated at once, by the poor Curate, who durst not disobey for
fear of the mighty command of the Judges of the Courts, whose awful
injunctions were as formidable to such 10. li. a year fellows, as Canon shot
to young Seamen. Ah Mr. Sponge, you know what prizes I have fetched into the
harbors. I tell you the name of the Doctors Commons was as terrible to these,
as Argier is to Gally-slaves.


Sponge. For my part I always covenanted with the Parator my setter, and paid
him, but I sat at home like one of the Spanish Inquisitors, and framed
Interrogatories against them that he brought in, all my care was to make sure
work with them, I had a way to chain them as fast in our Purgatories, as
thieves are in Newgate, or as blind Bears are to a stake, while we went about,
and whipped them soundly.


Hunter. I Will assure you, if the tide had kept on, I had intended to have done
some great matter or other: for I had several ways to get wealth by, as by
Popish Recusants, by Seminary Priests, for concealing their haunts, and diverse
of their holy Nuns, and young Novices which harbor in several places in and
about the town, whose starting holes I knew as well as themselves. I got no
small trading by the Brownists, Anabaptists, and Familists, who love a Barn
better then a Church, and would come off roundly and secretly, with good
feelings, whose disciples for the most part are females, and yet often decline
to the common gender: but I had diverse other courses to fetch in coin; how
dreadful has my citation been to poor Curats, Lecturers, and Schoolmasters
Ushers, that have been willing to officiate their places without licenses; and
though they had general licenses, yet I knew how to fetch them into captivity
for special licenses, which was gainful to you Mr. Sponge, though their
places were scarce worth the charges for taking out their licenses.


Sponge. IN faith Hunter thou say true, I have had many a good fee by thy
procurement, 'twas sweet fishing in troubled waters, 'twas best for us when men
sinned most: what bribes have I had for purgations beyond those of Physicians or
Mountebanks? Country wenches would sell their peticoats rather to pay us, then
to endure a white sheet; how have we thriven by their wantonness? we would
take what we pleased, 'twas but complying with the Surrogate, or bribing the
Judges Clarke, and at last sum up all with an Iujungimus coram Iudice
competente.


Hunter. O the thought of my quondam employments, with the constant in comes
that I had by my general usurpation! for I picked something out of all
professions by right or wrong, makes my heart doubt that our best times are
gone: now what a fool was I Mr. Sponge, that would not make nay when the Sun
shined? I protest what I got unjustly, I spent as lavishly. I am afraid that
beggary, if not disgrace, will accompany my old age: I knew how to fetch coin
from Lecturers, who as I made them believe, would be silenced because they
supplied their places too diligently; nay, I have got well too by some of their
auditors for leaving their own parish Churches and Ministers, and gadding
after strangers. I lost not all neither by giving Informations and intelligence
to the Bishops Pursevants, to find out the covies of many that were hidden,
and heard Sermons in private, for feate of the censure of the high Commission,
and of going to prison. An old Hare had not more muses to deceive the hounds,
then I had to receive cash by deceiving the people.


Sponge. O brave, and experienced controuler, I did not come much short of you:
for I tied my followers in cases of the Courts, as fast as birds be in lime
twigs; when a cause has been ready for sentence and small determination, I knew
what to say and do to the Judge. It was but by getting the case put off, as I
would pretend for the good of my Clyent. I knew how to get an order, in pro^:
but while I pretended his good, I intended my own profit. We had ways to
persuade men to make appeals from the Archdeacons Courts to the Chancellors,
from the Chancellors to the Bishops, from that to the Archbishops, from that to
the Delegates, and high Commission, and here we cooped them in as surely as so
many Foxes do so many Geese: for these two Courts are our rendevouz, we
accounted them our Bear-gardens for to worry men's purses; I am persuaded we
tormented them almost as bad as the Devil did Job. Men that appealed, did as
fish do, who leap out of the frying pan into the fire.


Hunter. I know that you knew all the toiles to catch men: I protest, I hold
the Proctors to be worse then Sergeants, and the Doctors Commo^s as dangerous
a den as either the Poultry or Woodstreet Counter: for here men are tormented
because they want money, but in the Commons they are punished most for having
too much money: the Counters take birds in, that almost want feathers, this
place receives such as are over-laden with feathers: the Counters afford some
relief to men that are undone, but the Commons take away relief from men that
they may be undone. Ah, Mr. Sponge, you know that Horsleeches do not more
eagerly suck blood from men's bodies, then you do money from their purses. Such
as came up with crammed bags full of silver in one term, you knew how to
metamorphose silver into a little parchment, and a red seal* it was well if
they could put up Johannes Lamb, legum Doctor and Miles, into an office box, it
made not much for Jacobusses in their purses, so that they could but show his
Injungimus and mandamus when they returned home.


Sponge. In troth (Hunter) though men might have learned wit by others
sufferings, yet people would flock to us as so many simple Ducks to a Decoy; we
had almost taught all England to be Courtiers, no day in the week but we had
one return or other, we feared no vacation as long as women could talk: for
there would be matter of defamation to work upon by their scolding; we got
great employment by women's tongues, too much talking and lying (I mean) on
their backs. Bow Church in Cheapside was the place of our imbatrailing for the
Arches, where we got well by balling out upon Domine Iudex, Domine Index.
Surely that Chancell had need to be new consecrated: for it was soundly
polluted by scolding, railing, lying, dissembling, foysting, cogging, jeering,
false latin, and corrupt judgment. Smithfield could scarce afford so many
cheating Horse coursers on a friday, as we could Counselors. Doctors,
Proctors, Advocates, Clerks, public Notaries, Registers, Pursevants, and such
Beagles as you are, Hunter, whom we accounted as so may Panders to our
spiritual courts, or like so many Egyptian flies that would be busy to spoil
a good cause by false oaths and a quart of Sack to enrich their poluted noses
with Carbuncles and Rubies. Is not this true?


Hunter. True say you: well Sir, we had our private gains that we merely guld
you of* for how many fruitful Lasses have we made use of, and have got good
moneys for concealing them from your Courts? we did as much knavery under
deckes, as you could practice above board* all Gristes came not to your Mills;
if the wenches, were either willing, or rich, or handsome, we gave them liberty
to use their own by our concealment, we had ways enough to keep them out of
your purlues, but if they were old, deformed, and half rotten; and poor, then
we would put them into your places of trial; so that alas! we gave you the
offals, but kept the choice bits for our own palats, thinking that old Bawds
and crafty Proctors were best bawling together.


Sponge. Alas! simple gull, do you suppose that our revenues came in but at one
door? we had the chief enquartering in that large Cathedral, where our
Radamanths sat in their Pontificalibus, as at Consistories, the Courts of
Audience, the Court of Faculties, the Prerogative, the high Commission these
Court days, together with the Court of Admiralty, were our Halcyon days:
these were our full Marts, Bees were never more busy when they swarm, then
we Hornets and Caterpillars were at these times: the cackling and number of
Jack-dawes upon the steeple, were not equal to us in the Church: you should
have heard such a humming and buzzing in our Courts, that the noise at Babels
confusion, or at the routing an Army, did scarce exceed it. Oh how terribly
have I sweat in yawling to the Judge, not so much desiring to be heard, as to
keep up the noise. No kennell of hounds has been heard with deeper notes or
louder throats: for we had good setters, and those that would pay any thing to
hear and see us busy to no purpose, though we might as well have been absent
as our Clients themselves, and lived more quietly and honestly.


Hunter. Nay, stand not boasting too much of your own happiness you dealt by
the Judges as we did by you, you lived all the year upon their corruptions,
and we thrive by yours: for as the Proctor is the Judges honey pot, so the
Parator is the Proctors; as the Judge will starve a cause without a feeling, so
a Proctor will wart a cause without a Parator. Hereupon we do usually receive
some bribe for a new years gift, and the Judge he expects a good piece of plate
for his favor showed in ending causes according to the Proctors desire: so
that in plain terms the Proctors must fee the Parator to bring in game, and
he must fee the Judge to keep them fast when they are in. But now Mr. Sponge,
let us leave off this, and talk of some thing else: I pray you what news hear
you of late?


Sponge. Pish, what do ask me of news? I had thought thou had brought
in some Will to prove, or to procure some license for some peccant Wench or
other that has been a Merchant Adventurer before she has had all her tackling
fitted; or else that thou had brought me notice of some zealous honest
Minister that preaches twice a day, and above an hour at a time: some of those
that will not Christen a child with the sign of the cross, or not wear a
Surplice, a Cap, and Hood; or one that would not read the book of lawful
recreations, or such a man as will prove the Sunday to be a Sabbath, or will
not read second Service at the Altar, or not bow at the name of Jesus, or else
who does speak against our Courts, or preaches against double beneficed men, or
Organs, or Copes, singing men, or the like: This, this had been something, I
would have trounc'd him in our Courts, I would have framed as many Articles
against such a man, as that Accuser the Divill could.


Hunter. Prithee bear a little, Mr. Sponge: thou know what service I have
done thee this way, but now I dare not so much as question any such, for so I
might quickly have enough about me. Alas know Mr. Sponge, you and I must be
very cautelous how we move those things: do you know that those rags and
relics of Romes superstition are derided? how they are laughed at by
Apprentises; in faith, let them that will wear them, maintain them: for I see
how the whole body of our rich Clergy are now put to it, they cannot uphold
them; and I fear the Doctors of the Commons will be fetched before their
betters in Parliament, touching such needless points, if not soundly fined to
the King for so unjustly defending them. I do ^hink it will go as hardly with
our Judges for these things, as it does with the Judges for maintaining the
lawfulness of Ship Money. Ah! indeed when things were not so strictly looked
into by wise Senators, then we might; but now, since things are better ordered
by the honorable Parliament assembled, it is folly to look after those
matters: though I confess it is one of the greatest batteries that has been
made against our profession; but we must bear. I am afraid of hard times, I
think it is best for me turn Cobbler or Chimney sweper, to get something
quietly, then to run such hazards.


Sponge. Faith Hunter, me thinks ever since the Parliament has sitten, I have
not seen that courage and authority in our Judges, as before; there is no such
flocking to Lambeth as there had wont to be, now the supporter of the Doctors
Commons is gone to the Tower, all his favorites are mainly decayed. It is but
a Roman fashion, if the Doctors of the Commons double beneficed men and
Proctors be soundly punished and fined. Trajan the Emperor when he knew the
people squiezed and oppressed them, then would he suffer the oppressors of them
to be retalliated. Now our Doctors and the rest have been large this way: they
may justly expect a requital. I doubt me the payment of such fines will be a
case clean contrary to their consciences.


Hunter. I do not much fear: for I have nothing to lose, I am sure of it I can
plead, that I have done a great deal of service to my country, in causing old
fornicators and adulterers, who usually fell into dirty ditches, to mend and
repair the high ways, and to make good cawsies for prevention for time to
come; witness the high way betwixt Wells and Glastenbury, and betwixt
Liechfield and Coventry, and many other places which are now made serviceable
by my informing against other men's sins. What say you to this diligence of
mine?


Sponge. Alas! your labor is nothing to what I have done in the Prerogative
Court, by protracting a cause concerning a Will: first, I have made them prove
a forged will communi forma, and then protracting the cause, after 12 years
space I have made them prove it per testes, and then to discharge the forged
will so proved, thus, with Annihilamus, Cassamus, and irritamus, and pro nihilo
habemus Rogeri, etc. And by this course I have made work for Westminster Hall
Practitioners for the space of seventy years after: a captivity long enough to
be endured by any (as I suppose) in those Law Toils, which are as troublesome
to poor Clyents, as Iron Fetters be to captived prisoners.


Hunter. Well, well, Master Sponge, let us not boast too loudly of these
exploits, there are so many overseers now, that it is best if we can sleep in
a whole skin; I shall desire thus much, that you would pray that I may not be
caught in my own snares, and I will do so much for you that if possibly it
may, that you may escape a general squeezing, but I fear that both of us
shall smart for our faults already committed.


Sponge. We must endure it, for there is no hopes of escape, and a man had as
good almost be hanged at home, as drowned or hanged abroad: well, I will give
my self a general suspension from practice as yet; and if I escape this
storm, I shall think my self happy for ever; and so farewell Hunter, for you
see how our Doctors Commons is more like a desolate wilderness for wild
beasts, then men; no Clyents appear to us in our Circles, and this certainety
of the Triennial Parliament cuts our combs for ever doing any great exployts
for aftertimes.


Hunter. I am sorry to see these days, but yet I will not cast away hope, for
if all fails, He turn Journey man to Gregory the hang man, for it is reported
he has great trading; any thing rather then stand out, better live by a Rope
then by the Pope.


FJNJS.

