A PROPHECY Of the Life, Reign, and Death of WILLIAM LAUD, Archbishop of
Canterbury: By an Exposition on part of the 13. and 15. Chapters of the
REVELATION of JOHN.

Wherein the sum of all his actions are foretold, his name nominated, his
correspondency with the Pope, his cruelty to the Church, and the strange
wonders declared, which in his time should be done by fire from heaven: and his
Courts, Seals, Marks, yea the very Monopolies all clearly foreshewed: Also how
by the supreme Council he shall be put to death; after which they shall rejoice,
and obtain a final victory over the Papists in Arms against them.

Amos 3. 8. The LORD has spoken, who can but prophecy? Perused and Allowed.

travesty portrait of William Laud

Printed for R. A. 1644.

A Prophecy of the Life, Reign, and Death of the Archbishop of CANTERBURY: in
an Exposition on part of the 13. and 15. Chapter of the Revelation of John.
THis Prophecy begins in an Exposition on the 13 Chapter of the Revelation of
John, Verse 11. where he says, I beheld another beast. John saw the
Antichristian Bishop of Rome rise out of the sea; that is, the great Beast,
Verse. 1. but this is not that Beast, but another, and yet a very Beast, another
Antichrist,

Coming out of the earth] The other Beast was to be raised out of those
Cardinals that are in the Sea of Rome, but William Laud, this Beast, was to
come up out of a Protestant Church, where Popery was buried; and to act in the
raising of those dead ashes to life, to bring in Popery again.

And he had two hornes] Those two horns are the two seats wherein he sat
Judge, the one in temporal matters, and the other in spiritual; and thus by
the High Commission, the Spiritual Court, the Star Chamber, and other places
where he sat in Judgment, he pushed, and caused to be imprisoned, whipped,
pillori'd, stigmatized, and the ears to be cut off of diverse godly people that
came before him.

Like a Lamb] Thus: 1. As a Lamb is little, so the Archbishop is a little man.
As a Lamb is of a meek nature, so he has always made a show as if he had
been a meek man. 3. As a Lamb couples not with a Ram, but follows the Ewe, so
the Archbishop would not marry, but follows the Church. And lastly, as a Lamb
pretends to be a type of Christ, so has he always pretended to do all things
in the name of Christ.

And he spoke as a Dragon] At the opening of the Dragons mouth comes forth
poison: and thus the poison of Asps has been always under his tongue; and in
all his actions were great cruelty against Gods people; and the Saints that
came before his Judgment Seat, became like a prey to the Dragon.

Verse. 12. He exercised all the power of the first Beast before him] The first
Beast, that is, the Pope, sent the other Beast, that is, William Laud
Archbishop of Canterbury, a Cardinals Hat, and approved and authorized all his
doings: particularly to those Jesuits and Priests about the Queen; to the new
Book of Common Prayer to be sent into Scotland; and those things which were of
greatest moment, he usually had the approbation and authority of the Pope of
Rome for the doing of them, just as John's Revelation foretells.

And caused the earth, and them that dwell therein, to worship the first Beast]
Thus he caused Altars of earth and stone to be set up, Ceremonies to be brought
in, and the people to be compelled to idolatry and superstition, according to
the Popes Decrees.

Whose deadly wound was healed] This wound was given (not to the Archbishop of
the Protestant Church, but) to the Pope, in the Reign of King Henry the eight,
and healed again by Queen Mary; but Queen Elizabeth gasht open that deadly
wound here, by settling the Protestant Religion again; and this deadly wound the
Archbishop had healed in part, so as he made the Popish Church to look up again
and live; but not perfectly to cure her wound, for it is deadly.

Verse. 13. And he does great wonders] The Archbishop has not only done
wonders, but made England a wonder to all Nations.

So that he makes fire come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of men]
The idolatry, and superstition, and other wonderful things by which he caused
the Church to sin against God, provoked the Lord to send down fire from heaven
on the earth, in the sight of men: particularly,

Verse. 14. And deceives them that dwell on the earth] The Archbishop has been
a notable deceiver; for whilst he did always pretend to cast out Popery and
faction, he endeavored nothing more then to bring it in, and settle it amongst
us.

By the means of those miracles he had power to do in the sight of the Beast]
The miracles which he has done are many, in the eyes of Rome and all the Popes
Dominions, of whom he was admired: 1. For procuring of so many Priests and
Jesuits to live in England by toleration. 2. That he brought in Popery so
fast, and by so great a power. 3. For over-topping so many Parliaments, and
causing them to be dissolved. 4. For establishing of such strange Canons, as
were by him authorized, after the Parliament was dissolved: and many other
things that he did, which were very wonderful in the sight of the Pope.

Saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make an Image to the
Beast] That is, to those of the Archbishops own mould, who came up out of the
earth, Verse. 11. That is, the Popish and Prelaticall Convocation; and there it
was where he took such pains to frame those wicked Canons, which were the very
image of the Popes own Canons.

Which had the wound by a sword, and did live] Although the wound was deadly,
Verse. 12. yet the Beast had breath again here by the Archbishops means, and
did live: and he did all he could to heal this wound, Verse. 12. that so the
Beast might come to that vigor, and strength again in England, as in Queen
Mary's days. And in that this wound is said to be given with a sword, it may
have relation to that sword sent by the Pope to K. Henry 8. since which the
Kings of England are called Defenders of the Faith.

Verse. 15. And he had power to give life to the Image of the Beast] And thus
the Archbishop had authority from the King for the establishing of the Canons:
the image of the Popes own Canons, as is before expressed on Ver. 14. procured
contrary to the Laws of the Land.

That the image of the Beast should both speak and cause that as many as would
not worship the image of the Beast, should be killed] By what those Canons
speak, and the Archbishop in them, it is plain, that he intended to put to
death all that would not submit to the said Canons. Boys rose against those
Canons, against his own house, and for that Bensted was hanged, drawn and
quartered: men opposed them in the High Commission, and for that M. Quatermaine
was arraigned, and the Archbishop sought his life. The Parliament voted against
them, and for that the Lord Kimbolton and the five Members were articled
against for Traitors. And thus the wars began, and all that oppose them they
endeavor to kill: and many a precious Saint has been killed for opposing
these followers of the Beast, that fight and kill the Saints, because they will
not worship the image of the Beast.

Verse. 16. And he caused all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and
bond, to receive a marke] That is, let them be who they will that come before
him, it is all one; they must be sure to be pushed with his horns, spoken of
Verse. 11. except they have his mark, and that mark was made two ways.

1 In their right hands] That is, by bribes; not by covenanting and making
promises to him, but by bringing their bribes with them in their hands. This
downright way of bribing was one: the other mark was,

2 In their foreheads] This was very notable in the Archbishop, that when any
man ever came before him to be judged in any case, if he frowned upon him, and
bended his brows, that was a mark of his favor; but if he smiled on him, then
the Archbishop was sure to give judgment against him: so the second mark was
the bending of his brows, it was put for them upon his forehead.

Verse 17. And that no man might buy or sell] There was no man more active in
the procuring of Monopolies from the King, then the Archbishop? he was a
carnal man, for poor tradesmen could not have their free liberty of trade for
him; ad no man must enjoy his own free trade.

1 Said he that had the marke] The Patentees had marks to set upon iron;
Butterfirkins, and every thing else, before any man was suffered to buy or sell
the same, or else,

2 The name of the Beast] that is, he must be a Prelate as the Beast is* And
indeed, there were none free but they who were grown to so high a pitch, that
none durst meddle with them, what ever oppression they brought upon the
subjects; they would be sure to be free themselves.

And if they had not the Patentees mark nor the Prelates, then they must not
buy nor sell those wares, except they had

3 The number of his name] that is* Will. Laud, the Archbishops: which is the
number of the Beast as appears in the 18. verse next following.

Verse 18. Here is wisdome] it is a rare thing to find this out: and yet there
is a way to find this out.

Let him that has understanding count the number of the Beast] but he must
count it, when he that is the Beast is suspected, he must have something to
count upon; and then let him that has skill in Arithmetic take out all the
figures out of that name which he subscribeth, who is suspected to be the
Beast, and count the same which that number amounts to.

For it is the number of a man, and his number is six hundred sixty six] now it
is plain, that this, is the Archbishop, he writes his name thus: Will. Laud.

And if we take the number of his name thus written, it will amount to just six
hundred sixty six, the just number of this Beast here spoken of, as is here
expressed.

W. is V. twice, that is, 10 I. is a figure of 1 LL. is twice 50. that is, 100
L. is once 50 A. is no numerall letter. V. is 5. more, 5 D. Stands for 500
Which in all amounts to the just sum of 666
And thus you see that Will. Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, both by his
actions, and also by his name, appears to be the Beast here spoken of, called
by John another Beast: verse 11. John speaks again of the destruction of this
Beast in the 15. Chapter of the Revellation, where he says,

Verse 2. I saw as it were a sea of glasse] the Parliament assembled may be
compared to glass, for the clearenesse of their Judgments; I think I offend
not, if I say they are the wisest Assembly that ever sat since the Apostles
days, and they are properly called a Sea because all the fountains of the
Kingdoms flow thither; so that I say the Parliament are fitly called a Sea of
glass. But further they are mingled with fire] they may be fitly compared to
fire because they purge out the Popish dross, and other grievances are
purifying, and reforming the Church and State; but that this is to be done by
fire, argues some difficulty in this work, which in truth appears at this day
by the unhappy wars which the Beast of England and his fellow-Prelats; having
joined with the Beast of Rome, have raised war against the Parliament, and it
is come to a bloody and cruel war, but (through Gods goodness in the end:
when Gods good time is come) we shall see that the Parliament are

Them that have gotten the victory over the Beast, and over his image, and over
his mark, and over the number of his name] The victory must be complete, the
Beast must die, his image must be defaced, there must be no such tyranizing
over the conscience as was in the Bishops Canons. All Monopolies must be taken
away, all bribing and injustice cast out, all secret Letters of favor to the
prejudice of the State, all pride in the Clergy, and sinister respects must be
laid aside before this victory be complete, and then the Parliament

Stand on the Sea of the glass, having the harps of God] that is, all Gods
people shall flow to them in peace, and shall find a sweet and joyful answer
to all their addresses.

First, they (shall) sing the song of Moses the servant of God] which he sung,
when the Israelites were delivered out of Egypt, and their Enemies destroyed in
the red Sea, which song is written Exodus 15. 1.

Verse 3. Secondly, They shall sing the song of the Lamb] which song follows
in the next words,

Saying, Great and mavelous are thy works Lord God almighty] when the
Parliament have gotten the victory (as is before expressed) then shall they see
that they have not trusted in God in vain; and they shall acknowledge that
they were not delivered by the strength of men, but by Gods great and
mavelous works for them. Therefore they shall say,

Just and true are thy ways thou King of Saints] as if they should say, our
trust Lord was not in earthly Princes, for they fought against us, but we
waited on thee, and trusted in thy promises and thou have made them good unto
us in giving us the victory. And therefore shall they go on praising God, and
saying,

Verse 4. Who shall not fear thee O Lord, and glorify thy Name, for thou art
holy] and having thus beheld Gods goodness in their own deliverance, they
shall declare it to others.

For all Nations shall come and worship thee O Lord] For, thy judgments are
made manifest to them in this great deliverance, which thy Saints wait for:
Which good Lord speedily send us, to thy glory, and the peace and tranquillity
both of Church and State.

FINIS.

