The PROPHECY of the WHITE KING Explained, Compared with several Copies, both
Welsh, Latin, and English: Some of which were written almost a thousand years
ago, besides this old English Copy here Printed, which was of high esteem in
the days of King Edward the fourth,



Printed for Robert Ibbitson. 1649.

THE Prophecy of the White KING EXPLAINED.
A Thing foreseen, and declared to come to pass concerning great Britain, is
very remarkable, and thus prophesied of long before.

When Britain, (that is, England and Scotland) shall have one King (whose Arms
is the Lion) And this King shall be the rightful Prince of the whole Isle)
then this time is near at hand; but not to be fulfilled in his life; It shall
not be accomplished in his time, but when he is dead, poisoned, or cut off,
then shall the time be.

The King that succeeds him, shall be such a one, as must be King of all
Britain, both England and Scotland, as the King his predecessor was.

He shall be all in White, Suite, Cloak, Stockings, all white, or some other
visible demonstration shall declare him to be properly called a White King, at
the very time of his Coronation, when he receives the Crown, and Scepter.

And he is to be not only born in Britain, but to be raised out of the loins of
the foregoing King, he shall be his only son then living, The aged Father
being dead, the Son shall rise, and sit in the Throne, to rule both England and
Scotland.

But yet he shall not come to the Crown without further marks concerning
him; to declare who this White King shall be. For four things are immediately
to go before his coming to the Throne.

1 He shall rise to the Crown ^y flying over the head of his Brother, or some
other, who is nearer (...) the Crown then he, And therefore shall be removed
out of the way by poison, death, banishment, or some way or other.

2 He shall ride, and travel far, to seek him a wife, he shall go into
Spain or Italy, or some other Kingdoms, to effect it, but shall return
unsatisfied.

3 He shall marry one out of France, or some nearer place, then whither he
before r^l^, and sought, and they shall be bodded, and lie together, before the
old King be removed.

4 In his lying with his wife, be shall do the office of an Husband.

These some things being accomplished, the Lion of Rightfulnesse shall dye. And
then the White King shall rise, and be led to the Throne.

After the White King has Reigned certain years in Britain, he shall so vex
his people, that when he is in England, Scotland shall rise against him. And
they shall publish Declarations, and show whether there be not Christ and King
in the Kirk, above the person of the White King.

And by that Kingdom forces shall be raised, and an Army gathered together,
for the freedom, and privileges, of the People.

And the White King also shall raise an Army in England, to be an help for him
against those raised by the Scots, and shall take to him such Officers as he
can best confide in, because he shall find a great unwillingnesse in the
people to this war.

But the Armies shall band, the King will impose ship money, and other
Sessements upon the people, and make himself a Merchant of their Estates,
Monopolies shall still increase, He shall set riders upon Horses, and force the
people by Taxes, to pay them, and shall cause his Subjects of the two kingdoms,
to be murdered like Oxen.

The King shall be sought to, that there may be a present help, and that all
the burdens, and grievousnesses of the kingdoms may be removed, both in Church
and State, but he shall not be prevailed with.

Yet it shall so come to pass, that there shall be a Treaty, at which head for
head shall have argument for argument; and at last a pacification shall be
agreed on, and then shall the Scots return back to their own Kingdom, and
the sun shall arise in England by the Kings calling of a Parliament.

Yet so that another cloud shall arise and cause this sun to set by dissolving
it presently again; and then shall the people be in sad discontents.

But after the dissolution of this Parliament, great risings shall be over all
Britain, in so much that the King will be forced to call a new Parliament.

And in that Parliament diverse Acts shall be passed, by the King, Lords, and
Commons; and yet the people (in great discontents) shall exclaim against the
King for oppression, and flock to the Parliament to cry for justice, by that
Kingly authority which is in them.

After this, when the King shall see how the people rise against him, he shall
go from his Parliament, and raise up his Standard, and put forth Proclamations,
and Declarations against them, and all that oppose him; and shall be resolved
(by the sword) to make them know that he is a King; for which purpose he shall
appoint a Commission of Array to be settled in all parts of the Kingdom.

These will be strange and trying times; some will stagger, and not know what
to do; yet Wisemen will be able to discern the providence and way of God, and
notwithstanding the great divisions then amongst the people; yet they will
find a settlement in their judgments, because they eye the way of God.

But there shall be a range of plundering Gleada, that shall live upon pillage
of the Country: Cavaliers, that shall join with the White King, shall bereave
men of their goods, and have the Command of men's houses, as if they were their
own.

And as for the time of this war, it is to last for the space of seven years,
in which time will happen many sad calamities, which usually accompany war.

There will be ravening after men's estates, violence to shed blood, the people
of God will be driven into Corners, and hide themselves in Ovens, and holes,
from the barbarous Cavaliers. The husbandman will have his corn carried away by
strangers, many shall be brought to poverty, and driven to live a most
miserable and wretched life; and yet (in their greatest misery) shall find but
few friends.

After this, Malignants, Chickens of the Court, shall pass from the South and
the East, to the North of England, and up and down Britain, to join with the
King against the Parliament. And to the Houses and Garrisons of the White King,
and the King himself will command them, and have great fellowship with them.

And by that time a year and an half is passed of the English war, the Scots
will come in to join with the Parliament of England; and then the war will be
all over Britain, both in England and Scotland, and then will a promise
belittle regarded; many will endeavor to keep that which is theirs, and to
live upon other men's estates. And this shall continue for a certain time.

But the time shall come, wherein the White Kings Army at Nazby or some such
place, shall be utterly defeated: land he himself shall be made very feeble
and weak, And he shall be so pursued that with much difficulty he shall make a
private escape out of Newarke or some besiedged Garrison to Oxford, or to some
Fortification of his from whence he came, by which there is a r^ning water.

Yet when he is there, he shall be followed by the Parliaments forces, and
through fear leave his old Garrison again; and at a place agreed on, he shall
be met, and surrender himself to the Scots, who shall deliver him to the
English, and themselves return back into Scotland.

He shall have guards of Soldiers set upon him; yet he shall make to him a
new host, and by private Commissions get a great strength, and they shall
engage for him in a new war; and the White King shall come to a Personal Treaty
with the Parliament and that to be over the great hall of the Schoole-house,
in the Churchyard at Newport in the Isle of Wight, or over some other hall in
a Kirk yard: where shall be his fall and ruin.

After this shall the King who is the Eagle, and all his Chickins be brought to
trial by the supreme power of the Commons of England, the highest Perch of
all Britain, first of his life.

And four things are observable about the death of the White King.

1 He shall not be slain amongst the young Soldiers, but shall be
preserved all the times both of the former and the latter War.

2 He shall not come to be old, not live to see long time after the wars are
ended, and yet he shall live to see peace.

3 That he shall come to be tried for his life, in which the gentle worthies of
the Parliament and their Army, will not suffer wrong to be done unto him, But
will give him an ample, public and legal Trial.

4 That the Realm being thus settled in peace, then the White King must dye.

Here are also set down what shall come to pass after the death of the White
King.

1 That two years after the Realm is in peace, there shall be fully
established an Agreement of the People, and a holy rule from heaven, which
shall settle the Church, as it shall stand for ever to the end of the world.

2 The Liberties of the three Countries shall be restored, so that England,
Scotland and Wales, shall never be in such slavery to the day of Doom.

3 The superstition of the Orosse and all Popery and Prelacy shall be taken
away.

4 There shall be a Temple builded not made with hands, but spiritual for the
advancing of Jesus Christ upon his Throne.

THE WHITE KINGS PROPHECY.
WHen the Lion of Righteousness is dead, there shall rise a White King in
Britain, first Flying, and after Riding, after Ligging down; and in this ligge
down he shall be lamed; after that he shall be led. And there shall be showed
whether there be another King: Then shall be gathered together much folk, and
he shall take help for him: And then there shall be Merchandise of men, (as of
an Horse, or an Ox) and there shall be sought help; and there shall none
arise, but head for head; and then shall one gone, there the Sun arises,
another there the Sun gone down: After this it shall be said by Britain (King
is King) King is no King. After this he shall raise up his head, and he shall
be taken him to be a King, be many things to be done, but wise men reading, and
then shall a range of Gleeds and that ever each has bereaving) he shall have
it for his own, and this shall last seven years, Lo raving and shedding of
blood; and Ovens shall be made like Kirks; and that as one sowes another shall
reap, and death shall be better then wretched life, and charity shall be of few
men; After then shall come through the South with the Sun, on Horse of tree,
and upon all waves on the Sea, the chicken of the Eagle sailing into Britain,
and arriving anon to the House of the Eagle, he shall show fellowship to them
beasts. After a year and a half shall be war in Britain, then shall a sooth be
naught worth, and every man shall keep his thing, and gotten other men's good:
after the white King feeble shall go toward the West, betlipped about with
his folk, to the old place been running water, then his Enemies shall meet him,
and meet him, and march in her place, shall be ordained about him in Host, on
the manner of a shield shall be formed, then shall they fight on Oven front,
After the white King shall fall into a Kirk-yard over a Hall. After the chicken
of the Eagle shall nestle in the highest Rooch of all Britain, nay he shall
naught be slain young: nay naught come old, for then the Gentle worthiness shall
naught suffer wrong be done to him, But when the Realm is in peace then shall
he die, and two years after shall come a new. Rule from Heaven and settle holy
Kirk as it shall evermore stand, and bring three Countries into one, England,
Scotland, and Wales, unto the day of doom, and the Holy Cross be brought into
Christian men's hands, and there shall be made a Temple that never was made,
such none.

The Original hereof was found by the Lady Poston of the County of Norfolk,
amongst the evidences of Edw. the fourth his time.

FINIS.
Jan. 26. 1648.

Imprimatur

Theodore Jennings.


