THE PRIESTS Wickedness and Cruelty, Laid OPEN, and made Manifest, By Priest
Smith of Cressedge, Persecuting the Servants of the Lord, whose outward
dwellings is in and about Shrewsbury.

As also, The Proceedings of Judge Nicholas, and the Court of Justice, so
called, against them so persecuted by the Priest, at the last general Assizes
holden at Bridgenorth for the County of Salop.

TOGETHER, With some QUERIES, to the Priests.

As troops of robbers wait for a man, so the Company of Priests murder in the
way by consent, for they commit lewdness,

Hosea 6.9. And judgment is turned backwards, and justice stands afarr off, for
truth is fallen in the streets, and equity cannot enter: yea, truth falls,
and he that departs from evil makes himself a prey, and the Lord saw it,
and it displeased him that there was no judgment,

Isaiah 59.14, 15. Hearken unto me ye that know righteousness; the people in
whose heart is my Law fear ye not the reproach of men: neither be afraid of
their revileings, for the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm
shall eat them like wool; but my righteousness shall be for ever, and my
salvation from generation to generation.

Isa. 51.7, 8 LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread Eagle,
near the West end of Paul's. 1657.

THE PRIESTS Wickedness and Cruelty, Laid OPEN, and made manifest.
IN all ages and generations the seed of the Serpent persecuted the seed of the
Woman; they that were borne after the flesh, them that were borne after the
Spirit; they that did evil, persecuted them that did well; they that had the
profession of godliness, them that were in the Prison; as it is declared in
the Scriptures of truth from the beginning to the end. Cain he offered
sacrifices and offerings to the Lord, yet he hated his Brother, his countenance
was cast down, Cain was very wrath and after slew his Brother Abell, whose
offering the Lord had respect unto. Genesis 4.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

And in the time of the Prophets who prophesied of Christ, who is the seed;
they that offered offerings, and cried peace, peace unto the people, persecuted
them that spoke the truth as they were moved of the Lord; as in Michah and
Jeremiah who was put in the dungeon for speaking the truth. 1 Kings 22.27. Jer.
38.6.

When Christ came, who was the end of the Prophets, and the Law, they that had
the Law and the Prophets Moses and his writings, could not believe on him but
sought honor one of another, Christ said unto them, How can ye believe, that
look for honor one from another, and seek not the honor that comes from God
only John 5.44. They said they were of Abraham's seed, and God was their Father,
and yet they called Christ a Blasphemer. They said, Not for a good work do we
stone thee, but for Blasphemy? John 10.33. They said that he had a Devil, and
because that he spoke the truth, If a man keep my saying, he shall never see
death. They said, Now we know thou have a Devil; John 8.51.52. Yet he did not
deny himself but spoke openly, that he was the light of the world. I am come
a light into the world, that whosoever believes in me should not abide in
darkness; Yet they could not believe, but told him that he bear witness of
himself. He said, If you believe not that I am he, you shall dye in your sins,
John 8.24. Which is to be fulfilled upon all that do not believe in Christ the
light. The Jews said unto him, How long make thou us to doubt, if thou be
the Christ tell us plainly? he answered them, I told you, and yes believe not;
and many of them said, He has a Devil and is madd, why hear ye him, John
10.20. And the high Priests were the incensers of the rulers and the people
against him, who was the Son of God the end of all their Priesthood, saying, Ye
have heard his Blasphemy, what think you? and they all condemned him to be
guilty of death, Mark 14.64.

And Stephen was stoned to death for witnessing against their Temple, and for
confessing he saw the glory of God, Acts 7.48, to the end.

And the high Priests stirred up the rulers against Paul, who preached Christ,
and was sent to turn from darkness to light, and called him a Pestilent
fellow, and a mover of sedition amongst all the Jews, a ringleader of the sect
of the Nazarens, Acts 24.5.

So here all along you may see they that persecuted were not the children of
God, although they profess his name, neither are they guided by the Spirit of
God that do persecute, but are in the envy which is of the Devil, which
through the eternal love of the father, we are come to see, who has sound
him, whom our souls longed after, even Jesus Christ the way to the Father, who
learnes to be meek, and sober, and to do unto all as we would be done unto,
who is the end of the Law, which is love, and so according to his promise made
of old by his servants the Prophets, the Law is written in our hearts, and the
Lord is our teacher, and the worship of our God is in Spirit; upon whom we wait
sometimes, meeting together in his fear, that his secrets may be revealed unto
us, where we are moved of the Lord, sometimes in our own houses in Shrewsbury
and there abouts; where we have been often molested, and persecuted by them who
came out of the fear of God, they being hearers of the Priests, if not members
of their churches, sometimes railing, and sometimes by throwing stones at our
windows in danger to do us hurt, breaking the glass, also throwing stones
and dirt at some of us as we pass the streets, with other great abuses that
might be mentined, and yet until now we kept these things from being publicly
known, but now at last being constrained out of love unto all men, we have laid
these things to open view, not that we rejoice to see such filthiness
committed, but that they that are not yet partakers with those men may not
through ignorance join with them, and so partake of their plagues. And likewise
that they that have done such things, or any thing that is evil, when they
come to see it with the light of Christ, they may come to repent, and so
forsake the evil. And this is the desire of us, who suffer for Christ's sake,
and the testimony of the truth which we dare not deny, but are willing to seal
it with our blood; if we should deny him, he would deny us.

And here follows a short Relation of Priest Smiths persecution of us, by him,
or his members, in this little paper, whereof the Judge so called had a copy
given to him that he might do nothing against us through ignorance, whereto
our names were subscribed, who are the sufferers.
William Pain. Constant Overton. John Pain. Homfr: Overton. Thomas Jenkes.
John Farmer. James Farmer.


THE first day of the week being the fifth day of the eighth month called
October. 1656. The servants of the Lord, who by the world in scorn are called
Quakers, as they were moved, met in the name and fear of the Lord on the way
near the steeple house yard near Cressedge, and there in peace abiding, and as
the minister of the Lord moved by the Spirit of the Lord was speaking, or
declaring to the people, there rushed out of the steeple house many of the
people, some of them running furiously, and in great rage, breaking over the
hedge laying violent hands upon many friends, amongst the rest some of the
Soldiers (they being friends) the people with their violence broke the hilt of
one of their swords being in the scabberd by doing their endeavor to take it
from him, although there was no occasion given by any, by words or deeds, and
also drew blood from his hand, such was their brutish immoderation. And when
their rage ceased, and the messenger of the Lord, as he was declaring the mind
of the Lord, was brought by the Constable into the Town, and there he was
further moved to speak from the Lord to die people, they being silent until he
was moved to prayer, then as he was at prayer, the Priests servants came forth
with kettles, and beated upon them, one with a key, the other with a staff,
and also some others with a candlestick, and a frying pan purposely to disturb;
and being asked why they did so, the Priests man answered and said, that he
that set them to do it, would bear them out. Likewise the Priests maid and
others, with wooden vessels throwing water in the faces of many of us, with
shooting, striking, and balling as the meerest Heathens upon the face of the
earth. And thus with many more abuses received, is the truth of the passages,
as many can witness; yet, notwithstanding all these gross abuses, the Priest
stirred the Justices so called, to grant a Warrant to fetch in the innocent
that patiently suffered the former wrongs; and upon the seventh day following
he procured several friends to be brought before Justice Harecot Layton,
Justice Richard Baggot, so called, in the Exchequer of Shrewsbury, where he,
the Priest, declared many untruths to the Justices, bringing in his servants
and others which were offenders for witnesses, and the innocent there accused
could have proved the Priest a man for-sworne, but they could not be heard. And
as the first was examined what he saw done by us, answered, that he saw nothing
done but that we stood peaceably, and then others being examined whether there
was any disturbance, one answered, he heard a dim sound at the lower end of the
Chapel, so called, but could not understand any thing. Also a Constable being
examined upon his oath whether he saw, or heard any disturbance, who answered
no, he saw them peaceable, and quiet, the Justices asked is he a Quaker? and
would not suffer him to speak further, but appointed his clark to make a
Mittimus to send us to the common goal. Some of us asking what Law we had
broken, then they read the Statute of the first year of Phillip and Mary, one
of us answered that we had not so much as broken that Law, not being in the
Chapel so called, nor Chapel yard, nor any of us mentioned in the Mittimus
spoke a word whilst the Priest was in the Chapel, neither saw his face, yet
the Justices said, it was supposed we had broken Marys Laws those Popish
principles, so upon this supposition sent us to Prison.

The Assizes being holden at the town of Bridgnorth, to which we came the 14.
day of the first month, the Priest made complaint unto the Judge, that the
Jayler gave us too much liberty, as the Clarke told one of us, who have
suffered by the said Priests cruelty, wherein his cruelty appears more and
more, and the deceit made manifest to all who love to do as they would be
done unto. And upon the 16 day of the month above mentioned, we were brought
forth before the Judge, and the Court, singly one by one, where we came in the
fear of God. The first of us being called had out hatt taken of our head, by
some that stood by the Judge, seeing that, and knowing there was no matter of
fact to lay to our charge, bad put on their hatts; and when our hatts were on
our heads, they told us they were a Court of justice, wherein all may see how
they seek to ensnare the innocent, and how unjustly they deal with the
innocent, who commanded our hatts to be put on, and then commanded us to take
them off (in these words) three times, the Court commands you to put off your
hatts; which being done, bad the Jailer take us away one after another.

And being carried to prison we remained till the next day, and then we were
brought forth before them again, and they read one indictment to us, wherein
was mentioned that we came in contempt of the Court, with some more things to
the same purpose, nothing being mentioned that we had done to the Priest who
cast us in prison. As touching the breach of any known Law, they asked us, are
you guilty? we answered, nay, we come not in contempt of the Court, but in
obedience to the Lord, who commands we should not respect persons; at which the
Judge bid us hold our tongues, I know what I will do with you; and this was
before the jury had their charge; wherein all may see, who loves the light, the
corruption and unjustice of this Judge, who could tell what he would do with
us, before the jury went forth; but the jury being called, and receiving their
charge of the Judge, wherein he told them, that putting of the hatt, was the
custom of the Nation, and the custom of the Nation was the ground of the Law
of the Nation; we answered, evil customs are not to be kept, and that Law,
that is grounded upon customs, and not upon the Law of God, has but a sandy
foundation; for many are accustomed to do evil, as the Scripture testifies;
and the saints were not to fashion themselves like to this world. Then there
was a proclamation made in the Court, that if any man had either matter of
fellonie, or murder, or the like, against the Prisoners, they might appear to
prosecute, or to that purpose; but none appeared against us, as touching the
breach of any Law either of God, or man.

Wherein all may see how the innocent are reckoned amongst the transgressors.
But we know the Law is good if a man use it lawfully, knowing this, that the
Law is not made for a righteous man, but for the Lawless, and disobedient, for
the ungodly, and for sinners, for unholy, and profane, for murderers of
Fathers, and murderers of Mothers, for manslayers, for whoremongers, for them
that defile themselves with mankind, for men-stealers, for liers, for perjured
persons, and if there be any other thing contrary to sound Doctrine, read 1 Timothy 1.8, 9, 10. Now we are not Lawless, for the Law of the Nation does not
forbid any public place to meet in, neither them that do profess faith in
Jesus Christ, the Law does not forbid, but by it they are to be Protected;
neither did we any thing contrary to sound Doctrine, as we shall be ready to
prove out of the Scriptures of truth, for there is nothing mentioned in the
Scriptures of putting off the hatt, and so keeping on our hatts is not contrary
to sound Doctrine and so not transgressors of the Law.

But is not he who is our accuser, and prosecuter, out of the said Doctrine of
Jesus Christ? is not he called master, does not he stand praying in the
Synogogues? has he not the chiefest seat in the Assembly, does he not take
hire? is not he a false accuser, who accused us that we disturbed him, and has
not proved it, and is not all these things contrary to sound Doctrine, and so
he found to be the transgressor of the Law?

And so all may see how the innocent is punished, and the guilty goes free, for
when the jury came in with their Verdict, they said that we were guilty as
touching keeping on our hatts not mentioning any other thing of concernment
whereupon the Judge with the consent of some of the Court, there present, fined
us seven, aforementioned, in forty pounds a piece, and to be kept Prisoners
till the payment; And this is the chiefest of the things that was done by the
Judge, and the Court that we do remember.

But yet for all this the malice of the Priest, and his members is not ceased,
for as some of our friends passed by the place called Cressedge where the said
Priest is called a Minister, the fruits that is brought forth by the people,
made him manifest to be no Minister of Christ, Christ says by their fruits ye
shall know them, they were mockers, and scoffers, and swearers, and such like
which I know is not fruit of the good tree, but of that tree that is to be hewn
down and cast into the fire, For every tree that brings not forth good fruit,
is to be hewn down, and cast into the fire, Mat. 3.10. And so it is good for
people to consider of their ways, who have such leaders as cause them to err,
for if the blind lead the blind, both fall into the ditch.

And the Priest to cover his former envy, goes on further, and to blind the
people more, and more, reported it, that we were fined for that we had done
unto him, which is a plain, and manifest lie, as many can witness, and may be
made appear; for the Judges Clarke told one of us, if we were but free to go,
and put of our hatts before the Bench, our fines might be taken off, and we
might have our liberty to prosecute against the Priest, and Justice, for false
imprisonment, and so have recovered our costs and damages for five months
imprisonment, which would have been no small sum of money, if we had been free
to have done so.

So here all may see the Priest to be a liar, and so a transgressor of the Law
of God, whose Law we durst not break, upon whom we wait for righteous
judgment, who will judge our enemies righteously.

And here follows a Copy of a Letter which was sent to the Judge so called:
but as we do understand, he would not receive it; wherefore we thought it
convenient to put it here, that all that desire to see it, may.
FRIENDS,
COnsider in this your day the things that belong to your peace, consider in
what way you are going, all people, both high and low, rich and poor, Judge
and Justice, Priest and People, before the decree of the Lord be sealed against
you, and the time of repentance be past, when there shall be no more time, but
you shall wish the hills and mountains to fall upon you, to hide you from the
presence of the Lamb, whose innocent and harmless Lambs you have oppressed.

O you Judges of the earth learn to be wise, pervert not judgment, and
justice, fear God and respect not the person of man, but do righteous
judgment between man and man, set the oppressed free, the Lord requires it of
you.

Consider, you that sit in place to do justice at the town of Bridgenorth,
what you have done already, who say you were a Court of justice, of whom we
might have expected justice, if it had been so, that our accusers might have
come to our faces, that we might have known the crime for which we are cast
into Prison: but we now see that there is nothing against us, unless it be
concerning the Law of our God, who commands that we should not respect the
person of man; In obedience of whose command we come before you, honoring you
in the Lord, in whose presence we stood, who commands no such things as the
putting off the hatt, as is ever recorded in the Scriptures of truth. And
moreover, some of us came before you, having our hatts taken of by some that
stood by, and the Judge bad put them on. Consider, was it both justice to bid
put on, and put off? consider, was ever the like heard of in any generation?
are you Ministers of the Law, or Judges of the Law, may you do what you will?
and not come to judgment? yea, the Lord whom we serve, shall judge righteous
judgment, and plead our cause against all our enemies, and he is able to
deliver us. However, be it known unto you, we will not break the command of God
to please you.

And for him, who is our accuser, who professes to be a Minister of Christ,
consider, was ever the like heard of, that ever any Minister of Christ caused
any to be halled to Prison, kept swearers in his house, revilers, mockers, and
scoffers? we were met to wait upon the Lord in quietness, disturbing no man,
nor men, but were disturbed by them, who are members of the Church of Priest
Smith.

Surely, the Ministers of Christ never did so, nor the members of Christ never
upheld such, but cried against them who preached for hire, and divines for
money, was this the fruits of divine service, to persecute? do you think the
Lord will be mocked? do you not know, such as you sow, such must you reap,
shall not the Lord reward you double, and as you have done, shall it not be so
done unto you? O foolish people, and unwise! do you not understand that the
Lord loves judgment, and justice? do you count it stubbornes in my servants,
says the Lord, that they will not bow to the will of man? was it stubbornes in
my servant Mordecai, who could not bow to Hammon, who would have had honor in
the Kings gates? was it stubbornes in my servants, that could not bow to the
Image that Nebuchadnezzar set up. Consider, is the putting of the hatt a lesser
matter then these things, and is not this the greatest thing that is against
us; And so is not this to be worse then the Heathens.

Consider of these things, all you to whom these may come, and all you in whom
there is desires after the way of God: be separated from these men, join not
with them in their sins, least you partake of their plagues: mind that which
calls for truth and uprightness in the inward parts, the Law of God written in
the heart according to his promise; that you may be taught of the Lord alone,
and be established in righteousness, that which reproves for swearing lying,
coveteousnesse, envy, mocking, scorning, that is the Light of Christ, take good
heed of being disobedient to it, it is near to you all continually, and ye
cannot escape his righteous judgments, who will render to every man according
to their deeds, with which light you shall see your deeds; If you do truth,
come to the light, and walk in the light, and put of the works of darkness,
that ye be not condemned with the light, which is the condemnation of the
world, prize your time, be not deceived with a profession, which will not stand
in the day of trial, but mind what you possess in truth, and what peace you
have with God, deal plainly and consider how you stand, whether you suffer
with the people of God, or you join with them that persecute.

So we having laid these things before you, to consider of, we have cleared
our consciences in the sight of God, and rest in peace, suffering for the
testimony of Jesus, waiting upon him for diliverance. And this ye shall
witness to be in love to your souls in the day of our Lord, when there shall
be judgment without respect of persons.

Given forth the 7 day of the 1 month. From us who are called Quakers by them
that live out of the fear of God, Constant Overton. Humfry Overton. John
Farmer. James Farmer. Thomas Jenkes. William Pain. John Pain.


Some Queries to Priest Smith, or any of the Priests, in Shrewsbury, or there
abouts, to be answered by them in plainess and soberness, according to the
Scriptures of truth.
WHether you do own that Christ lights every man that comes into the
worlds, yea, or no?

2. Whether this be a natural light which shines in darkness, which darkness
cannot comprehend, and is the condemnation of the world, yea or no?

3. Whether this be a created light, which John called the true light, that
lights every man that comes into the world, him by whom the world was made,
seeing God created all things by Jesus Christ, who is the light? answer plainly
that the people may receive satisfaction.

4. Whether you do own the same Christ that said in his Doctrine, beware of
the Scribes which love to go in long clothing, and love salutations in the
market places, and chief seats in the assemblies, and the uppermost rooms at
feasts, called of men (master) devour widows houses, and for a pretense make
long prayers, which shall receive the greater condemnation, if ye be found in
these steps, let us know how you will escape the damnation?

5. Whether do you own that Christ that suffered at Jerusalem, who said, as
you would that men should do unto you, do you unto them; and whether you that
hale to prison do as you would be done unto, yea, or nay?

6. Whether the worship of God be not the same now, as it was when Christ said,
God is a Spirit and they that worship him now, must worship him in Spirit and
truth? if yea, I require to prove where ever God commanded any man to take a
verse of Scripture and to give meanings, or conceavings upon it, and where this
is called spiritual worship, seeing this is your practice, when you meet
together? Prove your practice, or confess your error.

7. Whether it is better to wait upon the Lord in silence, meeting together in
his fear, to worship him in Spirit, or set up that God never required, nor
commanded, and live in pride, envy, coveteousnesse, and follow pleasures;
whether these are agreeable to the life of them that gave forth Scriptures?

8. What and where that is that leads the people of God into all truth, and
reproves the world of sin?

9. Whether the Scriptures can be read and understood by any other Spirit but
that Spirit that gave them forth, yea, or nay? And are not they that are out of
the Doctrine of Christ in life and practice, living in pride and envy, guided
by another Spirit then that which gave forth Scriptures, yea, or nay?

10. What is that which the Apostle speaks of in his epistle to the Romans
which was manifest in them that gain the knowledge of God, and whether that
which may be known of God is not manifest which is now, as it was then, yea, or
nay?

11. What that manifestation of the Spirit is which is given to every man to
profit withal, and where it is, whether within man, or without man, and
whether there be any profiting but in any by the Spirit, yea, or nay?

12. Whether that which was the saints rule and guide in former ages before the
Scripture was written, and their rule and guide who wrote Scriptures, be not a
guide, and rule to saints now: Or when was it changed, and the Scripture put in
its steed? is God changeable, is not his power the same, his way the same now,
is not he who was the foundation, and the Rock of his age then, the author and
foundation of the saints faith now, and the Rock of this age, and so the Rock
of ages, is not Christ the same yesterday, to day, and for ever?

Answer to these Queries plainly that deceit may be made manifest where it is,
and the truth exalted; and when they are answered, send the Answer to some of
us who are sufferers for the truth, whose names are aforementioned.

Who is wise, and he shall understand these things, prudent and he shall know
them: for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them,
but the transgressors shall fall therein, Hosea 14.9.

Given forth from the Common Goal in Shrewsbury, the 1 day of the 2 month,
called Apr. 1657.
THE END.

