PROPOSITIONS Agreed upon at a Court of Common Council, In Guild Hall London.
Feb. 21. 1642.

blazon or coat of arms of the City of London

Printed at London by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honorable City of London.
1642.

Commune Concilium tentum in Camera Guild Hall Civitatis London, vicesimo primo
die Februarii 1642. post meridiem, Annoque Regni Domini nostri Caroli, nunc
Regis Angliae, etc. decimo octavo, coram Isaac Pennington Majore, secundo
tempore, Civitatis London, Jacob. Garrad Milite, Thoma Atkin, Johan. Wollaston
Milite, Thoma Adams, Johan. Warner, Georgio Garret Milite, Johan. Fowke, Jacobo
Bunce, Willi. Gibbs, and Richardo Chambers, ejusdem Civitatis Aldermannis, ac
Johan. Langham Aldermanno and uno vicecomitum Civitatis praedictae, necnon
majore part Communariorum de Communi Concilio praedictae Civitatis tunc and
ibidem Assemblat.
THis day Master Alderman Fowke made report unto this Common Council, that
himself and the rest of the Committees appointed by Order of Common Council,
held the Eighteenth of this instant February, did accordingly yesterday humbly
inform both Houses of Parliament, that their desire of the Loan of threescore
thousand pounds to supply the Army signified by diverse of the Lords and Commons
to the said Court was taken forthwith into consideration. And notwithstanding
the great sums formerly lent by the City, they did with much chearefullnesse
and alacrity vote to do their uttermost endeavor to raise the said sum with
all expedition. And for the better promoting the said Work, the Lord Major,
Aldermen, and Commons then present, did each declare what they would lend
respectively toward the furnishing thereof. And caused an Order to be presently
made and Printed, and sent out to the Ministers of the several Parishes, to be
published in the Churches, and to stir up the Parishioners effectually to
advance the remainder of the said threescore thousand pounds. And that the
Common Council men and Churchwardens should repair to every Inhabitant and
Lodger within their several Parishes, and persuade them unto this good work.
And the said Committee did further make report, that they did then also humbly
present to both houses of Parliament, the scope and intent of such and so many
of the Propositions referred unto them to be presented, being to encourage the
Subscriptions of the said threescore thousand pounds, as in so short a time
they could conceive fit and needful. And that the Lords and Commons in
Parliament did return thanks to this Common Council for their great care and
readiness in promoting the advancement of the said threescore thousand pounds
by them desired, and that they would take the said Propositions into due
consideration, The brief heads whereof were after taken by the Clerk of the
House of Peers. And a Copy thereof was here now openly read in this Court,
and approved of, and Ordered to be entered, The tenor whereof is as follows.

1. That both Houses would vouchsafe to advance the raising of threescore
thousand pounds by their own example, and by paying it in to the Treasurers at
Guild Hall, to the end that the sight may encourage others.

2. That they may be eased in the rates of the weekly Assessements, because it
exceeds the proportion of the Counties, if it be not too late.

3. That the three thousand pounds per month granted out of the weekly
Assessements, may be made four thousand pounds per month.

4. That the Citizens Lands and houses in the Country, may not be rated for the
weekly Assessements, so as they pay in London

5. That in regard they are informed that diverse mis-informations have been
made concerning the City of London, by private persons, it is humbly desired
that hereafter no such credit may be given thereunto, as to be accounted the
sense of the City, unless it proceed from the Court of Aldermen, or Common
Council, signified by special Messengers of their own, or by the Burgesses
directed by one of the said Courts.

6. That it will much promote the said Service if the money Assessed by virtue
of diverse Ordinances be collected forthwith in London and other parts of the
Kingdom, that the charge may not wholly lie upon the willing part, for that
otherwise the well-affected will be either destroyed with them, or for them;
with them if they should refuse as others do; or for them, by contributing
alone to the public safety, more then their estates will bear.

7. That search may be made without the Liberties in the parts adjacent for
suspected persons, and that upon the disbanding those that are called the Kings
Army may be enjoined to go to their several habitations, and not to come to
London, to the disturbance of the peace, safety, and welfare of the said City,
and of the good government thereof; and that during the time of the Treaty and
Cessation, none of the said Army may be permitted to come to the City.

8. That to prevent misapprehensions and jealousies concerning the present
proceedings of both Houses of Parliament, about the Treaty and Cessation, and
disbanding; it is humbly prayed it may be declared that the resolutions of both
Houses is the same, as at the first, that nothing shall be done but that which
tends to the security of the true reformed Protestant Religion, the just
Liberties of the Subjects, and Privileges of Parliament.

9. That the Ordinances of the weekly Assessements may pass forthwith for the
securities of the re-imbursing of the threescore thousand pounds, which
otherwise will not be raised.

Also this Court taking into consideration the residue of the particulars
referred unto the said Committee to be presented to both houses of Parliament,
and the said Committees opinion thereupon; and apprehending that the
propositions lately sent to his Majesty by both Houses of Parliament, do
eminently tend to the preservation of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, and
to a Reformation of what is amiss in Church and Commonwealth, do order the
said Committee to render from this City all humble thankfulness to both the
said Houses for their great care therein, and to present their farther humble
desires as follows.

First, that his Excellency, the Earl of Essex, be desired to take order:

1. That the broken Regiments, and Troops in his Army may be reduced and made
1200. in each Regiment, and 80. in each Troop, to the end that the excessive
charge of paying more Officers then are necessary, may be avoided, and the
Counties which want Officers may be supplied, and such as are most scandalous
may be casheerd.

2. That special care be taken that the common Soldiers be duly paid from
time to time, without which they cannot subsist, and that for the better
affecting thereof (a great part of them being raised out of the City) that an
honest able man be there chosen for each Regiment of horse and foot
respectively, to muster and pay the said Soldiers, and view their Arms,
causing them to be made good according to the rules of War, and that fit
allowance be given to the said Pay masters for their Service.

3. That in regard this unhappy and unnatural War is lengthned out beyond
expectation, and the Officers of the said Army have already received great pay,
and are engaged in the public cause as well as others, who have lent great
sums of money to pay them, that therefore they will so far express their
good affections to the King and Parliament, as to forbear one half of their
areares and future pay upon the public Faith.

4. That the said Officers and Soldiers may take such an oath as is used in
times of war in other countries to be faithful to those that employ them,
and from whom they receive their pay.

5. That such prisoners as already are or hereafter shall be taken by any of
the said Army if they cannot be enterchanged, may be used as they are or shall
be used which are or shall be taken by those who are called the Kings Army.

6. That all unnecessary charges about the train of Artillery and otherwise
be taken away, and that honest and able pay-masters be thereto appointed, who
may carefully enquire and represent what charges are superfluous.

2. That in the intended treaty such care be taken for the indemnity of the
City, and Citizens of London, and of the privileges thereof as may secure
them, and be a witness to the present and future generations of their fidelity
to the King and Parliament.

3. That our dangers being great and our sins greater (whereof we have been
seasonably put in mind by a late Ordinance of both houses of Parliament) there
may be a Religious covenant and firm association forthwith entered into by the
Lords and Commons, City, Army, and all well-affected in the Kingdom,
according to a promise publicly made at a Common Hall, in the name of both the
said Houses; in expectation whereof the City then freely lent one hundred
thousand pounds. And that the Rents, Revenues, Goods, Moneys and Estates of
such as shall refuse to enter into that Covenant and Association be employed in
such manner and proportion as both the said Houses shall think fit and their
persons secured for the good and safety of the Kingdom.

FINIS.

