The PROCEEDINGS against the Lord RUSSEL, Upon His TRIAL for HIGH TREASON, At
the Sessions House in the Old Bailey, on the 13th. of this Instant July, for
Conspiring against the Life of the KING, to Levy War and Rebellion, etc. As
also the Trials of William Hone, the Joyner, John Rouse. and William Blake, For
Conspiring the Death of the KING, etc.
AT the Sessions House in the Old-Bayly, William Hone having been yesterday
Arraigned, and thereto Pleaded Not Guilty; was brought this Day upon his Trial,
who before he was put upon the Jury, desired to Retract his former Plea of Not
Guilty, and to Plead Guilty, as to the Conspiracy, but would not own his
procuring Arms, as in the Indictment was specified: which Plea the Court
refusing to approve, unless he would directly Plead Guilty to the whole
Indictment, the Jury was charged with him. And the Indictment Read, Importing
that he not weighing his Duty and Allegiance, but as a false Traitor, had
Conspired the King to depose from his Crown and Dignity, and him to Assassinate
and Murder, to raise War and Rebellion, and to make a miserable Slaughter of
His Majesty's Subjects; and in order thereto, he had procured Arms, as
Blunderbusses, Muskets, Carbines, Pistols, and the like. The Indictment Read,
the King's Council proceeded to open the Nature of the Fact, and Relate the
danger of the Conspiracy, and of what Fatal Consequence it would have proved,
if it had taken Effect; with many particulars Relating to what Evidence was to
be given against the Prisoner. After which, Mr. Keeling was Sworn, who Deposed,
that the Prisoner coming acquainted with him by the means of Mr. Goodenough,
had at sundry times declared, that he was tempered with, to enter into the
Conspiracy against the Life of the King; and that he was to be one in the
intended Assassination of His Majesty; And that particularly he was at a
Consult (as he verily believed) when the killing the Captain and Lieutenant was
to be loped, or dispatched by those, meaning the King and the Duke of York; and
that once being with him at the Flanders Coffee-House, he declared, That it
would be never well, till the Blackbird and Gold-finch were knocked of the
head, meaning the King and the Duke of York; And that in a Consult where the
Assassination of His Majesty in his return from New Market, when Mr. West being
in Company, demanded how many Swans Quills, Goose Quills, and a pair of Crow
Quills, with Ink and Sand, were in readiness? meaning thereby, Blunderbusses,
Muskets, Pistols, Powder and Bullets, that he was to have; and that he was
fully consenting to Imbarque himself in the wicked Enterprise; and that a
debate was held, what day the King was to return; and that diverse opinions
thereupon happened amongst the Conspirators.

Mr. West being next Sworn, gave Evidence, That the Prisoner came to his
Chamber in the Temple, and acquainted him, that he came from Mr. Goodenough,
and that he had by his persuasion, consented to be one that was to Assassinate
the King. And that it was further agreed by the Conspirators, that he should be
furnished with Twenty Pounds, or thereabouts, to provide him Horse and Arms,
and that he did procure Arms in order to the Design; with many other
particulars, Relating to the Wicked Conspiracy. This Evidence given, Sir,
Nicholas Butler deposed, That the Prisoner had Related, or Confessed Matter in
Relation to the Wicked Conspiracy, etc. After which, the Evidence being sum,
med up, the Jury without departing the Court, gave their Verdict, that he was
guilty, of High Treason, as in the Indictment it was laid.

Hone being Convicted as aforesaid, the Lord Russel was Arraigned, who,
thereupon desired longer time to prepare for his Trial; but that not being
allowed, he accepted against the Jurors, as not being Freeholders within the
City of London, and thereupon desired Council to be assigned him, to debate it
as matter of Law; which was granted, and Mr. Polxpheen, Mr. Holt, and Mr. Ward,
were assigned; whose opinions, after many Arguments between them and the King's
Council, were overruled by the Court; and thereupon the Jury was called, of
which the Prisoner Challenged about Thirty peremptory, but Twelve being Sworn,
the Indictment was Read, the substance of which being to this Effect. That he,
William Russel, Esquire (for so was he styled) together with James Duke of
Monmouth, Ford Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Armstrong, Ferguson. etc. had Conspired to
leavy War and Rebellion in the Kingdom of England, to compass the death of His
Majesty, and to make a miserable Slaughter amongst the Subjects of our Lord the
King, and to this Indictment he having pleaded not Guilty, Mr. North opened the
matter of Fact, and was seconded by Mr. Attorney General, who at large declared
the heinousness of the Crime, which in Evidence was to be given against the
Noble Lord, Prisoner at the Bar, which was also Insisted upon by Mr. Soliciter
General. After which, Colonel Rumsey was Sworn, who deposed, That the Duke of
Monmouth, the Lord Russel, Sir. Thomas Armstrong, and diverse others, being at
one Mr. Shepherds a Vintners, in the Parish of St. Nicholas Bashaw, he (...)
sent to them by the Earl of Shaftsbury, to know what forwardness they were in,
as to an Insurrection; to which he received Answer, That Mr. Trenchard, who had
promised to raise a 1000 Foot, and 4000 Horse, to be aided in the Design, had
certified them by a Letter, that he could not so soon Effect it, as was
required; for that the persons he desired to allure to his Interest, would not
rush upon a Design, e're they had provided for their Families, and that the
Earl of Shaftsbury must be contented, at which the Earl seemed much
disaffected. He further deposed, That diverse Consults had been held, in order
to the raising men in diverse places, and that an Insurrection was to have been
on the 9th. of November: and that he, viz. Colonel Rumsey was to have been a
Commander at Bristol, though in what Capacity was not nominated. And that it
was agreed, That the Duke of Monmouth, the Lord Gray, and Sir Thomas Armstrong,
should take a view of the Gurards in the Muse, and at the Savoy, to see how
they kept their Order.

After this Mr. Shepherd the Vintner was Sworn, who deposed, That Mr. Fergusen
came to him in the Name of the Duke of Monmouth, and named diverse Persons that
were to come to his House, desired a private Room, which they had accordingly;
and that the Prisoner was there, and at that time a discourse happened about an
insurrection; and a Declaration was Read, purporting to a Relation of the
Grievances of the Nation, tending to a Rising, etc. And that another time the
Company met, but that he was not positive, whether the Prisoner was there then
or no; but then, as at first, they were very private, and came on Foot, etc.

This deposition made, the Lord Howard of Escrich was Sworn; who declared the
whole Conspiracy at large from time to time, how the Plot was carried on by the
Earl of Shaftsbury in chief, and that he had declared his dissatisfaction in
the Coldness of the Duke of Monmouth, and other Lords to Join with him; and
that he had 10000 men in the City at his back; and seeing things were so far
advanced, he would cause the Design to be put in Execution; and that diverse
Messages passed between the Earl and the Lords, in relation to putting off the
design longer; which at last was from time to time put off, till the Earl,
doubting his safety fled into Holland, where he dyed; after which a Council of
six were constituted, who were the Duke of Munmouth, the Earl of Essex, the
Lord Russel, the Lord Howard (the now Witness) Mr. Sidney, and Mr. Hambden the
younger, who were to determine all matters as to the Insurrection; and that
they, to his knowledge, met at Hambdens House, and at the House of the
Prisoner, to debate about the carrying on the Design, and that Aaron Smith was
sent into Scotland to persuade the Gentry to Rise. This, or to this effect, tho
more at large, was the Evidence. After which, the Lord Russel called diverse
Evidences, some to declare what the Lord Howard had said concerning the Plot,
in relation to him, before the said Lord Howard was taken Prisoner, and others
for the most part, Persons of Quality, to testify his sincere Life and
Conversation. After which, the Kings Council summed up the Evidence, and the
Court gave the Charge, when the Jury going out, after some considerations,
brought him in Guilty of High Treason.

This Trial over, John Rouse, who was Yesterday Arraigned, came upon his Trial,
for Treasonably Conspiring to compass the Death of the King, to Leavy War,
raise Rebellion, etc. to which, upon this Arraignment, he Pleaded not Guilty;
but the Charge being opened by the King's Council, the Witnesses for the King
were Sworn, who deposed, That he, the Prisoner, had been at diverse Consults,
for the carrying on the Conspiracy against the Life of the King, to stir up the
people to Sedition, and Rebellion; with diverse other Treasonable Practices by
him done, and approved of sundry times, and in diverse places; and he not being
capable by Witnesses to disprove it, the Charge given, the Jury found him
Guilty of High Treason.

Next William Blake, a Sea-Captain, was Tried for Treasonable Conspiracy, and
intending to compass the Life of the King; in order to which, he, according to
the Evidence, had prepared Shipping to Assault the Tower, and to batter it with
Grenades; and that in order thereto, he had consulted with Richard Goodenough,
and diverse other Conspirators; But the Proof being full, only by one Evidence
the other not swearing positive, or not to what amounted to Treason, and the
Law; in Case of High Treason, requiring Two positive Evidences, the Prisoner
was found not Guilty.

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most
Sacred Majesty, Anno Dom. 1683.


