Proper Persecution, or the sandy Foundation of a general Toleration,
Discovered and Portrayed in its proper Colors.
By the fruit ye shall know the tree; And by the waters the fountain. Read and
Consider what the Envious man has done.
A Reply to DICTATED thought ^ By a more Proper Emblem
Dictater here behold in proper place
Three joynd as one to blemish and disgrace
Here wants noe chain to link each to other
You see how loueingly they gree together
Sweet peace and Truth how gladly would they meet
Yet for these enemies they Cannot greet


J shall begin with Martins cursed shrill Echo. page 5, 6.

1 THe life of Sir John Presbyter is like neither to be long nor good.

2. That he will be brought to a sudden untimely end, perhaps to hanging.

3. That Presbytery shall live but a short time to do mischief, and then the
common people will sing, Hey toss the Devils dead.

4. The Synod will soon be dissolved, the devil chained up.

5. Clap thy hands for joy, O England, Presbytery shall have never a child to
vex thee shortly, or imprison thy free Denisons, and to suck up thy fat.

6. Then farewell persecution for conscience, then farewell Ordinance for tithes;
farewell Ecclesiastical supremacy: farewell Pontifical revenue.

7. Farewell Assembly of Divines, Dissembled at Westminster, Sir Simon Synod,
and his son Presbyter Jack.

In Persecution Araignment, Page 2.

8. Persecution has a thousand Jack tricks above all the rest to block up all
passages and stop all mouths.

9. He turned Reverend Imprimatur and here all was as sure as the Devil and
Presbyter could make it.

10. Page 14. We employ Dr. Featlyes Devil a very reverend ten pound Sir John,
to make up a description of the Anabaptists, etc.

Against Tithes in a scurrilous Libel:

11. Time has been wholly taken up in the Procurement of that sacred Ordinance
of Tithes, wisely thought on before the Directory; for he is an Infidel and
denies the faith that does not provide for his Family.

12. My Lord the Defendant smells of a fat benefice; see his pockets are full of
Presbyterian steeples, the spires stick under his girdle; ha, ha, ha, instead
of weathercocks, every spire has got a black box on it.

13. Instead of Moses, Aaron, and the two tables, we shall have Sir Ssmon and
Sir John holding the late solemn League and Covenant.

14. And then that demure, spotless, pretty, lovely, sacred, divine, and holy
Ordinance for Tithes. The two tables of our Presbyterian Gospel painted upon
all the Churches in England.

15. O brave Sir Simon the Bells in your pocket chime all in, ours chime all out.

16. I pray you give a funeral homily for your friends here before you depart,
here is twenty shillings for your pains.

17. Yea it is sacrilege to bring down the prise as it was in the beginning is
now, and ever shall be, world without end, Amen.

18. Our Temporizing Doctors are not so simple to swim against the stream, they
are wiser in their generation and know most state goes that way.

19. Their Religion moves upon the wheel of the State.

20. I would your Lordships would call in your Ordinance for tithes, and turn
them to the peoples goodwils; Then a tithe pig would be sold for a penny.

In the Sacred Decretal, or Hue and C^y.

21. From his superlative holiness Sir Simon Synod, etc. In the front whereof
is the picture of a Bull tossing Sir Simon Synod on his horns, Trampling the
Ordinance for tithes under his feet, with this Inscription upon it. Ordinance
for Tithes.

22. That the Ordinance permitting none to preach, but such as are ordained is
a pattern of the spirit worse then the Monopoly of Soap, hereby to get all
trading into their own hands.

23, Sir John Gurns being lately robbed with a Parliament Coral, that late
Ordinance is made to put his boarish Tusks, his great huge iron fangs in
execution, to divorce, rend and tear these Heretics.

24. Therefore we wisely consulted of a Committee of examination to be chosen
out of us, it must not be esteemed a Court of Iuquision that's popery, not a
Renovation of the High Commission, that's Antichristian, only an Inlet to a
through Reformation, that's a godly name that may do much good, etc.

25. The Classical Clarks and Sextons of the three Kingdoms demolish and put
down all the Martins nests from your Church-wals and Steeples, that no birds
build, chatter, or do their business there.

26. But Church owls, Jack-dawes, otherwise called Sir John blind Batts
Presbyterian Wood cocks.

27. O ye two Houses of Parliament make another Ordinance, that all the
meetings may be made to fly the three Kingdoms the next Mid-summer with
Cuckowes and Swallows.

28. Thar so we may have a blew Cap Reformation, amongst Bats, Owls,
Jack-dawes and Wood cocks and the blew Cap for us.

Araignment of Persecution, page 33. 34.

29. Persecution is thy name, Perfect Reformation.

Persecu. Yes my Lord, Judge. Who gave you that name? I. Reasen, his God
fathers and Godmothers in his Baptism wherein he was made a member of the
Assembly, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Antichrist.

30. Judge. Who are your Godfathers, and Godmothers?

Persecu. My Lord, Master Ecclesiastical Supremacy, and Master Scotch
government my Godfathers, Mistress State ambition, and Church Revenue are my
Godmothers.

31. And I was sprinkled into the Assembly of Divines, at the taking of the
late solemn League and Covenant.

32. Judge. It Is strange, that at the making of the late solemn league and
Covenant, blood Thirsty Persecution should be Anabaptist present before
Reformation.

33. Then here is a design of blood in the Covenant, if under the name of
Reformation the Clergy have infused the spirit of Persecution into it.

34. My Lord there was never any National or Provincial Synod, but strengthened
the hand of Persecution under the vizard of Religion.

35. I. Reason, as soon as these underling Divines are from under their
Episcopal Taskmasters, and begin to incroach your Lordships power, they
presently take this notorious bloody Traitor Persecution, stripped by your
Lordships of his High Commission habit, and out of their zeal dress him in a
divine Synodical garb, and change his name from Persecution to Reformation.

Page 39. By the late solemn League and Covenant, Good Lord deliver us.

Araignment of Persecution in the Epistle.

36. A Reverend Assembly such a quagmire of croaking skipjack Presbyters etc.

37. New upstart trifling Presbyters, Synodian Cormorants; the Synodian whore
of Babylon; The traiterous Synod called the Assembly of Divines.

38. Presbyterian Horse leeches, blood-thirsty cattle.

39. The great gore-bellyed Idol, called the Assembly of Divines.

40. Jesuitical Traitors, designs of the Synod.

41. Our dissembly Doctors a Consistory of Devils.

42. Page 1. The Synod is guided by the holy Ghost, sent in Cloakbag from
Scotland.

43. Because the Assembly have sadled the Parliament, it is unlawful for the
Presbyterians to go on foot.

44. Page 35. 36. It is most certain that this fellow, whose name Sir Simon
fains to be Reformation, is absolute Persecution; so that had these Reformers
as much power as Queen Mary's Clergy, their Reformation would conclude in fire
and faggot.

45. Judge, oh insufferable Assembly, I see it is dangerous for a State to pin
their faith upon the sleeve of the Clergy.

46. Others are impoverisht and lose their lives in the Quarrel, but these are
inricht and advanced by it, save their purses and persons, cram their filthy
greedy guts too il to carry to a bear.

47. Yea my Lord this great gore belly Idol called the Assembly of Divines is
not ashamed in this time of necessity to devour more at one Meal then Bell and
the Dragon.

48. Besides all their fat Benefices forsooth they must have four shillings a
piece by the day, etc.

49. They move your Lordship that all the Clergy may be freed from taxations
that now the trade of Presbytery is the best.

50. All are taxt and it goes free, thus these Church-lubbers live at ease.

51. Let all that suffer opppression consider this and no longer be Riden and
Jaded by Clergymasters.

52. But to give the Devil his due, they are zealously affected to the honor of
the cloth, that it is pity to disrobe them of the cassock garb to be led in
strings from Westminster to Algate in leathern Jackets and mattock on their
shouldiers.

53. Page 36, 37. Primacy, Metra politanism, Prelacy etc. are shrunk into the
Presbytery, and the High Commission court turned into an Assembly of Divines.

With numerous such like cursed expressions the like whereof I persuade my self
all our Jesuitical State-destroying Romish enemies are no way able to parallel,
thus in plain English we see a goodly Foundation laid for a Toleration,
pretended for tender consciences but contradicted by hellish, heathenish and
cursed carnal practices.

London, Printed for Joseph Potts, and are to be sold at his shop, in the Old
Bailey, near the Sessions house 1646.


