PRINCE CHARLES PROCLAIMED KING, AND Landed in Jersey with the Duke of YORK,
and a list of the Lords, Knights and Gentlemen of quallity arrived there with
his Highness, and his design touching the West of ENGLAND.

ALSO His entertainment by the Lord JERMANE who is made Governor of the
Island, with the Lord Hopton and 300. other persons of note, that were convoyed
by 2. Statesmen of War WITH The Duke of Yorks Declaration touching his
brother the Declared King. And his Highnesses Message to the King of France,
and a present of one hundred thousand Crowns sent him by the Cardinal

London Printed for J. J. and are to be sold at Temple-Barre. 1649.

The landing of PRINCE CHARLES, And the Duke of YORK IN The Isle of Jersey,
with the Lord Hopton, and 300. other Lords, Knights and Gentlemen, convoyd by
2, Statesmen of WAR.
THe Prince of Wales since his long and tedious journey from his Native
Country, has with his Council at St. Germans in France (^ouching the next
place of his arrival) had several consultations, (having staid there longer
then welcome) after which consultations he with his brothe Duke of York, the
Lord Hopton, and 300 other Gentlemen of quallity betook themselves to hover for
a time at Sea, intending for Jersey, where they are (as the news is come) for
certain landed, being convoyed thither by two Statesmen of War, of 35 pieces
of Ordnance. Its conceived their intention and Resolution is to be speedily in
Ireland, and farther after they shall see cause.

From Dublin. Letters say that the Lord Lieutennant is marched with his whole
Army toward Trehah, it being first to be attached, the Governor thereof being
Sir Arthur Ashton, formerly Governor of Reading, an old Soldier, and one
famous for making good towns and did one once against the King of Sweden to his
admiration, this town is fortified as well as his, and as all the Ingineers
Ormond had could do it.

The cheef Governor must besiege it on both sides the water, whether he storm
it as was his usual way in England, or make a fotmal siege by i^trenching and
approaches time will show, its mineaqle in most places, the sudden and easy
carrying this place will faciliate the whole work, if this prove hard, the rest
it like to come of so, If any ask why North not South first, its anfwered, that
there is good reason for it, for the better accommodation by Sea, who will keep
out any thing from the besieged, and furnish the besiegers with food, as to
serve them with Biske, Beer; etc.

Sir, Our Armies being at present not enged as we can hear I can inform you but
little more for matter of News, only, we have for certain, that since the
advance of the Lord Leiutenant Crumwell, diverse come from Inchiqueene, and that
Col. Wentworth is come with 50 horse and men, and there has benn the like
attempt at Drorhedah, but not so good success some being taken and executed.

A Letter from Chester Sept. 9. Sir, In my last I gave you the glad tidings of
the Lord Governors landing in Ireland, since which we have not been acq^inted
with much action in those parts; but the best news at present as we hear is the
return of some ships from Dublin since the landing of the Lord Leiutenant who
specify, that the Lord Governor marched on Satturday last from Dublin, its
generally believed he is marched toward Tredah, and the Letters say, They hope
it is taken by this time, and that they question not but that before this
comes, to hand their will be some action, and further say that they do not
believe the enemies strength so great as they bragg off.

We also hear that diverse of Prince Ruperts men do often desert him so that he
has not Seamen with him, to man above 3 of his best ships, But there are not
yet come any letters from our Navy before Kingsale. since the late great winds

By Letters from Scotland, it was this day certified, That some Dan^s ships
passed by the Islands of Orkney, toward Ireland, and Isle of Pharoe, one of
the ships belonging to the Parl. of England chased them, and some of them ran
on the Coasts of Scotland. That on those Coasts in Scotland, ly 2 Armies, one
for the Kirk, and one for the State, who look for the landing of Forces from
Montrosse, whom they hear is gathering of Forces in Denmark and Sweaden, by
himself and his Agents to come against them, yet some of the Scots Soldiers
were very abusive.

From Yarmouth came thus, that Captain Coppin with the Greyhound set at
liberty a vessel that had been taken by 4 Dunkerk men of War, who after
turning out all het men, putting only 5 into her, were sending her to Ostend, he
also chased an Irish Frigot a long time, but the wind being extreme high, and
the storm increasing he was forced so let fall all his sales, or he had been
over set, but he see her hover on the sands, and its thought she got not off
again. This day we had Intelligence that the Garrison of Oxford was in some
distemper being seduced, partly by the discontented people of the Levelling
faction, and partly by the Cavaliers who drive on their interest by complying
and fomenting their discontents. The Soldiers there have drawn up certain
Proposals, The substance is, for a new Representative, etc. These men are now
quelled, and the house having notice thereof, and that certain Agents from
London are apprehended, who had blown up the min^s of these poor souls into
thoughts of being restorers of their Country, who know how to settle the Nation
better then ever it was, these are to be called to account, and proceeded
against, and a Declaration speedily to go forth for to undeceive.

The Soldiers a^ Oxford (as we are informed by letters from thence have drawn
up eight Proposals to this effesh viz. for the choosing of a new Representative
and disolving this, and for electing Agitators. They keep Guards and stop
passenger^, some talk of parties in other places ready to back them, and their
is o Letter intercepted going ^tom a prisone- in the Fleet to the Lorn
Cottingtor, wherein he relates that all the hoper of that party depends upon
the seeming compliance of his Majesty seems ing compliance with the Levelling
party, without whom it is impossible for any of his party here to prove
serviceable, unless upon their principles, he writes, That the Kings friends
increase daily, but have no possibility of acting unless the Levellers lead
the way.

This afternoon Col. Tomblinsou and Col. Euglisby were dispatched toward
Oxford.

From high Wickam we understand, that some turbulent spirits affronted the
Mayor who imprisoning some of them, with other of their confede ates broke the
prison, and after came dairing the mayor to his face,

Sunday Sept 9. The book of Common Prayer was read at Petert Paul's Whar^ by one
Williams, who not long since was required to forbear by the Lord Mayor, yet
still persisted in that course, for which he was carried away by a Troop of
horse, without doing any injury to his person, though some others were hurt in
the action.

Derby Sept. 9. 1649.
THe Miners of this County seem much discontented at some proceedings of Parl.
and especilly in their own business, they have had this week several meetings,
and we are informed to draw up a Declaration against the present Authority,
upon publication whereof they intend to be ready to maintain with their lives
and fortunes, and likewise the Agreement of the people. And if this fire should
unhappyly break out, I fear it would not be easily quenched, but prove to the
ruin of the whole Nation, which the Lord prevent, and incline the hearts of all
to justice, love and peace.

Windsor Sept. 10. The Major of Wickam complained lately to the Governor of
this Castle against some of the Soldiers, that offered many incivillities, and
high affronts to him; some whereof he had but the day before committed, and the
prison door broke open by the Levellers coming that way, The Governor
resolved, and has promised him all the assistance he can against them if they
come the next Market day; and then it is possible they will be snapt.

FRom Oxford came thus; Sir, The Levelling party does much resort ^o these
quarters, since this Garrison has revolted from the Parliament, Horse and foot
come in night and day in great numbers, but we hear that will be soon
prevented by some of the Asmies horse, that are appointed to straighten their
quarters. Their Council consisted most of private soldiers at first, but
since some head-peeces are come from London to join with them, They talk of
other Garrisons that will join with them, and that they doubt not but to have
an offensive Field Army before six weeks be ended, we hear they are framing a
Remonstrance for the recovery of Englands lost freedoms, and for ease of the
people from Burdens and oppressions, for obtaining whereof (they say) they are
resolved, to hazard their lives and Fortunes.

There came further this day that the Soldiery have seized on the 4. Gentlemen
sent down to appease them, and that Col. Inglesby himself is secured by his own
Soldiers in Oxon, but of this little certain^y.

From Scotland we here little of News, only the Committee of Estates are still
at St. Johnstons, The King and they can make nothing yet upon their Treaty, the
one working upon the others late defeat and the other thinking him stronger and
more populously affected then ever, and upon the least turning any of the three
Nations shall have as little need of their assistance as they of his affections.

A Letter from Chester
SIR,
Upon the sight of your last, da^ed the 28. of the forgoing month, wherein I
received so many extraordinary engagements, and courtisies from you I thought
good to answer your desires (therein mentioned) with the best n^wes for
present, which is thus, viz. That from Dublin we hear that since the advance of
the Lord Lieut. they hear that Inchiqueen is not w^^h O m^nd but only the Lord
A^d^ and Ormond are together much fearing Owen R^e should fall in their rea^e,
And further are informed that there has been some actioon between a party of
the Lord Leiut. and Ormonds near D^^gh^da, the manner thus, a squadron of our
horse b^ing sent ^ut to discover the enemy met (in a narrow passage with a
party of the en my, who though more i^ number then themselves, yet they
resolved to charge them, and at the first the enemy came on with such fury as
they were confident of a victory, yet our men wh^^^ ng about come on with such
resolution that forced them to retreat, that th^i^ eagernes proud their
desteny, in which dispute 6 of their men were killed only 3. of ours received
some small h^rt, and as we hear, brought of some of they s prisoners, by my
next I am co fid nt I shall give you a better accoun^ of the proceedings of our
A^my, and of their succ sse at D^oghedah.


The Committee of Estates are not yet come from St. Iohnstones, and so the
Letter not yet sent to our declared King, we shall not be to hasty in sending,
because we exspect a speedy answer, and a good: The banished out of the North
of Ireland, (whom my Lord of Ards etc. would give money and more to have again)
come hither, are to be reduced into six companies, who also will be disposed
for defense, and its but need, in regard of the alterations in Ireland. We
shall pass the Winter merrily, and quietly, merrily in regard we shall have
French Wines at as cheap price as Scotch Ale to you; quietly, because we have
no enemy within: We have nothing to bewail, but the general violation of most
of the Commandments of the second table, notwithstanding our Ministers
preaching, our public shames imposed upon offenders by the Church, and severe
laws that should, and generally are put in execution by the Magistrates.

It is Ceported that at the landing of the Prince tnd Duke with the rest they
were entertained with many expressions of joy [(from the Lord Iermaine)] for
his safe arrivill, which questionless they will suddenly they will soon be
weary of.

We here further that their design is to Proclaim Prince Charles King and to
Crown him in Jersey and after to reduce Dakmouth or some such place in the
West, in expectation of a general rising.

From France we hear the Duke of York came hither on Thursday last and the nexh
day was revisited by our King, and the Cardinal, whom he most humbly desired
to have compassion on his brother the King, and to give all the aid h^ could
for regaining his Kingdoms, whereto the Cardinal made answer it could not be
now, but when they were in capacity they would spare neither purse nor power,
but desired him to ac- of a small present of 10000 Crowns in the mean timr.

FINIS.

