(...) A STAY in TROUBLE OR THE SAINTS REST IN THE EVIL DAY. Exactly discovered
from their Cordial dependence upon God, and comfortable assistance by him.
Shortly digested as the SAINTS MANUAL In the worst of Times.

The FIRST PART.

By Alexander Pringle, a worthless Servant to Christ in the work of his Gospel.

Thou have known my soul in adversities.
(...)
Psalm. 31.8. The Lord was my stay.
(...)
Psalm. 18.19. I said thou art my God.
(...)
Psalm. 31.14. London, Printed by Anne Maxey, for William Weekly at Ipswich, and
are to be sold by John Rothwel, at the Fountain in Goldsmiths-Row in
Cheap Side. 1657.

To the most accomplished READER.
WOrthy Friend, (if such) thy Personal Character will easily discover the
Mystery of this Manual: Seeing the wise Man's eyes are in his head, Eccles.
2.14. and the spiritual Man discerns all things, 1 Cor. 2.15. Piety and
Prudence, as they are of a sacred Extraction, so they are of a searching
Discretion.

I confess here is (multum) not (multa) My (Genius) being accustomed to speak
rather much in a few, then little in many words.

Thou have objected to thy (...) a stay in trouble; together with the sacred
Sympathy of the Saints Unsealed in that Estate: If there be any thing seeming
amiss in the Draught of this Emblem, look again? There may be a dimness in the
Optic, as a blemish in the Object: The Eye and Color being often guilty of
their active, and passive distempers: Let me only tell thee, seeing Wisdom is
justified of her Children: The truth of this Compendious Tractate, is more then
ordinary careless of the trivial Censures of many.

But if any has a Cordial appetite to peruse it, I shall entreat them to
befriend it, with a few of the choicest acts of their Intellect; otherwise,
they may beat the Bush, but never catch the Bird.

It shall facilitate somewhat the Exercise of their Fancy, to keep close to the
Subject, charging nothing more of a second (Notion) upon it, then what the
(Being) of the first will bear.

Otherwise, if they trouble themselves with an over-sensing Nonsense; they may
build Castles in the Air, but no way reaching the mind of the Author.

I have Heartily contrived a short System of sound words, for the ease of
Troubled Spirits, if the gracious Sollidity of such sweetning Materials can
settle their Condition, he has his end, who zealously studieth their Spiritual
Establishment in Truth and Peace; As

Christ's meanest Servant in the Ministry of the Gospel, ALEX. PRINGLE.
From my Study in Harwich, Jan. 1. 1656.
READER,
BE pleased, take notice, that the Escapes of the Press, are neither the Mind
of the Author nor the Design of the Printer, and therefore let it be thy
Civility to both, to excuse the absence of the one, and correct the unwilling
Errata of the other.

Errata in the first Part.
Page 7. line 11. read as. p. 6. l. 1. r. Signing. p. 7. l. 1. r. as. p. 9. l.
20. r. say. p. 36. l. 1. r. but by him p. 39. l. 11. r. tedious.

Errata in the second Part.
Page 5 line 13. r. viris. p. 9. l. 21. r. affectu. p. 10. l. 19. r. serie. p.
17. l. 13. r. Indemnity. p. 28. l. 15. r. Gallios. p. 38. l. 3. r. affectus. p.
39. l. 11. r. a me. p. 47. l. 9. r. it. p. 4^. l. 22. r. holy. p. 62. l. 7. r.
manu:

Imprimatur,

March 7. 1656. EDM. CALAMY.

(...) A STAY in TROUBLE, OR THE SAINTS REST In the Evil Day.
Psalm. 63.8. My Soul cleaves to thee, Thy right hand upholdeth me.
Introduction.
IN the Composure and subject matter of this Psalm, Hic Psalmus est exgenere
mixtorum. Pareus ad loc.
we have a true account of the exercise of David's Spirit, whilst he was in the
Wilderness of Ziph; 1 Samuel 23.14. Psalm. 57.2, 3.
It seems that place to him (whatever it was in it self) was a solitude of
Prayer and Meditation.

Gracious Spirits can make the best of the baddest places, Animadversion. Isai.
26.3. Act. 5.41: 2 Cor. 6.10.
fair weather in the foulest storms; they can turn raging troubles into
Religious trials, and a barren Wilderness in a Sanctuary of worship: Psalm.
57.7, 8, 9, 10. Psalm. 42.5. Psalm 73.28. Isai. 40.29, 31.
It was David's cross to suffer, but his comfort and Crown to serve God in that
estate.

He had a malicious Saul for his implacable enemy, 1 Samuel 24.15. 1 Samuel 26.1.
Psalm. 52.8, 9.
but a merciful God for his intimate Friend, he will not gratify the one, to
dishonor the other; he will glorify God wheresoever he sojourn, let the Devil
and Saul do what they can; Psalm. 54.6.
Psalm. 57.2.
they may banish him from the Tabernacle, and force him to the Wilderness, 1 Samuel 26, 19, 20. Psalm. 56.2, 3, 4, 5.
but not from Gods worship; they may afflict his body, but they are not able to
pervert his Spirit: Romans 8.35, 36, 37. Psalm 56.11, 12, 13.
For (says he) My soul cleaves to the Lord, his right hand upholdeth me.

In which words we have two things materially considerable of David's Spirit, as
it is now engaged in this disconsolate condition.

First, Its dependence upon God, The Text divided.
My soul cleaves unto thee.

Secondly, Its assistance by God, His right hand upholdeth me.

In both which parts, Note. Saints spiritual communion in, trouble with God.
we may discern what a comfortable correspondence is kept betwixt the Lord and
David, in this sad time; his heart cleaves to God, and the Lords hand upholds
him; we shall consider his words, The Text opened.
(...) My soul, my whole Spirit, my life, Plura autem hoc vocabulo
fignificantur, 1. Spiritus. 2. Vita. 3. Anima rationalis. 4 Homo corpore, and
anima compositus. 5 Per synecdochen personam fignificat. Saints careful of
their spirits in trouble. Psalm. 56.3. Psalm. 7.2, 3. Amos. 6.8 Genesis 17.21 Lev.
19.28
the whole man as the root, (...) originally import, Genesis 17.14.

Doubtless, David had nothing but what he had cast upon God, in the case
wherein he was; but especially his person, which was more precious to him then
all his other enjoyments; and it is the Saints custom to speak by their Spirits
all things else, that being their (unum) their only thing precious; if this be
well placed, all things else are well preserved: So David speaks nothing here
but his heart, and its establishment upon God, Heb. Non simpliciter adherere
significat sed amantem conjugali affectu; quare, and Rabbi David in radicibus
per associari ex ponit.
My soul cleaves to God.

(...) Adhaesit, adherescit anima mea post te, My soul cleaves after thee, as
do things which hang by another; the root is of so great frequency in
Scripture, as of inquiry amongst Critics; it imports here the posture of
David's spirit, and speaks it close to God; and so depending upon him, as
nothing could loosen it from him: Satan's subtilty, Saul's cruelty; his own
personal loss and indemnity, are not all of them of any force or dexterity, to
cut asunder or unty the Gordian knot of this unity Expremitur hac voce
arctissimum, and indissolubile vinculum quale est inter conjuges. Gerh. loc.
com.
.

The cleaving of David's spirit, was a glewing of the Lords spirit; a marriage
of the Lords making, is altogether incapable of the Devils breaking.

It is no wonder, David's words report him so much devoted to God, Dependence.
seeing with the same breath they speak him supported by God, Assistance.
Thy right hand (says he.

(...) Dextra tua, Thy right hand; This is a humane member feigning a Divine
Power; Psalm. 118.16. Rev. 1.17. Psalm. 138.7. Psalm. 139.10. Psalm. 80.18.
it is ordinary for the Spirit to speak low, (...), for our infirmity that we
may conceive (...) (in a Divine decency) according to our capacity.

Right hand] In Scripture Language, when attributed to God sometime signifies
God himself, Isai. 48.13. His word, Isai. 62.8. His present aid and assistance,
Psalm 74.11. All which may be understood by this right hand upholding David in
this juncture of time.

(...) Sustentat me, Exprimit ad jumenta omnia and adminicula quibus pollere
sibi videtur. A word signifying not only the strength of body, but also of
mind.
He often or always upholdeth me: This seems to be a Phrase of David's
experience, he had tasted that the Lord was good in that and other his
suffering seasons.

The Saints are sensible of their supplies, and resent them: The vessels of
mercy are all so thankful, Note. Psalm. 116.3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
as faithful observers of Gods favor; Deuteronomy. 8.11. Psalm. 119.16. Psalm. 103.2.
they vent none of their receipts, but in respective acknowledgements.

It is not with them, as it is with those hollow Cisterns of this degenerous.
Generation, whose worthless Genius speak them such as they are; under the most
eminent kindnesses, all so senseless as thankless, Psalm. 9.17.

David it seems is of another more refined Spirit, Note. The thank fullness of
the Saints.
he will professedly publish those mutual outgoings of Spirit and power,
betwixt the Lord and himself, and tell the world, that his enemies may hear his
soul cleaved to God, and the Lord did uphold him.

Such Religious tidings might cool the courage of his adversaries, they hearing
he was joined to so strong a party, who was able to support him and bear him
up, 1 Samuel 18.13, 17. and 24.22.
in opposition to all their designed stratagems complotted or executed against
him.

HAving thus shortly taken a survey of David's words; I find they present the
singular deportment and encouragement of his own, The result of the words.
or any other gracious spirit in trouble, and thus in two eminent
considerations.

First,

Secondly, It has a comfortable assistance from Cod.

In these two streams flow all the substantial sweetness of David's words in
this place.

First, They give us in the testimony of David's spirit cleaving to God.

Secondly, They report his experimental assistance in the evil day by him; we
shall speak to each of these in their order.

I. Of the Saints Dependence.
FIrst, That a gracious spirit has its total dependence upon God in trouble,
seems to be David's case and qualification in this estate.

He was sharply assaulted by Saul, but strictly united to God; My soul cleaves
to God: Adhaerendi verbum (says Calvin) significat David cor suum firma
perseverantia semper affixum fore Deo. Call. ad loc.

Troubles lay hold upon David, David's custom. Psalm. 11.1. Psalm. 25.1.
and David's Spirit lays hold upon his God: It is worth Animadversion, he casts
not of his burden, but casts himself and his burden upon God: My foul, such
as it is, my persecuted, troubled soul cleaves to the Lord: Here David
expresses an absolute dependence upon God, Diodate.
says Diodate in loc.

Temporal sufferings for God, Troubles unite, and not divide saints from God.
are spiritual sodderings of the Saints Spirits to him: Such an Antiperistasis
begets a Religious heat in a gracious heart, burning their corruptions, and
melting their affections upon God, Psalm. 119.28.

Afflictions work kindly upon the Spirits of the Godly; Note.
it was good for me (said David) that I was afflicted: Note. Afflictions work
diversely upon Saints and Sinners.
Crosses are Corasives to some, but Cordials to others.

There is no stomach can down with calamity, Gal. 6.14. 2 Cor. 6.10. Psalm.
56.10, 11. Psalm. 56.3.
so well as that which is appetized with mercy; such spirits are more the Lords
then their own, The Saints rest in affliction. Isa. 54.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
and therefore in storms can rest upon him, like the Dove upon the Ark, or the
Ark upon Arrarat; he is the highest and surest mountain, and can settle us in
the deepest deluge: Note. Whether afflictions send or lead the Saints.
I confess, I have observed the Scriptures speak much of the Saints motion,
and tendency of their spirits in trouble, and I have always seen them turn into
this City of refuge, and take hold of the horns of this Altar: I read David
praising God, Psalm 18.2. By the Phraseology of a Rock, Fortress, Strength,
Trust, Shield, and horn of his Salvation: And elsewhere, Psalm 23. he priseth
his presence so much, that although he should walk in the valley of the shadow
of death, he feared no evil, he was with him, his rod and staff comforted him.

Bt it seems there is no love lost betwixt the Lord and his servants in
trouble; Note. The sweet correspondence betwixt the Lord and his people.
for he is with them whilst they are with him, 2 Chro. 15.2. Saints more happy
then the wicked every way.
Thus the Saints are happier in their crosses then the worldlings in their
comforts; the first may be enjoyed with God, the second without him.

But to wind up all what is here reported of David, Note. David's practice, and
all the Saints the same.
I find it is the Language and Learning of all the godly in his case; as they
are of the same spirit and interest, In affection.
so they are of the same practice and profession, to depend upon a gracious God
in trouble.

There be three reasons amongst many, Note Hence the arguments of the Saints
dependence upon God in affliction.
obliging the Saints to a dependence upon God in trouble.

First, Their accomplishment.

Secondly, Their encouragement.

Thirdly, Their establishment in that estate.

It seems as the Saints cannot be troubled without God, so they can confidently
look upon him for all their supplies and furniture in that their sad condition.

We shall take notice of those prementioned grounds in their order.

First, First Argument. Saints accomplishment. Described what it is.
Of the Saints accomplishment from their dependence upon God in trouble.

The Saints accomplishment is their gracious qualification, becoming their
Interest, adding nothing to their Essence, but to their Ornament, Phil. 4.13.
putting a fitness upon them to serve God in that condition. Note. The decency
of the Saints accomplishment in adversity. Psalm. 97.8.10, 11.


That this accomplishment is very suitable to the Saints, and arises to them
in trouble, from their dependence upon God is easy to find out, if we
seriously consider the Particulars following.

First, The grounds of accomplishment in trouble.
Troubles are the Saints trials, and there is nothing more becoming them in
that estate, then to act like themselves, Psalm. 13.1.2, 3.
that by their carriage they may confute their calamity, 1 Pet. 2.12. 2. Ground.
and the abetters of it.

Secondly, There is a dextrous activity necessary in trouble, which at other
times is useless: The Mariner in a Tempest must stand to his Tackling, when in
a calm he may sleep.

Thirdly, Preoccupation.
but that thus all our actions are gainers of honor.

Now as to these the Saints should come eminently short, if they were not fixed
upon God, and therefore they cleave to him for accomplishment, when (in such a
season) they have none in themselves. Dependence upon God necessary and
profitable.
And they find their dependence upon God is not labor in vain; God has
engaged his promise more then once or twice for the profit of this posture,
Isaiah 26.3. With an assured purpose will thou preserve perfect peace, because
they trusted in thee: Here is peace designed by God to a depending soul upon
him; the like is promised often elsewhere, Deuteronomy. 11.22. If ye cleave to him,
then will the Lord cast out the Nations before you: Here we may read Israel
will be too hard for his enemies, if he can be happy in holding fast his truest
Friend. The God of Israel is the giver of every good gift, Jam. 1.17. There is
no fear of Provision if he be our Steward, Psalm. 84.11, 12.

Hence it comes, Grace the Saints riches, and the Saints are happy in trouble
by their Graces.
the Saints are richer in adversity, then are the wicked in their prosperity;
they have more precious furniture in one corner of their hearts, then the
wicked in the whole Storehouse of their spirits, 2 Cor. 7.4.

The godly have not only the exercise, Graces great in adversity.
but the increase of their Graces in trouble; for they resting upon God, Note.
Enlargement of Graces in affliction.
they are recruited and enlarged by him. Hence it comes, their Faith is more
lively, their hope more heavenly, their Love more fervent, their Wisdom more
vigilant, their Patience more permanent, their Prudence more provident, their
Piety more prevalent, whilst they labor in that estate.

These distinguishing Characters of accomplishment, Graces manifested by
trouble.
have been written upon the Lords worthies in the days of their difficulty,
that they might shine as so many memorial Monuments to posterity of future
observance; that as it is the Saints lot to be troubled, Saints no losers by
trouble.
so it is their happiness to be no losers in that estate, by their dependence
upon God; it seems it is the Saints communion with God, that sweetens that
condition. No leaning upon our selves in affliction.


The godly should be hardly put to it, if they did lean upon themselves: David
was a great deal more happy by cleaving to his God, then Saul and all his
favorites trusting upon man. David outwits his enemies, by his dependence upon
God.
And herein he was wiser then all his enemies which complotted his ruin; he
knew he was not only out of their reach, when he rested upon God, but fully
accommodated with all things befitting his condition; he was with such a
Friend, who would spare no cost in his keeping, To close with God is the Saints
security in trouble.
and therefore to keep close to him was his surest and sweetest course he could
take in trouble, Psalm. 73, ult.

It is the excellency of David's spirit, that he is contented to be any where
with God; The godly are contented to be with God any where.
He can digest the weariness of a Wilderness, by the comfort of his company:
Gods presence makes every place alike, and is instead of all Enjoyments to the
godly, and it is no wonder they should be so satisfied with him, seeing he is
so precious or profitable to them, Psalm 37.39, 40.

Let this piece of David's and the godlies practice bear witness,

First, Saints are gainers by their dependence upon God.
It is the Saints gain to depend upon God, because of their furniture: They
should be as other men in trouble, if they were not happy in those things which
they receive from God, Psalm 31.19. How great is thy goodness which thou have
laid up for them that fear thee, and done to them that trust in thee before the
sons of men: Here the Spirit of God will have us take notice of two things,

First, The Saints mercy is expected by them.
That the godly have more then ordinary favor in trouble.

Secondly, They are such as depend and attend upon that goodness.

Secondly, Note. The wicked are losers.
For the Saints adversaries; That they are losers, it cannot otherways fall
out, if the godly be gainers; But so it is, the godly being joined to God, they
are accurately fitted by God to encounter their enemies. Divine dependence does
strengthen the Saints.
Through God we shall do valiantly; It is not for the enemies of the Lords
people to engage against God.

Me thinks all this, Application in trouble.
and much more, might give warning to the Saints to fear none of their enemies,
when they have the Lord upon their side, Romans 8.32. If God be for us (says
Paul) who can be against us.

I have observed the godly to be patient in their Afflictions, Note. An
observation of the saints deportment in trouble, whilst depending upon God.
Prudent in their transactions, Pious in their persecutions, Peaceable under
injuries, Humble under indignities, and hopeful of their deliverances; All
which, as so many extractions from their dependence upon God.

It is the worst of nonsense, Note.
to say we can be close by the fire, and not find warmth; and by the sea, and
not find water: Such may be the folly of those who imagine a soul united to
God, and not qualified in trouble suitable to its estate.

I confess, The saints singular carriage in this world.
when I see the Saints deportment in the world, I am apt to admire at their
singularity, that they are neither in Principle or Practice like the world; and
when I see they are no more strangers to some of the wickeds persons, then to
all of the wickeds practice and carriage in trouble; I consider that there is
something more then ordinary acting in them, whilst they are in that estate;
and when I have made a serious inquiry, I can find nothing but their cleaving
to God; Union with God makes the Saints of asweet behavior in the world, to the
good example of all.
that establishment of their spirits upon him, renders them not only
considerable in the eyes of their enemies, but eminently profitable to
themselves and others of their Interest.

For the nearer they are to God, the more accomplishment they have from him:
Dependence upon God delivers us from distractions.
So that the godly are eased of all their inconvenient Encumbrances, if they
rest upon him. The consideration of which, moved Peter when he writ to all the
Saints, 1 Pet. 5.7. To counsel them to cast all their care upon him, for he
cared for them; words of singular use for the godly in trouble, to attend
provision in such a season, Help to be expected from God, when there is none
visible.
when there is none to be seen: When the black curtain of calamity is drawn
about them, and all secondary helps separate from them, 2 Samuel 22.19. Such was
David's case in this desert, wherein he had no reserve but his God, and
therefore his soul cleaves to him: My soul cleaves to thee.

Secondly, Argument. Of the Saints dependence upon God.
there is another considerable ground of David's dependence upon his God; and
this is his encouragement in trouble.

David had need of encouragement in his now sad condition; Encouragement in
trouble.
it seems he had many cruel enemies, but few cordial Friends; and therefore he
thought it best to make sure of God, Saints sure of comfort if they depend upon
God in trouble.
and then he knew to be sure of continued comfort, whatever should betide him.

This was not only an act of David's Piety, but of his singular Prudence and
Policy; He was no stranger to the Lords tenderness over him, and all the godly
acting for both: The Lord (says he) is amongst them that uphold my soul, Psalm
54.4. It would seem the Lord makes a party for David in the midst of his
Enemies.

It had gone hard with him if Satan had got his mind; Saints should be in a
sad condition if the Lord did not own them in trouble.
he would not only have stripped him of all his accomplishment, but also of all
his encouragements.

By the first, Unfitting him to suffer.

By the second, Undoing him in that estate.

But I find David's dependence upon God, dispels all such discouragements; he
was certain that Satan or any of his Instruments could not wrong him, if the
Lord did stand his friend; I trust in God (says he, Psalm 56.11.) I fear not
what man can do unto me.

David had an enemy (which in respect of his place and pravity of spirit,
David's enemies of a cursed and cruel spirit, and bent to undo him.
as the times presented) might have dampt his courage, he being then in a
capacity to do him a great deal of mischief; but this sealed Saint, being in
league with God, he valued not his wrath; for he apprehended his security from
that unity betwixt God and his spirit: My soul (says he) cleaves unto God,
his right hand upholdeth me.

The Saints dependence upon God in trouble, does afford various encouragements
to them in that estate, The Saints encouragements in trouble.
but especially,

First, His presence with them.

Second, His Providence over them.

Third, Honor to their Friends.

Fourth, Shame to their Enemies.

Fifth, Shortness of their troubles.

Sixth, Sweetness of Deliverance.

First, Encouragement.
The Saints dependence upon God assures them of his presence: I am always with
thee (says David) I have set the Lord at my right hand, Psalm. 16 8.

It is not hard to find out Gods presence with his servants in trouble by
their dependence upon him; And I conceive, the Lord is pleased to encourage his
servants thus, by countenancing of them, that they may relish his favor, which
they account better then life. Gods presence, the Saints preservative.
Thus he will not have his servants to be troubled at the fury of their
Adversaries, whilst they have him to be friend.

Hence it is, that the godly do so much prize him, God the alone help of the
Saints.
that they look after no assistance with him; his presence is such a cordial
preservative to secure them, that they are almost careless of any power
whatsoever to oppose them: This encouragement, I conceive, may prove profitable
to all of David's interest, if they ingenuously desire the Lords presence with
them; Saints dependence is blessed with the Lords presence.
they must conclude to fix their spirits upon him, then they need not question
but he will hide them privily in his presence Psalm 31.20.
from the pride of men.

Secondly, Encouragement.
The Saints have the encouragement of the Lords providence acting for them,
when their spirits depend upon him; it is not the Lords custom to forget or
neglect those who are in unity with himself, he has an eye to look out for
them, as they have a heart to lay hold upon him, Psalm 17.7.

Hence the godly are not much troubled in adversity for their provisions; they
conclude (seeing the Lord is their Shepherd) they cannot want; He makes them
rest in green pastures, and leads them by the still waters; so that they may
know their unity with God speaks them happy, in the hardship of any estate
whatsoever: Gods gracious providence over them, is such an encouragement to
them, as both sanctifies and seasoneth their trouble, and their spirits under
it.

Let this encouragement quicken Saints, but damp sinners, Application of the
former encouragements.
whilst both suffer in the evil day; Let it assure the first, that they are not
alone in adversity, whilst the second are desolutely drowned in the fainting
fits of their own sinful calamity.

Third encouragement of Saints, Third encouragement.
depending upon their God in trouble, is the honor of their friends: The Saints
as they are a chosen generation, so they are of the same mutual interest and
honor.

It is not so much a matter of private, as public concernment, that they
depend upon God; thus they stand in the face of their enemies, Saints stand or
falito their brethren.
to their brethren as to themselves: For the Churches credit is common as to
all, so to each particular member of that body: It is no small encouragement to
the godly, Encouragement to the godly to see their party prosper.
to see their party prosper in despite of malice, they are delighted in the
Saints honor as their own; and therefore in the day of trouble they depend upon
God, that the Saints be no losers by them, and that all their enemies may know
the godly have credit and comfort in their sharpest conflicts, both for
themselves and friends, let the devil do what he can: All this is come upon us,
yet do we not forget thee, neither deal we falsely concerning thy Covenant,
Psalm 44.17.

It should not only be the shame, The godly are troubled in their brethrens
calamity, for their common concernment.
but the sorrow of Saints to see their brethren betray their common interest to
the will of the wicked, by making shipwreck of their integrity upon the
breaches of their trouble; Dependence upon God, a preservative of the Saints
integrity.
and there is nothing can preserve them from such an adventure, but to be much
with God; their unity with him, does fit and completely furnish them with an
accomplishment and sweet encouragement in every estate; so that in the worst of
times, their deportment may nor only be a happiness to themselves, but an
honor to all their friends.

Fourthly, Encouragement. Punishment of the Saints enemies.
it is no small encouragement to the Saints, to see God turn his hand against
their enemies; that as they have been scourged by them, he is pleased to cast
the rod in the fire: God always gratifies his servants thus when they depend
upon him; he can clothe their enemies with shame, that they may see their
desires upon them.

The Scripture tells us, The Lord will have the credit of calamity to fall at
last to the share of the Saints, but the curse to their enemies; that although
the wicked has sown their misery, The wicked sow what they do not reap.
yet they shall never be able to reap their ruin, no not so much as the least
of comfort or honor in their disturbance; it is just with God to trouble them
who trouble you, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.

Therefore the godly cast their case upon God, God the avenger.
and he takes order with their enemies to satisfaction; they cannot seek so
much honor to themselves, or shame to their adversaries, as the Lord will heap
upon both.

This (me thinks) should warn the wicked to mind themselves when they malign
the Saints: For if they prove insolent over the godly by an (Ace) another cast
of the Die of Providence, may Sink their condition.

Fifthly, Encouragement.
Shortness in trouble is another encouragement to the Saints from their
dependence upon God; and this is the Lords work, and the Saints benefit:
Dependence upon God shortens the Saints trouble.
It seems they obtain such favor from him, when they are in unity with him: It
is easy with God to make an end of the Saints Calamity, if they rest upon him,
for the Saints crosses are like Samsons cords, they are quickly broken if the
Lord do but strain them; Simile or comparison
it is but a poor trial of the Lords ability, to ease the Saints of their
sufferings, he can do that for them and never trouble himself: Therefore it
has been his practice to dispatch their calamity like a cloud, if their
spirits did six upon him; Exo. 14.13
how soon is Pharaoh drowned, when Israel stands still to behold the
salvation of his God?

I apprehend this is no course encouragement which the Saints have from God,
when their spirits cleave unto him; it seems he makes an end of their troubles
to the best advantage.

Therefore I conclude it convenient for the Saints to settle upon God in their
saddest condition; 2 Chro. 20.12, 22, 23, 24, 25.
they have trusted the Lord with their business, and he has always brought
their purposes to a desiderable period.

It is the Saints happiness to be happy in this, that they have learned to
depend upon God, more then upon any thing else below him, The Saints know what
the Lord can do for them by instruments.
for they are certain he can employ any instrument to befriend them, if they
did cast themselves upon him.

Sixthly and lastly, Encouragement, a gracious deliverance.
It is not the least encouragement to the godly after a tedious trouble, to be
sure of a gracious deliverance.

It seasoneth the bitterness of former calamity, to have a few grains of mercy
mingled in their future recovery; The Saints forget their troubles, and forgive
their enemies when they are delivered.
and therefore the godly being delivered, are contented to seal a Bill of
oblivion to all their former sufferings upon that account.

There is no better way to obtain this comfortable benefit from God, then by a
confident dependence upon him: For as there is no evil in the City without God,
so there is no deliverance from it by him.

Hence the godly have this their encouragement amongst the rest, that they do
rely upon God for a glorious deliverance; from trouble in their deepest
engagements in it, Mich. 7.9. he will bring me forth unto the light, and I
shall see his righteousness.

The Saints case should be very dismal and miserably dark, if they did not see
somewhat coming, which did sweeten their present condition; and therefore they
look for this as an encouragement of their dependence upon God, to have a
gracious deliverance from him.

I shall need add no more: David's practice our pattern in the evil day.
David is a notable pattern of this kind of practice: My foul (says he)
cleaves to thee: He fixes his spirit upon God, assuring himself if he did
engage his heart to a religious dependence upon him, he was certain of a
comfortable deliverance by him; and so much we have spoken of David's, and all
the Saints their encouragements, from their dependence upon God.

The third ground of the Saints their dependence upon God in trouble, Argument,
establishment of spirit.
is their establishment spiritual, whilst they are laboring under the pressure
of that dismal estate.

It is not only a convenient, but a qualification absolutely necessary for the
Saints interest, to be of an established spirit.

This piece of composure shows what they are, Establishment a character of
Saints.
both in Principle and Practice; and there is nothing can put or keep a soul in
this posture, but its dependence upon God, when the soul is anchored upon him;
it is fully fitted to ride out unchangeably the fury of any storm, Satan
Improves the Saints trouble to unfix them.
Psalm 46.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. It is Satan's Master piece to improve the Saints
afflictions to inconstancy of spirit; thus making his best advantage of their
worst and weakest condition

If he can but shake them from their piety, he is then sure to break them by
his policy, and therefore he is as vigilant as malicious to effectuate their
ruin.

The godly have nothing to prevent him, but to close with their God; prizing
more his presence with them, then the enmity of all created powers acting
against them.

This is visibly legible in David's spirit, who is careful in nothing but to own
his God; and he knew that the keeping of a familiar Correspondence with him,
should soon ease him of all his adversaries, he tells all of them of whatsoever
impression they were, his soul cleaved to God. Afflictions put the Saints to it.


It was an hard time with David, the waves of wickedness did wash upon his
Spirit, yet we see this tedoius Tempest did not drive it from its Anchor: David
is of a stable heart in the midst of those Distractions; his enemies could do
nothing upon his inward, whatever breach they did make upon his outward estate;
it seems he secures his Soul with God whatever befell him. Satan more pleased to
pervert the spirits, then to impoverish the bodily estates of the godly.


I confess it would have pleased the Devil better to have made David a sinful
Sceptick in this his Calamity, then to see him a suffering Saint, to have made
him of no Religion as to God, then of no Estate as to the World; to have stripped
him rather of the goodness of his Conscience, then of the glory of his Kingdom.
Satan prevented


But herein David outwits his Policy, and outworks his Power, he takes such a
Comfortable course with his Spirit, as Satan could neither unsettle it, or
unseal its integrety; he casts it upon God, and so firmly secures it in
opposition to any Change whatsoever, let Satan or all of his Instruments do
their worst.

So much we have considered of the Saints Dependence upon their God in trouble,
according to this pattern of David's practice, My Soul cleaves to God. We shall
further inquire into the second Conclusion.

II. Of the Saints Assistance.
IT appears by David's words here, and elsewhere, Note. Saints assistance a
fruit of their dependence upon God.
that the Saints assistance from God, is a fruit of their dependence upon him.

Our fathers trusted in thee (says David) and were delivered, they trusted in
thee, and were not confounded, Psalm. 22.4, 5.

There is an old correspondance of kindness kept betwixt the Lord and his
servants; as they look upon him for their furniture in adversity; so he upon
the frame and posture of their spirits expecting it: God will be sought after.
The Lord is good and a strong hold in the day of trouble; but (says the
Prophet) he knows them that trust in him, Nahum 1.7.

The godly consider the Lords assistance to be the best; Gods help the best and
most precious.
and therefore as that which is most profitable and precious, it is desired by
them. I find David and others of the godly in the Scriptures to look upon this
divine help as abstracted often from means. I do not trust in my bow, neither
can my sword save me, but thou have saved us, Psalm 44.6, 7.

As means are not the objects of the Saints confidence, so they know without
the Lord they cannot be the subject of their assistance. Saints rely not upon
means.
If the Lord had not helped me, (Psalm. 94.17) my soul had almost dwelt in
silence, when I said my foot slideth, thy mercy stayed me.

There is a Caveat put in against all means by the Spirit, Caveat.
that they rob not God of his honor; Dependence upon means, disparage God
and therefore the Saints give no more to them then he has allotted (...) they
know they only act in their service, Means are acted by God only, and not of
themselves
as they are ordered by God; and that there is no more of any ability in them,
then what the Lord has dispensed, therefore the godly look upon the Lords hand
as the hope of their help, in trouble, thy right hand upholdeth me.

So then the Lord is the only help, As the Saints look upon God, so he looks
upon them.
and grand assistant of his Saints, and their eyes in trouble are upon him;
which aspect, as it signifies the excellency of the Lords favor to them, so
it seals the unity of their spirits with him, In the multitude of the
thoughts of my heart, thy comforts rejoiced my soul, Psalm. 94.19.

Here is David's familiarity with God, and his refreshment given in to him, in
the juncture of his trouble.

And it may be witnessed by the experience of all the godly, that this is not
only his, Gods help the portion of all the godly.
but the portion of all the Saints, therefore shall every one that is godly,
make his prayer to thee in a time when thou may be found. Surely in the
floods of great waters they will not come near him, Psalm. 32.6.

It seems it is the Lords custom, for the Saints exceeding comfort, to engage
for them when they entreat him in trouble; God will be entreated for his
assistance.
and therefore he has commanded them to pray, that he might engage for them,
Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me; There is here somewhat notable, that the godly must
not fail to call if they expect the Lord to answer, or to do any thing for them.

Me thinks I need not put the Reader to any further cost of considering many
more Scriptures, Preocupatio.
which speak home the truth of the Lords assistance to his Saints in David's
case. Let us only take the Affidavit of one Scripture more to this purpose,
Isai 41.10. Fear not for I am with thee, be not afraid, for I am thy God, I
will strengthen thee, I will sustain thee with my right hand of Justice. Here I
conceive the Prophet has commission to speak the Lords mind fully to his
people in order to their comfort and confidence in trouble, and that he may do
it to purpose he crowds in the vast body of the Lords benevolence to them in a
Nutshel. And so he is pleased to speak much in little, and but a little of
much, Engrossing a sum of assurances, in the systeme of a few promises, for
their establishment.

It is a great comfort, which is able to settle the spirit of the godly in
trouble, when they know what the Lord will do for them.

And in this very point of the Saints Information, It is the Saints comfort to
know God to be their friend.
he is pleased to privilege them above the wicked in adversity. He opens their
eyes, not only to let them see their mercy, but himself the fountain of it.

I will lift up my eyes (says David) to the mountains, from whence my
salvation comes, my help comes from the name of the Lord. This was David's
distinguishing mercy, that in the midst of his misery, he could see his remedy,
and the Lord his Physician.

So then the difference betwixt suffering Saints and sinners lies in this,
Difference betwixt Saints and sinners in trouble.
the Lord engages for the assistance of the one, and not for the other. So
that the wicked are left hopeless and helpless in the evil day, when the godly
find a favorable and gracious support in that season.

Thy right hand upholdeth me, says David. This is a word of his experience,
and so much the Scriptures witness of all the godly, that the Lord does engage
for them. But upon what grounds he upholds the Saints against their
adversaries, Grounds of the Lords assistance for his Saints.
is the thing further now to be inquired after.

I find the Scriptures give in ample testimony of the Lords engagement for, and
supporting of his people in trouble, Eight grounds of the Lords assistance.
and so do move us to consider of eight reasons of his undertaking for them.

First, We read of an eminently intimate interest he has in them, Ground of
the Lords help his interest
so that they are honored with the names of strictest relation, union and
communion with himself, Cant. 5.2.
as of his Spouse, Children, Brethren, to his Son Christ, Exodus 19.5
his chiefest treasure above all people in the earth; and with the characters
of greatest worth as can be put upon such, as, a chosen generation, 1 Pet. 2.9,
10
a royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a people set at liberty; in times past not
a people, but now the people of God; in times past not under mercy; but now
obtained mercy, etc. By all which we understand those saving rights he has to
his Saints by Election, Ephesians. 1.4, 5 1 Cor. 1.30
Vocation, Redemption, Justification, Sanctification and Glory.

This Interest laid in the bottom, Interest the ground of assistance.
upon it is built the whole Fabric of the Lords favor both in prosperity and
adversity to the godly. So that they are put in a more then ordinary security
of obtaining whatsoever is necessary, for their comfortable assistance and
subsistence in any estate. I remember, David tells us, Psalm. 34.10. That the
beasts of prey may be starved when the Saints shall have plenty. The interest
which the Lord has in the Saints, Interest makes the Saints precious.
as it is the ground of his acting for them, so it renders them precious to
him, as a seal upon his heart, or a signet upon his arm. And it is not to be
questioned, but the Saints find the sweetness of it in their sharpest
conflicts. Saints dearer to God then their parents.
Though my father and mother forsake me, yet the Lord will gather me up, Psalm.
27.10. And therefore the Lord professes, that the case of his people is
always before him, when they apprehend (by their estate) that they are
neglected by him, Isa. 49.14, 15, 16.

This interest is the binding bond of matrimonial unity and amity betwixt the
Lord and his people, Interest the marriage bond of Saints.
Hos. 19.20. I have married thee, etc. Persons married are cemented with all
the soddering and sweetning influences of conjugal correspondence either in
prosperity or adversity.

Hence I find this interest to be very serviceable to the saints in their
suffering seasons. It is the Altar upon which they sacrifice the Offering of
their addresses to God when they are put to their utmost, Interest the Altar of
our duties to God.
Isai. 63.15, 16. Look down from heaven, and behold, from the dwelling place of
thy holiness, etc. Where is thy zeal and thy strength, and the multitude of thy
mercies, and of thy compassions? they are restrained. Doubtless thou art our
father though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel know us not. Here is a
serious address upon interest put up to God. It is no wonder the saints should
be earnest upon that account, Interest the ground of the Saints correspondence.
seeing the most solid ground of that mutual correspondence betwixt the Lord
and his people, and therefore to be improved in the worst of times.

Oh then let this be remembered by all the heirs of heaven in the dark day of
their danger, Improvement of Interest.
when the clouds of calamity are dropping over them here upon earth, that there
may be a spirit of wisdom acting in them, Interest the anchoring place of the
Saints.
to anchor their heart in peace; upon the ground and cape of this hope.

I could advise the godly to take that cordial counsel which Christ gives his
Spouse, Cant. 2^7. Christ's counsel convenient for the Saints.
Until the day break, or the shadows flee away, be like a young Heart upon the
Mountains of Bether. That however the Mountains of Divisions, (...) Divisio.
may eclipse the comforts of the saints prosperity; The Saints interest a means
of union.
yet I should wish this Mount of conjunction might dispel the distraction of
their calamity in the hour of trial.

The godly have a great advantage of all their enemies by reason of this
interest. They have the benefit of Gods power to support them in spite of
their enemies, The benefit of interest.
and therefore we find, that it lies not in the hand of the wicked to ruin the
godly: I presume it is not for want of malice, The Saints interest boundeth the
wickeds power.
but might. They cannot do what they would, and therefore they do what they
can. It is the happiness of the godly to be united to God by interest when the
wicked are divided from him by their iniquity.

As the first secureth assistance to the godly, so the second prepares
destruction for the wicked.

But seeing it is certain, that the Lords interest in the Saints is the first
ground of his engaging for them; me thinks this should fix diverse particulars
upon the saints spirits, Interest does settle the Saints spirits in trouble.
worth their serious meditation.

First, they are not to fear their enemies, when they have such a friend. David
is not afraid of ten thousand of the people to trouble him, if the Lord did
assist him, Psalm. 3.

Secondly, They must not look upon the Lords service as a piece of difficulty.
For if the Lord have an interest in our persons, he will have a finger inour
practice. He is as careful in the time of prosperity to direct and help us to
do good; as in the evil day to protect and preserve us from danger.

Thirdly, They are not to look upon their enemies, as in any capacity to undo
them, seeing the Lord does support them.

Advertisement to the wicked
It seems it is to kick against the pricks to fall out with the godly because
whatever they are to the world, they are dear and near to God. Let them be
opposed by any, they have a God to take their part.

I remember David, Psalm. 46.7. tells his enemies that he had God for his friend,
and so he was strong enough for his stoutest adversaries And this has put life
in the saints when almost mortified with the sense of their sufferings.

Fourthly, Interest binds the Saints to their good behavior.
This obliges the godly to a singular deportment before God beseeming his
engagement for them in the day of trouble. As they are above the world in their
unity with him, so I would have them in the same degree of duty to him. Oh how
careful should they be to honor him, whose principle and gracious practice it
is (by reason of his interest) to preserve them.

2d Ground, the Saints weakness.
The second ground upon which the Lord is pleased to give in assistance to his
Saints in their suffering condition, is their weakness to deal with their
enemies, who are often as mighty as malicious, and as numerous as furious, 1
King. 20.27. Israel marched like a flock of Kids before the Aramites who filled
the Country.

This ground of the Saints weakness does move the Lord with a great deal of
tenderness toward them, The Saints weakness the object of the Lords pity and
severity.
and bitterness against their enemies, that place of Obadiah, chap. 10.11, 13,
14, 15, 16. is worth our animadversion, and serious consideration.

How tenderly is the Lord affected with Jacobs calamity, and how smartly moved
against Esau's cruelty, For thy cruelty against thy brother Jacob, shame shall
cover thee, and thou shall be cut off for ever; when thou stoodest on the other
side in the day when the strangers carried away his substance, and strangers
entered his gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem, even thou wast as one of them.
After such like direful and dreadful expostulations, he concludes the
destruction of all his peoples enemies, giving a ground of his engagement
against them. Law of retaliation, equalis redditio.
For as ye have drunk upon my holy Mountain, so shall the heathen drink
continually.

It seems the Lord will satisfy the temporary crosses of his servants, with
the continued curses of their enemies, and that because they had insulted upon
their weakness.

The strength of the godly is without them. The Lord is the Saints strength.
God is the strength of David's heart, and his portion for ever, Psalm 73 26.
and therefore in all their engagements they lean not upon themselves, although
considerable in respect of competent ability, even in the sight of their
enemies. The saints have no confidence in the arm of flesh.
Jehosaphat professes for all his numerous army, that he knew not what to do.
We know not (says this potent Prince) what to do, but our eyes are toward
thee, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. He will rather lean upon God for the victory and his
assistance, then to dispute with such a malicious enemy by the strength of a
puissant and valiant Army, a stronger then which was never any assembled in
Judah. Note.
But as there is no counsel or strength against the Lord, It is good to have
the Lord to our party.
so is there none without him. It is good fighting under the Lords colors; if
he command and order the battle, the victory is certain.

The Lords presence is the fountain of power, Note.
and the seat of salvation, The Lord of Hosts (says David) is with us, the
God of Jacob is our refuge; He breaks the bow, and cutteth the spear, and
burns the Chariots with fire. And so we read of Saints performances in
opposition to enemies of greatest ability and subtilty; so eminently does the
Lord who is their strength act in weakness: Not I (says Paul, 1 Cor. 15.10)
but the grace of God in me Portus salutis.
. This Land of Rest was in the sight of David, when, Psalm 125.4. he entreats
Gods benevolence for the assistance of his brethren, Do well (says he) to
those who be true and upright in their hearts.

Oh that this Ground might bring forth something to our spirits in the day of
our controversies, God the best Umpire of controversies.
we should then sooner have our digladiations more certainly decided, and all
the contention of our controversies peaceably determined, then otherwise we
ever can; No finishing of business without the Lords assistance. Gods help in
our councels to give advice exceeding profitable and necessary.
we should do more in dispatching the punctiloes of Sacred and Civil
differences in an hour with God, then all our days without him.

Let him be President of our Councels, and then we shall find him the perfecter
of our purposes, Cast your burden upon the Lord, says David; Psalm. 55.22. This
good advise does teach us the shortest way to ease our selves. Commit thy work
(says Solomon, Prove. 16.3.) unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be directed.

There is no thinking of any end of that business, God must do all our work
forus, Isai. 26.12.
wherein the Lord has not a finger to finish it: and therefore in short, Let
the Lord be more familiar with us, and then all our matters shall be a great
deal more easy for us, there shall be no opposition which can stand against
us. It is a memorable encouragement which the Lord gave to noble Joshua, Josh.
1.5, 7. There shall not a man be able to withstand thee all the days of thy
life; as I was with Moses, so will I be with thee, I will not leave thee or
forsake thee, only be thou strong, and of a valiant courage, that thou may
observe and do according to all the Law which Moses my servant commanded thee;
thou shall not turn away from it to the right nor to the left hand, that thou
may prosper whithersoever thou go.

These words are directed to Joshua, Joshua's Commission and comfort belong to
all of his interest and Authority.
and in him to all of his gracious interest, Piety, honor or Authority, of
whatsoever magnitude they are; that they may clearly read their assured
assistance in the lines of their reliance upon, and correspondence with God.
Quo docemur ita nos, demum, fore in expugnabiles si ad prestandum Deo fidele
obsequium enitamur. Calvin ad loc.

The third Ground of the Saints assistance from the Lord, 3d Ground, The Lords
word.
is his word. He has engaged his word for their assistance in any of their
conflicts, whoever be their adversaries, of whatsoever place or power. God
secure his Saints by his word.
I find the Spirit gives a large and full account of this promise in many
Scriptures, but especially in that most excellent, Psalm, 9^.4. wherein we have
assurances of the Lords kindness in this particular set down almost in every
line, but especially in the 5, 6, 7, 15 and 16 verses, Thou shall not be afraid
of the fear of the night, nor of the Arrow that flies by day, nor of the
pestilence which walks in darkness, nor of the plague that destroys at noon
day. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand, but
they shall not come near thee. I will be with them in trouble, I will deliver
and glorify him; with long life will I satisfy him, and show him my
salvation. All which be more then ordinary expressions to assure the godly of
his favorable assistance, and doing well by them in the day of trouble.

And if the Saints had no more but a word of Promise from him who is holy and
true, Gods word sufficient to (...) the Saints.
and whose words are more unchangeable then the heavens it were enough; but to
his Promises we have his precepts and words of authority added commanding us
to make our addresses to him for help, Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me, etc. I will
deliver thee, etc. Saints rely upon promises.
And David confesses he had been much with God in that estate, and had found
such refreshment as his soul could wish, Psalm 34.7. Thou have known my soul in
adversity, says he; Saints find by experience the Lords words true.
this he speaks by personal experience, as to what he had found.

Doubtless David had such gracious returns, as give his spirit a great deal of
enlargement in extremity beyond his ordinary hopes.

The Scriptures often mention three Qualifications of the Lords Promises to
satisfy his servants in order to their assistance. Qualifications of the Lords
promises to the Saints.


First, they are full.

Secondly, they are free.

Thirdly; they are certain.

1. That his Promises are full, is very evident, because they are given out
without any limitation of persons, Lords promises indefinite.
places or dangers of the godly. So that it is a part of the Saints
Commonwealth, of whatsoever magnitude or size, they are high, low, rich, poor,
in whatsoever danger they fall in, Saints adventure any where upon Gods Word.
they are alike sharers in the Promises. Let David go in the valley of the
shadow of death, he is sure of deliverance, for God is with him, and his rod
and Shepherds crook shall comfortably preserve him.

This precious soul could not be alone in trouble, such was the fullness of the
Lords Promises to him, that he had always the Lords presence with him. Gods
presence and promises alike.
Gods Promises and Presence are of the same dimension, both essentially
infinite in their fullness.

2. They are free, 2d Qualif. Free.
and thus they are held out to the Saints, that they may never question their
accomplishment or application upon the sense of their own unworthiness and so
when such desires are sent up by them, the accomplishment of which may be as a
tree of life to them, Accomplishment of promises to the godly sweet.
they may confidently expect a seasonable return. And so I find David and
others never question, that if they call, but the Lord will answer to
satisfaction.

Hence the godly are more confident (in respect of the promises) in the night
of their adversity, The godly more confident in adversity, then the wicked in
prosperity.
then the wicked are negligent (by reason of their principles) in the day of
their prosperity.

The first has hope in his death when the other has no faith in his life.

3 Qualif. Certain.
That the Promises are certain. Christ is the best interpreter of his Fathers
words Heaven and earth may pass away, but of them there is not one jot to be
changed. O Lord (says David, 2 Samuel 7.28) thou art God, and thy words are
true; Hence the Saints pass with patience through any difficulty without the
least of disturbance, The patience of the Saints.
because they are certain by promise that they shall obtain if they run the
race with perseverance, which is set before them. They know that he who is
their life, and the length of their days can support them in opposition to any
Antagonist whatsoever, according to his promise.

These things being cordially considered, An advertisement in order to an
improvement of the premises.
Gods word of promise should take deep impression upon every heart, especially
such who have experimentally found the Lord holy and faithful, who may
comfortably and confidently assert they never sought the Lord in vain, but that
he has ever answered above their hopes.

Oh how should a spirit be touched with the feeling of that favor which has
ever shined cleerest in the cloudiest seasons of their extremity, when there
was none to befriend but God. The Lord a loving friend in extremity.


Oh let such never forget that it is the Lords custom to conform his kindness
in the thick of all discouragement, that the gale of his goodness blows in
every season, His mercies sweet in that season.
that there is no storm can stop his affection from watering all the
plantations of the Saints, that he puts counsel and comfort, in every corner
befitting their condition: Genesis 32.29 1 Kin. 17.4
he has an Angel for Jacob, and a Raven for Elijah.

Fourthly, 4th Ground His glory.
His own glory is another ground of his engagement for his Saints.

To this Ground we have the Scripture give in great and frequent testimony. It
seems the Lord speaks much of the tenderness of his glory, God is jealous of
his glory.
that he will not dispense with its abuse to any, I am the Lord, The Lords glory
engaged for his people.
my glory I will not give unto another, Isai. 42.8. In the Saints troubles the
Lords glory is much engaged; the Saints are always sufferers upon his account;
For thy sake all the day long are we persecuted, Note Satan intends to dishonor
the Lord by his servants
Psalm. 44.22. It is worth our noting, that in the Saints troubles, it is not so
much Satan's design, to disquiet the servant, as to disgrace the master. That
putting the Saints from their patience and perseverance he may turn the
reproach of their shipwreck and apostasy upon him whom they serve, Satan
endeavoreth to affront God upon his Saints sufferings.
who should have espoused their controversy, he having engaged to own them in
their sharpest conflicts; therefore the Lord for his glory has engaged in
opposition to their stoutest enemies, Psalm. 105.14, 15. He suffered none to do
them wrong, he reproved Kings for their sake, saying, Touch not mine Anointed,
and do my Prophets no harm. And again, He saved them for his name sake, Psalm.
106.8. I remember Moses in his administration does plead from his glory for his
peoples deliverance, often in Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomie; all
which, with a great many more Scriptures evidences we have to assures that the
Lord does good to his people in point of honor.

Here it is worth observation, Note.
if the Lord does impledg or pawn his honor for our peace in adversity, We are
to serve God as a preserver after deliverance Luke 1.74
we are justly obliged to pay the tribute of piety to him, in the day of our
prosperity.

As the Lord is pleased to look upon us afflicted, so we should look upon God
being delivered, etc. As he tendered our good, so must we his glory. It must not
be with the best of Saints, as it is with the worst of sinnners, to turn the
grace of God unto wantonness the most cordial kindness to a carnal
profaneness. The wicked unthankful.
Let us be more the Lords then our own, seeing he owned us when we were
nothing. Saints engagements.


Let Gods honor be as precious as it is profitable to us.

Let us not be so mercenary, Gods honor must be precious to us.
as to balance its commodity, and not its excellency. It is of greater worth
then all we can have by it.

Let it therefore be our piety to pay it its due, and our sincerity to
contribute all our endeavors to the promoting of its interest.

Ingratitude is the shame of Saints, What ingratitude is
and the Seal of sinners.

As it is the height of Sacrilege to rob God of his Glory, so it is the
purest worship in the Sanctuary to advance his honor; therefore as Blaspemy is
a subject of the greatest iniquity, Blasphemy a dishonor to God, and the object
of justice.
so let it be the object of the greatest severity. For as it was cruelty to
Israel to spare Amalek, so it is no friendship to God or his truth to favor
their enemies.

Let us then take notice of that glory engaged for us, Nothing to be preferred
before Gods glory
that our zeal be impartially engaged for it.

Fifthly, 5th Ground Wickeds power.
The power of the Saints enemies, is a ground of his engagement for them. Many
times it falls out, that the godly are overpowered, The Lord is the saints
reserve.
and their party worsted then it pleases the Lord to step into the field with
a recruit.

It seems this has been often Isreal's case, Psalm. 129.1, 2, 3.

The Church lamenteth thus, They have oftentimes afflicted me from my youth,
may Israel now say, etc. the Plowers have plowed upon my back, and made long
furrows, but they could not prevail against me; (mark it) for the righteous
Lord has cut the cords of the wicked.

I find here a clear confirmation of all this truth; we read in this testimony,
that the Lord appears for his people, when hopeless to do any thing for
themselves, in opposition to their enemies.

I remember in the time of Isreal's Aristocracy, (or Government under Judges)
they were often sadly and sharply put to it by their enemies, An observation of
the Saints trouble, and their help.
insomuch that if the Lord had not pitied their misery, they had been undone by
the malignant ability of their merciless adversaries.

But we find there recruiting recorded for the accomplishment and establishment
of their brethren in such a case.

That religious deportment of precious Hezekiah, toward the reproaching
Ribaldrie of railing Rabshekah, is very memorable. It seems he troubles not
himself with his language or Letter, The Saints leave their enemies to God:
but leaves both to the Lords consideration and reading for his return, he
speaks not a word to him, Saints are often silent when most falsely traduced or
accused; so was their Savior before Pilate, Luke 23.9.
but spreads his Libel before the Lord, that he might answer it. He knew that
Ashurs Army was to hard for him, but not for the Lord, who could quickly
dispatch them by one Commission Officer; and so he had them routed and ruined
in a night. Judgment to the wicked.


This Point of the Lords assistance threatens dreadfully the deluded spirits of
the Churches adversaries, they dream not of such an Auxiliary in their
confident combatings with the godly; but it seems they are mistaken, they find
a stronger and more eminent Antagonist then they are aware; and therefore it is
hard for them to kick against the pricks.

And this speaks well for the godly, Mercy to the godly.
who commonly have fewest friends, but most enemies, that they have a reserve
when weakest, to grapple with their strongest and greatest adversaries. 2 Cor.
12.10
It is the Saints glory to confess, when they are weak, then they are strong,
Let us therefore in all our conflicts, mind more the favor of our God, then
the fury of our adversaries.

Let us join with him to befriend us, speak our troubles to him, that our
spirits may have ease. Let us rest upon him, who will not fail us. Let us keep
a familiar correspondence with God in our prosperity, that he be no stranger to
us in the day of our calamity. Plety the Saints policy.
It is not the least part of the Saints policy to gather with God, and scatter
with the world: they can be no losers by such an exchange in the day of trouble.

He that has the Lord for his friend, and the world for his enemy, he has
Piety in his right hand, and Prudence in his left.

He is looked upon as the best of Saints, and wisest of men, whose troubles
prove but trials to depend upon God: and seeing it is the Lords practice to
frustrate the wickeds power, let us have heavenly affections in our greatest
distractions; Settled spirits in calamity.
and never fear that enemy which the Lord cannot only outwit, but outwork.

Sixthly, Saints pressures.
The Saints pressures under the weight of their troubles, does engage the
benefit of the Lords assistance and support under such a burden, Exodus 3.7. I
have surely seen the trouble of my people, and I was to them as he that takes
off the yoke Hos. 11.4.

I remember David, Psalm. 10.11. The wickeds delusion,
sets down the wicked under a strange delusion, asserting, that the Lord did
take no notice of what the Saints did suffer, or they impose upon them, He
hides his face (say they) he will not see. by Satan.
It seems the devil charmeth their spirits to this apprehension, as he did the
old Epicures, Deus nec curat sui, aut alieni. But how ever such are sinfully
deluded, The Saints persuasion.
suffering Saints are more graciously schooled, and know better of God, That he
beholds mischief and wrong, and takes it in his own hand, Psalm. 10.14. The
godly should have (duram provinciam) a hard task of their troubles, To be
neglected of God the saddest trouble.
if whilst they are afflicted by men, they should be neglected by God. Such an
oversight should more inwardly wound them, then all their wretched enemies
could outwardly wrong them; What Gods favor is to Saints.
for his favor is better then life, and his frowning is worser then death to a
gracious spirit; and therefore the fainting fits of our infirmity are the
designed objects of his paternal clemency. God is tender over his Saints.


He will not suffer our brudens to sink us, whilst the rolling of his bowels
are able to support us.

Let this respective kindness have a seat in our hearts which has such an
hand in happiness.

Let not the impresse of worldly distraction more affright us to suffer then
the promised power of a heavenly refection delight us to bear. Afflictions
mitigate.
Let Gods words more secure us with the hopes of our help, then all the world
unsettle us with the threats of our hurt. I cannot think that the vapors of
wickedness should so stupidly damp us, but that the spirit of grace and
godliness should more religiously prompt us to any piece of the Lords service
whatsoever.

Let us consider what we are in prosperity, The Saints are the same in
prosperity and adversity to God.
that the same we are in adversity to our gracious God, he is in both the
strength of our hearts and our portion for ever. There may be a little of our
condition eclipsed as to us, Gods love to his saints unchangeable.
but not a grain of affection changed, as to God; the Pleiades of his continued
providence, sweetly dropping over us, send down the same effluential
influences of power in all the weakly and sickly seasons of our cross bearing
condition.

So that there is no fear of ability to bear, Saints are carried out by a
divine power in affliction.
whosoever has laid on the burden, if we lean upon him. Hence I conceive, here
is something here worth the exercise of a Saints wisdom in the day of trouble.

First, God the Saints provisor in trouble.
We are not to consult the Oracle of our own, but of the Lords ability in that
estate; seeing he bears the purse of power, we need not fear provision, under
any pressure whatsoever. Saints inlargements in trouble.
We may be more in spending then sparing, in improving then retaining what is
entrusted to us.

Secondly, To mind our God the subject of our strength.
Whilst our burdens lie upon us, let our weakness warn us where our strength
lies. It is one of the greatest Characters of a worthless spirit, Stupidity in
adversity signs the indignity of a spirit.
to be a stupid sufferer, to merit little, and mind nothing of its supplies.
Such a patient, as it has but little of sense, and less of reason, so nothing
of grace in its deportment.

The choice government of a troubled Saint is well drawn up in David's words of
his dependence upon God, and his assistance by him. My soul (says he) cleaves
to the Lord, his right hand upholdeth me.

The seventh Ground of the Lords engagement for his people, Pride of the wicked.
is the pride of their adversaries.

The Scriptures tell us, it is not sufficient for the Saints enemies to afflict
them, but to insult over them. And thus as the godly are put upon all the
senses of sorrow, so the Lord puts himself upon all the service of their
succor and supply, in not only opposing the power but the pride of their
adversaries.

Of this we have large testimony from the Lords word, The saints know the pride
of their enemies.
and the Saints experience; but that there is an insulting spirit predominating
in the wicked over the Saints, is seen often in the sufferings of the godly
under it. The Saints complain of this indignity for case.
I have heard David in his Psalms bemoaning this piece of his injuries by the
wicked, beseeching the Lord to ease him of such an indignity, Psalm. 25.2. Let
not mine enemies rejoice over me, etc. and elsewhere often he entreats the
same favor. I take notice of the Churches voice, Mic. 7.8. Rejoice not against
me, O my enemy.

This kind of iniquity is a blossom of that cursed impurity which naturally in
the wicked designeth the disgrace of the godly. What this pride is.
For it is so with that cruel root of bitterness, Pride of enemies how it
grows.
that it never thriveth in any soul, but when it is watered with the contempt
of the Saints, which renders their case the more considerable, Saints contented
to suffer.
in that they are objects of their enemies scorn. It is the Saints humility to
submit to their cross; but the wickeds pride and pravity to trample them under
it.

God does not take it well at the wickeds hand, that they should add
affliction to the afflicted; he seems to resent it, God will be avenged of his
Saints enemies.
when he promises to make them repent it, that ever they meddled with his
people, Isaiah 10.12. he promises to remember Ashurs pride, after the
perfection of Zions peace. He tells us, The Saints enemies have their time of
visitation.
that he had not done with Ashur, when he had made an end with Jerusalem; He
must lift up the cursed Ephah from Israel, Zach. 5.10, 11
and place it in the Land of Shinar. He will burn the broom which beat his
children.

Me thinks (these things considered) it is dangerous meddling for the devil or
the wicked betwixt God and his children. I have observed from the Scriptures he
will have none so much as to laugh at their calamity, The Lord will have his
children beaten by none but by himself
but at their peril of mourning in the day of their prosperity.

He looks upon it as a just quarrel against the wicked, that they are so
forvvard to set him against his people, and to bring faggots to the fire of his
fury. And are so ready to run upon them in the day of his displeasure.

Thus we may see what the Lord is in reference to his people. How God deals
with his people, and for them.
He has love in his anger, and anger in his love, yet so well soddered for
their safety, as that he acts the first, for the correction of themselves,
and the second for the destruction of their enemies. God must bridle the
wickeds malice.
If the Lords power did not check the vvickeds pride, the world would soon
be too hot for the godly: How happy then are the Saints, The Saints happiness
in trouble wherein it stands.
who has one that can lodge them in despite of their enemies and protect them
in opposition to all their pride.

Let it therefore be the Saints wisdom to value the Lords power above the
wickeds pride. David's dependence and assistance common to all the saints.
Their position of David's antecedent, assures them of his consequent. If they
can but win their spirits to the unity of his dependence, there is no question
of the commodity of his assistance.

Eighthly, The wickkeds malice.
and lastly, the implacable malice of the Saints adversaries, is an eminent
reason of the Lords engagement for them, to oppose their fury. This the Lord
has comfortably concluded in favor of his servants. Determined assistance.
Because (says he) thou have a perpetual hatred, and have put the children of
Israel to flight, by the force of the sword in the time of their calamity, The
wicked threatened.
when their iniquity had an end, I will lay their Cities waste, etc. Ezekiel.
35.4, 5.

As the wickeds malice argue their mischief, so its continuance threatens
their ruin. Malice the bane of the wicked.
The wicked would do a great deal better by themselves, if they dealt kindly by
the godly.

It has been observed, that malice with continuance, What continued malice is.
is but the devil in disguise, who loves rather to be abroad in the hearts of
the wicked, then at home in hell.

Therefore to supplant his subtilty, and to prevent his cruelty, are eminent
acts of the Lords kindness in favor of the godly.

I have always observed that the Lord is pleased by the power of his grace, An
observation of Gods favor to the godly.
to make the Saints wiser then the wicked, and stronger then the devil. So
that hovvever both may hate them, yet neither can undo them.

They may be implacable in their malice, but incapable in their practice to do
them any considerable harm.

The heat of their hatred may blacken their beauty, Malicecannot undo the godly.
but let Satan and his instruments do what they can, the Saints are still
comely as the Tents of Kedar, and the Curtains of Solomon.

It is not the staining of the Saints Colors, but the stopping of the Saints
comforts, that is their sorrow. The Saints more afflicted with eclipsing of
their graces, then loss of their good
The breathings of malice may deface the first, but the gates of hell are not
able to obstruct the second. For as the Saints have hope in their death, so
they are blessed with the continued comforts of the spiritual life, let the
devil and the wicked do what they can.

The godly were in a piteous condition, Satan would undo the Saints if God did
not prevent him.
if they had no more refreshment then what Satan would bestow; he would starve
them to his service, and kill them in it; he would feed them with the bread of
affliction to prepare them for destruction. But it is the Saints happiness,
they are not upon his allowance. They have bread, whereof he knows nothing;
Saints are not spiritually starved.
the secrets of their mercy is shut up from him, and they are not straightened of
their provision, even in the worst of times. It is not Satan's malice that can
mince their mace.

Thou have prepared a table for me (says David, Psalm. 23.5.) in the sight of
my adversaries. The Lord will let Satan and the wicked know he keeps his
servants well, that they may conclude, there is nothing wanting to them that
fear him, Psalm 34.9.

It is the sweetness of the Lords Spirit, The Lords kindness comfortable in
the sharpest season.
the sharper the wicked hate his Saints, the dearer he loves them, and the
better they fare; For I am with thee to save thee, and deliver thee, says the
Lord to Jeremy, Jer. 15.20.

So me thinks Satan and his Clyents are but fools for all their fury; Conclus.
The folly of Satan and his instruments.
they do but befriend the godly by their malice, thus melting the Lords
affection in a warmer fervency to his Saints, The wicked defeat their own
design.
and so becoming guilty of the death of their own design; they show what they
can do, but not what they would.

It seems they have not so much rope in their posse, The wicked cannot execute
their malice against the godly.
as they have scope in their velle. Dogs may show their teeth although they
durst not bite.

Here me thinks it is no loss of time to pause a little admiring that mercy
which compasses the Saints. Saints favor great.
How great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear, and
done to them that trust in thee before the sons of men, says David, Psalm
31.19.

We see amongst all the stratagems of Satan's subtilty, he is not more
restrained in any, The wicked cannot but as they have.
then in this of the wickeds malice, that those his emissaries cannot hurt, as
they hate; the Lord having chained up their ferity with the cord of his
Commission; The wickeds weekness.
so that there is no stirring for Satan or his servants beyond the reach of
their line, let them struggle what they can.

Oh then, Saints are not given up to the wicked.
that he will not suffer his Saints to be sacrifices to the will of their
enemies; they may hunger for their destruction, but starve before they obtain
it. It is not malice can catch the prey, when mercy prevents it. David is here
cruelly hunted by Saul, but graciously supported by God. It is not his malice
can murder him, or his plotting that can surprise him; for the Lord was with
David, whither soever he went.

FINIS.
(...): BOWELS of MERCY BREATHING FOR THE SAINTS IN DANGER: OR SACRED SYMPATHY
UNSEALED.

BY ALEXANDER PRINGLE, A Worthless Servant to Christ in the Work of his Gospel.

(...), Col. 3.12. LONDON, Printed by A. Maxey for Will. Weekley at Ipswich, and
are to be sold by J. Rothwell at the Fountain in Cheapside, 1657.

LECTORI INTEGERRIMO.
INter Multifaria, blaterantis hujusce seculi (...), nulla tam perfrictae
frontis videtur nequitia; quam est ista in Evangelicae veritatis (...) Impudens
(...). Qua dum universa (...) dogmata conspurcare studeat (...), cruentos
quosdam e suis spelaeis excitat Lupos (...), sceleratisssimo quorum Ministerio,
Jurgia non modo, (...) refertisssima sed and Zizania in Domini vinea
virulentissima operose disseminat. Sic ut mediantibus hisce, (...). Satanicae
hujusce praxeos nefarii, (...); non tantum sunt Socinianae, (...) satellites,
Pelagianaeque vafritiae versipelles vaferrimi, aut enthusiastici (...)
Anabaptisticae (...), sed and alii quam plurimi purae-putae indignantis
ignaviae soboles astutissima (...) simulata quorum pietas duplicata evadit
iniquitas; quibusque aurigatio rustica aut sutrina quaedam civica, aptius multo
convenit quam ratione ratiocinante de crypticis fidei mysteriis (...)
disserere, aut sacrae paginae digestis (...), imponere, competit; (...) verum
isti (...) suas ineptias ac dilirantis cerebri diliria effutire gestiunt
nullumque non movent lapidem quo jure, quave injuria, ut evangelii sacris
ejusque servis fidelissimis Nigro Carbone sligmata inurerent. Hinc illae
Lachimae! quantum languescit Pietas, marcescit puritas, gliscit iniquitas,
ingruit aequitas, quam est Domini vinea spinosa, dumis, vepretisque referta,
Luporum spelunca, malesuadae partim ignorantiae, omnigenae propemodum dementiae
deformata inquinamentis; quanta est non modo errorum colluvies, sed et
convitiornm ubique congeries, quam est effrons blasphaemiarum aenea facies adeo
ut transmarinae illud heterodoxias (...) auribus identidem intonat, quicquid
schismaticum, aut haereticum Anglo-est, aut Scoto-Britannicum.

Pudet haec opprobria dici, etc. Verum hisce ex animo serio seduloque pensatis
(Integerrime Lector) (...) hanc sequentem, boni Consule; ejusque
lucubrationibus favere Perge, qui est Theologicae veritatis salut iferae
aeternaeque tuae (in Christo) beatitudinis

Summa Observantia Studiosissimus, AL. PRINGLAEUS.
Harvegiae 5 Id. Feb. 1657.
(...): BOWELS of MERCY, BREATHING FOR THE SAINTS IN DANGER.
PSALM. 125.4. Do well, O Lord, unto those that be good, and true in their
hearts.


IN This Supplicatory Address, we have the breathing of a very gracious spirit,
wishing good to the godly, entreating the Lord earnestly for them; that it may
go well with them in the day of trouble.

Note.
It is easy to find out the actings of this spirit (in Scripture) upon, and in
the hearts of all the godly whilst they are carried forth with the streams of
heavenly affection, and spiritual tenderness over the bleeding and suffering
condition of their precious brethren.

We find Esth. 3.1, 2. Mordecai
modest Mordecai was extremely moved when he was informed, that the Jews (the
Lords peculiar people should be utterly ruined.

The spirit of honest Uriah could not be persuaded to rest and sleep at home in
peace, Vriab.
when the Ark and Israel were abroad in danger, By thy life, (says he to
David) and by the life of thy soul I will not do this this thing, 2 Samuel 11.11.
It seems his spirit could not be brought to delight in any such refreshment,
whilst it went hardly with the Lords people.

I read Nehem: 1.4. Nehemiah
that gracious Nehemiah takes no pleasure at Court when he heard that poor
Jerusalem was lying plundered, burned, and broken down in the Country; he
tells us, how much he was affected with her trouble, When I heard these
words, I sat down and wept and mourned certain days, and I fasted and prayed
before the God of heaven.

The same melting spirit we find in zealous Daniel, Notandum est cum interpres
esset somniorum Daniel non tamen fuisse elatum vel confidentia vel superbia
Call. ad loc.
accounting little of his personal preferment, without a seasonable assurance
of Isreal's National enlargement, Dan. 9.3. I turned my face unto the Lord God,
and sought him by prayer and supplication, with fasting, sackcloth and ashes.
By all which and many more of his expressions we may observe he was more
humbled, and tenderly afflicted with the Church her calamity, then in the
least exalted or affected with the illustrious eminency of his personal dignity.

I conceive the same tenderness of spirit which we find in Mordicai, Uriah,
Nehemiah, Daniel and others, did predominate in David when he prayed so
affectionately, Do well, O Lord, unto those that be good and true in their
hearts.

These words are digested in one of those Psalms which are named by a
distinguishing Character, Text designed.
(...), Songs of Degrees. This Inscription is prefixed to fourteen Psalms more
of the same denomination, Difference of Interpreters about he title of this
Psalm.
and has cost Interpreters, both Jewish and Christian, more then ordinary
inquisition; all of them passing their (...) upon it, but with little or no
satisfaction in it.

I remember Calvin tells us of the Jewish Doctors, that they only divine, and
not certainly determine or agree about it. Hic Psalmus and quindecim sequentes
vocantur graduum, qua ratione, non convenit etiam inter Hebreos Doctores,
quidam fingunt quindecim fuisse gradus ad partem templi uvas destinatam; quum
infra subsisterent mulieres, Quindecini Psalmi sequentes vocantur, (...)
graduum, vel Ascensionum dequibus variae sunt opiniones alii a gradibus templi,
alii ab ascensione seu intention vocis dictos volunt, alii genus melo diae fic
dictum, alii Psalmos ascensionum, i. e. reditus Judeorum a Babilone in Judeam
ut Beza. Alii volunt esse tonos modulationis, ut Calvinus. Mollerus Lyrani
sentontiam sequitur de gradibus cleri lacerdotum. Par. adversar. in Psa. 120
sed frivola est divinatio and scimus quantum licentiae in rebus obscuris sibi
permittant Judaei ad quidivis fingendum. Call. in Psalm. 120.

And for Christian Expositors both ancient and modern, they conclude nothing
certain; they also conjecture, that these Degrees are spoken of certain places,
certain orders of persons, certain Descants, and Tones of Voices; wherein, by
whom, and how those Psalms have been sung.

Concerning this punctilio of the Title of this, and those other fourteen
Psalms, we need not make much inquiry, we may safely join with Learned
Paraeus, and conclude, In re tam obscura and non magni momenti liberum cuique
judicium; That is, in a thing of so great obscurity, and so small utility, we
may leave every man to abound in their own sense.

For my part, I have ever thought the time better spent in improving Scripture
Truths, then in searching out the fruitless pedigree of Scripture titles.

The subject matter of the words make up a considerable part of this Psalm. It
seems it is David's design (for I look upon him as the Author of this Song) to
cheer up and consolidate the spirits of the godly three ways,

1. By promises from God, ver. 1, 2, 3.

2. By Prayer to God, ver. 4.

3. By Prophesying against the wicked.

The words I have chosen, seem to fill up the middle rank of this order: for as
judicious Calvin well observes upon the words, after that David had given
assurance to all the godly, of their establishment and refreshment in
affliction, ver. 1, 2, 3. In order to their farther Confirmation, he prays for
the accomplishment of the same promised assurance, Quamquam propheta certo piis
omnibus pollicitus fuerat opportunum auxilium se tamen ad precationem
convertit. Calv. ad lo.
And he tells us, that this address of David was not in vain; for although our
Faith in the Promises may support us in respect of God, yet our flesh does
weaken us in respect of our selves, that there is need of Prayer to strengthen
us in attendance of the accomplishment of the Promises. Neque frustra quia etsi
nos sustentet fides quia tamen interea vacillant carnis nostra sensus, preces
miscenda sunt ad confirmationem. Calv. ad loc.

So much for the words of my Text, as they stand in order to their Contexts. If
we look upon them in themselves, we have them here formed to our hand in the
Model of an address to him, who had formerly given assurance it should go well
with the godly in their suffering condition. The rod of the wicked (says he)
shall not lie upon the (...) the lot of the righteous, v. 3. The fitness of my
text.
And thus my Context comes to hand in season, as a suitable subject exciting
the Saints this day to an intercession for their brethren in that estate.

The words be naturally digested in two material members: Text divided.


1. There is a Supplication, Do well, O Lord.

2. A Designation of certain select persons, for whom the address is tendered,
viz. such who are good and upright in their heart.

It seems David puts up a request to God, For whom David prays.
but it is for such as be under the eminent Characters of Piety and Sincerity:
Neque tantum simpliciter rogat ut bonos benign tratet Deus, sed bonitatem
quoque definit quis manat ex sincero affectum. Calv. ad loc. I apprehend David
understands here the faithful of the land (as he phraseth the godly, Ps.
Note. Gracious Magistrates car full of the godly.
101.6.) he is very careful of the party that they may be happy in a sweet
correspondence with God in the day of trouble. And therefore he intercedes in
those words, (...) Benefac Jehova: So Jerome, Tremelius, Do good, O Lord. To do
good, is an act (primario) Firstly, from Jehova, as the fountain of all Being
and Goodness: Operari sequitur esse.
he is that Primum bonum and summum in esse: He is that primitive Supreme Good
in being, and so from himself doing good in operation. All inferior agents are
subordinate to his moderation in all their transactions. Hence (in recta far
causalitatis) in the right case of causality, Means productive as influenced by
God.
all means, of whatsoever magnitude or qualification, are only productive,
(...), or (...) as they are influenced by him to do any good, and so the Lord
as he is the first, so he is the best, and choicest of Chemists, God the best
Chemist.
to quintessentiate the good of his people, from the most malignant materials.
Saints rest in God for assistance.
And therefore David in this address does trouble himself no farther to call in
the secondary succurrence of any subordinate instrument whatsoever to befriend
the Saints in trouble, but here goes confidently to the Throne of Grace,
Saints know where to go in trouble. Heb. 4.16.
for the Lords benevolence to his people in the time of need. I presume David
was no stranger in heaven, and therefore knew with whom to intercede for the
Saints on earth. He had often experience, that the God of Israel was the Lord
of Hosts, David acquainted with God by experience.
and the Saints surest and sweetest friend, and ever soonest to be found for
counsel, comfort, and all accommodation, in the evil day.

Me thinks David's practice should be the Saints pattern in their addresses to
heaven for themselves or others. David's practice should be a copy to us to go
to God.


They must not seek to the second, Animadversion.
but the first hand, for encouragements in the day of calamity; they are to eye
the God, and not the Men of Israel; Mercy before Means; the Fountain before the
Streams; Gods Favor, before humane Fidelity or Ability whatsoever. David a
good man and a good Magistrate
This is the method of David, one of the best of men, (a man according to Gods
own heart) and one of the choicest of Magistrates that ever did bear
principality or charge over the Lords people: And so much for his Supplication.

His Designation is (...) for the good in the plural. The persons designed in
this Address.
It seems the party for whom this address is made, are set apart by David as
singular for their qualification.

I conceive it is not necessary I should make any fixed discourse of those
Characteristical impressions by which they are illuminate, and designed in my
Text; Animad. before.
only we take notice, that this party is precious both in themselves, and
David's account.

In themselves they are set down to be (...) and those be Characters of such
eminent worth, The persons praid for are excellent, and of a choice
qualification.
that they always denominate the subject excellent, and above the ordinary
size or stature of Professors.

To be good, To be good, what
is to be of God by participation.

To be upright, To be upright, what
is to to be of his word by qualification.

And to be both in heart, To be both good and upright, what it is.
does sign the truth of Sanctification.

These be the marks of Honor, and letters of Religion, engraven and written
upon those persons which render them so precious in the eyes of David, that
their accomplishment gives him encouragement to make a presentment of their
condition before the Lord.

A gracious people are very dear to a godly Magistrate: David is tenderly
affected, that such precious souls should be afflicted; David studieth the
happiness of the Lords people.
and therefore (as their Prince and Prophet) he is willing to do his utmost for
them, that it may go prosperously with them; by making this serious Address to
God, that he would befriend them, in opposition to all of their enemies
whatsoever. Do well, O Lord.

The substance of David's words may be the comfortable seminary of several
sweet Conclusions. The fulness of this text
But for the present, I shall briefly take notice of two only.

1. Conclus. from the words.
That there is a special regard to be had of such who be gracious, and or
godly, whilst they are in danger.

2. We are to deal earnestly with God, to befriend them in that estate.

Both which Conclusions seem to be the rule of David's practice, and the subject
of his prayer in this place.

The party for which David pleads, is not of a trivial tincture, Who are
those who are truly godly.
but of the deepest ingrain of godliness, being clothed with the choicest
impresses of inherent holiness: True and upright in their heart, etc.

It is worth our observation as we pass along, Note. Of David's Spirit.
that it was one of the eminent ingredients of David's accomplishment, to have
his heart affected with, and his eye directed upon the honor and happiness of
the Saints: My eyes are upon the faithful of the land, Psalm. 101.6. All my
delight is in them, Psalm. 16.3. Thus setting an excellent copy to all of his
interest, both for Piety, and Authority to value the godly, etc.

First, Doct. or the Conclus. proved
that there is a special regard to be had of the godly in danger.

This is a matter of such material concernment amongst the Saints, that I find
it not only as a duty eminently recommended to them, but religiously improved
by them, as a service suitable to their interest; Pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, Psalm. 122.6. Remember them that are in bonds, as if ye were bound
with them, and them that are afflicted, as though ye were afflicted in the
body, Heb. 13.3. Weep with them that weep, Romans 12.15.

Hence is effectuate that tenderness of Spirit in the godly over their
brethren; so compassionately sympathising with their dangers and indempnities,
as if they were personally stricken with the sense of their sufferings,
Doctrine shortly cleared from some stirring principles, in the Saints moving
them to brotherly tenderness.
and the pressure of their burdens.

That there is somewhat more then ordinary amongst the Saints, which stirs
their bowels to such a benevolence, may be demonstrate from these Motives.

1. Gal. 6.10. Ephesians. 4.6.
From their mutual relation to God, that they are all of one Family, Mar. 23.9.
Ephesians. 5.23, 26. Ephesians. 5.26. Acts 2.38. Romans 8.17
of one Father, having the same Savior, the same Sanctifier, the same interest
in the Promises and Privileges, as heirs of the Kingdom of Grace and Glory.

This relation is none of the least, Saints are of the same relation.
if not the first engagement upon the Spirits of Saints, to take to heart the
case of their brethrens threatened, or inflicted calamity; they being all
Members of the same Body, they become all partners of the same malady, 1 Cor.
12.26, 27.

Secondly, Joh. 1.16. Ephesians. 4.7. 1 Pet. 2: 9, 10. Saints are of the same
dispensation of grace 1 Cor. 1.30
that they live under the droppings of the same benevolence; being all of them,
a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a people set at
liberty; being all of them called, justified, and sanctified, Col. 3.3 Gal.
2.20 Ephesians. 4.5, 6
having the same life and livelihood of Faith and Love, with the hope of
Salvation, does so influence the souls of the Saints with a more then ordinary
communion, both in prosperity and adversity, etc. Galat. 6.2. Phil. 2.4.

Thirdly, Ephesians. 4.5 Gal. 5.13 Rev. 19.10 Gal. 1.10 Acts 14.22 Saints are of the
same ministration. Luke 1.24 Mat. 24.45 Rev. 2.10 Hence the Saints are put to
it. 2 Cor. 4.8 But gainers, Job 23.10 Iam. 1.3, 4 The doctrines improvement.
their mutual Ministration, that they are all of one Economy, fellow servants
to the same Lord, having their work laid out in opposition to more then a
Legion of Adversaries, which want neither craft or cruelty to compass their
ruin, does engage their spirits to an affectionate Sympathy of one another
condition, etc. 2 Cor. 1.4.

Hence the truth of this Doctrine may determine its improvement:

1. Saints with all the cords of Christian kindness to a fraternal feeling of
their mutual calamity. It is a convincing Argument of the Saints
accomplishment, if they be affected with their brethrens trouble; Saints known
by their tenderness.
such a tenderness does speak them like themselves. It is a more then ordinary
carnal exorbitancy to be without compassion. As it seals the Pravity, so it
signeth the Cruelty of an unreformed spirit.

There is nothing more becoming a gracious heart, How becoming it is to
befriend the saints.
then to befriend the godly: for as it is an act of our obedience to God; so it
clears our correspondence with him.

Therefore let the saints adversity be of eminent efficacy to oblige our
prayers for their advantage in the evil day.

2. Of reprehension.
but of a selfish Practice, in prejudice of the godly; who are no more touched
with a sense of their sufferings, then are such who have no interest in them.

In order to the just rebuke of this Antichristian Apathy in such stupid
Stoics, The wicked reproved for their apathy of the Saints troubles.
I shall offer these Considerations:

First, Non tam vos quam Deum in vobis persequuntur, says Martia. It is not so
much you, as God in you which they persecute. (...). Acts 9.4
Why persecutest thou me? Christ a sufferer in his Saints.
Me (inquit) non meos, August. de Sanct. 14. My self and not mine: Christ is
pleased to call his Saints discourtesies his own, Mat. 25.41, 42, 43. I was
hungry, and ye gave me no meat; and thirsty, and ye gave me no drink. I was a
stranger, and ye took me not in; I was naked, and ye clothed me not, etc.

It is worth our Animadversion, Christ was not only once willing to be a
sufferer for his servants, but as yet constantly is contented to be afflicted
in them, Patitur in vobis Deus, says Martial Epist. 2. It may be a Paradox in
Nature to hear of a suffering God, (a Deity under infirmity) yet this is
nothing admirable, to be assured that Christ, who is God manifested in the
flesh, the Head of the Body his Church, to be contemned in his Members: Christ
takes part with his saints.
Contemnitur Christus dum contemnitur membrum Christi, August. in Psalm. 50.
Christ and his Members are sharers of the same disgrace. There is nothing which
does more discover enmity to God, then antipathy to the godly. God and his
people alike hated
Insectantur and oderunt servos Dei and in eis Deum. Salvian de Provid. lib. 8.

It is easy to find out how that spirit is affected to the Master, who has
no pity of his afflicted servants.

It is not likely that Christ is much respected, Animad.
when suffering Saints are altogether neglected, etc.

And therefore me thinks it is no injury to conclude against the love of those
to Christ, who has, There is no love to God where there is none to his members.
or shows none to his members, 1 John 4.20, 21. I humbly conceive the head is
not precious to such, who care not what become of the body.

Let this be a warning to hearts hardened against the Saints calamity, that
they keep a cold communion with Christ. Christus loquitur, Christus patitur,
quia in membris Christi Christus est. Loquitur caput pro corpore, and corpus in
capite. Aug. in Psalm. 30.

There is such a mystical Unity betwixt Christ and his Members, No
correspondence with Christ without his members.
that there is no correspondence with the one, without respect to the other:
they suffer, and complain of the same injury; Tanto vos affectu amare dignatur,
ut quod nos patimur, ipse se pati testatur. Aug. Hom. 15. Such is Christ's
affection to us, that he witnesses his affliction for us. Therefore,

If this day I might be esteemed worthy to counsel you, Ezhortation to all the
saints.
I would seriously desire you, consider the troubles of your brethren, as if
they were your own; their danger, as your indemnity: Such a care, as it
becomes your interest in them, so (let me tell you) ye are concerned in their
safety: All things come alike to all men, says Solomon, Eccles. 9.2. Cuivis
potest accidere, quod cuiquam potest; scito omnem conditionem versatilem esse
and quod in illum incurrit in te quoque, incurrere potest. P. Sir. apud Senec.
Troubles common to all the saints.
That which befalls one, may befall another. And it is worth observation
(says he) That every condition is changeable, and the lot of one may fall in
the lap of another.

And this is a Truth beyond Contradiction, An advertisement to all.
That there is no people or person whatsoever that has such armor of proof,
Animad.
as is affliction-free. Tum tua res agitur, etc.
It is the great Council of Providence, which passes Decree of the Saints
troubles, and determines precisely of its individual objects; the Saints must
be no choosers, but bearers of their burdens, Our own case must warn us.
Ille hodie, ego cras (says ancient Bernard) He to day, and I to morrow.

Therefore let this be a word in season,

Secondly, Such are dead who are not tender of the godlies case or sufferings.
yet they are dead as to God. As they are not affected with the Saints danger:
so they are not quickened with the Saints life. If they were of their spirit,
they would act like their being; operari sequitur esse: operation, or action,
is the natural flux of essence: as things are in Nature, so they Act. Hereby we
know, that we are translated from death to life, because we love the brethren,
1 John 3.14.

There is nothing which signeth more the life of grace in our selves, Note. A
mechanic membership without compassion or sense.
then to commiserate the mortal engagements of the godly. It is but a kind of
a mechanic Membership, which sympathiseth not with the case and temperature of
the person.

(...), Ex Herodoto.
a wooden leg naturally is of no feeling, or moving, as a silver nose is of no
smelling, and a withered hand of no holding; Dead members in the body for show
only.
and yet those are in the body more for show then use, being altogether
senseless of its pain or pleasure. So these members are dead in themselves, Note.
which are past feeling the dangers of others. They are rotten as to the body,
which does not compassionate its sufferings. Membra putrida and mortua sensum
non habent, tales sunt Christiani qui de alienis malis and afflictionibus non
dolent. August. in Psalm. 130. Hom. 15. As rotten and dead members (says he)
have no sense; such are Chistians who for the evils and calamity of others have
no sorrow.

Hence it is no wonder, the wicked are much of Gallius spirit, Acts 19 The
wicked careless of the saints condition.
careless of the Saints calamity, they having never tasted of their comforts.
They live not the Saints life, and so are senseless of the Saints lot; they are
altogether strangers to the sanctimony of their conditions, and therefore to
the severity of their afflictions.

Therefore me thinks this Consideration may prove serviceable, Strong arguments
to tenderness.
as an effectual incentive to all the godly, that as they have an eminent
interest in the things of heaven; so to own the transient troubles of their
brethren here upon earth.

Thus as they are not of the world, they will distinguish themselves from it;
as they are the coheirs of Glory, they will convince the world they are the
precious children of the Spirit of Grace. Therefore

I shall humbly beseech all the godly, Exhortation to all the saints
in this juncture of Jacobs trouble, to witness their principle, by their
practice; what they are in the graces of their life, To wrestle with God.
by the greatness of their labor this day with the Lord; Let it be known to
the enemy, that there be Chariots and Horsemen in Israel; and that the practice
of the Saints by prayer, is of greater power in heaven, The power of prayer.
then all Navies or Armies whatsoever, moving upon Sea or Land.

Let it not be said, We must look upon Christ's members and interest in trouble.
that we want a life to breathe for the refreshment of Christ's Members, lest he
take it ill at our hands. Who knows, but he has separated us from the
sadness of their condition, that we might be suitors for their safety? It is
good for them, that we may be honored to have a subordinate hand in their
happiness.

Let their engagement put a more then ordinary engagement upon our spirits: The
saints danger an argument of our intercession.
Let it be a matter of public evidence, that we live not only to our selves,
but to our brethren.

It shall be a glorious victory which is purchased by prayer; it shall be a
triumph of the Lords contriving, a day of the Lords deliverance, and an eminent
evidence of the Lords benevolence to our British Jerusalem; it shall be worth
our pains, worth our prayers; it will determine our interest in God, by our
prevailing with him in behalf of his Saints.

Thirdly, No zeal to God, where there is no love to the brethren.
as such are not affected with a sense of the Saints misery; so they are not
warmed with a zeal to the Lords glory. It is very certain, the same spirit
which is troubled with the one, is melted with the other. Animad.


There is such a strict communion betwixt the Lord and his servants, The saints
neglect is the Lords dishonor.
that he not only accounts their injury, but neglects, as impeachments to his
glory: and therefore where there is no tenderness for his Saints; he looks for
none or little respect to himself.

I could heartily wish, that every soul considered seriously a few things of
that correspondence kept betwixt God and his servants in extremity. The
thoughts of which, would influence their spirits to a sympathy of their
condition, as it becomes the Lords and our interest in them.

1.

2. Satan the saints and the Lords enemy.
The Lord and his people have the same common adversary, who endeavors the
dishonor of the one, as the ruin of the other; and in opposition to him, the
Lord equally ingageth for both.

The Saints are sufferers for God, Saints suffer upon the Lords account.
and therefore it is not to be imagined, when they are afflicted by the wicked,
that they are neglected by him: But the more they are persecuted for him, the
more they are owned by him, and indeared to him, by all the most intimate
engagements of love and honor.

4. Saints happiness what it is to God
We must take notice that the Lords honor consists much in the saints
happiness, and therefore such as befriend their prosperity, are promoters of
his glory.

5. Esa. 42.8 Gods honor engaged for the supply of he saints.
; so there is nothing can sooner engage it, then the saints necessity: for as
his honor is precious to him in respect of his Deity; so are his servants
wants in respect of his clemency.

6. God accounts favor to the saints respect to himself.
It has ever been the Lords custom, to balance the saints favor with his
own; always acknowledging himself a debtor to both, in order to a comfortable
requital: If a cup of cold water is not to be forgotten, how will greater
courtesies be remembered? We need not think we shall be losers by the godly,
when we contribute to their necessity, There is gain in doing the saints good
if the Lord be our play master: for he is never short, but always exceeds in
liberality our expectation or desire.

7. serve God better, It is service to God to befriend the saints.
then in befriending the godly.

It is one of the grossest parts of the wickeds folly, that they imagine a
correspondence with God, but not with his people; being strongly possessed, that
howsoever they may be in arrear to him, yet they are in nothing debtors to
them. Thus they often offer to God, with strange fire, the Idol of their own
conception.

8. Seeing there is nothing more considerable in the eye of God, To be tender
of Gods honor upon the saints account.
then to favor his servants; Let us ever be sensible of the prejudice of the
Lords honor, in the afflictions of the godly. It was not so much the routing
of the Host of Israel, The cause of Elies death:
or the ruin of his children, as the captivity of the Ark, and the blood of
the Saints, which was the cause of Elies death. He was more afflicted with the
injury of Gods glory, then affected with the sorrow of all his domestic
indemnity; it was Gods dishonor, and not his own loss, which broke his heart.

The wife of Phineas minds more Isreal's glory, and of his daughters.
then her husbands death; the taking of the Ark, then the traveling of her
birth; the departing of glory from Israel, then of life from her self.

Oh how tender is a gracious spirit of the glory of God. It is the ground of
the Saints engagement against the wicked: therefore it should be of eminent
efficacy to draw a strong party, even all of its interest to their assistance.

Hence it is easy to conclude this Consideration, that of the Saints, who are
not sensible of their sufferings.

Fourthly, Doggish anpidity hinders tenderness of spirit.
such doggish stupidity, Caninae aequanimitatis stupor; As it smells nothing of
Religion, so it crosses all antural affection. It is below the excellency of
reason, not to compassionate the injury of nature.

There be none but such who are appointed to ruin themselves, which do not
pity the ruin of others: Soli filii irae iram non sentiunt nec tristantur in
tristibus. Bern. Ep. 256. They are the children of wrath (says he) who are not
sensible of wrath, A danger not to be touched with the saints condition.
and are not affected when their brethren are afflicted.

It signeth not only a worthless, but a spirit of immanity, not to be troubled
with another extremity, Quis (...) illam ubi nullus animum tangit affectas
stuporem immanem quo nullo prorsus erigatur neque excitetur affectum non enim
quia durum aliquid inde rectum aut quia stupidum ideo sanum. August. lib. 14.
de Civit. cap. 10.

Who says, he can speak any thing of that Apathy, Apathy of inexpressible
injury to our selves and others.
which spoileth the mind of affection, and covers it with a stupid
distraction, so that there is nothing can stir it, is it therefore a thing
right, because hard? or sound, because stupid?

Let this give a short, An advertisement of trial of spirits.
but a seasonable Advertisement to such, to try their condition, who are more
in charity with themselves, then any else; who love rather to flatter their
own accomplishment, then to give encouragement to others; that whatever (...)
they pass upon themselves, they may consider again, and they shall find, that
this their senseless apathy of the state of others, signeth them to share more
of the worst of sinners, then of the meanest Saints; and more of Monsters, then
Men, who are altogether careless, what become of their Neighbors. We are not
only by Nature rational, but social: Homo sum humani, nihil and me alienum
puto. Terent. The want of Christian compassion and brotherly tenderness, does
design us of a more then beathenish spirit.
The very heathen could speak in order to their kind, and the befriending of
it: how much more such, who have learned in the School of Christ, to bear one
another burden, and to be tenderly affectionate toward one another, as
becomes brethren.

I heartily wish, this secret counsel might be serviceable to some, who have
not only cast off the bond of all spiritual fraternity with the godly; Spirits
warned of their (...).
but also of natural humanity with others: so that they take no more notice of
their danger, then if they were not concerned in their safety. They mind
nothing of the danger of others, so it go well with themselves: They will
neither be at the cost of prayers for them, or of encouragements to them in
their troubled condition; such is the Genius of those stupid Stoics, who think
they were made for none but themselves; whose spirits are else void of
compassion, as their hearts of holiness, or their ends of future happiness.

It would make a soul tremble to think, A fearful expectation to such who are
not tenderly affectioned.
what pity they can expect for themselves, who will show none to others; what
love they can look for from God, who has none to the brethren; who has
neither hearts or tongues to befriend them.

It is a rule which admits of no exception, That judgment merciless, belong to
them who show no mercy.

Therefore me thinks it were the wisdom of such, Exhortation to such.
to take warning, that such an apathy of spirit is nothing else, but a mortal
Messenger of their hastening misery.

It is good for us to deal with others, as we would have a gracious God to deal
by us: if we would have favor, we must be favorable; if pity, must be
pitiful; if tenderness, brotherly tenderness speaks us the Lords children.
we must be troubled with the afflictions of others. There is nothing which
speak us more the Lords children, the^ to bear the image of this grace.

But to conclude this Consideration,

And because a senseless apathy does better become unnatural abortives, then the
children of a heavenly extraction; Let us improve our passions to sweeten the
afflictions of the Lords people in this juncture of their need, and pray with
this same gracious spirit in my Text, Do well, O Lord.

And so much we have thought fit to present for the reprehension of those
sullen selfish apathy, who are altogether careless of the sad estate of the
godly in their comfortless dangers.

Lastly, Last Use of caution.
if the Saints must be regarded by us, when dangerously engaged for us, To
beware of iniquity seeing it is the cause of our own and others calamity.
in opposition to any cruel enemy whatsoever; let not our iniquity prove their
disadvantage.

It is supposed by many, (and that not without reason) that our domestic
iniquity may endanger them abroad; that our personal private sins, may make
them public sufferers; Cum aliorum peccata Deus in aliis videtur ulcisci.
August. in Jos. quaest. 8. whilst God punishes the sins of one upon another.

It is ordinary in Surgery to sear the Neck, for a Reuhme in the Eyes; to open
a vein in the Arm, for a predominant Humor in the Body. Jos. 7.1, 2, 3.
We read of one wretched Achan, which troubled the whole Camp of Israel; his
personal sin, became a national sorrow.

2 Samuel 24.16.17.
Thousands of David's subjects were sufferers for David's sin.

Jeroboams Son must dye for his Fathers offense.

Genesis 20.28.
Abimelechs family is plagued for his personal oversight.

The firstborn in Egypt must be killed, because Pharaoh is hardened.

Others punished for sins which they had not committed
It should be tedious to remember the course and consequence of sin, in its
practice and diversity of its punishment, as to the person offending, or
others. De anathemate quia usurparit unus, in eos qui nec fecerant nec factum
noverant vindicta processit. August. contra Julian. lib. 6. cap. 7.

Such who have neither known or done any thing to sins practice, yet may be
sharply afflicted with the curse of its punishment.

It is in the Lords disposal, Animadversion.
to punish as he pleases; he can change, or choose the object of the Rod,
without the least injustice.

Therefore it must be our constant care to please God, and our filial fear to
offend him, upon the account of our brethren, lest our sins make them
sufferers, and so they pay the debt which they never took on.

It is our happiness to be holy.
It is one of the greatest courtesies we can do to our selves or others of the
Lords people, to be holy and harmless, that we contract no disease which must
be cured upon them; making them the Patients, although we are the delinquents.

I humbly conceive then, we are to make peace with God for our selves, if ever
we think to be useful to our brethren: God will first be in unity with us,
before he will be entreated by us. God hears not sinners, Joh. 9.31. We shall
make bad Orators for others, who cannot speak a word with confidence for our
selves: No in ercession without reconciliation.
Cum displicet is qui intercedit irati animus ad deteriora provocatur: It is
not for us to intercede, unless we be in favor with God, our prayers are but
provocations to him.

Therefore let our first work be Reconciliation for our selves, and the next
intercession for others.

It is the saddest of injuries which comes by sin; Note.
for the fault of one may prove the plague of many: Unius facinus plurium
pestis. Salvian de Provid. lib. 7.

There is none more unhappy amongst the creatures, Sin like Satan and the
Cockatrice.
then those who kill at distance; as does Satan by sin, and the Cockatrice by
sight: nothing can cure the sting of their poison, but the death of the Patient.

It is a part of that hurt the Saints receive from their Neighbors, Saints
sufferers by the wicked
that they can wrong them by their wickedness at the greatest distance. When
the Lord makes inquisition for sin, he hunts at home; if he find it in the
whole Body, he can punish any member.

Oh that this were considered, A receipt to enre.
we might take a shorter course to cure our calamity by letting blood of our
wickedness for the health of the body.

It is a Maxim in Policy; Potius pereat unus quam unitas: Better that one,
then the whole society perish.

I have ever observed Piety to be the best security, both for our selves and
others,

And therefore I conceive it a matter of eminent concernment, A word to all.
to be near to God; for then we shall not only be serviceable to our selves,
but profitable to the godly.

It is like, Saints are the Courtiers with God.
when we live at Court, we may prove Favorites, and so be serviceable to our
friends. To walk with God, is an act of duty to him, and certainly of great
utility our selves and his servants. Such a deportment does not only befriend
our personal advantage, but all the Israel of God.

Now then to conclude this fraternal Consideration, of our regarding the Saints
in their suffering condition. If ever we intend to have our spirits helpful to
our Brethren, they must be helpful. We must not think to preserve them by our
Addresses to God, when by our sins we provoke him.

There is no prevailing with God for good, Saints are fit suitors when renewed
in spirit.
till we cease to do evil; and then it shall be brotherly tenderness indeed of
the first magnitude, to remove their dangers, by renewing of our spirits. Thus
preserving their prosperity, by the purity of our prayers, and purging that
from our selves, whose pestilential contagion may be the bane of others.

We know the right side cannot be well, when there is a Pleurifie in the left;
when the heart is sick, the head is heavy.

Non est enim pondus verae virtutis insensibilitas cordis, quia and valde
insana per stuporem membra sunt, quia and incisa sentire dolorem non possunt.
Greg-Mor. lib. 2. cap. 16.

Where insensibility of the heart is, there is no weight of true virtue;
because the members are unhealthfully stupefied, and being cut, they feel no
pain.

As if the Moralist should have said, Analogy of the physical and the mystical
body.
When there is no feeling in the heart, then the members are dead, and vice
versa. When the members are mortified, the heart is senseless.

Hence it is easy to unriddle his conception, that there must not only be a
symmetry of parts, but a Gospel-sympathy of hearts amongst the Lords people in
trouble.

I could heartily wish, Objection solved.
one scruple were removed by the force of this Doctrine, before we proceed.

It is the common Calumny of the wicked, then corruption, That there is no such
binding relation upon the spirit of any, obliging them to a strict observance,
or sympathising correspondence of, and with the suffering condition of the
Saints.

This piece of arrogance has no little efficacy to break Christian communion,
and to make our spirits answer with Cain, Am I my brothers keeper?

Therefore to cut the root of this poysonable Coloquintida, we shall shortly
present two things:

1. Anima ut in toto corpore tota est, and in qualibet ejus part, ideo cum sit
aliquid in exigua particula corporis quod non sentiat anima; illa tamen tota
sentit, quia totam non latet. August. de Trinit. lib. 6. cap. 6. As the Soul is
in all and every part of the Body, and there is no part of the Body insensible,
etc. By which is demonstrate, the sympathy not only of the Natural, but of the
Mystical Body, in its life, motion, affection, and mutual compassion.

2. Paul, Gal. 6.2. That we bear one another burden, and so fulfill the law of
Christ, which speaks nothing more, then a fraternal correspondence of the
Saints spirits in the time of trouble, that as the Saints have common benefit
in Christ, so they have common burden for him. Members of the same Body, are
of the same tenderness and feeling, if they be not dead; and if such, they are
not of Christ's Body, or inlived by him: Qui non dolet cum pungitur and
vellicatur pro putrido and mortuo membro habetur. August. Hom. 18. Such a
member (says he) which is not pained when pinched, is deservedly esteemed
rotten and dead.

By which we are certified, there is none of Christ's Body, but such who are
touched with a sympathy of his Members.

Therefore let us savingly conclude, Determination.
as there is no duty of greater utility; Saints communion the ground of their
compassion.
so there is none of greater authority to be improved amongst Professors of the
same Gospel, and its interest, then this is.

Cum patiuntur membra corporis ejusdem quomodo alia membra, licet superiora non
compatiuntur membris unius corporis laborantibus. Ambros-Epist. 22. When
members of the same Body are suffers, how can the one be without the sympathy
of another trouble?

Cum membra quaedam sunt in tribulatione quadam in pace, and istos contristat
eorum tribulatio, and illos pax illorum consolatur. August. in Psa. 30.

There is such a communion amongst members of the same Body, that they are sad
and rejoice, as it goes well or evil with them, in their saddest and most
peaceable times. It seems it is their practice, to mourn with them who mourn,
and rejoice with them who rejoice.

I have ever observed, No such communion as that of the Saints.
that there is no such communion kept amongst any, as amongst the Saints, both
in adversity and prosperity; but especially in the evil day, the time of common
danger; then they all cry with David, Do well, O Lord, etc.

And so much for the first Proposition. The first Doct. finished.


The second considerable Conclusion, David's Prayer, comes to hand, viz.

That the Lord is to be entreated to befriend his people in danger. Proved.


This, it seems, is David's Practice; let it be our Pattern: Let us take some
pains this day for the Saints profit: Esa. 62.7. Give him no rest, till he
repair and set up Jerusalem, etc. It is not for Saints to be silent, whilst
their Brethren are suffering: We are to pray for Zions prosperity, if we love
our own: Psalm. 122.6. They shall prosper that love thee.

The Lord is pleased to make the peace of his people, The Saints prayers
profitable.
the return of their prayers, that he may not only engage them, but all of
their Brethren, in the duty for such a purchase; and so it is easy to find
out, how zealously and often the spirits of the godly has been engaged for
their Brethrens security in the day of calamity; Because (says Samuel) it has
pleased the Lord to make you his people, God forbid that I should sin in
resting to pray for you, 1 Samuel 12.24. It seems Samuel looked upon it as an act
of iniquity, to deprive the Lords people of the Benefit of his Prayers. He
considered, his addresses for them to God, might prevent their ruin.

How importunate is Abraham for the Saints in Sodom! Genesis 18.25, 26.27.
How zealous is Elias for all the Israel of God! Nehemiah, Jeremiah, and
Daniel, for the children of the Captivity! It is no marvel to read those
gracious Orators so compassionately earnest for the obtainment of their end,
seeing the prosperity and interest of the Lords people, has been so eminently
dear unto them, that they have jointly striven to advance it at their utmost
peril.

I confess there be very solid Arguments and Grounds for the Saints engagement
in behalf of their Brethren, Arguments for he Saints prayers.
in the day of trouble: as

First, in respect of God; Demonstrate. Exodus 19.5, 6.
they are owned by him as his inheritance, his peculiar treasure, though all
the earth be his, Exodus 19.5.

As there is none like himself amongst the gods; so there is none like them
amongst the Nations.

They are not only near, but invaluablely dear unto him: Precious in the sight
of the Lord, are the death of his Saints, Psalm. 116. The Saints harm, touches
his honor: Zech. 2.8. He that touches you, touches the apple of my eye. God
is highly concerned, both in the Saints injuries and favor; he takes both
their enemies and friends as his own; God looks upon the Saints enemies and
friends.
assuring us, if we make account to keep in with him, we must befriend his
servants: so that there is no corresponding with him, without praying for them
in the day of trouble. He looks upon those to be most cordial to himself, who
are most compassionate to his Saints.

I conceive the godlies interest in God, is no ordinary argument to their
Brethren, of their Addresses to him upon their account. They may truly
apprehend their welcome with God, God favors prayers for his Saints.
who come about such business to him.

The Lord likes such suitors who come often before him, as Interpreters only
of his Saints Necessities.

Hence it comes to pass, Saints prayers prevail.
we seldom find any returned from the Throne of Grace, without a comfortable
answer.

Whilst Daniel was praying and opening the case of his peoples calamity, Dan.
9.20, 21.
there is a Messenger dispatched to ease his spirit, with the glad tidings of a
timely deliverance to the Church: so he had his question resolved, and his
mind satisfied.

Prayers in behalf of the Saints, Note.
is a part of that sweet communion which we entertain with God; for as long as
we have tongues to speak, Ps. 34.15.
he has an ear to hear: And I find, that the godly have taken this course of
correspondence with him in behalf of their Brethren.

Let us then in the first place conclude, Do well, O Lord, unto, etc.

Secondly, Not to come before God without our brethren.
let us ever be mindful of his servants, if they be in danger: Let us not come
before him without them; so we shall speed the better: and let us take notice,
when we pray for the Saints, we but befriend our selves; the more we endeavor
their happiness, the more we promote our own: The Lord has engaged our
Addresses for them upon our own account; and it is not to be questioned, but he
will acknowledge our kindness.

Let therefore this pregnant argument of the Saints Unity with God, The Saints
union with God, must encourage our proyers for them.
bespeak our deportment in Prayer, that it be such as please God, and profit
the Saints: for they are precious to him; let them be such to us: Let us not
forget their necessities, whilst we are earnest for our own supplies.

The Lord will have our Prayers to be the Proxies of our Spirits, and to sign
our qualification with a witness; so that all their Dialect must be sweetened
with Fraternity.

I humbly confess, it is harder to love another, then our selves; but the
Saints are taught to love both alike, that our hearts may seal their sincerity
to God and his interest.

I cannot but take notice, Animad.
before the dispatch of this Argument, how unkind they are to God, who mind
not his afflicted servants; whose case is as comfortless, as danger can make
it. I do apprehend such, as they express themselves guilty of want of unity
with God; so of interest in his Members.

I shall cordially desire all Professors, who seem to be respective to God,
They would be such to his precious servants: Let Gods love upon their hearts,
warm them to a constant communion with his Saints; and so fixing it as a
Monument of their kindness to him, never to be forgot.

I shall farther presume to add a word to the premises:

That the Lord takes such for enemies to himself, A word of enlargement.
who do not positively befriend his Saints; and so any may conclude, in what
relation they stand to God; by what of respect they carry to them.

Secondly, 2 Arg.
the godly are to be presented to God in their dangers or troubles in respect
of the Nation: to which they do belong.

The godly of a Nation, The gedly the precious in the nation.
as they are the party of the greatest worth as to God; so they are of the
greatest advantage to their neighbors. They are not like fruitless Weeds, which
trouble the ground, but such a Seed as make the soil the better; a Garden of
the Lords dressing; a Vineyard of his own watering; a Vine of his own planting;
and a husbandry of his own blessing: They are profitable in many respects to a
nation.
and their prosperity is of such commodity to the Country wherein they
converse, that they are guests which make the house the better.

First, In respect of ornament.
in respect of Ornament: the godly are a Nations glory; they put an honor upon
it, which naturally it has not in it.

There is a distinguishing Character, The Church thenations glory.
written upon Zion, Psalm. 48.2. which is not to be read upon all the Mountains
of the earth. It is not only the Beauty of the Nations, but eminent by its
Inhabitant, being the City of the great King.

It is no wonder that Esaias prophecies, The Mountain of the Lords House to
overtop the hills; seeing it is a habitation of Holiness, and the Sanctuary of
the Lords Rest.

I would have people to look upon the godly with other eyes, then upon the
world. There is as great difference betwixt them and the children of this
world, as is betwixt the precious and the vile, the heaven above, and the earth
below.

We must think it is not for nothing, Saints are eminently owned.
the Spirit does so emimently own them with a choice in the world, as if they
were not of it.

I have often listened, to hear the voice of God in his Word, speaking to them
as his People, Ps. 33.12.
his Inheritance, Psalm. ^4.1. 1 Cor. 6.19 Romans 8.16 Gal. 3.26. Can. 5.2, 3 Ephesians.
5.23. 1 Co. 12.12. Bsa. 40 11. Luke 12.32 Job. 10.3. Eze 34 12 Ezra 5.11.
his Tabernacle, his Temple, his Children, the Spouse of Christ, his Love, his
Dove, his Undefiled, his Body, his Members, his Flock, his Sheep, his Servants.
All which most eminent Titles of Love and Honor, do more then ordinary
demonstrate in what account they are with God, and how to be looked upon by the
world: But let the Sons and Daughters of Nature think what they please of the
Saints; they should be very contemptible with God, if they wanted their company.

The world without the godly, What the world is without the Saints.
is like the firmament without stars; or the Elementary Region, without the
light of the Sun. The Saints the Zodiac of the Sun of Righteousness.
It should not only be darkened by privation of their persons (the Zodiac of
the Sun of Righteousness) but for want of their practice, which do shine like
Lights in the world.

I shall not stand to put honor upon the Saints, to honor the world: Let this
world only take notice from a little, That the same is obliged in point of
credit, to wish well to the godly; and if their prayers were profitable, they
have reason to pour them out upon their necessity, seeing they are their
Ornament in respect of God; they should befriend them upon that account.

But all this is in vain to the wicked; Preocaupation.
they have other thoughts of the godly; The wicked do lowly esteem of the
godly.
they put a lower esteem upon them, and upon what is theirs; their Persons,
Principles, and Practice, are but (...) and (...) with them: they esteem not
them vvorth their society, much less of assistance; but least of all to be
named in the day of eminency and ornament amongst them; they scorn to hold any
communion of reputation, or honor with them; and therefore to persuade such a
party, were to beat the Air; or arenam arare) there is no speaking of a
correspondence betwixt God and Belial, in any season, either of prosperity or
adversity.

Let us therefore turn from them who are more apt to add affliction to the
afflicted, Apostroph or a word to the godly.
then to sweeten the Saints condition, and to prevent their distraction in the
evil day.

I shall humbly beseech the godly therefore, Exhortation.
who are of the same interest and unity with their brethren, that for Zions
sake they would wrestle with their God. Let the lives of the Saints be as
precious to them, as to the Lord who bought them. Let us call strongly for the
people of the Lord and the Ark of his strength (the Gospel and its
inlargements) Let there be nothing so near our hearts, Blood of Saints of the
greatest price. A dear commodity.
as the blood of Saints, which is a thing of the greatest price in heaven or
earth: Let the honor of the Lords people, and their continued safety, be a
great enlargement of our happiness, that it may not be spoken in Gath, or
published in the streets of Askelon, that the Lords Worthies, and the work in
their hand, should not only be worsted, but shamefully derided by the enemies
of the Lord, and his people, but that the Lord would do his great Work, that
all the world may know there is a God who rules in Jacob, and a King in
Israel; and that it may be set home upon the spirit of the Adversaries, that
their God is not like ours, even themselves being judges.

Secondly, It is a sadness to the Saints to have their party reproached.
let it be presented to God, the condition of our National Sadness, if it
should go hard with the godly in this dangerous engagement; if the godly be the
Nations glory, what an eclipse of that honor should overshadow the surface of
the City of God? How would the enemies of God blaspheme, and they of no
Religion cloud it with their Calumnies, The wickeds railings.
telling us, with more then impudent arrogance, That our interest in heaven is
but ordinary, or none at all, seeing the Saints have shared with the common
hardship of the wicked.

Let us deal earnestly with our God in behalf of the Ornament of the Nation, to
which we belong, seeing it is laid in the prosperity of the faithful of the
land, that chosen Generation, whose safety is the Nations honor, and their own
happiness.

Let this be presented to God, that we may receive a comfortable answer in
behalf of our Brethren. It seems they stand or fall not to themselves, but to
all of their Brethren and Compatriots: Remember the godly are the nations glory
They are their Ornament, and to lose this with an enemy, is a double affront.

First, it is to yield to an enemy, which we would not part with to our dearest
friends.

Secondly, it is to make our selves a scorn to them who thirst our disgrace.

I shall proceed no farther in this; only leave you to be thinking of this
Argument, to act your Spirits to a farther engagement with God, for his
comfortable Correspondence with those qualified persons in my Text, those true
and upright in heart, whose spirit with all its accomplishments, is more the
Lords, then their own.

Let those precious ones be obliged to your prayers for their security, and the
Nation to them, and their interest for its remarkable eminency: for they are
the Nations Ornament.

Secondly, they are not only the Nations Glory, but the Pledges of its peace
and security.

It should go hard with the wicked, if they had no favor for the godly; they
should not only fall short of mercy, but of all opportunities of Repentance.

It is remarkable in the History of the Deluge, Noah's preaching and preparing
of the Ark, deferred the flood.
That all the time Noah was building the Ark, he was warning the world of their
danger: But whilst he is preparing this great Vessel, the world was in no fear
of drowning: Noah and his Family must be shipped, before the world be destroyed;
he must be shut in the Ark, before the waters break out upon the earth; when he
is removed, the world is ruined. It feems all the Inhabitants of the earth are
undone, when Noah is gone.

God promised to Abraham, to save five Cities for ten righteous persons. God
will have the wicked beholding to the Saint.
God is graciously pleased to have the world beholding to the godly, upon a
religious account, that they may be persuaded, that Piety is of great price
with God, and of singular efficacy in the Saints, to befriend themselves and
others. Paul had the lives of all them who are shipped with him, presented to him
for salvation; that all might take notice of Paul to be the Lords favorite,
and an eminent Courtier in Heaven, although now Nero's Prisoner upon earth.

Many times, Note.
the godly are much mistaken by their Brethren; Saints mistaken.
and it is no wonder; for Satan their great Adversary, The wicked reproach the
godly to deform them.
has not only a mind to malign them, but a black Art to disguise them under
several shapes. He is not only a dexterous deceiver in himself, but a
malicious traducer in the person of others.

Let this give a running Caveat to Saints, A Caveat to the godly.
not only to consider the subtle cruelty of Satan, but the sacred integrity
of their fellow servants (although strangers) with a great deal of Christian
candor, and tenderness of spirit.

But if the safety of the Nation lean so much upon the Saints. I truly think we
need no other argument to befriend them, but the assurance of our own, in their
happiness and safety.

There is an observation of the Spirit. Esa. 57.1. that the righteous are taken
away from the evil to come; as if God, when he has designed to make war upon a
Nation, he removes his hostages of peace from it:

1. That the wicked may take notice of the godlies mortality, to be a deadly
messenger of their future misery.

2. That they may take seasonable warning, God has concluded mischief against
them, when he has withdrawn the saving society of his servants from them.

And that he has determined ruin against a Land, when he accounts it not
worthy to lodge his people.

The Scripture tells us, The Saints death a forerunner of the words destruction.
That all of the Antediluvian Patriarchs were removed to heaven, before the
Judgment of the flood.

The year of the worlds drowning, was the year of Methuselah's dying. God, it
seems, would close up the number of his many days, and shut his aged eyes from
beholding the sad spectacle of the Creatures confusion.

It is historically reported of S. Augustine, That the people of Hippo were not
only happy in his Preaching the Gospel to them, but also by the enjoyment of
his person amongst them, in the time of the Arrian Persecution in Africa: for
whilst he lived with them, nothing could be done by their cruel Adversaries
against them; but immediately after his death, their Town was totally ruined by
the merciless Vandals, before the falling out of the German Miseries by War.
The Lord was pleased to gather many of his precious servants to heaven in peace.

And this has not only been an ancient kindness to the godly, (before the
worst of times) but a Modern Mercy to many of our Age, who are daily taken up,
and secured in heaven from the present dangers of spiritual and carnal
profaneness, which overfloweth in this degenerous Generation wherein we live.
We should take notice of the godlies death and its warning.
Their daily removing from us, does presage nothing of good unto us, but
bitterness in the latter end.

I humbly desire this were more seriously considered by us, to a reforming
advantage;

That however the Saints removal be an act of Grace, as to themselves; yet that
their departure were owned by us, as a matter of sorrow, and greatest grief.

I shall offer one thing to be thought upon by all: and it is shortly this;

Where God has no favorites, Animad.
he shows no kindness, but separateth his Saints from the Tents the wicked, to
undo them for ever.

Therefore let me this day counsel you, Counsel.
if ever you make account to do any thing in favor of your Country, and its
National interest, mind your afflicted Brethren in this juncture of their
trouble.

We know not what a day may bring forth. Pressed home.
This is the day of Jacobs Calamity, and we know not what the Lord will do for
him, upon our interest and request.

What a Glory shall it be to us, to be the instrumental Saviors of our
Brethren, in preserving them more by our Prayers, than they can do themselves
by Military Power.

Animad.
Remember how much of the Nations happiness is wrapped up in their security,
whose private Orators we are upon a public account.

Let there be zeal in our spirits, to cry earnestly for them, that it may go
well with them.

Let us be wrestling with God, Our prayer our forces.
whilst they are struggling with men; joining our Forces, that they may prevail.

Let us sow in tears for them, that they may reap in joy for us.

I can use no stronger Argument to engage your spirits, than to assure you from
God, That the Glory of a Nation, are the Godly in it; they are the Pledges of
its Happiness, and therefore whenever or wheresoever such are engaged, Let us
mind their condition, upon a public account.

It is but folly, to fancy of our National or Personal security, whatever
become of them: Can the Building stand, if the Pillars be broken?

It is a Masterpiece of Satan's policy, Satan's invention.
to Charm some to such thoughts: thus fainting their spirits, and friezng their
prayers.

1. But if the Blood of Saints;

2. The Blessing of the Gospel; and

3. The Benefit of three Reformed Nations, can affect us, then let their cases
command our Addresses to God for their assistance; We cannot help our brethren,
but by prayer.
though they be wholly engaged for us: yet we cannot be farther serviceable to
them, than our Prayers can prevail. Let something therefore be done to purpose
with God for the profit of his People.

Let it be seriously remembered in our assemblings before the Lord, Animad.
that we make Addresses to him for the safety of his friends, and not of his
enemies; such who are not only in unity with himself, (True and upright in
their bearts) but are this day zealously engaged for his interest.

And if this Godly Party be joined in the common danger, A scruple removed.
to those who are of another Character, than this of Piety; mentioned in my
Text: Let such be favored upon the Saints account.

That those poor creatures may be convinced,

1. It is not in vain to serve the Lord in prosperity, and to depend upon his
assistance in the day of adversity: and

2. That they are debtors to the society of Saints for their deliverance:

3. Who are so highly prized by God, that he will spare the wicked for their
sake.

And however, some of those miserable wretches engaged, may be past prayers;
Jer. 7.16. and 11.14. and 14.11.
in respect of their personal demerit: yet now being occasionally concerned in
the public safety, they may reap a return of prayers upon the account of
others.

This I have added, The Saints spirits satis fied.
to ease the Spirits of some, who are straightened to intercede with God for such,
who possibly have lifted up their heart and tongue blasphemously against
himself, his Truth, and People.

But we hope there is no such ungracious Instruments employed in the present
quarrel. Therefore letting the judgment of Charity pass upon all, we conceive
it becomes our interest in them, to deal fervently with our God for them; ever
thinking our selves much befriended in their deliverance.

But lastly, L^st Anim^^ Our own concernment in this days address.
I presume it may contribute somewhat to the promoting of the present business,
if we consider our selves, there is nothing of greater misery can betide us on
this side of heaven, then to be stripped of the Saints company and comfort.

They are not only in general the Nations Glory, Our misery to win tue Saints
society.
and establishment, but each particular members encouragement and help.

There is none so useful and so intimate to Christ and his Members, The Saints
our help, every way useful.
as are those of his spirit and interest: they are eyes to the Blind, Feet to
the Lame, Light to the Ignorant, Quickening to the Negligent, and Ease to the
Oppressed. As they can speak a word, so they can do a work of seasonable
sweetness, for the comfort of their Brethren in the evil day.

And therefore, as it is of the greatest gain to be gathered with them; so it
is the saddest of losses to hear of their ruin.

We read of David, to be more afflicted with the tidings of Jonathans death,
then ever he was troubled with the malicious malignity of Saul's fury.

Gods children being of the same spirit and interest, Our obligation to Pray.
are supernaturally obliged to a continued Sympathy both of losses and crosses.
So that they are as much affected with their common indemnity, as if it were
personal.

And as they are of the strictest unity: so they are of the sweetest amity, for
mutual assistance.

Let all this be accounted to our Brethren. God All-sufficient for the Saints
waints.
We are now before him, whose favor can befriend them, whose Power can protect
them, whose Wisdom can direct them, whose Hand can help them, whose Heart can
pity them, and whose Presence is dreadful to all of their Adversaries.

I conceive then it stands us in hand to deal earnestly with the Lord for them.

It is not the Power of Man, but the Providence of God which can secure and
cover their head in the day of Battle.

Therefore before I close up this my Exercitation, A few profitable directions
for the qualification of our prayers.
I shall shortly recommend to your improvement, these few particulars following:

First, Holy.
Let your Addresses to God for them be holy. Sinful Prayers are always
fruitless: as they have no power with God: so they never return any profit to
our selves or others.

If we make account to do any thing for them, we must begin with our selves.

David tells us, Psalm. 26.6. that he will wash his hands in innocence, and then
compass the Lords Altar, etc.

So that it is easy to conclude, There must be personal Piety to season our
devotions.

Secondly, Humble.
let your Addresses be humble; there is an assurance of grace to such, who are
of this impression, Jam. 4.7. It is not for Beggars to be Boasters, but to
submit to the grace of the Giver: for as there is nothing in us which can
commend us to God; so we have nothing of qualification which should lift us up
before him.

Hence we may determine humility to be a necessary ingredient in our Addresses
for our selves or others.

Here pause a little, Note.
and consider the different entertainment of the Pharisee and the Publican; the
first is rejected; the second accepted.

Thirdly, Faithful.
let your Addresses be mingled with Faith: it is folly to seek God, without
confidence in him. He that comes to God, must believe that God is a Rewarder
of them who seek him, Heb. 11.6. For as it is impossible without faith to
please God; so it is to obtain any thing from him.

Hence the godly are the proper Orators at the Throne of Grace: For being
justified by Faith, they have access to God, so accomplished by his Son, who is
the Way, the Truth, and the Life, Joh. 14.6.

It is with Christians in their prayers to God, Comparison of the Saints with
the Molossians in their addresses.
as it was with the Molossians in their address to their king; It seems they
behoved to take the prince in their arms, before they durst come in his
Presence: So the Saints are to apply and embrace their Savior by Faith, before
they have access to God, or acceptance with him for favor.

To conclude this also, not imagine to obtain any from God by faithless
Addresses to him.

Lastly, Zealous.
let your prayers be warmed with zeal.

Let there be a heat in your hearts to your Brethren, and their interest,
whilst ye are dealing with God for them.

It ssems they are precious to God (True and upright in their hearts) Therefore
let our spirits be carried out with a more than ordinary ardency for them, That
when deliverance is granted, The Saints rejoice when their preyers are returned
for the Saints profit.
our hearts may be mercifully cheered with the expected refreshment of our
Prayers return, and triumphantly rejoice with the voice of gladness;
acknowledging that the right hand of the Lord has done valiantly; he has got
himself a Name by the safety of his servants, who looked for his salvation.

Oh then let there be nothing wanting in our Spirits, The Point pressed home.
that may effectuate such a glorious end!

If Holiness, Humility, Faith, and Zeal, can compass it, let us engage all for
a comfortable return. I desire nothing more from you, From the Saints practice.
than what has been the sacred practice of Saints in the like case. How
serious they have been in the time of common danger, importuning of God by
Fasting and Prayer in behalf of the godly!

I could instance (if time did not straiten me) both their persons and practice
to this purpose: Conclusion of the premises confirmed by Tertul.
but for the present, sparing all farther enlargement, I shall break off with
the presentment of a most excellent testimony from Tertullian to this purpose,
wherein we may observe the acting of that Spirit, which did quicken the
Primitive Saints, in favor of their fellow servants: Tertullian his testimony.
Coimus in caetum, and Congregationem, and Deum quasi manum fastu ambiamus,
(grata Deo vis est haec) vota fundimus; coeium tundimus, Deum tangimus,
misericordiam extorquemus. Tertul. in Apolog.

We beset God (says he) we offer violence to him (such as is acceptable to
him) we pour out our Prayers, we send up our Cries, we touch God, and we wrest
mercy out of his hand.

Let our Spirits be thus united, thus engaged, thus affected, and thus
exemparily directed, whilst we are acting with God in behalf of our Brethren;
and let us send up David's eapresson with David's affection; speaking his words
with his sympathising Spirit, Do well, O Lord, to those who are good, and
upright in their hearts.

(...).
BOOKS Printed for William Weekly at Ipswich, and are to be sold by John
Rothwell, at the Fountain and Bear in Goldsmiths-Row in Cheapside.
FEstered Conscence new lanced.

The good Masters Plea, and the evil Servants Cavil.

Orthodoxal Navigation.

The Universal Character.

Choice Sermons of Faith, by Matthew Laurence M. A. late Lecturer of Ipswich in
Suffolk.


