PROPOSALS Of the Right Honorable the Lords, The Lord
Hallifar. Nottingham. Godolphin.
TO THE Prince of Orange, And the Prince of Orange's Answer.
Hungerford, December. 8. 1688. SIR,
THe King Commanded us to acquaint you, that He observed all the Differences
and Causes of Complaint alleged by your Highness, seem to be referred to a
Free-Parliament; His Majesty, as he has already declared, was resolved before
this to call one, but thought in this present state of affairs it was advisable
to defer it till things were more composed.

Yet seeing that his People still continue to desire it, He has put forth His
Proclamation in order to it, and has Issued forth his Writs for the Calling of
it.

And to prevent any cause of interruptiom in it, he will consent to every
thing, that can be reasonably required for the Security of all those that shall
come to it.

His Majesty has therefore sent us to attend Your Highness, for the adjusting
of all Matters that shall be agreed to be necessary to the freedom of
Elections, and the security of Sitting, and is ready to enter immediately into a
Treaty, in order to it: His Majesty proposes, that in the mean time, the
respective Armies may be retained within such Limits, and at such a distance
from London, as may prevent the Apprehensions tha^ the Parliament may be in any
kind disturbed, being desirous that the Meeting of it may be no longer delayed
than it must be by the usual and necessary

Princes Answer.
WE with the Advice of the Lords and Gentlemen assembled with Us have in answer
made these following Proposals.

1. That all Papists, and such Persons as are not qualified by Law, be
Disarmed, Disbanded, and Removed from all Employments, Civil and Military.

2. That all Proclamations that reflect upon Us, or at any time have come to
Us, or declared for us, be recalled, and that if any persons for having
assisted us have been committed, that they be forthwith set at liberty.

3. That for the Security and Safety of the city of London, the Custody and
Government of the Tower be immediately put into the hands of the said City.

4. That if His Majesty should think fit to be in London during the sitting of
the Parliament, that we may be there also with an equal number of our Guards,
and if His Majesty shall be pleased to be in any place from London, whatever
distance he thinks fit, that we may be the same distance, and that the
respective Armies be from London 4 Miles, and that no further forces be brought
into the Kingdom.

And that for the Security of the City of London, and their Trade Tilbury Fort
be put into the hands of the said City. That a sufficient part of the public
Revenue be assigned Us, for the Support and Maintenance of our Troops, until
the Sitting of a Free Parliament,

That to prevent the Landing of French or other Foreign Troops, Portsmouth may
be put into such hands, as by His Majesty and Us shall be agreed on.

By Order, Reprinted at Edinburgh. Anno Dom. 1688.


