THE PROCEEDINGS AT Turners-Hall, In Relation to the Great DEBATE BETWEEN
George Keith AND THE QUAKERS, As the same was Managed In a Dispute between two
Moderate Persons of Different Persuasions.
Tho. WELL met Brother Will. I find a Spirit of Curiosity has led you, as well
as my self, to Turners-hall.


Will. And pray, How were Matters carried; for, like the Foolish Virgins, I
came when the Doors were shut?


Tho. Carried do say, Montes paturiunt nascitur ridiculus mus; There Is a
great Cry, but a little Wool; half a dozen Persons, more like bawling
wrangling Billinsgate Scolds, than Divines or Scholar, threw Dirt into one
another Faces, I think without either Sense or Reason.


Will. That Is Strange! The Challenger is a Man of Learning, Prudence and
Conduct; besides he had the Civil Magistrates Authority for his Proceedings
there.


Tho. His Learning, Prudence and Conduct I question not, Arbor cognoscitur ex
fructu; however, if I dare be so bold as to speak, this Day's Dispute has been
no Ornament to it: And as for what you talk of the Magistrates Authority, I
understand it to be no other but a free Leave for both Parties to meet, if they
please, with perhaps half a dozen Officers to keep the King's Peace; but I
think there was no great need of that, the other Party, I suppose, never
designed to disturb it.


Will. But Prithee, since we are very intimate Friends, and biased to neither
Party, let us talk freely; Have not the Quakers brought a Reproach upon their
Innocent Religion, by not clea^ing themselves from the Absurdities, to speak no
worse G. K. has publicly charged them with.


Tho. That there are Errors in both Parties, you and I, of different
Persuasions, shall easily assent to; but that the Quakers are more Blameworthy
for not appearing at G. K's Summons, will admit some Debate.


Will. Your Reasons Pray?


Tho. My Reasons I think are plain enough, for G. K. is a Revolter and
prejudiced Person, Livor and Invidia carpere dente solent: Malice never speaks
well.


Will. Nay, stay Brother, I think you are much too hasty, to make a Man-Midwife
of: If G. K. have a clearer Sight and Discerning of Things, and is as willing
to convince his Brethren of their Errors (Nemo sine crimine vivit) as he is to
Retract and Amend his own, I think he cannot be justly charged as an Impostor
or Revolter; for have not able Divines, more or less, in almost all Ages,
altered or varied something in their Opinions, without being thought chargeable
of Apostasy; and have they not also labored to undeceive them they have
misled, without being reflected on as envious prejudiced Persons; but Omnes
comparationes odiosae sunt.


Tho. I agree to the Major, and should not harbor hard Thoughts of G. K. did
he prosecute more Christian Methods, to compose the Difference betwixt him and
his quondam Brethren, than I see he yet does; for let me tell you, those
Divines you spoke of, did not make it their Business to raise Brawls, appoint
public Disputes, and to side with Persons of different Persuasions, to make
the Breaches wider in their own; they very well knew how directly opposite such
Proceedings were to the Doctrine of the Apostles, who taught, If thy Brother
shall trespass against thee, go tell him his Fault between thee and him alone.
etc. Matt. 18.15. In the most obdurate and hardened Obstinacy, the Gospel
forewarns us from bringing a Scandal or Reproach upon Christianity, by our
Disputes and Divisions, If any Man seem to be Contentious, we have no such
Custom, neither the Church of God, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.15. You cannot
imagine how a Roman Catholic will rejoice to see the Protestants Clash and run
into Divisions about External Rites: The Divisions amongst the Quakers, for
ought I can learn, are but about Shadows and not Substances, and therefore I
think it is an ill Bird that defiles its own Nest, as G. K. does; for, to my
Knowledge, he yet continues to profess himself one of the People called Quakers.


Will. Ay! say thou so. I thought he had solemnly protested against any
thing like Quakerism.


Tho. Protest against it! There Is no such Matter (qui nescit dissimulare nescit
vivere.) But I think they greatly wrong him that call him Quaker; for ought
that I can learn he is not very subject to Quake or Tremble at any thing.


Will. You are pleased to Romance upon the Matter.


Tho. No, I am Serious, but if I were so Merry disposed, some merry Conceits
might be remarked on.


Will. What Conceits I pray?


Tho. Why, truly pleasing Fancies might be drawn as well from the Champion
himself, as from the Martial Field; (Convenient nomina saepe rebus suis)
however out of respect to the Worthy Company the Hall belongs to, (whose
Merits, Loyalty and worth are Illustrious) I shall wave making any Reflections;
only let me observe (si fas sit it a loqui) That so long as G. K. has any thing
to do there it may very properly be called Turners Hall.


Will. What, do you make him a Turn-coat?


Tho. Truly, in my opinion, he seems little less in his Religion, whatever he
is otherwise; but be that how it will, sub judice lis est.


Will. I have no Acquaintance with the man, but I have heard it very creditably
reported that he is a very learned man; perhaps his Knowledge, in some measure
(like the vicar of Bray's) consists in suiting his Temper to every Genius, Mode
and Custom, according as it will best serve his Interest: Its an old policy,
Cum vivas Romae, Romano vivito more.

To Live at Rome, like Rome, is a venial crime.


Tho. Truly, Brother, you have very well helped the Lame Dog over the Style;
I Will sing you one small Catch for more I cannot till I have wet my Throat)

A Turn-Coat is a cunning man,
That cants to Admiration;
Says this, or that, or any thing,
For Peoples Approbation.

Will. Come, come lets go and take a Hearty Glass; for there is more cunning in
daubing than bare slapping Dirt on the Wall.

Dixi, Deo test, quod verum estimavi, nec Hominum gratiam, nec propriam
utilitatem respiciens.


Sold by E. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall,


