THE PROCEEDINGS IN THE LATE TREATY OF PEACE Together With several Letters of
his Majesty to the Queen, and of Prince Rupert to the Earl of Northampton,
which were intercepted and brought to PARLIAMENT. WITH A Declaration of the
Lords and Commons upon those Proceedings and Letters.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons, that these Proceedings, Letters, and
Declaration be forthwith Printed.

H. Elsing Cler. Parliament. Dom. Com.

LONDON, Printed for Edwards Husbands, and are to be sold at his Shop in the
Middle Temple. 1643.

The humble Desires and Propositions of the Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled, tendered unto his Majesty: February the first, 1642.
WE your Majesty's most humble and faithful Subjects, the Lords and Commons in
Parliament assembled, having in our thoughts the glory of God, your Majesty's
honor, and the prospetity of your People, and being most grievously afflicted
with the pressing meseries and calamities which have overwhelmed your two
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, since your Majesty has by the persuasion of
evil Counselors, withdrawn your self from the Parliament, raised an Army
against it, and by force thereof protected Delinquents from the Justice of it,
constraining us to take Arms for the defense of our Religion, Laws, Liberties,
Privileges of Parliament, and for the sitting of the Parliament in safety,
which fears and dangers are continued, and increased by the raising, drawing
together, and arming of great numbers of Papists, under the command of the
Earl of Newcastle, likewise by making the Lord Herbert of Ragland, and other
known Papists, Commanders of great forces, whereby many grievous Oppressions,
Rapines, and Cruelties have been, and are daily exercised upon the persons and
estates of your people, much innocent blood has been spilt, and the Papists
have attained means of attempting, and hopes of effecting their mischievous
design of rooting out the Reformed Religion, and destroying the professors
thereof. In the tender sense and compassion of these evils, under which your
people and Kingdom lie (according to the duty which we owe to God, your
Majesty, and the Kingdom, for which we are entrusted) do most earnestly desire,
that an end may be put to these great distempers and distractions, for the
preventing of that desolation, (which does threaten all your Majesty's
Dominions. And as we have rendered, and still are ready to render to your
Majesty that subjection, obedience, and service which we owe unto you, so we
most humbly beseech your Majesty, to remove the Cause of this war, and to
vouchsafe us that peace and protection which we and our Ancestors have formerly
enjoyed under your Majesty, and your Royal Predecessors, and graciously to
accept and grant these most humble desires and Propositions.

1 THat your Majesty will be pleased to disband your Armies, as we likewise
shall be ready to disband all those Forces which we have raised: And that you
will be pleased to return to your Parliament.

2. That you will leave Delinquents to a Legal Trial, and judgment of
Parliament.

3. That the Papists may not only be disbanded, but disarmed according to Law.

4. That your Majesty will be pleased to give your Royal assent unto the Bill
for taking away Superstitious Innovations: To the Bill for the utter
abolishing, and taking away of all Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors, and
Commissaries, Deans Subdeans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, Canons, and
Prebendaries, and all Chanters, Chancellors, Treasurers, Subtreasurers,
Succentors, and Sacrists, and all Vicars Chorall, and Choristers, old Vicars,
and new Vicars of any Cathedral, or Collegiate Church, and all other their
underofficers out of the Church of England: To the Bill against scandalous
Ministers: To the Bill against Pluralicies: And to the Bill for consultation to
be had with godly, religious, and learned Divines. That your Majesty will be
pleased to promise to pass such other good Bills for settling of
Church Government, as upon consultation with the Assembly of the said Divines
shall be resolved on by both houses of Parliament, and by them be presented to
your Majesty.

That your Majesty having expressed in Your Answer to the Nineteen Propositions
of both houses of Parliament, a hearty affection, and Intentions for the
rooting out of Popery out of this Kingdom; and that if both the houses of
Parliament can yet sinde a more effectual Course to disable Jesuits, Priests,
and popish Recusants from disturbing the State, or deluding the Laws, that you
would willingly give your consent unto it, That You would be graciously pleased
for the better discovery and speedier conviction of Recusants. That an Oath may
be established by Act of Parliament to be Administered in such manner, as by
both Houses shall be agreed on; wherein they shall abjure and renounce the
Popes Supremacy; The doctrine of Transubstantiation, Purgatory, worshipping of
the consecrated Host, Crucifixes, and Images, and the refasing the said Oath,
being tendered in such manner, as shall be appointed by Act of Parliament, shall
be a sufficient Conviction Law of Recusancie. And that your Majesty will be
graciously pleased, to give Your Royal assent unto a Bill for the Education of
the children of Papists, by Protestants in the Protestant Religion; That for
the more effectual execution of the Laws against popish Recusants, your
Majesty would be pleased to consent to a Bill for the true levying of the
Panalties against them, and that the same Penalty may be levied, and disposed
of in such manner as both houses of Parliament shall agree on; so as your
Majesty be at no loss; And likewise to a Bill whereby the practice of Papists
against the State may be prevented, and the Laws against them duly executed.

6. That the Earl of Bristoll may be removed from your Majesty's Counsels,
and that both he, and the Lord Herbert, eldest son to the Earl of Worcester,
may likewise be restrained from coming within the Verge of the Court, and that
they may not bear any Office, or have my employments concerning the State, or
Commonwealth.

7. That Your Majesty will be graciously pleased by Act of Parliament, to
settle the Militia both by Sea and Land, and for the Forts, and Ports of the
Kingdom, in such a manner as shall be agreed on by both Houses.

8. That Your Majesty will be pleased by Your Letters Patents, to make Sir
John Brampston Chief Justice of Your Court of Kings Bench; William Lentall
Esquire, the now Speaker of the Commons house, Master of the Rolls, and to
continue the Lord chief Justice Banks chief Justice of the Court of Common
Pleas; and likewise to make Master Sergeant Wild Chief Baron of Your Court of
Exchequer. And that Master Justice Bacon may be continued; And Master Sergeant
Rolls, and Master Sergeant Arkins, made Justices of the Kings Bench. That
Master Justice Reeves, and Master Justices Foster, may be continued; and Master
Sergeant Phesant made one of Your Justices of Your Court of Common Pleas; That
Master Sergeant Cresivell, M. Samuel Brown, and Master John Pulleston, may be
Barons of the Exchequer; And that all these, and all the Judges of the same
Courts, for the time to come, may hold their places by Letters Patents under
the great Seal, Quam diu se been Gesserint, and that he several persons not
before named, that do hold any of these places before inentioned, may be
removed.

That all such persons as have been put out of the Commissions of Peace, or
Oyer and Terminer, or from being Custodes Rotulorum, since the first day of
April 1642. (other then such as were put out by desire of both, or either of
the houses of Parliament) may again be put into those Commission and Offices;
And that such persons may be put out of those Commissions and Offices, as shall
be excepted against by both houses of Parliament.

That Your Majesty will be pleased to pass the Bill now presented to your
Majesty to vindicate and secure the Privileges of Parliament, from the ill
consequence of the late President in the Charge, and proceeding against the
Lord Kimbolton, now Earl of Manchester, and the five Members of the house of
Commons.

That Your Majesty's Royal Assent may be given unto such Acts as shall be
advised by both houses of Parliament, for the satisfying, and paying the debts,
and damages wherein the two houses of Parliament, have ergaged the public
Faith of the Kingdom.

That Your Majesty will be pleased, according to a gracious Answer heretofore
received from You, to enter into a more strict Alliance with the States of the
United Provinces, and other Neighbor Princes and States of the Protestant
Religion, for the defense and maintenance thereof against all designs, and
attempts of the Popish and Jesuitical Faction, to subvert, and suppress it,
whereby Your Subjects may hope to be free from the mischiefs which this
Kingdom has endured, through the power which some of that Party have had in
Your Counsels, and will be much encouraged in a Parliamentary way for Your
Aid, and Assistance in restoring your Royal Sister, and the Prince Elector to
those Dignities, and Dominions which belong unto them, and releeving the other
distressed Protestant Princes who have suffered in the same Cause.

That in the Ganerall Pardon, which your Majesty has bin pleased to offer to
your Subjects, all offenses and misdemeanors committed before the tenth of
January, 1641. which have been, or shall be questioned, or proceeded against in
Parliament, upon complaint in the House of Commons before the tenth of January
1643. shall be excepted; which offenses, and misdemeanors shall nevertheless
be taken, and adjudged to be fully discharged against all other inferior
Courts. That likewise there shall be an exception of all offenses committed by
any person, or persons, which has, or have given any counsel, assistance, or
encouragement to the Rebels there for the maintenance of the Rebellion. As
likewise an exception of William Earl of Newcastle, and George Lord Digby.

That Your Majesty will be pleased to restore such Members of either house of
Parliament to their several places of Services, and Employment out of which
they have been put since the beginning of this Parliament; That they may
receive satisfaction, and reparation for those places, and for the profits,
which they have lost by such removalls upon the Petition of both houses of
Parliament: And that all others may be restored to their Offices and
Employments, who have been put out of the same upon any displeasure conceived
against them for any Assistance given to both houses of Parliament, or obeying
their Commands; or forbearing to leave their Attendance upon the Parliament
without license, or for any other occasion arising from these unhappy
differences betwixt your Majesty, and both houses of Parliament upon the like
Petition of both houses.

These things being granted and performed, as it has always been out hearty
prayer, so shall we be enabled to make it our hopeful endeavor; That your
Majesty and your people may enjoy the blessings of Peace, Truth and Iuffice;
The Royalty and greatness of Your Throne may be supported by the Loyal and
bountiful affections of Your people; Their Liberties and Privileges
maintained by your Majesty's Protection and Justice; And this public honor,
and happiness of your Majesty, and all Your Dominions Communicated to other
Churches, and States of Your Alliance, and derived to your Royal Posterity,
and the future Generations in this Kingdom for ever.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

His Majesty's Answer to the Desires and Propositions of both Houses, February
the third, 1642.
Received at a Conference with the Lords, February the sixth, 1642.
IF his Majesty had not given up all the faculties of his soul to an earnest
endeavor of a Peace, and reconciliation with his People, or if he would suffer
himself by any Provecation to be drawn to a sharpness of Language at a time,
when there seems somewhat like an Overture of Accommedation, he could not but
resent the heavy charges upon him in the Preamble of these Propositions, and
would not suffer himself to be reproached with protecting of Delinquents by
force from Justice, (his Majesty's desire having always bin, that all men
should be Tried by the known Law, and having been refused it) with raising an
Army against his Parliament, and to be told that Arms have been taken up
against him for defense of Religion, Laws, Liberties, Privileges of
Parliament, and for the sitting of the Parliament in safety, with many other
particulars in that Preamble, so often and so fully answered by his Majesty,
without remembering the World of the time, and circumstances of raising those
Arms against him: when his Majsety was so far from being in a condition to
invade other men's Rights, that he was not able to maintain and defend his own
from violence; And without telling his good Subjects that their Religion (the
true Protestant Religion, in which his Majesty was born, has faithfully lived,
and to which he will die a willing Sacrisice) their Laws, Liverties,
Privileges, and safety of Parliament were so amply settled, and estavlished; or
offered to be so by his Majesty before any Army was raised against him, and
long before any raised by him for his defense, that if nothing had been
desired, but that Peace and Protection which his Subjects, and their Ancestors
had in the best times enjoyed under his Majesty or his Royal Predecessors;
this misunderstanding and distance between his Majesty and his people, and this
general misery, and destraction upon the face of the whole Kingdom, had not
been now the discourse of Christendom: But his Majesty will forbear any
Expressions of Bitterness, or of a sense of his own sufferings, that if it be
possible the memory thereof may be lost to the World. And therefore though many
of the Propositions, presented to his Majesty by both Houses, appear to him
very derogatory from, and destructive to his just power and Prerogative, and no
way beneficial to his Subjects, few of them being already due to them by the
Laws, established, (And how unparliamentary it is by Arms to requite new Laws,
all the World may judge) yet (because these may be waved, or mollified, and
many things that are now dark, or doubtful in them, cleared and explained
upon debate) his Majesty is pleased (such is his sense of the miseries, this
Kingdom suffers by this unnatural war, and his earnest desire to remove them
by a happy peace) that a speedy time and place may be agreed upon for the
meeting of such persons as his Majesty and both Houses shall appoint to
discuss these Propositions, and such others here following, as His Majesty
does propose to them.

1 THat his Majesty's own Revenue, Magazins. Towns, Forts, and Ships which
have been taken, or kept from his by force, be forthwith restored unto him.

2 That whatsoever has been done or published, contrary to the known Laws of
the Land, or derogatory to his Majesty's Legal, and known power, and rights,
he renounced and recalled, that no seed may remain for the like to spring out
of for the future.

3 That whatsoever illegal power has bin claimed and exercised by, or over
his Subjects, as imprisoning their persons without Law, stopping their Habeas
Corpusses. and imposing upon their Estates without Act of Parliament, etc.
either by both, or either House, or any Committee of both, or either by any
persons appointed by any of them, be disclaimed, and all such persons so
committed, forthwith discharged.

4 That as His Majesty will readily consent (having done so heretofore) to the
execution of all Laws already made, and to any good Acts to be made for the
suppressing of Popery, and for the firm settling of the Protestant Religion now
established by Law: so he desires that a good Bill may be framed for the
better preserving of the Book of Common Prayer, from the scorn and violence of
Brownists, Anabaptists and other Sectaries with such clauses, for the ease of
tender consciences, as his Majesty has formerly offered.

5 That all such persons as upon the Treaty shall be excepted out of the
General Pardon, shall be tried per Pares, according to the usual course, and
known Law of the Land, and that it be left to that, either to acquit, or
condemn them.

6 And to the intent this Treaty may not suffer interruption by any intervening
Accidents, that a Cessation of Arms, and free Trade, for all his Majesty's
Subjects, may be first agreed upon.

This offer and desire of His Majesty he hopes will be so cheerfully
entertained, that a speedy and blessed Peace may be accomplished. If it shall
be rejected, or by insisting upon unreasonable Circumstances, be made
impossible (which he hopes God in his mercy to this Nation will not suffer) the
guilt of the Blood which will be shed, and the desolation which must follow,
will lie upon the head, of the Refusers. However his Majesty is resolved,
through what accidents soever he shall be compelled to recover his Rights, and
with what prosperous successes soever, it shall please God, to bless him, that
by his earness, constant endeavors to propagate and promote the true
Protestant Religion, and by his Governing according to the known Laws of the
Land, and upholding the just privileges of Parliament according to his
frequent Protestations made before Almighty God, which he will always in
violably observe. The world shall see that he has undergone all these
difficulties, and hazards for the defense and maintenance of those, the zealous
Preservation of which his Majesty well knows, is the only foundation, and
means for the true happiness of him, and his People.

Hen. Elsing, Cler. Parliament. D.C.

The Articles of Cessation sent to His Majesty, Februar. ultimo.
Whereas the Lords and Commons in Parlia. out of a tender sense of the present
miseries and distractions of the Kingdom, and for the obtaining and settling of
a happy Peace between his Majesty and his People, have humbly presented his
Majesty, diverse Propositions, to which he has bin pleased to make this return;
That his desire was, that a speedy time and place might be appointed for the
discussing of those Propositions, and likewise some others proposed by his
Majesty. It is thereupon agreed in both Houses, that a Committee of both Houses
shall be apponited to attend His Majesty, on or before the fourth of March, if
his Majesty shall so please to endeavor to give him all humble and fit
satisfaction concerning the said Propositions, both his Majesty's and their
own. And whereas for the more speedy removal of the bloody and miserable
effects of war, his Majesty has likewise been graciously pleased by a late
Message, to signify his desire, That for a voiding all intervening Accidents
of war, which might interrupt this Treaty, there might be a Cessation of Arms
under such particular conditions and limitations as should be agreed on, Their
humble desires therein concurring with his Majesty. It is by them assented and
agreed, That a Cessation of Arms in Order to such a Treaty as is resolved upon
by both Houses of Parliament, may be enjoined to all the Armies and Forces now
on foot in the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, on either side, under
the restrictions and limitations hereafter following, And that neither side
shall be bound and limited by this Cessation, in any otherwise or to any other
purpose then is hereafter expressed.

1 THat all manner of Arms, Ammunition, Victuals, Money, Bullion, and all
other Commodities passing without such a safe conduct, as may warrant their
passage may be staid and seized on, as if no such Cessation were agreed on at
all.

2 That all manner of Persons passing without such a safe conduct as is
mentioned in the Article next going before shall be apprehended and detained,
as if no such Cessation were agreed on at all.

3 That his Majesty's Forces in Oxfordshire, shall advance no nearer to Windsor
then Wheatly, and in Buckinghamshire, no near to Aylesbury, then Brill, and
that in Berks the Forces respectively shall not advance nearer the one to the
other then now they are: And that the Parliament Forces in Oxfordshire shall
advance no nearer to Oxford, then Henley; and those in Buckingham, no nearer to
Oxford, then Aylesbury; And that his Majesty's Forces shall take no new
Quarters above twelve miles from Oxford, any way, And that the Parliament
Forces shall take no new Quarters above twelve miles from Windsor any way.

4 That no siege shall be begun or continued against Gloucester, And that his
Majesty's Forces now employed in the Siege shall return to C^ester, and
Malmesbury, or to Oxford; as shall be most for their conveniencie, And the
Parliament Forces which are in Glocestershire, shall remain in the Cities of
Gloucester, Bristoll, and the Castle and Town of Berkley or retire nearer to
Wondsor, as they shall see cause, And that those of Wales which are drawn to
Gloucester, shall return into their Quarters, where they were before they drew
down to Glocestershire.

5. That in cafe it be pretended on either side, that the Cessation is violated
no Act of Hostility is immediately to follow, but first the party complaining is
to acquaint the Lord General on the other side and to allow three days after
notice given for satisfaction. And in case satisfaction be not given or
accepted, then five days notice to be given before hostility begin. And the
like to be observed in the Remoter Armics by the Commanders in Chief.

6 Lastly, that all other Force, in the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of
Wales and not before mentioned, shall remain in the same Quatters and Places
as they are at the time of the publishing of this cessation, and under the same
conditions as are mentioned in the Articles before, and that this Cessation
shall not extend to restrain the setting forth, or employing of any Ships for
the defense of his Majesty's Dominions.

All which they humbly desire his Majesty will be pleased to ratify and
confirm. And that this Cessation may begin upon the fourth of March next, or
fooner if it may be, and continue until the five and twentieth of the same
month, and in the mean time to be published to the Commanders, Officers and
Soldiers, And all other his Majesty's loving Subjects on either side, and that
the Treaty intended, may commence upon the fourth of March next, or sooner if
it may be, and the continuance thereof not to ex^ed 20 days.

Hen. Elsinge Cler. Parl. D. Com

His Majestys. Message to both his House of Parliament in answer to the
Articles of Cessation, received at a Conference, Martii 6. 1642.
HIs Majesty hoped the Treaty would have bin begun, and the Cessation agreed on
long since, and that much might in this time have been concluded in Order to
the Peace and happiness of the Kingdom, but since in almost a month (for his
Majesty Propositions were made on the third of February, and he heard not since
from both Houses till the first of March) no consent has been yielded to it;
He conceives the Cessation cannot begin so soon as the fourth of this Month,
by which time (though his Majesty uses no delay in making his Answer) the same
can hardly be returned to them; And many of the Articles now presented to him
from both Houses concerning the Cessation, are so strict, that such of his good
Subjects, who are not of his Army (and for whom generally he shall always
have a principal, just and compassionate regard) receive not any benefit, or
are restored to any liberty thereby, which his Majesty shall ever insist upon
(when in matters merely concerning himself, he may descend to easier
Conditions) and which he has returned with such Alteterations, as he doubts
not both Houses will consent to, and do sufficiently manifest how sollicitous
his Majesty is for the good of his people, and how desirous he is, that in
this unnatural Contention no more blood of his Subjects may be spilt (upon
which he looks with much grief, compassion and tenderness of heart) even of
those who have listed up their hands against him; and his Majesty therefore
desires (against which he can imagine no objection can be made) that the
Cessation may begin upon the Twelfth of this Month, or sooner, if the
Conditions of the Cessation shall be sooner agreed on, and is willing the same
shall continue for twenty days, in which time he hopes by the Treaty, and a
clear understanding of each other, a full peace and happiness may be
established throughout in Kingdom. And during that time his Majesty is
willing that neither side shall be bound or limited by this Cessation in any
otherwise, or to any other purpose then is hereafter expressed.

1 That all manner of Arms, Ammunition, Money, Bullion, and victuals passing
for the use of either Army without a pass or safe conduct from the Generals
of each Army may be stayed and seized on, as if no Cessation were agreed on at
all.

2 That all Officers and Soldiers of either Army passing without such license
or safe Conduct as aforesaid may be apprehended, and detained, as if no such
Cessation were agreed on at all; And that all manner of persons his Majesty's
Subjects, of what quality or condition soever (except Officers and Soldiers of
either Army) shall pass to and from the Cities of Oxford and London, and back
again at their pleasures during this Cessation, as likewise to and from any
other parts of his Majesty's Dominions, without any search, stay, or
imprisonment of their persons, or seizure, and detention of their goods or
estates; And that all manner of Trade, Traffic and Commerce, be free and open
between all his Majesty's subjects, excepting as aforesaid, between the
officers and soldiers of either Army, or for Arms, Ammunition, Money,
Bullion, or victuals, for the use of either Army without a Pass or safe
Conduct as aforesaid, which may be a good beginning to renew the trade and
correspondence of the Kingdom, and whereby his good Subjects may be restored
to that liberty and freedom they were borne to, and have so happily enjoyed,
till these miserable distractions, and which even during this war, his
Majesty has to his utmost labored to preserve, opening the way by most
strict Proclamations to the passage of all commodities, even to the City of
London it self.

3 That his Majesty's forces in Oxfordshire shall advance no nearer to Windsor
then Wheatly, and in Buckinghamshire no nearer to Aylesbury then Brill, and
that in Bark-shire the forces respectively shall not advance nearer, the one to
other then they shall be at the day to be agreed upon for the Cessation to
begin; And that the forces of the other Army in Oxfordshire, shall advance no
nearer to Oxford then Henley, and those in Buckinghamshire no nearer to Oxford
then Aylesbury; And that the forces of neither Army shall advance their
quarters nearer to each other, then they shall be upon the day agreed on for
the Cessation to begin, otherwise then in Passage and communication between
their several Quarters respectively, without any acts of Hostility each to
other, but any enlarge themselves within their own Quarters respectively, as
they shall find convenient.

4 That the forces of either army in Glocestershire Wiltshire and Wales, as
likewise in the Cities of Gloucester, Bristoll, and the Castle and Town of
Berkley shall be guided by the Rule expressed in the later part of the precedent
Article.

5 That in case it be pretended on either side, that the Cessation is violated,
no act of Hostility is immediately to follow, but first the party complaining
is to acquaint the Lord General on the other side, and to allow three days
after notice given for satisfaction, and in case satisfaction be not given or
accepted, then five days notice to be given before hostility begin; And the
like to be observed in the remoter armies by the Commanders in chief.

6 That all other forces the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales not
before mentioned, shall remain in the same Quarters and places as they are at
the time of publishing this Cessation otherwise then in passage and
communication between their several Quarters, as is mentioned in the later
part of the third Article; And that this Cessation shall not extend to
restrain the setting forth, or employing and Ships for the defense of his
Majesty's Dominions, Provided that his Majesty be first acquainted with the
particulats, and that such Ships as shall be set forth be commanded by such
persons as his Majesty shall approve of.

7 Lastly, that during the Cessation none of his Majesty's subjects be
imprisoned, otherwise then according to the known Laws of the Land; And that
there shall be no plundring or violence offered to any of his Subjects. And his
Majesty is very willing if there be any scruples made concerning these
propositions and circumstances of the Cessation; That the Committee for the
Treaty nevertheless may immediately come hither, and so all matters concerning
the Cessation may be here settled by him.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

His Majesty's Answer to the Articles of Cessation sent to His Majesty.
HIS Majesty has sent a safe Conduct for the Earl of Northumberland, Mr.
Pierpoint, Sir William Ermyn, Sir John Holland, and Mr. Whitlocke, but has not
admitted the Lord Say to attend him, as being excepted against by name is his
Proclamation at Oxford of the third of November, and by Writ to the Sheriff
proclaimed then in that County, in which his Majesty's Intention is declared to
proceed against him as a person guilty of high Treason, and so falling to be
within the case of Sir John Evelin, who upon the same Exception was not
admitted to attend his Majesty, with the rest of the Committee at Colebrooke
in November last; But his Majesty does signify that in case the House shall
think fit to send any other person in the place of the Lord Say, that is not
included in the like Exception, his Majesty has commanded all his Officers,
Soldiers, and other subjects to suffer him as freely to pass and repasse, as
if his name had been particularly comprised in this safe Conduct.

His Majesty is content that his Proposition concerning the Magazines, Forts,
Ships and Revenue, and the Proposition of both Houses for the disbanding of the
Armies, shall be first Treated of, and agreed of before the proceeding to treat
upon any of the other Propositions; And that after, the second of His
Majesty's, and the second of theirs be treated on, and agreed of, and so on in
the same order; And that from the beginning of the Treaty, the time may not
exceed Twenty days: in which he hopes a full Peace and right understanding may
be established throughout the Kingdom.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

The last Articles of Cessation now sent to His Majesty.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament being still carried on with a vehement
desire of Peace, that so the Kingdom may speedily be freed from the desolation
and destruction, wherewith it is like to be overwhelmed if the war should
continue; Have with as much expedition as they could considered of the Articles
of Cessation, with those alterations and additions offered by his Majesty,
unto which they are ready to agree in such manner as is expressed in these
ensuing Articles. (viz.)

1 That all manner of Arms, Ammunition, Victual, Money, Bullion, and all
other Commodities, passing without a safe Conduct from the Generals of both
Armies, as well of his Majesty's as of the Armies raised by the Parliament may
be stayed and seized on, as if no such Cessation were agreed at all.

2 That all manner of persons passing without such a safe Conduct as is
mentioned in the Articles next going before, shall be apprehended and detained
as if no such Cessation were agreed on at all.

3 That his Majesty's Forces in Oxfordshire shall advance no nearer to Windsor
then VVheatly, and in Buckinghamshire no nearer to Aylesburie then Brill, and
that in Barkeshire the Forces respectively, shall not advance nearer the one to
the other, then they shall be at the day to be agreed on for the Cessation to
begin; And that the Forces of the other Army raised by the Parliament shall
advance no nearer to Oxford then Henley, and those in Buckinghamshire no nearer
to Oxon then Alisbury, and that the Forces of neither army shall advance their
Quarters nearer to each other then they shall be upon the day agreed on for the
Cessation to begin.

4 That the Forces of either army in Glocestershire, Wilts, and Wales, as
likewise in the Cities of Gloucester and Bristoll, and the Castle and Town of
Berkley shall be guided by the rule expressed in the later part of the precedent
Article.

5 That in case it be pretended on either side, that the Cessation is violated
no act of Hostility, is immediately to follow, but first the party complaining
is first to acquaint the Lord General on the other side, and to allow three
days after notice given for satisfaction, and in case satisfaction be not
given or accepted then five days notice to be given before Hostility begin,
and the like to be observed in the remoter armies by the Commanders in Chief.

6 That all other forces in the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, not
beforementioned, shall remayn in the same Quarters and places, as they are at
the time of the publishing of this Cessation, and under the same Conditions as
are mentioned in the Articles before, And that this Cessation shall not extend
to restrain the setting forth or employing of any Ships for the defense of his
Majesty's Dominions.

7 That as soon as his Majesty shall be pleased to disband the Armies which both
Houses earnestly desire may be speedily effected, and to disarme the Papists
according to Law, the Subjects may then enjoy the benefit of peace in the
liberty of their persons, goods, and Freedom of Trade; in the mean time, the
Generals and Commanders of the Armies of both sides shall be enjoined to keep
the Soldiers from plundering, which the two Houses of Parliament, have ever
disliked and forbidden.

And for the speedy settling of this so much desired Peace, they have thought
good to send their Committees with Instructions, that if his Majesty be pleased
to consent to a Cessation so limited and qualified, they may forthwith proceed
to treat upon the Propositions, and because the time is so far elapsed in these
preparations, they desire the Cessation may begin the five and twentieth of
this instant March, or sooner if it may be, and in the mean time, notice to be
given to all the Forces in the several and remote parts, and the Commanders,
Officers, and Soldiers, are enjoined to observe this Cessation accordingly, to
which they hope and pray, that God will give such a blessing, That thereupon,
Peace, Safety, and Happiness may be produced and confirmed to his Majesty and
all his People.

H. Elsing Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

Instructions agreed on by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, for Algernoon,
Earl of Northumberland, William, Lord Viscount Say and Seal, William
Pierpoint, Esquire, Sir William Armyn Baronet, Sir John Holland, Baronet, and
Bulstrode Whitlock, Esquire: Committees appointed to attend his Majesty upon
the Propositions made by his Majesty to the Parliament, and likewise upon the
other Propositions, humbly presented from them to his Majesty.
1 YOu shall present to his Majesty, the Articles agreed on for the Cessation
of Arms, Humbly desiring his Majesty to ratify and confirm the same under
the Great Seal, which being obtained, you are to send it up to the Parliament
with all possible speed, and shall likewise beseech the King to dispatch away
Messengers to the Generals Commanders and Soldiers of all his Armies and
Forces, with a strict Command and Injunction, that they observe those Articles
of Cessation, according as they are agreed upon as the two House likewises
intend to give the like direction the Lord General of the Armies raised for
their defense.

2. After his Majesty has declared, and ratified the Cessation, you shall then
proceed to the Treaty, beginning with the first Proposition on his Majesty's
behalf, concerning his Majesty's own Revenue, his Magazines, Towns, Forts, and
Ships, and thereunto make this Answer.

You shall declare, That the two Houses of Parliament have not made use of his
Majesty's own Revenue, but in a very small proportion, which for a good part
has bin employed in the maintenance of his Majesty's Children, according to
the allowance established by himself, And they will satisfy what shall remain
due to his Majesty of those sums received, out of his Majesty's own Revenues,
and shall leave the same to his Majesty for the time to come, And you likewise
shall propound to his Majesty, that he will restore what has bin taken for his
use, upon any of the Bills assigned to other purposes by several Acts of
Parliament, or out of the provision made for the war of Ireland.

That they will remove the Garrisons out of all Towns and Forts in their Hands,
wherein there were no Garrisons before these Troubles, and slight all
Fortifications made since that time, which Towns and Forts it is to be agreed
on both parts, shall continue in the same condition they were in before; And
that those Garrisons shall not be renewed nor the Fortifications repaired
without consent of his Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament.

That for those Towns and Forts which are within the Jurisdiction of the
Cinque Ports, they shall be delivered up into the hands of such a Noble person
as his Majesty shall appoint to be Warden of the Cinque Ports, being such a one
as they shall confide in.

That the Town of Portsmouth shall be reduced to the number of the Garrison, as
was at the time when the Lords and Commons undertook the custody thereof. And
such other Forts, Castles, and Towns, as were formerly kept by Garrisons, as
have bin taken by them into their care and custody since the beginning of these
Troubles shall be reduced to such proportion of Garrison, as they had in the
year 1636* and shall be so continued, And that all the said Towns, Forts, and
Castles shall be delivered up into the hands of such persons of Quality and
Trust, to be likewise nominated by his Majesty, as the two Houses shall confide
in.

That the Warden of the Cinque Ports, and all Governors and Commanders of
Towns, Castles, and Forts shall keep the same Towns, Castles and Forts
respectively for the Service of his Majesty, and the safety of the Kingdom,
And that they shall not admit into any of them any Foreign Forces raised
without his Majesty's authority and consent of the two Houses of Parliament,
And they shall use their uttermost endeavors to suppress all Forces whatsoever
raised without such authority and consent; And they shall seize all Arms and
Ammunition provided for any such Forces.

That the Ships shall be delivered into the Charge of such a Noble person, as
his Majesty shall nominate to be Lord High Admiral of England, and the two
Houses of Parliament confide in, who shall receive the same Office by Letters
Patent quam diu been se gesserit and shall have power to nominate and appoint
all subordinate Commanders and Officers, and have all other powers appertaining
to the Office of High Admiral, which Ships he shall employ for the defense of
the Kingdom against all Foreign Forces whatsoeves and for the safeguard of
Merchants, securing of Trade, and the guarding of Ireland, and the intercepting
of all Supplies to be carried to the Rebels; And shall use his uttermost
endeavor to suppress all Forces which shall be raised by any person without
his Majesty's authority and consent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament: And
shall seize all Arms and Ammunition provided for supply of any such Forces.

That all the Arms and Ammunition, taken out of his Mejesties Magazins, which
shall remain in their hands, shall be delivered into his stores, and whatsoever
shall be wanting, they will in convenient time supply in kind, according to the
proportions which they have received; And that the Persons to whose charge
those public Magazins shall be committed, being nominated by his Majesty shall
be such as the Lords and Commons shall confide in; And you shall propound to
his Majesty, that he will restore all such Arms and Ammunition as have bin
taken for his use from the several Counties, Cities, and Towns.

To the Proposition made by the two Houses concerning the disbanding of the
Armies you shall humbly desire his Majesty's speedy and positive Answer, unto
which if he shall be pleased to give his Assent, you shall then beseech his
Majesty in the name of both Houses that a near day may be agreed upon for the
disbanding of all the Forces in the remote parts of Yorkshire, and the other
Northern Counties, as also in Lancashire, Cheshire, and in the Dominion of
Wales, and in Cornwall and Devon; And they being fully disbanded, another day
may be agreed on for the disbanding of all Forces in Lincolnshire,
Nottinghamshire, Lecestershire, and all other Places except at Oxford, and the
Quarters thereunto belonging, and Windsor, and the Quarters thereunto
belonging; And that last of all a speedy day be appointed for the disbanding
those two Armies at Oxford and Windsor, and all the Forces, Members of either
of them.

That some Officers of both Armies may speedily meet to agree of the manner of
the disbanding, and that fit Persons may be appointed by his Majesty and the
Parliament, who may repair to the several Armies, and see the disbanding put
in speedy execution accordingly.

That his Majesty do likewise remove the Garrisons out of Newcastle, and all
other Towns, Castles and Forts, where any Garrisons have bin placed by him
since these Troubles; And that the Fortifications be likewise slighted, and
the Towns and Forts left in such state and condition as they were in the year
1636.

That all other Towns, Forts, and Castles, where there have been formerly
Garrisons before these Troubles, be committed to the charge of such Persons to
be nominated by his Majesty, as the Parliament shall confide in, and under such
Instructions as are formerly mentioned.

That if his Majesty shall be pleased to assent to these Propositions
concerning the Towns, Forts, Castles, Magazines and Ships, that then his
Majesty be humbly entreated to name Persons of Quality to receive the charge
of the several Offices and Forts, Castles and Towns, to be forthwith
certified to the two Houses of Parliament, that thereupon they may express
their confidence in those persons, or humbly beseech his Majesty to name
others; None of which Persons shall be removed during three years next
ensuing without just cause to be approved by Parliament, and if any be so
removed, or shall dye within the said space, the Person to be put into the same
Office, shall be such as both Houses shall confide in.

That all Generals and Commanders in any of the Armies on either side, as
likewise the Lord Admiral of England; the Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports; All
Commanders of any Ships, and Commanders of any Town, Castle or Fort, shall
take an Oath to observe these Articles aforementioned; And to use their
uttermost power to preserve the true reformed Protestant Religion, and the
Peace of the Kingdom against all Foreign Force, and all other Forces raised
without his Majesty's authority and consent of the two Houses of Parliament.

You shall move his Majesty, that for the better dispatch of the Treaty, and
the free intercourse of Instructions and advertisements betwixt the two Houses
of Parliament and the Committee, that there may be a free pass of Messengers
to and from the Parliament, and the Committees Without search or interruption,
and his Majesty's safe Conduct, to be obtained to that effect to such Persons
as are, or shall be appointed for that service, viz. For

Mr. John Rushworth, Mr. Michael W^lden, Mr. John Corbet of Graies Inn, and
Mr. James Standish.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

23 Martii, 1642. The Kings Message concerning the Cessation.
CHARLES R.

HIs Majesty has immediately upon their arrival admitted the Committee sent
to Him from both Houses of Parliament (as the Messengers of Peace) to his
Royal Presence, and received the Articles of Cessation brought by them, which
are in effect the same his Majesty formerly excepted to, though their
expression in the Preface to these Articles of their readiness to agree to
those Alterations, and Additions offered by his Majesty in such manner as is
expressed, made Him expect to have found at least some of the real
Alterations, and Additions made by him admitted, which He does not discover.

1. His Majesty desired the Provision might be made, and License given to his
good Subjects, for their freedom of Trade, Traffic and Commerce, (though in
matters which concerned Himself more immediately, as in Arms, Ammunition,
Money, Bullion, and Victual, for the use of his Army, and the Passage of all
Officers and Soldiers of his army, He was contented the restraint should be
in such manner as was proposed) of which his Majesty is so tender, that as he
has provided for the same by His gracious Proclamations, so He does daily
release and discharge such Merchandise and Commodities, as are contrary to
those Proclamations stayed by any of his Majesty's Forces.

To this freedom and liberty of his good subjects, there is not the least
admission given by these Articles, so that they have not any Ease or benefit by
this Cessation, which his Majesty desires both Houses to consider of, and
whether, if his Majesty should take the same course to stop and interrupt the
Trade of the Kingdom, as the other Army does, a general loss and Calamity
would not seize upon his good Subjects.

2. His Majesty to the end that a full Cessation might be as well at Sea as at
Land, and He might be secured, that the Ships proposed to be set forth for the
Defense of his Majesty's Dominions, should be employed only to that end and
purpose, desired, that they might be put under the Command of Persons to be
approved of by his Majesty, which is not consented to by these Articles, but
their former, to which his Majesty excepted, strictly and entirely insisted on,
by which (besides that part of Hostility remains) the conveying of any number
of Forces from any part to any other, by that means, remain free to them.

3. For the Prevention of any Inconveniences which might arise upon real
Differences, or Mistakes upon the Latitude of expressions (as if his Majesty
should now consent to these Articles proposed, in the Terms proposed, He must
confess the Army, of which he complains, to be raised by the Parliament, and
either himself to be no part of the Parliament, or Himself to have raised
that Army) and for prevention of that delay which He foresaw could not
otherwise be avoided, if upon every Difference the Questions must be remitted
to London, His Majesty desired that the Committee (for whom He then sent a safe
Conduct) might have liberty to debate any such Differences and Expressions, and
reconcile the same, that all possible Expedition might be used to the main
Treaty.

In this point of so high Concernment, no power is given in these Articles, and
the Committee confessed to his Majesty they have no power given, but are
strictly and precisely bound to the very words of the Articles now sent, and
that before these are consented to by us, they cannot enter into any Treaty
concerning the other Propositions.

4. His Majesty desired, that during the Cessation none of his good subjects
might be imprisoned, otherwise then according to the known Laws of the Land.

This is in no degree consented to, but the privilege and liberty, (to which
they were borne) reserved from them till the disbanding of both armies (though
they are no part of either Army) and so have no benefit by this Cessation.

5. His Majesty desired, that during this Cessation there should be no
Plundering or violence offered to any of his Subjects.

In the Answer to which, His desire against violence, is not at all taken
notice of, nor is his desire against Plundering any ways satisfied; his
Majesty, not only intending by it the robbing of the Subject by the unrulinesse
of the uncommanded Soldier (which their clause of requiring the Generals and
officers to keep them from it seems to imply; And the assertion, that the two
Houses of Parliament had ever disliked, and forbidden it, declares plainly, to
be their only meaning) but particularly the violence and Plundring used to his
Subjects by forcibly taking away their goods for not submitting to Impositions
and Taxes required from them by Orders or Ordinances of one or both houses of
Parliament, which are contrary to the known Laws of the Land.

Besides that there is no consent given to those alterations and additions
offered by his Majesty, (whatsoever is pretended) so where an absolute consent
may be supposed, because the very words of his Majesty's Article are wholly
preserved, yet by Reason of the Relation to somewhat going before, that is
varyed by them, the sense of those words is wholly varyed too, as in the fourth
Article, that part of the Third article to which that did refer, being wholly
left out. So that upon the matter all the Propositions made by his Majesty
(which did not in Terms agree with those presented to him) are utterly
rejected.

For these Reasons, and that this Entrance toward a blessed Peace and
Accommodation (which has already filled the hearts of the Kingdom with Joye
and Hop:) may be improved to the wished end, his Majesty desires, that the
Committee now sent, may speedily have liberty to treat, debate, and agree upon
the Articles of Cessation, in which they and all the world shall find, that his
Majesty is less sollicitous for his own Dignity and Greatness, then for his
subjects Ease and Liberty. And He doubts not upon such a Debate all
differences concerning the Cessation will be easily and speedily agreed upon,
and the benefit of a Cessation be continued and confirmed to his People by a
speedy disbanding of both Armies, and a sudden and firm Peace, which his
Majesty above all things desires.

If this so reasonalbe, equal, and just Desire of his Majesty shall not be
yielded unto, but the same Articles still insisted upon, though his Majesty
next to Peace desires a Cessation, Yet that the not agreeing upon the one, may
not destroy the hopes of, nor so much as delay the other; He is willing however
to Treat (even without a Cessation, if that be not granted) upon the
Propositions themselves, in that order as is agreed upon (and desires the
Committee here may be enabled to that effect) In which Treaty He shall give
all his Subjects that satisfaction, That if any Security to enjoy all the
Rights, Privileges and Liberties due to them by the Law, or that happiness in
Church and State, which the best times have seen, with such farther acts of
Grace as may agree with his Honor, Justice and Duty to his Crown, and as may
not render Him less able to protect His Subjects according to his Oath, will
satisfy them; He is confident in the mercy of God, that no more precious
blood of this Nation will be thus miserably spent.

My Lord and Gentlemen,
Whereas by your former Instructions, you are tied up to a circumstance of
time, and are not to proceed unto the Treaty upon the Propositions, until the
cessation of Arms be first agreed upon; You are now authorized and required, as
you may perceive by the Votes of both Houses, which you shall herewith receive,
to Treat and debate with His Majesty upon the two first Propositions, according
to those Instructions, for four days after the day of the receipt hereof,
notwithstanding that the Cessation be not yet agreed upon.

Your Lordships most humble servant, Manchester, Speaker of the House of Peers
pro tempore.
March 24. 1642. Received March 25.



Die Veneris, 24. Martij, 1642.
Resolved upon the Question by the Lord and Commons in Parliament;

THat the Committee at Oxon, shall have power to Treat and Debate with His
Majesty upon the two first Propositions, according to their Instructions, for
four days after the day of the receipt of this Message; notwithstanding that
the Cessation is not yet agree upon.

Resolved, etc.

THat the Committee formerly appointed to prepare the Articles of Cessation and
Instructions for the Committee at Oxon, shall consider of an Answer to be made
to His Majesty's Message this day received; And likewise prepare Reasons to be
sent to the Committee, for them to press in the Treaty and Debate upon the
former Articles of Cessation; And to show His Majesty the grounds why the
Houses cannot depart from those former Articles.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

The Votes of both Houses, and the Copy of the answer to His Majesty. Received
Martii 25. 1642.
May it please Your Majesty;
We Your Loyal Subjects the Lords and Commons in Parliament, having received
a Message from Your Majesty; In which you are pleased to express Your Self
not to be satisfied with the Articles of Cessation, Presented unto You by our
Committee now attending You at Oxford, and yet a signification of Your
Majesty's willingness to Treat upon the Propositions themselves, even without
a Cessation; Do with all humbleness give our consent that our Committee shall
have power to Treat and debate with your Majesty upon the two first
Propositions, according to their Instructions, for four days after the day of
the receipt of this Message, notwithstanding that the Cessation be not yet
agreed upon; That (as much as in us lies) there may be no delay in the
proceedings, for the obtaining of a blessed Peace, and the healing up the
miserable breaches of this distracted Kingdom; And do purpose to represent very
speedily unto your Majesty, those just Reasons and grounds, upon which we have
sound it necessary to desire of your Majesty a Cessation, so qualified as that
is, whereby we hope you will receive such satisfaction, as that you will be
pleased to assent unto it, and being obtained, we assure our selves it will be
most effectual to the safety of the Kingdom; and that Peace, which with so
much zeal and loyal affection to your Royal person, and in a deep sense of
the bleeding condition of this poor Kingdom, we humbly beg of your Majesty's
justice and goodness.

John Brown Cler. Parl.

A Letter from the E: of Manchester, to the E. of Northumberland, Received
March 29.
MY Lord, I am commanded by the Peers in Parliament, to send unto your
Lordship, the Reasons which both Houses think fit to offer unto His Majesty, in
pursuit of their adhering to their former Resolution: concerning the Articles
of the Cessation of Arms. MY Lord you shall likewise receive additionall
Instructions from both Houses, and a Vote, which I send you here enclosed.

My Lord, this is all I have in command, as

Your Lordships most humble servant, Manchester, Speaker of the House of Peers,
pro tempore.
Mar. 27.
Die Lun^, 27. Martii, 1643.
Resolved upon the Question by the Lords in Parliament;

THat the E. of Northumberland their Committee at Oxford, is thereby authorized
to acquaint His Majesty with all their Instructions upon the two first
Propositions.

Joh: Brown, Cler. Parl.

Additionall Instructions, March 29. Additionall Instructions, agreed upon by
the Lords and Commons in Parliament, for Algernon Earl of Northumberland,
William Viscount: Say and Seal, William Pierpoint Esquire Sir William Armine
Baronet, Sir John Holland Baronet, and Bulstrode Whitlock Esquire Committees
attending His Majesty upon the Cessation and Treaty.
YOu shall alter the words mentioned in his Majesty's third Article in this
manner, leaving out the words ( The Army raised by the Parliament) and putting
in these words ( The Army raised by both Hou^es of Parliament.)

You shall humbly present to his Majesty the Reasons herewithall sent from both
Houses, for their not assenting to those alterations and additions to the
Articles of Cessation offered by his Majesty.

You shall press the force of those Reasons, or any other, as there shall be
occasion, in the best manner you may, to procure his Majesty's a^s^ to those
Articles of Cessation, which if you shall obtain within two days after the day
of the receipt hereon, you shall in the name of both houses of Parliament agree
and conclude upon the Cessation, to continue to the end of twenty days, to be
reckoned from the twenty fifth of March, and upon a day certain as soon as may
be, when the same shall first begin, and be of force; within which time notice.
is to be given as well by his Majesty, as by the Lords and Commons, to the
several Generals, Commanders, and Soldiers respectively, to observe the same
Cessation, as it is qualified and limited in those Articles; And after such
conclusion made, you shall take care that those Articles be passed under the
Great Seal in a fitting and effectual manner, and speedily sent up to the Lords
and Commons in Parliament, with four Duplicates of the same at least.

If his Majesty shall please to agree upon the two Propositions concerning his
own Revenues, Towns, Forts, Magazines and Ships, and the disbanding of the
Armies, you are then authorized fully to agree and conclude upon those
Propositions, according to your Instructions; and you shall desire his Majesty,
that the same may be forthwith put in execution, according to the Instructions
formerly given in that behalf; And the two Houses will be ready to put in
execution what is to be performed on their part, of which you have hereby power
to assure his Majesty; And if his Majesty shall not be pleased to agree upon
those two Propositions within the time of four days, you shall then speedily
give advertisement to the two Houses of Parliament, that thereupon they may
give such further direction as to them shall seem fit.

Joh: Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

Martii 27. 1643. Reasons for the Committee.
To the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY.
The Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, Do with all humble
thankfulness acknowledge Your Majesty's favor in the speedy admission of
their Committee to Your Royal Presence, and the expedition of Your Exceptions
to their Articles, that so they might more speedily endeavor to give Your
Majesty satisfaction; And although they were ready to agree to the Articles of
Cessation, in such manner as they expressed in their Preface, they cannot agree
to the alteration and addition offered by Your Majesty, without great prejudice
to the Cause, and danger to the Kingdom; whose cause it is: The reasons
whereof, will clearly appear in the answer to the particulars pressed by Your
Majesty.

1. THey do deny that they have restrained any Trade, but to some few of those
places where Your Majesty's forces are enquartered, and even now in the heat of
War do permit the Carriers to go into all the parts of the Kingdom, with all
sorts of commodities for the use of the Subjects; except Arms, Ammunition,
money, and Bullion: But if they should grant such a free Trade as Your Majesty
desires to Oxford and other places, where Your forces remain, It would be very
difficult, if not impossible to keep Arms, Ammunition, money, and Bullion from
passing into Your Majesty's Army, without very strict and frequent searches,
which would make it so troublesome, chargeable, and dangerous to the Subjects,
That the question being but for twenty days for so few places, the mischiefs
and inconveniences to the whole Kingdom would be far greater, than any
advantage which that small number of Your Subjects (whom it concerns) can have
by it.

The case then is much otherwise than is expressed by Your Majesty's Answer; for
whereas they are charged not to give the least admission of this liberty and
freedom of Trade during the cessation, The truth is, that they do grant it as
fully to the benefit of the Subject, even in time of War; and that Your Majesty
in pressing this for the peoples good, does therein desire that which will be
very little beneficial to the Subjects, but exceeding advantageous to Your
Majesty, in supplying Your Army with many necessaries, and making Your quarters
a staple for such commodities, as may be vented in the adjacent Counties, and
so draw money thither, whereby the Inhabitants will be better enabled by Loans
and contributions to support Your Majesty's Army; And as Your Majesty's Army
may receive much advantage, and the other Army much danger, if such freedom
should be granted to those places; so there is no probability that the Army
raised by the Lords and Commons shall have any return of commodities and other
supplies from thence, which may be useful for them: And they conceive that in
a Treaty for a Cessation, those demands cannot be thought reasonable which are
not indifferent, that is equally advantageous to both parties.

As they have given no interruption to the Trade of the Kingdom, but in
relation to the supply of the contrary Army, which the reason of War requires;
So they beseech Your Majesty to consider, whether Your soldiers have not
robbed the Carriers in several parts where there has been no such reason, And
Your ships taken many ships, to the great damage not only of particular
Merchants, but of the whole Kingdom. And whether Your Majesty have not declared
Your own purpose, and endeavored by Your ministers of State, to embarque the
merchants goods in foreign parts, which has been in some measure executed
upon the East-land merchants in Denmark, and is a course which will much
diminish the wealth of the Kingdom, violate the law of Nations, make other
Princes Arbiters of the differences betwixt Your Majesty and Your people, break
off the intercourse between this and other States, and like to bring us into
quarrels and dissentions with all the neighbor Nations.

2. To demand the approving of the Commanders of the Ships, is to desire the
strength of one party to the other, before the difference be ended, and against
all Rules of Treaty; To make a cessation at Sea, would leave the Kingdom naked
to those foreign forces, which they have great cause to believe have been
solicited against them, and the Ports open for such supplies of Arms and
Ammunition as shall be brought from beyond the seas: But for conveying any
number of forces by those means from one part to another, they shall observe
the Articles of the Cessation by which that is Restrained.

3. As for the expression of the Army raised by the Parliament, They are
contented it should be altered thus (raised by both Houses of Parliament) as
not desiring to differ upon words, but to give any conlusive power in this case
to the Committee, upon such differences as may arise, wherein the Houses have
given no express direction, is neither safe for the Committee to undertake,
nor fit for the two Houses to grant; yet to debate and to press the reason of
their desires, whereby an agreement from Your Majesty may be procured, is
granted to them; and although the two Houses did think it (...) proper the
Cessation should be first agreed on, and that it was unfit to treat in blood;
yet to satisfy the world of their earnest longing after peace, they have given
power to the Committees to enter into the treaty upon the two first
Propositions, notwithstanding the Cessation be not yet assented to; And those
being agreed, they hope the foundation will be laid, not only of a suspention,
but a total abolishion of all hostility in the Kingdom.

4. If the nature of War be duly considered, it must needs be acknowledged,
That it is incompetible with the ordinary rules of a peaceable government; Your
Majesty would have them commit none but according to the known Laws of the
Land, whereby they conceive Your Majesty understands, that it must be by the
ordinary Process of Law, which being granted, it will follow, That no man
(...) be committed by them for supplying Your Majesty with Arms, Powder and
Ammunition; for by the Law of the Land, the Subject may (...) such goods from
London or any other place to Oxford; the Soldiers most not be committed if
they run from their Colors, and refuse any duty in the Army, No man shall be
committed for not submitting to necessary supplies of money; so that if this
be yielded in Your Majesty's sense, they shall be disabled to restrain
supplies from (...) enemies, and to govern or maintain their own Soldiers; it
cannot be thought reasonable, that under the disguise of a Cessation, they
should admit that which will necessarily produce the dissolving of the Army,
and destruction of the Cause.

It seems not probable. That Your Majesty does intend that if any be taken with
supplies for this Army, or ^tining in Your own, that such persons shall not be
committed, but according to the known Laws of the Land, that is, by Process
of Law; Put rather that your Majesty will so interpret this limitation of
known Laws, that although it lays straight ^o^ upon the two Houses, yet it
leaves Your Generals as much liberty as before; for it has been denied by
your Majesty, that these known Laws give any power to the two Houses of
Parliament to raise Arms, and so consequently their General cannot exercise
any marshall law in those cases, and it is not unlike but that it will be a^ed.
That the Generals constituted by your Majesty's Commission, have that power by
the same known Laws; So that this Article under the specious show of liberty
and Law, would altogether disable them to defend their liberties and Laws, and
would produce to your Majesty an absolute victory, and submission under
pretense of a Cessation and treaty.

5. Being by necessity inevitable on their part enforced to a defensive War
in this unhappy breach between your Majesty and them, and that they are
therein warranted both by the Laws of God, and man, it must needs follow, that
by the same Law they are enabled to raise means to support that War; And
therefore till it shall please God to incline your Majesty to afford them such
a peace as may secure them, they cannot relinquish the power of laying taxes
upon those who ought to join with them in that defense, and the necessary ways
of leavying those taxes upon them, in case of refusal, for otherwise their
Army must needs be dissolved. But if your Majesty shall consent to disband the
Armies, the cause of the War being taken away, the consequences will likewise
be removed, and the Subject restored to the benefit of those Laws which the
necessity of Arms has in such cases suspended.

6. They deny any pretense of consenting to those alterations and additions
offered by your Majesty, only in the Preamble they say they have considered of
those Articles, with such alterations and additions, unto which Articles they
professed they were ready to agree, not as they were accompanied with those
alterations and additions, but in such manner as they expressed; As for the
clause left out in the third Article, it implied a freedom of passage and
communication of quarters, which is contrary to the nature of a Cessations
whereby matters should be preserved in the state they are, and neither party
have liberty so much to advantage himself, as it is evident your Majesty might
do, if Your Forces in the North and West might join with those at OXFORD, and
bring those supplies of treasure or Arms thither which were brought out of
HOLLAND, or at least it should be so indifferent as to give a proportionable
advantage to the other side, which this does not; for the Forces under the
power of both Houses are so disposed, that they have an easy passage from one
to the other; but your Majesty's Forces are severed the one from the other by
many large Counties, strong passes, and competent Armies, and if they had
admitted this clause, they had bereaved themselves of one of the greatest
advantages, and freed Your Majesty's party of one of the greatest
inconveniences, which your Majesty, or they have in this War.

For the Reasons already alleged, They cannot agree to the alterations and
enlargements of the Cessation propounded, or to transfer any such power to
the Committee of Treating, debating and agreeing upon those Articles in any
other manner than the Houses have directed, but that a fair and speedy passage
may be opened to a secure and a happy Peace; They have enabled their
Committees to treat and debate upon the two Propositions concerning His
Majesty's own Revenue, the delivery of His Towns, Castles, Magazines, and
Ships, and the disbanding of the Armies, which being agreed upon, a present
peace and security will follow, and the Treaty upon the other Propositions be
facilitated without fear of interruption, by the confusion of War, or
exasperation of either party, by the bloody effects thereof.

In which Treaty, the two Houses will desire and expect nothing but what does
stand with. Your Majesty's Honor, and the trust reposed in You, and is
necessary for Your Majesty's good Subjects, that they may enjoy the true
Religion, and their Liberties, and Privileges, and that they may freely and in
a Parliamentary way concur with Your Majesty in those things which may
conduce to the glory of God, the safety and happiness of Your Majesty, and
Your Posterity and people, and preventing the like miserable effusion of
English blood for the time to come; for the effecting whereof, Their most
earnest Prayers, and uttermost endeavors shall ever be faithfullly and
constantly employed, in hope that God will give a blessing thereunto.

Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Additionall Instructions concerning the Cessation, March 29.
IN case we shall obtain Your Majesty's assent to the Articles of Cessation, as
they were last presented to Your Majesty, within two days after the day of the
receipt of the reason this day presented to Your Majesty from both Houses, for
their not assenting to those alterations and additions to the Articles of
cessation offered by Your Majesty.

We are authorized by our Instructions this day received, in the name of both
Houses of Parliament, to agree and conclude upon the Cessation, to continue to
the end of twenty days, to be reckoned from the 25 of this instant march, and
upon a day certain as soon as may be, when the same shall first begin and be of
force; within which time, notice is to be given as well by his Majesty, as by
the Lords and Commons, to the several Generals, Commanders, and Soldiers
respectively, to observe the same cessation as it is qualified and limited in
those Articles last presented to Your Majesty.

Northumberland. John Holland. B. Whitlocke. Will: Pierrepoint. Will. Armyne.


The Kings question concernning removal of quarters, March 31, 1643.
Whether by denying the Communication of quarters, you intend to restrain the
quarters of either Army from each other; As that the forces at Abbington may
not remove to Banbury, or the forces at Henly may not remove to Alisbury, or to
any other places within the quarter of each army respectively.

Falkland.

The Committees answer concerning removal of quarters, Mar. 31. 1643.
IN answer to Your Majesty's question upon the third Article of the Cessation;

We humbly conceive, That it is not intended to restrain the quarters of their
Army respectively from each other, So as they come not nearer the quarters of
the other Army: But that the forces at Abbington may remove to Banbury, or the
forces at Henly may remove to Alisbury or to any other place within the
quarters of each Army respectively: So as the Forces of either Army
respectively, come not nearer the quarters of the other army, then they shall
be upon the day agreed on for the cessation to begin.

John Holland. B. Whitelocke. Northumberland. Will. Pierrepoint. Will. Armyne.


The Kings Questions concerning the Cessation, March 31. 1643.
HIs Majesty desires to be resolved by the Committee of Lords and Commons;
Whether the Forces of Oxford may not as well go to Reading, as the Forces of
Henly may to Alisbury?

Whether His Majesty's Forces belonging to the Army at Oxford, may not go to
Shrewsbury or any other place backwards from London, so that in their march
they approach no nearer to any quarters of any of the contrary Armies, then
some of His Majesty's Forces shall quarter upon the day agreed upon for the
Cessation to begin.

Falkland.

The Committees answer concerning the Cessation, March 31. 1643.
WE humbly conceive, That by our Instructions we are not enabled to give any
resolution upon Your Majesty's questions concerning the remove all of quarters,
other than we have already given.

Northumberland.
John Holland. B. Whitlocke. Will. Pierrepoint. Will. Armyne.


A Letter from the Earl of Manchester, April 4.
MY LORD,
I Am commanded by the Lords in Parliament, to send unto your Lordship these
enclosed Votes, for the giving your Lordship and the Committee longer time to
treat of the first Propositions; This is all I have incommand, as.

April 2. Your Lordships most humble servant, MANCHESTER, Speaker of the House
pro tempore.

Votes of both Houses for four days longer to Treat. April. 4.
Die Luna, Aprilis 3. 1643.
Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled.

THat further time shall be given to the Committee at Oxon, to Treat upon the
two first Propositions, viz. The first Proposition of His Majesty's, And the
first Proposition of both Houses.

Resolved etc.

THat the time prescribed for the Treaty upon the two first Propositions, shall
be until Friday next.

Resolved. etc.

That Friday in this last question shall be taken inclusive.

Jo: Brown Clex. Parliamentorum.

His Majesty's Message concerning the Cessation.
Charles R.

HOw His Majesty has spent His time since the Committee from His two Houses of
Parliament came hither, how willing He has been (during the four days
allowed to them) to expedite the Treaty it self, by the free and diligent
disquisition of the particulars comprised in those two first Articles, and how
intent He has been upon the Cessation (which He thinks so necessary, and so
much desires) since the last Message concerning the same came to Him, the
Committee themselves cannot but observe: And though no conclusion could be made
within the two days (a time limited with much strictness in a business of so
great moment, where all words and expressions must be carefully and exactly
weighed) His Majesty cannot doubt but both Houses will be willing to give and
receive satisfaction in any particulars which are necessarily to be considered
in concluding the same, though the two days are expired. And if His Majesty
enlarges Himself in His Replies more than may seem necessary to the
Propositions and differences in debate, It must be remembered by what
unnecessary and unwarrantable Expressions in this last Message from His two
Houses; He is not only invited, but compelled thereunto, which He could
heartily have wished might upon this occasion have been forborne.

1. For the freedom of trade, His Majesty has great reason to require, and the
two Houses to admit that freedom to His good Subjects He desired; For what
concerns the supply of the Army with Arms, Ammunition, money, Bullion, and
Victuals, He consented to the very terms proposed by the two Houses; and that
they may be observed, is contented that searches may be made, which being but
the trouble of particular persons, is not considerable, in respect of the
public benefit and advantage. But why all other liberty of traffic and
Commerce should not be granted to His good Subjects, He cannot understand; for
that His Majesty's army should receive much advantage thereby, and the
contrary army none, is in no degree confessed: For (besides, the restraint is
to places where no part of His Majesty's army is, and indeed the whole trade of
the Kingdom interrupted) it is as great a support (if not a greater) to the
contrary army, to maintain and keep up the trade of London, from whence that
receives its supply and relief, as to his Majesty's army to continue the trade
of Oxford, or any other place where Forces recide, and to stop and seize the
cloth, Ker^ies, and other Western commodities (which his Majesty can daily do
from Reading) would be as great disturbance to the Trade of London, as the
seizing of any commodities (which may be done by the E. of Essex from Windsor
or Wickham) can be to the Trade of Oxford; And therefore his Majesty has great
reason to press, that mutual and universal Freedom to all his good subjects
may be granted; Otherwise, he must either permit that License to his army, to
seize the goods of his people in their passage to London, and to interrupt and
break the Trade and correspendence of the Kingdom (which bott our of public
consideration, and private compassion, his Majesty is most averse from) or else
must grant that evident benefit and advantage to those who deny the same to
him, and to his people for his sake. And it cannot be denied, but this Freedom
is so very beneficial to his subject, and so wholly considerable to his
Majesty under that Notion, that their very subsistence depends upon it, and by
this means Trade may be continued, which, if a little more suppressed by these
distractions, will not be easily recovered, even by a settled Peace. His Majesty
believes that some Carriers have bin robbed by his Majesty's soldiers, But it is
as true that no complaint has been made to him of that kind, which he has not
received to the relief and reparation of the Petitioners. And it is therefore his
desire that both Houses would join with him (at least during the Cessation)
that there might be no more such violences and interruptions offered to his
good Subjects by either side.

For the imbarquing the Merchants Goods in foreign parts, his Majesty denies
that any endeavor has yet been made by his Ministers of State to that
purpose. But it is true, his Majesty has declared his Resolution, which he
shall pursue, that such persons who absolve themselves from their obedience to
him, and assist or consent to Actions of disloyalty to him here, shall be
deprived of those advantages, and must not expect that Protection from him
abroad, which is due, and which he always has and will allow to his good
subjects. And this is not to make other Princes Arbiters of the differences
betwixt his Majesty and his people, but to use the mutual amity and
correspondence with other Princes, for the maintenance and support of that
dignity for which it is made and entered into.

2. His Majesty did not demand the approving of the Commanders of ships only,
with reference to his present Right, for then he would have demanded, not the
approbation of the Commanders, but the ships themselves. But this demand was
and is a thing most neccessary for his Majesty, for the setting out the present
Fleet, is pretended to be for the defense of his Majesty's Dominions, and which
cannot conveniently suffer any alteration in Commanders, if the Cessation and
Peace should be fully and speedily agreed upon. And therefore it is most
necessary for his Majesty, to know both the Designs, and to approve of the
Commanders, who will not be so fit to be altered, when once they are sent out.

His Majesty cannot see how a Cessation at Sea between his Majesty and his
Subjects, should leave the Kingdom naked to foreign Forces (a continuance of
War may well do it:) And his Majesty is willing to concur in the resistance of
all such, of what kind soever, and expects that during the Cessation, the
conveying of all Forces from one part to another by Sea, for the Assistance of
the Earl of ESSEX be restrained, which both Houses seem now to consent to,
which was not at all expressed in their former Articles.

3. His Majesty's opinion, how unfit it was to Treat in Blood, sufficiently
appears, this debate concerning a Cessation arising first from his Majesty's
motion (it being left out in the Answer to his Message for a Treaty:) In order
to which, he had and has great reason to desire, that the Committee may have
liberty to debate and conclude any differences and Expressions in the Articles
of the Cessation, that the same may be reconciled and removed, without
remitting all Questions to London; For as those now consented to, might in much
less time have been agreed here, if there had been that liberty, so there can
hardly be a right and clear understanding of Intentions, without expounding of
words, and knowing the meaning from each other; as in the consent which his
Majesty now understands to be given by both Houses, that no Forces shall during
the Cessation be sent by Sea for the relief of any place now held by them, the
expression is not so clear, but refers to Articles, in which if it was not
comprised before (as his Majesty does not conceive it was) no alteration is
made, by what now seems to be consented to, and the liberty which to all
understandings may seem to be given, by removing out of one quarter to another,
within the Precincts proposed, is not yet so demonstrable; The Committee having
no power to Answer what they understand in that point which is most necessary
to be known, that the Peace be not broken, during that Cessation; And his
Majesty wonders that it should be thought unsafe or unfit to give such a
conclusive power of such differences and doubts to the Committee here, when it is
notoriously known, that the very Liberty and property of the Subject is
committed not only to other Committees of the Houses, without reporting to the
Houses, but to persons who are employed by them, uninteressed in, and
unacquainted with the directions of either, or both Houses.

4. It was no part of his Majesty's intention, that his Article against
Imprisonment of his subjects, otherwise then according to the known Laws of the
land, should extend to the destruction of the Military Discipline of either
army; But this is a very sufficient instance of the necessity of inabling some
persons to conclude upon these Articles, without which (through
inanimadvertence or doubtfulnesse in the expressions(they who are nearest of a
mind, will hardly ever come to conclude, if every Punctilio must be forced to
be sent forwards and backwards a hundred miles; And (if this authority had been
given to the Committee here, as for such causes was desired) limitation of half
a dozen words (which would have been as soon agreed to as proposed) would have
saved most of this fourth Reason. And he that desires any thing necessary to
the speed of this Cessation, gives a good argument of desiring the Cessation it
self, and whoever is averse to the one, can hardly be thought inclinable to the
other.

But such of his subjects as are not concerned in the discipline of the army,
are not concernd in this Objections; and his Majesty has reason to insist that
the same Liberty may be restored to them, in which they were born, and the care
and defense of which is so much and so merely pretended by those who deny it to
them.

5. Though it grieves his Majesty to the soul, to see the present miserable
condition of his subjects, groaning under so many visible pressures, because of
an invisible necessity, and plundered and imprisoned to maintain such a
defensive War, as was begun to be raised against him before his Majesty had
granted one Commission to raise a man; yet he cannot but be pleased with the
ingenuity of this confession, that the implicit Faith of his seduced subjects
begins to wear out so fast, that the authority of Declaring new, unknown
Fundamental Laws, does not now so work with them, to believe that these Taxes
are laid according to the Laws of God and man, nor the many pretenses of
imminent dangers, and inevitable ruin of their Religion, Laws and Liberties,
so persuade them to believe this Cause, to be the Cause of the Kingdom; But
that if their Cause, Authority and Eloquence were not assisted by Force and
Rapine, their army must needs be dissolved for want of being thought fit, much
less necessary to be paid by those who have equal right to judge of the
necessity and danger, and for whose sakes, interests and concernments only it
was pretended to be raised, and who are defended by it against their wills; Nor
is it strange that his Majesty cannot receive these charges upon him, as a
reason to make him contented and Acquiesce with these injuries to his subjects;
Or that they who saw his Majesty's condition the last year (till continued
violence against him, opened the eyes and hearts of his subjects to his
assistance) should not believe that the began that War, which they saw him so
unlikely to resist; Or that they, who could never find, nor hear from them
(who use not too modestly to conceal what is for their advantage) that from the
beginning of the world to this present Parliament, ever one man was raised
before by Commission from both Houses, should not believe the raising of that
there army to be so warranted as is pretended, and any more approve of their
Law, then of their Necessity; Or that they who know that his Majesty (in whom
the power of making WAR and PEACE was never denied to be, till these new
Doctrines, which make it unlawful for Him to do any thing, and lawful to do
any thing against Him, were of late discovered) though He can legally raise an
army, is not allowed to be legally able to raise Money to maintain it, will not
allow of the argument, from the power of Raising, to the power of Taxing, and
are as little satisfied with their Logic, as with their Law, and extremely
troubled to pay an army they do not desire, for a Necessity they cannot see, by
a Law they never heard of; And that other men without their consent must be
jealous, fearful, and quick-sighted at their charges, and they have great
reason to be apt to suspect that those made most haste to make a War, and have
least desire of making Peace, who in time of War pretend their legal power to
be so vastly enlarged; His Majesty therefore has great reason to insist, that
no Violence or Plundering be offered to his subjects for not submitting to the
illegal Taxes of one or both Houses, which in it self is equal; His Majesty
being willing to be obliged from the like course, and relying wholly upon the
known justice of his Cause, and the affection of his people, and in which (if
the Kingdom be of their mind, and believe the cause of the contrary army to be
really their own) the advantage will be wholly theirs, and this judgment will
be best given, when the people is left to their liberty in this decision.

His Majesty's real desire of disbanding the Armies, may fully appear by His
often seeking, and earnest endeavors to continue and conclude this treaty in
order to that disbanding.

6. His Majesty leaves their Preamble to all the world to consider and to
judge, whether any man by their saying they were ready to agree to his
Majesty's Articles, in the manner as was expressed, would not have expected to
have found after that expression, that they had agreed at least to some one
thing material in them, and had not only meant by agreeing as was expressed, to
express they would not agree at all.

For the clause of Communication of quarters so quietly left out, His Majesty
looks upon it as of most infinite importance, the leaving, out of that, having
dis-composed the whole, many things having in the rest been assented to, which
were therefore only yielded, because the inconveniences growing by these
clauses, if they were alone, were salved by that addition; and some things in
the other very dark and doubtful, were by that interpreted and cleared. And
his Majesty is sufficiently informed how highly it concerns him, that every
thing be so clear, that after no differences may arise upon any disputable
point, since they whose union, industry, subtilty and malice could persuade any
of his people, that in the business of Brainceford he had broken a Cessation
before any was made or offered, would have a much easier work to lay the breach
of a made cessation to his Majesty's charge, if the ground of that breach would
bear the least dispute.

His Majesty does agree, That to preserve things in the the same state on both
sides, with as little advantage or disadvantage to either, as the matter will
possibly bear, is truly the nature of a Cessation, and is willing this
principle should be made the rule, and never intended any thing that should
contradict it; But cannot see the inequality in this which is pretended; For
could Sir Ralph Hopton and the Earl of Newcastle come by this means to the
King, and not the Earl of Stamford, and Lord Fairsax to the Earl of Essex? Nor
can his Majesty find any strong passes or forces to hinder his armies from
joining with him, then hinders theirs from joining with them. If the forces be
unequal, theirs will hardly hinder the passage of his without a cessation; if
they be equal, their coming in time of cessation, will be of equal use and
advantage to their side, somewhat in point of supplies to come with them
excepted; and some advantage to one side will be, poize it how you will. But on
the other side, it this clause be not in, how much greater is the disadvantage
the the other way by some clauses? And how are his Forces (principally the
Earl of Newcastles) cooped up in old and eaten up quarters of necessitated to
retire to such as are more barren and more eaten; so that if this were yielded
to, under the disguise of a Cessation, He must admit that which will much
endanger the dissolving of the Army, and destruction of the Cause, which is
such a disadvantage, as is against the nature of a Cessation formerly agreed
and estated.

Notwithstanding all this, His Majesty to show his extraordinary and abundant
desire of Peace, and to prevent the effusion of blood, is contented, if both
Houses shall refuse to consent to his Propositions, which are so much for the
benefit and advancement of the public trade, and advantage of his good
Subjects, to admit a cessation upon the matter of their own Articles (excepting
that liberty be given to the Committee to word it, according to the real
meaning and intention. And that the remove of quarters within their own bounds,
which is intended, may be so expressed and understood, that no mistakes may
arise,) So that his Majesty may not be understood to consent to any imposing
upon, leavying, distraining, or imprisoning his good Subjects to force them to
contribute, or assist against him (which he shall always continue to inhibit,
Requiring all men to resist those illegal Acts of injustice and violence,
against which he does absolutely Protest;) And so that there may not be a
liberty for any Rapine, Plundering, or seizing upon his Subjects, by any of the
Soldiers of that Army, for not submitting to such illegal impositions as
aforesaid; For otherwise, they may during this Cessation (besides what is
already imposed) impose new Taxes, not only to the Nineteenth part, but if
they please (for their pleasure is all their bound) to the half of, or all
their Estates upon his good Subjects in his City of London, and all Counties
within their reach; and their army would then be at leisure to be employed as
Collectors as well of the old impositions, (which in most places without their
army they cannot leavy) as of any such new one, and vast sums would and might
by this means be raised to the destruction of his Subjects, extraordinary
advantage to them, and great disadvantage to his MAJESTY; Who can neither
obtain His own Consent to take the like courses, Nor in case He could, is
He so quartered, as to have within the power of his army, without breach of
the cessation by drawing nearer to their forces, any such City, or so many, so
rich, and so fresh Counties, as they have to retire into to that purpose. So
that as nothing is more just in it self, and for his people, than such a
limitation; so nothing can be more unequal to His Majesty, or more
advantageous to them, than the admission of, or connivence to any such
practices upon His people. This cessation to begin on the 9. of April, and to
continue to the end of 20. days, from the 25. of March. And His Majesty
desires that the Treaty may proceed upon the Propositions in order, upon which
His Majesty has an earnest desire, that a firm and stable peace may be agreed
on, and both Armies speedily disbanded; otherwise, if during this cessation,
(in the Articles of which His Majesty in order to peace, has yielded to things
manifestly unreasonable and prejudicial to His Army) the Treaty be not
dispatched, His Majesty cannot without manifest ruin to His Army (principally
that of the North) be able to contain Himself beyond this time now limited for
the cessation, in the quarters in which He has so long bin, and now is, and
which will hardly be able to hold out so long, but must be forced to remove,
as He shall find agreeable for His occasions.

And in case any delay be made in consenting to these His Majesty's
limitations, or that the Houses shall reject this His offer of cessation, His
Majesty as He has lately desired (by a Proposition to both Houses, delivered
to their Committee, to which He has yet received no Answer) so He does
earnestly continue to desire, That the Treaty it self may not be delayed or
interrupted by it, but that their Committee may be enabled to proceed upon it
in the mean while.

Copia vera.

Jo: Brown Cler: Parliamentorum.

Addition of four days longer to Treat, April 4. 1643.
WE humbly acquaint Your Majesty, that we received this morning the resolution
of both Houses of Parliament; whereby farther time is given to us to Treat upon
the two first Propositions, viz. The first Proposition of Your Majesty, and the
first Proposition of both Houses. And that the time prescribed for the treaty
upon the two first Propositions, shall be until Friday night.

Northumberland.
John Holland. B. Whitelocke. Will. Pierrepoint. Will. Armyne.


A Letter from both Houses, Received April 8. 1643.
WE are commanded to send these enclosed Instructions to you from both Houses
of Parliament; By which the resolutions of the Houses will appear unto you:
This is all we have in command, and rest,

Westminster the 7 of April, 1643. Your humble servants MANCHESTER. Speaker pro
tempore. William Lenthall. Speaker of the Commons House.

Instructions concerning the Cessation. Received April 8. 1643.
A farther Addition of Instructions agreed upon by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, for Algernon Earl of Northumberland, William Pierrepoint, Esquire;
Sir William Armyne Baronet, Sir John Holland Baronet, and Bulstrode Whitelock
Esquire; Committees of both Houses of Parliament attending His Majesty at Oxon.

YOu are hereby to take notice, That the two Houses have considered his
Majesty's Answer to their reasons concerning the Cessation, wherein there are
diverse expressions which reflect much upon the honor and Justice of the Houses,
and might occasion particular Replies; Yet at this time they desire to decline
all contestation, their wishes and endeavors being earnestly bent upon the
obtaining a speedy peace; For which cause they do not think good to consume any
more of that time allowed for the treaty, in any farther debates upon the
Cessation; concerning which, they find his Majesty's expressions so doubtful,
that is cannot be suddenly or easily resolved; and the remainder of the time
for the whole treaty being but seven days, if the Cessation were presently
agreed, it would not yield any considerable advantage to the kingdom. Wherefore
you shall desire his Majesty, That he will be pleased to give a speedy and
positive Answer to their first Propostion concerning the disbanding, that so
the people many not have only a shadow of peace in a short time of Cessation,
but the substance of it in such manner as may be a perpetual blessing to them,
by freeing the Kingdom from those miserable effects of War, the effusion of
English blood, and desolation of many parts of the Land.

For the obtaining of which happiness, The Lords and Commons have resolved to
enlarge your power, That if you shall not have fully agreed upon the two first
Propositions before Friday night; you may notwithstanding any former restraint,
proceed to treat upon them according to the Instructions formerly given you,
although the Articles of the cessation are not agreed upon.

And those two first Propositions being concluded, the two Houses will
thereupon give you further instructions to proceed to the other Propositions,
that so the whole treaty may be determined within the twenty days formerly
limited, to be reckoned from the 25. of March last, which can admit no
alteration or enlargement, without manifold prejudice and danger to the whole
Kingdom.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

The Paper to the King upon the Instructions for disbanding, Received, April 8.
1643.
BY Instructions this day received from both Houses of Parliament, we humbly
conceive, that we are to acquaint Your Majesty; That they have taken into
consideration Your Majesty's Answer to their reasons concerning the cessation,
wherein there are diverse expressions, which will occasion particular replies,
which at this time they desire to decline, their wishes and endeavors being
earnestly bent upon the obtaining a speedy peace; for which cause they do not
think good to consume any more of the time allowed for the treaty, in any
farther debates upon the cessation, concerning which, they find your Majesty's
expressions so doubtful, that it cannot be suddenly or easily resolved, and the
remainder of the time for the whole treaty, being but 7 days, if the cessation
were not presently agreed, it would not yield any considerable advantage to the
kingdom.

Wherefore we are required to desire your Majesty to give a speedy and positive
answer to the first proposition concerning the disbanding, that so your
subjects may not only have a shadow of peace in a short time of cessation, but
the substance of it in such manner as may be a perpetual blessing to them, by
freeing the Kingdom from those miserable effects of War, the effusion of
English blood, and desolation of many parts of the land.

Northumberland.
Will. Pierrepoint. Will. Armyne. B. Witlocke. Jo: Holland.


The Kings Reply touching Cessation, and desire to enable the Committee to
treat upon the Propositions in the mean time, and touching His coming to the
Parliament
C. R.

IF the Comittee according to his Majesty's desire had had but power to agree
in the wording of expressions in the Articles of cessation, His Majesty's
(which are as clear as the matter would bear, and as he could make them) had
not appeared so doubtful to any, but that the cessation might have bin
suddenly and speedily resolved, and that long before this time. And if the
expression of both Houses in their reasons had not necessitated his Majesty in
his own defense, to give such answers as could not upon those points deliver
truth without some show of sharpnes, no expression of that kind in his
Majesty's answer had given any pretense for the rejection of, or refusing so
much as to treat upon this cessation, which (though it were at present for no
long time) yet was from the day named by themselves the 25th of March; Whereas
his Majesty first moved for a Cessation and treaty without any limitation at
all in the time of either, and his Majesty was most ready to have enlarged the
time (so that in the mean while the point of quarters might be so settled, as
that his Armies might subsist) and which might have been (if they had pleased)
a very good and promising earnest, and forerunner of that great blessing of
Peace; for the obtaining of which, the wishes and endeavors of all good men
being earnestly bent, a farther debate in order to so great a benefit, did not
deserve to be styled a consumption of time. And his Majesty cannot but conceive
himself to be in a strange condition, if the doubtfulnesse of expressions
(which must always be whilst the treaty is at such a distance, and power is
denied to those upon the place to help to clear and explain) or his
necessary Replying to charges laid upon him (that he might not seem to
acknowledge what was so charged) or the limitation of the time of seven days
for the treaty (which was not limited by his Majesty, who ever desired to have
avoided that and other limitations which have given great interruptions to it)
should be as well believed to be the grounds, as they are made the arguments
of the Rejection of that, which (next to Peace it self) his Majesty above all
things most desires to see agreed and settled, and which his Majesty hopes (if
it may be yet agreed on) will give his people such a taste of such a blessing,
that after a short time of consideration, and comparing of their several
conditions in war and Peace, and what should move them to suffer so much by a
change, they will not think those their friends that shall force them to it,
or be themselves ready to contribute to the renewing of their former miseries,
without some greater evidence of necessity than can appear to them, when they
shall have seen (as they shall see, if this treaty be suffered to proceed) That
his Majesty neither asks nor denies any thing, but what not only according to
Law He may, but what in Honor and care of his people He is obliged to ask or
deny. And this alone (which a very short Cessation would produce) His Majesty
esteems a very considerable advantage to the Kingdom; And therefore cannot but
press again and again, that, what ever is thought doubtful in the expressions
of the Articles, may (as in an hour it may well be done) be expounded; and
whatsoever is excepted at, may be debated and concluded, and that power and
instructions may be given to the Committee to that end, That the miserable
effects of War, the effusion of English blood, and desolation of England
(until they can be totally taken away) may by this means be stayed and
interrupted.

His Majesty supposes, That when the Committee was last required to desire his
Majesty to give a speedy and positive Answer to the first Proposition
concerning disbanding; His Answers in that point (to which no Reply has been
made, and which He hopes by this time have given satisfaction) were not
transmitted and received: But wonders the Houses should press his Majesty for
a speedy and positive Answer, to the first part of their first Proposition
concerning disbanding, when to the second part of the very same Proposition
concerning his return to both Houses of Parliament, they had not given any
power or instructions to the Committee, so much as to treat with his Majesty.
And when his Majesty (if his desire of peace, and of speeding the treaty in
order to that, had not been prevalent with him) might with all manner of
Justice have delayed to begin to treat upon one part, until they had been
enabled to treat upon the other; In which point, and for want of which power
from them, the only stop now remains: His Majesty's Answers to both parts of
their first Proposition, being given in, transmitted, and yet remaining
unanswered.

To which, until the Houses shall be at leisure to make Answer, that as little
delay in this Treaty as is possible may be caused by it; His Majesty desires
likewise, That the Committee may be enabled to treat upon the following
Propositions in their several orders.

A Letter from both Houses, April 8.
WE have sent unto you by this Gentleman Sir Peter Killegrewe some additionall
Instructions, by which your Lordship and the rest of the Committee will
perceive the Resolutions which the Houses have taken, upon the papers which
they received this day from you; This is all we have in command, and remain,

Westminster this 8 of April, 1643. Your Lordships humble Servants, MANCHESTER.
Speaker of the House of Peers, pro tempore. WILLIAM LENTHALL Speaker of the
Commons House in Parliament.

Instructions concerning the Insisting. Received April 9. 1643.
Additionall Instructions for Algernon Earl of Northumberland, William Lord
Viscount Say and Seal, William Pierrepoint, Esquire Sir William Armyne, and Sir
John Holland Baronets, Bulstrode Whitelocke Esquire; Committees from both
Houses, attending His Majesty at Oxford.

Magazines and enlarging the time.

THe two Houses of Parliament are unsatisfied with his Majesty's Answer to that
Clause of the first Proposition which concerns the Magazins. Wherefore you are
to desire his Majesty to make a further Answer in such manner as is expressed in
the Instructions formerly given you; And you shall let his Majesty know, That
the Lords and Commons do not think fit to enlarge the time of the Treaty,
beyond the twenty days formerly limited.

Cinque Ports, Towns, Forts, and Castles.
THey likewise remain unsatisfied with his Majesty's Answer concerning the
Cinque Ports, Towns, Forts, and Castles, being in the most material points an
express denial: Wherefore you are to insist upon their desire for another
answer according to your Instructions.

Ships.
THey observe in his Majesty's Answer concerning the Ships, not only a denial
to all the desires of both Houses; But likewise a Censure upon their
proceedings. However, you are to insist upon their desires expressed in your
Instructions.

Disbanding.
THey further conceive. That his Majesty's Answer to their first Proposition
concerning the disbanding, is in effect a denial, unless they desert all
those cautions and limitations which they have desired in their answer to his
Majesty's first Proposition. Wherefore you are to proceed, Insisting upon that
part of their first Proposition concerning the disbanding, according to your
Instructions.

KINGS Return to the Parliament.
YOu shall declare to his Majesty the desire of both Houses of his Majesty's
coming to his Parliament, which they have often expressed with as full ofters of
security to his Royal Person, as was agreeable to their duty and Allegiance;
And they know no cause why his Majesty may not repair hither with honor and
safety, but they did not insert it into your instructions, because they
conceived the disbanding of the Armies would have facilitated his Majesty's
resolution therein, which they likewise conceived was agreeable to his
Majesty's Sense, who in declaring his Consent to the order of the Treaty, did
only mention that part of the first Proposition which concerned the disbanding,
and did omit that which concerned his coming to the Parliament.

Oath of Officers.
THey conceive the ordinary oaths of the Officers mentioned, are not sufficient
to secure them against the extraordinary causes of jealousy, which have bin
given them in these troublesome times; And that his Majesty's Answer lays some
tax upon the Parliament, as if defective, and thereby incapable of making such
a Provisionall law for an oath. Therefore you shall still insist upon their
former desires of such an oath as is mentioned in your Instructions.

If you shall not have received his Majesty's positive Answer to the humble
desire of both Houses in these two first Propositions, according as they are
expressed in your Instructions, before the twenty days limited for the Treaty
shall be expired; you shall then with convenient speed repair to the
Parliament, without expecting any further direction.

Jo: Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

CHARLES REX,

TO show to the whole World how earnestly His Majesty longs for peace, and that
no success shall make him desire the continuance of his Army to any other end,
or for any longer time then that, and until things may be so settled, as that
the Law may have a full, free, and uninterrupted course for the defense and
preservation of the Rights of His Majesty, both Houses and his good Subjects.

1. As soon as His Majesty is satisfied in His first Proposition concerning His
own Revenue, Magazines, Ships, and Forts, in which he desires nothing but that
the just, known legal Rights of his Majesty (devolved to Him from His
Progenitors) and of the persons trusted by Him, which have violently been taken
from both, be restored unto Him, and unto them, unless any just and legal
exceptions against any of the persons trusted by Him (which are yet unknown to
His Majesty) can be made appear to Him.

2. As soon as all the Members of both Houses shall be restored to the same
capacity of sitting and voting in Parliament as they had upon the first of
January, 1641. the same of right belonging unto them by their birthrights, and
the free election of those that sent them, and having been voted from them for
adhering to His Majesty in these distractions; His Majesty not intending that
this should extend either to the Bishops whose Votes have been taken away by
Bill; or to such in whose places upon new Writs new elections have been made.

3. As soon as His Majesty and both Houses may be secured from such tumultuous
assemblies, as to the great breach of the privileges, and the high dishonor
of Parliaments have formerly assembled about both Houses, and awed the Members
of the same, and occasioned two several complaints from the Lords house, and
two several desires of that house to the house of Commons to join in a
Declaration against them, the complying with which desire might have prevented
all these miserable distractions, which have ensued. Which security his Majesty
conceives can be only settled by adiourning the Parliament to some other place,
at the least twenty miles from London, the choice of which his Majesty leaves
to both houses.

His Majesty will most cheerfully and readily consent that both Armies be
immediately disbanded, and give a present meeting to both his Houses of
Parliament at the time and place, at and to which the Parliament shall be
agreed to be adjourned.

His Majesty being most confident that the Law will then recover the due credit
and estimation, and that upon a free debate in a full and peaceable convention
of Parliament, such Provisions will be made against sedicious preaching and
printing against his Majesty, and the established Laws, which has been one of
the chief causes of the present distractions, and such care will be taken
concerning the legal and known Rights of his Majesty and the property and
liberty of his Subjects, that whatsoever has been published or done in or by
color of any illegal Declaration, Ordinance, or Order of one or both Houses,
or any Committee of either of them, and particularly the power to raise Arms
without His Majesty's consent, will be in such manner recalled, disclaimed, and
provided against that no seed will remain for the like to spring out of, for
the future, to disturb the peace of the Kingdom, and to endanger the very
being of it.

And in such a convention his Majesty is resolved by his readiness to consent
to whatsoever shall be proposed to him by Bill, for the real good of his
Subjects, (and particularly for the better discovery and speedier conviction of
Recusants, for the education of the children of Papists by Protestants in the
Protestant religion, for the prevention of practices of Papists against the
State, and the due execution of the Laws, and true leavying of the penalties
against them) to make known to all the World how causeless those fears and
jealousies have been, which have been raised against him, and by that so
distracted this miserable Kingdom.

And if this offer of His Majesty be not consented to (in which he asks
nothing for which there is not apparent Justice on His side, and in which He
defers many things highly concerning both Himself and People, till a full and
peaceable convention of Parliament, which in Justice He might now require) His
Majesty is confident that it will then appear to all the World, not only who
is most desirous of peace, and whose default it is that both Armies are not now
disbanded, but who has been the true and first cause that this peace was ever
interrupted, or these Armies raised, and the beginning or continuance of the
War, and the destruction and desolation of this poor Kingdom (which is too
likely to ensue) will not by the most interressed, passionate or prejudicate
person be imputed to His Majesty.

His MAJESTY'S Questions before the Treaty, and the Committees Answers, March
25, 1643.
His MAJESTY desires to be answered these Questions, in writing, by the
Committee of both Houses.
1. WHether they may not show unto Him those Instructions (acording to which
they are to Treat and bebate with His Majesty upon the two first Propositions)
of which the last Message from both Houses takes notice, and refers unto?

2. Whether they have power to pass from one Proposition to the other, in the
debate, before His Majesty have expressed His mind concerning the Proposition
first entered into?

3. Whether they have power to give an entire Answer to His Majesty's first
Proposition, before His Majesty's Reply to any part thereof, or to pass from
any part of that Proposition to another part of the same, before his Majesty
has given a Reply concerning thar part?

4. Whether in case His Majesty's Answer or Reply to any part of either
Proposition do not satisfy them, they have power to send up that His Answer
or Reply to both Houses, and proceed upon the debate of another part of the
same?

5. Whether they have power to conclude these two Propositions?

6. Whether they have Power to press or consent unto the execution of either
of these two Propositions, or any part of them, till the whole Treaty be agreed
upon?

Falkland.

The Committee of Lords and Commons appointed to attend His MAJESTY upon the
Treaty, do humbly return these Answers to the Questions propounded by His
Majesty.
March 25. 1643.
To the first. THey are enjoined not to show or discover their Instructions, or
to give any Copy of them.

To the second. Concerning His Majesty's first Proposition, and the first
Proposition of both Houses of Parliament, they humbly conceive they may pass
from the one Proposition to the other after that His Majesty has given His
Answer to the particular part of either Proposition that shall be in debate.

To the third. They humbly conceive, that they are to receive His Majesty's
reply to that part of the Propostion to which they give their Anser, before
they proceed to any other part of either Proposition.

To the fourth. They humbly conceive, that when they have received His
Majesty's Answer or Reply to any part of either Proposition, wherein they are
not satisfied, they are to send that His Majesty's Answer, or Reply to both
Houses, and in the mean time may proceed to another part of either Proposition.

To the firfth. They humbly conceive they may conclude these two Propositions
if they be agreed unto a according to their Instructions.

To the sixth. they humbly conceive they may press and consent unto the
execution of the two Propositions, according to their Instructions, before the
whole Treaty be agreed upon.

Northumberland.
Y. Holland. B. Whitlock. W. Pierrepoint. W. Armyn.


The Papers concerning leave to repair to HIS MAJESTY.
March 27. 1643.
WHereas we humbly presented to Your Majesty severll Answers to Your Majesty's
demands in your first Proposition, and in reply to those answers, we have
received several Papers from Your Majesty. Our humble desires are that Your
Majesty would be pleased to give us leave to repair unto you, for our farther
satisfaction upon any doubts which shall arise amongst us in those Papers we
have already received, or any other which we shall hereaster receive from your
Majesty, before such time as we shall transmit them to both Houses of
Parliament.

Northumberland.
John Holland. B. Whitlocke. Will. Pierrepoint. Will. Armyne.


March 28. 1643.
HIs Majesty is well pleased, that the Committee of both Houses repair unto him
for their further satisfaction upon any doubts which shall arise amongst them,
in the Papers they have aleady received, or any other which they shall
hereafter received from His Majesty, and to which they shall not have
acquiesced, before they transmit them to both Houses of Parliament.

FALKLAND.

The Papers concerning the Revenue.
March 26. 1643. To that part of Your Majesty's first, Proposition concerning
Your Majesty's own Revenue, we give this answer.
THe two Houses of Parliament have not made use of Your Majesty's own Revenue,
but in a very small proportion, which for a good part has been employed in the
maintenance of Your Majesty's Children, according to the allowance established
by Your Self: And the two Houses of Parliament will satisfy what shall remain
due to Your Majesty of those sums received out of Your Majesty's own Revenue.
And will leave the same to your Majesty for the time to come.

We likewise humbly propose to Your Majesty, that You will restore what has
been taken for your Majesty's use, upon any of the Bills assigned to other
purposes, by several Acts of Parliament, or out of the provision made for the
war of Ireland.

Northumberland.
Will. Pierrepoint. Ioh. Holland. Will. Armine. B. Whitelocke.


March 26. 1643.
HIs Majesty knows not what Proportion of his Revenue has been made use of
by his two houses of Parliament, but He has reason to believe that if much of
it has not been used, very much remains still in their hands, His whole
Revenue being so seized and stopped by the orders of one or both houses, even
to the taking away of his Money out of his Exchequer and Mint, and Bonds
(forced from his Cofferers Clerks) for the Provision of his Majesty's
household, that very little has come to his Majesty's use for his own support.
He is well contented to allow whatsoever has been employed in the maintenance
of his Children and to receive the Arreares due to himself, and to be sure of
his own for the future.

He is likewise willing to restore all Moneys taken for is Majesty's use by any
Authority from him, upon any Bills assigned to other purposes; his Majesty being
assured he has received very little or nothing that way, and expects that
satisfaction be made for all those several vast sums received and diverted to
other purposes, by orders of one or both houses, which ought to have been paid
upon the Act of Pacification to his Subjects of Scotland, or employed for the
discharge of the debts of this Kingdom, and by other Acta of Parliament for the
relief of his poor Protestant Subjects of Ireland.

FAUKLAND.

March 27. 1643.
HIs Majesty desire to be resolved by the Committee from both Houses, whether
their Proposition to His Majesty to restore what has been taken for His
Majesty's use upon any of the Bills, etc. be a new demand, or a condition upon
which only that is granted which goes before?

Falkland.

March 27. 1643.
WHereas your Majesty desired to be resolved by us, whether the Proposition to
Your Majesty to restore what has been taken for Your Majesty upon any of the
Bills, etc. be a new demand, or a Condition upon which only that is granted
which goes before.

We humbly conceive it to be no new demand, but whether it be such a Condition
upon which only that which goes before is granted, we are not able to resolve.

Northumberland. W. Pierrepout. W. Arwyne. I. Holland. B. Whitelocke.


March 27. 1643. Whereas we have received Your Majesty's Answer of the 26. of
this instant to ours of the same date, concerning Your Majesty's own Revenue.
WE humbly desire to know of Your Majesty if You will not account Your own
Revenue to the sure for the future, if both Houses of Parliament do leave it
in the same way as it was before these troubles did begin.

Northumberland.
W. Pierrepont. W. Armyne. I. Holland. B. Whitelocke.


March 27. 1643.
HIs Majesty did intend in his former Answer by those words (of being sure of
His own for she future) that no restraints or interruption should be made by
one or both Houses in and upon his Majesty's Revenue, but that if should be
left in the same way it was before these troubles did begin.

Falkland.

March 28. 1643.
WE shall transmit Your Majesty's answer to that part of Your Proposition
concerning Your Revenue, to both Houses of Parliament, without father Reply.

Northumberland.
J. Holland. W. Peirrepont. W. Armyne. B. Whitelocke.


The Papers concerning the Magazines.
March 26. 1643.
To that part of Your Majesty's first Proposition concerning Your Magazines we
humbly give this Answer.
THat all the Arms and Ammunition, taken out of your Majesty Magazines, which
shall remain in the hands of both Houses of Parliament, shall be delivered
into your Stores, and whatsoever shall be wanting, they will in convenient time
suppply in kind, according to the Proportions which they have received. We
likewise humbly propose unto your Majesty, that the persons to whose charge
public Magazines shall be committed, being nominated by Your Majesty, may be
such as the two Houses of Parliament shall confide in. And that Your Majesty
will restore all such Arms and Ammunition as have been taken for Your
Majesty's use from the several Counties, Cities, and Towns.

Northumberland.
W. Pierrepont. W. Armyne. I. Holland. B. Whitelocke.


March 27. 1643
HIs Majesty's is content that all the Arms and Ammunition taken out of his
Magazines, which do now remain in the hands of both houses, or of Persons
employed by them, be forthwith delivered into such of his Stores as his
Majesty shall appoint, and that whatsoever shall be wanting of the Proportions
taken out from thence by them, be supplied by them with all convenient speed in
kind. Which shall be committed to, and continued in the costody of the sworn
Officers, to whose places the same belongs. and if any of the said Officers
shall forfeited, or shall forfeit that trust by any misdemeanors, his Majesty
will by no means defend them from the Justice of the Law.

For the restoring all such Arms and Ammunition as have been taken for this
Majesty's use from the several Counties, Cities, and Towns, his Masjestie being
compelled to take them; his own being taken from him, did it always with this
Caution and promise to the places from whence he took them, that he would, by
the blessing of God, restore them again, and make recompense out of his own
Stores, as soon as it should be in this power; which promise he will make good
to them, expecting that such Arms and Ammunition as have been taken from the
several Counties, Cities and Towns, for the use of the Armies under the
command of the Earl of Essex, be likewise restored to them.

Falkland.

March 28. 1643.
Whereas we have received Your Majesty's answer of the 27. of this month, to
ours of the 26. of this instant, concerning Your Majesty's Magazines.

WE humbly desire to know of your Majesty what time you intend by the
expression in the words (be forthwith delivered.) We likewise humbly desire to
know in what places Your Majesty would have your Stores, and who are the sworn
Officers your Majesty intends, that according to our Instructions we may
transmit their names to both houses of Parliament.

Northumberland.
W. Pierrepont. W. Armyne. I. Holland. B. Whitelocke.


March 28. 1643
HIs Majesty intended by that Expression (be forthwith delivered) as soon as
the Treaty shall be concluded, and agreed on.

Falkland.

March 29. 1643.
The place of Store into which his Majesty is content that the Arms and
Ammunition, taken out of his Majesty's Magazines, be delivered, is his Tower of
London; and the Officers he intends, are such as by Patent ought to receive and
keep the same.

Falkland.

March 29. 1643.
Concerning the Magazines.
WE humbly desire, according to our Instructions, that the persons to whose
charge the public Magazines should be committed, being nominated by your
Majesty, should be such as the Lord and Commons should confide in.

We, not knowing whether the two housts will confide in the persons your
Majesty mentions, must transmit their names to both houses of Parliament to
receive their farther Instructions.

Northumberland.
W. Pierrepont. W. Armyne. J. Holland. B. Whitelocke.


April 5. 1643.
HIs Majesty conceives his Answer concerning the persons to whose custody his
Magazines shall be committed, to be very clear and sufficient, and shall
forbear any more particular Nomination of them, the two houses well knowing
whether they have any just exceptions to make against any of them, which if
they have, his Majesty will leave them to the due course of justice.

Falkland.

April 10. 1643.
BY Instructions yesterday received from both houses of Parliament, we are
commanded humbly to desire your Majesty to make a further answer to that clause
of the first Proposition which concerns the Magazines; and we are humbly to
acquaint your Majesty, that the two houses of Parliament do not think fit to
enlarge the time of the Treaty beyond the twenty days, formerly limited, to be
reckoned from the five and twentieth of March last, which can admit no
alteration or enlargement without manifold prejudice and danger to the whole
Kingdom.

Northumberland.
Will, Pierrepoint, Ioh. Holland. Will. Armyne. B. Whitelocke.


April 14. 1643.
HIs Majesty having made several Answers to that Clause of the first
Proposition; which concerns the Magazines, knows not what Answer to make
further, except he were informed what part of the Propositions made to him was
not clearly answered, or had reasons given him to change and alter the Answer
already made; neither of which is yet done. And he is very sorry that both
houses of Parliament have not thought fit to enlarge the power of the
Committee, (whereby less time would have served for the Treaty) and are so
absolutely resolved not to enlarge the time of the Treaty beyond the twenty
days which (by Messages and attending the Instructions of the house) are so
near spent, notwithstanding all possible readiness in his Majesty, and which
in truth might have ended all the Propositions, if sufficient authority had
been given to the persons employed to debate and conclude: neither can His
Majesty understand why an Alteration or Enlargement, in the point of time,
cannot be admitted without manifold prejudice and danger to the whole Kingdom.
He prays to God, that an Averseness to such an alteration and enlargement may
not prove an unspeakeable prejudice and danger to the whole Kingdom.

Falkland.

The Papers concerning the Towns, Forts, Cinque Ports, etc.
March 27. 1643.
To that part of Your Majesty's first Proposition, which concerns Your
Majesty's Towns, and Forts, we humbly give this Answer.
THat the two houses of Parliament will remove the Garrisons out of all Towns
and Forts in their hands, wherein there were no Garrisons before these
troubles, and slight all Fortifications made since that time, and those Towns
and Forts to continue in the same condition they were in before, and that those
Garrisons shall not be renewed, nor the Fortifications repaired, without
consent of Your Majesty, and both houses of Parliament.

That for those Towns and Forts which are within the jurisdiction of the
Cinque-Pores, they shall be delivered up into the hands of such a Noble Person
as your Majesty shall appoint to be Warden of the Cinque Ports, being such a
one as they shall confide in.

That the Town of Portsmouth shall be reduced to the number of the garrison at
was at the time, when the Lords and Commons undertook the custody thereof; and
such other Forts, Castles and Towns as were formerly kept by Garrisons, as
have been taken by both houses of Parliament into their care and custody,
since the beginning of these troubles, shall be reduced to such proportion of
Garrison as they had in the year 1636. And shall be so continued. And that all
the said Towns, Forts, and Castles shall be delivered up into the hands of
such persons of quality and trust, to be likewise nominated by your Majesty, as
the two houses of Parliament shall confide in.

That the Warden of the Cinque Ports and all Governors and Commanders of
Towns, Castles, and Forts, shall keep the same Towns, Castles, and Forts
respectively for the service of your Majesty, and the safety of the Kingdom;
and that they shall not admit into any of them any foreign Forces, or any
other Forces raised without Your Majesty's authority, and consent of the two
Houses of Parliament; and they shall use their utmost endeavors to suppress
all Forces whatsoever, raised without such authority and consent; and they
shall seize all Arms and Ammunition provided for any such Forces.

They likewise humbly propose to Your Majesty, that you would remove the
Garrisons out of Newcastle, and all other Towns, Castles, and Forts, where any
Garrisons have been placed by Your Majesty since these troubles, and that the
Fortifications be likewise slighted, and the Towns and Forts left in such
State and condition as they were in, in the year 1636.

That all other Towns, Forts, and Castles, where there have been formerly
Garrisons before these troubles, may be committed to the charge of such persons
to be nominated by Your Majesty, as both Houses of Parliament shall confide in,
and under such Instructions as are formerly mentioned.

And that those new Garrisons shall not be renewed, nor their Fortifications
repaired without consent of your Majesty, and both houses of Parliament.

Northumberland.
Will. Pierrepont. Ioh. Holland. Will. Armyne. B. Whitelocke.


March 28. 1643.
HIs Majesty is content that all the Garrisons in any Towns and Forts in the
hands of any Persons employed by the two houses of Parliament, wherein there
were no Garrisons before these troubles, be removed, and all Fortifications,
made since that time, may be slighted, and those Towns and Forts shall for
the future, continue in the same condition they were in before.

For the Cinqueports, they are already in the custody of a Noble person,
against whom his Majesty knows no just exceptions, and who has such a legal
interest therein, that his Majesty cannot with Justice remove him from it,
until some sufficient Cause be made appear to him; but is willing if he
shall at any time be found guilty of any thing that may make him unworthy of
that trust, that he may be proceeded against according to the rules of Justice.

The Town of Portsmouth, and all other Forts, Castles and Towns, as were
formerly kept by Garrisons, shall be reduced to their ancient proportion, and
the Government of them put into the hands of such persons against whom no just
exceptions can be made, all of them being before these troubles by Letters
Patents granted to several persons, against any of whom his Majesty knows not
any exceptions, and who shall be removed if just cause shall be given for the
same.

The Warden of the Cinqueports, and all Governors end Commanders of Towns,
Castles, and Forts, shall keep the same Towns, Castles, and Forts, as by the
Law they ought to do, for his Majesty's service, and the safety of the
Kingdom and they shall not admit into any of them foreign Forces, or other
Forces raised or brought in contrary to the Law, but shall use their utmost
endeavor to suppress all such Forces, and shall seize all Arms and
Ammunition, which by the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom they ought to seize.

The Garrisons of Newcastle, and all other Towns, Castles, and Forts, in which
Garrisons have been placed by his Majesty since these troubles, shall be
removed, and all the Fortifications shall be slighted, and the Town and Forts
left in such state and condition as they were in the year, 1636.

All other Towns, Forts, and Castles, where there have been formerly
Garrisons before these troubles, shell be committed to the charge of such
Persons, and under such cautions and limitations as his Majesty has before
expressed.

And now new Garrisons shall be renewed, nor their Fortifications repaired,
otherwise then as by the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom, they may or ought
to be.

Falkland,

March 29. 1643.
COncerning the appointing of the Warden of the Cinque Ports, and Governors of
Your Majesty's Towns, Castles, and Forts, we humbly desire to know if Your
Majesty's Reply does intend, that both houses of Parliament may express their
confidence of the persons to whose trust those places are to be committed, for
what we are directed by our instructions, that if Your Majesty be pleased to
assent thereunto, that You would nominate persons of Quality to receive the
charge of them. That we may forthwith certify both houses of Parliament, that
thereupon they may express their confidence, in those persons or humbly
beseech your Majesty to name others; none of which persons to be removed during
three years next ensuing, without just cause to be approved by both houses of
Parliament, and if any be so removed, or shall dye within the said space, the
persons to be put in the same Offices shall be such as both houses shall
confide in.

We humbly desire to know if Your Majesty intends the Garrison of Portsmouth,
to be of such a proportion as it was about the year 1641. About which time a
new supply was added to the former Garrison to strengthen it. which both houses
of Parliament think necessary to continue.

We humbly desire Your Majesty would be pleased to give a more full answer to
this clause, that they should not admit into them any foreign or other
forces, Raised without Your Majesty's authority and consent of the two houses
of Parliament, and that the shall use their utmost endeavors to suppress all
forces whatsoever, Raised without such authority and consent, and that those
Garrisons should not berenewed, or their fortifications repaired without
consent of Your Majesty and both houses of Parliament.

Northumberland I. Holland. B. Whitelock. VV. Armine. Will. Pierrepont.


April. 5. 1643.
HIs Majesty does not intend that both Houses of Parliament shall express
their Confidence of the Persons to whose trust the Cinqueports, or other His
Majesty's Towns, Castles and Forts now are, or shall be committed, but only
that they shall have liberty upon any just exceptions to proceed against any
such persons, according to Law; His Majesty being resolved not to protect them
against the public Justice. And well knowing that when any of those places
shall be void, the Nomination and free election is a right belonging to, and
inherent in His Majesty. And having been enjoyed by all his royal progenitors,
His Majesty will not believe that His well-affected subjects will desire to
limit him, in that right.

His Majesty intends the Garrison of Portsmouth to be of such a proportion as
it was in the year, 1641. Except he finds good cause to enlarge or diminish
that porportion.

His Majesty cannot give a more full Answer to that Clause concering the
admission or Forces into any of his Forts, Castles and Towns, then he has
alread given, his Majesty having therein made the Laws and Statutes of the
Kingdom the rule of what is, or what is not to be done, Which will be always
the most impartial Judge between him and his people.

Falkland.

April. 10. 1643.
BY intructions and yesterday received from both houses of Parliament, we are
commanded humbly to desire another answer from Your Majesty concerning the
Cinque Ports, Towns, Forts, and Castles, Your Majesty's former answers
concerning them being, in the most material points, express denialls, as both
houses of Parliament understand them.

Northumberland.
I. Holland. W. Armyne. W. Pierrepont. B. VVhitelock.


April. 14. 1643.
HIs Majesty will not at this time remember the many Acts of grace and favor
he has passed this Parliament for the good of his people, but he must say, he
has not denied any one thing proposed to him by both houses, which in Justice
could be required of him, or in reason expected; and he has been and his
still so unwilling to give a denial to both his houses, that as they shall be
sure to receive none to any proposition they shall make of right, so in matters
of grace and favor, he shall be willing to receive any information and reason,
which at any time may invite him to consent, and therefore will gladly receive
any reason from the Committee, or both houses, which may induce his Majesty to
give another Answer, then what he has already given in the point of the
Cinque Ports, Forts, and Castles; but till such be given, he cannot consent to
dispossess any of his servants of what they are legally possessed, without a
just Cause expressed, or to quit his own right of sole disposing of their
commands, no other cause yet appearing to him, then that the places they
command have been taken from him.

Falkland.

April. 14. 1643.
YOur Majesty, in one of Your papers this day delivered unto us, mentions that
You would gladly receive any reason from both houses, or their Committee, which
may induce Your Majesty to give another answer then what You have already given
in the point of the Cinque Ports, Forts, Castles and Magazines.

We did according to our Instructions, humbly desire Your Majesty that the
Cinqueports, Forts and Castles might be put into the hands of such Noble
persons, and persons of Quality and trust, to be nominated by Your Majesty, as
the two houses of Parliament should confide in, and to be kept for Your
Majesty's service, and the safety of the Kingdom, that no foreign forces, or
other forces, raised without Your Majesty's authority, and consent of the two
houses of Parliament, should be admitted into any of them, and the Commanders
to use their utmost endeavors to suppress all Forces raised without such
authority and consent, and to seize all Arms and Ammunition provided for any
such Forces.

Unto which we humbly desire Your Majesty's gracious assent, and to our other
desires concerning Your Majesty's first proposition, and the first proposition
of both houses of Parliament, for that we humbly conceive Your consent
thereunto will be the best means for such a peace to be made, as will be safe,
firm, and lasting, the which is not to be hoped for, except there be a cure
for Fears and Jealousies, for which an apparent remedy is to disband all
Forces, and the same to be so mutually done, as neither part to have any force
remaining, of which the other may be Jealous or, in fear, but if for other
causes, not concerned in these unhappy differences, Forces are to be retained,
as in the Cinque Ports, and in some Forts, Towns, and Castles for the defense
of the whole Kidgdome against foreign Enemies, that then the same may remain
in the hands of such persons, with such powers, as both parts might believe
themselves secure; for if the same places were considered in relation only to
these unnatural distempers, and to the settling thereof, the Forces in them
were likewise to be disbanded.

Northumerland.
I. Holland. W. Pierrepont. W. Armine. B. Whitelock.


April 15. 1643.
AS his Majesty was and is very desirous to receive any Reason from both
Houses, or their Committee, which might induce his Majesty to give other
Answers, if what he has or shall give, do not satisfy, so he rather expected
those reasons should have had their foundation in the Law of the land, and have
showed him that by Law he had not the Right be pretended, or that by that, or
by some fundamental Law, they had a Right superior to his in what was now in
question, or have showed him some Legal reason why the persons trusted by him
were incapable of that trust, then only have insisted upon Fears and
Jealousies, of which as he knows not the ground, so he is ignorant of the
Cure. But this his Majesty knows, that if readiness to acknowledge, retract
and provide against for the future any thing of error that had happened against
Law, and having actually passed more important Bills, and parted with more of
his known Rights for the satisfaction of his Subjects, then not only any one
but all his Predecessors, would have been thought a sufficient remedy for
Fears and Jealousies, the Kingdom might still have enjoyed a safe, firm, and
lasting Peace, and those would not first have been made a reason to seize upon
his Rights, and then after have been made an Argument to persuade him to part
with them. And his Majesty wonders the Committee should not see, that this
Argument might extend to the depriving him of, or at least sharing with him in,
all his just Regal power (since Power as well as Forces may be the object of
Fears and Jealousies, and there will be always a power left to hurt, whilst
there is any left to protect and defend;) And that if those Rights which he
received from his Predecessors were really so formidable, That would have
been more feared before, which is now feared so much, and his Forts and
Castles would either not have been attempted, or at least have enabled him to
defend and keep them, and have kept this from being a Question now between
them. Which since they could not do, his Majesty (if he had as much
inclination, as he has more right, to Fears and Jelousies) might have more
reason to insist upon some addition of Power, as a security to enable him to
keep his Forts, when he has them, then they to make any diffcultie to restore
them to him in the same condition they were before. But as his Majesty contents
himself with, so, he takes God to witness, his greatest desire is always to
observe and maintain the Law of the Land, and expects the same from his
Subjects, and believes the mutual observance of that rule, and neither of them
to fear what the Law fears not, to be on both parts a better cure for that
dangerous disease of Fears and Jealousies, and a better means to establish a
happy and a perpetual Peace, then for his Majesty to divest himself of those
trusts which the Law of the Land has settled in the Crown alone, to preserve
the power and dignity of the Prince, for the better protection of the Subject,
and of the Law, and to avoid those dangerous distractions which the interest of
any Sharers with him would have infallibly produced.

Falkland.

The Papers concerning the Ships.
March 27. 1643.
To that part of your Majesty's first Proposition, which cencerns your ships,
we humbly give this Answer.
That the Ships shall be delivered into the charge of such a noble person as
your Majesty shall nominate to be Lord high Admiral of England, and the two
houses of Parliament confide in, who shall receive the same Office by Letters
Patents, quam diu se been gesserit, and shall have power to nominate and
appoint all subordinate Commanders and Officers, and have a^l other powers
appertaining to the Office of high Admiral, which Ships he shall employ for the
defense of the Kingdom against all foreign Forces whatsoever, and for the
safeguard of Merchants, securing of Trade, and the guarding of Ireland, and the
intercepting of all supplies to be carried to the Rebels, and shall use his
utmost endeavor to suppress all Forces which shall be raised by any person
without your Majesty's authority, and consent of the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, and shall seize all Arms and Ammunition provided for supply of any
such Forces.

Northumberland. W. Pierrepont. J. Holland. W. Armyne. B. Whitelocke.


March 28. 1643.
HIs Majesty expects that his own Ships be forthwith delivered to him, as by
the Law they ought to be. And when he shall please to nominate a Lord high
Admiral of England. it shall be such a noble person against whom no just
exception can be made, and if any shall be, his Majesty will always leave him
to his due trial and examination, and grant his Office to him by such Letters
Patents as have been used; in the mean time his Majesty will govern the said
Admiraltie by Commission as in all times has been accustomed. And what ever
Ships shall be set forth by his Majesty, or his authority, shall be employed
for the Defense of the Kingdom against all Foreign Forces whatsoever, for
the safegua^d of merchants, securing of Trade, guarding of Ireland, and the
intercepting of all supplies to be carried to the Rebels, and shall use their
utmost endeavors to suppress all Forces which shall be raised by any Person
whatsoever, against the Laws and Satutes of the Kingdom, and to sieze all
Arms and Ammunition provided for the supply of any such Forces.

Falkland.

March 29. 1643.
WE humbly desire your Majesty would be pleased to give a more a more full
Answer to the clause for the Ships to be delivered minate to be Lord high
Admiral of England, and the two houses of Parliament confide in, who shall
receive the same Office by Letters Patents, Quam diu se been gesserit.

And to that clause, to suppress all Forces which shall be raised by any
person without your Majesty's Authority, and consent of the Lords and Commons
in Parliament.

Whereunto if your Majesty shall be pleased to give your assent, we conceive
we are then directed by our Instructions, humbly to desire your Majesty to
nominate such a noble Person to be Lord high Admiral of England, that we may
forthwith certify both houses of Parliament, that thereupon they may express
their confidence in that Person, or humbly beseech your Majesty to name
another, and that in case such noble Person, who shall be appointed to be Lord
High Admiral of England shall be removed, or shall die within the space of
three years next ensuing, that the Person to be put in the same Office shall be
such, as both Houses shall confide in.

Northumberland.
Will. Pierrepont. Will. Armyne. John Holland. B. Whitelocke.


April. 5. 1643.
HIs Majesty conceives his former Answer of the 28. of March, concerning his
Ships, to be so full, that he can add nothing thereunto in any part of it.

His Majesty conceiving it all the Justice in the world for him to insist,
that what is by Law his own, and has been contrary to Law taken from him, be
fully restored unto him, without conditioning to impose any new limitation upon
his Majesty or his ministers, which were not formerly required from them by
Law, and thinking it most unreasonable to be pressed to diminish his own just
Rights himself, because others have violated and usurped them.

Falkland.

April. 10. 1643.
BY Instructions yesterday received from both Houses of Parliament, we are
commanded humbly to insist upon the desires of both Houses expressed in our
former Papers concerning the Ships: And both houses of Parliament do observe
in your Majesty's Answer, not only a denial to all their desires, but
likewise a censure upon their proceedings.

Northumberland.
W. Pierrepont. W. Armyne. I. Holland. B. Whitelocke.


Apil. 14. 1643.
HIs Majesty for the present forbears any farther Answer touching his Ships,
desiring first to receive the Answer of both Houses, to his Message of the
twelfth of this month: But his Majesty will howsoever, before their departure
hence, give them a further Answer.

Falkland.

April. 15. 1643.
HIs Majesty gave so clear a reason to justify what he insisted upon in the
point of the Ships, that he cannot but wonder to see the same again pressed to
him, and yet both the reason he gave, left unanswered, and no other Reason
opposed to weigh against it. His Majesty's end in this, was not to lay any
censure upon their proceedings, but it being necessary to the matter in
Question, for his Majesty to say what had been done, and the matter of fact
being such, as it seems could not be repeated, but it must appear to be
censured; his Majesty did not think himself bound to be so tender of
seeming to censure their proceedings, as by waving his own true reasonable
Justifications, to leave his own naked and exposed to a general censure. And
his Majesty hopes, that since they esteem his saying, that they have taken his
Ships from him contrary to Law to be a Censure, they will either produce that
Law by which they took them, or free themselves from so just and unconfutable
a censure, by a speedy and unlimited restoration. Upon which demand, his
Majesty's care of his ancient and undoubted Rights, does oblige him to insist.
And when his Majesty shall think fit to make an Admiral, as near as he can,
he shall be such an one, against whom no just exception can be made, and if any
shall be offered, he will readily leave him to the trial of the Law.

Falkland.

The Papers concerning an Oath for Officers.
March 29. 1643.
WE are humbly to desire your Majesty, that all Generals and Commanders in
any of the Armies on either side, as likewise the Lord Admiral of England, the
Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, all Commanders of any Ships, and Commanders of
any Town, Castle, or Fort, may take an oath to observe the Articles formerly
mentioned, and to use their utmost power to preserve the true reformed
Protestant Religion, and the peace of the Kingdom, against all foreign Forces
and all other Forces raised without your Majesty's authority, and consent of
the two houses of Parliament.

Northumberland.
W. Pierrepont. W. Armine. J. Holland. B. Whitelocke.


April. 5. 1643.
HIs Majestle conceives the Oaths which all those Officers are already by Law
obliged to take, to be very fully sufficient: But if any thing shall be made
appear unto him necessary to be added thereunto, when there shall be a full
and peaceable Convocation in Parliament, his Majesty will readily consent to
an Act for such an addition.

Falkland.

April. 10. 1643.
BY Instructions yesterday received from both houses of Parliament we are
commanded humbly to inform your Majesty, that both houses of Parliament
conceive the ordinary Oaths of the Officers, mentioned in your Answer
concerning the same, are not sufficient to secure them against the
extraordinary Causes of jealousy, which have been given them in these
troublesome times. And that your Majesty's Answer lays some tax upon the
Parliament, as if defective, and thereby incapable of making such a
provisionall Law for an Oath. Therefore we are humbly to insist upon our former
desires for such an Oath, as is mentioned in those Papers which we have
formerly presented to your Majesty concerning this matter.

Northumberland.
John Holland. W. Armine. W. Pierrepont. B. Whitelocke.


April. 14. 1643.
HIs Majesty did not refuse by his former Answer, to consent to any such Oath
as shall be thought necessary, though he did, and does still conceive the
Oaths already settled by Law to be sufficient, neither did he ever suppose the
Parliament incapable of making a provisionall Law for such an Oath; but as he
would be willing to apply any proper remedy to the extraordinary Causes of
Jealousies, if he could see that there were such causes, so he will be always
most exact in observing the Articles agreed on in preserving the true reformed
Protestant Religion, and the peace of the Kingdom against foreign Forces, and
other Forces raised or employed against Law. And when both houses shall prepare
and present sent such an oath, as they shall make appear to his Majesty to be
necessary to those ends, his Majesty will readily consent to it.

Falkland.

The Papers concerning the disbanding of the Armies.
March 28. 1643.
His Majesty's Answer to the first Proposition of both his Houses of Parliament.
HIs Majesty is as ready and willing, that all Armies be disbanded, as any
person whatsoever, and conceives the best way to it, to be a happy and speedy
conclusion of the present Treaty, which (if both houses will contribute as much
to it, as his Majesty shall do) will be suddenly effected. And that this
Treaty may the sooner produce that effect, His Majesty desires that the time
given to the Committee of both houses to treat, may be enlarged.

And as his Majesty desires nothing more then to be with his two houses, so he
will repair thither as soon as he can possibly do it with his honor and
safety.

Falkland.

March 29. 1643.
WE are directed by our Instructions humbly to desire your Majesty's speedy
and positive answer concerning the disbanding of the Armies, to which if your
Majesty be pleased to assent, we are then to beseech your Majesty in the name
of both houses, that a near day may be agreed upon for the disbanding of all
the Forces in the remote parts of Yorkshire, and the other Northern Counties,
as also in Lancashire, Cheshire, and in the Dominion of Wales, and in Cornwall
and Devonshire. And they being fully disbanded, another day may be agreed on
for the disbanding of all Forces in Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire,
Leicestershire, and all other places, except at Oxford and the Quarters
thereunto belonging, and Windsor and the Quarters thereunto belonging. And that
last of all, a speedy day may be appointed for the disbanding of those two
Armies at Oxford and Windsor, and all the Forces members of either of them.

That some Officers of both Armies may speedily meet to agree of the manner of
the disbanding, and that fit persons may be appointed by your Majesty, and both
houses of Parliament, who may repair to the several Armies, and see the
disbanding put in speedy execution accordingly.

Northumberland.
W. Pierrepont. W. Armyne. I. Holland. B. Whitlocke.


March 29. 1642.
Concerning Your Majesty's Answer to the Proposition of both Houses for
disbanding of the Armies.
WE humbly desire to know, if by the words (By a happy and speedy Conclusion
of the present Treaty,) your Majesty do intend a conclusion of the Treaty on
your Majesty's first proposition, and their proposition for disbanding the
Armies, or a conclusion of the Treaty in all the propositions of both parts.

We have given speedy notice to both houses of Parliament, of your Majesty's
desires, that the time given to the Committee of both houses to treat may be
enlarged.

To the last Clause we have no Instructions.

Northumberland.
W. Pierrepoint. I. Holland. W. Armyn. B. Whitlock.


April 5. 1643.
HIs Majesty intended by the words, By a happy and speedy conclusion the
Treaty, such a conclusion of or in the Treaty, as there might be a clear
evidence to himself and his good Subjects of a future peace, and no ground
left for the continuance or growth of these bloody dissentions; which, he
doubts not may be obtained, if both houses shall consent, that the Treaty may
proceed without further interruption or limitation of days.

FALKLAND.

April 5. 1643.
WHen the time for disbanding the Armies shall be agreed upon, His Majesty well
approves that some Officers of both Armies may speedily meet to agree of the
manner of disbanding, and that fit persons may be appointed by his Majesty, and
both Houses of Parliament, who may repair to the several Armies, and see the
disbanding speedily put in execution accordingly.

FALKLAND.

April 6. 1643.
WE humbly desire to know, if by the words (By a happy and speedy conclusion of
the present Treaty) Your Majesty intends a conclusion of the present Treaty on
Your Majesty's first Proposition, and the Proposition of both Houses for
disbanding of the Armies, or a conclusion of the Treaty on all the Propositions
of both parts.

And what your Majesty intends to be a clear evidence to your self, and your
good Subjects of future peace, and no ground left for the continuance or growth
of these bloody dissentions.

Northumberland.
Will. Pierrepoint. Ioh. Holland. Will. Armine. B. Whitelocke.


April 6. 1643.
HIs Majesty desires to know from the Committee of both Houses whether they
acquiesce with His Majesty's Replies to their Anwers concerning His first
Proposition, which yesterday they received from Him, and to which they have yet
made no return.

His Majesty likewise desires to know, whether they have yet received power and
Instructions to Treat with his Majesty concerning his return to His two Houses
of Parliament, which is a part of the first Proposition of both houses.

Falkland.

April 6. 1643.
WE shall transmit your Majesty's Replies to our Answers, concerning your first
proposition to both houses of Parliament, without farther reply.

We likewise humbly answer, that we have not received any power or Instructions
to treat with your Majesty concerning your return to Your two Houses of
Parliament, but we assure our selves they will give your Majesty satisfaction
therein.

Northumberland.
Ioh. Holland. Will. Pierrepont. Will. Armyne. B. Whitelock.


April 7. 1643.
HIs Majesty conceives His Answers already given, (for he has given two) to be
very clear and significant. And if the conclusion of the present Treaty on his
Majesty's first Proposition, and the proposition of both Houses shall be so
full, and perfectly made, that the Law of the Land may have a full, free, and
uninterrupted Course, for the defense and preservation of the rights of His
Majesty, both Houses, and His good Subjects, there will be thence a clear
evidence to his Majesty and His good Subjects of a future Peace, and no ground
left for the continuance and growth of these bloody dissentions, and it will be
such a conclusion as his Majesty intended.

His Majesty never intending that both Armies should remain undisbanded until
all the Propositions of both sides were fully concluded. But his Majesty is
very sorry that in that point of the first Proposition of both Houses, which
has seemed to be so much wished, and which may be so concluded as alone much
to conduce to the evidence desired, ( viz. his return to both houses, to which
his Majesty in his Answer has expressed himself to be most ready, whenever
he may do it with honor and safety) they have yet no manner of Power no
instructions so much as to treat with his Majesty.

Falkland.

April 7. 1643.
WE have not transmitted your Majesty's answer to the Proposition of
disbanding, wherein your Majesty mentions your self to be most ready to return
to both houses of Parliament, whenever you may do it with honor and safety,
for that we humbly conceive, we were to expect your Majesty's answer to that
Proposition this day received, before we could give a due account thereof to
both houses of Parliament, the which we will presently send away without
farther reply.

Northumberland.
I. Holland. W. Pierrepont. W. Armine. B. Whitelock.


April 8. 1643.
BY Instructions this day received from both Houses of Parliament, we humbly
conceive that we are to acquaint Your Majesty, That they have taken into
consideration Your Majesty's answer to their reasons concerning the Cessation,
wherein there are diverse expressions which will occasion particular replies,
which at this time they desire to decline, their wishes and endeavors being
earnestly bent upon the obtaining a speedy Peace, for which cause they do not
think good to consume any more of the time allowed for the Treaty, in any
farther debates upon the Cessation, concerning which they find your Majesty's
expressions so doubtful, that it cannot be suddenly or easily resolved, and
the remainder of the time for the whole Treaty, being but seven days, if the
Cessation were not presently agreed, it would not yield any considerable
advantage to the Kingdom.

Wherefore we are required to desire Your Majesty to give a speedy and positive
answer to the first Proposition concerning the disbanding, that so Your
Subjects may not only have a shadow of peace in a short time of Cessation, but
the substance of it in such manner as may be a perpetual blessing to them, by
freeing the Kingdom from these miserable effects of war, the effusion of
English blood, and desolation of many parts of the Land.

Northumberland.
Job. Holland. Will. Pierrepont. Will. Armyne. B. Whitelock.


April 10. 1643.
BY Instructions yesterday received from both Houses of Parliament, we are
commanded humbly to insist upon that part of the first Proposition of both
Houses of Parliament, concerning the disbanding, according to the Papers we
have formerly presented to Your Majesty thereupon. And we are humbly to
acquaint Your Majesty, That both Houses of Parliament do conceive Your
Majesty's Answer concerning the disbanding to be in effect a denial, unless
they dissert all those cautions and limitations, which they have desired in
their Answer to Your Majesty's first Proposition.

Northumberland.
Will. Pierrepont. Job. Holland. Will. Armyne. B. Whitelock.


April 10. 1643.
BY Instructions from both Houses of Parliament yesterday received, we are
commanded to declare unto Your Majesty the desire of both Houses for Your
Majesty's coming to Your Parliament, which they have often expressed with full
offers of Security to Your Royal Person, agreeable to their duty and
allegiance, and they know to cause why Your Majesty may not return thither with
Honor and Safety; but they did not insert it into our Instructions, becauses
they conceived the disbanding of the Armies would have facilitated Your
Majesty's Resolution therein, which they likewise conceived was agreeable to
Your Majesty's sense, who in declaring Your consent to the order of the Treaty,
did only mention that part of the first Proposition which concerned the
disbanding, and did omit that which concerned Your Majesty's coming to both
Houses of Parliament.

Northumberland.
Will, Pierrepont. Job. Holland. Will, Armyne, B. Whitelock.


April 14. 1643.
His Majesty had great reason to expect, that as He answered to every part of
the first Proposition of both Hooses, so the Committee should likewise have had
power and Instructions to Treat with His Majesty concerning both parts of the
same; not had the Houses any reason to suppose their course agreeable to His
Majesty's sense, for his Majesty in declaring His consent to the order of the
Treaty, indeed mentioned their first Proposition by the style of the first
Proposition which concerned disbanding, but did not style it that part of the
first Proposition which conerned disbanding, as if he had meant to have
excluded any part of that Proposition from being treated on, he would and ought
to have done, but though his Majesty's Answers in the point of disbanding and
return to his Parliament were as particular and as satisfactory as his Majesty
had cause to make, or could well give, till this latter part were consented to
be Treated upon; yet out of His great desire of peace, and of complying with
both uses, His Majesty has made a full and particular Answer and Offer to both
houses, concerning as well the first part of their first Article, upon which he
has treated with the Committee, as that upon which they have yet no power to
treat. though His Majesty has pressed that such power might be given to them.

Faulkland.

April 14. 1643.
WE received Instructions from both Houses of Parliament the ninth of this
present April, and in pursuance thereof, we humbly presented a Paper to Your
Majesty upon the tenth of this instant, wherein those Instructions were
expressed. and the desire of both Houses concerning Your Majesty's return to
Your Parliament.

Northumberland.
Will, Peirrepont. Job. Holland. Will, Armyne. B. Whitelock.


April 15. 1643.
HIs Majesty does acknowledge to have received a Paper from the Committee upon
the tenth of April, expressing, That they had received Instructions, to declare
unto His Majesty the desire of both Houses for His Majesty's coming to His
Parliament, which they had often expressed with full offers of security to His
Royal Person, agreeable to their Duty and Allegiance; and that they know no
cause why His Majesty might not return thither with honor and safety. But as
the Committee had before acknowledged in a Paper of the sixth of April, not to
have any power or Instructions to treat with His Majesty concerning His Return
to His two Houses of Parliament, and as this Paper mentioned no Instructions to
treat, but only to deliver that single Message concerning it, so His Majesty
took it for granted, that if they had received any new power or Instructions in
that point, they would have signified as much to Him, and therefore conceiving
it in vain to discourse, and impossible to treat upon that, with those, who had
no power to treat with Him, His Majesty addressed that Answer concerning that
point to both Houses, of which His Majesty took notice to the Committee in a
Paper of the seventh of April, and which was showed to them before He sent it.
And if both Houses will upon it but consent, to give His Majesty such security
as will appear to all indifferent Persons to be agreeable to their Duty and
Allegiance (those Tumults which drove Him from thence, and what followed those
Tumults, being a most visible and sufficient reason why He cannot Return
thither with His Honor and Safety, without more particular offers of security,
then as yet they have ever made Him) all disputes about that point between
them, will be soon ended, and his Majesty speedily return to them, and His
whole Kingdom to their former Peace and Happiness.

Faulkland.

His Majesty's Letter to the Queens Majesty. Oxford, 20 Febru./23 Janu.
DEar Heart, Saturday and Sunday last, I received two from thee, of the 29 of
December, 9 of January, both which, gave me such contentment, as thou may
better judge, then I describe; the which, that thou may the better do, know,
I was full three weeks wanting but one day, without hearing from thee; besides,
skurvy London news of thy stay and lamenesse, which though I did not believe,
yet it vexed me so much the more, that I could not prove them liars; So now I
conjure thee by the Affections thou bear me, not only to judge, but likewise
participate with me in the contentment thou have given me by assuring me of thy
health and speedy return, concerning 45. 31. 7. 4. 132. 300. I will answer thee
in thy own words, Je le remetteray a vous respondre per bouche, being confident
that way to give thee contentment; in the mean time assure thy Self, That I
neither have, nor will loose any time in that business, and that I have not
contented my Self with Generals; and though I hope shortly to have the
happiness of thy company, yet I must tell thee of some particulars, in which,
I desire both thy opinion and assistance: I am persecuted concerning places,
and all desire to be put upon thee, the which I cannot blame them; and yet thou
know I have no reason to do it, Newarke desires Savills place, upon
condition, to leave it when his father dies; Carenworth, the same being
contented to pay for it, or give the profit to whom, or how I please; Digby and
Dunsmore, for to the Captain of the Pentioners, Hartford once looked after it;
but now I believe he expects either to be Treasurer, or of my Bedchamber; I
incline rather to the latter if thou like it, for I absolutely hold Cottington
the fittest man for the other. There is one that does not yet pretend, that
does deserve as well as any, Im an Capell; therefore I desire thy assistance to
find somewhat for him before he ask. One place I must fill before I can have
thy opinion, It is the Master of the Wards; I have thought upon Nicholas, being
confident that thou will not mislike my choice; and if he cannot perform both,
Ned Hyde must be Secretary, for indeed, I can trust no other. Now I have no
more time to speak of more, but to desire thee not to engage thy Self for any;

Dated Oxford. 2^ Febru./23 Janu. So I rest eternally thine, C. R.

My Lord,
IT is His Majesty's pleasure, that there be something attempted upon the
Castle of Warwick; Therefore you are to send as many Musketeers as you can
horse, with the Prince of Wales his Regiment of horse, and your own; This
bearer La Roche will bring Petarrs, and all things necessary for them: you must
march to morrow in the Evening, to be there before break of the day on Saturday.

Oxford, 2 of March. 1643. Your faithful friend, Rupert.

For the Earl of Northampton at BANBURY.
My Lord,
I Have acquainted the King with the hinderance you have in your desire, He was
pleased to command me to tell you, That your Lordship should send one of your
Scouts to enquire, if Ingrom be in the Castle; if he be, you may safely go on
with your design; for knowing but of your coming, he will make but little or
no resistance, and the sooner, the better: if after this, you should think it
feasible to raise the siege at Litchfield, you have also that power to do it.
This bearer will inform you with some other particulars. So I rest

Oxford, the 3 of March. at 12 at night. Your Lordships Most faithful friend
Rupert.

To the Earl of Northampton, RUPERT.
His Majesty's Letter to the Queen.
DEar Heart, Though ever since Sunday last, I had good hopes of thy happy
Landing, yet I had not the certain news thereof, before yesterday, when I
likewise understood of thy safe coming to York; I hope thou expects not welcome
from me in words, but wren I shall be wanting in any other way (according to my
wit and power) of expressing my Love to thee, then, let all honest men, hate
and eschew me, like a Monster; and yet when I shall have done my part, I
confess, that I shall come short of what thou deservest of Me.

H 3:189: ^ 3:42:17:25:27:39:21:66: a 1:45:31:7:4:32:18: 47:46:9:3: d 4: g
4:46:35:67:48:7:40:5:43:74:3:41:7:33:62: 8:63:68:50:64:34:9:51:45:69:46:37:
deer 45:31:7:1:33:18:49: 47:19:21:10:70:13:7:45:58:8:9:41:10: this a 2:324: in
the mean time 46:31:7:50: e 3:20:3:6:8:48:75:41:9:2: upon 60:19:50:61:27:
26:7:69:12:19:47:45:8:24: Yesterday there was Articles of a Cessation brought
me from London, but so unreasonable, that I cannot grant them; yet to undeceive
the people by showing it is not I, but those who have caused, and fostered this
Rebellion, that desire the continuance of this war and universal
distraction; I am framing Articles fit for that purpose, both which, by my
next, I mean to send thee, 219: b 3:58:51:75:46:7:3:45:37:2:1:189:46:38:1: g
1:173: 131: which I think fit to be done a 5:4:30:3: n 5: d 3:46:31:8:10:
2:32:18:64:7:3:45:31:9:66:46:32:19:41:25:48: k 1: e: 4:67:69: 63: I am now
confident that 173: is right for my service: Since the taking of Cicester,
there is nothing of note done of either side, wherefore that little news that
is, I leave to others, only this I assure thee, That the distractions of the
Rebels are such, that so many fine designs are laid open to Us, We know not
which first to undertake; but certianly my first and chiefest care is, and
shall be to secure thee, and hasten Our meeting, So longing to hear from thee,
I rest eternally Thine.

Oxford, 12/2 March. 1643/2. C. R.
THe last I received of thine was dared the 16/6 Febr. and I believe none of my
four last are come to thee; their are 13/1: 23/23: 25/15: Febru. and 20 Febr.
or March the 2.



A Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament upon the
proceedings in the late Treaty, and the aforesaid Letters.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, being deeply afflicted with a
sorrowful sense of miserable distractions of this Kingdom, overwhelmed with
the calamities of the worst kind of War, have by several Petitions and many
humble Addresses to His Majesty, besought him by removing the causes thereof,
to put an end thereunto: And although all their endeavors have not only
proved fruitless, but some of their Petitions received a denial even of
Audience, (a favor not denied to the Rebels of Ireland) which might very well
justify them before God and man, to decline any further prosecution that way,
especially in a case where themselves and the kingdom are the parties injured
and oppressed: Yet their bowels did so much yearn after a happy peace, that
they resolved, notwithstanding their former discouragements, to break through
all difficulties; And yet once more most humbly to represent to His Majesty
the miserable distempers of His two Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and if
possibly they could to endline His Royal heart, really to act what he has so
often verbally professed, To compose those unhappy distractions, and restore
His people to a blessed and lasting Peace. And for that purpose, about the
first of February last, They in all humbleness presented their desires to His
Majesty, digested into fourteen Propositions, and how reasonable and
indifferent those Propositions were, they expose them to the view of the world
to judge, resting assured that no indifferent man that shall duly weigh them,
with the time and circumstance, will find any thing contained in them, but
what was necessary for the maintenance and advancement of The true Protestant
Religion, The due execution of justice, The preservation of the Liberty and
Property of the Subject, and The establishment of the Kingdoms Peace and
safety. And because they might with all speed take off the burden under which
this Kingdom did principally groan, and stop the spring from whence most of
these calamities did slow; They in the first place propounded, That the Armies
and Forces raised on both sides might be disbanded, which being effected, the
Kingdom might with the more ease and security expect the issue of the Treaty.
And therefore they were very careful, that no Proposition or circumstance
touching the Treaty should precede this.

His Majesty having received and considered these Propositions, he not long
after returned his Answer, wherein he Professes to have given up all the
faculties of his soul to an earnest endeavor of a Peace and reconciliation
with his people, and desires a speedy time and place might be agreed upon, for
the meeting of such persons, as His Majesty and both Houses should appoint to
discuss those Propositions; and six other Propositions made by His, Majesty,
and sent with that Answer; whereof one was, That to the intent the Treaty might
not suffer interruption by any intervening accidents, That a Cessation of Arms
and free Trade might be first agreed upon; which Answer the Lords and Commons
did take into their consideration: And because His Majesty did desire that a
Cessation might be first agreed upon, they did accordingly submit thereunto,
though they had purposely avoided it before; being unwilling to waste the time
about the shadow that would of it self vanish with the disbanding, which they
desired might be concluded in the first place.

But they were willing to give all satisfaction to His Majesty's desires,
hoping thereby to incline him the more readily to consent to their just
requests. And according to their resolution, they prepared ready the Articles
of Cessation, and that with as much equality and indifferency to both sides as
possibly they could. They likewise agreed to Treat upon the Propositions before
the Disbanding; in which Treaty, so much of His Majesty's Propositions as
concerned His Majesty's Revenue, Magazines, Forts, and Ships, and the
Propositions of both Houses for the Disbanding, should be first Treated of, and
concluded, before the proceeding to Treat upon any other. And that this Treaty
should begin the fourth of March, or sooner if it might be; and that from the
beginning of the Treaty, the time might not exceed twenty days. They fu^ther
resolved, that a Committee of both Houses should be appointed to attend His
Majesty, if His Majesty should so please, to endeavor to give him all humble
and fit satisfaction, concerning the said Propositions.

All which their resolutions they forthwith by a Messenger dispatched for that
purpose presented to His Majesty, and not long after sent a Committee to
attend him. And though they hoped for a ready concurrence from His Majesty to
the Articles of Cessation, the Proposition proceeding from himself, yet they
received a return, much contrary to their expectation, where they found many
scruples raised, and other Articles propounded, which being assented unto by
them, would inevitably destroy the Forces raised by them for The defense of
themselves, their Religion, and Liberty, and strengthen the Malignant and
Popish Army raised against them; which they made appear by their humble Answer
to those Alterations and Articles which are herewith at large published, and
therefore do refer themselves thereunto. And in the interim, while His
Majesty was considering of this their humble Answer, they gave power to their
Committee to Treat upon the two first Propositions for four days, which after
wards they enlarged to the end of twenty days. And within some distance of
time afterward, they received a very long Message from His Majesty, which
(indeed) carried not with it the face or semblance of a Treaty, but in plain
down right language, was a bitter Invective against the two houses of
Parliament, and their proceedings; so that by this time it might very well
appear, That the enemies of the Kingdoms peace, so really prosecuted, and
likely to be effected by the earnest endeavors of both Houses, thought it high
time to cast in their tares of sedition, to prevent the growth of so blessed a
fruit. In this Message, after very heavy Taxes, and unjust Scandals and
Accusations laid to their charge, forced in, quite besides the question. His
Majesty condiscended to the Cessation in manner as was agreed on, by both
Houses, to continue only for five days, expecting a liberty notwithstanding
to be given the Committee to word it according to the real Intention, and so
that His Majesty might not be understood to consent to any Imposing upon
Leavying, Distraining, or Imprisoning of His Subjects, to force them to
Contribute, expressly protesting against it, and Inhibiting his Subjects to
submit thereunto, and requiring them to resist; and so that there might not be
a liberty for Seizing upon his Subjects by any Soldiers of the Army, for not
submitting to such Impositions: Which offer of His Majesty's, being but a
Cessation only for five days, and some part of that time to be first spent by
the Committee in wording of it, and limited with a Protestation against, and a
Command to resist that Power whereby their Forces must be paid and supported,
which if not answered and justified, would by a consent to His Majesty's offer,
imply a declining of that power, which might endanger the Disbanding of their
Army; And if answered, would necessarily have enforced them to some sharpness
of language, which the enemics of this Treaty would easily take occasion to
quarrel at, and persuade His Majesty to break off; which the Lord and Commons,
out of their hearty zeal to bring it to a happy conclusion, did purposely
avoid. and therefore they did not only passely these Scandals, and unjust
Accusations laid to their charge by that Message, but purposely declined to
enter into any dispute of their power, for maintaining the Forces raised for
their own necessary defense. And therefore thought it best to spend the
remainder of the time in Treating upon the Propositions, and for that end
enjoined their Committee, as much as in them lay, to hasten it, especially that
part touching the Disbanding, which being concluded, would not only produce a
temporary Cessation, but an absolute abolition of all acts of hostility. The
proceedings and issue of which Treaty, the Lords and Commons think it necessary
to publish to the Kingdom, to the end the sincerity of their endeavors, to
procure a happy settlement of these miserable distractions may appear.

When they perceived that the most part of the time prescribed for the Treaty
was like to be spent about the Cessation, they gave power to their Committee in
the mean time, to Treat upon the Propositions in order as they had formerly
Voted, and therefore beginning with His Majesty's first Proposition, whereby.
His Majesty demanded, That his own Revenue, Magazines, Towns, Forts and Ships,
which had bin taken or kept from him by force, should be forthwith restored
unto him. The Lords and Commons by their Committee, made him this humble
Answer. First, That as to his Revenue they had not made use of it but in a
small proportion, and a good part of that was employed for the maintenance of
his own children, according to the allowance established by himself, that what
should remain due to His Majesty they would satisfy, and would leave the same
to His Majesty for the time to come. They likewise thereupon propounded to His
Majesty, That he would restore what had been taken for his use, upon any of
the Bills assigned to other purposes, by several Acts of Parliament, as out of
the provision made for the Wars of Ireland, which offer of theirs, after some
debate thereupon with the Committee, was thought reasonable, and in effect
concluded. And as to the Demand of the Towns, Forts, and Ships, they in
substance gave this humble answer; That they would deliver up such as remained
in their hands, into the hands of such persons of worth, quality, and trust,
to be nominated by His Majesty as the two Houses of Parliament should confide
in, none of which persons to be removed during three years next ensuing,
without just cause to be approved of by both Houses. That the Warden of the
Cinque Ports, and all governors and Commanders of Towns, Forts, and Castles,
should keep the same respectively, for the service of his Majesty, and the
safety of the Kingdom, and that they should not admit into them any Foreign
Forces, or any other Forces raised without His Majesty's authority, and
consent of the two Houses of Parliament. And they should use their uttermost
endeavors to suppress all Forces raised without such authority and consent,
and seize all Arms and Ammunition provided for any such Forces. Unto which
Offer of theirs His Majesty gave this conclusive Answer: That His Majesty did
not intend that both Houses of Parliament should express their confidence of
the persons to whose trust the Cinque Ports, April 5.
or other His Majesty's Towns and Forts, were or should be committed, but that
they should have liberty to proceed against them according to Law; His
Majesty claiming the nomination and free election to belong to him of right.
And to the Clause concerning the admission of Forces into those Forts, Castles,
and Towns; His Majesty would consent no further then these general terms;
That is, That no Forces raised or brought in, contrary to Law should be
admitted, and that all Arms and Ammunition should be sei^ed upon, which by the
Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom they ought to seize. They made the like
Answer concerning the Ships, That they should be delivered into the hands of
such noble Person as His Majesty should nominate to be Lord high Admiral of
England, and the two Houses of Parliament confide in.

To which offer His Majesty refused His consent, declaring His Resolution to
insist upon what by Law was His own (as His Majesty was pleased to express
it,) and take from Him should be restored unto Him without any conditioning, or
new lymitations to be put upon Him or His Ministers. And now the Lords and
Commons will refer it to the world to judge, whither their demands were not
such, and so moderate, as was fit and necessary for them to make, and just and
reasonable for His Majesty to assent unto: wherein they may be pleased to
consider, That this was a Treaty for the disbanding of two Armies, and Forces
raised in opposition each to other. That the Towns, Forts, and Ships, are a
great part of these Forces, and of the strength of that side, that possesses
them: That for any one side to demand the possession and power thereof, and the
other side to disband their forces, and quit themselves of all their strength
is in effects a total disbanding of that side, and a continuing the forces of
the other, which must be granted to be most unequal; And therefore the Lords
and Commons did think it just and honorable, That the remaining strength
should be put into such hands, as both sides might trust.

Secondly, That their demand to have the Forts and Castles into the hands of
such persons as both Houses should confide in, was a Proposition warranted by
the frequent The fourth of Edward the third, Articw. 1. against Roger Mortimer.
The King had put to him four Bishops, four Earls, and four Barons; without
whose content, or of some of them, no great businessle was to be transacted.
Rot. Parham, 13 E. 3. N 15, 16 The whole N^ d^sposed of by Parliament, N. 13,
14 Admiralls appointed, and Instructions given to them. N 32 Instructions for
the defense of Jersey, and a Deputy Governor appointed in Parliament. N 35.
Soldiers of York, Nottingham, etc to go at the cost of the Country; and what
they are to do N. 36 A Clark appointed for payment of the r^wages by the
oversight of the Lord Percy and Nevill N. 38 Sir Walter Creak appointed keeper
of Berwick N. 39. Sir Tho de Wake appointed to set forth the Array of soldiers
for the County of York, and N. 40, 41, 42, 4, others for other Counties. XILLI.
E. 3. N. 36. The Parliament agrees that in the Kings absence the Duke of
Cornwall shall be Keeper of England. N. 35. They appoint the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Earls of Lancast. Warton, and Huntington. Counselors to the
Duke, with power to call such others as they shall think fit N. 19. Certain
appointed to keep the Islands and Sea. Coasts. N. 42. The Lord of Mowbray
appointed Keeper of Berwick. R 48 Commission to the L. Mowbray of the Justices
of Lentham N. 53 54. etc Commissions of Arra to the Earl of Angou, and others.
XV. E. 3. N. 15. That the Chancellors, ch^ef Justices, Treasurers, Chancello^s,
and Barons of the Exche quer, etc, may be chosen in open Pariament, and there
openly sworn to observe the Law, Answer thus: That as they fall by death or
otherwise, it shall be so done in the choice of a new, with you assents, etc
L.E. 3 N. ^0,11. Ordered in Parliament. That the King should have at the least
tea or twelve Counselors, without whom no weighty matters should pass, etc. N
15. A Commission to the L. Perey and others, to appo^nt able persons for the
defense of the Marches of the East Riding. 1. R. 2. N. 18,12. The Parliament
wholly disposes of the Education of the King, and of the Officers, etc. N. 51.
Officers for Gascoine, Ireland, and A^ton, Keepers of the Ports, Castles etc.
II R. 2. Rot. Parl. pars 2. artic. 39. The Admiralry. N. 37 In a chedule is
contain the order of the E of Northumb and others, for the desence of the
North Seacoasts, and confirmed in Parliament VI. R. 2. N 11. The Proffer of
the Bishop of Norwich, to keep the Sea Coasts, and accepted in Parliament.
VIII. R. 2. 11.16. The names of the chief Officers of the Kingdom to be known
to the Parliament, and not to be removed, without just cause. XI. R. 2. N 23.
No persons to be about he King, or intermedole with the Affairs of the Realm,
other then such as be appointed by Parliament, XV. R. 2. N 15 The Commons name
the person to treat of a Peace with the Kings enemies. Rot. Parl. 1 H 4 N. 106.
That the King will appoint able Captains in England and Wales. Stat. 4 H. 4
cup. 31,32,33. primed. The wels;h men shall bea Office. V. H. 4. N. 16. The
King, at the request of the Commons, removed his Confessor, and three other men
from about him. N 37. At the Request of the Commons, names diverse Privy
Counselors. VII. and VIII. H. 4.26 Power given to the Merchants to name two
persons to be Admiralls. VII. and VIII. H. 4. N 31 Counselors appointed by
Authority of Parliament. N 26. Commissions granted in Parliament to keep the
Sea. Rot. Parl. ^ H. 6. N 61 Chancellor, Treasurer, and Privy Seal, appointed
by Parliament. N. 24. Protector, and Defensor Regni, appointed by Parliament N
26. Privy Counselors. II. H. 6 N 15. Council named by Parliament IV. H. 6. N.
19. The Duke, by common consent in Parliament appoints a Deputy to keep Berwich
Castle. XIV. H. 6 N. 10 The keeping of the Town of Callice is committed to the
Duke of Glo^cester, by Indenture between him and the King, and confirmed in
Parliament. XXXI. H. 6 N 41. Roch; Earl of Salubury, and others, are appointed
by Parliament to keep the Seas, Tunnage and Poundage appointed to them for
three years 33 H. 6 N. 27. Discharged. 39 H. 6 N. 32. The Duke of York made by
Parliament General. Stat 21 ^ac. cap. 34. Treasurers, and a Council of War
appointed by Parliament, and an Oath directed to be by them taken. The Earl of
Essex made Lord Lievt. of the County of York Sir Io. Conniers Lievt. of the
Tower, upon the desire of the Lords and Commons this Parliament.

With very many more Presidents, which to avoid prolixity, are purposely
omitted.


Presidents of former times, whereby it appears, that many other Parliaments
have made the like and greater demands, and His Majesty's Predecessors have
assented thereunto.

Thirdly, It was a Proposition which his Majesty himself in several
Declarations of his own affirmed to be reasonable and just; for in his
Majesty's Answer to a Petition of the house of Commons, January 28.1641. He He
expresses thus, For the Forts and Castles of the Kingdom, his Majesty is
resolved, they shall be in such hands, and only in such as the Parliament may
safely confide in, etc. And in another Answer to two Petitions of the Lords and
Commons, delivered the second of February, 1641. His Majesty uses these words,
That, for the securing you from all dangers or Jealousies of any) His
Majesty's, will be content to put in all the places, both of Forts and Militia,
in the sevarall Counties. such persons as both Houses of Paliament shall either
aprove or recommend unto Him, So that you declare before unto His Majesty the
name of the persons whom you approve or recommend, unless such persons shall
be named, against whom he shall have just and unquestionable exception; which
being declared by His Majesty Himself they had no cause to suspect a denial,
being confident, that His Majesty did intend what he spoke; and if any ill
Counsel could prevail to make Him recede from His word, it must be admitted
the Kingdom has more cause to be further secured.

Fourthly, For that to our sad experience, it is well known, That His Majesty's
power in this and other things, is too much steered and guided by the advice of
these secret and wicked Counselors, that have been the Instruments of our
present miseries; And though His Majesty carries the name, yet they will have
the disposing of those places; And the Lords and Commons thought it the more
reasonable and necessary to insist thereupon, Because that in the time when
they were preparing their Propositions to His Majesty, it did appear unto them
by a Letter written by His Majesty to the Queen, (which they have caused to be
here with Printed) that the great and eminent places of the Kingdom were
disposed by her advice and power, and what Her Religion is, and consequently
how prevalent the Counsels of Papists and Jesuits will be with Her, may be
easily conjectured; and it is to be observed who the persons designed for
preferment were, even during the sitting of a Parliament. The Lord Digby
impeached in Parliament for high Treason, and most, if not all the rest
impeached in Parliament, and such as bear Arms against them.

Lastly, admitting that these demands touching the Ships and Forts had been
made even in a time of Peace and tranquillity, yet considering the attempts of
Force and Violence made and practiced against the Kingdom, and this present
Parliament; as the Designs many years since to bring to this Kingdom the
German Horse, to compel the Subject to submit to an arbitrary Government; The
endeavor to bring up the late Northern Army, by force and violence to awe
the Parliament; His Majesty coming in person to the House of Comments,
accompanied with many Armed men, to demand their Members to be delivered up;
And the Treason of the Earl of Strafford, to bring over the Irish Popish Army
to Conquer the Kingdom; they might very well justify, nay they were in duty
bound (in discharge of the trust reposed in them by the Commonwealth) to make
that Demand, and expect the performance thereof, to the end the people might be
secured from any such violence hereafter, yet (to their inexpressible sorrow
they must speak it) neither the Reasonableness the Moderation, or Justness of
the Request, nor the Peace of the Kingdom (which probably would ensue
thereupon, could be Arguments prevalent enough to induce His Majesty's cons;ent
thereunto; and His Majesty's offer of those Commanders that shall offend, to
leave them to Justice and Trial of the Law, is an Answer more to show His
power to protect Delinquents then satisfaction to a Parliament, being the due
and right of the meanest Subject; and yet entitled here as a favor done to
both Houses of Parliament.

And though His Majesty is pleased to justify His denial, with the
Allegation, That it is His right by Law; they must appeal to the judgment of
all indifterent men, whether that be a satisfactory ground of refusal, for
admitting His Majesty's power of disposing the Ships, Forts, and Castles, and
committing them into what hands He please, to be by Law absolutely vested in
His Majesty (which they by no means can admit, He being only trusted with
them for The defense and safety of the Kingdom) as He son, for the King to
refuse His consent to after that Law, when by circumstance of time and affairs,
that power becomes destructive to the Commonwealth and safety of the people:
The preservation whereof, is the chief end of the Law, and though the two
Houses of Parliament, being the representative body of the Kingdom, are the
most competent Judges thereof, yet in this Case they do not proceed only upon
an implicit Faith, but demonstrate it both by Reason and Experience, That
their demand is not only neccessary to secure the Kingdom from Fear and
Jealousy, but to preserve it even from ruin and destruction.

And surely had this Argument of being Their right by Law, been prevailing with
His Majesty Precedessours, this Nation should have wanted many an Act of
Parliament which now they have, that was necessary for their being and
subsistence. And they coul heartily wish that the Laws and Statutes of the
Kingdom might be The rule of what is, and what is not to be done, acknowledging
with His Majesty, that the same is the only rule between Him and His people,
the assurance of the free enjoyment thereof is their only aim; but how little
fruit the people has gathered from this true, let the woeful experience of
these last eighteen years judge, where, in a time of Peace and Plenty, the
power of issuing out Commissions, to compel Loanes; A power in the King at His
pleasure to impose a charge upon the people, to provide Ships, without
limitation of time or proportion; A power in the Council Board to commit men,
and determine business without distinction of persons or causes; The power of
laying Imposition, both upon Foreign and Domesticke Commodities, and many
other Acts of oppressions, was under the name and color of a Legal right
thereunto, practiced and put in execution; Against which, the Subject had no
help of relief, but necessitated to submit and lie under the burden: And when
at any time a Parliament was called (being the only cure and remedy for these
griefs) it could no sooner touch upon these sores, but it was dashed in pieces
by a sudden dislolution. And now that a remedy is provided for that mischief,
by the Act for continance of this Parliament, it is attempted by the force and
power of an Army to effect that which formerly could have been done with more
ease and readiness.

And now they refer it to the censure of any honest man, whether they have
not the warrant of Reason and Necessity, to demand some security to enjoy
that which His Majesty confesses to be the peoples right: And in reference to
that, whether their Demand of having the Forts, Castles, and Shipping to be put
into such hand as both Houses shall have cause to confide in, was not both
moderate and reasonable.

And touching their Demand, and His Majesty's Answer to the Clause concerning
the admission of Forces into those Forts, Castles, and Towns, they must still
submit it to all indifferent judgments, how much reason and justice was
comprehended in their Demand, and how little satisfaction they received
therein: His Majesty answers, That no Forces raised or brought in contrary to
Law, should be admitted; which they could heartily wish heretofore had, or
hereafter would be really performed: But they desire it may be considered, What
security this will be to the Kingdom, to prevent the raising or bringing in of
Forces contrary to Law; who shall be Judges of the Law, when those Forces are
once raised, and once brought in? Surely His Majesty will not acknowledge the
two Houses of Parliament to be; for His Majesty by several Declarations, has
expressly denied them any such power: For contrary to their Declarations,
fortified with Law and reason, His Majesty published and affirmed the legallity
of the Commission of Array, and put the same in execution in most parts of the
Kingdom; Has authorized the Papists of the Kingdom to take Arms to oppose the
Parliament, and their Proceedings, and to rob, spoil, and deprive the
Protestants of this Kingdom of their estates and lives; Has by diverse
Proclamations and Declarations published the raising of Forces, and taking up
of Arms by the two Houses of Parliament, and such as therein obey their
Commands, for their own defense, and the defense of their Religion and Liberty
assaulted by an Army of Papists, and their adherents, to be Rebellion and
Treason; and the taking up of Arms by the Papists and their adherents, to be
acts of duty and loyalty; And all this urged and pretended to be warranted by
the Law of the Land: And they do not doubt, but by the same Law, persons
legally impeached and accused in Parliament of high Treason; as the Lord Digby,
Master Percy, Master Jermyn, Master Oneale, and others, are by the Power of an
Army protected from the Justice of the Parliament: And yet all this while the
people have not only his Majesty's promise, but His Oath, to govern and
protect them according to the Laws of the Land. And now they appeal to the
world, Whether such a general Answer, That no Forces raised or brought in
contrary to Law, without admitting them so much as to declare their confidence
in the persons that are to be entrusted with the Power, be just or reasonable:
What is it otherwise in effect, then to make those persons that are the
Instruments to violate the Law, Judges of that Law (which to our sad
experience, is the woeful and miserable present condition of this Kingdom.

And though, by what had hitherto passed, they had little cause to suspect such
a happy issue to the Treaty as they heartily wished, and most earnestly
labored for, discovering not the least inclination of compliance to their just
Demands, but all, or most of them, answered with a denial, and that not
without some sharpness and acrimony; yet resolving to be wanting in nothing of
their parts, they enjoined their Committee to press on the Proposition for
disbanding, and humbly desire His Majesty's positive Answer thereunto; which
(if assented unto by His Majesty) would, though not wholly take away the cause,
and perfectly cure the distractions of this Kingdom, yet at least take off the
smart and pain under which both Church and State do most miserably languish,
and so better enable them to endure the expectation of a through Cure.

The Committee applied themselves to His Majesty accordingly; and after some
endeavor to protract the debate of this Proposition, and desire that it might
be deferred to the conclution of the Treaty; and that the time of the Treaty
might be enlarged, His Majesty being earnestly importuned to a positive and
speedy Answer, to the end the Kingdom might know what they might trust to, His
Majesty was pleased to return this Answer; That as soon as His Majesty were
satisfied in His first Proposition, concerning His own Revenue, Magazines,
Ships, and Forts. Secondly, as soon as all the Members of both Houses shall be
restored to the same capacity of sitting and voting in Parliament, as they had
upon the first of January, 1641, not intending to extend it to the Bishops
Votes, or to such in whose places, upon new Writs, new Elections have been
made. Thirdly, as soon as His Majesty and both Houses might be secured from
such tumultuous assemblies as formerly assembled about both Houses; which
security, His Majestly explains, can be only settled by adjourning the
Parliament to some place twenty miles from London, His Majesty would consent
that both the Armies should be disbanded, and come to the Parliament; which in
terms plain enough, is as much to say. That until both Houses shall consent to
those demands, he will not disband His Army, He will continue the War: And
what reason or justice is either in the matter or manner of those demands; Or
what hope or expectation the people can have to see an end of their present
calamities, they leave it to themselves to judge. His Majesty in the beginning
of the Treaty, in His answer to the Propositions of both Houses, was pleased to
express how unparliamentary it was by Arms to require new Laws: but how to
apply that the two Houses of Parliament, they must confess they are to seek;
they never having demanded any new Laws by Arms, endeavoring only (what in
them lies) to preserve and defend themselves, their Religion, and Laws, from
the violence of an Army first raised against them; which being laid down and
disbanded, they offer to disband theirs, without any other condition. But they
are well assured, That by this His Majesty's Answer, here is not only a
requiring of new Laws, but a repealing of the old, by Arms: For His Majesty
must have this Parliament adjourned to another place; which by a Statute made
this present Parliament, cannot be done, without the consent of both Houses. He
must have the Members disabled to sit there by the respective judgment of both
Houses, restored to their former capacity of sitting and voting, or he will not
consent to disband. And how destructive to the Liberties of the Parliament, and
dangerous to the Kingdom these Conditions required by His Majesty to precede
the disbanding, are, any man that has an eye to see, may easily discern: As
first, To satisfy his first Proposition, in yielding up the Magazines, Ships,
and Forts, into the hands of such persons as His Majesty shall appoint to
receive the same, without any admission to the two Houses to express their
confidence in those persons: which being performed, were to yield up the
principal part, if not all the strength they have, and expose themselves,
Religion, and the Kingdom, to the mercy of a powerful Popish Army raised
against them; and submit it to them, and to the will and pleasure of those
Counselors, whose interest with His Majesty, has brought this Kingdom to this
desolate condition, whether they would disband or not. Secondly, To satisfy
Him in His Proposition touching His Revenue, wherein He demands a restitution
of what has been taken from Him: Which (though it would prove no considerable
Sum, yet the time that the examination and agreement upon the account, would
necessarily take up, would prove such, as might very well make the Kingdom sink
under the burden of two Armies, before it came to a conclusion. And touching
His Majesty's requiring a restitution of the Members to their sitting, and
Votes; It is observable that the demand is made, without distinction of
persons, or offenses; so that be the persons never so criminous, or the
offenses never so notorious, and so the Judgment never so just, yet all must
be restored, or no consent to disbanding. And the reason and ground of the
Demand is as observable; Because they adhered to His Majesty in these
distractions: An Argument, they must confess, much used by the Earl of
Strafford, in defense of his Treason, who would have justified the most
notorious Crimes laid to his charge, by Authority and Commands derived from His
Majesty, and his zeal to advance His Majesty's Service and profit: and no doubt
the same reason may be used for the Judges, in case of Ship Money, and most of
the Monopolists and Projectors, who by Letters Patents had not only His
Majesty's Command and Authority for the doing what they did, but brought in
great Sums of Money to His use and benefit, and that perhaps in times of
necessity and want thereof: And so consequently, because these adhered to His
Majesty, (for what they did, was for his profit) with the like reason it may be
required, That all Impeachments and Proceedings against them should be
repealed, and laid aside.

And surely nothing can be more destructive and dangerous both to Parliament
and Kingdom, then the consenting to that Demand: For what can be more
destructive to both Houses, then to restore those persons to have their former
suffrage and Votes in Parliament, over the lives and Liberties of the People,
and the Privilege of Parliament, who have not only disserted the Parliament,
disobeyed and contemned their Authority, neglected the Trust reposed in them by
those that sent them thither, in whose behalf they were to attend and serve
there, but by private practices and open hostility have endeavored to destroy
both Parliament and people.

And it would be an objection of difficulty to answer, whether in giving a
consent to this demand, the people who are to choose these Members should not be
deprived of their interest and freedom of choice and election now divolved unto
them, by putting out the Members already sent; And to this they might add, the
danger of the President, and the reflection of dishonor that would fall upon
both Houses, should they consent to this which would be with the same breath,
as it were, to give and repeal their judgment, and pronounce sentence of
injustice and rashness against themselves; but they will not insist thereupon
in a case otherwise so full of danger and inconveniencie to the public.

And touching the Proposition of adjourning the Parliament twenty miles distant
from London, they shall not need in a case so apparent, to spend many words to
discover the inconveniencie and unreasonablenesse thereof, for, should they
assent unto it, to pass over the inconveniences that would happen to such
persons that should have occasion to attend the Parliament, by removing it so
far from the residencie of the ordinary Courts of Justice, and the places where
the Records of the Kingdom remain (whereof there is frequent use to be made) it
would not only give a tacit consent to those scandals so often pressed and
affirmend in several Declarations, That is, That His Majesty was forced for
the safety of His own person heretofore to withdraw, and hitherto to absent
himself from the Parliament, which both Houses can by no means admit, but must
still deny. But likewise to that high and dangerous aspersion of awing the
Members of this Parliament, raised without doubt, purposely to invalide the
Acts and proceeding thereof. And by that engine, in case the Popish Army
should prevail against the Parliament, (which they trust God in his goodness
will never permit) to overturn and nullify all the good Laws and Statutes
made this Parliament.

And it would give too much countenance to those unjust aspesirons laid to the
charge of the City of London, whose unexsampled zeal and fidelity to the true
Protestant Religion, and the Liberty of this kingdom is never to be forgotten,
That His Majesty and the Members of both Houses cannot with safety to their
persons reside there; when as they are well assured, That the loyalty of that
City to His Majesty, and their affections to the Parliament, is such, as does
equal, if not exceed, any other place or City in the Kingdom: And with what
safety the two Houses can sit in any other place, when even in the place they
now reside, the House of Commons was in apparent danger of violence, when His
Majesty, accompanied with some hundreds of armed men, came thither to demand
their Members, let the world judge.

And now the Lords and Commons must appeal to the judgment of all impartial
men, Whether they have not used their utmost and most faithful endeavors to
put an end to the distractions of this Kingdom, and to restore it to a blessed
and lasting Peace; And whether their Propositions (being the way thereunto)
were not such as were reasonable and necessary for them to make, and just and
Honorable for His Majesty to grant; And whether His Mejesties Answer to these
Propositions, are satisfactory, or correspondent to His Expression, To have
given up all the faculties of His soul to an earnest endeavor of a Peace and
Reconciliation With His People: But they must confess, that they had just
cause to suspect, That this would be the happy issue of the Treaty; for the
prevalency of the enemies thereof, who like that evil spirit, do most rage
when they think they must be cast out, was such, that they would not proceed
therein one step, without some attempt or provocation laid in the way to
interrupt and break it off; for after they had resolved to present their humble
desires and propositions to His Majesty, their Committee must not without a
special safe counduct and Protection from Him have access to Him, (a liberty
incident to them, not only as they are Members of the Parliament, and employed
by both Houses, but as they were free born Subjects; and yet when they passed
over this, His Majesty refused a safe conduct to the Lord Viscount Say and
Seal, being one of the Committee appointed by both. Houses to be employed upon
that occasion, such a breach of privilege that they believe is not to be
paralelled by the example of former times, and yet their desire was such to
obtain the end they drive at, (that is a happy and lasting peace) That they
resolved not to interrupt the Treaty for that time by insisting upon it. And
then they had no sooner entered upon the Treaty, but a Proclamation dated at
Oxon the 16 of February, 1642. entitled His Majesty's Proclamation, forbidding
all His loving Subjects, and the Counties of Kent, Surrey, Sussex, and
Hampshire to raise any Forces, etc. And another Proclamation dated the 8 of
February, forbidding the assessing and payment of all Taxes by virtue of an
Ordinance of both Houses, and all entering into Associations, were published in
His Majesty's Name, containing most bitter invectives and scandalls against the
proceedings of both Houses, by stiling them and such as obeyed them, Traitors,
and Rebels, charging them under the name of Brownists, Anabaptists, and
Atheists, to endeavor to take away the Kings life, and to destory His
Posterity, the Protestant Religion, and the Laws of the Kingdoms, with many
other such scandalls and aspersions; and even at this time were many designs
practicing against the Parliament, which in all probability were the grounds
and reasons of His Majesty's confidence and denial of their just desire.
Insomuch, That His Majesty in a Letter sent from Him to the Queen, and read in
the House of Commons, did declare, That He had so many fine designs laid open
to Him, that He knew not which first to undertake. One whereof probably was the
most bloody and barbarous design upon Bristoll attempted (though by Gods
infinite mercy prevented) during the Treaty. And whether that of Sir Hugh
Cholmleys in betraying of Scarborough Castle, wherewith he was entrusted by the
Parliament, to the Queens hands, and acted likewise during the Treaty. And that
of Killingworth Castle, which should have been likewise betrayed, and a design
discovered by a Letter found in the Earl of Northamptons pocket, slain near
Stafford, written to him from Prince Rupert, were some of the other designs
mentioned in His Majesty's Letter, they cannot certainly affirm, but
conjecture. And when this collateral provocations and attempts could not
prevail to make them desert the Treaty, then comes in His Majesty's Message of
the fourth of April, which they have mentioned before, charging them to abuse
the people with imaginary dangers, and pretended fears, to use force and
Rapines upon His good Subjects, with publishing new doctrines, That it is
unlawful for the King to do any thing, and lawful to do any thing against
Him, with malice and subtilty to abuse the people, that their pleasure is all
their bounds; with many other such bitter expressions, that no man could think
such an Answer could be any part of a Treaty, or at least to proceed from a
heart that desired a happy issue thereunto. Notwithstanding all which, the
Lords and Commons were so resolutely fixed to prosecute that Treaty, and (if
possibly they could) to bring it to a blessed and happy conclusion, that they
were content to lie under all these scandalls, and endure all these wounds, so
they might make up the breaches of the Commonwealth; And therefore they did
forbear the returning of an Answer to any of these provocations. And then when
that Malignant and Popish party (too too prevalent with his Majesty) preceived
their constancy not to be provoked to break that Treaty of their part, they
found it necessary to seduce His Majesty to refuse His consent to their most
necessary and just desires, and to propound such things as could not with the
peace and safety of the Church and State be yielded to, and so effected their
own desires. All which, The Lords and Commons thought it their duty to publish
to the Kingdom, to the end that they may see that what has been long
endeavored by subtle and secret practices, is now resolved to be effected by
open violence and hostility; That is, the destruction of our Laws, and the
Protestant Religion, and introducing of Popery and Superstition; and that there
is little or no hope by any endeavor of a Treaty to procure the peace of this
Church and Kingdom, unless both be exposed to the will and pleasure of the
Popish party, until the Army and forces now raised and continued by them, be
first destroyed or suppressed. And therefore the Lords and Commons do hope,
that not only such as are already convinced of their design and malice; but
even those that by their subtle and false pretenses have been ignorantly
seduced to join with them, that love their Liberty and the Protestant Religion,
will now with one heart and mind, unite together, to preserve their Religion
and Liberty. In the defense whereof, The Lords and Commons are resolved to
offer up themselves, their lives and fortunes, a willing Sacrifice.

Die Sabbati, 6 May. 1643.
A Declaration upon the Result of the Treaty, brought in with some amendments,
was this day read in the House of Commons, and Ordered to be delivered unto the
Lords at a Conference. And it is further Ordered by this House, That this
Declaration shall be Printed, and Master Glyn do take care for the Printing of
it, and that none shall Print or re-Print it, but such as Master Glyn shall
appoint, to the end, That by his care the Records may be rightly cited, and the
Letters and other matters, Ordered to be Printed with it, be carefully Printed.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Sabbati, 6 May. 1643.
IT is this day ordered by the Commons now Assembled in Parliament, That all
the Passages of the Treaty at Oxford, shall be Printed, and Master Whitlock
take care for the Printing of it, and none shall Print or re-Print it, but such
as Master Whitlock shall appoint, to the end, That the same may be truly
Printed.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

18 May, 1643.
WE do appoint Edward Husbands to Print the said Declaration, Letters, and
proceedings in the late Treaty.

John Glyn. Bolstrode Whitlock.


FINIS.

