A proper new Ballad on the Old Parliament. Or, the second part of Knave out of
Doors.
To the Tune of Hei ho my honey, my heart shall never rue, Four and twenty now
for your money, and yet a hard pennyworth too.
GOod morrow my Neighbors all, What news is this I heard tell?
As I past through Westminster Hall, by the house that is near to Hell:
They told me John Lambert was there, with his Bears, and deeply did swear:
(As Cromwell had done before) those Vermin should sit there no more.
Sing hi ho Will. Lenthall, who shall our General be?
For the House to the Devil is sent all, and follow gid faith mun ye.
Sing hi ho, etc.
Then Muse strike up a Sonnet, come Piper and play us a spring.
For now I think upon it, these Rs turned out their King.
But now it is come about, that once again they must turn out:
And not without justice and reason, that every one home to his prison.
Sing hi ho Harry Martin, a Burgess of the Bench.
There Is nothing here is certain, you must back and leave your wench.
Sing hi ho, etc.
He there with the buffle head, is called Lord, and of the same house,
Who (as I have heard it said) was chastised by his Lady's spouse.
Because he ran at sheep, she and her maid gave him the whip;
And beat his head so addle, you would think he had a knock in the cradle.
Sing hi ho Lord Munson, you have got a Park of the Kings,
One day you will hang like a hounson, for this and other things.
Sing hi ho, etc.
It was by their Masters order at first together they met.
Whom piously they did murder, and since by their own they did set.
The cause of this disaster, is 'cause they were false to their Master.
Nor can their Gensd'armes blame, for serving them the same.
Sing hi ho Sir Arthur, no more in the house you shall prate;
For all you kept such a quarter, you are out of the Council of State.
Sing hi ho, etc.
Old Noll once gave them a purge (forgetting Occidisti,)
(The furies be his scourge) so of the cure mist he.
And yet the Drug he well knew it, for he gave it to Dr. Huit.
Had he given it them he had done it, and they had not turned out his son yet.
Sing hi ho brave Dick, L. Hall, and Lady Joane,
Who did against loyalty kick; is now for a New-yeers-gift gone.
Sing hi ho etc.
For had old Nall been a^ive, he had pulled them out by the ears.
Or else had fired their Hive, and kicked them down the stairs;
Because they were so bold, to vex his righteous soul,
When he so deeply had swore, that there they should never sit more.
But hi ho Nol 's dead and stunk long since above ground,
Though lapt in spices and lead, that cost us many a pound.
Sing hi ho, etc.
Indeed brother Burgeis your ^ing did never stink half so bad;
Nor did your Habberdin, when it no pease-straw had.
Ye both were chose together, cause ye wore stuff-cloaks in hard weather.
And Cambridge needs would have a Burgeis fool and knave.
Sing hi ho J. Lowry, concerning Abberdine,
No Member spoke before ye, yet you nere spoke again.
Sing hi ho my honey my heart shall never rue,
Here Is all picked ware for the money, and yet a hard pennyworth too:
Ned Prideaux he went post, to tell the Protector the news.
That Fletwood ruld the ^ost, having taken off Dickes shoos.
And that he did believe, Lambert would him deceive;
As he his brother had guld, and Cromwell Fairfax bul'd.
Sing hi ho the Attorney was still at your command,
In flames together burn ye, still dancing hand in hand.
Who Is that that would hide his face, and his neck from the collar pull?
He must appear in this place, if his cap be made of Wool.
Who is it with a vengeance? it is the good Lord Saint John's!
Who made Gods house to fall, to build his own withal.
Sing hi ho who comes there? who it is I must not say;
But by his dark-lanthorn I swear he is as good in the night as day.
Sing hi ho, etc.
Edge brethren, room for one, that looks as big as the best;
It Is pity to leave him alone, for he is as good as the rest.
No picklock of the laws, he builds amongst the Daws.
If you ha'any more Kings to murder for a President look no further.
Sing hi ho J. Bradshaw, in blood none further engages;
The Devil from whom he had's law will shortly pay him his wages.
Sing hi ho etc.
Next Peagoose Wild come in, to show your weesle face.
And tell us Burleys sin, whose blood bought you your place.
When loyalty was a crime, he lived in a dangerous time.
Was forced to pay his neck, to make you Baron of the Cheque.
Sing hi ho Jack Straw we will put it in the margent,
It Was not for justice or law that you were made a Sergeant.
Sing hi ho etc.
Noll servd not Satan faster, nor with him did better accord;
For he was my good master, and the devil was his good Lord.
Both Slingsby, Gerrard, and Hewit, were sure enough to go to it,
According to his intent, that chose me President.
Sing hi ho L. Lisle, sure law had got a wrench,
And where was justice the while, when you sat on the bench?
Sing hi ho etc.
Next comes the good Lord Keble, of the triumvirate,
Of the seal, in law but feeble, though on the bench he sat.
For when one puts him acase, I wish him out of the place,
And if it were not a sin, an abler lawyer in.
Sing give the seal about, I Would have it so the rather,
Because we might get out, the Knave, my Lord my Father.
Sing hi ho, etc,
Pull out the other there, it is Nathaniel Fines.
(Who Bristol lost for fear) we will not leave him behind's;
It Is a chip of that good old block, who to loyalty gave the first knock.
Then stole away to Lundey, whence the foul fiend fetches him one day.
Sing hi ho Canting Fines, you and the rest to mend'um,
Would ye were servd in your kinds, with an ense rescidendum.
Sing hi ho, etc.
He that comes now down stairs, is Lord chief justice Glin.
If no man for him cares, he cares as little again.
The reason too I know it, he helped cut Straffords throat,
And take away his life, though with a cleaner knise.
Sing hi ho Britain bold, straight to the bar you get,
Where it is not so cold as where your justice set.
Sing hi ho, etc.
He that shall next come in, was long of the Council of State;
Though hardly a hair on his chin, when first in the Council he sat:
He was sometime in Italy, and learned their fashions prettily.
Then came back to's own Nation to help up Reformation.
Sing hi ho Harry Nevil, I prithee be not too rash,
With Atheism to Court the Devil, you are too bold to be his Bardash.
Sing hi ho, etc.
He there with ingratitude blackt is one Cornelius Holland:
Who but for the Kings house lackt, wherewith to appease his colon.
The case is well amended, since that time, as I think,
When at Court gate he tended, with a little stick and a short link.
Sing hi ho Cornelius, your zeal cannot delude us,
The reason pray now tell us, why thus you played the Judas?
Sing hi ho, etc.
At first he was a Grocer, who now we Major call:
Although you would think no Sir, if you saw him in White Hall.
Where he has great Command, and looks for cap in hand,
And if our eggs be not adle, shall be of the next new Moddle.
Sing hi ho Mr. Salloway the Lord in Heaven does know
When that from hence you shall away where to the Devil you will go:
Sing hi ho, etc.
Little Hill since set in the House, is to a Mountain grown:
Not that which brought forth the Mouse, but thousands the year of his own.
The purchase that I mean, where else but at Taunton Dean?
Five thousand pounds per annum, a sum not known to his Granam.
Sing hi the Good old Cause it is old although not true
You got more by that then the laws, so a Good old Cause to you.
Sing hi ho, etc.
Master Cecil pray come behind, because on your own accord,
The other House you declined, you shall be no longer a lord.
The reason as I guess, you silently did confess,
Such lords deserved ill, the other House to fill.
Sing hi ho Mr. Cecil, your honor now is gone,
Such lords are not worth a whistle, we have made better lords of our own.
Sing hi ho, etc.
Luke Robinson shall go before ye, that snarling Northern tike,
Be sure he will not a door ye, for honor he does not like.
He cannot honor inherit, and he knows he can never merit:
And therefore he cannot bear it that any one else should wear it.
Sing hi ho envious lown, you are of the Beagles kind,
Who always barked at the Moon, because in the Dark it shined.
Sing hi ho, etc.
It Is this that vengeance rowses that while you make long prayers,
You eat up widows houses and drank the Orphans tears.
Long time you kept a great noise, of God and the Good old Cause;
But if God to you be so kind, then I Am of the Indians mind.
Sing hi ho Sir Harry, we see by your demeanor,
If longer here you tarry, you will be Sir Harry Vane Senior.
Sing hi ho, etc.
Now, if your zeal do warm ye, pray loud for fuirer weather,
Swear to live and die with the Army, for these Birds are flown together.
The House is turned out a door, (and I think it was no sin too)
If we take them there any more, we will throw the House out of the window.
Sing hi ho Tom Scot, you lint the Devil your hand:
I wonder he helped you not, but suffered you t'be trapand.
Sing hi ho, etc.
They Are once again conduced, and we freed from the evil
To which we long were used, God bless us next from the Devil!
If they had not been outed, the Army had been routed,
And then this Rotten Rump, had sat until the last trump.
But hi ho Lambort 's here, the Protectors Instrument bore:
And many there be that swear, his Lady had done it before.
Sing hi ho, etc.
Come here then honest Peter's, say Grace for the second course:
So long as these your betters, must patience have upon force.
Long time ye kept a great noise, with God and the Good old Cause,
But if God own such as these, then where is the Devils Fees. His rumps and his
kidneys.

Sing hi ho Hugo, I hear thou art not dead,
Where now to the Devil will you go your Patrons being fled.
Sing hi ho my honey, my heart shall never rue:
Four and twenty now for a penny, and into the bargain HUGH.

