THE PROCEEDINGS, Votes, Resolves, AND ACTS Of the late Half-quarter
Parliament, CALLED The RUMP: As it was taken out of their own Journal-Books,
and Printed for the general Satisfaction of the NATION.

London, Printed for John Thomason. 1660.

THE RUMPS JOURNAL, etc.
Thursday, Jan. 27.
ORDERED,
THat the Members now met together, do sit here as long as they live, in spite
of the Peoples teeths; and that the Government of the Nation be entailed up on
their Heirs successively unto Eternity; and that this their Resolution be
forthwith confirmed by an Act of the House.

Accordingly an ^ct was brought in, and ordered to be speedily engrossed; the
tenor whereof was as follows:

WHEREAS the Parliament have thought fit, for the good of themselves, to keep
the Government in their own hands as long as they live: And whereas well
knowing how laudable a thing it is for Fathers to provide for their Children,
(seeing that the Ape has a kindness for her own Whelps) that they may always
have cause to bless the tender care of their deceased Parents, we are also
Resolved to continue the said Government to our Heirs and Assigns for ever;
which intention of ours, there is nothing but the Day of Judgment can hinder,
for that, as we are informed, will put an end to the World within a small
period of years, and consequently destroy the reign of our Posterity.

Be it therefore Enacted by this present Parliament, and by the Authothority
thereof, That no person or persons whatsoever, whether Red-coat or Red-coats,
Blew-coat or Blew-coats, Cavalier or Cavaliers, or whatever other Faction
soever, that conceive themselves agrieved by us, do attempt or endeavor to
molest, disturb or hinder our sitting during the whole term of ours and their
natural lives; and that our Sons, and our Sons Sons do tyrannize over this
Nation for ever and ever. And we do further Enact and Declare, that the
aforesaid Day of Judgment is hereby disanulled, abolished, and straightly
forbid, as if it had never been intended; And all creatures both in heaven and
earth, are required to take notice of this Act, and to give obedience thereto,
upon penalty of our displ^asure, and the anger of our Posterity, who we hope
will be no better then our selves.

Friday, January 28.
Resolved upon the Question, That Tyranny and Oppression are not only lawful,
but expedient for the Management of the public Affairs; and that Justice
Morality, Conscience, and Privileges of the People, are but mere airy notions,
and destructive to the peace of the Commonwealth.

This day they also made an Act declaring what should be Treason.

WHEREAS it concerns those who are got into Authority, to look well about them
for their own Security, and to be as subtle as heir enemies can be for heir
hearts and bloods; And whereas we the Rump and Bumm of a wrongfully disturbed
Parliament, have taken upon us to succeed the Thirty Tyrants of Athens, in the
monstre u^^ss of their Fame, And where is there are millions of people who care
not a fort for us and would do all they could to destroy us, yet plead the Laws
of the Land for their Contrivances against us, we have therefore though sit to
publish our Commandments, and to chalk out unto them what ^s Treason against
us, and what not, for that it is impossible for them to know unless, they be
told; Be it therefore Enacted by this present Rump, and the An h^^^ty hereof,
That who every yields not an exact Obedience unto us both in thought, word,
and deed, shall be guilty of high Treason. Who ever pu^teth not off his Hat,
and makes not three Congies to us as we pass through the Hall, shall be guilty
of high Treason. Who ever talks ^o us with his Hat on, and dares to
reprehend us for any enormity which we shall commit, shall be guilty of high
Treason. Who ever shall see a Rumper in bed with his wife, and is not patient
and willing, and holds not his tongue, shall be guilty of high Treason. If a
Rumper, being in the majesty of his thoughts as high as Ahab, shall happen to
covet the Vineyard of Naboth, and shall make demand thereof, and shall be
refused, who ever shall make such refusal, shall be guilty of high Treason. Who
ever shall demand any Debt or Debts due from a Rumper, be they more or less,
shall be, and is hereby adjudged guilty of high Treason Lastly, That Mr.
Harrington shall be, and is hereby declared guilty of high Treason, for
publishing the Mysteries of Government in a profane Coffee-house, and seeking
to impose upon us his silly Oceana, as if we knew not our own intentions, and
what sort of Government was best for our turn better then he did.

Resolved upon the Question, That Mr. Scot shall, as soon as he is dead, go to
heaven without let or morestation, notwithstanding a certain place of Scripture
which seems to intimate the contrary from the practice of his life.

Ordered, That Mr. Scot do print the Sermons of Mr. Roe, from the Copies which
he has writ in the Abbey, and that the Stationer give him as much
proportionably, as Adoniram had for the Assemblies Catechism.

Ordered, That though Mr. Scot, as he is Secretary of State, have liberty to
dive into the secrets of men's hearts, that he do not so often dive into the
secrets of women's bodies, as he used to do, lest he fail the Secretary-ship
sooner then they are willing the Secretary-ship should fail him.

Saturday, January 29.
This day the House agreed upon an Act, for putting an Excize upon Trap-sticks
and Whirligigs, in these following words:

WHEREAS we do perceive a very great dis-affection in the Children and Boys of
this Nation to our Government, by singing Ballads to our disgrace, and calling
us the Rump at every word; which hatred to us is grown so high, that though
they can be able to spend many a brass Farthing and single Penny upon
Whirligigs and Trap-sticks, for their own delight, yet they are altogether
unwilling to contribute the least mi^e toward our crying necessities. That
therefore we may be too cunning for them in their wicked intentions, and gain
from them as well as from the rest of the Nation, Be it Enacted and Ordained by
this present Parliament, and the Authority thereof, That there be a New Excize
laid upon the Instruments of their Pastime; that is to say, Three farthings
upon every Trap-stick that shall be sold for a penny, and five farthings upon
every Box Grass-cat which is sold for two pence; and one farthing for every
dozen of Whirligigs that shall be sold for a half penny: And it is further
Ordained, That Mr. Leadsum the Informer be Collector of the several Sums so to
be gathered, and that the said Sums so collected shall be equally divided among
the Members for their own private and particular uses.

Resolved upon the Question, That the Apothegm of Trajan the Emperor, Dulcis
odor lucri ex re qualibet, be writ in Letters of Gold, and placed over the
House door.

Ordered, That the famous Book, commonly called Aretines Postures, be bound up
in Turky-leather, with gilded Leaves, and that it be presented to Mr. Martin in
the name of the House, as an Acknowledgement of their Thanks to him for his
many good services.

Ordered, That he have a particular Dispensation for having two wives, because
it is not fit that there should be any general Rule without some Exceptions.

Ordered, That Mr. Dove be Brewer to the Navy, that he may not forget his
Calling, as Col. Pride was in the Protectors time.

Monday, January 30.
Ordered, That there be another High Court of Justice erected with all
convenient speed, and that Sir Arthur Hesilrigg be President thereof, and that
it be committed to his discretion to pronounce what Judgment he pleases, and
that he have full power to execute it himself when he has done.

Ordered, That there be a Day set apart for a private Fasting among the
Members, that they may fall upon the great Work of Devouring the Nation with
the better stomachs.

This day several Officers received their Commissions, and among the reft Mr.
Streater received his Commission to be a Colonel of Foot, of the Regiment
formerly belonging to the single-ey'd Gentleman that gave command to shoot his
brother Cobbler.

Ordered, That the Lord Mounson have a privilege to wear a Backpiece, and
Breast Plate, and a Pot, to secure his bones from the knocks of his Ladies
Bed-staff.

Ordered, That Mr. Syndercomb be canonized for a Saint, and that a Letter be
forthwith sent to the Great Turk, entreating him to perform that pious work.

Ordered, That the Walls of Sion shall be let alone, but that the Cities of
Sodom and Gomorha shall be rebuilt, and the said Lord Mounson and Mr. Martin do
see it performed accordingly.

Orderea this day, That Mr. Praise-God Barebone shall be Master of the
Ceremonies, and that it be his care to convert all the Foreign Ambassadors that
come over, and see them rebaptized before they have Audience.

Tuesday, January 31.
The House were upon Qualifications, and they Ordered that none should bear any
Office in the Commonwealth, that had the least pick in the world against
Perjury, and could not swallow any Oath which they should command them to take,
with as much ease as the Whale swallowed Jonas. Secondly, That they should be
Sectaries of the latest Edition, men indeed despising any ^^eity, but loving
Covetousneis with all their hearts. Thirdly, That they should have the
treachery of Informers, the tongues of Slanderers, the malice of Toads, the
venom of Basilisks, the cruelty of Nero, and the tyranny of Pharaoh.

Ordered, That London be set on fire, and that there be another great City
built in some other part of the Nation, and that all the freeborn People of
the Land be compelled to make bricks, and gather straw for themselves, for the
carrying on of the great Work, that they may appear to be most truly gods
people, that is to say, in affliction, and not after the custom of the Heathen
under the Government of a King.

Ordered, That the Protectors Grave be broke open, and that the Plate of Gold
which is upon his breast be taken off, and that the Members do throw most at
three throws who shall have it.

Resolved upon the Question, That Mr. Vavasour Powel, Mr. Feak, and Mr. Rogers
be sent to the top of Penmenmaur, the highest hill in all Wales, there to pray
upon their bare knees, till God hear them, and give them an answer.

It was also Ordered, because they intended to hang a good number of their
enemies, That Mr. Peter's be sent for to accompany them to the Gallows, as he
did in the beginning.

Ordered, That my Lord Craven shall never have any justice done him, nor any
other person that has been wronged since their Fellow Members were secluded.

Wednesday, February 1.
Ordered, That Mr. Prynne do say or write what he pleases, because the House is
not able to give any answer to the Law and Reason which he propounds.

Ordered, That Wimbleton-House be sequestered, because the summer draws on, and
Sir Arthur wants a fine Seat near the Town.

Ordered likewise, That he have the Protectors gilt Coach, and that he ride out
of Town every Afternoon to take the Air, as the Protector was wont to do.

Ordered, That Colonel Martin do not pay one farthing to his Landlord in
Ax-yard, but that he do forthwith Arrest him for detaining his Clothes for
Rent, and that he justify this act by the Authority of the House.

Ordered, That Sir Arthur Hesilriggs Daughter go no more with her Fathers Clerk
to eat a Six-peny-minc'd Pie in an open Cooks shop, or if she do, that she go
up stairs, and not sit in one of the small Rooms where none but Porters drink,
lest she bring a great scandal upon her Family.

This day came a Letter from the General of the Cossacks, humbly desiring the
House to send him twelve stone of Brisket beef, and seven great Cabbages, with
two Hogsheads of Northdown Ale, for that his wife longed to taste some of the
English Diet.

The House was resolved into a Grand Committee about this ungent Affair, they
sat till ten of the clock at night, and adjourned till the next day.

Thursday, February 2.
This day they resumed the said Debate again, and being put to the Vote, it was
carried in the Affirmative only by two Voices.

Ordered, That the Earl of Pembroke does very well in going to Mistress
Creswels in Moor-fields, to mortify his pampered flesh; and that it is no sin
for a Quaker to go a whoring after strange women, provided he do not go a
whoring after strange Gods.

Resolved upon the Question, That the said Earl is not wise enough to make
himself the Head of the Quaking Faction, let him do what he can: And that there
be a Committee to examine his Lordship whither he went, when he stayed away
from his house a whole formight together, to wait upon two Draggle-tayl
Bitches, that made him believe they were two Kings daughters all glorious
within.

Ordered, That Mr. Nevil, because he will play at Picquet with no body but us,
nor so much as venture upon any hands but ours, have a Sizeisme out of Sir
George Booths Estate, as the reward of his Constancy.

The House having heard the report, How that Pope Gregory was struck with a
perperual pain in his stomach and feet by an Angel, because he compelled God by
his Prayers to deliver Trajan out of hell, and transfer him into Heaven, they
were strick with a panick fear; and whereas they had intended to have desired
of God to do as much for the Lord Bradshaw as he did for Trajan, they resolved
upon the consideration of the event, even to let him alone where he is, and not
to have him stirred by any means.

Friday, February 3.
Ordered this day the first thing they did, That all that would not take the
Oath of Abjuration and the Engagement, should be Bondslaves.

Ordered, That those Members that will keep whores, may not be expelled for
that, because it ought to be presumed before hand, that those Members cannot be
without'um.

Ordered, That there be a public Toleration of Bawdy-houses, upon condition
that they pay a yearly Stipend to the Members, there being no reason why the
House may not, as well as St. Peter, be beholding to the Stews for part of
their Revenue.

Ordered, That there be speedily levied upon the Nation more pounds, then there
be Indulgences in the Lateran Church, which Pope Boniface said a great while
ago, that only God could number.

Saturday, February 4.
This day some few of the Anabaptists children, whose Fathers had owned their
Authority, put up a Petition to the House, making heavy moan by reason of the
Excize which was laid upon their Play-things, but the House took it so
hainously, that they voted the Petition scandalous, seditious, and to the
prejudice of the Members; and that the Boys should be publicly whipped upon the
Scaffold upon Tower Hill; and Mr. Du-gard was ordered to slash their buttocks
soundly.

Ordered, That Friar Rookwood do live securely under our protection,
notwithstanding that he he is both a Coyner and a Felon, by reason that he is
an excellent Informer, and has done us very good service in betraying sundry
of our enemies.

Monday, February 6.
This day there was a Petition presented to the House, in the name of sundry
Welsh Farmers, which was as follows:

To the reeght Honoraple, etc.
The Humble Pettishon of sundry Shentlemen of Walls:
Does most humply shoh to your Worsip^,
THat whereas there were sundry fery creat Repells in our famous Countries of
Walls, who did rise hup in repellion against your Worsips, and would have
killed and slain all your cood Worsips, as we are fery well aple to testify
unto your Worsips, once more py Cods crace in Parliament assempled; And whereas
the Ring leater of these pase Repells was a fery creat Shentleman of Walls, a
man of a fery creat power, and of a fery creat Estate, py name Sir Hugh
Middleton, and whereas we so understand that you are coing apout to sell all
his fery creat means,

May it therefore pless a your cood Worsips, if you will sell such cood
penyworths as your cood Worsips formerly have done, as tere is no toubt, putr
your cood Worsips must be forced to do, to let your poor Petishners have a
cood pargain of your cood Worsips, as soon as another, for py Cods plutree
nells we pee Shentlemen of Walls, and will pay your cood Worsips fery
honestly, and pesides that we shall pe efer pound to pray, etc.

The Petition being read, the Petitioners were called in, and received the
thanks of the House, which the Speaker did give them accordingly.

Ordered, That a Letter be sent down to Colonel Overton, to know upon what
grounds he dares keep Hull for Jesus Christ, while they are the Supreme
Authority of the Nation?

They also resolved upon the form of an Oath, which was this: YOu shall Swear
to be faithful and constant to Us, our Heirs, Executors, and Assigns, from
generation to generation, as long as the world endures, and longer, if possible
may be. That you shall obey us in every thing, whether lawful or unlawful. And
that you set your Consciences adrift in a Bowl-dish in the middle of the
Thames, where you may never see them more, when you enter intoour service;
without which burden you can never be fit and qualified for our employments.
That you shall subscribe with you own blood, as the devil binds Witches when
he makes them enter into Covenants.

Tuesday, February 7.
Ordered, That Mr. S. and L. R. be sent to consult with the most knowing
Physicians in that particular, which is the best and most secret way of
removing the Lord General out of the way, in case he do not answer their
expectations.

Resolved upon the Question, That he is no true Politician who cannot tell how
to remove any Obstacle or Obstruction that lies in the way of his Advancement;
and that those that follow the practices of Caesar Borgia cannot erre^

This day the Ministers did show to the House sundry and weighty Reasons why
they should not demolish the Universities, or take away tithes.

Hereupon the House made answer, That neither the Universities nor tithes
should beamedled withal as yet; for they did not find themselves able to go
about a Work so generally dis-satisfactory to the Nation: However in process of
time they hoped they should be able to get those large Revenues also into their
Clutches, which were a very great scandal and eyesore to many weak and
distressed Brethren, and indeed that it was a shame that those things that were
founded in a time of Superstition, should not be taken away in a time of
Reformation.

They also told the said Ministers, that who ever would assist them in this so
pious a Work, should have very good shares, which should enable them to live
without the help of those Idolatrous Revenues.

Resolved, that the House do bestow one thousand pound per week upon
themselves, out of the Publique-treasury of the Nation, because the wants of
the Soldiery are very heavy, and the necessities of the people extraordinary
great.

Resolved upon the question, that Mr. C. H. is as good a Gentleman as any is in
England, now he has got an Estate [though it be known he was originally a
Link-boy] And that the Pedigree which he hired Will. Lilly to make him, whereby
he derived himself from John Holland Earl of Exeter, be as Authentic as any
the most ancient Pedigree in the Heralds Office.

Wednesday, February 8.
The House having this day little to do, resolved that a Letter of thanks
should be sent to the two Giants, Dramusiand and Tramustant, and also to
Clerimon Knight of the Green tree, for their great kindness to Don Palmerin,
the renowned English Champion. And they further Ordered, that three London
Prentices should be made choice of to go with the Letter.

Thursday, February 9.
Ordered, that H. Martin be rebuked for forbidding the people at the Sessions
in Berkshire to stand bare, and to do Fealty and Homage to their Lords, being a
tenent of a dangerous Consequence, and destructive to the Interest of the now
intended Commonwealth.

Resolved upon the question, that the spirit which sanctifies every particular
Member of this House, does in every particular Member blow where it lists,
sometimes this way, sometimes that way, and therefore they can make no
profession of any certain Doctrine or Discipline, because they know not which
way the spirit will blow their light Weather cock Hearts

Resolved upon the question, that if a man be questioned for any Crime, though
his Judges have neither competent witnesses, nor testimonies to evidence his
guiltiness, yet that if they think in their consciences he be guilty, they may
condemn him out of the private testimony of their own consciences.

Friday, February 10.
This day there was a certain person had Audience in the House, who presented
himself to be an Agent from Cardinal Mazarine. He was brought into the House
with the Mace going before him, on his left hand went the Master of the
Ceremonies, on his right hand the Secretary of State; But when all came to all,
he appeared to be a French Dancing Master, as you shall hear by his Speech.

Monsieur de man in de Shear,
BEgar me no speak a si bon Engliss comme vous, but me make a de shift for to
speak a de leetle, pour make a you ave a de some understanding of mine
affairs. Begar Monsieur, mine affairs be de plus important affairs in all de
varle, begar and dat is mush, you will say. Begar me play ode leetle Fidele, me
teash a to dance, o so rare, so rare; begar you no ave a so brave fellow in
all England besides me self. Begar your autre Maistres dey teash make leg
like a de Bear, or like a de Hoarse; begar all me Scolars be all de compagnie
for a de Prince, au de Princess: But begar dit is noting to dat I kenow, for
begar me can teash all de people to dance after mine peep. Begar if you will
done moy l'Argent, me give you dis peep, and me teash a you to make a de
people dance after your peep, begar the people all follow your peep, comme
de tree au de stone follow aftre de Poet Orfu's. Par mafoy n'aucun autre man
in de varle offer so great advantage to any Prince in de varle. Begar if you
make a de refuser, me go presentemant to Monsieur de King of o de Swedes, au
me go to Monsieur de King de Danemark, me varrant you me live a dear in de
plus great fame in de varle.

The House having heard his Speech, Ordered that the business should be
referred to a Committee to consider thereof But the impatient Frenchman
thinking himself scorned, because he did not receive a present Answer, went
away in a great fume, telling them, They should make a Whistle of his Breech,
before they should have his Pipe, since they put such a contempt upon his worth.

Saturday, February 11.
Ordered, that Mr. Harringtons Tenent of Rotation is of dangerous consequence,
and destructive to the Interest of this House, and that one of the Sergeants
men be sent to him, to desire him not to trouble himself with those things
which do so little concern him.

Upon this a Petition was presented from the Coffee-man, humbly requesting the
House to let him alone for his own benefit, for that he had been at a very
great charge to rail in the Room, and for making a great table: Whereupon the
House taking it into debate, Ordered that the Rotators should continue till he
was satisfied for his rails and table, and no longer.

Ordered, that Politicus do continue in his Office of contriving false
Intelligence, because no person of ability else will undertake the employment

FINIS.

