Prince Ruperts cruel VVarrant.
BY virtue of the Authority and Power given to me, from Our Sovereign Lord,
King CHARLES, under the Great Seal of England, as General under His Majesty,
of all His Majesty's Forces of Horse, already raised, or to be raised, within
His Majesty's Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales; For the Defense of the
true Protestant Religion, His Majesty's Person, The two Houses of Parliament
and their just Privileges, And the Liberties and Proprieties of His Subjects:

I Do strictly charge and command you and every of you whom it may or shall
concern, All delays, pretenses and excuses whatsoever set aside, immediately
after sight hereof, To send in to Thomas Jay, His Majesty's Commissary General
for the provifions of His Horse Forces, lying at* Ambrose Bartons house against
the Talbot in Tocester, All possible provisions of Mans-meat, and Horse-meat.
And I do also hereby strictly charge and command you in like manner, To send in
to Lieutenant Colonel Green, His Majesty's Engineer, lying at the Sign of
Betty-Briggs or The Running-Mare, in Tocester aforesaid, As many lusty and able
Pioneers or Laborers, with Shovels, Spades, Pickaxes, Mattocks, crows of Iron,
Hand-barrows, VVheel-barrows, Bags and Baskets to carry Earth, as you can
possibly find and provide within your Constablery. In the punctual
performance of these my commands of His Majesty's present service, you and
every of you whom it may or shall concern, must in no wise fail, as you will
answer the contrary at your utmost perils;

As the total Plundering and Burning of your Houses, with what other mischiefs
the licensed and hungry Soldier can inflict upon you.

And for your so doing, this shall be to you and every of you sufficient
VVarrant.

Given at Easton-Park, under my Hand and Seal at Arms, this First day of
November, Anno 1643. To the Constable, Officers and Jnhabitants of Cortenhall,
in the Hundred of Wimersley, in the county of Northampton. Rupert.
The Constables are required, in person to give an account of their doings, to
the Commissary General and Engineers. Ordered by the Commons assembled in
Parliament, That this Warrant be forthwith printed and set upon posts.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edward Husbands, November 13. 1643.


