(...) OR, THE DOCTRINE OF CONSCIENCE, Framed according to the points of the
CATECHISM, in the Book of COMMON PRAYER. By the Right Reverend Father in God,
JOHN PRIDEAUX, Late Lord Bishop of Worcester, for the private use of his Wife.

1 Timothy 3.9. Holding the mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience.

Major est honestatis fructus in conscientia, quam infama reponitur. Plinius
secundus, in Epistolis.

London, Printed for Rich: Marriot, and are to be sold at his Shop in St.
Dunstans Churchyard Fleetstreet, 1656.

TO THE Right Worshipful, Mrs MARY PRIDEAUX, Relict of the Right Reverend
Father in God, JOHN, Late Lord Bishop of WORCESTER.

To the Reader.
THis manual (as the title of it tells thee) was composed for the private use
of a most religious Matron: Yet such is her love to piety, that she desires
not to confine it to her closet, for her own instruction only; but freely
permits it to walk abroad in the world, that others may partake of the same
benefit with her. Indeed those good women, we read of in the sacred story of
the Gospel, we find either Ministering to Christ, or to his Members. Mary
anointing his blessed head, and Dorcas making coats, and garments to cloth his
servants. And so did that delicate Sex continue all the primitive time, and for
many Centuries after, insomuch that we find Plac lla, the wise of Theodosius
the Emperor, descending from her throne to look into the hospitalls, and into
the Chambers of the sick, and of those in want, that so she might be acquainted
with, and serve their necessities. Then the love of Christ was hot, and did
flame in the breasts of professors: But now that fire is decayed, and it is out
of fashion to be religious. Devotion is termed Superstition, Charity Popery,
the divine grace of mercy in high disgrace, even with those that term
themselves Saints, and condemned, and sent into exile, to walk with God in the
way of his holy commands, a legal faith, and faith, so strangely exalted, that
works are trampled under foot, or rather buried in the grave of oblivion.
Hence sin becomes not only to receive kind entertainment amongst the Sons of
men, but is grown in such request, that she has patrons, and Advocates to
defend, and plead her cause. Yea, we have those that sin with greediness,
because they think they have such an antidote, from the Spirit they pretend
to, that all the poison thereof is not of power to do them injury. Herein not
unlike the d sciples of Marcus, a branch of the Gnostics, that held forth (as
Irenaeus reports) that no sin whatsoever, though of a crimson dye, was
forceable enough to defile them, any more then the purest gold could be
contaminated in a sink, or the glorious beams of the Sun suffer pollution in
a dunghill, and all upon this pretense, and bottom, that they were (...), by
nature spiritual. It Is not to reckon up the several distempers in this kind.
Wherein we may complain, with S. Jerome. Nunc loquentibus, and pronuntiantibus
plenus est orbis. Docent quae non didicerunt. Magistri sunt, cum discipuli ante
non fuerunt. The world does now abound with those that speak, and make a
noise. They teach those things they never learnt, from Christ, nor his
Apostles. And the cause Of this evil is, because such take upon them to sit in
the Chair of Divinity, and to give responses from that Oracle, who never were
educated in the Schools of the Prophets, or sat at the feet of a learned
Gamaliel.

To prevent this spreading leprosy, it were to be wished, that our Swords were
beaten into plough-shares, and our Spears into pruning-hookes. I mean that the
apple of discord, in controversies, and Polemicall discourses with those of a
differing persuasion to us in points of religion, might not be so studiously
received, and treated with so much love, and kindness as if that were the UNUM
NECESSARIUM: whereby the Church of Christ has been long rent, and torn into
pieces, and to so little benefit of religion, that by advantage thereof, the
Enemy, not whilst we slept, but fought up to the ears in blood, concerning a
trifle and a quiddity, has sown his tare of high wickedness, and profaneness
even to Atheism. And if instead thereof, not only the Ministers of religion,
but those over whom they have rule, would mind the end of our redemption, that
we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him in
holiness, and righteousness all the days of our lives. Luke 1, 74.75. And in
order thereunto, the first set upon the preaching, and both upon the serious
practice of a holy life. Our faith would then flourish, and make a glorious
show with the fruit of obedience, and good works: and with reason then it
might be expected, that righteousness, and peace should kiss each other: and
thereby too, we should make appear to the world, what Justin Martyr said of
old, (...), that our religion did not consist in words, but works, ^ot only
proposing rules of holy living, but requiring in the professors thereof
obedience thereunto, which is likewise the sense of our grand-master, and by
him expressed in words not much different, Mat. 7.21. Not every one that says
unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does
the will of my Father, which is in heaven. Indeed action ought to be the life
of a Christian, and though speculation may enrich his head, yet it is practice
that makes his light to shine before men, whereby God is glorified, and
religion reverenced.

To this purpose was this little treatise designed. That the Christian man
being freed from those clogs, and scruples which hinder, and molest him in the
way, might run his race in obedience, and a holy life with so much the more
alicrity. We know, and are sensible what it is to have (...), a seared
conscience, which is not only an extreme brand, but an extreme evil. For
that principle being ill affected, it does infect the other parts with the
malignity thereof, whereby it has a very bad influence upon the whole life of
man, causing his actions to be very irregular. I shall not need to illustrate
this by examples. To cure this malady there is no remedy more proper, then to
make it malleable by the power of Gods word, which is sharper then any
two-edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and Spirit, and
of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
heart. Hebr. 4.12. And when that is done, by resolving it in those scruples
with which she is perplexed, and winding her out of those doubts, and
intricacies in which she is lost, and shut up as in a Labyrinth. Herein this
Reverend Praelate has lent us his assisting hand. A man of incomparable parts,
both for his great learning and reading, as the world well knows* and other
his learned works do abundantly testify; yet, as tall a Cedar as he was, in
this piece so humble, and condescending, that he may be said truly to have
denied himself, the points here handled being done without the least
ostentation of quotations, and School-niceties: and again with so much
brevity, and perspicuity, that they are made not only legible, but intelligible
to the meanest capacity. Wherein he has conformed himself to the practice, and
example of that great Doctor of the Gentiles, and Labourer in the Gospel, S.
Paul, who of himself professes, that he was made all things to all men, that
by all means he might save some. 1 Cor. 9.22. a virtue, and happiness I
confess, as to be admired in our Worthy Bishop, considering his great parts:
So to be desired in other learned men, who though they have deserved high
renown in the Church of God, yet have so locked themselves up in abstruse
terms, or high rhetorical expressions, that the benefit of their labors
cannot descend unto the many. To avoid this rock therefore, the method he
observes here is of the Catechism in the Liturgy, as being most plain, and
easy, and known to all; and which he always very much extolled, as an
excellent summary of religion, neither burthening the head with multiplicity of
needless points, nor leaving out any that was needful. Milk indeed fit for
babes, and prepared with great prudence by the composers thereof. Begun it was
by him but a little before his fatal sickness, by means whereof it wanted
the happiness of his review, and some pages with this mark ['](near the end
of the book) were left empty, which are now adventured to be filled up, though
by no learned hand, yet by one that had rather his low fortune and condition
should be taken notice of, in casting but a mite into the treasury, then an
unwillingnesse observed in him to serve his generation, according to the sphere
of his activity, Farewell.

Y. N.

Of Conscience.
COnscience is a faculty of the soul, sitting as a Bishop to oversee, and
censure all the actions of Man; with impartial approving, dislike, or doubting
of them.

That which we call Nature in Insensibles, in Sensibles Instinct, in Men
vulgarly Reason, as it is applied in Religion, may be called Conscience, which
is nothing but Reason, freely acting without partiality or seducement.

Hence it is set as a Judge, Isa. 5.3. brought as a witness, Romans 2.11
retained as an advocate, Act. 23.1. called by some the dictate of reason, the
Law of the understanding, that in reasoning thus, plays the Logician, and
makes an argument. A betrayer of Innocent blood is to be condemned, this
position is infallible out of Scripture. Then Judas brings in the assumption,
but I have betrayed Innocent blood; the conclusion will thereupon necessarily
follow, therefore I am worthy to be condemned. Conscience therefore (says one)
is the applying of our knowledge to particular acts, whose Court is the Heart,
whose Proctor is Reason, whose Sentence is impartial, if it be accompanied.
with simplicity and godly sincerity, as the Apostle sets down. Our rejoicing is
this, the testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity,
not with fleshly wisdom, but by the Grace of God we have had our conversation
in the world, 2 Cor. 1.12.

For such a conscientious teacher, desires to be made manifest, not to the
Ears alone, but to the Consciences of his hearers, 2 Cor. 4.2. and 5.11. So
obedience to higher powers, is to be performed, not for complement, or
commodity, or fear of the penalty ensuing, disobedience, but for Conscience
sake, Rom, 13.5. For such. Conscience toward God, grief and suffering
wrongfully is to be endured, 1 Pet. 2.19. For such a Conscience (as may appear
in David) will be troubled, and start back at the offering violence, but to the
skirt of the Royal robe of his Sovereign, 1 Samuel 24.5. And this Conscience
becomes one with that merry heart, that makes a cheerful countenance, and
proves a continual feast, when the cry goes otherwise abroad, the staff of
bread is broken, and they have no wine (as the wise man informs us) a good
conscience fears no colors; but a wounded conscience who can bears?

Those that have taken upon them the curing or securing of Consciences in all
variety of cases, spend much time in discussing either grammatically, the
original, or meaning of the word, and how Synteresis and Synidisis differ, or
naturally what place Conscience should hold, in reference to the understanding,
or will; whether it may be termed a power, or faculty, or an habit; what duties
may be expected from it, what acts it performs, how liable it is to
affrightments, scruples, demurres, errors, woundings, cauterizings,
extinguishings, of weakness, and waywardness in good consciences: of
outragiousnesse or stupidity in the bad, etc. But a plainer path may serve our
turn, who aim only at practice, and leave disputes to those that have
leisure, or pleasure to make use of them.

This thing in no case may be omitted, especially to consider, that as the
ground is laid, so the building is like to prove firm, or tottering. Whereupon
it will follow, that from doubtful praemises in reasoning, a warrantable
conclusion may in no case be expected. In the Court therefore of Conscience,
these rules must stand as unconcontroleable. I. That man's Conscience is known
to God alone, 1 Corinthians. 2.10, 11. II. Therefore it can be subject to none but
to him, that can search the depths, and discover the windings of it. III.
Nothing by the same reason can bind or loose it, but that which has undoubted
authority from God. IV. Thence it will follow, that the written Word of God
must decide all our cases of Conscience, either by positive Texts, or clear
deductions, that cannot be justly excepted against. V. Traditions, Customs,
humane Laws, Oaths, Promises, Vows, or the like, may no further bind the
Conscience, then that they are consonant, and backed by the Word of God. VI. No
Indulgence, pardon or dispensation of Man can free, or bind the Conscience,
but his only that brings that key with him, which opens, and no man
shuts, and shuts, and no man opens. VII. The Church and lawful
Ministers have the power of binding and loosing the Conscience committed to
them. Mat. 18. Joh. 20.23. which takes effect in those only, who Religiously
and with due preparation, are humble suitors for it, and with penitent hearts
entertain it.

The neglect of which rules, and foysting in Decrees, and Decretalls, with
Scholastical and Philosophical determinations, in stead of Scripture, and solid
inferences from it, has entangled the antienter Casuists with so many
exorbitances, that little good is to be gotten by them: and those that set
forth the same way, under the name of Morals, give rather a new dress to the
old Felt, then redress any thing upon better grounds, as it will quickly
appear, to those that will come and see. Since the Reformation, those that have
recalled matter of Conscience to Scripture, not without great commendations to
themselves, and satisfaction in most things, to weak Consciences, agree not
concerning the method in delivering this doctrine: but this should scruple no
man, all laying sure grounds, and driving to the same end, which the Apostle
mentions, The end of the Commandment is Charity out of a pure Heart, and a
good Conscience, and Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5. This Threefold cord may not
be untwisted and broken; howsoever perchance be somewhat entangled, without
sundring that which God has joined together. The heart must be pure, without
unclean or corrupt affections; the Conscience good, not tainted with
by-respects, or vendible for any advantage; and Faith, the ground of all, must
lastly be unfeigned, not puffed up with presumptuous pretenses, but expressed
in good works, as the Apostle prescribes, Jam. 2. a tree, planted by such
rivers of water, will bring forth its fruit in due season. And a Conscience
fastened by such nails, and pricked on by such Goads, will never shame the
Masters of the assemblies, for the disposing that am^sse, they have received by
the hand of one Sheep-herd and Bishop of their Souls, to whom they have
returned from the bypath of men's traditions.

As I censure not the courses that any have taken in this kind: so I trust none
will take my disposition amiss which I shall frame, as near as I may, to the
points of the Catechism in our Church-booke wherewith all should be best
acquainted. The cases of conscience then so disposed will come under these
heads.

Concerning 1. Religion. 2. Scripture. 3. The Apostles Creed. 4. The Decalogue
or ten Commandments. 5. Lords Prayer. 6. Sacraments.


In speaking somewhat of all which (as God shall enable) observe, that C.
stands for Conscience proposing scruples, D. a Doctrinal resolution or
direction answering such queries by, 1. what, 2. whether, 3. why, 4. wherefore,
briefly and plainly, as the case requires.

CHAP. I. Of Cases concerning Religion.
WHether Christian Religion may not be thought to be a politic invention of
the wisest worldlings to keep the simpler sort in awe, and order?

This is that Satan would buzze into busy conceits to make men atheists, D.
that he might rule all: but herein he bewrayes himself, for if by his
sensible commerce Witches, 1 Samuel 28. Acts 16.
Possessed, Pythonists, such as have familiars, or spirits of divination, whom
they consult with, and work by, do apparent mischief, it be made most
apparent that there is a Devil, it will necessarily, thence be inferred also,
that there is a God that puts a hook into his Nostrills, to restrain him from
further mischiefing this, invisible frame of the world, with all the
inhabitants thereof. Whom reason will further convince, that such an
inestimable piece of work, as the world is seen to be, could not come to be so
by chance of it self, or endure as it does, without a maker, and preserver,
which what may we imagine to be but God Almighty, to whom we owe our being, and
preserving. Reason and Necessity therefore, will cast us upon the
acknowledgement of all Religious duties to be performed to him.

What assurance have Christians that their Religon is to be preferred before
that of the Jews, C. II.
Mahumetans and Heathens?

Christianity has the most D.
warrantable antiquities, and testimonies of all ages to confirm it, miracles
beyond all exception, and prophecies of future contingencies, above humane
comprehension to back it, such doctrine as fiteth all men of all conditions, to
live religiously in respect of God, justly in relation to others, and soberly
in reflex upon their own demeanure, with plain instructions, concerning the
original progress, and reward of wickedness, the only freeing from it, the
immortal rewards of another world, which the wisdom of this world could never
think of. This the Wisest and Learned in all ages have embraced, Tyrants, and
the Devils, with all their accomplices, have in vain opposed, the ablest opposers
of it, themselves have been convinced to justify with Pharaohs Magicians, that
the finger of God is in it. And none could take any exceptions against, which
have not been answered to their confusion. All which, and diverse other
excellencies, all other professions are so far defective that, upon slight
examination, they will be found to be unreasonable, brutish and ridiculous.

May not all sorts of people that never heard of, C. III.
or were instructed in Christianity, attain unto Salvation, if they live
morally well in their own profession?

Their punishment may be easier in another world, D.
then that of those who have lived amongst them more disorderly, because
punishments are by Gods justice proportioned to demerits. Tire and Sidon shall
have an easier doom then Corazin and Bethsaida, that were better instructed and
did worse. But for coming to the Father without the Son here, Ioh. 14.6.17.3.
Act. 4.12. Ioh. 10.7.
or hereafter, we can find no way. No life eternal to be expected, but by
knowing him. No Salvation but by his name. No entrance but by that way, and
door. And this the Heathen do in a manner confess, when the best of their
dead must be beholding to Charon's boat, the Turks, when they place their
Paradise, they know not where, to supply them with all sensual pleasure, they
had not so fully here. And what good can the Jews howl for, in expectation of
a Messiah to save them in another world, beyond the date of all their
Prophecies? who tarrieth (no man knows where) some, say lingreth at Rome.

Seeing that they that turn many to righteousness, C. IV.
shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. and the King of Heaven
would have men compelled to come in to the celebration of his Sons Marriage
supper, Luke 14.23. Whether those of a contrary persuasion to Christianity
under our power, and living amongst us, may not be forced to conform
themselves to our Religion.

By no means. D.
For the Commandment runs, go and teach, not force by Fire or Faggot, or any
other co-active ways, all nations; Mat. 28.19. seconded by the Apostle, be
infant, in season, and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
long-suffering and doctrine. 2. Tim. 4.2. Religion being not to be planted or
propagated in a Turkish manner by the Sword, but by the Word in an Apostolical
manner, and method. I beseech you brethren, by the mercies of God, Romans 12.1.
no lording over men's Consciences, which St. Peter forbad long ago, 1 Pet. 5.3.
(which his pretended successors have little hindered) whence the compulsion the
Gospel speaks of, must be by persuasion not coaction, as appears by the use of
the same word, Mat. 14.22. Gal. 2.14.

Whether Protestants by renouncing Popery, C. V.
may justly be charged to have set up a new Religion, differing from that which
their ancestors professed, and are charitably thought to be saved in?

They can be charged no further with Novelties, D.
then Josias might be, and other Pious Kings, for plucking down Idols, and
purging Gods Worship from Idolatry; nor then our Savior, for whipping out
buyers and sellers from the Temple. A religious Reformation, that separates the
precious from the vile, the wheat from the chafe, gold and silver from hey and
stubble, rejecting the one, and reteining the other, has been ever held
necessary, and practiced by those themselves, who blame it. Thus the
Protestants have retained the Creed, Commandments, Lords Prayer, Baptism and
Supper of the Lord, together with the same Word of God, which their ancestors
had. In these points consist Religion, and not in papal superstructions, with
which our ancestors were deluded and wronged. To turn therefore from a Papist
to be a Protestant, is not to chang Religion, but to reject Superstion, which,
as a pharisaicall leaven, had corrupted the whole Mass, and could not be
transubstantiated to any good, without such a fair riddance, whereby we have
left them no further, then they have left Gods Word: and are ready to comply
with them again in any thing, that thereby shall be convinced to be
justifiable.

The Protestants truly urging, C. VI.
that a Papist may with a safe Conscience be present at their Sermons, and
Service, and communicate with them, in as much as nothing is contained in them,
but they themselves have, and must allow of; whether on the other side may not
a Protestant communicate with them in going to Mass, with the like liberty of
Conscience? 2 Kings 5.18.
Elisha seeming to allow Naaman to be present at the Worshipping the Idol
Rimmon?

By no means. D.
For that the presence of a Protestant will not be permitted, without Divine
Worship performed to a God of Bread, imagined to be made by five Latin words,
pronounced by a Mass Priest, which would make him guilty of more then
Heathenish Idolatry. To pass by Crosse-Worship, and that exhibited to Saints
and Relics in their breviary. Neither has the farewell of Elisha to Naaman,
go in peace, relation to his bowing down to Rimmon that he might join in Ver.
17.
it, but to his religious purpose, protesting to sacrifice to no other God but
the Lord, and to afford no bowing to Rimmon, howsoever he should, by his duty,
be forced to bow to his Master before Rimmon. Others conceive Naamans petition
to desire only a pardon for that he had done, and thus read the Text: In this
thing the Lord pardon thy servant, that when my Master has gone into the house
of Rimmon, and worshipped there, I have bowed my self with him, for which the
Lord pardon me. To this the Prophet might well add, go in peace; but the more
warrantable interpretation is the former.

Whether entering into a Monastery under the vows of perpetual Obedience, C.
VII.
Poverty and Chastity (as Popish Monks and Nuns take them) be not rather a
breach of the Communion of Saints, or an abridgement of Christian Liberty, then
a branch of Christian Religion, to be termed so by an Excellency?

The answer is to be affirmative, D.
for although a betaking to a scholastical, and a contemplative life under
prescribed rules, for the better accomplishing of it, be not only laudable, but
necessary for the training up of laborers to be sent into the Lords Vineyard:
yet the mewing of them up in a Monastery for perpetuity, who should be there
only restrained for a time, till they were fit to be employed abroad, (as they
are in the Colleges of the Universities) and to bear the Church in hand, that
by blind obedience, voluntary begging, and forced Chastity, men might
supererogate, and over-doe the Scripture-Commandements to supply others
defects, if such spiritual redundancies be applied by an wholesome indulgence.
This is that will hardly give satisfaction to a well-grounded Conscience, that
pitcheth upon these passages of the rule, that cannot deceive us. 1 Cor.
7.17.23. Gal. 5.1. Act 20
As God has called every man, so let him walk, ye are bought with a price, be
not made servants of men, it is better to give, then to receive.

CHAP. II. Cases concerning the Holy Scripture.
HOw shall I be assured that the Scriptures we have, C. I.
is the Word of God?

By its (1.) Antiquity, D.
(2.) Contents, (3.) Universal Tradition. The Antiquity of the Old Testament
(which carries the New with it in the same bottom) is apparent, in regard no
Alphabeticall writing can be produced of equal standing with it: for those
pieces fetched from the the Sons of Seth, the prophecy of Henoch, scraps
fathered upon Abraham, or the like, might pass either by Tradition, or in
Characters from hand to hand, the Alphabet being too high an invention for man's
contrivance, and therefore is worthily ascribed to Gods first manuscript of the
Decalogue, upon the two Tables of Stone, in mount Horeb. Now as for the
Contents of the whole Scripture, they are such both for matter, mystery, and
manner of expression, that the greatest wits of the world have admired it, that
it has born away the Bell, and those shamed themselves, who have ventured to
oppose it: though Satan and his brats has maliced it above all writings
whatsoever, which is a strong argument it came from God, whom he and his most
hates. Lastly, if Universal Tradition (wherein (if not all, yet) the most
sage and eminent judgments, in all succeeding ages have concurred) should not
command an ingenious belief, we might question every thing beyond the reach of
our senses, or make a doubt whether we had Grandfathers, or Parents, because
we knew them not.

Can that be received for a rule of Faith and Manners, C. II.
which seems casually to be written, without any sensible method or connection,
for instruction or direction, and in such ambiguous terms, in points of
greatest consequence, that sets at variance, rather then uniteth the most
accurate searchers of it?

As God made man upright, D.
though he sought out many inventions, Eccles. 7.27. so the Law of the Lord is
perfect, and sure to enlighten the eyes, and make wise the simple, Ps. 19. but
it is the ignorant perverseness of men, that wrest it to their own
destruction. 2 Pet. 3.16. It is a blasphemous cavil therefore, to slight the
Scripture, as a casual commonitor, against the express texts of the Apostle.
Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning, that
we through patience, and comfort of the Scripture, might have hope, To. 15.4.
All Scripture is given by inspiration of God and is profitable for doctrine,
for reproof, for correction, and instruction in righteousness that the man may
be perfect, thoroughly furn^shed to every good work. 2 Timothy 3.15.
To no other rules our Savior sends his opposers to be rectified, Joh. 5.39.
and calls the Disciples travailing toward Emmaus, fools, for being slack in
believing them, Luke 24. The method of which is not paedantical, as in Arts and
Sciences for lower matters, but practical, and so divinely fitted, that all may
be fit learners by it. Where, in the Old Testament, the History in Josuah,
Judges, Samuel, the Kings, etc. follow the Law in the five books of it, to show
by examples, the rewards upon the fulfilling thereof, and punishments attending
the breaking of it. The Moralities in Job, David, and Solomon, the exercise of
patience, devotions, and all manner of wisdom in all cases whatsoever. The
Prophets, beating down the wickedness of the times, lead us to Christ, whom the
Gospels in the N. T. set forth as the Prophet, Priest, and King, on which the
Church must wholly depend, whose planting and progress is set forth in the
Acts of the Apostles, doctrine laid down in the Epistles, and expectances in
the Revelation, by a method so connected, that none but prating fools (as the
wise man terms such) may carp at, wherein the obscurities of some places are
enlightened by the clearness of others, or set as taskes for the industry of
the greatest wits, to beat down their pride and presumption: that finding
themselves over-mastered, they may seek unto God by prayer, for that they
acknowledge themselves to come short of. Whereupon the dissentions that arise,
prove the faults of the wranglers, not the insufficiency of the rule, no more
then the different judgments of Artists, do the disorder-linesse of the
celestial, or terrestrial bodies.

Upon cansideration of the new covenant foretold by Jeremy, C. III.
c. 31.33. and ratified by the Apostle to the Hebrews, c. 8.10. wherein a plain
promise is made of writing Gods Law so in men's hearts, that they shall not need
to teach one another, because all shall be so gifted; may not a weak Conscience
be warped to think well of the Swenchfeldists, and enthusiasticall Wrigelians
of these times, to lay aside the letter, that the Spirit may act the more
freely?

The old and new Covenant are both alike, D.
under hand and seal, though the tenure be diverse: the first was of Works,
the other is of Faith, for our Justification: the one says, Do this, and
live; the other, Believe in him that has satisfied for thee, and thou shall be
saved. The spirit indeed is promised to lead us into all truth, but not by
frantic enthusiasmes, but by the Scripture, which is written for our learning,
and many times walks under the name of the Spirit too. God has in these last
days spoken unto us by his Son, Hebr. 1. Joh. 5.39. Romans 1.16
which is his Word, and which alone ought to be our guide: search ye the
Scriptures is commanded us, which are the conduit of Life and Power of God unto
Salvation. Thus we are taught of God, not to inquire at the Oracles of our
Lusts, and Fantasies, but of his word, not to be led by conceits of our own
framing, but by the means of his prescribing, the outward preaching of the
Word, and the inward operation of the Spirit to embrace it.

It is thought amongst many Learned, Godly, C. IV.
and painful Ministers, that the bare reading of the Word in public, or
private, is not of power sufficient to beget Faith in the hearers; what comfort
shall any therefore find in assemblies by scripture, where there is no
preaching Minister? and how can I esteem of that, my Conscience tells me will
do me no good?

Dilating upon a text of Scripture, D.
taken at adventure, must not be taken for the only preaching, that begets
Faith: it may set an. edge upon some hearers devotion; but can add no efficacy
to the Text, that is quick, and powerful of it self, and sharper then any two
edged sword, to discern the very thoughts, and hearts intentions, Heb. 4.12.
Beside, it is well known that Moses was held to be preached by the Apostle, in
that he was read in the Synagogue every Sabbath day, Act. 15.21. Those that
benefit not therefore by hearing the Text read, which they may well rely upon,
will hardly be better edified by the gloss, which may be as obscure as that,
and far more liable to exceptions. And should not our Saviors, and the
Apostles Sermons instruct them better, that often hear them reiterated with
attention, then a set speech of a man of meaner gifts, that may be forgotten as
soon as it is uttered, and ofttimes is more intricate and obscure, then the
Text it endeavored to explain. This must be taken not to detract from solid,
and seasonable preaching, but for vindicating of the word read, from the
abatement, and scorn too many put upon it, in these evil days.

The Scripture being acknowledged to be the undoubted word of God, C. V.
containing that counsel of his, which he would have communicated unto all for
their Salvation; with what. Conscience may any portion of it be kept back from
being read in the Congregation, as the Canticles, with diverse other parts of
the Old Testament, and most part of the Revelation in the New?

The not reading of some passages in Scripture, in public, detract nothing
from their Authority, only serve to put a difference between milk and
stronger meat, according to the stomachs that are to receive it. I have many
things to say unto you (says Christ to his Disciples) but ye cannot bear them
now. What would the Hebrew titles, the Higgaions, Selahs, etc. in David's Psalms
benefit the auditory? when the Teachers themselves cannot agree what to think
of them. So Genealogies in the Chronicles, and the not understood praedictions
in the Apocalipse, which the Learned make use of, the Vulgar may sooner cavil
at them, then in any sort be bettered by them.

How may any with a safe conscience endure the reading of the, C. VI.
Apocrypha in the Church, especially when so many Chapters of Canonical
Scripture are laid aside, that may supply the yearly course of reading, with
more sure Doctrine, and more evident, then from the Apocrypha can be expected?

In the titles of our Bibles, D.
the Apocrypha is sufficiently distinguished from the Canonical Scripture: so
that the Chapters that are read out of it, are not prescribed to set aside the
Canonical; it being left to the choice of the Minister, to read such Chapters
in their stead, as he thinks fit. And by reason of the consonancy of that which
is read out of them with the Canon, the respect by the ancient given unto them,
and the instructiveness of the style, some choice passages are read out of
them, as of ancient and received homilies, making for the better explication of
the Canon, which those that most oppose them, cannot deny, but they may as well
be approved, as their comments upon a Text: which ('it is presumed) they would
not have to be taken as Canonical.

How far may Scripture be conscionably used in exorcises, in casting out, C.
VII.
or commanding Devils, or in charms for curing of diseases, or in
preservatives, in wearing it about us, to protect us from several dangers, or
inconveniences?

In such cases it may be used not at all; D.
otherwise then as the ground of prayer, by which we must be supplicants to
God, that he would preserve and deliver us from all evil. Natural operations
are not to be expected from the words of Scripture, but moral from the sense,
and directions, no more then we can imagine, the leaves of a Physic book will
cure a disease, or wound, if it be applied to the part ill affected. Those
pieces therefore of Scripture, or names of God, or Angels, thence pretended to
be deduced by Exorcists, and Magicians, or names of the three Kings of Cullen,
or the beginning of Saint John's Gospel, or the like, hung about the neck of
any, are delusions of Satan. The words that I spoke unto you, are spirit and
life (says our Savior) John 6.63. and were written that ye might believe, and
that believing, ye might have life through his name, John 20.31. not for charms
to do mischief, or seeming cures upon the body, which Satan uses as a bait
to destroy the soul. Let the Pythonists in the Acts say never so truly
concerning S. Paul, and Silas, these men are the servants of the most high God,
which show to us the way of Salvation, Act. 16.17. yet Saint Paul would not
endure such she-Chaplains of the Devils ordering, who take up good to do
mischief, and act the Devils part in the attire of an Angel. The punishment of
the mongrell-blasphemer, Lev. 24. should make all conscionable men afraid, how
they adventure to make bold with Gods Sacred name, or word, lest perchance as
the Sons of Sceva, they meet with some mad Devils, that will wound and strip
them for their folly; and terrify others, causing them to burn such damnable
books of curious Arts, though of never so much esteemed value, Act. 19.18, 19.
On the contrary, a Conscience must be made for the abusing any parts of the
Bible, or things once consecrated to God to profane, and sordid uses, lest
Belshazzers proscription stand against them, to their sudden ruin, for non
est tutum ludere cum sanctis (as the common saying is) it is not good to dally
with a Deity.

CHAP. III. Cases concerning the Apostles Creed.
THree Creeds are received in all Catholic Churches, the first called the
Apostles Creed, the second the Nicene, and the third the Creed of Athanasius.
The two latter of these are but expositions of the Apostles Creed, composed
more especially to withstand the Arian Heresy, which denied the Deity of
Christ, and had then well-nigh overspread the whole face of Christianity. Into
the Apostles Creed, as our Liturgy has hitherto led our forefathers, we were
baptized. To make then this the first case of Conscience, it may be well
enquired,

Whether the rejecting this Creed, C. I.
out of our Liturgies and Catechismes, into which we were baptized, and to
which our sureties undertook for us, we should always stand to be, not a kind
of renouncing, or rather plain Apostasy from the Faith we were baptized in,
whereto may be applied, that speech of God to Samuel, they have not rejected
thee but me? 1 Samuel 8.7


They can best give satisfaction to this, that have been the actors in it. To
say they supply it in the Doctrine of their preaching, their auditors will tell
them that they have not the art, nor are taught it by them, how to pick out so
punctual Articles for their Belief, and so to order them, that they may have
them by heart, to be ready always to give an account to every man that asks
a reason of the hope that is in them, as Saint Peter charge, 1 Pet. 3.15.
upon which they may ground the good Conscience that follows in the next verse.
Now those that have a touch of Conscience, reason thus with themselves, either
the new Articles we are to expect from the Sermons of our new Lights, are the
same which we had in our old Creeds or different If they prove the same, why
might not the old have stohd? but if we shall have new Articles of our Creed
which the Papists themselves hold to be above his Holiness authority to make)
then woe to our ancestors, that have so long misled, and to our dull capacity,
which cannot with a safe conscience yet cease to contend for the Faith, which
hitherto we have conceived, was once delivered to the Saints, Jud. 2.

How may the Conscience be assured, C. II.
that this is the Apostles Creed, which is stood so much for, seeing the
tradition, that it was made by the twelve Apostles, before their separation to
preach the Gospel, has no warrant to confirm it?

Though it may not be called the Apostles Creed (as diverse D.
of the ancients would have it) because it was made immediately by the Apostles
themselves; yet modern Divines are forced to agree in this, that the Articles
in it are clear deductions from the Doctrine of the Apostles: in which sense it
is rightly called the Apostles Creed, in substance, though not for composure. A
true translation is held with us for the Word of God, though not so
immediately, yet as undoubtedly as the original.

Christ is said in this Creed to be conceived by the Holy Ghost, C. III
according to that of Saint Matthew, that which is conceived in her is of the
Holy Ghost, cap. 1.20. and of Saint Lute, cap. 1.35. the Holy Ghost shall come
upon thee, and the power of the highest shall overshadow thee, therefore that
Holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. Whence
an ungrounded Conscience may gather, that Christ should be rather called the
Son of the person of the Holy Ghost; then the only Son of the first person,
the Father Almighty, which confounds the believed doctrine of the sacred
Trinity, and is urged by Novellists to puzzle weak Consciences?

The Nicene Creed clears this, D.
by putting a plain difference between begetting, made, and incarnate.
Begetting has relation only to the Father, begotten of the Father (says the
Creed) not of the Holy Ghost, before all worlds, that is, from eternity; as God
of God, Light of Light, very God of very God, being therefore of one substance
with the Father that begot him, infinitely of a higher pitch then any thing
that was made. For things made are all sorts of Creatures, and so the Son, that
begotten from eternity, was made Man in the fullness of time, when it is said,
he was incarnate by the Holy Ghost, and this incarnation is appropriated to the
Holy Ghost, though it be the work of the whole Trinity, united ever in all
outward operations; in regard this power of the Highest proceeds from the
Father and Son, and is next in order, and more conspicuous to the producing of
the greatest effects. Whence, as in the Creation, the spirit of God is
mentioned moving upon the waters, so in Christ's baptism, the Spirit is visible
in the shape of a Dove, and in inspiring the Apostles, in cloven tongues, where
the Father was only heard, or heard of, not seen, and the Son not seen as the
begotten Word, but as he took flesh, and dwelt amongst us, Joh. 1. But these
mysteries are more submissively rather to be believed, then curiously pryed
into. The beginning therefore of our Letanie, expressing as much in this
behalf, as any need learn, or profess, of God the Father, God the Son
Redeemer by taking man's nature upon him, God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from
them both: which in a Trinity of persons make but one God, to be merciful to
us miserable sinners, and inform us further, when we shall come to see God,
face to face, not as now as it were in a glass, but to know as we are known, 1
Cor. 13.12.

C. IV.
The Article of the descent of Christ into Hell is thought supposititious of
some, and expounded at pleasure by others, either for suffering hellish Agonies
in the Garden before his Passion, or for remaining in the state of the dead
after his burial, until he arose again, or for his descent into Limbus
Patrum, to fetch thence the fathers, or for descending into the place of the
damned, to proclaim his satisfaction for sin, and triumphing over Death and
Hell, of which it was not possible he should be holden, Act. 2.24. Among all
which distractions, where is it safe for a scrupulous Conscience to rely, and
quiet it self?

D.
On the general believing of the thing, as it is laid down out of this, and
the Athanasian Creed, in the third Article of our Church, in these words, As
Christ died for us, so it is to be believed, that he went down into Hell: and
not further to trouble our selves about the precise manner of it, which,
particularly not revealed in Scripture, intangleth rather the curious
searchers, then affords satisfaction for the conscience. If then from the
consideration of this one more evident place, Col, 2.15. Christ blotting out
the hand writing of Ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us,
and took it out of the way by nailing it to the Cross, spoiled upon it
principalities, and made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it, we
collect that after his going in the Garden, through wrath against sin, which
he had undertaken, and Sufferings on the Cross by Satan's instruments, upon the
consummatum est, or finishing the work of our Redemption, his Soul encountered
Satan in a spiritual way (who found nothing to except against, and therefore
was conquered and triumphed over) with his accomplices, with O Death where is thy
sting, O Grave where it thy victory? We may well retain this Article, as
having the like ground with the rest, and to continue to sing in the Te Deum,
when thou had overcome the sharpness of Death (which was done by the
descending, and triumphing over all hellish forces) thou did open the
Kingdom of Heaven to all believers.

Upon the Article concerning the Catholic Church, C. V.
the weaker Consciences, by Romish emissaries, are thus ensnared; out of the
Catholic Church there can be no Salvation, as all sides grant upon that in the
Act. 2.47. And the Lord added to the Church, such as should be saved: but the
Roman Church is only the Catholic Church, therefore whosoever will be saved,
before all things, must first turn Roman Catholic?

This grand imposture in depraving the Article of Unity, D.
wherein the Saints community, and forgiveness of sins consists, is (as a
Spiders web set up to catch Flies) thus swept off. Acknowledging that out of
the Catholic Church, Salvation is not to be expected, it will be denied in the
next place that Rome is the only Catholic Church, and made evident that it is
only a particular member of it, as the Churches of Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus
and the rest were, when S. Paul wrote to the Romans. These were not then
members of the Church of Rome, but sisters with it, not subordinate to the
Church of Rome, but coordinate with it. To omit Logic quiddities in
discovering the fallacy, what a piece of reasoning is this; because Rome is
Catholic, therefore the Church of England, France, and Spain, cannot be
Catholic; as much as to say your nag ambleth, mine may not, or must do it in
subordination to yours, and yet the Catholic Church is, the Creed, is not made
by us an imaginary idea, as some put upon us, but a general that includs many
particulars under it, as the general notion. of a City does this or that City,
to which it does equally impart the name, and nature, where the particular is
the object of sense, and set on an hill cannot be hid, but the general the
object of faith, which is of things understood, or to be believed.

The Article of the forgiveness of sins, C. VI.
may much trouble a weak conscience, in that we read the sin against the Holy
ghost shall never be forgiven; beside there are sins which waste the
conscience, and destroy it, that admit of no repentance, and surmount the
absolution of the Minister of the Gospel, which is acknowledged to work by
prayer, not power, what peace then may be had, or pacification in such
distraction?

That which Gods word holds forth unto us, First, D.
this ground must be laid that forgiveness cannot be expected without
repentance, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish, Luke 13.3. Then
that the sin against the Holy ghost may be committed by two sorts of people.
First, by such as being unbelievers, by reason, of their education, and
condition, have the word so evidently laid home to their capacities, that their
consciences are convinced that they hear the right; and yet for by respects of
pleasure, pelf, promotion, or the like, knowingly, and maliciously set
themselves against the light of it; and prefer darkness before it. This was
the course of the Pharisees, who were convinced sufficiently, that our Saviors
casting out of devils, could not be but by the over-mastering, divine power (
as Nicodemus ingenuously acknowledged, we know that thou art a teacher come
from God, for no man can do those miracles which thou do, except God be
with him, Jo. 3.2.) yet they maliciously gaine-said it, and bore the people in
hand, that it was by Beelzebub the Prince of the devils, Matthew. 12. By a
second sort the sin against the Holy ghost is committed, that have listed
themselves in the Church, tasted of the heavenly gift, and word of God, yet
then wilfully fall away, and renounce Christianity, Heb. 6.4. and 10.26.
neither of these can be renewed by repentance, because the forgiveness of sins
is only to be had in the pale of the Church, and those sons of Belial, the
first sort, refuse to enter, and the second out themselves from the safe
condition they were in; the first are termed blasphemers, the other Apostates,
whose case is far different from the greatest offender, who remains still in
the Church, whereby repentance and remission of sins may be had, though never
so much crying for vengeance, and tearing the conscience. Though your sins are
as Scarlet, I will make them as white as snow; though they be red like crimson,
they shall be as wool, Isai. 1.18. Come unto me, take my yoke, though seven,
nay, though legions of devils possess you, I will give you rest, Matthew. 11.28.
When the Ministry of absolution, and absolution of a lawful Minister is to be
accounted more then petitory, which may be performed by any other pious friend,
but not authoritatively (as it is said) and by way of power. For as a Judge who
has a lawful commission from his superior, that can grant it, may absolve or
condemn a party brought before him, which another man, perchance of more
eminency, may not do; for want of a calling to it: so a Minister by virtue of
his commission given him, whose sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and
whosoevers sins ye retain, they are retained, Jo. 20.23. Matthew. 18.18.
provided always that they go not beyond the limits of their commission, which
considered, as it should be, by tender consciences, would mould them to a
greater regard of their spiritual guides, and Prelates, which now are so cast
aside by those, who know not, or care not, what in conscience they are most to
look after.

How can that Creed be a perfect symbol of our Faith, C. VII.
which leaves out the chief of all, that Faith only justifies; and has
nothing concerning Predestination, or Man's liberty of will, concerning which so
many consciences are, and have been troubled.

The first Scruple is cleared by the first word of the Creed, I believe. D.
Wherein the word Believe, being the proper act of Faith, shows that Faith is
laid for the Ground, that all the Articles that follow, stand upon; and I, the
first syllable, requires an application of every article to our selves. So
that in this sense they are to be taken: I believe in God, that he created me,
as all other creatures besides, and in Jesus Christ, not only that he is his
only son, conceived by the holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary, but that
he Suffered, was crucified, dead and buried, triumphed over death, and hell,
and rose again for my justification. By whose satisfaction I am quitted, and
delivered from the bondage of sin, Satan, and the Law, to serve him in
holiness to God, and righteousness toward my neighbor, all the days of my
life. And is not here the doctrine that faith justifies alone, not a
temporal, historical, or speculative habit; but an affiance, and reliance on
that which Christ has done for me, without which as it is impossible to please
God, so it is impossible likewise to case a troubled conscience. The second
scruple of Predestination may be taken off, by a sober consideration of the
attributes of Almighty, and creating all things ascribed to God, which
includes the other attributes. For he that made all things of nothing, and may
dispose of his own as he pleases, may choose, or pass by whom he lists.
But herein, what he has done from eternity, he acquaints us not with: but
leaves us to be guided, to think, or do as his written word, and certain
deductions from thence lead us. Under which most free disposition of the
Almighty, Man's freedom given, lost, and restored, must be believed to be
placed: for it is he that works in us to will and to do of his good
pleasure, Philip. 2. In like manner other necessary points to salvation may be
reduced, and those that cannot, may not be imposed upon the conscience as
necessary.

CHAP. IV. Cases concerning the Decalogue, or Ten Commandments.
COncerning the Decalogue, or Ten Commandedements, these points are manifest:
(1.) That these Commandments were written with the finger of God on two Tables
of Stone: Exodus 31.18.32.16.
(2.) That they were written on both sides: (3.) That these Tables being broken
by Moses at the sight of the Idoll-calfe, they were written again by God in
the same words, they had at first, but upon two Tables of stone of Moses
hewing: 34.
(4.) That they were just ten in number: (5.) That our Savior reduces all the
duties of them to two heads, the love due to God, Mat. 22.37. Luke 10.27.
and the love to be performed to our neighbor: (6.) That most of the Ancient
designed three of these Commandments to the first Table (which division
thereupon is by most Churches retained) and seven to the second.
Notwithstanding diverse of the Reformed ascribe four to the first, and six to
the second Table. But such differences, in things indifferent, have been
always tolerated amongst sober men without prejudice to any dissenting. I
should think the division of the Jews to be more equal, and passable; that
five Commandments should belong to the first Table, to show our duty toward
God: and so many to the second, comprising our duty toward our neighbor, both
having a like number to instruct our christian Carriage to God, and Superiors,
in the first: and to our neighbors, and inferiors, in the latter. In reference
to the first, these cases seem to be of most use.

Our Savior having made full saiisfaction, and quitted us from Gods wrath, the
curse of the Law, and the interest of Satan, what need any works, or duties to
be performed on our parts, or paying that debt again by observing the
Commandments, which our Savior has so confessedly discharged; Is not the
conscience hence lest at liberty to do what she lists, and the opinions of
modern Antinomians (as they are called) justified, who urge that the
commandments are by the Gospel cancelled?

D.
The law delivered by Moses was ceremonial, judicial, and moral. The first
proposed types, and shadows, which vanished at the coming of our Savior,
which was the substance. The second sort had relation to the Jewish
commonwealth, with which it did expire, and had its period. So that the moral
Law in the ten commandments come only in this point in question, that is in
plain terms, seeing we, being justified by faith only, in believing and
depending upon that which Christ has done for us, may do as we list; for
keeping or not keeing the commandments can do us neither good nor harm. The
settling of the conscience herein is, (1.) the distinguishing betwixt
justification, and Sanctification, then (2.) by considering what that faith is
that justifies, (3.) by weighing the means whereby we shall come to that
happiness and eternal salvation, which faith has set us free to obtain.
Faith indeed only on our part justifies us before Gods tribunal, by pleading
that our Savior has paid that debt for us, which we could not do: and
therefore should not in justice be exacted again. And this is that, which S.
Paul so much urges, in the Epistle to the Romans, and elsewhere. But as to the
second point, S. James will purposely tell that this justifying faith must not
be merely speculative, but operative, expressed in good works, as the Apostle
enjoyneth us, which has charity annexed to it, that without it, it is dead and
hypocritical, rather damning then saving. Whereupon our Savior calls upon
us, if you love me (for that I have freed you) keep my commandments, and in a
more strict manner then was urged, and practiced by the Scribes and Pharisees.
And S. Paul's precept is peremptory (to show the Hebrews he writ to the faith
included, not excluded good works) follow peace, and holiness, without which
no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 22.14. All then of any judgment grant that
Faith and Works must be necessarily joined; but whether Works come in as
necessary fruits of faith, or copartners with it in justification, this breeds
the quarrel: And some have gone so far, as to make Faith nothing else but
obedience to the Commandments. But no conscience should dare to appear with
works to justify it before Gods Tribunal, but only those of our Savior which
the Prince of this world could not except against. As our faith therefore in
Christ justifies us, so our works must justify, or make good our faith. We
are delivered from the hands of our enemies (says old Zachary) to serve God
without fear, but how? in serving him in holiness, as to God-wards, and
righteousness, toward our neighbor, before him all the days of our lives.
Luke 1.74, 75.

C. II.
The second Commandment forbids not only all kind or idolatrous worship, but
the precise making of any sort of images, pictures, statues, graven, molten, of
Stone, Brass, or other metal, pillars erected or the like, with what
conscience then may images be permited to remain in Churches, where a full
reformation of idolatry is pretended?

D.
The Commandment forbids not the making, or having of images in any places
absolutely, but only for a religious use; falling down to, at or before them
by way of adoration, as they represent the true object of our worship. For as
the first Commandment holds us to the true worshipping of the living God,
that only knows the heart, and can discern between right meaning and
hypocrisy: so the second prescribes the due manner he would be worshipped in,
not by images, or imaginations, or Chimeras, the calves of man, or poetical
inventions, but in the beauty of holiness, in spirit and in truth, as he has
appointed. Images then not of God, who is infinite, and must not be confined to
the idea of a peevish painter, may be tolerated, or made (1.) for historical
use, representative, or memorial, as the structure of the arc, temple, and
holy utensills belonging to it, and the boundaries of places, and Countries by
mapps, which our best bibles have. (2.) They may serve for ornament, as the
cherubims, and palme-trees prescribed by God himself in Sacred addresses. (3.)
By way of emblemes, expressing sage parables, and passages as make for
instruction in faith, and manners. As the parable of the rich glutton, and
Lazarus, the Prodigal, or the like. But upon these pretenses to be taken in by
a new title of relative worship, and so to be crouched unto, kissed, and
clothed, also to be perfumed and prayed at, this is that which is ever to be
protested against, and detested. Our memorialls, directions, and praescriptions
for Gods worship are set before us, (1.) in his works, (2.) in his word, (3.)
in his Sacraments. Psalm. 19.
The heavens declare the glory of God. The word of the Lord gives wisdom unto
the simple. Images are teachers of lies, in this behalf. And for remembering
the gracious work of our redemption, the direction runs not, get thee a
material crucifix, or an artificial picture of it, to stir up thy devotion:
but take Bread and Wine, break it, and drink it, according to thy Saviors
solemn institution. Do this in remembrance of me. People amongst us are now so
weaned from these babies, that they are left in diverse Churches, without
looking after: But if they chance to prove scandalous, the removal of them, as
of the brazen serpent, in a lawful way, has been always thought, and taught
amongst us to be necessary and laudable.

To the third Commandment may be referred, C. III.
the taking of Gods name in vain (1.) by irreverent using of it in common
talk, or merriment, (2.) In not professing, and confessing of our Faith upon
just occasion, (3.) using asseverations, obtestations, or protestations to
deceive, (4.) in imprecations, (5.) blasphemies, (6.) gallanting it in Oaths,
and Perjury, (7.) with the least, or no consideration at all of the Penalty
that lies upon it, The Lord will not hold him guiltless, that takeeth his name
in vain: In all which, these cases should especially be looked after. Whether
(1.) ignorance, (2.) passion, (3.) aequivocation, (4.) fraud, (5.) force, (6.)
a good intention, (7.) the avoidance of utter ruin may excuse from Perjury?

D.
For directing the Conscience herein, it must be first taken for a ground: That
an Oath is a Religious, Heb. 6.16.
and necessary confirmation (because not otherwise to be used, but in cases of
necessity) of things doubtful, by calling on God, to be a witness of our true
meaning, to end differences, and a revenger of falsehood, if we swear falsely;
wherein the failing is Perjury, not to pardoned but by God himself, who in the
highest degree is dismoured by it. Secondly, such an Oath (to pass by other
distinctions) is either assertory, or promissory. The assertory is that which
usually is ministered to, and taken by witnesses for the affirming, or denying
of a thing past; wherein the Perjury is apparent, and inexcusable, if the truth
prove otherwise, then the Oath has asserted it to be. The promissory is an
engagement for performance, or forbearance somewhat to come, taking God to
witness, that that is truly meant, which is sworn. This (as much less in the
assertory Oath for things past) ignorance cannot excuse, for why will thou
swear that which thou art incertaine of? Neither should passion, as fury,
fear, love, hatred, or the like. For these overbearing Religion, rather
aggravate then extenuate the fault, which the yiedling unto, where it should
not, makes voluntary. And herein equivocation is such a deluding of God, and
Man, that it makes it to be of a deeper tincture, and less tolerable, then
more open fraud, whereby though we cozen Men, God will not be mocked. A good
intention, and the avoidance of utter ruin, may put one forsworn into a
capacity of pity, in regard of humane frailty, but not of pardon for Perjury,
when the gain of the whole world may not countervaile the loss of a Soul.

C. IV.
Whether an oath taken by a party that is in a capacity to swear, wherein God
is called on to be a witness, in express, or inclusive terms, may be
dispensed with by any created power, or authority, from the disburdening of a
tender conscience?

A single answer cannot satisfy a question, consisting of many distinct
particulars, yet this may pass for a rule in some sort general, That every
oath, upon what motive soever taken, binds the taker to the possible
performance of it, if the thing be good: or to a serious repentance, for
perjured rashness, if it be found otherwise. In particular, (1.) an oath is to
be distinguished from a simple asseveration, promise, vow, protestation, or
engagement; wherein God is not called to arbitrate, but Man stands upon his
own reputation, and sincere dealing, or true meaning: and therefore the breach
of these is accounted rather dishonesty, then rude perjury. Where, (2.) notice
is to be taken, that the party swearing, be not incapable, by reason of
infancy, madness, or distemper, to take an Oath: for the actions of such come
not under the censure of the Court of Conscience. (3.) such usual forms of
speech as these, God is my judge, God knows I meant no harm, before God I had
no such thought, or the like, must be reckoned as Oaths; whereas by my Faith
or Troth, or of my Soul, or Honesty, or Salvation, or the like, be but serious
asseverations: of respecting which religiously, a Conscience must be made.
Whence that Amen, Amen, verily, verily, must not be accounted an Oath of him,
that gave in charge, in common conversation, not to swear at all. (4.) Besides
here, the swearing by Creatures is no way approved by a Papist, and discovers
the heedlesse vanity of a Protestant, worthy to be punished, though not for
Perjury, yet for peevish profanesse. As by the Heavens, by our Lady, by the
Mass, or by my George, which bind (yet make guilty the swearer) in relation
the Creatures have to the Creator, (5.) In regard whereof, neither Pope,
Prince, or Potentate, has any power to dispense: for such cases are reserved
only to God, whose interest Man must not presume to entrench upon, except he
will deal (as the Devil did with our Savior) and take upon him to give all
Kingdoms, who had interest only in Hells Dungeon. (6.) When therefore a
contract by Oath, is between Superior, and Inferior Prince, and Subject, or
Equal, bargaining one with another; or promises are made on conditions, or by
parties not in their own disposition; if the Superior dye, or cease to be
such, or the parties concerned give up their interest, or condition at first,
possible, but after the contract prove unpossible, or of scandalous, or
damnable consequence, or the act of the party, under government, be disallowed
by his lawful Guardian, the Oath may be truly said to be void, and the
Conscience disburdened of it, not by man's dispensation, or relaxation, but by
Gods disposition, who has appointed oaths as a part of his worship to end
controversies, not to entangle consciences. (7.) Lastly, an oath taken to
perform that is wicked, as that of the Jewish Zealots to kill S. Paul, or to
abandone that which is good, As a man to swear he will never serve his Prince,
come near his wife, help his children, or friends, (which by all ties of
religion, and morality he is bound to do) the band lies still upon his
conscience to expiate his damnable rashness in taking such an oath, with all
conscionable repentance, not to execute that which he has sworn: lest by
thinking to decline perjury, he incur a more damnable abomination. Herod had
better have broken his oath, then so barbaroussly have murdered John Baptist.
And David blessed the advice of Abigail, that was a means to put him off from
that he had vowed to God, to perform. And Saul was content with the peoples
mutiny in a manner, that plucked Prince Jonathan away, from undergoing the
doom of fury under Zeales vizard.

C. V.
Touching the fourth Commandment, with what conscience can any say, Lord have
mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law, when it is confessed,
that the day is changed, and the praecise observation of the letter would
necessarily cast us back upon the observation of the Jewish Sabbath, turning
our Sundays into Saturdayes, there being neither praecept, nor promise to
direct us otherwise?

D.
In the Sabbath two things are considerable, (1.) the day, and (2.) rest. The
day, by the analogy manifested in the commandment, is to be one in seven,
according to the pattern given by God. The rest is opposed to such worldly
labor, as might any way hinder it; but not as though it were set aside to all
employment, or might be spent in sleep, or idleness, or (that which we call
pastimes: but employed, it must be, in works of sanctity, not to be diverted,
or retarded by our selves, or any that belong unto us, in businesses of our
ord^nary vocation. This rest must ever be taken for moral, for all men's
consciences will give them, that public worship is as due to God, and should
be performed with more solemnity then private. This cannot be done without time
and place so set, that the assembling may be certain. But the duty still
remaining, the day was alterable: especially by him, who professes himself,
Lord of the Sabbath, Mat. 12.8.
Matthew. 12.8. and therefore might well substitute the, Lords day instead
thereof. This day the acts of the Apostles confirmed, by the keeping of it; and
their successors have continued it, as of divine ordinance, in all Churches;
which so must stand, Heb. 4.10.
till it bring us to the perpetual Sabbath of the Church triumphant. When we
say therefore at the recital of this commandment, Lord incline our hearts to
keep this law, our meaning is, the morality of this law, which is, an
enlivening, as it were to all the rest, not as the day was set the Jews; to be
the seventh from the creation, but as it was altered by our Savior, and his
Apostles practice, in regard of his glorious resurrection, from that resting in
the grave, to which the Jewish Sabbath had reference. So that typical Saturday
might well give place to that Sunday. For which change, those that call for a
precept, must learn, that patterns may be as warrantable in matters of order,
as precepts in the Articles of the Creed, the acts of the Apostles being as
canonical as the four Evangelists.

In the same commandment, C. VI.
the text expressly giving in charge, six days shall thou labor, and do all
that thou have to do, what warrant may a pious conscience find, for keeping
any holidayes any time of the week, and sometimes with greater solemnity, then
the Lords day it self is celebrated?

D.
Those words are not to be taken as a command, but to be received in this sense.
I have allotted thee a vocation in whatsoever condition thou art, and allow
none to be idle, but to walk as I have called him. To perform which duty, for
thine own occasions six days are allotted thee: But the seventh I refer
wholly for mine own service, and command all thy secular business to be laid
aside, the more punctually to attend on it. Where we find that of the time left
to our dispose; if we, upon good grounds for extraordinary blessings appoint a
day, or more, for prayer, praise, and thanksgiving, we have the pattern of the
old Testament, and the practice of our Savior, who honored with his presence,
and preaching the feast of the dedication, Jo: 10.22 Macchab. 4.59.
ordained by the Machabees. And for that we are taught, and know, that right
dear in the sight of the Lord are the death of his Saints, as their lives have
been honorable. And the righteous God has so done, and does his marveilous
works, that they ought to be had in remembrance: What heavenly advantages may
be taken, for setting forth Gods praises in his Saints? And stir up men to
imitate such excellent guides, and to glorify the giver of all in the best
expression we may. Those consciences, little consider, that make no conscience
on their own heads to call men from their vocations, to their affected
assemblies, upon any day of the week, and yet murmr at the Church, for
celebrating the memory (I say) not of Saints, and Martyrs, but of our Saviors
Nativity, and ascension, as though it carried with it superstition.

C. VII.
The fifth Commandment is acknowledged by all, to give in charge the duties of
all inferiors to their lawful superiors, the due performance of which, is
backed with a promise of long life, and enjoyments of such possessions, as God
has bestowed on all in their several callings. But if such superiors
renouncing God, and all goodness, endeavor the oppression, and ruin of those
they should protect, are not inferiors in such cases bound in conscience to
resist, for their own preservation, and forceably to oppose them, if the case
require it?

S. Paul's decision is herein express for the negative, D.
Romans 13.1, 2. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, as being Gods
ordinance, and cannot be resisted without the penalty of Damnation. But what
and they prove so intolerable, that to yield to them, should be the undoing of
our selves and ours? Notwithstanding Saint Peter will afford no dispensation
for this giving honor, and submission: which must be performed, not only for
our own quietness, and conveniences, but for the Lords sake, and not to
Kings only that are supreme, 2. Pet. 2.13.
and have no superior judge to be accountable to but only God; but also to such
governors as they shall put in commission, whether gentle, or froward, must be
respected with due reverence in their places. For this is thankeworthy (says
the same Apostle) if a man, for conscience toward God, endure grief, suffering
wrongfully. He adds the example of our savior for confirmation. For hereunto
were ye called (says he) because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an
example that we should follow his steps. Which how sincerely they do, that
corrupt old texts with new glosses, judge where they should be judged: and put
that to the question, and carry it how they please, which never heretofore was
doubted of, their own conscience will tell them one day, when they shall be
called to repetitions.

SECT. II. Cases concerning the five Commandments of the Second Table.
THe precepts of the second Table have relation to our neighbors, and equals,
as those of the first had to our Superiors. Which neighbor must not be wronged
of us, (1.) in his life, by murder, (2.) in his wife, by adultery, (3.) in his
goods, by stealing from him, (4.) in his good name, by bearing false witness
against him, (5.) no not so much as in desire. But our utmost endeavor must be,
for preserving all these blessings in life, wife, goods, and good name unto
him: being contented on our part, with what God has blessed us with, in all
those particulars; not wishing to better our estates, by the diminishing of
another, nor grudging that our neighbor enjoyes more plenty, then our selves,
but holding, that which God has sent us, to be the fittest portion for us.

Concerning then this sixth Commandment of the ten, C. I.
and first (as we reckon) of the second Table, Thou shall do no murder, that
is, thou shall in no sort wrong thy Brother touching his life, but do the best
to preserve it, a scruple may be raised, Whether a man upon any pretense to
avoid any inconvenience, or to attain any bettering of his estate, may be his
own executioner, and make himself away?

He may not, D.
and that by virtue of this Commandment. For if our love to our Neighbor,
must be patterned by the love we bear our selves, according to that, Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self: Then if thy Neighbor may not be slain
by thee, neither any violence or injury offered unto him tending that way, much
less can thou in conscience kill thy self, or use any means on purpose to
shorten thy days, be the pretext never so specious, (2.) Instances out of
Scripture, (1.) of Sampson, (2.) Saul, 1 Match. 6.46.2.14.37.
(3) his armor-bearer, (4.) Eleazar Savaran's Desperate adventure upon an
Elephant, (5.) Razis, and (6.) Judas Iscariot, yield not the Least excuse for
so unnatural a fact. For though somewhat may be said for Sampson, that he
intended not his own death, but revenge on his enemies, as Eleazar did the
honor of his Country, and religion; yet Razis violence can hardly be excused,
Readiness and his armour-bearers must needs be condemned. Achitophels is set up,
for a pattern for all perfidious politicians to take example by, and Judas
left as a monument to the terror of all traitors, that buy and sell their
Masters. (3.) Those that through drinking, drabbing, or needless quarrelling,
hasten their own ends; as also through peevish vows, affected sorrow, or
wayward melancholy dammes, neglect their own preservation, by all decent
means offered, may do well to consult with their own consciences, whether
they come not within the compass of this command, thou shall not commit
murder, neither on thy self nor others. But of others more hereafter.

Next the preservation of Gods image, in being tender of man's life, the
upholding and keeping his temple from pollution is especially to be respected,
which is done in this seventh commandment, thou shall not commit adultery,
wherein not only all kind of uncleanness, and incitements thereunto tending,
and alluring are utterly forbidden: But modesty, shame facenesse, and
continency in thought, word, and deed, are established. In which this scruple
may first arise.

Whether marriages within degrees of consanguinity, or affinity prohibited,
Levit. 18. or of patties separated after lawful wedlock, while both remain
alive, or polygamie that multiplyeth the couple, that should make but one
flesh, in conscience may be condemned, as adulterous?

The safest tenent is that they may and ought. D.
For these prohibited degrees, in Leviticus are urged by God, as the dictates
of nature, extended as well to all gentiles, as Jews, by the text it self. For
all those abominations have the men of the land done which were before you,
Lev. 1 8 27 etc.
and the land is defiled. For which offenses they were spewed out, and that
soul shall be cut off from among his people, that is found in the like
transgressions. (2.) Then for the indissoluble bond of wedlock, but only by
death, our Savior and the Apostle are so punctual, that it should terrify any
one free to marry a party divorced, and not by death separated. Fornication
indeed may make a separation, but not justify the marrying of the party
innocent. Why may not upon repentance, and amendment of the party offending, a
Christian reconciliation be made? after which, if fornication precedent had
dissolved the band, a new marriage of the party so dissolved must be made,
before they may lawfully come again together, as man and wife. Beside this
opens a gap to wicked people, that are weary of their first engagement, by
wickedness to make a way for freeing themselves of it, to satisfy their
leudness, under a pretense of law. And (3.) for Polygamy, or taking more wives
then one at a time, the examples of the fathers of the old Testament cannot
satisfy the conscience of those, who live under the New, being taught by our
Savior, that from the beginning it was not so: but two only were appointed to
be one flesh. And therefore what was not taxed in good men, but borne with in
Gods not revealed designs, must not make a rule for posterity, who are tied to
follow Gods precepts, not all the best men's actions in cases of conscience:
according to the Apostles limited exhortation, 1 Cor. 11.1.
Be ye followers of me, as I am a follower of Christ.

Whether painting, C. III.
or patching of the face, crisping and curling of the hair, exposing the
nakedness of the neck or paps (which as attractives or incentives unto
lustful desires) especially by such women, that have husbands; and that in
public assemblies, in conscience may be used, or approved of?

In matters of indifferency, D.
custom, and shunning singularity may pick out some excuse. But those, who
shall consider the censure past upon the daughters of Sion in that behalf, by
the Prophet, Isai. 3. and the wholesome instruction left by the Apostle to
wives, 1 Pet. 3.3. (which others also may do well to follow) whose adorning,
let it not be that outward adorning of playting the hair, and in wearing of
gold, and putting on of apparel, but let it be the hidden man of the heart (in
that which is not corruptible) even the ornament of a meek, and quiet spirit,
which is in the sight of God of great price, will be very cautious how they
adventure in this particular; surely the Blessed Virgin would have been ashamed
to have admitted such garments, as now Superstition adornes her Statues with to
set her forth, for spiritual fornication. And S. James would have cried out, at
the sights in these times, Matt. 11.8.
Ye adulterers, and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world
is enmity with God? Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, is an
enemy of God. Jam. 4.4. Our Savior taxes not the soft raiment of those that
dwelt in Kings houses, whereby differences of places, and degrees are
accordingly distinguished; but thereupon to paint with Jezabell, and riot with
Dives, Jer. 3.3.
and leave poor Lazarus to the dogs provision, this is to put on a Whores
forehead, against all modesty and conscience.

Whether dancing of men and women together, C. IV.
frequenting stage plays, enterteyning lascivious songs, delighting in idle
Romancies of love-bookes, or the like, come not as much within the compass of
this commandment, as the looking upon a woman, and the lusting after her?
which our Savior pronounces to be adultery in the heart. Matt. 5.28.


There is a saying among Philosophers, D.
things commonly prove as they are taken. Dancing of men with women, why may it
not be as harmless as the sitting of them together at the Table, or in other
assemblies? And what prohibition have we against Stage Plays, that being
cautelously penned, and decently acted, they should not pass for commendable
recreation, for those that are fit spectators of them? So well contrived, and
well languaged Romances (as some term them) may be allowed to be read, by
those that know to make use of parabolicall, and emblematicall Proposalls. They
state not the question, that decry wine, because Drunkards abuse it. Old men's
stoicall sewernesse must not blame Saint Paul's confessed weakness, that when
he was a child, he spoke as a child, he understood as a child, and thought as a
child, 1 Cor: 13.11. But rather endeavor, by all religious inducements, to
draw those that are become men, to put away childishnes. Let young Chimham go
with the King (says old Barzillai) and turn Courtier to serve his Master. But
I that am a man of four score, and now past feasting, or hearing any more the
voice of Singing men, and singing women, let me go home, and be buried with my
ancestors, 2 Samuel: 19.35. And that wise King-preacher (as well gifted as any in
these days) has told all posterity, that as there is a time to weep, so there
is a time to laugh, and as there is a time to mourn, Eccles. 3.4.
so there is a time to dance.

The eight Commandment, thou shall not steal, brings us from the conflicts
of the flesh, confined in the former precept, to the dealings abroad in the
world, to try how conscience will be there esteemed of. Wherein the cases of
Sacrilege, abusing things consecrated to profane uses, (2.) cheating, or
cozening in all sorts of contracts, (3.) diverting, or depriving the true
owners of their right, being of special note, this one question will serve in
stead of many.

With what conscience Lay-Impropriators withhold Tithes, C. V.
or any other rights from the Church? or Merchants, and other tradesmen
overreach those they contract with by any kind of deceit? Or careless debtors
that take no course to pay their Creditors, or provide things honest, or
befitting themselves and families, and yet think to be freed from the breach,
and penalty, not from the burning in the hand only, but from the burning in the
heart for notorious thieves?

Those that are found guilty in these, D.
and the like crimes, have no other salve for a festering conscience, then that
Joshuah advised Achan unto, to take off the venom of his sacrilege. My son
give glory to God, make Confession what thou have done, that Satisfaction may
be made, before thou, and thine be utterly undone. Ios: 7.19. The accuser will
be found to reinforce the evidence, till Satisfaction be made. Will a man rob
his God? but ye say, wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes, and offerings.
(But what of that? We have law to back us, yet mark what follows) Ye are
cursed with a curse; for ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation, Mal. 3.8,
9. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, he is a consuming fire, and who will
justify where he condemns? Prove 11.1. Lev. 19.36 Deuteronomy. 25.15 Pro.
16.11.20.10.23. Romans 13.8.
Circumvention and fraud, or any kind of cheating by weights, or balances, or
shoprhetorick, he takes for no other then smooth theft; And will have his
servants to owe nothing to any man, but that they love one another. He that is
quitted by humane precesses, may be cast and hanged at the Bar of Conscience;
which will never cease to be clamorous here, nor gnaw as a worm hereafter; if
satisfaction be not made, not by poor put-offs, but real intendment, and
restitution.

Concerning the ninth Commandment, C. VI.
which forbids us to wrong our neighbors reputation by any means, under the
expresion of bearing false witness: Ephesians. 4.15
and enjoyneth us to speak the truth by all means in love, for the setting
forth of Gods glory, and the good of our selves and others. The Case may be,
whether the meaning of it be so rigidly to be taken, (1.) That the telling an
untruth by Abraham, and Isaac to save their Wives chastity: (2.) By Jacob to
beguile his brother of his blessing: (3.) Of the Egyptian Midwives to save
poor infants from drowning: (4) Of Rahab, and the good woman of Bahurim for
protecting of the faithful State-messengers: (5.) Of Chusai, for defeating the
treacherous designs of the son against the father: (6.) Of Jehu, for grubbing
up the Baalites root and branch: (7.) Of Ananias, and Sapphira, to keep
something about them, to trust to, howsoever things should fall out, may not
with a safe conscience be followed? The like may be held of pretenses making
show of one thing, and meaning another, as that of Jaell to Siserah, and the
seeming of our Savior, who made as if he would have gone further, to the
disciples, travailing to Emaus, yet by the event may be gathered, meant no such
matter?

Lies, D.
the chief thing forbidden under the name of false witness, are consented by
all to be either, (1.) pernicious, (2.) officious, (3.) flashes of wit to make
sport. The pernicious lie, that tends to the apparent wrong of any one, is
condemned by all: but an officious lie, framed on an occasion to do a deed of
mercy, or preventing of an imminent mischief, with that merriment of the third
sort of jesting lies for recreations to show wit, or make sport, are exempted
by diverse from the mark of sin, and so taken off from the jurisdiction of this
commandment. But the better grounded opinion is, that no lie of what kind
soever can be justified. For the text is plain, ye shall not steal, nor deal
falsely, Lev. 19.19.11
nor lie one to aanother. Put away lying, speak every man truth with his
neighbor, For we are members one of another: and members of the same body
should naturally concur, for the preservation of the whole, which consists in
mutual agreement. And when liars come to be censured, there will be allowance
out of doubt had, according to the proportion of wrong done, or intended,
without any distinction, or exemption. Liars are chained amongst the fearful
to stand up for Gods truth, Revel: 21. 8
amongst infidels, and abominable, amongst murderers, and whore-mongers,
sorcerers, and idolaters, which shall have their portion in the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Now, for answer to
the instances given, which seem to make some lies passeable. Howsoever,
Apologies in particular may be made to excuse them from being lies, this
general rule may serve, That where the Scripture sets down Historically, that
which has been done, without manifest approving of it: the deed with all the
circumstances is not a directory, or warrant for our manners, which are to be
guided by Gods precepts, not by Man's practice: for the best men's actions may
have some imperfection in the carriage, which Gods infinite wisdom turns to his
own glory, not proposes to us for imitation, where precept is to the
contrary. Our Savior told not the travelers to Emmaus, that he would go
farther; but they conceived by his posture, that he would, which he took on him
not to deceive them, but to quicken their desires, to retain that which he had
purposed to do for their good. Let this Case of Conscience lie therefore
against all sort of collusion, whether in sport, or earnest; for Gods truth is
not to be played with, but as the third Commandment beats down swearing to
Gods dishonor, so this ninth allows no lying, whereby truth and plain dealing
with any one may suffer injury.

The last commandment puts the ax to the root of the tree, and excepteth not
against external acts, with internal purposes, and assent: but the very
motions of corrupted nature, that bubble up against Gods law. So that original
sin is here as it were knocked on the head, lest the cockatrice, not crushed in
the egg, might prove a masterlesse serpent. The virtues here prescribed are a
hearty submission to Gods command, without the least regret within, and a
content with outward means, without grudging at others more happy condition.
Whence the case may arise, C. VII
whether we may (which is done too often) wish, with a good conscience, that
any thing should be withdrawn from our neighbor to his prejudice, and
conferred upon us, who rest not content with what God hathgiven us?

Such wishes, concupiscence, or desires, are the seeds of all mischiefs, and
have their operation in touching, tickling, and tarrying thoughts, from which
arise desire, assent, and action. For the two last of which, that is, assent
and action, the precedent commandments take sufficient order: but here the
involuntary motion, and pronenes to sin without consent is taken notice of and
censured; that man may be careful of his most retired plots, seeing the
searcher, and tryer of the heart and reins calls all to a reckoning. Philip: 4
^^
I have learned (says the Apostle) in what estate soever I am, therewithal to
he content. That which our Savior put off the tempting, entrapping Pharisees,
and Herodians with, Mat. 22.21
give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are
Gods, may serve by way of arbitration to direct our conscience in this behalf.
Let our affections thus resolve. I am fully content with that house, wife,
servants, or substance, or any other thing that God has blessed me with. I
heartily thank him for it, and beseech him that I may so improve it, that my
reckoning at the last account may receive a, Quietus est, or approbation. And
let my neighbor enjoy his on Gods name, whether it be more, or less then I
have, or he uses aright. To behave our selves otherwise were to question Gods
wisdom, and grudge at his distribution, who gives and takes away not
according to our appetites and fancy. Not our wishes, therefore, wild and
witless, but his will must: be, that a good conscience should always wait
upon: Which if it were done, it would prevent the manifold law-suites, and
quarrels, that breed so much vexation, and disasters among Christian
neighborhood; and set a good tune to that passage of the Psalmist, Turn again
then unto thy rest O my soul, for the Lord has rewarded thee! And why? thou
have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from
falling, that I may walk before the Lord in the land of the living, Psalm.
116.7.8.9.

Chap. V. Cases upon consideration of the Lords Prayer.
FRom the first word our ( as it lies in our language) and holds forth a
general, C. I.
without exception, some conscience may happily scruple, whether it be lawful to
pray for all sorts of people, without distinction, amongst whom some are
departed this life, and can receive no benefit by our prayers, others may have
sinned against the Holy ghost, and God's decree is past upon them, for whom we
are not to pray.

An evil man, D.
in an evil way, petitioning for an evil thing, may speed no better then
Bathsheba did for Adeniah, in her suit to Solomon, to give him Abishag to wife:
charity in our prayers is to be understood to extend no further, then Gods word
does limit it. To pray for the dead, who have their immutable doom, we have no
warrant. It is sufficient ground therefore for our conscience in this behalf,
that God would have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of his truth,
to make it a petition in our Litany, that it may please him to have mercy upon
all men, we beseech thee to hear us good Lord. Wherein we express our
charitable desires, leaving it to God to distinguish for whom our prayers shall
be effectual. A further direction may be that of our Savior to his Disciples;
Mat. ^0.11, 13.
if ye come into a house, salute it, and if the house be worthy, let your peace
come upon it, but if the house be not worthy, let your peace return to you. So
our devotion in prayer for all shall be acceptable to our father, who makes
his sun to rise on the evil, as on the good; and his rain to fall on the
unjust as on the just: though the saving benifit thereof shall redound only to
those, whom God has appointed it shall take with.

The second word in our Lords prayer is, C. II.
Father, which shows to what person in the blessed Trinity, we should direct
our prayers. This prayer then being not only a prayer to be used of all, but
also a pattern to all, what warrant then has a scrupulous conscience to
direct its prayers (not to Saints, or Angels, or any other creatures, for that
good Christians are easily satisfied in, but either) to the Son, or holy Ghost?
in as much as we are precisely to keep to the rule which our Savior has left
us, and not to frame other devotions, how religion soever they may seem to be,
according to the model of our own fancies.

This ground being laid in our Creed, D.
that the three Persons, howsoever distinguished, are but one, God: it will
necessarily follow thereupon, that whosoever prays to one, prays to all:
and all the persons howsoever distinguished in themselves, yet in relation to
the creatures may be called Father. And beside, for the directing of our
prayers to the Son, we have that of Saint Stephen, Lord Jesu receive my spirit,
Act. 7.59. And for that of the holy Ghost, who gave a commandment separate me
Barnabas and Saul to the work which I have called them, which must needs be
taken for the command of a person, that was God, It follows, after they had
fasted and prayed, 3.
to whom can we imagine that they have prayed, but to him who gave the command?
Matthew. 28.
This is confirmed by our baptizing equally in the name of the holy Ghost, as
of the Father, and Son: and by S. Paul's blessing, taking in equally the Holy
Ghost, with the Father, and the Son. Where he makes this as his ordinary
blessing, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 13.14
and the love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all.
Where the putting of Jesus Christ before the Father plainly shows, that (as
we have it in Athanasius Creed) in this mysterious, and sacred Trinity, none is
before, or after another, none is greater or less then other. That which is
done therefore to one, is done to all. For which that attribute, in the prayer
of the Apostles, may be taken for a further ground. The Text is, they prayed,
and said, Act. 1.
thou Lord which know the hearts of all men. To him that knows therefore
our hearts, and to no other, we may safely direct our prayer; and who will deny
that the Holy Ghost knows our hearts? which is said to guide, and lead into
all truth. That petition therefore in our Liturgy, with the like, O God the
Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father, and the Son, have mercy upon us
miserable sinners: and the Doxology so often repeated, glory be to the Father,
and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, cannot be excepted against, but only by
such wretches, which deny the Sacred Trinity. Notwithstanding as some prayers
are private, of, or by our selves: others public, with the congregation: As
private prayers are, usually, not necessarily, directed to either of the
Persons: So public are most orderly in the first place tendered to the Father,
through our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, that he will vouchsafe us his Holy
Spirit, to furnish us with all blessings, to accomplish all our warrantable
petitions. And according to this are all, or most of our Liturgicall petitions
framed, which in an uniformity show the order of the Persons in the Trinity,
and prevent distractions, which might arise amongst the weaker by reason of
variety.

From the first petition, C. III.
hallowed be thy name, may arise this doubt. That in as much as our Savior
approved of such as cast out devils in his name, yet followed him not, and
would not have them forbidden: and the Jews attribute, even at this day, a
virtue to the name Jehovah, that miracles may be done by it, in regard whereof,
in reverence they dare not to utter it: Why may not we think that the name of
God used by Magicians, and exorcists gathered by Cabala from the Scripture, may
work wonders in casting out divills, curing diseases, and foretelling events,
and thereupon with a safe conscience have recourse to wizards for aid in that
behalf?

The name of God, in the scripture, especially imports propriety, authority,
and ability. So that being baptized, in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, we are made Gods peculiar, to submit to his authority,
under the protection of his omnipotent ability. In this petition therefore it
is, as foolish, as superstitious, by the name of God to understand, from the
coupling of the letters, the sound resulting from it; or to imagine an hidden
virtue to be in the characters, or sound of words, to terrify spirits or work
other wonders. The hallowing of Gods name is the setting forth of Gods glory,
in all his attributes, to which all our petitions must be referred, that his
kingdom in his Church may be promoted here, to be perfected hereafter in
heaven: and his will be done in order, according as is prescribed in his word.
Which warrantable directions we have from that guide that will not deceive.
Saul will get cold comfort by consuting with the witch of Endor: 1 Samuel 28. 2
Kings. 1
or Ahaziah by sending to Beelzebub of Ekron. Our Savior reproves, rather the
aemulous jealousy of his disciples, then approves of the parties that made
use of his name, whom they would not follow. Concerning which we have his
censure, many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, Matt. 7.22
have we not prophesied in thy name? And in thy name cast out devils? And in
thy name done many wonderful works? I then will profess unto them I never
knew you, depart from me all ye that work iniquity. The seeking therefore to
such deluded by Satan, and deluding others, is a departure from God, wherein
he, that turns himself into an Angel of light, will be found at length to be
the Prince of darkness, worse then a light angel, and will help the body and
state no further, then to gain upon the soul to its eternal ruin.

Whereas, C. IV.
in the fourth petition, we beg for our selves, all things necessary for our
corporal sustenance, under the name of daily bread, that frugality may be
thought to be justly employed: which excludes any extraordinary preparations in
feastings, apparel, building, more then necessity requires; with what
conscience can we go beyond that we daily desire? Since such superfluities,
our Savior tells us, the nations of the world seek after, and the Apostles
rule is, Luke 12.20 1 Timothy 6.8.
having food and raiment, let us be therewith content.

Herein the circumstances of time, place, our abilities, D.
condition of estate, and life, with the end, why sometime the ordinary course
is exceeded, varieth the case. Genesis 18.6, 7.
Abraham for enterteyning the angels made better then ordinary provision: and
at the weaning of Isaac made a great feast. And what extraordinary diet there
was at the time of shearing their sheep, 1 Samuel 25. 2 Samuel 13.
the story of Nabal and Absalom sufficiently declare. To this purpose, that
chearing up of Nehemiah to the people that mourned at the hearing of the law,
which they had transgressed, is worth the noting. Go your way, eat the fat,
and drink the sweet, and send portions to them, for whom nothing is prepared:
for this day is holy unto the Lord. Nehem. 8.10. And the good father in the
Gospel thought his best provision not good enough, for the welcoming home his
paenitent prodigal: Luke 15.25
but Music, and Dancing must be had for the complement of the festivity, and
gladness. Expenses therefore in this case must be considered, either in an
ordinary course of provision, and so they are to be limited by a temperate
frugality, and discretion, according to the several estates of men or
condition: or upon just causes of augmentation, or sparing. For as there is
variety of bread, apparel, and calling; so the allowance must be measured
accordingly. Our Savior invited himself to Zachaeus house, Luke 19.
who strained himself out of doubt, to give his best entertainment, and it was
well taken: but Judas had a check for blaming Holy Mary's profuseness. Jo. 12.4.
How solicitous was the Blessed mother, Joh. 2.
that the marriage feast should not be discredited, for want of wine? And how
unexpectedly did our Savior supply it? Feasts then and triumphs may be often
celebrated, in due time, and place, by those whom it may concern, for
expressing our thankfulness to God, and praising his bounty: as fasts, and
humiliations are, on other occasions, to turn away his indignation from us, by
our hearty repentance. The kingdom of God consists not in eating, and
drinking. Let all be done to Gods glory, as he has prescribed. Daily bread,
here, is to be taken, for the portion fit for every ones condition. Then as in
the ordering of Mannah, he that had gathered much, had nothing over, and he
that had gathered little, had no lack.

If our trespasses, C. V.
or debts, are desired to be forgiven us by God, no otherwise then we are
content to forgive our debtors, or those that have trespassed against us: with
what conscience then can we sue for our debts, or prosecute those that any way
have wronged us, or Lawyers take fees for the promoting of such?

Offenses, D.
or debts may be such, as either entrench upon Gods glory, Church, or Word, in
which all true Christians have an interest, and we are not to forgive, or
remit; but tied to prosecute the offenders, that so they may be brought to a
just satisfaction, according to our power, or condition. Other differences, and
debts there may be, wherein our persons are only concerned, without the least
prejudice to any other: and these only are here required to be remitted, that
our suit may have no demur at the throne of grace. We find what a great sum was
remitted to the penitent debtor, upon his free acknowledgement, and promise of
his faithful endeavor to satisfy. But when he fell so foulely upon his
indebted brother, O! what a heavy doom the merciful Lord laid upon him. O!
Thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou desiredst me:
Should not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow servants, even as I
had pity en thee? Now debts, that are due unto us, may be not only required for
supplying of out own necessity, but support of our family, and retinue; who
thereby have also in them an interest; and when a wrong done to my Person,
stays not there, but does reflect upon my calling, and reputation, which I am
bound to maintain, and often breaks out further, to the dishonor of God
himself, or of his Church, or word, the encouragement of the wicked, and
scandal of the well-affected, remission in such cases may prove so
unseasonable, that if justice be not executed to the utmost, it may cause the
Sword thereof to turn back, and to prick him that endeavors to put it up.
Thus Saul was punished for sparing Agag, 1 Samuel 15.
and a lion killed that party that would not strike, 1 King. 20.36.
when a Prophet from the Lord Commanded him.

From the sixth petition, C. VI.
Lead us not into Temptation, seeing it is apparent, that Temptations are from
God, as they are from Satan: what Characters of difference may the conscience
find to discern the one from the other, that it may make the true use of both
to Gods glory, and his own contentment?

As, in the original, D.
there is a maine difference between (...), and (...): so in our tongue a
trial from a tentation has an evident distinction. It was no tempting of
Philip, when our Savior put him the question to try him; because he himself
knew what he would do. Gods tempting therefore of Abraham was but to try,
whether he preferred his Faith in him, before natural affection to his only
Son. But Satan's tempting of Adam was to his ruin. The scope, and end of the
Suggestion therefore is a sufficient differing of a trial from God, and a plot
from Satan. Saint James tells us, that when a man is tempted, he is not tempted
of God. For God (says he) cannot be tempted of evil, neither tempts he any
man. But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away, and enticed, Jam. 1.13,
14. Such temptations are most commonly (1.) to wantonness, (2.) to security,
(3.) to Vainglory, (4.) to contempt of Gods word, and Ministers, (5.) to
revenge, (6) to Covetousness, (7.) to despair. Sampson, Solomon,
Achitophelly, David's numbering of the people, he that built his barnes in the
parable without thinking on the Author of his plenty, Achans sacrilege without
minding Gods inhibition, Judas executing himself without consideration of the
mercy of his Master, are Sufficient instances from whom such Temptations
proceed. But Gods fiery trial has another issue of joy, 1 Pet. 4.12
and comfort, that we are made Partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his
Glory shall be revealed, we may be glad with exceeding joy. Our petition
therefore to God is, that in consideration of our own weakness, and the
forces, and sleights of our adversaries, that he will not expose as to be
tempted above that we are able: but, if it stand with his good pleasure to try
us, to make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it. As he did to Job,
1 Cor. 10.13
to his Disciples, to the Martyrs, who have left their victorious trophies for
us to imitate. But deliver us from evil. Some make this petition an explication
of the former; and the sense to be no other, but to be free from the dangers,
that Temptations may cast upon us. But the Ancient make it the seventh
petition; and others take it in this sense, that whereas formerly we beg
Protection from seducing allurments of the world, and the flesh, which can only
flatter us into mischeife: so here we sue for garding patronage, from the
violent assaults of the devil, which goes about night and day as a roaring
lion, seeking whom he may devour, and cannot be withstood, but only by the
lion of the tribe of Judah, who has a chain to bind him, and a kennell to
coope him up, that a legion of them have not power to hurt a hog, without
express leave. This interpretation the word favors, where it is in the
original, deliver us from that evil, or that evil one, by an excellency
termed the tempter. C. VII.
Whence a scruple may arise. What is to be thought of those that are commonly
held possessed by the devil, or haunted with evil Spirits, and by what means
we are bound in conscience to procure them releif, and comfort?

Especial care must be taken that there be no collusion in the business. D.
It is well known what Popish Priests have attempted in this kind, to
re-establish here amongst us their Superstition: as also the disciplinarians to
overthrow our Apostolical Church government. But if upon due search, and
observation, such possession, or obsession be found, no repairing must be
thought upon to conjurers, white, or curing witches, or purring any confidence
in crucifixes, holy water, consecrated hoasts, or charms, bus by most humble,
earnest, persevering addresses to God, joined with fasting; which is the method
prescribed by Christ, Matthew. 17.21. Taking this for our ground, Our Father,
which art in heaven, deliver us from this grand evil. The woman of Canaan,
Mat. 15.22.
herein is to be imitated. She applies her self directly to our Savior, was
not daunted with the uncomfortable interposition of the disciples, send her
away, for she cries after us, v. 23.
gave not over suit upon our Saviors first put off, I am not sent, but to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel, v. 24.
rests not upon a second more harsh denial, v. 26.
it is not meet to take the childrens bread, and give to dogs: but persevering
obteins with a high commendation, woman great is thy faith, v. 27.
be it unto thee even as thou will, v. 28.
and her daughter was made whole from that very hour. But here we are to
look, that fits of deep melancholy, of the mother, Epilepsies, etc. be not
mistaken, for possessions of the devil. Physicians likewise here should be
consulted with, whose endeavors, accompanied with the prayers of Divines, and
good people, will give ease at least and comfort, if not do the cure.

CHAP. VI. Cases upon the Sacraments.
SAcraments are Signs of Gods favors, and seals of his covenants made with
us for our salvation. These, in the new Testament of our Saviors immediate
institution to be such, are but two: the first of admission, or reception into
the Church, which is Baptism: the other of continuation, and nourishing in the
same, and that is the Lords Supper, both having plain institution from Christ,
distinct Signs Signifying, and Graces, and Benefits Signified, and conferred
by them.

And here (as presumptuous Fanatics have now bewitched poor Christians) it
may well be made a case of conscience in the first place, C. I.
whether the Sacrament may be administered without a Minister lawfully called,
and there be a nullity in the action that in this case is done by any other?

To this twofold proposal we must give distinct answers. D.
We know in the old Testament how hard it went with the 250 Intruders upon the
Priesthood, designed to the Levites, who perished in the contradiction of
Corah. Number. 16.24.
Saul lost his Kingdom without a calling, 1 Samuel 13.13.
and King Uzzah (otherwise a worthy Prince) carried the leprosy with him to his
grave, 2 Chronicles. 26.16
for daring to burn incense upon the Altar, to the which he had no lawful
call. Whereupon we have that of the Apostle in the Hebrews, Heb. 5.4.
No man takes this Honor upon him, but he that is called of God, as was
Aaron. Our Saviors command was only to his Disciples, that as they were to
Preach the Gospel, so were they to Baptize, in the name of the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost. And to his Disciples only it was left to celebrate his Supper, in
remembrance of him, which all Churches have followed in their Successors. To
the second scruple, if women, or other Lay People, in defect of a Minister,
should take upon them to Baptize, yet do it in a right way, before Men, the
Baptism may be taken for good, though they sinned that did it, because the
efficacy of the Sacrament depends upon Christ, that ordained it, not the
Minister that gives it, provided that afterward it come under the examination,
and approbation of the Church. Few of the Lays have adventured among us to
administer the Lords Supper. But in such exigencies where no Lawful Minister
is to be had, if upon hearty desire of a society of Christians, it should be
undertaken by a Laick, the fact cannot be excused of the party, that shall
proceed further then he has warrant, in regard that in such a case, the
religious desire of the well-affected company will be more acceptable, then the
thing done unlawfully. In civil matters will any Parliament, or Corporation in
Universities, or Towns, take his Suffrage for good, which intrudeth himself
to have an interest in that, to which he is not called? The case is herein
alike. When our Savior was called to be an arbitrator for division of an
inheritance, man (says he) who made me a judge? Luke 12.14
Declaring thereby that no action, especially concerning Gods worship, we must
presume to further, more then by Gods appointment in his Word, we have our
commission thereunto.

Whether the Infants of Believing Parents are to be baptized? C. II.
in regard it is objected they are destitute of Faith, which is the necessary
qualification of such who are to he admitted to the Sacrament of Baptism.

It has been the Custom of the Church in all ages (and not at all denied) no
not by Pelagius himself, D.
who denied original sin) till these latter days) to admit the children of
believing parents to the Sacrament of Baptism, and that as a Right due unto
them, by especial privilege of birth, within the bosom of Holy Church. Wherein
the Church may be said not only to have the example of Christ to lead her
thereunto, who commanded little children should be suffered to come unto him,
and laid his hands upon them, the Kingdom of Heaven consisting of such. Mat.
19.14, 15. But likewise was warranted by that inference of the Apostle, if the
root be Holy, the branches are also Holy. Romans 11.16. Which though it be
immediately spoken concerning the Jews, and their off spring, yet by a parity
of reason may be accomodated to Christians, and their Children. An
Ecclesiastical Sanctity being to be found in these, as well as the other,
whereby they have a present interest, and right to those means, by which the
ordinance of Christ is, his Church should be Sanctified. Neither may the
Christian Childs incapacity to believe, or understand the nature of the
Baptismall vow be any bar for his admission thereunto, more then the same
incapacity in the Jewish, was an obstacle to his circumcision: who it is
presumeable, at eight days old could then understand no more of the Covenant,
of which Circumcision was the Sign, then the Christian infant now can of the
promise, and vow made by him in Baptism; and yet was he commanded to be
circumcised under pain of excision, Genesis 17.14. Add to this that infants, as
well as men, were admitted to enter into covenant with the Lord under the Law.
Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. And why by the same reason should they not enjoy that
privilege under the Gospel? and so Baptism the Sacrament thereof. The
Covenant of the one being as ample, and of as large extent as the other. For
which we have the express judgment of Saint Peter, Act. 2.38.39. We shall find
therefore the Baptism of infants continued all along in the Church in an
uninterrupted line. Which custom of theirs certainly was derived from the
Practice of the Apostles themselves, if we will give any credit to the authority
of Origin, St. Austin, Ecclesiae ab Apostolis traditionem accepi^, etiam
parvulis dare baptismum, in Romans c. 6.
and others of the Fathers: or have any regard or consideration that the
Apostles themselves did baptize whole houses; in which it is to be conceived
there were some children, Augustinus l. 1. de peccat. merit. c. 16. dicit,
traditionem bane a Domino per Apostolos manasse. (...).
as well as those of riper years. And with small force of argument may that of
Mat. 28.19. Go teach all nations Baptizing them etc. make this to signify
nothing, if it be remembered that the word in the original (in our translation
tendered to teach) is properly, and according to the genuine signification
thereof to make Disciples, or receive into Discipleship all nations, etc. of
which Baptism is the ceremony; It being the Sacrament of our initiation, or
admittance into the School of Christ: and of this infants are as capable, as
those more grown in years. To make a disciple not denoting that any one comes
such to the School of Christ, but what afterward he becomes by Christian
institution. Of which thing the Church has been very careful, providing for
them Sponsores, who are not only witnesses of the promise, and solemn vow made
by them in baptism* but Sureties for them also; and in case of the death, or
neglect of their parents, when they come to age, are bound to see them
Christianly educated, according to the tenor of the obligation entered into by
them.

Whether Baptism be necessary to salvation, C. III.
that all dying without it, even infants are damned? and what is to be thought
of those persons, through whose default, children are deprived thereof, and dye
not having received it?

That regeneration is necessary to Salvation, or Eternal life, does manifestly
appear, by what our Savior taught Nicodemus, Jo. 3.3. of which as the Spirit
is the necessary inward cause, so Baptism is a necessary outward mean
thereunto. v. 5. Hence God is said with water to sanctify, and cleanse his
Church. Ephesians.5.26. Saint Paul calls it the balne. or font of regeneration.
Tit. 3.5. And Saint Peter advises men to receive it, as an outward effectual
means, for the remission of sins, Act. 2.38. Upon this ground many of the
Fathers judge very severely concerning such, who have died unbaptized,
especially Infants; toward which, there is none more rigid, then Saint Austin:
who is therefore styled, durus pater infantum. Yet the Church herein has
showed her self a more indulgent mother, and has mingled her Judgment with
Mercy, having constantly held, that as the wilful neglect, or contempt
thereof, is a sin of a very high nature, and damnable, as may appear from the
punishment to be inflicted upon the uncircumcised, Genesis 17.14. That soul shall
be cut off from among his people, so the privation thereof, where there is an
impossibility of having it, has been supplied to such believers, as have been
of judgment by their vehement desire of it, and to Infants by the secret
desire of others. God having not tied his grace absolutely to baptism. Beside,
such is his lenity, that unto things altogether impossible, he binds none,
and if we cannot perform what is commanded us, accepts the will for the
deed: or where that is wanting, by reason of their age, does otherwise dispense
with his ordinance, by the secret ways of his own incomprehensible mercy. But
notwithstanding this absolveth not any from guiltiness of blood, whose
scrupulous curiosity should cause an ordinance of so high a concernment as
this, to be withheld, wherein our merciless strictness (says a learned
Author) may be our own harm, not theirs toward whom we show it, and we for the
hardness of our hearts may perish, albeit they through Gods unspeakable mercy
may live. An eminent example to this purpose, we have in Moses: whose neglect
to circumcise his Son, drew a judgment upon himself: as the like neglect in
us to baptize our Infants, may kindle Gods wrath against us, and that
deservedly, if we consider the multitude of souls, that by this means may be
hazarded, should we suffer them to run on, till they come to ripeness of
understanding; that so they may be converted, and then baptized, as Infidels
heretofore have been, a cunning artifice of Satan to destroy Christianity, by
making it a sin to engage any early to the service of Christ. Wherein the
Prince of this world has managed his business with as much subtilty, as when
he set Julian on work to plunder the Church of their revenue: both equally
tending to the destruction of Christian Religion, the one cutting off the
branches, as the other did hew up the root.

Whether the sign of the Cross, C. IV.
according to the order in our Liturgy, may be lawfully used in the
administration of Baptism?

Not only to the Jew is the Cross of Christ an offense, D.
but we have those, who though nothing can seem more odions unto them, then to
be said to put Christ to death, yet crucify his members, in revilings, and
disgraces: and amongst other reasons they pretend, this is not the least,
because they are for the Cross in Baptism, and defend the Liturgy in the
lawful use thereof. But to pass by these Sons of thunder. Those that are more
moderate will rest themselves satisfied with the reason given by our
Church-book, why that ceremony is used, as also for the lawfulness thereof: if
they will allow the Church what St. Paul gives to her, a power to enact laws
concerning decency and order: and then consider too, that it has been a
laudable rite, and very ancient in the Church of Christ, taken up in defiance
of the Pagans, to tell them wherein the glory of Christians did consist, even
in the Cross of Christ, which by them was accounted the shame and disgrace of
their profession. And though it may be objected now, that the cause being taken
away, 'twill be useless if not superstitious to keep it on foot still; yet may
such remember, 1. that all things, whose use does cease, are not presently to
be taken away, and destroyed: witness the brazen Serpent, which was reserved
till the days of Ezechia, as a monument of Gods mercy; to which purpose also
the pot of Mannah, and the rod of Aa^on were preserved. 2. Though we have not
Pagans to deal with, yet it is to be feared there are too many, amongst those
who take upon them the profession of Christianity, who though they will not
endure to be called enemies, yet are despisers of the Cross of Christ. 3. That
it does serve us as a memorial, to put us in mind of our duty and profession.
Neither can it weigh with any rational man, what is buzzed in the ears of men
to amuse them, that it is an Idol, and has been abused to Idolatry, in which
charge the Popish Cross is concerned, not ours. 'Twill be no good reason,
because the Papists have abused the Cross to Superstition, therefore we should
be denied the lawful use thereof. Beside the Sun, and the Moon were worshipped
by the Heathen, Paul and Barnabas, deified by the men of Lystra, the bread in
the Sacrament adored by Papists, yet I hope upon this bottom, none will be so
indiscreet, as to adjudge them to eternal destruction. Neither can they be led
thereunto from that instance (so much used) of the Brazen Serpent, whence it
may only be inferred, that the same individual thing idolized, is to be
destroyed, but not their whole kind. We may not burn all trees, because one
tree, or grove has been abused to Idolatry.

What is to be done, C. V.
that one may worthily receive the Lords Supper?

Observe that rule of the Apostle, D.
1 Cor. 11.28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
bread, and drink of that cup. To do which rightly, it is requisite he make a
twofold inquiry into himself, 1. concerning his Faith, 2. his manners. 1. For
his Faith, that he has a competent, and right understanding of the principles
in Religion, particularly concerning the doctrine of the Sacraments, so as to
be able to render some account thereof, as also to discern the Lords body;
which last, upon no terms, he can be said to do, who makes his approach to
this Holy Table, with no other devotion, then if he came to sit down at a
common repast, the vice not only taxed, but punished in the Corinthians. 1
Cor. 11.
To satisfy his Conscience therefore in this particular, let him remember, 1
Cor. 11.29.
1. it is the Lords body, he is invited to a most high, and mysterious mystery;
yet such is the love of Christ to him, that he is permitted, not only to look
thereinto, but to partake thereof. 2. He profane it not as the Corinthians did
with their own Feasts, so with irreverence, and indevotion. 3. 1 Cor. 11.31.
He judge himself most unworthy of so high an entertainment, and favor a
sinner the chiefest of sinners. Now II. for his manners, he is to make inquiry
whether he has lived, according to the rules and doctrine of the Faith he
professes, to which there is required, though not exact, yet sincere
obedience. If in either of these he prove, and not approve of himself, he ought
to abstain from those holy mysteries, till such time he has either informed
his knowledge, or reformed his manners, at least in a resolution, and serious
purpose of Holy living. For as to be qualified to receive this Sacrament
worthily, knowledge is necessary to instruct the head, so likewise is
repentance to purify the heart, both which must be rightly prepared for this
work. Neither the ignorant, nor the unholy person being fit guests to sup with
Christ. But yet there is one more beside our selves, concerned in this work,
which is our neighbor, toward whom we must he affected with Charity, which is
the Simbol, or badge of a Disciple of Christ, and is the cement to join, and
knit the Communicants together: whence the Sacrament may in a most sweet, and
genuine sense be termed a Communion, without it being rather a disunion, then
so to be called. Indeed this is the salt of the Sacrifice, without the which
nothing is to be offered, as well under the Gospel, as the Law.

Whether any one who has a suit at Law with his neighbor, C. VI.
or is at private difference with him, may with a safe conscience come to the
L: Table?

As to private differences, D.
the case is quickly resolved. It being manifest that this Holy Feast was
instituted by our Savior, not only to show forth his death, but also to be a
Sign, and Symbol of Love, with which they ought to embrace each other, that
do partake thereof: 1 Cor. 10.17. And as a commentary to this Text you have
the Practice of the Christians in the primitive Church, who before they
received the Eucharist, did greet one another with an Holy Kiss, to signify
not only their Communion in faith, but union in heart likewise; and therefore
immediately after it was celebrated began their agapae, or love Feasts. None
therefore are to adventure to offer Their gift on this Altar, Mat. 5.23.24.
whose hearts are enflamed with anger, or revenge Against their Brother: but
there must be an atonement made with him first, that so God may be atoned, and
the Sacrifice acceptable. For in vain do they beg a boon from the
all-merciful Lord, whose merciless hearts are hardened against their
fellow servants. Wherefore all, who expect welcome, here, must lay aside their
anger, and come in peace, and love. But though God is pleased thus to pluck the
Sword of revenge out of the hand of each private person, yet does he establish
it in the Magistrate. For (says Saint Paul) he bears not the Sword in vain,
for he is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does
evil. Romans 13.4. Contrary to the calumnation of Julian the Apostate; who upon
this pretext, that Christian religion did forbid revenge, did therefore impugn
it, as destructive to all government: When it is manifest Christ's Doctrine
abolished not, but did vindicate it rather, not permitting every private person
to usurp the Supreme authority, or sit in the regal throne. To decide the
first branch of the case therefore, we are to observe and take notice of three
things. 1. That judicial Proceedings at law are not forbidden in the new
Testament, but the contrary warranted, as may most evidently appear, not only
from express texts of Scripture, Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2. But likewise from the
examples of Christ, and Saint Paul. Our Blessed Savior not refusing to answer
at the tribunal of Pilat, and Paul himself appealing to Caesar. Whence it will
follow, that a suit at law with ones neighbor, is no sufficient plea for a man
to abst^in from the Communion. Yet 2. there ought to be labor, and
circumspection that we our selves add not fuel to inflame this public
controversy, or deny such just means to quench it, which are proposed to bring
things to an accord, whereby amity may be established: or contend concerning
trifles, and things of no value. They who are conscious to themselves, that
they are peccant in any of these particulars, are not clad with the Wedding
Garment of love, and so cannot hope for any kind reception at the hands of
Christ in this great banquet. To which purpose it is desired of them, they
should take a view of these places in Scripture, Romans 12.18. If it be possible,
as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men, To. 14.19. Let us
therefore follow after the things which make for peace, and things wherewith
one may edify another. 1 Cor. 6.7. Now therefore there it utterly a fault
among you; because ye go to law one with another. Why do ye not rather take
wrong? Why do ye not rather suffer your selves to be defrauded? 3. We are to
take care, we do not seek for justice at the hand of the Magistrate; that so
under that pretext, we may cloak, and exercise our malice the more freely,
against our neighbor. This is but to clothe private revenge in a public
dress, and to make it so much the more odius to God, as it is gilded over with
hypocrisy. Therefore remember it is the voice off God that speaks unto thee,
Lev. 19.18. Thou shall not avenge, nor bear any grudg against the children of
thy people, but thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. I am the Lord. And
that the same spirit, who denies thee not a lawful prosecution of thy right,
yet is so far from tolerating revenge in thee that he commands thee to feed
thine enemy when hungry, and if thirsty to give him drink. Romans 12.20.

Whether kneeling, C. VII.
at the receiving of the Sacrament, be not a most pious, and decent gesture?

Were there nothing to commend this ceremony, in this high service of religion,
but the humility of the gesture, certainly it must needs be kindly enterteyned
by that soul, where piety and devotion dwell, considering that the most High
ha^h not only a respect to the humble heart, but is likewise well-pleased with
such external behavior, as serves best to testify the same; but when to
this, it is added, that it is the most significant sign of that reverence
which the creature ought to exhibit to God in supplication, and that, as the
Sacrament is particularly delivered to every man therewith, so each man is
bound to particularize, and apply to himself the Sacramental benefit by devout
invocation of Gods name, who then can be offended with our Liturgy, for
enjoining the decent use of it? Or question his piety, who in obedience
thereunto shall observe it? I know it has been, and is the fancy of some, that
sitting is a gesture better agreeing with the nature of a Supper; but such
ought to remember that it is no ordinary meal, but a heavenly banquet to which
we are invited, in which Christ with all his benefits is exhibited to us, and
therefore such an humble posture of body would best become us, as did serve
best to express reverence, and devotion at so high, and holy a mystery.
Neither will it be any prejudice thereunto, to quarrel at this gesture,
because Christ did not use it when he administered the Sacrament to his
Apostles, as neither did he sitting, but lying on a bed, according to the
custom of those Eastern nations. In these circumstances not prescribing their
manner, but leaving the determination of them to the prudence and judgment of
those, who are to see them done decently, and in order.

The Table.
A.
ABsolution of the Minister, more then petitory. Page 58 Agapae used at the
Communion, and the reason, Page 163 Apocrypha, why read in the Church Page 37
B.
Baptism, whether necessary to Salvation, 150. the peril of those, through
whose default Infants are deprived thereof. Page 151
C.
Charity to our neighbor required in a Communicant. Page 159 Christian
Religion, whether a politic invention only. Page 12 Why to be preferred before
other Religions. Page 13 Whether to be enforced. 17 not destructive to
Magistracy. Page 167 Christ, whether to be called the Son of the Father, or
Holy Ghost, 46. whether he descended into Hell. Page 49 Conscience what it is.
1. The rules for it to walk by. 6. The praejudice, by neglect of them. Page 7
Content in what estate, or condition soever enjoined in the last Commandment.
Page 113 Covenant old and new, the difference betwixt them. Page 31
Commandments. Cases concerning them. 63. How divided. 64. Whether to be
observed by Christians. Page 68 Creed, Cases concerning it. 41. Whether
composed by the Apostles. 44. Peril of rejecting it. 42. Whether a perfect
summary of Faith. Page 59. Other points how to be reduced to it. page 60
Cross, whether it may be lawfully used in Baptism. page 154. Objections to
the contrary answered. page 156
D.
Dancing of men with women, whether lawful. page 101 Debts their kinds, 130.
Whether to be sued for. ibid. Debtors that are careless, their danger. page 104
E.
Examination required before receiving the Lords Supper. 159. The manner in
which we are to proceed. ibid.
F.
Faith, the nature of it that justifies. page 66
G.
God, whence inferred. page 12
H.
Hallowing Gods name, what it is. page 124 Holy days, whether to be observed
page 86 Holy Ghost, what warrant we have to direct our prayers to him. page 118
Holy kiss, when used, and the reason. page 163
I.
Images whether to be permitted to remain in Churches, their use, their abuse.
page 70 Infants of believing parents, whether to be baptized. page 144
Irreverence in receiving the Mysteries, the danger of it. page 159
K
Kneeling at the receiving of the Sacrament, whether a pious and decent
gesture. page 168
L.
Lay-Impropriators, whether with Conscience they withhold the right from the
Church. page 104 Letter, whether to be laid aside, that the spirit may act the
more freely. page 31 Lying, whether upon any pretext lawful. page 106 Lords
Prayer, cases concerning it. page 116
M.
Marriages within degrees of consanguinity, or affinity, or after separation
for fornication, whether lawful. page 95 Murder of a man's self, whether
justifiable. page 92 Merchants, whether they may overreach. page 104
N.
Name of God, what it imports. page 123
O.
Oath what it is, whether to be dispensed with, the difference of it from an
asseveration. page 73 Ordinaries, whether to be exceeded. page 126
P.
Painting, patching, etc. whether to be approved. page 98 Perjury, whether to
be excused upon any pretext. page 73 Petition the sixth, the extent thereof.
page 137 Polygamy whether lawful. page 96 Possessed, the course to be taken
with them. page 137 Prayer, whether to be made for all without exception. page
118 Protestants, whether by departing from Popery, they set up a new Religion.
16. Whether with a safe conscience they may be present at the Mass. page 20
Punishments proportioned according to demerits. page 15.
R.
Religion, Cases concerning it, 12. Not to be planted by the Sword, but by the
Word. page 17 Roman Church, whether the Catholic. page 52
S.
Sacraments, their nature. 140. Whether administered without a lawful Minister,
there be a nullity in the action. page 141 Salvation whether to be had without
Christ. page 15 Scripture, cases concerning it. 25. How to be assured it is the
Word of God. ibid. Whether appointed to be a rule. 27. The method observed in
it. ibid. Why some parts of it not appointed to be read. page 36 Whether to be
used in charms, etc. page 33 Son, what warrant to direct our prayers to him.
page 119 Sin against the Holy Ghost, what it is, ibid. Whether all are
forgiven. page 54 Sunday, whether to be observed by the fourth Commandment.
page 82 Subjects, whether they may resist the supreme Magistrate. page 87.
Stage Plays, whether lawful. page 101 Supper of the Lord, how one may
worthily receive it. 139. Whether one at Law with his neighbor, or private
difference with him, may come with a safe Conscience thither. page 162
T.
Tentations from God and Satan, how to be distinguished, page 133 Tradesmen,
whether they may overreach by false weights, or other deceit, page 164
V.
Vows Monastical, whether lawful. page 23
W.
Word read, whether of power to beget Faith. page 33 World testifies there is
a God page 15 Wizards, whether to be consulted with. page 125
FINIS.

