The PROCEEDS of the PROTECTOR (so called) and his COUNCIL against Sir HENRY
VANE, Knight.

A late Eminent MEMBER of the COVNCILL of STATE of the Commonwealth of
ENGLAND: As touching his Imprisonment in the Isle of WIGHT.

Together with his Testimony delivered in writing to the said Protector, by way
of a peculiar address to himself, and faithful advice of an old Friend and
Acquaintance.

Faithfully Transcribed and Attested out of the Original Copy's,

And published by a real Well-wisher to SIONS Prosperity and ENGLANDS Liberty.

Prove. 29.1. He that being often Reproved, hardens his Neek, shall sudaenly
be destroyed, and that without remedy.

Gal. 2.18. For if I build again the things that I have destroyed, I make my
self a Transgressor.

Reader,
THou have here a true Narrative of the whole proceedings against Sir Henry
Vane Knight, and his Imprisonment in the Isle of Wight. Occasion being taken
(as thou will find) from his writing and publishing a discourse Entitled, An
Healing Question, etc. tending to the Composure and Uniting all honest men's
hearts and spirits, who from the first beginning of all the War all along have
been engaged in the Cause of true Freedom, against Oppression and Tyranny,
unto which he was invited by the Declaration for a solemn Fast, set forth by
those in power, the thirteenth day of March 1655. exciting the good people of
England and Wales to wait upon the Lord for light and conviction, professing in
the sight of God and man, a most willing mind readily to receive, when
convincingly offered by any.

This being in short the true state of the Case, and falling providentially
into my hands, out of duty to my Country, and respect to that worthy Patriot
(who at this day so eminently suffers for the Cause of God, and true Freedom,
and that from the hands of those he has deserved better measure) I have
exposed the whole to public view, that thereby thou may be informed of the
truth, and the Nation may know what is become of so considerable a Member, who
may deservedly be a Pattern for all true English men to immitate, in this
Apostatizing and backsliding Age.

The Copy of the Summons for Sir Henry Vane Knight his first appearance at
White Hall.
In pursuance of an Order of his Highness and the Council, you are to attend
the Council on Thursday the 12. of August next, at 11. of the Clock in the
fore-noon, Dated at White Hall this 29. July 1656.

Subscribed by Henry Lawrence President.

To Sir Henry Vane Knight.
A true Copy of Sir Henry Vane his Answer sent to this Sommons.
Sir,
LEast my silence might be mis-interpreted upon the last Paper, I have
received, subscribed (as I suppose) with your hand, appointing my attendance at
White Hall the 12. instant: I have held my self obliged to return you this
account, that my purpose is (God willing) to set forward from this place to my
House in the Strand, the beginning of the next week, which is as soon as I can
well expect to have a Coach to meet me half way, this very hot season for
travail, and my own being in no condition to perform so long a journey upon so
short a warning given to.

Belleaw the 4. of August 1656. Your humble Servant Hen. Vane.

To Henry Lawrence Esquire, President of the Council at White Hall.
Sir Henry Vane's Letter to Mr. Jessop Clerk to the Council at White Hall
presently after his coming to London.
Sir,
IT being declared by Parliament (as is very well known) that it is against the
Laws and Liberties of England, that any of the people thereof should be
commanded by the King (when there was one, to attend him at his pleasure) but
such as are bound thereunto by special service (which others therefore are
not) It will I hope be permitted me without offense, to claim the same
privilege and liberty in these times, and in the case of the Sommons sent me,
wherein I find no cause for my appearance expressed but mere will and pleasure:
Yet in vindication of the innocent, and peacable deportment I live in according
to the Laws; I have not refused to be upon the place at my House here in the
Strand ever since Thursday night last, as I made known unto you by this Bearer
the next Morning. And as ever since I have been, so I am still ready to appear
when I shall be sent for, until the pressingnesse of my occasions (in
reference to my Family concerns, which at this time by reason of my Fathers
Debts are very great, and heavy upon me) shall require my attendance upon them
in other places of the Nation. All which I held my self obliged to make known
unto you in the relation you stand in, especially not having heard from you
Yesterday, as I suppose I might. I am

Charring-Crosse House the 20. August 1656. Your Servant H. V.

For Mr. Jessop, Clerk to the Council at White Hall.
The first Order of the Council concerning Sir Hen. Vane here follows.
Thursday, the 21. of August 1656. At the Council at White Hall.
SIr Henry Vane having this day appeared before the Council, and they having
taken cosideration of a seditious book by him written and published, entitled
a Healing Question propounded and refolved etc. the same tending to the
disturbance of the present Government, and the peace of the Commonwealth,
Ordered that if Sr. Henry Vane shall not give good security in five thousand
pond bond by Thursday next to do nothing to the prejudice of the present
Government, and the peace of the Commonwealth, he shall stand committed, and
that Orders be drawn up accordingly.

W. Jessop Clerk of the Council.

Sir Henry Vane his Letter to Mr. Jessop upon the receipt of this Order of the
Council.
Sir,
IT is a great quiet to my mind, and satisfaction to my conscience in the
sight of God and man; to perceive at the first entrance into my sufferings,
that the Witness owned by me, under the title of a Healing Question (when I
was at White Hall 21. present) which asserts the Principles, Spirit, and
Justice of the Cause we have professed and fought for in our late Wars) is now
thought fit by those that are in power to have the name given to it of
seditious, especially considering that the Healing nature, and great tendency,
that clearly shines forth thorow-out that discourse (to the uniting the whole
party of honest men in the true publipue interest warranted by the Laws of the
Land, and in away of safety against common danger) does with its own evidence
wipe of the blemish of that reproach, with the same breath that it is caston.

Nay I can truly say, I am very well content to take this as a mark of honor
from those that sent it, and as the recompense of former services, as knowing a
better reward is laid up for me in his hands, thorough the wisdom of whose
providence, this may be the means prepared to keep me unspotted, and undefiled
from the evils of these backsliding times unto the day of Christ's appearance,
which shall be my joy, when my enemies shall be ashamed.

Nor can I but observe in this proceeding with me, how exactly those that have
made this Order do in this (as in many other things at this day) tread in the
steps of the late king whose design being (as is expressed in the Remonstrance
of the state of the Kingdom 15. December 1642.) to set the Government free
from all restraint of Laws concerning our persons and estates, and to render
the Monarchy absolute, did think he could have no better means to effect it,
than to cast into obloquie and disgrace, all those that desired to preserve the
Laws and Liberties of the Nation, and to mantain Religion in the power of it,
under the names of Puritans, factious and seditious persons, as well knowing
that the light of their pinciples and practices, were like to stand most in the
way of bringing to pass such an evil design.

And truly it is with no small grief, at this time to be lamented, that the
evil, and wreched principles of the misgovernment, which the King then aimed
to work out his design by, but could not effect, should now revive, and
spring up so evidently in the hands of men professing godliness (to the great
profaning, and reproach of Gods name) and arrived at maturity in practice,
which former times abhorred to think of, and the designers themselves with all
their policy and power could never reach.

This appearing but with too much evidence in my conscience, when the present
Governors held themselves obliged to call the people of these three Nations
unto a day of public humiliation, and to invite to the giving in of Light and
conviction, with a free and open profession of a ready subjection of mind
thereunto, was a chief motive that induced me to prepare my Wituess, as I did,
which being asked for from me by one of the Council, I delivered in writing
and it continued in their hands about a Months space, with out any prohibition
to Print, and then was put to the Press in the ordinary way of all other
books, and had the usual warrant for the coming forth, and nothing laid to
its Charge ever since, till (for what reason of State I know not) it is now
thought meet to be called seditious, and occasion is taken thereby to threaten
me with Bonds, unto which I say the will of the Lord be done; through whose
supporting grace I am made not careful in this matter, and therefore have been
willing (without any circumlocution or advantage I might have taken) to own
with all readiness that Witness for which the Lord has given me a heart most
freely to suffer whatsoever he shall call me unto, in the faithful discharge
of a good conscience therein. And this being said (as is needful in my own
vindication) my Answer to the Paper, that orders me to stand committed,
unless I will give security by Bond, etc. and so by my own voluntary Act, do
that which may blemish and render suspect my innocence, and the justice and
Good of the Cause I suffer for; is this, That my purpose is God willing, to
give no such Bond, but rather expose my self to the commitment mentioned;
althoughl must ingeniously profess, I neither know, nor acknowledge the
Authority, which those that have made the Order, do exercise over me in this
Case: Nor do I conceive their Votes and Orders have a binding force by the
Laws of the Nation. This is my Answer to the Paper I received from you, which
I desire may be accordingly presented to their view, that ordered my
Commitment; my intentions being to make use of the little time of liberty,
which is remaining to my own dispose for the visiting of my near Relations in
Kent where I shall be sure to be heard of, and however do propound to my self
not above a weeks stay, before my return again to my House in the Strand, so
subscribes

Henry Vane

A true Copy of the first warrant. To Edward Dendy Esquire. Serjant at Arms
attending the Council, or to his Deputies and every of them.
Whereas upon consideration of a seditious Book written and published by Sir
Hen. Vane Knight, Enti^used An Healing Question Propounded and Resolved, etc.
tending to the disturbance of the Present Government and the peace of the
Commonwealth. It was Ordered by his Highness and the Council on the 21. of
August last, that if he should not give good security in 5000 pounds Bond by
Twesday then next coming, to do nothing to the prejudice of this present
Government, or of the peace of the Commonwealth, he should stand Committed.
And whereas he has not given security according to the tenor of that Order,
but refuses to do the same. These are therefore to will and require you
forthwith to apprehend, and take into your charge, the body of the said Sir
Henery Vane, and him to convey in safe custody to the Isle of Wight, and there
to deliver him to the Governor of th^r Island, or to his D^puty, to be by him
disposed of according to the Order of his Highness and the Council. Hereof
you are not to fail: And for so doing this shall be your sufficient Warrant.

Signed in the Name and by Order of his Highness and the Council Henry
Lawrence President.
Given at Whit-hall this 4. day of September 1656.
A Copy of the Warrant to the Governor of the Isle of Wight or his Deputy.
Whereas upon consideration of a seditious Book written and published by Sir
Henry Vane Knight, entitled an Healing Question Propounded and Resolved etc.
tending to the disturbance of the present Government and the peace of the
Commmonwealth. It was Ordered by his Highness, and the Council on the 21. of
Aug. last, That if he should not give good security in 5000 l. Bond by ^wesday
then next coming, to do nothing to the prejudice of the present Government. or
of peace of the Commonwealth, he should stand Committed. And whereas he has not
given security according to the tenor of that Order, butrefuses to do the same.
These are therefore to will and require you, to receive into your Charge from
the Bearer hereof, the body of the said Sir Honry Vane, and him to secure, and
keep in safe custody in such place within the Isle of Wight under your Command,
as you shall judge most convenient, not suffering him to speak with any person
during his abode there, but in the presence of some Officer, and to continue
him thus under custody till you shall receive other Order; whereof you are not
to fail. And for so doing this shall be your Warrant.

Signed in the name and by Order of his Highness and the Council, Hen.
Lawrence, Pr.
Given at White Hall this fourth day of September, 1656.
Here follows the TESTIMONY of Sir HENRY VANE delivered in writing by his own
hands.
My Lord,
HAving something in my mind to speak by way of more peculiar address and
concernment to your Lordship than the rest of your company, I have chosen to do
it by these lines, as the Testimony which upon this occasion I desire to speak
before your own conscience in the sight of God.

The Scripture says, he that will save his life shall loose it, and he that
will loose his life for Christ's sake and the Gospel (in faithful witness
bearing) shall save it; This Word of the Lord is in especial manner fulfilling
amongst the Saints and people of God at this day, whom the Lord is bringing
very eminently upon the stage of trial and sufferings, and that not only from
open enemies, that sin in a declared profane spirit, but from equals and
friends that have gone into the House of God in company, and taken sweet
counsel together in all their concern's, but yet come at last to hate their
Brethren, and cast them out under a pretense of Z^al and glorifying God therein.

And to come a little nearer the Case in hand, this great Truth is hastening a
pace to be made good in those principles, that spirit, and course of action
your Lordship is found in, and in those which the Lord enables me to own and
profess, and is bringing me through his rich grace in some weak measure, to
the practice of, which are to cleave to what is right and good, though power be
on the other side to oppose it.

The Message which in former times you fent me, is in my Memory still, it was
immediately after the Lord had appeared with you against Duke Hamiltons Army,
when you bid a Friend of mine, tell your Brother Vane (for so you then thought
fit to call me) that you were as much unsatisfied with his passive and
suffering principles, as he was with your active; and indeed I must crave leave
to make you this Reply at this time, that I am as little satisfied with your
active, and self-establishing Principles, in the lively colors wherein daily
they show themselves, as you are or can be with my passive Ones, and am willing
in thi^ to join issue with you, and to beg of the Lord to judge between us and
to give the decision according to truth and righteousness.

And having named Truth and Righteousness, surely it may but too truly be
said, that amongst us remains nothing but the Name, the power and life thereof
seems to be ceased from our land, and is banished from the societies of most
men; Yet my Lord, it is that whereby the actions and practice of all men are to
be ruled, as well of Governors as of the governed. Governors themselves are
neither to be, nor make themselves more then what in truth and righteousness
they are and ought to be: When they swerve from this rule, they become sinners
and must look by transgression to fall, as well as the lowest of the People.

That which in truth of fact you were, is vissible enough to every eye, that is
to say, under the Legislative Authority of the People Represensented in
Parliament, duly chosen and rightly constituted: you and the Force under your
command are the Nations strength, and formed military Power, kept up by a
derived Authority from them, at a settled Pay to be employed for the Nations
use and service, and theirs only; and over this Military body you are by them
placed as the head.

This then is the Power, which duly and properly you are, and more than this, I
am not satisfied in my Conscience is in Truth and Righteousness, appertaining
unto you; to use this power lawfully, is your honor, your duty, your safety,
as well as their welfare, and preservation, for whom it was raised, and is
still paid. To use this unlawfully as evidently you do, when you go about to
assume and establish to your self the Power of your head, and at best will but
allow them but to share with you in their known Right to the Legislative
Authority, unto your whom your self, and the Army under your Command
acknowledged the whole to be due, when as a seal set to this their Authority,
they caused justice to be done upon the late King; you then become like that
one finner, which Eccles. 9.19. is said to destroy much good, and do forget
that wisdom which teaches, and restrains from such unlawful use of force and
strength, is better then weapons of war managed never so successefully in a
way of destroying that which is right and good, whatever worldly gain and
advantage in other respects to be obtained thereby.

And although your own Conscience cannot but consent to the truth of what is
here told you, in the name and fear of the Lord, yet being strong and trusting
to the power of your sword, which is Flesh and not Spirit, is man and not God,
your heart is lifted up, if you speedily repent not, unto your destruction; for
you are not able to hear the reproofs of the Lord, nor the faithful witness
and advice of his Saints and people that in love and true friendship dissuade
you from going on in this way, as foreseeing and foretelling your ruin and
destruction therein: And the fears they have, that you will not ruin alone,
forasmuch as their outward safety and welfare is so very far included in yours.

Nor does the Witness of the Saints which they bear against you rest here; but
it is too evident to those of them, that have a spirit of discerning, that in
reference as well to Christ your heavenly head, as to the good people of this
Nation in Parliament Assembled, and rightly Constituted who were, and ought to
be your earthly Head; you lift up your heel, and harden your self every day
more than other, in a fixed Resolution not to become subject, as is your duty,
nor to hold and keep your self in your due station alloted to you in the Body;
but are aiming at the Throne in spirituals as well as Temporals; and to set up
your self in a capacity of not holding your head either in the one
consideration or the other.

And if this evil be in you at the bottom, be assured the Lord will speedily
lay it open as before the Sun, and none of the webbs you are weaving will prove
garments to cover your nakedness; neither will your agreements or convenants
with death stand; even those pollitick contrivances and conjunctions with those
that are the enemies, whether open or secret, against the Spirit of life, and
the workings and manifestations thereof, in the suffering Saints and anointed
ones of the Lord Jesus, whom the Lord is about to own for his wisdom in the
midst of the Earth, unto which excellent Spirit that shall be found in those
holy ones of the Lord, not only this Nations wisdom in their very supreme
Assembly, but the Ruling powers of the whole world shall yield subjection, and
think it their glory to become subservient to the bringing forth of the new
Heavens and that new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness and truth; this is
the foundation Stone, Elect and precious, which through faith is seen to be
laid already in our Sion at this day, which those that believe, and make not
have, shall arrive to the experience of, and shall discern that this Stone is
in cutting out amongst us without hands, to its becoming a great Mountain, and
filling the whole Earth.

Take then in good part before it be too late, this faithful warning and
following advice of an ancient friend, but is now thought fit to be used and
dealt with as an Enemy.

Break off timely your sins by repentance, do judgment, execute justice, and
walk humbly before the Lord; yea, rent your hearts and not your garments, for
those are the fasts the Lord has chosen, break every yoke, and let the
oppressed go free; in one word, proceed no further in lifting up your self
against the Lord of Heaven, but instead of causing the vessels of his house,
even his most precious Saints to be brought before you (as you do daily) for to
exercise public scorn and triumph over them, see that your true interest lies
with them and in them, as well now as hertofore, and endeavor to recover their
hearts to you, and their prayers for you, least your God in whose hands your
breath is, and whose are all your ways, whom you have not cared to glorify as
you ought) should arise suddenly and tear you in pieces, by the immediate
stroke of his own vengeance, and there be none to deliver, even such of you who
live in pleasure on the Earth, and have been wanton, and nourished your selves
as in a day of slaughter, who have condemned, and in your hearts killed the
just One, and he does not resist you; But behold the Judge stands at the door.

FINIS.

