SACRED ELOQUENCE: Or, the Art of RHETORIC, As it is laid down in Scripture.

By the Right Reverend Father JOHN PRIDEAVX late Lord Bishop of WORCESTER.

(...) --

(...). 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.

LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson, for George Sawbridge, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the sign of the Bible on Ludgate Hill, 1659.

SACRED ELOQUENCE: OR, The Art of Rhetoric, as it is laid down in Scripture.
CHAP. I.
SACRED ELOQUENCE is a Logical kind of Rhetoric, to be used in Prayer,
Preaching, or Conference; to the glory of God, and the convincing, instructing,
and strengthening our brethren.

The meditation of which gave David more understanding than all his teachers,
Psalm. Psalm. 119.19.
119.19. proved a Hammer to Jeremy, that breaks the rocks in pieces, Jer.
23.29.
chap. 23.29. was St. Paul's Engine, for the pulling down of strong holds, and
casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalt^th it self against
the knowledge of God, bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.
5.

At which, used by our Savior, the people were astonished; For he taught them
as one having authority, Matthew 7.28.
and not as the Scribes, Matthew. 7.28. His perverse Countrymen of Nazareth bare
him witness, and wondered at the gracious words that proceeded out of his
mouth, Luke 4.22.
Luke 4.22. And the fee'd Officers, sent to apprehend him, returned with this
excuse, Never man spoke like this man, Joh. 7.46. Joh. 7.46.
For it pricketh in the hearts of the hearers, Act. 2.37.
Act. 2.37. The word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper then any
two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing assunder of soul and spirit, and
of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
heart, Heb. Heb. 4.12.
4, 12.

In this especially may be observed, 1. Tropes. 2. Figures. 3. Schemes. 4.
Patheticks. Darbenoth, stimuli (...), quibus boves punguniur: and Masmeroth,
clavi qui retinent illud, cui infiguntur. Eccl. ^. 12.11. (...), Act. 2.37.
5. Characters. 6. Antisheses. 1 Timothy 6.20. Oppofits. Gal. 5.17
7. Parallels. Allusions, (...), cor-espondencies.



CHAP. II.
Of (...), vertere, To turn; A flourish of speech, whereby a word is turned or
changed from his genuine signification into another. Cicero, de c'ar. Orat.
calls them, Verborum immutationes; in his Partitions, Verba modificata. It
differs from a Figure or Scheme, because the one does alter the habit of or
make a change in, the Words only; the other, in the Speech. (...) P^utar^^ in
vit Homer. Dictionum vero immutatio, appellatur Trepa^^ compositionis contra,
Schema. Both the species of Elocution.
Tropes.
TRopes carry with them, in Scripture, the phraseologie of the sacred Tongues,
far differing in weight and majesty from Ethnic Ashdodism.

Most useful amongst these may be noted, Hyperbole and Catachresis are by some
modern Rhetoritians accounted affections of a Trope, rather than Tropes
themselves; because there is no Trope, but may be set forth in too harsh and
unequal a dress, which is a Catachresis; or be screwed up too high in
hyperbolicall expressions. Yet neither Tully, Quintilian, nor any of the
Ancients observe this exactness, but number them amongst Tropes, as does the
Author.
1. Hyperbole. Hyperbole and Catachresis are by some modern Rhetoritians
accounted affections of a Trope, rather than Tropes themselves; because there
is no Trope, but may be set forth in too harsh and unequal a dress, which is
a Catachresis; or be screwed up too high in hyperbolicall expressions. Yet
neither Tully, Quintilian, nor any of the Ancients observe this exactness, but
number them amongst Tropes, as does the Author.
2. Catachresis. Emphasis is rather a Figure than Trope, in precisnesse of
speech; it belongs not to the adorning of a word, but sentence, which, by
this Figure, is so pronounced, or otherwise notified, that what lies hid, and
muffled under a clowd, does manifestly appear. Emphasis est etiam inter
figuras, cum ex aliquo dicto latens aliquid eruitur. But the Author takes a
Trope in the same latitude Quintilian does, l. 9. c. 2. (Tropus est sermo a
naturali and principali fignificatione ad aliam, ornandae oracionis gratia) and
so Emphasis may be permitted to stand where it does.
3. Emphasis. 4. Metonymia. 5. Ironia. 6. Metaphora. 7. Synecdoche.


(...), Excedere, superare; An excess of truth, either by elevating it too
high, or depressing it, as low. Superlatio, ac trajectio veritatis, minuendi
augendive causa, Cicer. de Orat. l. 3. So all amplifications and extenuations,
beyond or below their just measure, may be termed Hyperbolicall; although the
words whereby they are expressed be not borrowed, but proper. Whence that of
Virgil, Eclog. 9. Candidior cygnis, hedera formosior alba. that of Plaut. in
Aulular. Pumex non aeque est aridus, atque hic senex, and such like, are taken
by Rhetoritians to be hyperbolicall expressions, though the words remain
unaltered from their native habit and signification. This Beumler will not
endure, and therefore has excogitated a double Hyperbole, the one Logical,
the other Rhetorical: the Logical, where, in proper words the thing is
hyperbolically set forth; Rhetorical, where there are improper or borrowed
terms used, for the amplyfying or extenuating a thing.
Hyperbole.
Hyperbolicall speeches are these, or the like, in the old Testament: Judah
shall bind his fool unto the vine, and his asses-colt unto the choice vine, and
wash his garments in wine, and his cloths in the blood of the grape, Genesis
49.11. expressing the extraordinary plenty of wine that shall stream in his
coast. So Exodus 3.17. A land flowing with milk and honey. The rivers, the
floods, the brooks of honey and butter, Job. 20.17. hyperbolically speak an
incredible abundance. With honey out of the rock should I have satisfied thee,
Psalm. 81.16. i.e. By means which could not be expected. In like manner the
fierceness of the Horse is set forth, by swallowing the ground with his rage,
and saying, Ha, ha, amongst the trumpets, Job 39.24, 25. The vastness of the
Behemoth, by drinking up a river, and trusting that he can draw up Jordan into
his mouth, Job 40.23. The hideousness of the Leviathan, whose eyes are like
the eyelids of the morning, out of whose mouth go burning lamps, whose breath
kindles coals; that makes the deep to boil like a pot, and the sea like a
pot of ointment; by reason of whose plunging, the mighty through fear (purgant
alvum, says one) purify themselves, (so our Translation) Job 41.25. which set
forth an unutterable terriblenesse, not to be reached in other Languages. So,
the skipping of mountains like Rams, and of little Hills like Lambs. Psalm. 114.
would have us to conceive the shattering of the finest creatures at the
Creator's presence. In the New Testament, The passing of a Camel thorough the
eye of a needle, Mat. 9.24. The Stars falling to the earth, as a figg tree
casts her untimely figgs: the departing of the heaven as a scrowl rolled
together, Revel. 6.13.14. The whole world cannot contain the books, wherein
our Savior's acts should be written, Joh. 21.25. may not literally be taken,
but as sublime Hyperboles, expressing in the first, a matter of the greatest
difficulty; in the second, a foretelling of stupendous confusion; in the last,
the not registered acts of our Savior, hardly, and not necessary to be
recounted of. So sin is confessed in terms to be hyperbolically sinful, Romans
3.7. Light affliction, (...), in an eminent hyperbolicall manner, to work an
eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. And St. Paul acknowledges, that, (...),
before his conversion, he persecuted the Church, Gal. 1.13.

(...), Abusio, so called, when for want of a fit name to express a thing by,
we borrow that word which comes nearest to hand; by which means it comes to
pass, that the word is abused, and the Trope is more harsh and unequal: as,
-- equum divina Palladis art Aedificant --
Catachresis.
Catachresis, abused (as it were) or far-fetched incongruous speeches, may be
termed such, as, All the earth was of one lip, and one sort of words, Genesis
11.1. that is, of one Language, and spoke one Tongue. Let us smite him with the
tongue, Jer. 18.18. Jer. 18.18.
that is, Slander him. I will open the shoulder of Moab from his Cities, Ezech.
Ezekiel. 25.9.
25.9. that is, Dismantle his Towns to make way for his enemies. I will turn
to the people a pure lip, that they may call upon the name of the Lord, to
serve him with one shoulder, Zeph. 3.9. Zeph 3.9.
that is, with one consent. So, Daubing with untempered mortar, and sowing
pillowes under arm-holes, Ezech. 13. Ezekiel. 13.
are unusual to express deceitful and flattering doctrine; much more that
(as the Doway Bible gives it) in the Canticle of my Cosen, concerning his
vineyard in Horn; the son of oil, Isai. 5.1. for, Isa. 5.1.
Situated in a fertile or fruitful hill. Likewise, Psalm. 119.
My soul is always in my hand, Psalm. 119. i. e. I am in eminent danger. The
ploughers plowed upon my back, and made long furrows, Psalm. 129. Joh. 8.5.
Psalm. 129. grieviously afflicted me. To see death, Joh. 8.51. for, To die. To
shake off the dust of the feet, Matthew. 10.14.
Matthew. 10.14. for, Utterly to renounce or abandon. To pluck out the eye and
cast it from us, Matthew. 5.29.
Matthew. 5.29. to take away occasions; are elegancies in Scripture, which
otherwise might seem catachresticall. So merit, and wages, or reward are urged,
which import no more then a good work; and wages is called (...), because it is
paid in the evening, when the work is done. Also plenty of all things is
expressed by 1. Butter of Kine; and 2. Milk of Sheep; and 3. Fat of Rams; and
4. Rams of the breed of Bashan; and 5 Goats, with 6. the fat of the kidneys of
Wheat; and 7. the pure blood of the Grape for drink, Deuteronomy. 32.14.
Deuter. 32.14. So, I might have received mine own with usury; that is, with
increase, a Catachresticall Synecdoche, Matthew. 25.27. From one dead, sprang so
many as the stars of heaven, Heb. 11.12. Heb. 12.1. (...).
and as the sand beside the lip of the sea innumerable, Heb. 11.12. A clowd of
witnesses, Heb. 12.1.

(...), speciem praebere, repraesentare; because thereby is a representation
made of some special thing that lies hid in the words; which is made
manifest, either by the pronountlation of them, or by the affixing of some
demonstrative article to them; and this, when it is not so safe or meet to
express our sense in words at length. Virgil. Non licuit thalami expertem sine
crimine vitam, Degere, more ferae! Virum te praestes oportet.
Emphasis.
As Catachresticalls make an impression through their harshnesse and
strangeness; so an Emphasis works through its vigor, which in reading is
enlivened by the pronunciation. Hitherto are referred such epithets, wherein
the Apostles are called the salt of the earth, Math. 5. wicked men, the men of
Gods hand, Psalm. 17. Psalm. 17.
employed sometimes to chastise the godly. So, Man of sorrows, Isa. 53. Isa.
53.
Son of perdition, of Belial, of thunder, of the morning, have especial
emphases in them. As also, First born of death, king of terrors, bars of the
pit, Job. 18.13, 14. Job 18.13. Ib. 17.16. Ib. 38.37.
Ib. 17.16. Bottles of heaven, Ib. 38.37. With which may be ranged those high
phrases and strains, Behold, I am against thee, O thou destroying mountain,
(says the Lord) which destroyest all the earth; and I will stretch out my hand
upon thee, and roll thee down from the rocks, and I will make thee a burnt
mountain, Jer. 51.25. Jer. 51.25.
I will make it a possession for the Bittern, and pools of water, and I will
sweep it with the beesome of destruction, Isa. 14.23.
Isa. 14.23. His breath shall sift the Nations with the sieve of vanity, Ib.
30.28.
Ibid 30.28.

Nominis pro nomine positio: A putting of one word for another. By this Trope,
the inventor is put for the thing invented, the possessor for the thing
possessed, the continent for the thing contained, and the efficient for the
effect, etc. By Cicero termed Hypallage, immutatio and traductio, lib. 3. de
Orat. Traductio and immutatio in ver^o.
Metonymia.
Amongst Metonymies, those wherein the cause and the effect, the subject and
the adjunct, the antecedent and the consequent, are taken one for another, are
most of note and use. And the Lord said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth, and why
is thy countenance fallen? If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and
if thou do not well, sin lies at the door, Genesis 4.6, 7. [Sin] that is, the
punishment for sin, the cause for the effect; or, as some, [Sin] that is, the
sacrifice for sin, a repentant heart in thy power; and therefore have no reason
to lowre at my dealing with thee. For the second, what more frequent in the Old
and New Testament, then Sacramental metonymies? as, To kill the passover,
Exodus 12.21. Kill the passover. 2 Chronicles. 30.18. Keep or celebrate the feast of
the passover. 2 Chronicles. 30.1. Christ our passover is sacrificed for us,
therefore let us keep the feast not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of
malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth, 1
Cor. 5.7, 8. where, Passover, the thing signified, is put for the
commemorative and sacrifice, by which it was to be presented, Exodus 12.14.27.
In which metonymicall sense, the words of institution of the Lords Supper must
be understood, Hec est corpus meum, Matthew. 20.26. 1 Cor. 11.24. the Sign
dignified with the name of the thing signified, for the assurance of the
performance on the part of him who sealed the evidence; except we would make a
prodigy of the blessed Supper, appointed to set at variance, not in unity to
fix believers. For the exemplification of the third kind of Metonymies, upon
the mutual change of antecedent and consequent, with the thing to be
expressed. So, To know a woman, to go in unto her, to be with her. Has Ammon
thy brother been with thee? 2 Samuel 13.20. serve modestly to express what may
be done, without otherwise speaking of it. So, Joseph is not, and Simeon is
not, Genesis 42.36. Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted,
because they were not, Jer. 31.15. Matthew. 2.18. by consequence speak their
precedent death.

Simulatio, Because we speak one thing, and mean another. Cum aliud in pectore
reclusum, aliud in lingua habemus, as in the Poet. Scilicet is superis labor
est -- It is likewise called by Tully, Inversio, a turning upside down of a
thing, or contrary to the right form. A proper term to express this Trope
where the contrary is meant to what is said Euge bone serve! curasti probe.
There are six species of it, 1. Chleuasmus, or Epicertomesis. 2. Charientismus,
or Scomma 3. Astismus. 4 Diasyrmus. 5. Exutenismus. 6. Sarcasmus.
Ironia.
Ironies also find an admittance in both Testaments; for, He that dwells in
heaven laugheth his enemies to scorn, the Lord shall have them in derision.
Psalm. 2. Elias mocked them [Baalites] and said, Cry aloud, for he is a god,
either he is talking, or pursuing, or he is in a journey, or peradventure he
sleeps and must be awaked. 1 King. 18.27. So that speech of Micajah to Ahab,
Go up and prosper, for the Lord shall deliver it into the hands of the King, 2
King. 22. cannot stand with a true Prophets integrity, if it be not passed with
an Irony, as the King also took it, verse. 16. By the like proverb (which is the
Scripture phrase) the King of Babylon is entitled Lucifer, son of the morning,
which did weaken the Nations, Isa. 14.12. The Prince of Tyrus is also taunted,
Behold, thou art wiser then Daniel, there is no secret that they can hide from
thee. With thy wisdom and with thy understanding thou have gotten thee riches,
and have gotten gold and silver into thy treasures. By thy great wisdom and by
thy traffic have thou increased thy riches, and thy heart is lifted up because
of thy riches, Ezekiel. 28.3, 4, 5. In the New Testament, that of our Savior must
needs be taken for an Irony, Full well ye reject the commandment of God, that
ye may keep your own tradition. Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers,
Matthew. 23.32. And that, Sleep on now, and take your rest; behold, the hour is
at hand, and the son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners, Matthew.
26.45. So that of the Apostle, Now ye are full, now ye are rich, ye have
reigned as Kings without us; I would to God ye did reign, that we also might
reign with you, 1 Cor. 4.8. More bitter and baser were those Sarcasms of the
soldiers to our Savior, whom they had crowned with thorns, Hail King of the
Jews, Matthew. 27.29. Milder that of the Apostles, Ye suffer fools gladly,
seeing ye your selves are wise, 2 Cor. 11.29. And what is it wherein ye were
inferior to other Churches, except it be that I my self was not burdensome
unto you? forgive me this wrong, ib. 12.13. Some would have that to be
ironically spoken, Rather give alms of such things as ye have, and behold all
things are clean unto you, Luke 11.4. which others with greater reason deny.

Translatio, when a word is transferred from one thing unto another, by reason
of the likeness that is betwixt them. Nihil est in rerum natura, cujus non in
alijs rebus possimus uti vocabulo and nomine. Vnde enim Simile, duci non
potest? potest autem ex omnibus. Indidem verbum unum quod similitudinem
continet, translatum lumen affert orationi. The Greek Rhetoricians under this
notion did comprehend all the Tropes. Arist. (...), Id Rhetor. lib. 3. cap. 1.
(...). So Cicero ad Brutum. Though the variety of this Trope be very great, and
field large; yet Quintilian endeavors to reduce it into four ranks. 1 When one
animate is put for another, as Cato barked at Scipio. 2 Inanimate for another
as -- Classique immit^it habenas. 3 Inanimates for animates, as ferro an fato
virtus Argivum occidit? 4 Animates for inanimates, as, -- Sedet inscius (metus)
alto.
Metaphora.
As Metonymies, so Metaphors in Scripture are eminent and numberless. What have
thou done? the voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the ground, Genesis
4.10. as an importunate Suitor crying for justice. We are come to Jesus the
Mediator of the New Teastament, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks
better things, then that of Abel, Heb. 12.24. whose also, being dead, yet
speaks, Heb. 11.4. Speech is here translated from man to blood. (2) We have
fathers, mothers, brothers, sisters, masters, servants, and such other
relatives without stint, metaphorically taken. So God is said to be father of
all. Has the rain a father? or who has begatten the drops of dew? Job 38.28.
none but God, that created them. The child (Christ) is called the everlasting
father, Isa. 9.6. The devil is a liar, and the father of it, Joh. 8.44. that
is, the author, inventor, propagator. Jabal, and Jubal, the fathers of such as
dwell in Tents, keep cattle, handle the harp or Organ, Genesis 4.20.21. Micah's
massepriest must be a father to the plundering Danites, Judge. 18.19. that is,
an instructor. One Joab is the father of the valley Charashim, for they were
craftsmen, 1 Chronicles. 4.14. Elisha cries after Elijah, My father, my father, the
Chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof, 1 King 2.12. a surer protector,
then all their Martialists with their best forces. With the same, King Joash
reverenceth Elisha, ib. 13, 14. And Naamans servants honor their Master, My
Father, if the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have
done it? Ib. 5.13. Job stoopes to acknowledge corruption to be his Father, and
the worm to be his Mother and Sister in regard of his woeful plight, Job
17.14. And our Saviors position is catholic, Whosoever shall do the will of
God, the same is my Sister, and Brother, and Mother, Mar. 3.25. not by
generation but acceptance. In an opposite sense is the inscription on Babylons
forehead, Mystery, Babylon the great, the Mother of harlots, and abominations
of the earth, Revel. 17.5. In as farfetch'd Metaphors we have The sons of the
quiver, for arrows, Job 41.28. Lament. 3.13. Jonah's goard shall be the Son of
a night, Jon. 4.10. The pascall-Lamb a male, the Son of the first year, Exodus
12.9. Corn the Son of the threshing floor, Isa. 21.20. the Owls daughters,
Ib. 3.21. that is, Chicken. Villages belonging to Bethshean and other Cities
are said to be their daughters, Jos. 17. Daughters of Jerusalem, Sion, or
Babylon are the inhabitants which acknowledge those places for Mothers. In which
sense, Jerusalem is said to be the Mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. To this Trope
are referred Anthropopathies, wherein hands, and eyes, and ears, and other
members, and humane affections are referred to God, and Spirits: which
Anthropomorphites taking literally were condemned for Heretics. Of this kind
are these passages, It repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth, and
it grieved Him at the Heart, Genesis 6.6. His soul was grieved for the misery of
Israel, Judge. 10.16. Let me alone that my wrath may wax hot against them, Exodus
32.10. The Lord repented of the evil that he thought to do unto his people, v.
14. and the like. In which expressions, for man's weak capacity, God is said to
do such things out of passion, which from eternity he had determined: as men do
out of weakness, when they change their minds. No change being in God, but in
the things done: which fall out in men according to the mutability of their
purposes, carried on by passion, Thou tellest my wanderings, put my tears in
thy bottle. Are they not in thy book? Psalm. 56.8.

Comprehensio, intellectio. Intellectio est cum, res tota parva de part
cognoscitur, aut de toto parva pars. Author ad Heren.
Synecdoche.
Of Synecdoches, are met with no less store, 1. In generals put for
particulars, Preach the word to every Creature, Mar. 16.15. meaning, that is
capable of it. The earnest expectation of the creature waits for the
manifestation of the sons of God, Romans 8.19. all sorts of men hoping to have
their states bettered. Submit your selves to every humane Creature for the
Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2.13. that is, every man to whom you are subordinate,
because God will have it so, 2. Specialties put for generals, as, The Sun
shall not burn thee by day, nor the Moon by night, Psalm. 1216. that is, nothing
shall hurt thee. Edom, and Moab, and Ammon have confederated or covenanted to
take unto themselves the houses of God in possession, Psalm. 83. i.e. the
progeny of such wicked persons. So souls are put for persons, All the souls
that came into Egypt with Jacob were 70. that is all the persons, Genesis 46.27.
His travel shall fall upon his own head, and his wickedness upon his own
pate, Ps. 7.16. his person shall endure the brunt of it. Is not the hand of
Joab in all this? 2 King. 14.19. Joabs advice and counsel. 3. A synecdoche is
frequently observed in putting a set number for an indefinite, and
reciprocally. If we would contend with God we cannot answer one for a Thousand,
1 Samuel 18.8. that is, a great multitude: by which trope, 7 is often put for
many, or an unlimited number. The women said to Naomi concerning Obed, He shall
be unto thee a restorer of life, and a nourisher of thine old age. For thy
daughter in law which loves thee; which is better to thee then 7 Sons, has
born him, Ruth 4.15. So an evil spirit cast out, when he returns, is said to
take with him 7 other spirits, which makes the re-possession of him that was
freed worse, than when he was first possessed, Matthew. 12.45.

It is a good caution put in by a father, Augustinus de Doctr. Christia. Lib.
3. c. 5. and 10. and 11.
that To urge a trope according to the letter, and that which is literally
taken to wrest to a trope, in some sort verifieth that of the Apostle, The
letter kills, but the spirit gives life, 2 Cor. 3.6. Such a mistake the
Disciples were guilty of, who understood the leaven of the Pharisees, and
Sadduces, which their Master warned them to take heed of, to be literally meant
of bread, which should have been understood metaphorically of their leaven of
doctrine, Matthew. 16.12. And the false witnesses alleged against Christ the
destroying of the material Temple, which was spoken of him by a Trope
concerning the Temple of his Body, Jo. 2.21. These tropes twisted together in a
speech continuate are as sparkling Diamonds in a Ring, by the Apostle termed an
allegory, (...) Gal. 4.24.
Gal. 4.24.

And may be conspicuously discerned in 1. Types. 2. Mysteries. 3. Apologues. 4.
Parables. 5. Apothegms. 6. Reproofs.


(...), exemplar, figura, a picture, or shadow of things to come, qui in veteri
testamento praefiguravit aliquid in novo: fit tribus modis vel. 1. Natura: vel.
2. Hominum confilio: vel. 3. Dei.
Types.
Hagar and Sarah by the Apostle are urged as types of difference between the
old and new Testament; as answerable to Sinai in bondage, and free Jerusalem,
Gal. 4.25. Isreal's reducing from Egypt, mentioned by the Prophet Hosea 11.1. is
made a type by the evangelist of our Saviors returning from thence, Matthew.
2.15. The deliverance by the arc said to be a type of baptism, 1 Pet. 3.21.
as likewise the lifting up of the brazen Serpent a type of Christ's lifting up
on the Cross, Joh. 3 14. The passing of the Israelites thorough the red sea,
mannah, the cloud, and the rock; set down as types of the Sacraments of the New
Testament, 1 Cor. 10. So, to take such precepts literally, as, Thou shall not
seethe a kid in his mothers milk, Exodus 23.19. Thou shall not plough with an
ass and an ox together, Deuteronomy. 22.10. Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the ox
that treads out the corn, Ib. 25.4. and not morally, for avoiding cruelty,
parting stakes in worshipping, and defrauding the Minister of his due, the
Apostle brandeth as gross; for, (says he) Does God take care for oxen? 1 Cor.
9.9. 1 Timothy 5.18.

(...) 1. (...) ^u^d. An hidden secret in Religion, the knowledge of which is
not attainable by any strength of flesh and blood, but by divine revelation.
Mysteries.
Mysteries, under aenigmaes or hidden speeches, contain matter either 1.
Moral: 2. Sacramental: 3. Prophetical; for informing of manners, by way of
doctrine; confirming of promises, or points of belief; or fore-warning of
things to come, for the good of Gods people, and terror of their opposites.
For instances in either: Without controversy great is the mystery of
godliness. God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of
Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received into
glory, 1 Timothy 3.16. To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of
God, but to them that are without, all things are done in parables, Mar. 4.11.
Of these mysteries, the Apostles and their successors are the dispensers: Let a
man so account of us as of the ministers of Christ, and stewards of the
mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1. Which mystery was kept secret since the world
began, but now is made manifest by the scriptures of the prophets, according to
the commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all nations for the
obedience of faith, Romans 16.25, 26. This is called, The wisdom of God in a
mystery, not revealed to the princes of this world, 1 Cor. 2.7. Which is
uttered by the Apostle, not in words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the
holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual.

2. Doctrinall mysteries are seconded by Sacramental, as the mystery of
Redemption, and regeneration by Baptism, and the Lords Supper. Christ's
spiritual marriage with his Church, (so gloriously set out by David, Psalm. 45.
and Solomon, thorough the whole book of Canticles) is termed a great mystery,
somewhat opened by the entire love that should be between man and wife, Ephesians.
5.32.

3. All Prophecies, not understood or fulfilled, remain as mysteries; so are
styled the seven Stars and golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1.20. Concerning the
calling of the Jews, to be expected in latter times: I would not, brethren,
that ye should be ignorant (says the Apostle) of this mystery, lest ye should
be wise in your own conceits, that blindness in part is happened to Israel
until the fullness of the Gentiles come in, and so all Israel shall be saved,
Romans 11.25. He, that no man understands under unknown tongues, or Tropes, may
speak mysteries: I will tell thee the mystery of the woman (says the Angel)
and the beast that carries her, which has the seven heads and ten horns, Rev.
17. And so the same Angel must tell us of the number of the beast, though it be
the number of a man, and set down to be 666. Rev. 13.18. And the 1000 years of
the Saints reign upon earth, whilst Satan is chained in prison, Rev. 20. Of the
overthrow of Gog and Magog in the Battle of Armageddon, and the like, before we
shall decipher such mysteries. So the Ark, Urim and Thummim; so Isaiah's cup of
the Lords fury, and dregs of the cup of trembling, cap. 51.17. Jeremiah's cup
of consolation for the death of father or mother, cap. 16.17. Ezekiel's cup of
astonishment and desolation, cap. 23.33. our Savior's cup, which he prayed,
conditionally, might pass from him, Mar. 14.36. the cup the Apostles were to
drink of, Matthew. 20.23. the devils cup, 1 Cor. 10.31. the golden cup of the
great whore, full of abominations, and filthiness of her fornications, Rev.
17.4. are full of mystical Tropes, without the knowledge of which, they cannot
be understood. As neither the mystical books of Job's logical discourses,
David's rhetorical Psalms, Solomon's moral Institutions, and Canticall
Pastoralls, can any way be opened without the same key, as Sampson's Riddle,
Judge. 14.12. the handwriting against Belshazzar, Dan. 5.25. our Savior's,
Wheresoever the carcass is, thither will the eagles resort, Matthew. 24.28.

(...), Apthon: A feigned speech, under which the truth is represented, as in a
picture. Aliud aperte dicit, aliud ex eo innuit ac profitetur; ergo, (...)
nonnulli appellare ausi sunt (...), sermones a sermon, unum ab alio conclusum:
Martinius: There are three kinds, Rational, Moral, and Mixed. Rational,
wherein something is feigned to be done by man. Moral, which does imitate the
manners of those things that are void of reason, as Brutes, Trees, etc. Mixed,
that does consist of both; all designed to instruct man, and inform his manners.
Apologues.
Apologues are here understood, not such as are to be rejected, as old wives,
[(...)] 1 Timothy 4.7. Jewish, [(...).] Sophistical, [(...)] 2 Pet. 1.16. but
such as are taken from irrational creatures, wherein one thing is said, but
another meant; in which kind is that of the Trees, where the base Bramble
usurps regal authority, which the Olive, Fig Tree, and Vine refused, Judge.
9.7. That of the poor man's one little ewe lamb, which touched David to the
quick, for his tyrannical dealing with honest Uriah, 2 Samuel 12. That of
Jehoash to Amaziah of the Thistle, which would match his son to the Cedar of
Lebanon's daughter, wherein he handsomely girdeth at his overweening
presumption, 2 King. 14.9. All which are a concatenation of diverse Tropes,
which from unreasonable creatures teach men to be reasonable: Which kind of
teaching some have not unfitly called Zoopaedia. An Onomapaedia from
Scripture-names might in like sort be framed; as from Adam, earthy; Cain,
possession; Abel, vanity, may be congruously gathered, that all earthly
possession is vanity. From Mishma, Dumah, and Massah, the names of the family
of Ishmael, Genesis 25.4; the Hebrews gather by their Grammatical derivation,
that in destructive times, many things are to be heard, not spoken of, but born
with, when no other remedy may be hoped for. From Diblaim the mother, Fagius in
Genesis
Gomer the daughter; from Jezreel, Loruchamah, and Loammi the children, the
corrupt condition of the Church of Israel was represented to Hosea. Whence may
be inferred, that luxury and surquedry in a State, breeds a consumption and
overthrow, which begets dispersion and desolation, whereby the people become
out of mercy, and not to be accounted any people at all, as the etymon of the
words gives it.

(...). Suid. Comparatio, collatio, qua res diversae ostenduntur in aliquo esse
similes. Amongst the Hebrews they were in so high esteem, that any choice and
rare sentence they dignified with this title; and those things that were so,
they covered with this veil, thereby not casting their pearls before swine, to
be trampled by them, and exposed to contempt: Herein imitated by the Egyptians
in their Hieroglyphics.
Parables.
Parables are differenced by some from Apologues, or fables, because that they
descend not to irrational actors, as of brutes, or bushes, but are bounded
within the scene of rational representations. In which kind in the old
Testament, some make the whole Book of Job to be a pattern of a conference,
grounded upon the true history of a man unexpectedly ruined, and mistaken by
his friends that came to visit and comfort him. Solomon's Proverbs to be a
Symposium spirituale, wherein Wisdom's invitation and cheer is set out after an
heavenly manner, where are Viands, 1. Ethicall. 2. Political, 3. Oeconomicall.
4. Aulicall. 5. Conjugall. 6. Experimental. 7. Celestial. The Canticles are
acknowledged by all to be an Eclogue betwixt our Savior and his Spouse the
Church, beyond imagination of Poets, and expressions of human affections. Of
the same kind these pieces of Apocrypha, Tobit, Judith, Story of Susanna, Bell
and the Dragon, are by diverse taken, which find more pith in the Morality, than
ground for the History. 2. In the New Testament, much of our Saviors Doctrine
is proposed in parables, whereof seven we have in one Chapter, Matthew. 13. In
all, some have reckoned --. Amongst which, in the parable 1. of the sower, is
set forth the diverse events of the same word preached, by reason of the
diverse dispositions of the auditors: of which, Some have ears to hear, some
none: 2. In that of the prodigal Son returning to his forsaken Father, Luke 15.
the cheerful entertainment of a sinner that unfeignedly repents: 3. In that
of the freed debtor by God, Matthew. 18.20.
so tyrannically imprisoning his brother, and the heavy doom that befell him
upon it; the necessity that we should forgive, if we look to be forgiven: 4.
In that of the laborers in the vineyard; and wages paid them; that God
endures not Idlers, and rewards not as men exspect, but of pleasure, yet still
beyond exspectation: 5. The case of him that was for building of Barnes,
instead of thankfulness to God that gave corn to fill them, Luke. 12.16. and
of Dives and Lazarus; Luke 16.
for vvordlings not to surfeit so here, that they suffer for it hereafter; and
for the pious poor, left here to the dogs, to find favor with the Angels: 6.
In the passages parabolically set forth between the Priest, the Levite, Luke
10.30.
the pitiful Samaritan, and the wounded Traveller apparently may be observed,
that those who are most obliged commonly most neglect their duty; and help
often comes from whom, and when, it might be least exspected: 7. Our
Savior spoke this parable unto certain which trusted in themselves, that
they were righteous, and despised others, Luke. 18.9, 10. Two men went up
into the Temple to pray, the one a Pharisee, the other a Publican; their
prayers and postures we have, but the event shows, not the vaunting gifted
man, that pressed so high with his perfections; but the poor penitent, that
stood a far off, not daring to lift up his eyes to Heaven, that smote his
breast crying, GOD be merciful to me a sinner, came last, but sped best.

Sententia brevis and acuta, quae multa paucis comprehendit.
Apothegms.
Apothegms are speeches of pregnant instruction, smart reproof, or profound
consequence; expressed in compendious proposals, resolvs, or replies. As, when
Benbadad sends to Ahab, The Gods do so unto me, and more also, if the dust of
Samaria shall suffice for handfulls, for all the people that follow me. The
King of Israel inferred, and said, Tell him, Let not him that girdeth-on his
harness boast himself, as he that puts it off, 1 King. 20.10, 11. for
things may fall out unexpectedly, and events cross hopes and presumptions. So
of the wise Woman of Abel's proposal to Joab, that furiously stormed the City
before any Summons given, they plainly spoke in the beginning (it was noysed
first amongst us of the Town, when we first admitted Sheba, and heard of thy
pursuit) Surely, they will ask of Abell, and so make an end (they will not
strike before they speak, or batter or throw down the walls, before they
understand whether we are Royalists, or Rebels, that will justify Sheba's
action) I am one of those that am peaceable, and faithful in Israel, thou
seek to destroy a City, and a mother in Israel, why will thou swallow up the
inheritance of the Lord? a discreet and quiet conference would take up the
matter. This put Joab upon a sight of his oversight, and an Epizeuxical
acknowledgement, Far be it, far be it from me, that I should swallow up, or
destroy: 2 Samuel 20.18, 19, 20. So, our Saviors answer to the combined
Pharisees, and Herodians concerning tribute due to Caesar, left them all to
marvel, but not a word to reply, Matthew. 22.22. To Amaziahs message, (a kind of
challenge) Come and let us look one another in the face, Jehoash's answer was
pricking and pertinent, The Son of The thistle was no fit match for the
Cedar's daughter, 2 Kings. 14.18. Our Savior's Replies are here more then
apothegmaticall: 1. To that of his mother, Son why have thou dealt with us
thus? Luke 21.49.
Wist ye not that I must be about my Fathers business: 2. To her motion, They
have no Wine. Joh. 2.3, 4.
Woman? what have I to do with thee? mine hour is not yet come: 3. To them
that told him, that his Mother and his Brethren waited for him (whom by Nature
he was bound to respect); he stretched forth his hands toward his Disciples,
Matthew. 12.48.
and said, Behold my Mother, and my Brethren: for, whosoever shall do the will
of my Father which is in Heaven, the same is my Sister, and Brother, and Mother
(in my esteem). My Mother and my Brethren are those that hear the Word of God,
Luke 8.20.
and do it: 4. To that of the Pharisee, why do thy Disciples transgress the
tradition of the Elders, Mar. 7.15.
in not washing their hands before meat? His satisfaction was, Not external
ingredients, but internal, defile a man: 5. To that, Why eats you Master with
publicans and sinners? Matthew. 9.11.
Those that be whole need not the physician, but those that are sick. Go and
learn what that means, I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice: Mar. 2.18.
6. To that, why his Disciples fasted not as well as those of John, and of the
Pharisees? It was not seasonable while the bridegroom was with them; and no
more advantageous then to put a new patch upon an old garment, and new Wine
into old vessels, which will mar all, rather then make good: Things must be
so ordered that they may do good, and Disciples instructed that they may be
edified: 7. To that, Mat. 2.27, 28.
Why do thy Disciples pluck the ears of Corn upon the Sabbath day? which is
unlawful. They may do it, in case of necessity; as David are the shewbread
when he was hungry: And, the Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath.
Therefore the Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath. Likewise him that intruded to
be his follower, he discharged with, Luke 9.58.
Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man
has not where to lay his head. Thou will miss of thy aim, if thou think to
make a vvorldly fortune by follovving me. Him that put off his call, Let me
first go and bury my Father, he lessoneth, Let the dead bury the dead, but go
thou and preach the Kingdom of God. So him that would complement with his
friends, before he would serve his Master, he teaches better manners, No man
having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of
God.

Reproofs, Complaints, and Execrations, mixed, or severed.
As in a building there must be a sure foundation, strong vvalls, and a good
roof, otherwise it will soon totter, according to that of our Savior, Matthew.
7.27. So in spiritual building, Scripture must be the ground-vvork, Liturgy the
vvalls, and Discipline the roof; otherwise it will never hold out against
vvind and storms. But Pharach's dream is verified in us, The lean kine so
devour the fat, that they leave no bones behind them, Genesis 41. And the famine
of Samaria increases upon us, where an asses head is prized at eighty pieces
of silver; and the fourth part of a cab of dove's dung, for five: 2 King. 6.
Gehazi will cheat both Naaman, and his Master, though the Leprosy attend it,
2 King. 5. And Korah with his accomplices oppose Moses and Aaron, though the
earth her self does gape to swallow them for it, and their families. Instead
of acknovvledging of our rebellions, we cry out with them in the prophet, we
have no King because we fear not the Lord, What should a King do to us? false
swearing, and a covenant will batter fit our plots, Hos. 10. We will not have
this man shall reign over us, this is the heir come let us kill him, and the
inheritance shall be ours, Matthew. 21. Luke. 20. But shall the svvord devour for
ever? will not this bring forth bitterness in the end? 2 Samuel 2.26. In the
mean while Jonah, sentt to Niniveh, flies to Tarshish; and we, when our
Master is going to suffer, are questioning, Who should be chiefest. How can
we censure Esau for parting with his birthright at so lovv a rate? He wept
when it was done; but we do worse, and boast of our bargains. O Judas, how
does our perfidiousnesse justify thy highest treachery? Thou soldest thy
Master, yet in a desperate kind of repentance restored'st the money: but we
hold it a disparagement to be over-seen in any thing, and will venture rather
Hell and the Gallovvs to be thought grand Politicians, then to part with that
we have once gotten. It was a poor content the rich man had of his full
barnes, that must the same night lose his Soul, Luke 12.16. And Dives feasting
was not vvorth the reckoning, that afforded him not a drop of water for a
Grace-cup, Luke 16. The Spirit of the Pythonisse could preach true Doctrine,
These men are the servants of the high God, Acts. 16. but to bring about a
plot, to drive the Apostles out of Town, by the infatuated Aldermen that heeded
not God, but their gain. Rebobohams brazen shields make a show as those of
Gold placed in the Temple, by his wiser father; but, put to the touch, the case
is altered. The Holy Ghost may be so invocated, that instead of a Dove, an Owl
may make appearance. So, many men talk of gifts, that are but shifts; and vaunt
of taking pains, who from our Savior, in the latter day, shall have small
thanks for their labor, Matthew. 7.22. These Rabshakehs will tell us of lands,
of corn, and wine, and olives, and honey, that they will transplant us unto, 2
Kings. 18.32. but it will prove better to advise with some trusty Isaiahs, then
to presume too far upon the Gentleman's word. The Woman that upbraided the
Shoemaker for want of a shoo to fit her foot, was found to have a foot not to
be fitted without a misshapen shoo made on purpose. It is dangerous to break
such hedges, where a Serpent is like to bite us by the fingers, Eccles. 10.8.
and to pour in new wine into old vessels that will surely break them.

Of the three Teaching Fig Trees in the Gospel, the first tells us, that
leaves without fruit draw on a curse, Matthew. 21. The second, that where
dressing helps not, it must not any longer stand to burden the ground, Luke.
13. The third, that a day of reckoning is growing upon us, Matthew. 24. It was
too late to gather Mannah, when the Sun had risen and melted it: and in vain to
cry, Lord, Lord, with the foolish virgins, when the doors are shut, Matthew. 25.
Thirst is a sign in Physic, that the purgation taken has well wrought, as it
should: My soul has a thirst for God, yea even for the living God, when shall
I come and appear before the presence of my God? Psalm. 42.2. My meat, is to do
the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work, John. 4.34. And, Blessed
are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled,
Matthew. 5, 6.

1. The Generation of vipers: 2. Sons of Belial: 3. Baal Kemarims: 4.
tongue-men: 5. belly-gods: 6. cursed liars, and slanderers: 7. filthy dreamers,
that blaspheme dignities, may have their portion here, but shall have their
potion hereafter, fire and brimstone, storm and tempest; this shall be
prepared for them, Psalm. 11. The Spider weaves a subtle web, and watches in
it diligently to entangle flies, which he may devour: but when the beesom of
destruction comes, behold his travail shall come upon his own head, and his
wickedness on his own pate, Psalm. 7.17. Musicians usually tune their
Instruments before they play in consort; and the foot should be looked unto,
before we enter into the house of God; except we intend to offer the fool's
Sacrifice, Eccles. 5.1. The water of Siloah, that runs softly, will prove
better in the end, then the Son of Remaliah's overflowing torrents. Every
plant that the heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted out, Matthew.
15.13.

CHAP. III.
Of Figures.
AS tropicall Speeches consist of choice and graceful Words: So Called by
Cicero, Orationis habitus from the Greek word (...), because speech is
clothed and adorned therewith: termed Figura, because it gives a new shape,
or face to the word, or sentence, that is embelished, and set forth with those
flowers. (...). Plutarch. Figura aneem est, oration immutata ab co, quod in usu
in consuetudine positum est, constans fictione quadam, ornatus aut utilitatis
causa. Tully in Bruto divides them in verberum and sententiarum lumina, (...).
Figures arise from the fit placing, disposition, or repetition of words in
Sentences, which otherwise would be represented, as homely, or (as may be
said) disfigured.

In this range, are these of especial Note, and Use; to which the rest may be
reduced. 1. Epizeuxis. 2. Anaphora. 3. Epistrophe. 4. Epanalepsis. 5. Epanados.
6. Paronomasia. 7. Polyptoton.


Ab (...) ad, et (...), jungere, because the same word is adjoined, or
presently repeated, therefore termed by Quintilian, lib. 9. chap. 3. Geminatio.
There are three ends of it, put down by him there: 1. for amplification, as
occidi, occidi; non Sp. Metium, Wherein the first serves to show, or
demonstrate, the other to affirm: 2. for commiseration, Ah Coridon, Coridon:
3. for elevation, being joined with an Irony.
Epizeuxis.
By an Epizeuxis the same word is geminated in the same sentence; in an
elegant, earnest manner. My heart is fixed, O GOD, my heart is fixed, I will
sing and give praise. Awake up my glory, awake up my lute and harp, I my self
will awake right early, Psalm. 57.7. O God to whom vengeance belongs, thou
God to whom vengeance belongs, show thy self, Psalm. 94.1. How long shall
the wicked? How long shall the wicked triumph? How long shall they utter, and
speak hard things, and make such proud boasting? Ib. For these things I vveep,
mine eye, mine eye, runs down with water: because the comforter, that
should relieve my Soul, is far from me, my Children are desolate, because the
Enemy prevailed, Lament. 1.16. So, O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the
Lord, Jeremiah. 22.29. A sword, a sword, is sharpened and also furbished: it is
sharpened to make a sore slaughter, it is furbished that it may glitter, should
we then make mirth? It contemns the rod of my Son, as every tree, Ezekiel.
21.9, 10. I will overturne, overturne, overturne it, and it shall be no more
until he come, whose right it is, and I will give it him, Ezekiel. 21.27. In
the same strain are these of our Savior; Martha, Martha, thou art careful
and troubled about many things, but one thing is necessary, Luke 10.41, 42. O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are
sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy Children together, as a Hen
gathers her Chickens under her wings, but ye would not, Matthew. 23, 37. Luke
13.34. Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision, for the day of the
Lord is near in the valley of decision, Joel. 3.14. Sometime, a Parenthesis is
interposed, as They seemed to be somewhat (whatsoever they were, it makes no
matter to me, God accepts no man's person) for they who seemed to be somewhat
in conference added nothing to me, Gal. 2.6.

To this Epizeuxis, may be referred Reduplicatie, called by Plutarch (...),
Verbi ejusdem repetitio a (...), dicere; quia idem sonus iteratur.
Anadiplosis, which is when the same word, that ends one sentence, begins the
other: and Climax, a climbing by a repetition of the words before, to make as
it were a foot-step to ascend higher, as both words give it. I was glad when
they said unto me, We will go into the house of the Lord; our feet shall stand
within thy gates O Jerusalem. Jerusalem is built as a City that is at unity in
it self, Ps. 122.1.2. I will laugh at your calamity, and I will mock when your
fear comes; when your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction comes
as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish comes upon you, Pro. 1.26.27. And
it shall come to pass when they shall say unto thee, Whither shall we go
forth? then thou shall tell them, Thus says the Lord, Such as are for Death,
to death; and such as are for the Sword, to the sword; and such as are for
Famine, to the famine; and such as are for Captivity, to the captivity, Jer.
15.2. So, Zach. 11.9. That which Dies, let it dye, and that that is Cut off,
let it be cut off, and let the rest cut every one the flesh of another.

Of (...), scala, gradus, (...), because in this figure we do proceed as it
were by certain steps, or rounds in a ladder: whence it is named Gradatio;
repetit quae dictasunt, and priusquam ad aliud descendat, in prioribus
resistit. Quintil. L. 9. c. 3.
Climax, these notable concatenations we have in the New Testament, Whosoever
shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved: How then shall they call on
him, in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him, of whom
they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? and how shall
they Preach, except they be sent? Romans 10.13, 14, 15. Whom he did foreknow, he
also did praedestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might
be the first born among many brethren. Moreover whom he did praedestinate, them
he also called; whom he called, them he also justified, and whom he justified,
he also glorified, Romans 8.29. We glory in tribulation, knowing that tribulation
works patience, and patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes
not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy
Ghost, which is given unto us, Romans 5.3.4, 5. Giving all diligence, add to your
faith virtue, and to virtue Knowledge, and to knowledge Temperance, and to
temperance Patience, and to patience Godliness, and to godliness Brotherly
kindness, and to brotherly kindness Charity, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7. In which kind
is that saying, Learn to know, know to do, do to dye, dye to live, live to
laud. So as by Higgaions, Selahs, Hosannahs, we may attain at length to
celestial Halleluichs.

By Plutarch called (...), and by him taken notice of to be very powerful to
work upon the affections as well as to delight the care; (...) quare videtur
esse adhibenda and ad exornandam, and augendam orationem. Auth. ad Heren.
Anaphora.
In Anaphora the same word is re-assum'd to begin diverse sentences. So
blessings, and cursings, are Anaphorically propounded. If ye walk in my
statutes, and keep my Commandments, and do them, I will give you rain in due
season, -- I will give peace in the land, -- I will have respect unto you, -- I
will set my Tabernacle amongst you. -- But, if ye will not hearken unto me, but
walk contrary to me, then will I walk also contrary to you, in fury; and I,
even I, will hastise you 7 times for your sins, Lev. 26.3.27, 28. In like
manner, Deuteronomy. 28. Blessed, blessed, blessed, -- and, Cursed, cursed, cursed, --
are reassumed by Anaphora, as the 8 Beatitudes, and so many Woes are
pronounced and denounced to the Happy, and Hypocrites, Mat. 5. and chapter 23. In
the same figure, Charity is displayed; Charity suffers long, and is kind;
Charity envieth not, Charity vaunteth not her self, 1 Cor. 13.4. The
abominations of the bloody City of Jerusalem, in which the Princes of Israel
were in their power to shed blood, are heavily taxed. In thee have they set
light by Father and Mother; in the midst of thee, have they dealt by
oppressions, with the stranger; in thee have they vexed the fatherless and the
widow. Thou have despised my holy things, and profaned my Sabbaths; in thee are
men, that carry tales to shed blood; in thee they that eat upon the mountains;
in the midst of thee, they commit lewdness; in thee, have they discovered
their fathers nakedness; in thee, have they humbled her that was set a part
for pollution, and one has committed abomination with his neighbors wife,
and another has lewdly defiled his daughter in law, and another in thee has
humbled his Sister, his Fathers daughter; in thee have they taken gifts to shed
blood; thou have taken usury, and increase, and thou have greedily gained of
thy neighbor by extortion, and have forgotten me, says the Lord God, Ezekiel.
22.7. The devastations of Jerusalem are lamented by the Prophet, Mine eyes fail
with tears, My bowels are troubled, My liver is poured upon the earth for the
destruction of the daughter of my people? What thing shall I take to witness
for thee? what thing shall I liken to thee, O daughter of Jerusalem? what shall
I equal to thee? that I may comfort thee, O virgin daughter of Sion, for thy
breach is great like the Sea, who can heal thee? Lament. 2.11.13. Howsoever
Gods people may be worried, and vilified as trampled dross, yet God
professes, He will make them his battle-axe, and weapons of War: Jer. 51.20,
21, 22.
For with thee (says he) will I break in pieces the Nations, and with thee
will I destroy Kingdoms, and with thee will I break in pieces the horse, and
his rider, and with thee will I break in pieces the Chariot, and his rider;
with thee also will I break in pieces man and woman, and with thee will I break
in pieces old and young, and with thee will I break in pieces the young Man,
and the Maid. I will also break in pieces with thee, the Shepherd and his
flock, and with thee will I break in pieces the husbandman and his yoke of
oxen; and with thee will I break in pieces Captains and Rulers, Jer. 51.20.
What went ye out into the wilderness to see? three times assumed, Mat. 11.7.
The 11th Chapter to the Hebrews is a continued Anaphora by resuming the word,
By Faith.

Rutilius calls it (...), Hermogenes (...), Plutarch. (...). Cicero
Conversio, quid ad postremum continenter revertimur. Auth. ad Heren.
Epistrophe.
That elegancy which Anaphora acquires by repeating the same words in the
beginning, Epistrophe equals, by doing the like in the conclusion, which
follow one the other: Ye house of Israel, put your trust in the Lord; He is
their succor and defender. Ye house of Aaron, put your trust in the Lord; He
is their succor and defender, Psalm. 115. So, His mercy endures for ever,
Psalm. 136. twenty and seven times repeated. To which Figure may be referred
that of our Savior, This is the Father's will which has sent me, that of all
which he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at
the last day. And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which
sees and believes in him, may have everlasting life, and I will raise him up
at the last day. No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me
draw him, and I will raise him up at the last day, Joh. 6. Likewise that, If
thy hand offend thee, cut it off; it is better for thee to enter into life
maimed, then having two hands to go into hell, into the fire that never shall
be quenched. And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off; for it is better for thee
to enter in halt into life, then having two feet to be cast into hell, into the
fire that never shall be quenched; where the worm dies not, and the fire is
not quenched. And if thy eye offend thee, pluck it out; it is better for thee
to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast
into hell fire, where the worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched, Mar. 9.
So, of mystical Babylon's ruin it is said, The voice of harpers, and
musicians, and pipers, and trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in thee.
And no craftsman of whatsoever craft shall be found any more at all in thee;
and the sound of the millstone shall be heard no more at all in thee, and the
light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee, and the voice of the
bridegroom shall be heard no more at all in thee, Rev. 18.22.

Under Epistrophe may be compriled Commoratio, quia in loco firmissimo, que
tota causa continetur, monetur diutius, and eodem saepius reditur: nam and
commoratio in una re permultum movet. Cicer. de orat. Epimone est Tropus in
theologia quando dictio repetitur ad majorem certitudinem, vel defiderii
expressionem, ut, Amen, amen, dico-vobis. Al^i^i. unt quod sit, quando dictio
non tota repetitur sed principium and finis variatur, ut, Expectando expectavi.
Vetus Vocabularius.
Epimone, When a sentence, as it were the burden of a song, is often repeated;
as that, Turn us again, thou God of hosts, show us the light of thy countenance
and we shall be whole, thrice repeated Psalm. 80. So, Why art thou so vexed, O
my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me? O put thy trust in God --
Psalm. 42.11. So that passage, O that men would therefore praise the Lord for
his goodness, and declare the wonders that he does for the children of men,
Psalm. 107. four times repeated. As that, For all that, his anger is not turned
away, but his hand is stretched out still, Isa. 9. So that of our Savior to
his Disciples, He that loves father or mother more then me is not worthy of
me, thrice repeated, Matthew. 10.37. And so, -- receive a reward, Ib. 41. In the
same strain is that, Charity bears all things, believes all things, hops
all things, endures all things, 1 Cor. 13.7.

From Anaphora and Epistrophe joined together, arises Complicatio, because
both the former Figures are folded and wrapped in this. Cum repetitio fit in
principiis and clausulis.
Symploce, as, O give thanks unto the Lord for he is gracious, because his
mercy endures for ever. Let Israel now confess that he is gracious, and that
his mercy endures for ever. Let the house of Aaron now confess, that his
mercy endures for ever. Yea, let all them that fear the Lord confess, that
his mercy endures for ever, Psalm. 118.2, 3, 4. No man of us lives to himself,
and no man dies to himself; for whether we live, we live to the Lord, or
whether we die, we die to the Lord: Whether we live therefore or die, we are
the Lords, Romans 14.7, 8. We know in part, we prophesy in part; but when that
which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. When I
was a child I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child;
but when I became a man, I put away childish things, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10.11. A
stupendous Symploce is that, Ezekiel. 32. Ashur is there, and all her company:
his graves are about him, all of them slain, fallen by the sword, whose graves
are set in the side of the pit, and her company is round about her grave; all
of them slain, fallen by the sword. There is Elam and her multitude round about
her grave, all of them slain, fallen by the sword, which are gone down
uncircumcised unto the nether parts of the earth, which caused their terror
in the land of the living, yet have they born their shame with them that go
down into the pit -- So, There is Mesech, Tubal, Edom, the Princes of the
north, and all the Sidonians, in the same posture. More punctual is that of
Obadiah, Obad. 1.13.
Thou should not have entered into the gate of my people in the day of their
calamity; nor laid hands on their substance in the day of their calamity. To
this may be referred that strain of our Savior, If ye love them that love you,
what thanks have ye? for sinners also love those that love them. And if ye do
good to them which do good to you, what thanks have ye? for sinners also do
even the same. And if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive, what thanks
have ye? for sinners also lend to sinners, and to receive as much again, Luke
6. So, Luke 17.34. Two -- the one shall be taken and the other left; thrice
repeated.

Resumptio, quando primis respondent ultima. Quintilian. Author ad Heren. vocat
Conduplicationem, cum ratione amplificationis, aut commiserationis cjusdem
unius, aut plurium verborum fit iteratio.
Epanalepsis.
Epanalepsis ends with the same word it begins. For we are saved by hope; but
hope that is seen is not hope, Romans 8.24. Rejoice in the Lord, and again I say,
Rejoice, Phil. 4.4. So Psalm the 8th begins with, O Lord our governor, how
excellent is thy name in all the world? and ends with the same words. Likewise
Psalm. 103. has this beginning, Praise the Lord, all my soul; and ends in the
same words, termed, The Orators round. As we said before, so say I now again,
If any man preach any other gospel unto you then ye have received, let him be
accursed. Inferred upon the saying before, Though we or an Angel from heaven
preach any other gospel unto you than ye have received, let him be accursed,
Gal. 1.8, 9.

Regressio, sen Reditio in viam, (...), Plutarch: Quando duas res, and nomina
proponens aliquis, sensu nondum finito, redit ad utrumque nominum, ut complete
sententiae defectum, ut, -- Divellimur inde Iphitus and Pelias mecum; quorum
Iphitus aevo Jam gravior --
Epanados.
Epanados resumes that which was spoken, and dismisseth it with an explication,
ringing, as it were, the same Bells in changes: The ungodly have drawn out the
sword, and bent the bow, to cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such as
be of a right conversation. Their sword shall God throw through their own
heart, and their bow shall be broken, Psalm. 37.14, 15. Woe unto thee that
spoilest, and wast not spoiled; and dealest treacherously, and they dealt not
treacherously with thee. When thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled;
and when thou shall make an end to deal treacherously, they shall deal
treacherously with thee, Esaias 33.1. When the holy Ghost comes, he shall
reprove the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. Of sin, because
they believe not on me; of righteousness, because I go to the Father, and ye
see me no more: of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged, John
16.8, 9, 10, 11. The Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom;
but we preach Christ crucified; to the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the
Greeks foolishness; but unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks,
Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God. Because the foolishness of God
is wiser then men, and the weakness of God is stronger then men, 1 Cor. 1.

Agnominatio, allusio Vocis ad vocem, quae fit per literae adjection^m,
detractiunem, tr^^spositionem, vel immutationemnt, Amantes sunt amentes. Raras
das mihi literas; charas tamen.
Paronomasia.
Paronomasia seasonably used, delights the hearers, helps the memory, and
shows, in propinquity of words, the difference of things. Behold, I have taken
upon me to speak unto the Lord, which am but apher and epher, dust and ashes,
Genesis 18.27. As for the gods of the heathens, they be but idols; their Elohim
are elilim, Psalm. 96.5. Diis, noddys, their idols addle, idle in English
expression. In the mountain [of the Church] the Lord of hosts shall make unto
all people mishteh shemanim, a feast of fat things; mishteh shemarim, feasts of
wine in the lees, Esa, 25.6. wherein shall be the complement of marrow-dishes,
and brisk pure wine, which shall satisfy the utmost spiritual appetite. So,
(...) and (...), envy and murder; (...) and (...), fornication and wickedness;
(...), without understanding, covenant-breakers, Romans 1.29.31. have a color of
Paronomasia, which will savor of pedantism to be too often used. In the eighth
of Amos, verse. 1, 2. Kaits ushereth in Keets; plenty, destruction.

(...), multum; and (...) ca^o, quasi dicas, Casuum carietatem, cum ejusdem
nominis casus sapius commu^antur, Cicer. ad Brut. Variatur haec casihus and
generibus i^^, under (...) no^ Quint lib. 9. Con^ (...) variorum casuum ^^dem
f^nte deductorum, ut O^^d Metamorph. lib. 5.

Heu quantum scelus est in viscere viscera condi,
Congestoque avidum pinguescere corpore corpus.
Alteriusque animantem animantis vivere lethol
Called by the Author ad Heren. Traductio, by others Me (...).

Polyptoton.
Polyptoton inculcates vehemently, in diverse cases and expressions, what we
would have notice to be taken especially of. Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked.
Thou art waxen fat, thou art thick, thou art covered with fatness. Then he
forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation,
Deuteronomy. 32.15. Has he smitten him as he smote those that smote him? or, is he
flain according to the slaughter of them which are slain by him? Esa. 27.7. No,
in measure. God will deal more favorably with his, then his enemies. When it
shouteth forth he will debate with it, and stay his rough wind in the day of
his east wind, (...), Matthew. 15.14. Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, who comfort us
in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any
trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God, 2 Cor.
1.4. The sabbath was made for man, not man for the sabbath; therefore the Son
of man is Lord also of the sabbath, Mar. 2.27, 28. For he has made him to be
sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him, 2 Cor. 5.21.

The combining of these Figures together with the former Tropes, carry with
them a delightful and winning grace, especially in 1 petitions; 2 complaints;
3 quick reproofs or encitements. So, (1) that of the Apostle, O the depth of
the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God I how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out? For who has known the mind of the
Lord? or who has been his counselor? or who has first given to him, and it
shall be recompensed to him again? For in him, and through him, and to him are
all things, to whom be glory for ever. Romans 11. My God, my God look upon me.
Why have thou forsaken me, and art so far from my health, and from the word of
my complaint? Psalm. 22.1. O God my heart is ready, my heart is ready; I will
sing and give praise with the best member that I have, Psalm. 18.1. (2.) A
complaint studded with such sparkling gems, we have, Psalm. 69. (3.) Quick
speeches, called by the Preacher, goads and nails, fastened by the masters of
the assemblies, Eccles. 12.11. come under this reckoning. As, Our Savior
turned water into wine to supply the new married's wants; but we turn wine into
water out of luxurious wantonness. If St. Peter's successor were stinted to
his founder's allowance, Silver and gold have I none; he would quickly be weary
of the Chair, which has so scant a cushion. Both sorts of those fanatics are
to blame, as well those that will have no set prayers, as those that will have
no prayers but set. God makes Protestants, but the Papists make god. Religion
makes us, but they make religion; and this made-religion they maintain, that
this maintained may maintain them. We should as well apply our selves to
Christ's merits, that so his merits might be rather a stay to our infirmities,
then a stale to our enormities. We must therefore couple faithfulness with
faith, that we may do, as well as believe, and that because we do believe. We
must take heed, that whilst we hunt after neat expressions, (...), Col. 2.4.
(...), 1 Cor. 1.19. (...), Ib c. 7.4. (...), unde (...), Ephesians. 5.6.
we let not slip the thing that should be chiefly pressed and expressed. Diverse
aim to show, how much they can say on a Text, with no regard at all how little
their auditors can bear away; as though they came into a Pulpit to open only
their store, not to feed their flocks; and to beg applause of their
Congregation, that they are ready Preachers, not to so lead them that they may
be profitable hearers. Such sounding brass is not fit metal to make vessels
for the Temple; and such tinckling cymballs, without solidity and charity, make
fit music for a May Pole. These sycophanticall sermonings, angling for gain,
more then souls; and applause, more then the proficiency of the hearers, the
Apostle calls God to witness, was far from his manner of teaching, 1 Thessalonians.
2.4, 5.

CHAP. IV.
Called (...), quia affectus seu motus animi istas Sententiarum figuras
praecipue sequuntur. Differt Sententiae figura a figura Dictionis, quod illa
sententias illuminet, in figuris autem dictionis apt and jucunde inter se
resonent: deinde quod sententiarum conformationes mutatis verbis confistere
possunt; Figurae autem dictionis non item, quia mutatis sedibus perit
resonantia, qua fit color.
Of Schemes.
TO teach, to delight, and thoroughly to persuade, are the scopes of Oratory.
After teaching-Tropes therefore, and delighting-Figures, convincing and
persuading- Schemes may be well enquired after.

These come under the titles of 1. Ecphonesis. 2. Epanorthosis. 3. Apostrophe.
4. Prosopopoea. 5. Aporia. 6. Anacoinosis. 7. Synchoresis.


Exclamatio, because in the pronountiation there is required a straining and
elevation of the voice, the sign of which is either some Adverb or
Interjection. Ecce quam bonum and quam jucundum habitare fratres in unum! Psalm.
133. O prosundas divitias tum sapientiae, tum cognitionis Dei! quam
inscrutabilia sunt ejus judicia, and ejus viae impervestigabiles? Romans 11.35.
Ecphonesis.
Ecphonesis, or exclamations, are raised upon so various occasions, that they
can hardly be confined; most fall within compass of these limits: 1. Of
Admiring, How is the faithful city become an harlot! It was full of judgment,
righteousness lodged in it, but now murderers. Thy silver is become dross,
Isa. 1.21.
thy wine mixed with water. 2. Wishing; O that they (Gods people) were wise,
that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end! Deuteronomy.
32.29. O that my people would have hearkened unto me! If Israel had walked in
my ways, I should have soon put down their enemies, and turned my hand against
their adversaries. The haters of the Lord should have been found liars. Also
with the finest wheat flour, and with honey out of the stony-rock, should I
have satisfied thee, Psalm. 14.15, 16. O that thou would rend the heavens,
that thou would come down, that the mountains might flow down at thy
presence, as when the fire of melting burns, Isa. 64.
the fire that causes the waters to boil, to make thy name known to thine
adversaries. 3. Complaining: O Lord, what shall I say, when Israel turn their
backs before their enemies? for the Canaanites and all the inhabitants of the
land shall hear of it, and shall environ us round, and cut off our name from
the earth, and what will thou do unto thy great name? Josh. 7.8. O God,
wherefore art thou absent from us so long? why is thy wrath so hot against the
sheep of thy pasture? O think upon thy congregation whom thou have purchased,
and redeemed of old. Think upon the tribe of thine inheritance, and mount Sion
wherein thou have dwelt. Lift up thy feet, that thou may utterly destroy
every enemy, which has done evil in thy sanctuary, Psalm. 74. O wretched man
that I am! Romans 7.24.
who shall deliver me from this body of death? 4. Indignation. O generation of
Vipers, who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Matthew. 3.7. O
faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you? how long
shall I suffer you? Matthew. 17.17. O fools and slow of heart to believe all that
the Prophets have spoken? Luke 24.25. Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in
hearts and ears; ye do always resist the holy Ghost; as your fathers did, so
do ye, Act. 7.51. O full of subtlety and all mischief, thou child of the
devil, Act. 13.10.
thou enemy of all righteousness, wilt you not cease to pervert the ways of
the Lord? 5. Exsultation. Behold how good and joyful a thing it is for
brethren to dwell together in unity! Psalm. 133.1. What reward shall I give unto
the Lord, Psalm. 116.11.
for all the benefits he has done unto me? 6. Insultation. How art thou fallen
from heaven, O Lucifer son of the morning! How art thou cast down to the
ground, which did weaken the nations! Isa. 14.12. O thou enemy! destructions
are come to a perpetual end, Psalm. 9.6.
even of the Cities which thou have destroyed, their memorial is perished with
them. 7. Commiseration. Ah Lord God! will thou destroy all the residue of
Israel in pouring out of thy fury upon Jerusalem? Ezekiel. 9.8. Behold O Lord,
and consider to whom thou have done this! shall the women eat their fruit, and
children of a span long? shall the Priest and the Prophet be slain in the
Sanctuary of the Lord! Lam. 2.20.

To this Exclamation may be referred an Rei narratae, vel probatae summa
acclamatio. Quint. ut, Tantae molis erat Romanam condere gentem Ad ditur ad
finem, fine exclamationis nota.
Epiphonema, or sententious closure, relating to premises of consequence: Thus
they provoked him to anger with their own inventions, and the plague was great
amongst them. Psalm. 106.29. Thus were they stained with their own works, and
went a whoring after their own inventions. ib. 38. Thus they turned the glory
of God into the similitude of a calfe that eats hey. Ib. 20. Thus Joash the
King remembered not the kindness which Jehojada his father had done unto him,
but slew his son; and when he died, he said, The Lord look upon it, and
require it, 2 Chronicles. 24.22.

Quasi (...), Libertas loquendi.
Parrhesia, an assumed freedom of speech, which is commonly ushered in, with
an excusing praeface. Men and brethren let me freely speak unto you of the
patriarch David, that he is both dead, and buried, and his sepulcher with us
this day, Act. 2.29. We cannot but speak the things which we have both seen,
and heard. Ib. 4.20. the King knows of these things, before whom I speak,
[(...)] freely. For I am persuaded, that none of these things are hidden from
him; for this thing was not done in a corner, Act. 26.26.

Correctio, quae tollit id quod dictum est; and, pro eo, id quod magis idoneum
videtur, reponit. Author. ad Heren. Called by the Greeks likewise, (...), and
(...).
Epanorthosis.
Epanorthosis does in some sort qualify that, which has, as we make it,
slipped from us; or drowneth somewhat, which we would have understood, though
not uttered. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have
compassion on the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will not I forget
thee, Esa. 49.15. Father, save me from this hour; but for this cause came I
into the world, Joh. 12.27. I labored more abundantly then they all; yet not
I, but the grace of God which was with me, 1 Cor. 15.10. I marvel that you are
so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ, unto another
Gospel, which is not another. But there be some that trouble you, and would
pervert the gospel of Christ, Gal. 1.6, 7.

Attendant to this is Reticentia, Cicer. Obticentia, Celsus. Called by others,
Interruptio, because the thread of discourse is broken off. Virgil. Quos ego:
sed motos praestat componere fluctus. Used 1. To express anger; Quem quidem
ego si sensero: sed quid opus est verbis, Plaut. 2. Fear: Virgil. Neque vincere
certo: Quanquam O: sed superent quibus hoe, Neptune, dedisti. 3. An high
passion of grief: Tu autem Jehova quousque! Psalm. 6.4.
Aposiopesis, when somewhat is left to be gathered, by a breaking off abruptly.
Oh this people have sinned a great sin, and made them gods of gold: yet now if
thou will forgive them their sin [It is too much for me to ask, but thy
infinite mercy may afford it]: if not, blot me out, I pray thee, of the book
which thou have written, Exodus 32. To whom I swear in my wrath, [if they should
enter into my rest] left to be understood, Let not me be trusted any more upon
oath. If thou had known, even at least in this thy day the things which
belong unto thy peace, (thou would have taken better courses, or the like):
but now they are hid from thine eyes, Luke 19.42.

Aversio, sermo aversus; because the scene of speech is changed and directed to
another.
Apostrophe.
Apostrophe, in a continuate speech, turns from the hearers, or matter present,
and bespeaks a thing or person absent, or present, by the By. So David, in
lamenting the death of Saul and Jonathan, lets fly an imprecation upon the
place where they were slain: Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew, nor
let there be rain upon you, nor fields of offerings; for there the shield of
the Mighty is vilely cast away, the shield of Saul, as though he had not been
anointed with oil, 2 Samuel 1.21. So, in declaring Israel's exodus from Egypt,
he bespeaks the sea, and Jordan, with the mountains, and earth it self: What
aileth thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest! etc. Psalm. 114.5. So Isaiah makes
the heavens and earth his auditors; Hear, O heaven, and give ear, O earth, for
the Lord has spoken. I have nourished and brought up children, and they have
rebelled against me, Isa. 1.2. Baldness is come upon Gaza, Askalon is cut off
with the remnant of their valley; how long will thou cut thy self? O thou sword
of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? Put up thy self into thy
scabbard; rest, and be still, Jer. 47.6. In the 24th Psalm; upon profession,
that although The earth be the Lords, with all the fullness, and inhabitants of
the world; yet because all have not that share in it as the Israelites, (God's
favorites) Deuteronomy. 10.14, 15; the Prophet breaks out, by an high Apostrophe, to
the Gates, for enlarging themselves, to entertain the Ark of God: Lift up your
heads, O ye gates; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors; and the King of
glory shall come in. Twice repeated; that the compellation of the senseless
gates might make the deeper impression, for opening to Christ knocking at the
door of our hearts. And this sort of Apostrophe to senssesse creatures, is
often met with in other Authors. But two other besides, the one to God, the
other to our own souls, are peculiar in a manner to Scripture-Rhetorick.
Apostrophe to God, 1. by Petition. 2. Complaint. 3. Praises. 4. Thanksgiving.
5. Detestation of opposites. 6. Stirring up our selves. 7. Inciting others, and
inviting. Thus, upon a narration of Gods wonderful conducting the Israelites
out of Egypt, the Prophet raises a most patheticall Apostrophe. Look down from
heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy holiness, and of thy glory.
Where is thy zeal, and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels and thy
mercies, toward me are they restrained? -- Doubtless, thou art our Father --
O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our hearts
from thy fear? by leaving us to putrify in our own corruptions). O that thou
would rend the heavens -- Behold, thou art wroth, for we have sinned? Isa.
63. Such are those of blessed King Charles, worthy of all imitation. Apostrophe
to our own selves are termed Soliloquies, seldom found out of Scripture. So,
The river of Kishon swept them away, that ancient river, the river of Kishon. O
my soul, thou have trodden down strength, Judge. 5.21. In such a Soliloquy,
David cheareth up himself, Why art thou so vexed, O my soul, and why art thou
so disquieted in me? O put thy trust in God, for I will yet thank him, which is
the help of my countenance and my God, Psalm. 42.14. So, Praise the Lord, O my
soul, and all that is within me praise his holy name, Psalm. 103. So, 104.
Praise the Lord, O my soul. Thus he does himself, and makes Apostrophe's to
others to do the like; O come let us sing unto the Lord -- Sing unto the Lord a
new song -- So, all former Halleluiahs are shut up with an Apostrophe to all,
Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord, Psalm. 150.

Fictio personae, when the person is not there, but brought in upon the stage
speaking as if he were present. So a thing that is mute oft-times, is dressed
up in a person, and words put in his mouth. In this, there ought to be a
decorum observed, that ye dress not the servant like the master, but that
there be a respect had to the thing personated, and accordingly to be clothed
with words, Prove. 1.22.
Prosopopoea.
By a Prosopopoea, 1. Wisdom is filled with a speech; How long, ye simple ones,
will ye love simplicity, and the scorners delight in their scorning, and fools
hate knowledge? Turn at my reproof: behold, I will pour out my spirit unto you,
I will make known my words unto you. 2. A Harlot; I have peace offerings with
me this day, I have paid my vows. Therefore come I forth to meet thee
diligently, to seek thy face; and I have found thee. I have decked my bed with
coverings of tapestry, with carved work, with fine linen of Egypt. I have
perfumed my bed with myrrh, Prove. 7.
aloes, and cynnamon. Come, let us take our fill of love until the morning,
let us solace our selves with love. For the good man is not at home, he is gone
a long journey; he has taken a bag of money with him, and will come at the day
appointed. 3. Sacrilegious Church-robbers: Come let us root them out, that they
be no more a people, and that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.
Psalm. 83.4.
4. Hypocritical Separatists, Isa. 65.5.
that walk after their own thoughts. Stand by thy self, come not near to me;
for I am holier then thou. 5. Rebels; For now they will say, We have no King,
because we feared not the Lord, Hos. 10.
what then should a King do to us? They have spoken words, swearing falsely
in making a covenant. Thus judgment springs up like hemlock in the furrows of
the field. The inhabitants of Samaria shall fear, because of the calves of Beth
aven. 6. Wretched Nabals: What shall I do? I have no room to bestovv my fruits.
This will I do, Luke 12.17, 18, 19.
I will pull down my barns and build greater, and there will I bestovv my
fruits and my goods. And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou have much goods
laid up for many years, Take thine ease, eat, and drink, and be merry. 7.
Penitent Prodigals: How many hired servants of my fathers, have bread enough
and to spare, and I perish with hunger? I will arise and go to my father and
say to him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and against thee, and am no
more worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy hired servants, Luke
15.17, 18, 19. In like manner the Pharisee and Publican are fitted with
prayers, Ib. 18.11, 12, 13. And the desperate, with a speech consonant to
their remediless case: This was he whom we had sometimes in derision, and a
proverb; We fools accounted his life madness, and his end without honor.
How is he numbered among the children of God, and his life among the Saints?
-- We wearied our selves in the way of wickedness. -- What has pride profited
us? -- All these things are passed away like a shadow, Wisd. 5. Sometimes, in
stead of personating one, diverse are represented on the theater, as, Who is
this that comes from Edom, with his garments from Bozrah? that is glorious in
his apparel, traveling in the greatness of his strength. I that speak in
righteousness, mighty to save. Wherefore art thou red in thy apparel, and thy
garments like him that treads in the wine-fat? I have trodden the winepresse
alone, and of the people there was none with me. For I will tread them in my
anger, and trample them in my fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my
garments, and I will stain all my raiment, Isa. 63.1, 2, 3. We have a little
sister, and she has no breasts; what shall we do for our sister in the day
when she shall be spoken for? If she be a wall, we will build upon her a palace
of silver; and if she be a door, we will enclose her with boards of cedar,
Cant. 8.8.

Addubitatio, eum ^^^^lamus quaerere, unde incipiendum, ubi desinendum, quid
potissimum dicendum omnino fit. Quint. l. 9. c. 2.
Aporia.
Aporia is, as it were, a casting about, and deliberating with our selves in a
doubtful business, what way to take. The Steward said within himself, What
shall I do? for my Lord takes away from me my Stewardship. I cannot dig, and
to beg I am ashamed. Luke 16.3. I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire
to depart, and to be with Chirst, which is far better: nevertheless, to abide
in the flesh is more needful for you, Phil. 1.22, 23, 24. Such deliberations
by an anthropopathy are ascribed to God himself O Ephraim what shall I do unto
thee? for your goodness is as the morning clowd, and as the dew it goes away,
Hos. 6.4. So, Ib. 11.8. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver
thee, Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim?
Mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together. What reward
shall I give unto the Lord for all the benefits he has done unto me? I will
receive the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my
vows now in the presence of all his people. Right dear in the sight of the
Lord, is the death of his Saints, Psalm. 116.11, 12.

A Dubitatione non procul abhorret Communicatio, cum aut ipsos adversarios
consulimus, aut quando cum judicibus deliberamus. Quint. l. 9. c. 2.
Anacoinosis.
Anacoinosis debates the matter with others, and admits of scruples; but, so
far, as we may plausibly decide them. And here a Prolepsis, the foreseeing and
anticipating of doubts, is most natural. Will a man rob his God? Yet ye have
robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings. Ye
are cursed with a curse; for ye have robbed me, even the whole nation, Mal.
3.8, 9. Thou will say, The branches be broken off that I might be graffed in:
Well, because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou stand by faith; be
not high-minded, but fear. For if God spared not the natural branches, take
heed lest he also spare not thee, Romans 11.19, 20, 21. Thou will say unto me,
Why does he yet find fault, for who has resisted his will? Nay, but, O man,
who art thou that reply against God? Shall the thing framed say to him that
formed it, Why have thou made me thus? Romans 9.19, 20.

By this Scheme, any controversies of the Schools may be rhetorically handled,
as, Thou vvilt tell me, There is a purgatory, by which David passed through
fire and water, to a place of refreshing, Psalm. 38. But this must be meant of
temporal affliction, which David in this life had passed. But, After this
life there is a prison, whence redemption may be had upon payment of the
uttermost farthing, Matthew. 5. Allusions give not Conclusions; and the prison
mentioned is no purging of the soul, but urging of a pious and timely
agreement, to prevent further inconveniences. But why were men baptized for
the dead, if it did the dead no good? Baptized they were in their own blood,
which they shed, rather then they would bewray their brethren. But it is
known, the Fathers held Purgatory. But never as a tenent of religion, but a
matter of discourse, with a forsitan verum est, as St. Austin. Decked with
this Anacoinosis is Rabshekah's oration, What confidence is this wherein thou
trustest? Thou say, I have counsel and strength -- Egypt is but a bruised
reed, which will pierce the hand of him that leans upon it -- But if ye say,
We will trust in the Lord our God; is it not he whose high places and whose
altars Hezekiah has taken away? -- 2 King. 18.19.

Concessio, cum aliquid etiem iniquum videmur causae fiducia pati. Quint. l. 9.
c. 2. Gracis dicitur etiam (...). Vnde ali^ figuram hanc Confessunem vocarent.
Synchoresis.
Synchoresis grants as much, as the adversary can in reason desire; yet
shows, that it makes nothing for him. Behold, thou art called a Jew, and
restest in the Law, and make thy boast of God, and know his will, and
approvest the things that are more excellent, being instructed out of the Law,
and art confident that thou thy self art a guide of the blind, a light of them
that are in darkensse, an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes, which
have the form of knowledge, and the truth in the law. Thou that teach a man
should not steal, do thou steal? thou that say a man should not commit
adultry, do thou commit adultry? thou that abhorrest idols, do thou commit
sacriledg? thou that make thy boast of the law, through breaking the law
dishonourest thou God? Romans 2. The Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek
after wisdom, but we preach Christ crucified, a stumbling block to the Jews,
and to the Greeks foolishness; but unto them which are called, both Jews, and
Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the vvisdome of God. Because the
foolishness of God is vviser then men, and the weakness of God stronger then
men, 1 Cor. 1. Am I a God at hand, says the Lord, and not a God a far off? can
any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see him says the Lord? Do
not I fill heaven, and earth, says the Lord? Jer. 23.23, 24. Upon which
dissension, the auditory are usually desired to judge. And now inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge, I pray, between me and my vineyard. What
could I have done more to my vineyard than I have done unto it? Isa. 5.3, 4. I
speak to wise men, judge you what I say; The cup of blessing, which we bless,
is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread, which we break, is
it not the communion of the body of Christ? 1 Cor. 10.15, 16. Ye Hypocrites, ye
can disern the face of the sky, and of the earth; but how is it that ye do not
discern this time? yea, and why of your selves judge ye not what is right?
Luke 12.56, 57.

CHAP. V.
Passionem, seu affectam afferens; such things as move the mind to love,
hatred, etc.
Of Patheticks.
IN this we have the height of Rhetoric, wherein James and John, the sons
of Zebedee, appear as sons of thunder, Mar. 3.17. Peter stabs the hearts of his
auditory to a trembling prostration, Men and brethren, what shall we do?, Act.
14.11, 12. Apollos, the eloquent Alexandrian, mightily convinced the Jews in
public, Act. 18. For an introduction to which, 1. The affections are to be
considered, that are to be wrought upon. 2. The vvorking upon them diversely,
by Scripture - Patheticks.

Affections to be wrought upon may be conveniently reduced to 1. Love. 2.
Hatred. 3. Hope. 4. Fear. 5. Joy. 6. Sorrow. 7. Zeal.


Motives to Love.
Love respects God, our selves, our neighbors. David's love to God is expressed
in diverse places extatically, O how amiable arethy dvvellings, thou Lord of
hosts! My soul has a desire and longing to enter into the courts of the Lord:
my heart and my flesh rejoice in the Living God, Psalm. 84. Happy Sparrovvs and
Svvallovvs which there may have a nest or house; to which, a passage through
this vale of misery is a proceeding from strength to strength; where one days
entertainment is better, than a thousand spent in vvorldly pleasure. The tents
of ungodliness may be held delectable dvvellings; but I had rather be a
dore-keeper in the house of my God, than the chief commander in the stateliest
palaces, Ib. So every where in all his devotions, such flashes of love break
out: The Lord is my strength and my shield, my heart has trusted in him, and I
am helped. Therefore my heart danceth for joy, and in my song will I praise
him, Psalm. 28.8. Like as the Heart desires the vvater-brooks, so longs my soul
after thee, O God. My soul is a thirst for God, yea, even for the living God; O
when shall I come to appear before the presence of God, Psalm. 42.1, 2. I have
set God alvvaies before me, for he is on my right hand, therefore I shall not
fall. Wherefore my heart was glad, and my glory rejoiced, my flesh also shall
rest in hope. For thou vvilt not leave my soul in hell, neither vvilt thou
suffer thine holy One to see corruption. Thou shall show me the path of life:
in thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy right hand there is pleasure
for evermore, Psalm. 16. The men of thy hand, and worldlings, may take pleasure
in their portions in this life, whose bellies thou fillest with thy hid
treasures. They have children at their desire, and leave the rest of their
substance for their babes. But as for me, I will behold thy presence in
righteousness, and when I awake up after thy likeness, I shall be satisfied,
Psalm. 17.14, 15, 16. This of David's, de art amandi, is to be studied. The
special motives thereunto, are. 1. Gods tender love to us. 2. His inestimable
benefits bestowed, and continued upon us. For what brutish disposition will not
be taken to love him, from whom he receives his being, and all that he has?
Is it an ordinary expression of love from the King of Kings to the durty
Israelites, in Egyptian slavery? Israel is my Son, even my first borne, and I
say unto thee, Let my son go, that he may serve me: and if thou refuse to let
him go, behold I will slay thy son even thy first born, Exodus 4.22, 23. And
often he had brought them out, to the confusion of mighty Pharaoh, and all
their opposites, and supplied their wants. What heart would not melt to ponder
that affectionate winning speech? And now Israel, what does thy Lord thy God
require of thee? but to fear thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to love
him, and to serve thy Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul?
Deuter. 10. More patheticall is that (if it may be) concerning their hard usage
(though deserved) from Assure and Babel. Israel is a scattered sheep, the lions
have driven him away: first the King of Assyria has devoured him, and last
this Nebuchadnezzar has broken his bones. Therefore, thus says the Lord of
hosts, behold I will punish the King of Babylon, and his land; as I have
punished the King of Assyria, and I will bring Israel again into his
habitation, and he shall feed in Carmel, and Bashan, and his soul shall be
satisfied upon mount Ephraim, and Gilead. In those days, and at that time,
says the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be
none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found: for I will pardon
them whom I reserve. Go up against the land of the rebels, over against it,
and against the inhabitants of Pekoda that are to be visited, waste, and
utterly destroy after them, says the Lord, and do according to all that I have
commanded thee, Jerem. 50. If this love take not, what should the
considerations work, 1. that it is the Lord that woeth us, that made us, and
not we our selves. 2. that loved so the world, being his enemies, Joh. 3.16.
Romans 5.10. Col. 1.21.
that he sent his only begotten son to redeem us from hellish slavery to an
everlasting kingdom. 3. that sent his holy spirit to be our comforter, Joh.
16. to help our infirmities. Romans 8.26. and to cry Abba father. 4. Psalm. 119.
his word to be a perpetual lanthorn unto our feet, and a light unto our
paths 5. his blessing, for our supply in all necessaries, and all
conveniences: Verily thou shall be fed. Psalm. 37.3. When young lions do lack,
and suffer hunger, those that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing.
Psalm. 34.10.
his protection and safe conduct from the roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8.0
and his accomplices, that walks about seeking whom he may devour. 7. his
deliverance from all contempts, Psalm. 107.41.
and pressures. Motives to preserve and love our selves. What can be more
patheticall then that of our Savior? What is a man profited, if he shall gain
the whole world and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange
for his soul? Matthew, 16.26. or that of Job, What is the hope of the hypocrit?
though he has gain. When God takes away his soul, will God hear his cry when
trouble comes upon him? Will he delight himself in the Almighty? will he all
way call upon God? Job 26.8. Or that of the Apostle, Know you not that your
members are the the members of Christ? shall I take the members of Christ, and
make them the members of an harlot? God forbid. 1 Cor. 6.15. Know ye not, that
ye are the temple of God? and the spirit of God dwells in you? if any man
defiles the temple of God, him God will destroy. For the Temple of God is
holy, whose temple ye are, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. Ye are not your own, ye are bought
with a price, therefore glorify God in your body, and your spirit, which are
Gods. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. For the loving of Gods Church, and our neighbors, and
enemies, what can be more pathetical then that speech watered with tears of
our Savior over Jerusalem? When he was come near, he beheld the city, wept
over it, saying, If thou had known, even in this thy day, the things that
belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes, Luke 19.41, 42.
The Aposiopesis makes it more passionate. As that of Moses for the people; O
this people have sinned a great sin, and made them Gods of gold, yet now if
thou will forgive their sin! If not, blot me I pray thee out of the book which
thou have written, Exodus 32.31, 32. which St. Paul professes in plainer
speech, I say the truth in Christ, I ly not, my conscience bearing me witness
in the holy ghost, that I have great heavynesse, and continual sorrow in my
heart. For I could wish my self were accursed from Christ for my brethren, my
kinsmen acording to the flesh, Romans 9.1, 2, 3. And what a lamentation have we
of David's for Saul his enemy? 2 Samuel 1.17. And of Jeremiah for Zedekiah, and
Jerusalem, that had used him so barbarously, in his passionate Threnes? Which
are a sufficient pattern where love should be opened and placed: which our
Savior urges as the chief mark of his followers. A new commandment I give
you, that ye love one another: as I have loved you, that ye also love one
another. By this shall all men know, that ye are my disciples, if ye love one
another, Joh. 13.34, 35. Which is farther urged by that beloved disciple, 1 John 4. from the 7 v. to the end of the Chapter.

Motives to hatred.
May be especially bent against, 1. sluggishnesse. 2. impertinences. 3. sordid
avarice. 4. bestiall luxury. 5. brutish inhumanity. 6. persidious breach of
promises, oaths, and vows. 7. and rebellion against such as God has set over
us. For the first; To the Ant, thou sluggard, consider her ways, and be wise;
which having no guide, overseer, or ruler, provideth her food in the summer, and
gathers her food in the harvest. How long will thou sleep o sluggard? when
will thou arise out of thy sleep? yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a
little folding of thy hands to sleep: So shall thy poverty come as one that
travelleth, and thy want as an armed man, Pro. 6. Why stand ye here Idle?
Matthew. 20. Bellygods, whose glory is their shame. Phil. 3.r9. to whom the
Apostle would have no victual afforded. 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. Notwithstanding. 2.
such pragmaticall, (...).
and busy-bodies will work not at all, as they should, but disorder all, 2 Thessalonians. 3.11. these will be digging a pit, which themselves fall into; breaking
hedges till a serpent bite them; removing stones and cleaving wood, whereby
they shall be hurt and endangered, Eccles. 10.8. and slaves on hors-back, when
Princes go on foot. ib. Promising liberty to others when they themselves are
the servants of corruption, 2 Pet. 2.19. Women will have their share amongst
them with their tattling, (...).
and idle running from house to house, 1 Timothy 5.13. And some of the pick-thanke
tencher-chaplaines, who will take upon them to epis copize it in other men's
diocesses, 1 Pet. (...).
4.13. till a judgment fall upon them which they cannot avoid. 3 Our Savior
waving the decision between two brethren for a matter of pelf, with this
exemplary put-off, Man who made me a judge? or a divider over you? lanceth this
sordid avarice, with the proposal of a Parable of that base rich churl, that
was all for the enlarging his barnes, without thinking on Him that sent the
corn; that any ingenious person would detest the case of the wretch, who
applauded himself in the gain of his Grain, to the loss of his soul, Luke 12.
And who can think upon the drunken sottishness of clownish Nabal without
indignation, and detestation? who could not afford good words, where good deeds
were due. Who is David, or who is the son of Jesse? There be many servants that
now a days break away every man from his master. Shall I then take my bread
and my water, and my flesh, that I have killed for my shearers, and give unto
men, whom I know not whence they be? 2 Samuel 25.10, 11. Little knew this
caitiffe (that was such a son of Belial, that a man could not speak to him)
what mischief was near him, and his; if his wive's courteous demeanure had not
prevented it; but God let it not so pass, Ib. This sordid humor by the
Apostle is termed Idolatry, that praeferreth his muck before his Maker, Col.
3.5. the doltish vanity of which is touched by the preacher, When goods
increase, they are increased that eat them, and what good is there to the
owners thereof? saving the beholding of them with their eyes, and his foolish
son perchance shall spend all: Eccles. 5.11.14. Who would not loath the
labor, that brings so unpleasing an in-com? 4. To represent how much bestiall
luxury is to be detested, the parable of Dives with the circumstances may be
insisted upon 1. backed most pathetically by that of our Savior, They ate,
they drank, they married -- til the flood came, and destroyed them all. And as
afterward in Lots days in Sodom, they ate, they drank, they sold, they
planted, they builded, till fire and brimstone from heaven marred their market,
Luk, 17. where Lots wife is pillarred for a mark of remembrance. And Esau's
bad bargain, in parting with his birthright for a morsel of meat, registered
for a caution to all posterity, Heb. 12, 16. 5. Brutish inhumanity may be
displayed to the detestation of the auditors, in the usage of Joseph, by his
brethren, They said one to another, Behold this dreamer comes, come now
therefore, and let us slay him, and cast him into some pit, and we will say,
some evil beast has devoured him, and we shall see what will become of his
dreams, Genesis 37.19. Thus they brought his feet to be hurt in the stocks, the
iron entered into his soul. Of Jeremiah, whom they plunged so in the mirie
dungeon, that he was fain to be drawn up with cords, and cast-clouts, and
rotten rags put under, to save his flesh from gaulling. Jer. 38.12. Of St.
Stephen, whom they stoned, at least possessed with a phrensy, Act. 7.58. Of St.
Paul, who was like to be pulled in pieces between the factions of the
Pharisees, and Sadduces, Act. 23. (6. Breach of oaths and promises may be
rendered odious by Zedekiah's heavy doom, for revolting from Nebuchadnezer, to
whom he was obliged by oath, 2 Chronicles. 36.13. And what a misery fell upon the
house of Saul, for wronging the Gibeonites? to whom their forefathers had so
long before obliged themselves by oath? Jos. 9, though all that Saul did was
out of his zeal to Israel, 2 Samuel 21.2.
and Judah. (7) what can set out Rebellion to be hated more in his ghastly
colors, than the swallowing up of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, with all that
belonged to them? Number. 16. The prodigious hanging of Achitophel, and Absalom, 2 Samuel 18. And the fearful end of Judas, the traitor, in Akeldama, Act. 1.18.

Motives to Hope
Hope lays hold on 1. deliverances, 2. praeservation. 3. consummation, from
which arise all spiritual comfors. God is our hope, and strength, a very
present help in trouble? therefore will we not fear, Though the earth be
moved, and though the hills be carried in the midst of the sea. though the
waters thereof rage, and swell, and though the mountains shake at the tempest
of the same. The rivers of the flood thereof would glad the city of God -- God
is in the midst; therefore shall she not be removed. God shall help her, and
that right early. The heathen make much ado, and the kingdoms are moved, but
God has showed his voice, and the earth shall melt away, Psalm. 46. God is
called the hope of Israel, Jerem. 14.8. which makes not ashaimed, Rom, 8.24.
to which salvation is attributed. Rom, 8.24. whose emblem is an anchor, Heb.
6.19. which is laid up for us in heaven, whereof we have heard in the word of
the truth of the gospel, Col. 1.5. and therefore with the work of faith, and
labor of love the Apostle will have the patience of hope in our Lord Jesus
Christ, without ceasing, to be remembered, 1 These. 1.3. Upon this hope of
deliverance was grounded the resolute answer of the three children to angry
Nebuchadnezzar, We are not careful to answer the, in this matter; if it be so,
our God, whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace,
and he will deliver us out of thine hand O King. But if not, be it known unto
thee, O King, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship the golden image
that thou have set up, Dan. 3.17, 18. This hope was the only help King Darius
could find for Damel, Dan. 6.16.
Thy God whom thou servest continually, he will deliver thee 2. for help of
preservation, we have a veyn of golden oar running through all the Psalms,
and almost all the Scripture. I will not be afraid of ten thousand of people,
that have set themselves against me round about, Psalm. 3.6. The Lord is my
light, and salvation, whom then shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my
life, of whom then shall I be afraid? When the wicked, even mine enemies, and
my foes came about me to eat up my flesh, they stumbled and fell, Psalm. 27.
Though I walk through the valley of the shadovv of death, I will fear no
evil; for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff comfort me, Psalm. 23.
Confidence against taking thought, we have pressed by our Savior, Matthew. 6.25.
Take no thought for your life what ye shall eat -- ad finem: and Diffidence
reproved, Why are ye fearful? Matthew. 8.26. (3. For inflaming the hope of
consummation, what can be more patheticall then that of our Savior? Let not
your hearts be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me. In my fathers
house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you, I go to
prepare a place for you, Joh, 14.1, 2. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give
unto you, not as the world gives give I unto you: Let not your heart be
troubled, neither let it be afraid -- if ye loved me, ye would rejoice, ib. 27,
28. A glimpe only, and taste of this joy, put Peter beside himself, Master it
is good for us to be here -- let us here pitch tabernacles, and not down to
the world again.

Motives to Fear.
Fear is the betraying of those succors, which reason offers, Wisd. 17, 12.
arising from dangers, which reason tells us we are unable to withstand. These
dangers may affright us 1. in our temporal estate. 2. in our spiritual. 3. in
our eternal being hereafter. For temporal afrightments, what thunders are so
terrible startling, as those against 1. Pharaoh, and Egypt for his perfidious
and treacherous dealing with Gods people? Ezech. 29.
2. against Tyrus, and their King for their pride and luxury? 3. against
Babylon? Isa. 13. and 14. for their captivating and insulting upon Gods people.
2. For his temporal estate, Cain complained not; Genesis 4.14.
but the fear of a guilty conscience was a Fury that ever haunted him, My
punishment is greater then I can bear. Behold, thou have driven me out this day
from the face of the earth; and from thy face shall I be hid, and I shall be a
fugitive, and a vagabond, and it shall come to pass that every one that
finds me shall slay me. A scantling of the third, It is a fearful thing to
fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10.31. This fcarfulnesse, in
proposing the law, was so terrible, that the people could not endure that which
was commanded; and if so much as a beast touch the mountain, it shall be stoned
and thrust through with a dart: and so terrible was the sight, that Moses said,
I exceedingly fear, and quake, Heb. 12.20, 21. What horror will then be (can
any heart imagine) when the sun shall become as black as sackcloth of hair,
and the moon and the stars of heaven fall unto the earth, even as the fig tree
casts her untimely figs, when she is shaken of a mighty wind, when the
heavens shall depart as a scroul rolled together; and every mountain and island
shall be removed out of their places; when the Kings of the earth, and the
great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and
every bondsman, and every freeman shall hide themselves in the dens, and in the
rocks of the mountains, and shall say unto the rocks, and mountains, Fall on
us, and to the hills, Cover us, and hide us from the face of him, that sits
upon the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: for the great day of his wrath
is come, and who shall be able to stand, Rev. 6. When the dismal doom is once
pronounced, Go ye cursed of my father into everlasting fire, prepared for the
devil, and his angels, Matthew. 25.41.

Motives to Joy.
Joy, the aim of all our desires, must be raised especially on the serious
consideration, 1. of joy in the holy Ghost. 2. comfort in a good conscience. 3.
and a cheerful and thankful use of temporal blesings. These depend one on
the other. Temporals delight not, if conscience be not satisfied; and
conscience receives not content, but from assurances from the holy Spirit, that
all is well. Amongst the fruits of the spirit, this joy is served in with love,
which quickneth all the rest. The fruit of the Spirit is lov, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meeknes, temperance, against such
there is no law. Galat. 5.22, 23. Upon this is grounded that holy frolic (if
the word profane not) of the Apostle to the Philippians, Rejoice in the Lord
always, and again I say rejoice. Let your moderation be known unto all men,
the Lord is near at hand, Phil. 4.4, 5. Upon which grounds, we have the
excitation of the church, O come let us sing unto the Lord, let us heartily
rejoice in the strength of our salvation, Psalm. 95. O be joyful in the Lord
all ye lands -- Psalm. 100. O sing unto the Lord a new song -- Psalm. 98. And
diverse other Psalms; set to the same key of joy. This was the rejoicing of the
blessed-Virgin My spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior Luk: 1.47. That which
our Savior exhorts his disciples unto, In this rejoice not, that the spirits
are subject to you; but rather rejoice, that your names are written in heaven
2. Luke 10.20
All the days of the afflicted are evil: but he that is of a merry heart
(upon a good conscience) has a continual feast, Prove. 15.15. This merry heart
makes a cheareful countenance; but by the sorrow of the heart the spirit is
broken, Ib. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of
God, we have had our conversation in the world, 2 Cor. 1.12. Thus the Apostles,
when they were beaten, and threatened after their imprisonment, by the high
priests command, departed from the presence of the Council, rejoicing that they
were accounted worthy to suffer for his name, Act. 5.41. It was St. Paul's
exercise to have a conscience void of offense toward God, and toward men,
Act. 24.16. And the Hebrews took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing
in themselves, that they had in heaven a better, and an enduring substance,
Heb. 10.34. 3. Joy and thankfulness for temporal blessings are not only
approved, but enjoined, Thou shall rejoice before the Lord (in acknowledgment
of temporal blessings) Deuteronomy. 12.12.18. At the presenting of the first fruits,
and tithes, after a set paryer, it is added, Thou shall rejoice in every good
thing, which the Lord thy God has given unto thee, and unto thine house, thou,
and the Levite, and the stranger that is among you, Deuteronomy: 26.11. When God
crowns the year with goodness, and the clouds drop fatness upon the
dwellings of the wilderness, the little hills are brought in to rejoice on
every side: when the folds shall be full with sheep, the valleys also shall
stand so thick with corn, that they shall laugh and sing. Psalm. 65.12.
Whereupon the Kingly prophet sets forth a proclamation, O praise the Lord, for
it is a good thing to sing praises unto our God; yea a joyful and pleasant
thing it is, to be thankful, Psalm 147.

Motives to Sorrow.
A sorrowful spirit is a sacrifice to God, despise not, O Lord, humble and
contrite hearts, Psalm. 51.9. Sorrow arises commonly from any thing that
crosses our desires, and therefore may be either, 1. godly; or 2. worldy.
Concerning both which, we have that of the Apostle, Though I made you sorry
with a letter, I do not repent, though I did repent, for I perceive that the
same Epistle has made you sorry, though it be but for a season. Now I rejoice,
not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to repentance, for ye were
made sorry after a godly manner, that ye might receive damage by us in
nothing: for godly sorrow works repentance to salvation, not to be repented
of; but the sorrow of the world works death, 2 Cor. 7.8.9.10. Motives to
Godly sorrow, are frequently met with in Scripture; For 1. private corruptions.
2. public calamities. 3. praevayling pressures, and insultations of Satan, and
his adhaerents, to the scandal of christian religion, and professon. 1. What
an heartbreaking was this to David? Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in
sin did my mother conceive, or warm m^ Psalm. 51.5. Mine iniquities are gone
over my head, and are a sore burden for me, too heavy for me to bear, Psalm. 38
4. Innumerable troubbles are come about me, my sins have taken such hold upon
me, that I am not able to look up; yea, they are more in number, then the
hairs of my head and my heart has failed me. O Lord, let it be thy pleasure to
deliver me, make haste O Lord to help me, Psalm. 40.15, 16. When thou with
rebukes do chasten man for sin, thou make his beauty to consume away, as
it were a moth fretting of a garment: Every man therefore is but vanity, Psalm.
39.12. whence St. Paul. bemoans himself, I delight in the law of God after the
inward man: Romans 7.
but I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind,
bringing me into captivity to the law of sin, which is in my members. O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? sin
must needs bring sadness to many, that proved so odious to God's nature, that
it ruined the angels, bereaved Adam of Gods favor and Paradise, could not be
expiated but by the son of God, who knew no sin, yet was made sin for us, that
we might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. (2. How public
calamities affect the heart with sorrow of all those that are true of heart,
may be gathered by those passionate passages of Isaiah, Look away from me, for
I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfortme, because of the spoiling of the
daughter of my people, Isa. 22.4. Of Jeremy, My bowels, my bowels I am pained
to the very heart. The wall of my heart makes a noise within we, I cannot
hold my peace, because thou have heard O my soul, the sound of the trumpet,
the alarm of war. Destruction upon destruction is cried, for the whole land is
spoiled. Suddenly are my tents spoiled, and my curtains in a moment. How
long shall I see the standard, and hear the sound of the trumpet? For my people
is foolish, they have not known me, they are sottish children, they have not
understanding they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge,
Jerem. 4 O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I
might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people. Oh that I
had in the Wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring men, that I might leave my
people, and go from them: for they be all adulterers, an assembly of
treacherous men, Jer. 9.1. Thus Jerusalem is bemoaned, made drunk with the cup
of fury, that had none of her sons to take her by the hand to guide her, of all
those she has brought up, but lay as a bull in a net at the head of all the
streets, Isa. 51. (3. Complaints of Sataincall insultations are, The ungodly
for his own lust does persecute the poor: He is so proud that he cares not
for God, neither is God in all his thoughts: His ways are always grievous, thy
judgments are far above out of his sight, and therefore defieth he all his
enemies. For he has said in his heart, Tush I shall never be cast down, there
shall no harm happen unto me, Psalm. 10. This complaint is taken up again, Psalm.
73. To which, satisfaction is given, Psalm. 37. and 49. Jeremy harps upon the
same string, Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore are they
happy, that deal very treacherously? Thou have planted them, yea they have
taken root; they grow, yea they bring forth fruit. Thou art near in their
mouths, but far from their reins. But it follows, Those that have so trodden
down the Lords portion, and desolated the land, shall reap Thorns instead of
Wheat, put themselves to pain without profit. For they shall be ashamed of
their revenues, because of the fierce anger of the Lord, Jer. 12.

Motives to Zeal.
Zeal; which may be good or bad. Good is either, 1 for Gods honor, 2 house, or
3 people. The first was of Elias, I have been very jealous for the Lord God of
hosts, because the children have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown down thy altars,
and slain thy people with the sword; and I, even I only, am left, and they
seek my life to take it away, 1 King. 19.14. For this zeal Phineas is commended
of God. Phineas the son of Eliezar, the son of Aaron the priest, has turned my
wrath away from the children of Israel, while he was zealous for my sake
amongst them, that I consumed not the children of Israel in my jealousy Number.
25.11. Of this zeal Jehu boasted, Come with me, and see my zeal for the Lord:
so they made him ride in his chariot, 2 King. 10.16. The 2d sort of zeal may
be typified in David, The zeal of thy house has eaten me up, and the
reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me, Psalm. 69.9. My
zeal has consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy words, Psalm.
119.139. But practiced by our Savior, when he found in the temple, those that
sold oxen, and sheep, and doves, and the changers of money sitting, He made a
scourge of small cords, and drove them out of the Temple, and the sheep, and
the oxen, and poured out the changers-mony, and over-threw the tables, and said
unto them that sold doves, Take these things hence, and make not my Fathers
house, an house of merchandise. And the disciples remembered that it was
written, The zeal of thine house has caten me up, Joh. 2.14. Much different
from the zeal, of our modern zealots the zeal of whom eats up God's house.
3. For zeal to Gods people; The zeal of Moses and St. Paul are notoriously
eminent, which was seconded by that of that resolute Priest Mattathias, who
when he saw a Jew sacrificing to idols, was inflamed with zeal, and his reins
trembled, neither could he forbear to show his anger according to judgment:
wherefore he ran and slew him upon the altar. Also the Kings commissioners, who
compelled men to sacrifice, he killed at that time, and the altar he pulled
down. Thus dealt he zealously for the law of God, as Phineas did to Zambri the
son of Salom. 1 Maccab. 1.

Bad zeal spends it self either in. Nemesis. (...) Zelotypia.
1 revenge. 2 rejoicing at others ruins, or 3 in impetuous undertakings, and
pursuances, not acording to knowledge. Belonging to the first kind was that of
Saul, for rooting out the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel 21.2. And those more then forty,
that had bound themselves under a curse, that they would neither eat, nor
drink till they had slain Paul, Act. 23.12 Haman was sick of this disease,
and therefore he thought it scorn to lay hands on Mordecai alone, but all the
Jews must be destroyed with him. Hest. 3.6. All his riches, multitude of
children, advancement above the Peers of the Kingdom affected him little, in
comparison in his vaunting before his friends, and Zerith his wife; yea Hester
(says he) the Queen let no man come in with the King, to the banquet she had
prepared, but my self; and to morrow am I invited unto her also, with the
King: yet all this avails me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew
sitting at the Kings gate, Hest. 5.13. (2. (...), Joy in another ruins, is a
zeal which least becomes Christians. It was a beseeming thought in furious
Jehu, that after the tumbling of painted Jezabel down from a window, and
trampling her under his horses feet, from the midst of his cups he could
command, Go see now this cursed woman, and bury her, for she is a King's
daughter, 2 King. 9.34. For want of which, Edom is sharply taxed, For thy
violence against thy brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee, and thou shall be
cut off for ever in the day, that thou stooddest on the other side, in the day
that the stranger carried away his forces captive, and forreiners entered into
his gates, even the wast one of them. Obad. 10. Such was ^he rejoicing of the
dwellers on the earth over the two Witnesses slain, whom they would not suffer
to be put in graves, but were merry over them, and sent gifts one to another,
because they tormented them that dwelt on the earth. 3. Blind zeal, Rev.
11.9.10. (...).
seizes on any thing, putting no difference betwixt good or bad, friends or
foes. This carries most commonly with it a mistake, in all the rest of the
passions; as in the 1 of dotage or lust, for love. 2 Spite to the person or
revenge, for hatred to the fault. In the 3 praesumption, despair, or groundles
credulity is obtruded for hope. In the 4 cowardice and needless trembling, for
fear. In the 5 ridculous merriments, for true joy. In the 6 causeless dejection
and melancholly-dumps, for grounded sadness. Of all which, examples from
Scripture may be gathered.

CHAP. VI. Of Characters, Descriptions, or Idea's.
I. See that thou make all things according to the pattern, showed to thee in
the Mount. Exodus 25.40. Act. 7.44. Heb. 8.5.
Characters, as they come to hand, and for the easier remembering of them,
(where the text will bear it) may be cast into heptades, As God will protect,
them that call upon him, from 1 Wicked men, ungodly that fear not God. 2 evil
that are injurious to men. 3 foolish in their practices. 4 vain in their
projects. 5 lying in their discourses. 6 blood-thirsty in their persecutions. 7
deceitful in all their contracts, and dealings, Psalm. 5.4, 5, 6.

II. The way of Cain ( Jude. v. 11.) consisted of 7 crooked-misleading steps. 1
Hypocrisy, he would sacrifice as well, and readily as Abel. 1 John 3.12.
2 His aemulating hatred to his brother, by reason of his preferred devotion. 3
This brought him to murder him. 4 which he endeavors to slubber over with a
surly lie, Genesis 4.9.
I know not where my brother is: am I his keeper? 5 his desperation upon
conviction, without the least remorse, but rather grumbles at God's just
sentence; My punishment is greater than I can bear. Thou have fined me too
deep, dealt too hardly with me. 6 his opposition rather to withstand his
punishment, then submission to mitigate it; and marries, gets children, builds
a city, and names it Enoch to eternize his son's name. Setheans, Cainites had
forsaken.

III. These six things does the Lord hate: and seven are an abomination, 1. A
proud look, 2. A lying tongue, 3. Hands that shead innocent blood, 4. An heart
that devises wicked imaginations; 5. Feet that be swift in running to
mischief, 6. A false witness that speaks lies, 7. And him that sows
discord among brethren, Pro. 6.

IV. Genesis 4.
Marked men for revived offenses in our time, 1. Cain for fratricide, 2. Genesis
9.28.
Cham, for insulting irreverently on his father's nakedness, 3. Ishmael for
flouting Isaac, and playing, (it should seem) on his name, Gal. 4.29.
given by God, terming him some such thing as a ridiculous young Master, which
is called a kind of persecution, 4. Korah, for rebellious contradiction, Number.
16.
5. Saul for usurping the Priests office in sacrificing, sparing Amalek against
God's express command, 1 Samuel 13.
butchering innocent Abimelech, and all the inhabitants of Nob, the city of the
Priests, Ahaz for Sacrilege, and continued Idolatry when Gods hand was upon
him, with this Character set upon him, This that King Ahaz, 7. Zedekiah for
perjury, and neglecting Gods Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 28.
2 Chronicles. 26.

V. Sin's genealogy, 1. Suggestion, from Satan, 2. Delectation, was pleasant,
3. Consent, she took it, 4. Act, did eat, 5. Contagion, gave her houseband, 6.
Horror of Conscience, saw their nakedness, feared, hid themselves, 7. Censure
of punishment, because thou have done this.

VI. Practices of the Jews against their own, in the fury of their ignorant
zeal, 1. They killed the Lord Jesus, 2. And their own Prophets, 3. Persecuted
the Apostles, 4. Please not God, 5. Are contrary to all men, 6. Forbidding to
the Gentiles, [deceived] that they might be saved, 7. Fill up the measure of
their sins, [to the brim,] that the wrath of God may come upon them at the
utmost, 1 These. 2.15, 16.

VII. A representation of the Divine Majesty, I saw the Lord sitting upon a 1.
Throne, high and lifted up, (which is applied to Christ, Joh. 12.) above it
stood the 2. Seraphims, each one had 3. six wings; with twain He covered his
face, and with twain he did fly, and 4. cried one to another, and said, 5.
Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory:
and the posts of the door moved at him that cried, and the house was filled
with smoke, Isa. 6.

VIII. A larger representation to Ezechiel, in 1 four living creatures, each
having the likeness of a man with 4 faces, Of a man, a Lion, an Ox, an Eagle,
2. fourwings to show their swiftness, 3. Sparkling calves feet, like
burnishing brass, 4. Hands of a man under their wings on their four sides, 5.
Four wheels animated one with in another full of eyes, 6. A throne of Sapphire
arched with a Rainbow, 7. Upon the likeness of the Throne, was the likeness
of the appearance of a man upon it.

IX. Rev. 1.13.
Our Savior is set forth by his 1. Attire, a garment down to the foot, girt
about the Paps with a Golden girdle;

X. A good Bishop should have, 1. Good education, as Moses learned in all the
wisdom of the Egyptians, Act. 7.22. The children of the Prophets under Samuel
and Elisha. St. Paul at the feet of Gamaliel, Act. 22.3. Which society our
Savior graced, in sitting in the midst of the Doctors, Luke 2.36.
hearing them, and asking them questions. 2. He is advanced to his chair not
ambitiously sought after, Be not ye called, Rabbi, Masters, Matthew. 23.
but humble your selves that ye may be exalted, 3. He must be free from busying
himself in impertinencies, and intangling himself with many worldly
businesses, 1 Pet. 4.15.
4. He is to Ordain and settle Priests in every Parish, Tit. 1.5. and neither
suddenly, 1 Timothy 5.22.1.3.
or without due examination to lay his hands on any, 5. He is especially to
convince Innovators, and wrangling Sophisters, Act. 20.28.
and to chase away Wolves, and Foxes from the Flock of Christ, 6. Against an
Elder he is not to receive an accusation, but under two or three witnesses: But
those that sin (scandalously) rebuke them before all, that others may also
fear, 1 Timothy 5.19. 1 Timothy 5.17.
Honoring them with double honor, that labor in the Word and Doctrine. 7. He
is discreetly to withdraw himself from proud, and peremptory Fellows, knowing
nothing, but doting about questions, and strife of words, whereof comes
strife, railings, and evil surmises, perverse disputings of men of corrupt
minds and destitute of truth, supposing that gain is godliness, 1 Timothy 6.

XI. A virtuous woman is of price far above Rubies, because, 1. The heart of
her Hous-band may safely trust in her, so that he shall have no need of spoil.
2. She will do him good, and not evil all the days of her life, 3. She
seeks Wool, and Flax, and works willingly with her Hands, 4. She is like
the Merchant's ship, that brings food from afar, 5. She rises when it is yet
night, and gives meat to her household, and a portion to her Maidens, 6. She
considers a Field, and buyeth it; with the fruit of her hands, she planteth a
vineyard, 7. She girdeth her loins with strength, and strengthens her arms,
8. She perceives her Merchandise is good, Her candle goes not out by night.
9. She lays her Hands to the Spindle, and her Hands hold the Distaffe, 10.
She stretches out her arms to the poor, yea she reaches her hands to the
needy, 11. She is not afraid of the snow, for her household; for all her
household are clothed with scarlet. 12. She makes her self covering of
tapestry; her clothing is silk, and purple. 13. Her Housband is known in the
gate, when he sits among the Elders of the land. 14. She makes fine linen,
and sells it, and delivers girdles to the merchant. 15. Strength and honor
are her clothing, and she shall rejoice in time to come. 16. She opens her
mouth with wisdom, and in her tongue is the law of kindness. 17. She looks
well to the ways of her household, and eats not the bread of idleness. 18.
Her children rise up and call her blessed, her housband also, and he praises
her. 19. Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all. 20.
Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain: but a woman that fears the Lord,
she shall be praised. 21. Give her of the fruits of her hands, and let her own
works praise her in the gates. Pro. 31.

XII. The picture of old age Eccles. 12. to which the sun, the light, the moon
and stars yield little comfort, by reason of one weakness tumbling upon another
as clouds returning after rain, one storm seconding another. 2. For in it, 1.
the keepers of the house shall tremble, that is, the arms and hands (the
readiest defenders of the body) weakened by palsies and other infirmities. 2,
the strong men bow themselves, thighs, and legs through Sciatica, aches,
defluxions. 3. the grinders cease, because they are few, the teeth, most lost;
they left, rotten. 4. and those that look out by the windows be darkness, which
must be meant of the eyes. 5. and the doors shall be shut in the streets, the
lips or chaps little employed when the sound of the grinding is low, when the
teeth have little to do. 6. and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird,
awake early in the morning at cock-crowing, or bird's singing, in regard old
men through infirmity sleep little. 7. And the daughters of music shall be
brought low, the wind-pipes to utter, or ears to hear or delight in songs, as
old Barzillai acknowledged 2 Samuel 19.35. Also they shall be asraid of that
which is high, and fear shall be in the way, old men dread to climb, and
hazard themselves in dangerous ways by reason of the imbecility of their
limbs. Now though these are sufficient remembrancers, yet nearer symptoms come
with new memento's. 1. the hoariness or baldness of the head, as white as the
blossoms of an almond tree. 2. the belly or legs laden with dropsies or gouts
puffing him up and making him lazy, and misshapen as a locust; where grasshopper
denotes a grashopper's unweildy devouring to no purpose. 3. the thought of his
long home approaching, and sight of mourners dishearten him from all worldly
pleasure, and cloud him with sadness. 4. especially when he, stooping in the
back, shows that the silver chord of spina medulla is loosed, which was wont
to trusse him up more upright 5. the golden bowl, the pia matter which conteins
the brain, is cracked. 6. the pitcher, the miseraic, cava and portaveines are
stopped, or broken, that they bring not, as formerly, good blood from the
fountain of the liver to cheer up the whole body. 7. And last, when the wheel
of the lungs, which compass and preserve the cistern of the heart, from whence
the vital spirits are dispersed by the arteries, through the whole body to
hold (as we say) life and soul together, then that must of force be thought
upon, that Dust shall return to the earth as it was, and the spirit shall
return to God that gave it.

XIII Necessaries for a Preacher, Eccles. 12.9.
1. assiduity in teaching others, Because the preacher was wise, he still
taught the people knowledge. 2. choice of matters of moment well studied, He
gave good heed, and sought out, and set in order many proverbs, 4, Rhetorical
expressions, The preachersought out to find acceptable words. 5. warrantable
doctrine, by its own grounds, and confirmation of the masters of the assembly,
that which was written was upright, even words of truth. The words of the wise
are as goads, and nails fastened by the masters of the assemblies. 6. derived
from the Word, which is given by the hand of one shepherd, Christ our Savior.
7. Abstaining from distracting studies, which weary the flesh in making many
books, when his own bible would give content if it be rightly used, that we
need (especially for matters of salvation) no other Directory.

XIIII The arms of a Christian Soldier against 1. principalities. 2. powers.
3. rulers of the darkness of this world. 4. spiritual wickednesses in high
places. 1. the girdle of truth for the loins. 2. for the breast, the
breast plate of righteousness. 3. for the feet, the preparation of the Gospel of
peace. 4. for the left hand next the heart, the shield of faith to quench the
fiery darts of the Devil, 5. for the right hand the sword of the spirit, which
is the word of God. 6. for the head, the helmet of salvation. 7. for the
accomplishing of all, prayer and supplications in the Spirit, with watching and
all perseverance. Ephesians. 6.12.

CHAP. VII. Of Antitheses.
I. IT is written that Abraham had two sons, the one by a bondmaid, the other
by a freewoman: but he that was of the bondwoman was born after the flesh;
but he of the free woman was by promise. Which things are an Allegory. For
these are the two covenants, the one from mount Sinai, which gendereth to
bondage, which is Hagar; for this Hagar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and answers
to Jerusalem that now is, and is in bondage with her children, but Jerusalem
which is above is free, and is the mother of us all, Gal. 4. Where may be noted
correspondencies, and antitheses between 1. Hagar a bondwoman, and Sarah free.
2. (...).
Ismael, Hagar's son after the flesh; and Isaac, Sarah's, according to promise.
3. Sinai in Arabia the desert, and Jerusalem in the land of promise. 4. Sinai
called by the Arabians Hagar, allegorizing the Law; Jerusalem, the mother of us
all, the covenant of the gospel thence proclaimed. 5. dependers of the Law for
justification, Hagarens born to bondage; adherents to faith, the sons of Sarah,
born to freedom. 6. fleshly Ismaelites, persecutors; spiritual sons of Sarah,
for a time under the cross. 7. the censure, upon the persecuting
juststiciaries, Cast out the bondwoman and her son: on the other side, The
freewoman's children shall be heyrs.

II. Antithesis, between Christ and Adam, Romans 5. (1) Not as the offense, so is
the free gift: that, by justice extended; this by grace abounded, 2. That
included the venom of one offense, or propagated but one offense original:
this quits from original, and infinite actualls, 3. That, by one brought in
the tyranny of death; this by one the gift of Righteousness and reign in Life,
4. That the root of just Condemnation, this of the free gift of Justification,
5. That made all men sinners, this made many righteous, 6. The horridness of
that is manifested by the Law, the abounding of grace is more illustrious by
the Gospel. 7. That was attended by reigning sin unto Death, this by Grace to
Righteousness and Eternal Life.

III. Antithesis, between the flesh, and the Spirit, Romans 7. where, 1. The
flesh brings forth fruit unto death, the Spirit contendeth to serve in newness
of Life, 2. The flesh holds by the old letter, the spirit by a new tenure, 3.
The flesh works death by that which is good, that sin might become exceeding
sinful: the Spirit clears it self by pleading a pardon, 4. By the flesh we
are sold unto sin, by the Spirit we attain redemption, 5. In the flesh, to
will may be present with us, but deeds follow not; but the spirit urges to
perform, 6. The inward man delights in the Law of God: but the Law of the
members carry the intents against the Law of the Mind, 7. The flesh makes up
the body of sin, the Spirit obtains deliverance by Christ.

IV. Antithesis between the Body before, and after, the Resurrection, 1 Cor.
15.1. It is sown in Corruption, it is raised in incorruption, 2. It is sown
in Honor, it is raised in Glory, 3. It it sown in weakness, it is raised
again in power, 4. It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual
body, 5. It is sown, as the first Adams issue, having only a living soul; it
is raised, as the second Adams purchase, made a quickening spirit, 6. The first
is of the Earth earthly, the second from the Lord of Heaven heavenly, 7. The
first carrying the image or stamp of earth, from which he was taken; the second
the badg of Heaven, to which he is advanced.

V. Antithesis between true pastors, and impostors or scorners, 1 Cor. 5. We
are made a spectacle to the World, and to Angels, and to Men. 1. We are fools
for Christ's sake, but ye are wise in Christ, 2. We are weak, but ye are strong,
3. Ye are honored, but we are despised, as it appears, because at this
present hour, we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffetted, and
have no certain dwelling place, and labor, working with our own hands, 4.
Being reviled we bless, 5. Being persecuted we suffer it, 6. Being defamed we
entreat, 7. We are made the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of
all things unto this day.

VI. Gods Ministers to be approved, 1. In much patience, 2. In afflictions, 3.
In necessities, 4. In distresses, 5. In stripes, 6. In imprisonment, 7. In
tumults, 8. In labors, 9. In watchings, 10. In fastings. By, 1. Pureness, 2.
By knowledge, 3. By longsuffering, 4. By kindness, 5. By the Holy Ghost, 6. By
love unfeigned, 7. By the word of truth, 8. By the power of God, 9. By the
armor of Righteousness, 10. On the right hand and on the left, 11. By honor
and dishonor, 12. By evil report and good report. As, 1. Deceivers and yet
true, 2. As unknown and yet well known, 3. As dying, yet behold we live, 4. As
chastned and not killed, 5. As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing, 6. As poor
and yet making many rich, 7. As having nothing, and yet possessing all things,
2 Cor. 6.

VII. The chaste Matrone, and the whore of Babylon, are thus differenced, 1. The
Matron is clothed with the Sun from Heaven, Rev. 12.1. The great whore with
Scarlet, and Gold, and Pearls from the earth, 2. The Matron has the Moon, and
spotted-changes under her Feet; the Whore sits on many waters, which will at
length fail her, 3. The Matron has a Crown of 12 Stars upon her Head; the
Whore appears with a frontlet of blasphemies, Mystery, Babylon the great, Rev.
17.5.12.2.
Mother of harlots, and abominations of the earth, 4. The Matron is fruitful,
and traveling to bring forth Children; the Whore is drunk with the blood of
Saints and Martyrs, and is more for destruction then honest propagation, 5. The
Dragon watches the Matron to devour her offspring; but mounts the Whore upon
a beast, which has seven Heads and ten Horns, the most terrible and
majesticall in all his hellish mewes, 6. The Dragon with his Angels enter the
lists in the Whore's quarrel; but Michael and his adherents undertake for the
Matron, to the Dragon's shameful routing, 7. The Matron is furnished with
Eagle's wings to be nourished, and preserved in the wilderness; but the whore
is deserted and hated by her Partisans, who shall make her desolate, and naked,
and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire, Rev. 17.36.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Parables, and Similitudes.
I Have spoken by the Prophets, and I have multiplied visions and used
similitudes by the hand of the prophets, Hos. 12.10.

A Parallel betwixt Christ, and Melchizede^k. 1. both had like Ordination. 2.
by oath, not by descent. 3. without praedecessors, or sucessors, father,
mother, beginning or end of life. 4. greater than Abraham, by reason of
receiving tithes from him, and Levi in his loins. 5. King of righteousness and
peace. 6. blessing as the greater, but not receiving from him 7. both offering
for others, not for their own sins, as Christ the antitype did once for all,
Heb. 7.

Between a minister, Matthew. 5.15.
and a candle. Men light not a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a
candlestick and it gives light to all that are in the house, 1. A candle
lightens not it self, but must be lightened of, and from, another: so a
Minister must have his calling and gifts from God's illumination, How shall he
preach except he be sent? 2. Romans 10.15.
A candle is not lighted to be hid under a bushel, neither a Minister ordained
to behave himself as a dumb Dog, sleeping through idleness, never satisfied
through covetousness, and drowning himself and others in all kind of
surquedry, 3. Isa. 56, 10.
A candle must be set on a candlestick, for its more commodious giving light:
So must the Minister reside in some designed Cure, wherein he may do most good:
he must not bischop it in another man's dicecesse, 1 Pet. 4.15. nor boast
without his measure in other men's lines, 4. 2 Cor. 10.15.
A candle gives light to all indifferently that are in the house: So a
Minister should apply himself to all within his compass, making himself all
things to all men, that by all means he may save some, 1 Cor. 9.22.
6. A candle sometimes wants snuffers; so may a Minister, correptions: But it
should be with snuffers of Gold belonging to the Sanctuary, and by such as
know, and have right to use them; not by polluted fingers or other means,
which may rather extinguish, then make them burn the brighter; 7. A candle
inverted is extinguished by his own nutriment: and so a Minister who turning
that light downward, which should turn upward, most commonly is fried to
destruction in his own fatness.

The course of man's life resembles an expedition at sea, wherein 1. our
nativity is the shore we lanch from. 2. the church the bottom wherein we are
carried. 3. the world the sea. 4. Christ the pilot. 5. the Scripture, the
compass 6. the gifts of the holy ghost, the prosperous gales we sail by. 7.
Sinus Abrahae, the haven of happiness we are bound for. Then are they glad
because they be at rest; and so he brings them to the haven where they would
be, Psalm. 107. 30.

God's people, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy
priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ
1 Pet. 2.5. A good man in diverse respects resembles a stone. 1. A stone is to
be hammered fit for the place, before it be laid in building: So a faithful
man by education and suffering, is fashioned to the calling, wherein he is to
be employed. 2. A stone is measured before it be laid in its place: So the
faithful should be placed according to their abilities. 3. a stone must be
hard to endure wind and weather, beside casual assaults: the like opposition
must be expected of those that live godly, 4. a stone in a lower range bears
his superior, covers his inferior, and justles not with his fellows set
beside: the like respect should be had amongst good men to superiors, to
peers, and inferiors. 5. a stone butting out must be beaten back to range with
his fellows: and so must too forward exorbitants, which ambitiously perk
before their brethren. 6. a mouldered stone must be plucked out to have a
sounder set in his place: so in defect of a treacherous Judas, a Matthias is
justly chosen. 7. stones that are not well cemented continue not a building: so
without the cement of charity, christianity shattereth, which is built upon the
foundation of the Prophets, and Apostles; Jesus Christ himself being the
chief cornerstone, in whom all the building fitly framed together grows
unto an holy temple in the Lord: In whom ye also are builded together for an
habitation of God through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.20.

I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner as all my fathers were, Psalm.
39.12. (1) A pilgrim professes himself to be so by carriage, and habit: so
should a christian. 2. he passeth-by obvious sights, as not belonging unto him:
this becomes a mortified christian. 3. He builds not in every Inn he lodges
in: so ought a christian. 4. He burdens not himself with unnecessary carriage:
such would be combersome to a christian. 5. He shrinks not at impediments and
dangers which cross him, but constantly struggles through them: much more
should a christian. 6. He makes the best of the entertainment he meets with
any where, not calling fire from heaven upon inhospitable Samaritans, Luke
9.54: this sorts with the calm spirit of a Christian. 7. He always has a
desire to his true home: this should be the aim and comfort of a christian.
For while we are in the body we are absent from the Lord: for we walk by faith,
and not by sight: and therefore should be confident and willing rather to be
absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6.

1. For the Lords day there is ground in nature: Some time is to be set apart,
for the public worship of God, observed in all religions. And the same ground
there is for Episcopacy, that some persons should be set a part, and praeferred
before others to perform, and oversee the performance of that sacred worship.
2. A pattern for that was among the Jews, one day designed in seven. The like
was also for churchgoverment, by chief Priests, Priests, and Levites: to which
are answerable our Bishops, Priests, and Deacons under the gospel, The most
that is said for appointing the Lord's Day for public worship is the
intimation, not praecept of our Savior, but practice of the Apostles: and so
much we have, and more, in the differencing of the xij Apostles, lxx disciples,
and the observation of the Apostles and Church upon it. 4. The mention of the
Lords day Apocal. 1. is not so clear an evidence for the stablishing Sunday,
for the jewish sabbath; as the Epistles to the Angels of the 7 Churches there
mentioned, conclude, that those were the Bishops of those Churches, whom our
Savior allows by writing unto. 5. There cannot be brought any thing
concluding for the Lords day out of the New testament so fully, as that for
subordinat degrees in ecclesiastical hierarchy. God has set some in the church
first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, etc. 1 Cor. 12. such as
were Timothy and Titus, Paul and Barnabas, who ordained Presbyters, and
prescribed rules unto them. 6. The settling of the Lords day for Christian
assemblies in place of the Jewish sabbath, and deductions; will hardly be made
so conspicuous, as the deduction of episcopacy, from the Apostles themselves in
all eminent churches, before the late interruption of our licentious times: as
it appears in the genuine and undoubted epistles of Ignatius, and all
antiquity. 7. And those that are almost superstitious for the Sabbath,
acknowledge a kind of episcopacy; which they would be content to bear (if they
might have the managing of it) and be obedient to the orders, and control of
it.

St. Peter and St. Paul paralleled. 1. Both called immediately by Christ; the
one, before; the other, after his ascension. 2. Both principal Apostles, Peter
of the Jews, Paul of the Gentiles. 3. Both full of humility; Peter professes
himself to be (...), 1 Pet. 5.1. Paul to be (...) 4. 1 Cor. 15.9. 1 Pet. 2.13,
14. Romans 13.
Both earnest for the supreme authority of magistrates. 5. Neither Peter for
the claim of the Pope, his pretended successor; nor Paul in his large epistle
to the Romans, so much as give a hint of Papal supremacy. 6. Both are sent by,
and give account to the Church. Peter to them of Jerusalem, Paul to the
Antiochians. 7. Both take it well to be reproved: Peter reproved by Paul to his
face. Gal. 2.11. Paul by Peter for his (...) 2 Pet. 3: 16:

Of Similies.
Similies are used by all, for illustration: and though they prove not simply,
yet they teach more easily then firmer grounds; especially, those that be fed
with Milk, rather than stronger Meat, Heb. 5.12, 13. It was the method of
teaching by the best Master; Whereunto shall I liken the men of this
generation, and to what are they like? They are like unto children sitting in
the Marketplace, and saying, We have piped unto you, but ye have not danced;
we have mourned to you, and ye have not wept. For John came neither eating
bread, nor drinking wine, and ye say, He has a Devil: the Son of man is come
eating and drinking, and ye say, Behold a gluttonous man, and a wine-bibber, a
friend of Publicans and sinners: but wisdom is justified of all her children,
Matthew. 11. Luke 7. Are ye not ashamed to be so way-ward, and childish as the
Town-boyes? brawling for trifles, or nothing, in the Market place? that nothing
can please you, neither John's strictness nor my easy hand, but both must be
rejected, and slandered by you?

As Balaams cursed intention was turned into a blessing, Esau's fury into a
friendly meeting with his brother Jacob, Saul's warrant to persecute into a
grand commission for promoting the Gospel: so God may charm the hearts of the
Labans of these times (Take heed thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad,
Genesis 31.) to be so far from injuring him any way, as to give him not so much as
an ill word. This is the generation of them that seek him, even that seek thy
face, O Jacob, Ps. 24.6.

The man that walks, 1. Not in the counsel of the ungodly] will have nothing
to do with their plots, who take not God with them, 2. Stands not in the way of
sinners] concurring with, and justifying their actions, 3. Sits not in the seat
of the scornefull] contemning and jeering at those that take better courses, 4.
But delights in the Law of the Lord] more then in the attaining of polfe and
praeferment, 5. And in that law is exercised day and night] whereas other spend
their time in revelling, and abominations. Shall be like] not a hollow Reed
pearing out of the Mire, but, 1. a Tree spreading abroad his boughs, 2. planted
by a provident hand, that expects good of it, 3. not in a barren soil, or
rocky mountain, exposed to all blustering wind and weather; but, 4. by the
water's side, which will minister it gracious moisture, that it may not stand
for a show only, or shade, but, 5. bring forth fruit, 6. and that not
unnaturally, or unseasonably to be blasted, but in due season, when expected,
7. The lease of such a Tree shall not wither with Winter, nor be scorched in
Summer; but shall flourish, spreading abroad like a Cedar in Lebanon, and
bringing forth fruit most in their age.

FINIS.

