A PROPHECY, Lately found amongst the Collections of famous Mr. JOHN SELDOM.
Faithfully rendered in the Original Latin, and Translated for the English
Reader.

LONON, Printed in the year, 1659.

A PROPHECY.
PRinceps e Scotia secundus, Vxorem ducet Papisticam, post quod, evadet Regum
infelicissimus.

Englished.

This needs no Comment.
The second Prince from Scotland, shall marry a Popish Wife; after which, he
shall become the most unhappy of Princes.

Prophecy.

Vary exorientur turbe, Populusque eligit sibi, tres successive belli Duces:
Comitem, Equitem, and Obscurum, qui miris artibus, and Religionis pretextu,
Potestatem, non Titulum, acquiret sibi Regium; tandemque in Aula Reg^li
extinguetur. In cujus Prole, aliquamdiu durabit lumen accensum, minor paullo
felicius tractabit Lyram, been habebit, si ad ejus modulos saltaverit Monachus.

Englished.

Various troubles shall arise, Neither this.
and the People shall choose to themselves three Generals successively, viz. an
Earl, a Knight and an Obscure person, who with strange Arts, and pretenses
Religious, shall acquire to himself the power, but not the title of King; In
whose posterity the kindled light shall, for some time, continue. The younger
Son may, more happily, tune the Harp: It shall go well if a Monk dance to
his tune. Q. Of what Order!


Prophecy.

Eodem tempore Oligarchiae studebitur and Monarchiae Vanae, nec unquam in
terris visibili, cnjus caput Enthusiasticum, and fanaticum, praedicatorum
munus, preter ornem suum occupabit, and in fumum, cum societate sua evanescet.

Englished.

This is submitted to the interpretation of the learned
At the same time some will endeavor to set up an Oligarchy and Vane Monarchy,
never to be seen upon the Earth. The Enthusiastic and Fanatique Head whereof
shall invade the Office of a Preacher, besides his Order, and with his company,
shall at length vanish into smoke.

Prophecy.

Us Londinio, toti Clero and Jurisperi^is; ve Angli^ omnibus preterquam
Papicolis, qui sub plurimis formis Religionem suam in Anglia stabilire
conabuntur.

Englished.

Woe to London; woe to all the Clergy and Lawyers; Deus ave^ta^
woe to all Englishmen, but Papists, who under many shapes shall endeavor to
establish their Religion in England.

Prophecy.

Doctrina and factis superabuntur Larvati Muncerus and Leidensis. Papismus erit
sibi similis, pluresque succendet ignes.

Englished.

The former is obvious, the latter too probable.
The Protean Munster, and John-a-Leyden, shall be exceeded both in Doctrine and
Deeds. Popery shall be like it self, and shall kindle many Fires.

Prophecy.

Plurimi tunc deficient, Populusque jugum excutiet. Armati sentient se deludi,
and ab Exule quodam, stipendia insoluta recipient. Sub quo universum Corpus:
Florebit, longo Bello exhaustum and mirum in modum ditabitur, pace fruetur
stabili and generali, and Terra, Marique fortunabitur.

Englished.

Many shall then fall off, and the People shall shake off their Yoke. Those in
Arms shall find themselves deluded, and shall receive their arrears from one
banished. Under whom the whole Body, (exhausted with long War, Let all who love
their Country say, Amen.
) shall flourish and be wonderfully enriched, shall enjoy a firm and general
peace, and shall be happy by Sea and Land.

Prophecy.

Redeunt Saturnia regna.

Englished

Happy days return.

Prophecy.

Felices qui intelligunt, and utuntur.

Englished.

Blessed are they that understand, and make use of this.

The Lord in mercy look upon us, and deliver us from the Plots of the Jesuit,
lurking under the disguise of Quakers, Anabaptists, and very many other
Professions. Amen.

FINIS.

