The PROPHETS Malachy and Isaiah PROPHESYING TO The Saints and Professors of
this Generation Of The Great Things the Lord will do in this their Day and
Time.

Showing (amongst other things) The Nature and Quality of the Apostasy. The
Judgment of the Lord upon the Leaders of the Apostasy. How the Lord will deal
with, and carry himself toward, others guilty of the Apostasy. The certainty
of deliverance at hand for the true Seed.


By a wel-wisher to the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus.

To which is prefixed two very useful Epistles, by Christopher Feak, and John
Pendarves, Ministers of the Gospel.

Thus says the Lord God, Howl ye, woe worth the day: for the day is near,
even the day of the Lord is near, a cloudy day.

Ezekiel. 30.2, 3. The day of the Lord is darkness, and not light; as if a man
did flee from a Lion, and a Bear met him; or went into the house, and leaned
his hand on the wall, and a Serpent bit him: even very dark, and no
brightness in it,

Amos 5.18, 19, 20. I have yet many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear
them now,

John 16.12. LONDON: Printed for, Livewell Chapman, at the Crown in Pope's Head
Alley. 1656.

TO THE READERS: Whether Such as follow the Lamb, or such as wonder after the
Beast. Love and Pity, for the Lords sake.
OUR dear Lord, in the days of his flesh spoke many words privately among his
Disciples, to this effect, viz. that they should be hated of the world, that
they should be hated of all men for his Names sake: yea, and in that last
solemn Address to his father, related, John the seventeenth (wherein he has
left upon record a pattern of his intercession on the Behalf of his Disciples,
who did then or should afterward believe on him through their word) he does
expressly mention this matter, (surely his heart was full of it and much
affected with it) I have given them thy word (says he there to his father)
and THE WORLD HAS HATED THEM because they are not of the world, even as I am
not of the world. And again in a certain place he testifies saying, If the
WORLD HATES YOU, ye know that IT HATED ME before it HATED YOU, If ye were of
the world the world would love its own, but because ye are not of the world,
but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore THE WORLD HATES YOU. Now to
bear up their hearts under this Burden of the Hatred of the world, he puts
them in mind of that lesson, which he had formerly taught them, Mat. 10.24.
John 13.16. saying, Remember the word that I said to you: the servant is not
greater then the Lord, etc. If they have persecuted me they will presecute you
also, if they have kept my saying, they will keep yours also. The spirit and
life of the encouragement lies in this, that the Son of God was their Brother
and companion in Tribulation, and in suffering the hatred of the world, they
should drink out of the same cup with him in all the afflictions which they
were to endure from the world. Now if any Man, that observes the
considerablenesse of these and many other passages of this Nature, should
desire to know the particular reason why the Lord Jesus (with his Disciples)
was always thus hated, persecuted and Abased by the world, Did He and they
give any just Cause of hatred and ill will against them? I answer, no surely,
there were never a more innocent and harmless sort of people in the world
then they, But the true reason of this inveterate hatred is expressed by
himself John the 7 and 7. in a Conference betwixt himself and his Brethren
which did not believe in him. The world (says He) cannot hate you but me it
hates because I testify of it (or concerning it) that the works thereof are
evil. Observe the matter seriously, and you will well perceive, that the world
has works of its own, the world is full of its own proper works, doings and
bufinesse, which it is altogether conversant about, Things which it must mind
and manage, with all care and Industry: then secondly consider, these works
are such as are exceedingly beloved and delighted in by the world, and the
world cannot endure with any patience that any sort of men should account them
evil works; but then thirdly if any should presume not only to Account, but
also to Call them evil works, and so testify against them as evil works
and odious in the sight of God; for such a Testimony though given by the Son of
God himself (who for this purpose came into the world, that he might bear
witness: to the truth) would the world hate him, and persecute him even unto
death, if not hindered by the overruling power of God himself.

And therefore if the true Disciples of Christ himself (who having his Spirit,
his Truth, his Cause, his Glory and all his precious Concernments dwelling and
working in them mightily, are constrained, by the power of his love, to second
and confirm This his great Testimony against the world and the wicked works
thereof) should incurr the same hatred, indignation and wrath from the world,
which was measured out unto him, they must by no means think it a strange
thing, but rather rejoice exceedingly in their being thus made conformable to
the fathers first borne among many Brethren.

And blessed be the Name of the Lord, that there are any among us, who are
counted worthy to suffer shame and violent Dealing for his Name, and for their.
Testimony concerning the world, that the works or Deeds thereof are evil.

But will it not be well worthy your time and leisure to inquire into these
two or three particulars, first, what does the Lord Jesus understand in the
Scriptures before mentioned by the word world. Secondly what are those evil
works which our Lord testified against in the days of his flesh; and Thirdly
what is the nature of the Testimony of Christ and his Disciples that the world
should be so much incensed with hatred and indignation against them for it,
Hearken oh ye Children of men, and consider with all your might and with all
speed, for the time of Consideration is almost spent and passed away. To the
First I shall return this Account, undoubtedly by the word world in the
Scripture mentioned, a Certain part of mankind, namely the degenerate part,
the worst part contra-distinguished from the Best, namely the Church is here to
be understood, for the Church and the world, are Contrary one unto the other,
evermore.

This degenerate part of the world or of mankind I distinguish thus, some of
them, are such as having departed from the light and Law of Nature, did
afterward by degrees degenerate into Brutishnes, and profannes, as namely, the
nations of the earth, which neither worship God, nor love their Neighbor
according to the written rule, but live and walk after their own and their
Rulers lusts and inventions in all things; being full as of all ungodliness,
so of all unrighteousness likewise, as may be observed once for all, in Romans
1. from the 18 verse to the end of the Chapter. These Gentiles in the point of
Government and worship have not Jehovah for their Judge, or their Lawgiver, or
their King, but have in a constant succession submitted to the four Beasts
which rose out of the great Sea (as is described by Daniel the Prophet) as to
their Sovereign Lords in all things.

Others of the degenerate part of Mankind, are such as having been taken into
Covenant with God, from among the Idolatrous Nations, to be his Church and
people, did for a time observe and do his Commandments, but afterward
forsaking the Lord their God, have joined themselves to Idols, after the manner
of the Nations of the world, and so have gradually degenerated into the very
Image and similitude of the Gentiles which know not God, and so are of the
world, as the Egyptians were of the world, and as the Canaanites were of the
world. This was the state of the Ten Tribes, and this state is notably
described in Jeremy the 2 from the 9 to the 21 verse.

Such also were the degenerate Members of the Jewish Church in the first day of
the Son of man, they were of the world, as the Romans and the Grecians were of
the world; and therefore without controversy our Lord in the forementioned
passages, does include within the compass of the word WORLD, the Order of the
Priests (from the Highest to the Lowest) the whole state of the Elders, the
whole Hypocritical Generation of the Scribes and Pharisees, and the Generality
of the people, who being corrupted from the simplicity and purity of the Divine
Institutions, did not long after the Testimony aforesaid, Join in the
Murdering of the Lord of glory: This is the world which hated Jesus Christ,
even with a more perfect hatred, then Herod, or Pontius Pilate, [or the
Centurions, or the Soldiers of the Romans. These Things are plain and clear to
almost every understanding, and therefore I for bear further explication.

Only let me add this. As it was then even so it is now, in these our days, as
by many Instances it might appear.

That the Turks are of the world, that the Jews are of the world (and not of
the Church) that the Persians, the Indians, the Moors are of the world as the
nations before the day of Christ, were of the world is Confessed by us all: But
is it not as true? that the Idolatrous, the profane, the Brutish, the
Barbarous Papists are of the world, as the Mahumetans etc. are of the world?
(though they pretend to be the only true Church of God upon earth) this also
will be assented to as the Truth among the protestants; they may believe upon
Scripture ground, that the Romish Church as now degenerated, must needs be
very near of Kin, to the Heathenish world, because the spirit of the world and
the Characters of the world, works effectually in them, and is plainly
discerned upon them, as in and upon others of the children of Disobedience.

But now what shall we say of the Protestant Churches, of the Reformed
Churches, which have a name to live, to be the Spouse of Christ, etc. we
cannot endure to hear them evil spoken of, we cannot bear it that they
should be looked upon as the world, or the worldly Church, or the Carnal
Church, these are odious expressions, they and their state are not to be
compared with the state of the Jewish Church as our Lord found it when he
testified that they were the world and that their works were evil.

To this, with an holy Boldness as in the sight of Christ, I dare to say, that
in their present Constitution and Condition they may, without doing them any
wrong, be compared to the Jewish Church and state in the Days of Christ and
his Apostles, in respect of their superstitions and persecutions, of their
hatred and enmity to the pure ways of Christ as the popish Church, may be
justly compared to the Apostate Ten tribes in respect of their Idolatryes and
persecutions; for this is a most certain truth, full of evidence in it self,
where you find the spirit of Idolatry, Superstition, Tradition, Ceremony and
formality in worship prevailing, and overpowring the true Gospel spirit, there
will you find the spirit of the world. Moreover where the Lord Jesus and his
Members feel the power of the spirit of injustice and opression of hatred and
persecution overcoming the spirit of truth and equity, of righteousness and
innocence, there they may safely say, these Men are the men of the world, and
so no other, no better then the world.

Now then forbearing to inquire into the state of the reformed Churches abroad,
let us take a short survay of the national Churches of England, of Scotland
and Ireland, which are accounted in the Number of the Reformed Churches, and
their Daughters the Parish Churches, as they were formerly or are now
Constituted and Governed by the Lords Spiritual the Lord Bishops the Lord
Presbiters, and the Lord Triers under Charles R. and Oliver P. those two
protestant Princes those two Defenders of the faith, those two supreme Heads
(successively) of the Church in these parts of the Earth with all their
Ecclesiastical furniture of Church officers patrons, Parsons, Vicars, Curates,
Church Wardens, Clearks, Sextons, etc. not to omit all their Parish and
Collegiate-Church members. Did they formerly or do they now look like the
Churches of Christ, or like the Churches of Antichrist? were they not, are they
not, of the world? did they not, do they not speak of the world? as says
the Apostle John, yea all of them, from the Head to the tail? as says the
Prophet Isayah. Were they not, are they not now again (under the shadow of
their Lord protectors wings) Constituted Countenanced, maintained and Governed
after the Inventions of men, after the traditions of Antichrist, after the
rudiments of the world, and not after Christ? do not these Churches and their
officers worship the Lord in vain, teaching for Doctrines the commandments of
Men? nay more then this, did they not in the Prelates days, do they not in
the days of the present Tryers appear full of the spirit of enmity against
the ways of Christ, against the Kingdom of Christ, against the Government of
Christ, and his Legislative power? is there not now, as formerly a great and a
general hatred among the Scribes and the Pharisees, and the Corrupt Lawyers,
against the new non-conformists, and nonsubscribers, and against all those who
in the spirit of Christ shall boldly bear witness that they are the world, and
not the Church, and that their works are evil? Let those who are spiritual
consider the matter, and speak their mind. Let those whose senses are
exercised, by reason of use, to discern betwixt Christ and Beliall, betwixt
the Inventions of men and the Injunctions of God, well weigh the premises in
the balance of the Sanctuary and give judgment according to God.

But to hasten to the second Question, What were those EVIL WORKS, which our
Lord did testify against, or for which he did bear witness against the world,
and for doing whereof, he was hated of the world?

I answer. Without Controversy, THOSE EVIL WORKS may be reduced to two or
three general Heads. Either such as were wrought by them in the way of an
ECCLESIASTICAL BODY, or such as were brought forth in the Manner and Method of
a CIVIL STATE, or else such as were done by the confusion and mixture of ALL
together, as the Holy Spirit in that notable Prayer of Peter intimates, where
all sorts of Interests, Civil, Ecclesiastical, Military, are declared to
Combine together against our Lord. Acts 4.27. Of a truth against thy holy
Servant Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both HEROD, and PONTIVS PILATE, with
the GENTILES, and the PEOPLE of Israel were gathered together. Here is a
Combination in the Church, in the Court, in the CAMP, against the Savior of
the world. And upon examination of the works and workings of all these parties,
we shall find cause to say they were to be testified against as Evil.

But more particularly, to reckon up some of them as we find them occasionally
recorded by the four Evangelists (and, as we go along, to compare them with
those evil works which are now carried on in these parts of the earth) as done
by the High Priest, by Herod, by Pontius Pilate, by the Gentlemen of the long
Robe of both professions, etc. First, let us begin with their Counsels against
Christ, those works of darkness, they are evil works within doors, Mat.
12.14. The Pharisees went out, and held a Counsel (privately) how they might
destroy him. Here were consultations held against the life of Christ. So Mat.
27.1. All the chief Priests, and Elders of the people took counsel against
Jesus, to put him to death.

We shall have an exact account of all their wicked murtherous Consultations
against the Person, the Doctrine, the Honor of the Lord Jesus, in that day
when he shall Judge the secrets of all men, according to his Gospel. But in the
mean time we know that these Deeds of Darkness, were some of those evil
works, which our Lord did testify against.

And in like manner, at this day we know (in that light of truth which will not
fail us) that there are many close and cunning consultations to destroy that
Cause of Christ which not long since was, in show, highly honored, and
contended for, by him, who is known by the name of his Highness the Lord
Protector, etc. but who gave him that Name, I leave to him to Answer, when he
shall be called to a strict account for all the evil counsel given against the
Lord, and his followers, because of their righteous reproofs of the Army and
their General, for the Hypocrisy, Apostasy, Oppression, and Persecutions,
whereof they are guilty in the sight of the Sun.

Another kind of evil works, was their watching of the Lord Jesus, and sending
forth Spies, which should feign themselves just men, that they might take hold
of his words, that so they might deliver him to the power and Authority of the
Governor, Luke 20.20. And the Scribes and Pharisees ( Luke 11.53.) urged him
vehemently, and provoked him to speak of many Things, laying wait for him, and
seeking to catch something out of his mouth, that they might accuse him.
Certainly every man who loves the Lord Jesus, will easily grant these were very
wicked works. But are not such practices frequently used by the Spies, which
are Employed from the Court and Council at White Hall? I am sure before our
Imprisonment, Many who came to catch our words, feigned themselves to be Just
men, to be good men, whereby they were capeable to entangle us in our talk.
The same Spirit which wrought effectually in those children of disobedience,
does work in these as effectually, and we doubt not but we shall prove these
Spies to be guilty of the same evil works, with those Spies which watched
Christ, and their Masters to be of the same conspiracy, with the Pharisees and
Herodians, namely at that Day when his Highness shall stand before the
Judgment seat of Jesus Christ, without either his Clergy or his Lawyers to
plead his Cause. We shall then understand what Instructions they were which he
or his Secretaries gave his Catch poles, when he employed them, and what
conference he had with them when they read our Sermon Notes in his hearing; and
all those works of darkness and secrecy shall be brought to light, and Our
Lord Himself shall second our Testimony, That their Deeds were evil.

Again, Other evil works of the world, and the men of the world, which the
Lord Jesus did testify against, was, Their devouring widows houses, while
for a pretense they made long prayers, Mat. 23.14. Surely this was a double
evil work, and therefore He tells them they shall receive greater Damnation.
Not only widows Houses have been devoured by the new Rulers, but whole
Families, in pressing and forcing, or else enticing men to the ends of the
earth for Gold and Silver, thousands having perished in the Enterprise; but
while these Families were devoured by Sea and Land, what frequent fastings and
long prayers were made at White Hall: The Lord beholds this. Hypocrisy, and it
will one day appear how abominable this project was in the sight of God (as it
does in part already) not withstanding all their long prayers to color it
over, as a Design against Antichrist and his Kingdom.

Besides these evil works before Mentioned, the Lord declares against them,
because of their extortion and excess, as it is in Matthew, because of their
ravening and wickedness, as it is in Luke, yea he speaks of their Binding of
heavy Burdens and grievous to be borne, and laying them on men's shoulders, but
they will not move them with one of their fingers. For my part, I am verily
persuaded that the same evil works are Done to the Innocent people by this
present Sword power, and their cries enter into the ears of the Lord of Hoasts,
though they pity them not, who Do thus oppress them.

Many more might be added, which in the Judgment of all the true Disciples of
Christ, will be accounted evil works, (but I must not enlarge a Preface
beyond its proportion) this therefore shall sufface for the second Point, what
kind of evil works they were which Christ testified against, and how like
unto them, the evil works of this present Generation of Rulers will be found
to be, when they are examined by the Righteous Judge of all the world.

Now as for the Nature of the Testimony given by Christ concerning the evil
works of that world or worldly Church which hated both him, his doctrine, and
his followers (which is the third general Head to be spoken to) it is plain,
that it is no less then a Divine Testimony.

As says the Apostle, If we receive the* WITNESS of men, THE WITNESS OF GOD is
greater. Now This Witness (or Testimony) whereof we are speaking from John
7.7. is not the witness of a man, a mortal man, but the witness of God, the
witness of one who is God and man, and so it is most Authentic. And how often
Does our Lord in his Ministry and Testimony, inculcate this upon his hearers,
That he spoke nothing of himself, but as the Father gave him Commandment? John
12.49, 50. And again, John 8.38. I speak that which I have seen with my Father.
So that when the Lord Jesus testified, it was the highest Testimony which could
have been given to the truth.

His Testimony was an unquestionable Testimony, a righteous Testimony, a
witness which will carry the cause against the whole world: for Let God be
true, but every man a liar, as it is written, that thou might be justified
in thy sayings. The sayings of Christ from the father concerning this present
evil world, and the wicked works thereof, will be made good at the last day.
Let no powers on earth think or hope to enervate his Testimony in the least, by
any pretenses, excuses, or distinctions whatsoever.

Now as Christ Himself was in the world, so ought those who are Christ's
Ministers and Witnesses, to be in the world likewise. Those whom he sends
were born and anointed to this end, viz. to bear witness to the truth in his
sted, and on his behalf; and let the Princes of the world, and the people of
the world assure themselves, The Lord never did, nor ever will, leave himself
without witness. Some of his Servants shall be stirred up by his Spirit to
plead the Cause of their Lord against his adversaries; although they know before
hand, that through the hatred of the world, they shall be exposed to a thousand
dangers, distresses, deaths, for the truths sake.

The Dragon, the beast, the scarlet Whore, the false Prophet, the Kings of the
earth, although by a complication of interests, they are desperately engaged
and enraged against the Lamb and his followers, against the Lord and his
witnesses, nevertheless the wrath of God has been (and now is) revealed from
heaven to their very faces against all their ungodliness and unrighteousness,
by those witnesses, which he has raised up and furnished, with Heroic spirits
to contend with the whole earth, and that wrath so revealed, by his Servants
the Prophets, shall be executed likewise, for The Testimony of Jesus is the
Spirit of Prophecy, which the true Church is never destitute of altogether.

So that I am persuaded (and I believe many others) that Matters are carried at
this day, betwixt the Servants and Spirit of Christ, and the Servants and
Spirit of Antichrist, as they were carried in those days betwixt the Spirit
and person of Christ, and the Spirit and persons of the Priests and powers of
the earth.

It is not to be expected that his Highnesses Court Chaplains who are fed at
his Table, should lift up their heel against their Good Lord and Master, in
testifying openly that his Counsels are evil, that his Instrument is an ugly
Idol, and an Image of Jealousy, that his Government is evil, that his works
in imprisoning the Servants of Christ without Just Cause are evil, that his
Extortion and Rapine in Imposing and gathering in all his Taxes by an Arbitrary
power, contrary to the Law of God and the Land, is evil, that his devouring
whole families in sending thousands to the ends of the earth (and multitudes
against their wills) upon a base and beggarly Design, that stinkes in the
nostrills of God, and good men, is evil and abominable: And which of his City
and Country Clergymen fed and Clothed by his Tyrannical execution of the
Popes Cannon Law will declare against him for maintaining the Relicts and
Remainders of Popery; and for his setting up New-Carnall spiritual Courts of
Prelaticall Tryers or Comissioners to reign over the Parish Ministers in the
Bishops stead. Which of those Inslaved Preachers, Lecturers and
Augmentation-Men, who come cap in hand to their Inferiors or equals for their
Approbation, and a box full of Orthodox Orders to preach in such or such a
steeple House, and to receive the ancient profits and perquisites of the parish
for their pains, dare to turn head upon their Ecclesiastical Lords, and join
with Christ and his spirit, to testify against these New invented Babylonish
Abominations? Alas poor wretches they have no heart, no spirit for the Interest
of Christ, they are ashamed of the testimony of our Lord and of us his
prisoners, who by the most powerful Illapses and influences of his spirit, are
enabled and Constrained to bid Defyance to the scarlet colored Beast, and to
all his 7 heads of Blasphemy, and to all his ten homs of persecution, to all
the Kings of the earth which commit fornication with the mother of Harlots, and
with all her danghters.

But, because these Men, thus lamentably yoaked by their new Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, dare not particularly and courageously, in the power of the
Spirit, bear their Testimony for Christ, against the world, or world like
Church, that their deeds are evil; therefore the Lord will raise up others to
supply this defect. And be it known to all the Kings and Princes, which
oppress and persecute the Children of the free woman, that the Lord will
furnish himself with a sufficient Number of faithful Servants, who shall, in
his strength, maintain that Conflict and Combat which is needful, till the
great of the Battle of the Almighty God.

As Christ told the Chief Priests and Scribes, who were displeased that the
Children cried Hosanna to the Son of David: If these should hold their peace,
the stones would immediately cry out, so I say, in words of truth and
soberness, seeing the Chief Preachers, Pastors, and Teachers, are dumb, and
connive at the present Apostasy, Hypocrisy, Oppression, Tyrannical
Government, and going back to Egypt, the Lord is as it were compelled to
furnish himself, from among the private Christians, and the weakest and meanest
of the Brethren, to bear a Testimony against this wicked Generation of
Backsliders, and if they likewise should hold their peace altogether, the
stones of the streets, and the very brute Creatures would immediately cry out
for the Lord will not altogether and utterly leave himself without witness.
This Ensuing Treatise, was not Composed by any of the University-scarlet
Doctors, nor by any Batchelour of Divinity, or Master of Arts and sciences, I
am persuaded their Acadenicall Unction will teach them to practice compliance,
and to sing Placebo. But surely this is some Honest Sool, who observing the
Common Clergy to be as mute as Fishes, when they should have cried aloud, and
have lifted up their voices as a Trumpet, to show the Apostatized Christians
their transgressions, and the Hypocrites their sins, has so far laid their
Abominations to heart, that he cannot for bear to speak a word for God against
such an adulterous Generation, and to encourage that little Remnant which speak
often one to another, and think upon Jehovah's Name: Wherefore, let all Men who
shall read, search the Scriptures, whether those things which he has written,
and brought together from the holy Oracles, be so yea or no, and accordingly
embrace what they find of the Spirit and truth of God, and what they meet with
that savours of humane frailty, and mistake (for which of the Learned Orthodox
Doctors of the Church, as they are called, are not full of them?) let them
(reflecting upon their own insufficiency, and imperfections) pass by in
brotherly love, or rectify according to the measure of their seize in
Christ. For undoubtedly the Aim of the Author, and the scope of his discourse,
is no way unworthy the Name and profession of a Disciple of Christ.

A plentiful portion of the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the knowledge
of Christ, be given to every such Disciple in this day, for the Lords sake,
Amen. So prays

One of the Servants of Christ, and your Servant for Jesus sake. CHR. FEAKE.
From mine own Hired House (where a Soldier is appointed to keep me) this 14
day of the 5 Month, 1656.
TO THE READER.
GOD who in times past left not himself without Witness, Acts 14.16, 17. has
in the days of the Gospel compassed us about with a aloud of Witnesses, Heb.
12.1. A Remnant of whom, (notwithstanding that great Apostasy spoken of, 2 Thessalonians. 2.) has the Lord reserved, and by wonderful providence has preserved,
during all the bloody rage and reign of the man of sin, to bear a Testimony
for Jesus, with the hazard of their lives, Rev. 17.6. And in this our
Generation, O how eminently has God appeared witnessing to the truth, Rev.
12.11, 17.
and against all the unrighteousness of men, as by many signal paovidences,
and dreadsull judgments, Chap. 6.9.
so also by raising up diverse Witnesses in his behalf? The number of those
has he augmented of late, and prospered their Testimony to a great increase of
light, and still the Lord holds them in his right hand, and makes them like the
Pen of a ready Writer, bearing a swift Testimony against the most refined
abominations of Professors, declaring the mind of the Lord in diverse dark
sayings of Scripture, bringing that light out of obscurity, that many ages past
have never seen; 1 Pet. 1.12.
showing plainly how the Prophets of old, did Minister to the Saints and
Professors in the last days. Behold how these at this day are revived (as from
the dead) to witness for God and Christ against a sinful and adulterous
Generation. It rejoices me to behold how the Lord does spirit instruments, and
instruct them to promote their Testimony, by expounding, and sitly applying,
their words for Reproof, and instruction in Righteousness, as once he did
Ezra, and others with him, to hold forth the Law of Moses, when that work,
which typed forth much of this now in doing, was upon the wheel.

But as the Lords Witnesses of old, were the main object of the hatred of those
whom they witnessed against, as Amos, Jeremy, and others, who were threatened,
imprisoned, and reproached: even so, are the Children of the Prophets, those
who (through their word) are brought forth to witness against evil doers,
now, hated and misused by the men of this Generation. I know men are ready to
say with the Pharisees, Mat. 23.30, 31, 32. If we had lived in the days of our
fathers, we would not have persecuted the Prophets, whilst in the mean time
they seek to suppress those, who in the same Spirit of faith, do with their
words explained, bear witness against such, yea, the self same evils by other
persons committed now.

Obj. But some may Object, saying, This is the duty and work of extraordinary
Prophets only, to bear a Testimony against the evils of the Times, ordinary
Ministers have little to do, ordinary Saints much less, with such matters.

Ans. The Prophecies of old, and the Testimonies of the Prophets, are gathered
up into the Prophecy and Testimony of Christ, the Great Prophet of the New
Testament, the faithful witness and by him (having received of the Father The
Promise of the Spirit, in the fulness of it) committed to his Seed, even the
faithful, (believers as believers being made to partake abundantly of the same
Spirit, which was not given at least so generally, and ordinarily, until Jesus
was exalted, John 7. 38, 39.) by them to be declared, and held forth from
Generation to Generation, each word in its season, according to their measure
of Grace, and of the gift of Christ, as these Scriptures here inserted, with
many more do sufficiently prove, Rev. 1.4, 5, 11. Rev. 12.10, 11, 17. Isa.
59.21. Psa. 145.4. Isa. 43.3, 5, 8. Isa. 8.16. 2 Timothy 2.2. And as it is the
concernment of Saints in general, qualified for the work, to witness for
Christ against Antichrist, so is it in a special manner the work of Gospel
Ministers orderly called to that Office, to bear their Testimony against all
Antichristian Abominations.

And if these things be so, may we not conclude, that men ought to take heed
that they be not found despisers, when God comes forth by the words of his
Servants (though Babes and Sucklings) with stammering tongues and pens, Psalm.
8.2.
to witness against the evils of the times.

O Ye that are called by the name of Saints, Is it a time for you to dwell at
ease in your cieled houses? Is it not high time to awake and to consider your
ways? to enquire into, to lay to heart, to sigh and cry for, all the
abominations of such as profess to be the Lords people, whereby the grace and
praiseworthy name of God is reproached at home and abroad? Oh how gloriously
is this duty rewarded? and how severely are professors, even the ancient of
them, punished for the neglect hereof? Ezekiel. 9.4, 5, 6, 7. If love to God and
Christ does not constrain, yet let the just judgments of God breaking forth
upon a professing yet sinful secure people, provoke you hereunto.

In this weighty work the ensuing Treatise will afford thee no small help, for
by it (if the presence of the Lord accompany the reading) thou may dig
through a wall as Ezekiel was bid to do, Ezekiel. 8.7, 8, 12. and may behold
with him an open door, whereat entering in, thou may see greater
abominations, then probably thou have hitherto observed, vayled over with
spetious pretenses, and a large profession. Herein is the wisdom of God to be
seen, and justified, in bringing his truths to light in their proper time,
whilst men are working in the dark, Isa. 29.15.
saying Who sees us? How has the Lord lighted Candles wherewith to search
Jerusalem, visiting the men that are settling, Zeph. 1.12.
or willing to setle on their Lees.

Reader, This work serves not only to present unto thee (as it were in a
Glass) the face of the Times, but thine own face, use it as a Touchstone to
try thy heart, whether it be right for the Lord, and for his work. Behold how
the Lord comes, and sits as a Refiner, in and through those discoveries of
soule-searehing truths, Jer. 23.29.
which he brings to light daily.

His word that goes forth out of the mouth of his witnesses, is like fire
refining the precious Sons of Sion, Rev. 11.5.
who are compared to Gold, but consuming, Lam. 4.2.
or threatening to consume the wicked, who are like stubble. The Sword that
proceeds out of the mouth of Christ, Rev. 2.12.
is sharp and two-edged; if it do not convert from sin, it will condemn for
continuing in sin. Such as are disobedient to his word, are inexcusable, fitted
for ruin, as stubble fully dry. And have not some cause to fear, that, if
after many reproofs, Exodus 23.28.
they go on hardening their necks, their fall will be sudden, 1 Pet. 2.7, 8.
and their sad condition remediless? Prove. 29. 1. Isa. 30.10, 11, 12, 13. Yea,
and then shall the Lords people who have testified against them, rebuking in
the Gate, Jer. 7.16.
and exhorting to repentance, keep silence in that day, Jer. 11.14.
ceasing to plead with them, or with God for them, Amos 5.13.
thereby justifying the hand of God in bringing his judgments on them. And
whosoever is wise let him observe, That when those backsliders spoken of, Isa.
29.20, 21. proceeded to that degree of imimpiety, to watch for iniquity, to
make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproved in the
Gate, by such acts as these, they perfected their iniquity, and filled up the
measure thereof.

The following Discourse sets forth in a Type, by comparing together many
remarkable words in the Prophecy of Malachy and Isaiah, A most refined Apostasy
of a professing people, after a Reformation begun. Their words, though first
spoken to others, are declared to light on us the Saints, and Professors in
this Generation, who having greatly sinned, number. 32.23.
may justly say, Our sins have found us out.

Now as relating to this Apostasy, or Backsliding, with the cause, and cure
thereof, I shall offer these things to be considered.

As this backsliding is either total and final, in those who perish, or
partial, in the Saints, so also is the cause thereof twofold.

First, Hypocrites, who fall away in time of temptation, have no root in
themselves, Luke 8.13. They are not partakers of the Divine nature, neither are
they regenerate; wherefore such Professors notwithstanding for a time they may
appear with clean outsides, are fitly compared by the Spirit of the Lord to the
Sow, which being washed, turns again to her wallowing in the mire, 2 Pet. 2.22.

Secondly, That Backsliding which is not total, ordinarily springs from Saints
forgetfullnesse of Gods great love in Christ revealed to them, and his
wonderful works done in them, and for them; as also the love of their
espousalls, their first love to God, their relations, vows, and engagements to
him.

Of this Backsliding both of sinners and Saints, and the judgments thereunto
belonging, do these Prophets treat. The Saints themselves, Gods Children, and
his Jewels shall not escape a trying refining day, which will be terrible to
them; yea, and as they are or may be found in unbelieving, earthly, sensual
forms of Spirit, consulting with flesh and blood, unsufferable. Who shall stand
when he appears? Mal. 3.2, 3. His presence to the carrying on of this work of
reforning will be to some (who may be judged good men) no less grievous, but
rather more then fire is the flesh of a man.

As for Hypocrites and Sinners in Syon, their dreadful doom, and just sentence
that goes forth out of the mouth of those two Witnesses, is, that they shall
be consumed, Isa. 1.28. Mal. 4.1. The fiery day shall burn them up, that it
shall leave them neither root nor branch.

According to that word of God to Jer. 15.19. If thou take forth the precious
from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth. This Prophet Malachi speaking as the
mouth of God, puts a difference (as also does the Prophets and Apostles
generally) between the two Seeds, The Seed of the Woman, and of the Serpent,
between whom God did by his own mouth* first put the difference, Genesis 3.15. To
all which agrees that clear distinction between the Son of the bond woman, and
of the free, Gal. 4.22, 23: which things (says the Apostle, v. 24.) are an
Allegory, for these are the two Covenants, viz. The one of Works, the other of
Grace.

The two grand Characters whereby the two Seeds are here distinguished, are 1 A
true filial fear of God. 2 A sincere love and respect unto the name of God
above all things.


These two choice effects of a lively faith, are such things as Hypocrites are
strangers to, such singular things as do infallibly accompany salvation. In
these things the carnal seed under the Law, and the formal Professor under the
Gospel, come short of the Israelite in deed, and being weighed in the balance
of the Sanctuary, are found wanting. And although such may be in a Palace with
King Belshazzar, if they look narrowly into this Prophecy of Malachy, as here
explained and presented to their view, it may be with them (if they be not
miserably hardened) no better than with him, when beholding the writing on the
wall, his countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the
joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another, Dan.
5.6.

As for the former of these, viz. A filial fear of God, upon the account of
their lack of this one thing, the Prophet Malachy reproves the people, saying,
Chap. 1.6. If I be a Father, where is mine honor? And if I be a Master, where
is my fear, says the Lord of Host? whereas on the contrary, he commends his
beloved Remnant for their fear of him, Chap. 3.16. and of his Name, Chap. 4.2.
Yea, Christ himself the everlasting father of that chosen Generation, is
extolled, and found worthy to be entrusted with the greatest of Gods work, on
the account of this blessed qualification, viz. the fear of God, Chap. 2.5. My
Covenant was with him, of life and peace, and I gave them to him (says God)
for the fear wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before my Name.

These things well weighed, may through the blessing of the Lord, give some
check to that unseemly lightness which often appears in the shameless
foreheads of many noted Professors. Oh! where will such appear, if they repent
not, seeing God has not entered them on his Book of Remembrance, which is
written for those only who fear the Lord, Chap. 3.16. and tremble at his word?
How shall they escape that dreadful day mentioned, Chap. 4.1. Seeing then our
God is a consuming fire, let us then take hold of his grace in Christ Jesus,
whereby to serve him acceptably, with reverence and godly fear. He who is risen
up to shake hereby the Earth, and also the Heavens, will certainly ere long
shake off and cast out (as it were out of his lap) a Generation of light and
loose Professors; against whom, those who are of a low and legal spirit and
Principle, falling short by many degrees of their professed light in the
Gospel, are risen up, and shall rise in Judgment to condemn them, for their
intolerable pride and sensuallity.

Qu. If any shall now enquire, what is this fear of the Lord here spoken of?

I Answer, It is a precious effect of the Spirit of Christ, Isa. 11.23.
in the heart of a believer, Jer. 32.40.
whereby (through the discovery of the glory of God in his word, Psalm 86.11.
and works by Christ; Romans 3.18.
and in consideration of the vast disproportion that is between God and the
Creature) he is made to think highly of God in all his Attributes, Exodus 33.18.
and 34.4, 5, 6, 7.
and to have respect unto all his Commandments. Hosea 3.5.
Thus referring the Reader to the search of Scriptures, Psa. 8.3, 4.
whether the thing be so, Psa. 111.7, 8, 9, 10.
and to the examination of his own heart, Jer. 10.6, 7, 10, 12.
whether this good thing be found in him, Isa. 40.15, 16, 17.
I shall hasten to the second qualification before mentioned.

Secondly, Eccl. 12.13.
The second Character whereby the faithful people of God are distinguished
from those Formalists, is, Their true, and tender respect unto the name and
glory of God; preferring it above all their private concernments. Of this
blessed frame that people fell short, who are upon this account reproved by the
Prophet: Herein is their Hypocrisy discovered, that notwithstanding all their
profession, and performance of duties in assembling and bringing Offerings,
yet, the Lord declares against them, because they were men of mercenary
self-seeking spirits. Which of you, says he, would kindle a fire on might
Altar for naught? Chapter 1.10. These were more like the Off spring of Hagar, than
Sarah, unfit for Gods work, which was to exalt his name among the Heathen:
wherefore he lays them by, saying, I have no pleasure in you; neither would he
accept an Offering at their hands, as you may see in the same Verse, and in
Chap. 2.3. of this sin, who are so deeply guilty as the Priests, whom the
Prophet charge with despising Gods great Name? Chap. 1.16. yet are they
farthest off from conviction. They put the Prophet (or rather the Lord) to it,
to prove the charge, with A WHEREIN, Wherein (say they) have we despised thy
Name? And thus they dispute with God and his Messenger: but we find little or
no confession, or conviction of any evil charged on them, but rather a
charging God with injustice, or unrighteousness, in not rewarding their
services, Chap. 3.14. speaking stout words against him, saying, It is vain to
serve the Lord. Could not these boast of a large and long profession, as do
many now, of their keeping Gods Ordinances, walking mournfully before the Lord?
etc. These observing solemn days of Fasting and Prayer, as those whom the
Prophet lays open and reproves, Isa. 1. and 58.2, 3. But in all these things
mark what they had in their eye, their own profit; What profit is it? say they.

As for the right Seed, their care is exercised about their fathers name;
regarding it so much the more, by how much others slighed it, and as being
provoked by the backsliding of many, to an holy jealousy for God, whilst
others are looking after their Olive yards, and Vineyards, their purchases and
large pay; at best, their present sensible enjoyments. These are content to
serve God (though as to an eye of sense) for naught, and without profit; if God
hide his face, they will give him glory by looking to him, and waiting for him.
They meet together in a dark day, and speak often one to another of the things
that concern their fathers Name, that being with most weight on their hearts:
We read of nothing save that, nothing like to that upon their hearts, they
minded it more then their Trades, Farms, Wife and Children, Lands and Lives;
these are the right seed whom God owns for his in trying days, Mal. 3.16, 17.
and whom he delights to use, having bent their hearts for him, and for his
design, to make his name great in all the earth; to these he promises the
shinings of the Son of Righteousness, with healing in his wings, Mal. 4.2, 3.
and that they shall go forth, and grow up as Calves of the stall, and tread
down the wicked, who shall be as ashes under the soales of their feet.

The words and actions of that chosen Remnant thus qualified (howsoever
slighted by the proud) are noted in Gods BOOK OF REMEMBRANCE, where their words
who in a light self-seeking spirit made use of his great name, have no place.
How apparent is the difference in this respect, betwixt many Professors, and
Church Members? some chiefly minding that work, and those duties, wherein they
apprehend their present comfort and eternal salvation most nearly concerned,
little regarding those Ordinances which more especially respect the honor of
God, as to reprove sin, and to reject or excommunicate offenders, as just
occasion is offered; an Ordinance, by the due practice whereof, the name of God
his truth and people are cleared, and preserved from the blame of the
miscarriages of scandalous offenders: how heartlesse are Professors and
Ministers (at least so accounted) to this work? Did God lay them by of old, who
despised his name, and will not God lay these by as Vessels wherein he takes no
pleasure, if they repent not, and that speedily? in as much as he is making
have to his great work, viz. To exalt his great name, not in one corner of the
earth, but in all the corners thereof; Amen, Hallowed be thy Name, and
Hallelujah.

Qu. But who shall follow the Lord in this great work?

Ans. They only who are called chosen and faithful, whom he has formed for
his praise, having redeemed them from the earth. These follow him whithersoever
he goes, not looking and tarrying for man, till such and such a man go before
them: It is enough to them to see clearly, that the Lamb goes before them, for
they are his followers, and will follow no other, but in the way of following
him.

Qu. But whence is it, or how comes it to pass, that so many professed
followers of the Lamb, do turn back, yea, and turn against him at this time?

Ans. Surely with many (if not with all) such Apostates, the cause is, their
not being established with the grace of God, because they were not steadfast in
believing Gods free Promises in Christ for the Kingdom, and all things else to
be added to them in seeking that first. Their hearts being not right in the
matter of Regeneration, therefore have they failed in the work of their
Generation; and being found Enemies to a through work within, are found such to
a through work of righteousness without, and abroad in the Nation: But did such
at first run well? Oh then, seeing so many have begun to build, and have not
been able to finish; let those who would follow Christ in the Regeneration, or
their Generation work, sit down first, and (with serious spirits) count the
cost. Take that word of Christ for your help, Luke 14.26. If any man come to
me, and hate not father and mother, and wife and children, brethren and
sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple. The Law and
Testimony of the Lord is bound up, and sealed with such Disciples-indeed, who
choose rather to loose their ALL in this world, than to do any thing contrary
to the mind of God contained therein. As for others, the Lord counts them
unworthy; and if they be enlightened, they cannot but judge themselves unworthy
of so great a trust.

But why do I detain the Reader thus long from that discourse, which may
afford more profit and delight? The work is before thee, go on to it in the
fear of the Lord; only this I shall say further, viz. That I doubt not but men
who will reject a good work (as the manner of some is) for some small (and it
may be merely supposed) Error, may find whereat to be stumbled in reading this
Book; and so this, as many other worthy works, be rendered useless, and an
offense to them; whilst honest hearts (who having the love of truth, cannot
easily be prejudiced against it, Psalm. 119.165.) are like to reap precious
benefit hereby. And here let it be noted also, That God is not a little jealous
for the glory of his great Name, in the work he has begun. Though he will use
man in his work, yet so, as that his Imperfection shall appear, that we may
cease from man, and from glorying in men, our selves, or others; and that we
may give all the glory to him, whose due it is. Amen; Blessing, and glory, and
wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might, be given unto our
God for ever. Having thus far enlarged, as being engaged to bear my Testimony
in love to those truths contained in the ensuing work, I commend it to the
Lord for his blessing, adding this only, that I am

Thine if thou rejoycest not in Iniquity, but in the Truth. JOHN PENDARVES.
The 10 day of the 6 Month. 1656.
Errata.
PAge 2. line 14. for vissitudes read vicissitudes. p. 9. l. 3. r. are not. l.
36. r. heart-feuds. p. 11. l. 8. r. they give him the honor. p. 13. l. 40. r.
as at. p. 15. l. 36. r. is in Zion. p. 16. l. 31. dele abide the day. p. 17. l.
4. r. he tells us. p. 64. l. 12. r. secondly. p. 65. l. 8. dele of. p. 77. l.
34. r. swiftnes.

Many other literal Mistakes have escaped the Press, but these above written
are some of the chief, of which the Reader is desired to take notice.

The Prophets MALACHY and ISAIAH PROPHESYING to the Saints and Professors of
this GENERATION Of the great things the Lord will do, and bring to pass in this
their day and time.
MAL. 3.16, 17, 18. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another,
and the Lord hearkened, and heard it; and a book of remembrance was written
before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his Name. And
they shall be mine, says the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my
jewels, and I will spare them as a man spares his own son that serves him.

Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the wicked,
between him that serves God, and him that serves him not.


THE State of the Nation and Commonwealth of Israel, their Worship, and the
dispensation of their God toward them; were Tipes of the better condition he
would bring his Children into, of those clearer discoveries the Lord would make
of himself, and his Glory, and after what manner he would carry himself toward
his Chosen in the Gospel-day: And it is as true that the backslidings and
apostacies of that Tipical Commonwealth and people, with their corrections,
bondages, and captivities; were Tipes also of the state and condition of the
Church of God under that Gospel-administration: yea, their very Enemies were no
less than Tippical, pointing out to us those adversaries the Serpent would
raise up against the seed of the Woman (the true Church and people of God) in
that divident of time called the last days.

Their servitude and sore bondage in Egypt was a general Tipe of the malicious
practices of the seed of the Serpent against the Woman's seed, all the Serpents
day long, til the appointed time comes, wherein the Lord will judge them, and
deliver his people with a mighty hand, with signs and with wonders after the
manner of Egypt.

But in a more particular way.

After many vissitudes and changes, falls and risings, backslidings and
reformations wrought in this Commonwealth (which also are not without their
Tipical significancies,) when those two admirable and excellent Tipes, David
and Solomon had run their race, this people of one Nation became two, which
tipically is very significant to us: For as those 10 Tribes who made the
fraction, presently turned aside from their God, and through their backslidings
and apostacies after many warnings from Heaven, brought a destroying enemy upon
them, that their place and name was taken quite away; they were a Tipe of those
ten parts (if I may so express it) of the professing Gospel Church, who through
their backslidings and apostacies 2 These: 2.3.
falling away, made way for the man of Sin, the Babylonish power to exalt it
self over them to their ruin.

And as the Lord for his servant David's sake, and for Jerusalems sake, promised
to preserve one Tribe, that David might have 1 King. 11.36
a light before the Lord in Jerusalem; notwithstanding their backslidings and
apostacies, yet upon the pure account of his Covenant with David, the Lord
preserves this one Tribe (according to his promise) til Shiloh came: this Tribe
was a Tipe of that small part of the professing Gospel Church, which the Lord
will preserve for David his Sons sake, and for Jerusalem his true Churches
sake, that the seed of the Woman may not be quite extinct, nor our Lord Jesus
the Son of God left without his Remnant in the world, notwithstanding all the
deviations, backslidings, and apostacies of Kings, Rulers, and people, yet
there is a cluster in the midst of it, that has such a blessing in it, that it
shall be preserved and continue, til he comes the second time, whose right it is
to Reign.

But for the iniquities, backslidings, and Apostacies of this one Tribe, the
Lord delivers them for a season into the hand of the King of Babylon; and after
a certain term of time, by a Cyrus he opens away for their coming out of
Babylon, and return to their own Land to Worship the Lord God of their Fathers
at Jerusalem, in the true Church; now they apostatising after this
super-abundant grace and favor, stopping their ears against the Lords
Messengers, he withdraws, God leaves them to themselves, their Prophets cease,
the Lord troubles them with no more of his Messengers, only there is a company
of honest hearts that fear the Lord, speaking often one to another about these
things, but their language is such, as is neither understood, nor hearkened to
by that Generation, indeed it is said the Lord hearkened and heard, but not a man
minds it as we read of: in this particular also is this one Tribe a Tipe; and
its of no small concernment to us at this day.

In this time of apostasy it was, that our Prophet Malachy delivered his
heavenly Message: before I can enter into the mystery of those words, the
opening of which is my chief design; there lies a necessity upon me somewhat
to mind the Prophecy in general.

In this Prophecy there are three special, remarkable times to be minded.

1 A day or time of Apostasy, wherein the Lord spoke these words by the mouth
of his servant Malachy. 2 A day or time of purging and purifying Syon in the 3
Chap. 3 A day or time of judging and desiroying the wicked in the 4 Chap*
That this day of Judgment that shall burn like an Oven, is one and the same
with the time of Dauiels stones smiting the great Image, is clear to me upon
this double ground.

1. Because I find the same work done in this day, the stone does in that.

Dan: 2.35, and 44. Then was the iron, the clay, the brass the Silver, and the
gold broken to pieces together, and became like the chaff of the summer
threshing-floors, and the wind carried them away that no place was found for
them: it shall break in pieces, and consume all these Kingdoms.

Mal: 41.3. For behold the day comes that shall burn as an Oven, and all the
proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day that comes
shall burn them up says the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither
root nor branch: and ye shall tread down the wicked, for they shall be ashes
under the soles os your feet.

2 Because I find the same growth and prosperity, the same blessing following
the performance of the work in both places.

Dan: 2.25. And the stone that smote the Image became a great Mountain, and
filled the whole earth.

Mal: 4.2. The Son of Righteousness shall arise with healing in his wings, and
ye shall go forth, and grow up as Calves of the stall.

There is only this difference, Daniel speaks of the Powers, Authorities, and
great ones of this wicked world; and Malachy speak of the wicked in general,
both small and great, root and branch: Daniel speaks of the stones executing the
wrath and vengeance. of God upon his enemies; and Malachy speaks not only of
that, but also of that subjection the wicked shall then be in, to every
individual Saint of that number, they shall be ashes under the soles of your
feet: Daniel speaks of the prosperity of the stone as a body compact together,
the stone became a great mountain; and Malachy speaks of the prosperity and
advantage of particular Saints, ye shall grow up as Calves of the stall: yet
both have reference to the same work and time.

That the Lord might prepare and fit his people for the great work of this
terrible day, he will purge and purify them: which is the work of the 2d. day
or time mentioned in the Third Chapter of this Prophecy. To prevent some
objections which perhaps might be thrown in the way of that further use I must
make of this Prophecy in its due place, I desire you to take notice of two
things.

1. That this Prophecy has special relation to the Gentiles in this
Gospel-day, which is apparent by that partial fulfilling of this Prophecy, our
Lord himself attributes to the beginning of the Gospel-day, even his days in
the flesh, as will be evident it you compare with this Prophecy, Math. 11.10.
Mark 1.2, 3. Luke 7.27. and Mat: 3.11, 12.

2 That it has not yet been fulfilled, either to Jew or Gentile: this
purifying here treated of, is a Reformation wrought after an Apostasy, for in
the day of the most wicked and loathed apostasy ever Israel was guilty of, the
Prophet speaks of it as that which is to come: and sueh a reformation it is, as
is a reducing the people to their first and pristine glory and beauty they had
in the day of their Espousals, as the 4th. verse intimates to us, Then shall
the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days
of old, as in ancient years, (as the margent of some Bibles has it.) the
excellent glory and Heavenliness of this beauty was such, as the Lord seems to
glory in it, Jer: 2. 2, 3 I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love
of thine espousals; Israel was holiness unto the Lord: it is deseribed at large
Ezekiel: 16. from the 8th: to the 15th. verse, and our Lord himself seems to hint
at such a Reformation, in that speech of his, Mat. 19.8. But from the beginning
it was not so: intimating to us, that things ought to be reduced to their first
inslit^tion, their beginning state: it is that which the Church of Ephesus must
return to, otherwise she must bear her punishment, Rev: 2.4, 5. This has not
yet been fulfilled to the Jews; for at our Lord first coming they were so far
from being reduced by him to their former love, reformed to their first glory,
as that they were cast away, Rom: 11.15. and the day of the espousals of the G
miles came: and since that dismal time to them, have they not been as a people
driven out from the presence of the Lord? Neither have the Gentiles possessed the
fullness thereof; for can any man show us any time or season wherein any part of
the professing Gospel Church has (after any of her backslidings and
apostacies) been adorned with the glory of her marriage-day, the excellency of
her first love in the days of her youth, that the Lord could say unto her, Thy
offerings are pleasant unto me, as in the days of old, as in ancient years?
but so much it is, the Lord has said in this Prophecy he will do for his
chosen, and this glory it is the Lord will clothe his Zion with in due time.

We are now returned to the first day or time mentioned, which is, a day of
great Apostasy: and by this time I hope I have gained some ground to make good
with demonstration to the understandings of men, the truth and certainty of the
following discourse. This day of Apostasy after the building of the second
Temple (that time of Reformation) being the l^st state and condition of that
one Tribe, as a Nation, and that wherein our Lord Jesus came and found them to
their cost and sorrow; It was a Tipe of the state and condition of some part of
the professing Gospel Church, at that time wherein our Lord shall visit it, with
Isai. 4.4.
the spirit os Judgment, and the spirit of burning. That we may be able by
scripture light, to know to whom this Prophecy relates in a more special manner
than to others; and that the door of our hearts might be opened (if possible)
to receive the following truth: let us consider,

1. The Time of this apostasy. 2. The Quality of this apostasy. 3. The People
thus apostatising.
For the Time it self, we have three Characters of it.

1. It is after their coming out of Babylon (as is acknowledged on all hands,
that Malachy was the last of the Prophets, and Prophesied after Haggai and
Zachary's time, who Prophesied at the time of their return from Babylon) after
the Lord had delivered them out of the hands of the Babilonians their enemies,
and put them into a capacity to serve him in his own appointments, according to
his will, they turn their backs upon their God, and apostatise from the Truth.

2 Its that time of Apostasy in Zyon, which the Lord will take to visit his
people in, with a spirt of Judgment, and a spirit of burning; by a fiery
refining dispensation, making up his Jewels after the manner of purifying gold
and silver: the Lord does not suffer their enemies to carry them back into
Babylon (he takes not that former course with them) but he takes them into his
own hand to make them a fit and a suitable instrument to do that great,
wonderful, and strange work he has to do in and upon the world: that this is
such a time, my thinks there needs no other proof then what the Prophet says
in the 5th: verse of this 3d: Chapter, And I will come near to you to
Judgment, and I will be a swift witness against you that fear not me says the
Lord of hosts; you, Who? why, those to whom the Prophet had spoken before: it
signifies thus much, in that day wherein I shall thus purge and purify the sons
of Levi (my chosen) that they become beautiful and glorious, pleasant unto me,
I will be a swift witness against you, and judge you that have thus without any
fear of me played the Apostates, turned aside and gone backward: the day of
Sions purifying, is the day of the Lords judging these leaders of apostasy;
therefore these Times are contemporary, so joined together, as none can put
them asunder.

3. Its that time of apostasy immediately preceding the stones smiting the great
Image; that day wherein the Lord will burn up the wicked, leaving them neither
root nor branch: when the Lord by turning his hand upon his people, at the
concluding time of this apostasy* has (refining them) made up his Jewels,
fitted and qualified them, they fall to the work of the burning hot day
mentioned in the 4th. Chapt. which has been proved to be all one with that day
of breaking Daniels great Image; there is no interval of Time between these two
dispensation.

2. For the Quality of this Apostasy: its a refined hypocritical apostasy:
These men will seem religious, although indeed their hearts are most
irreligious, Mal: 1.13
snuffing at the Ordinances and true worship of the Lord: an offering they will
bring, though it be but the blind, and the torn, and the lame, and the sick*
though it be a wearisom burden to them, yet worship they will; though they be
under a Verse 14.
curse for their blind, and torn, and lame, and sick, and corrupt
performances; yet they will seem outwardly to the world to be the worshippers of
God, the blessed people of the Lord, crying the Temple of the Lord, the Temple
of the Lord; yea* they have such cloaks and coverings for their actions, that
their backsliding and apostasy is not observable (for a while) by the vulgar
eye; none are sensible of it but a company of dispicable souls that fear the
Lord, they indeed see this apostasy, and speak often one to another about it,
but the rest are blind; yea so hypocritically cunning are these men, that let
the Prophet charge them with what he will, they answer him with a wherein have
we done it? does he charge them with robbing God of his honor, and of his Ch:
1.6.12
sear due unto him, and with dispising and profaning the great name of the
Lord of hosts? their answer is, Wherein have we despised thy name, and wherein
have we robbed thee? does he charge them with poluting the Verse 7.
Altar of God, saying the Table of the Lord is contemptible, despising and
contemning the true Worship of God, that those that fear the Lord exercise
themselves in at this time; they reply, Wherein have we done it? does he charge
them with Ch: 2.13.
Covering the Altar of the Lord with tears, with weeping, and with crying out
through their oppressions and violence, that his people cannot serve the Lord
with a cheerful and free spirit? they answer him with a wherefore? does the
Prophet charge them with speaking stout words against the Lord, saving, its
vain to serve God, and Ch: 3.13, 14*
what profit is it that we have kept his Ordinances, and that we have walked
mournfully before the Lord of hosts? their answer still is, What have we spoken
so much against thee? yea, though they call the Verse 15.
proud happy, and set up workers of wickedness, and deliver them that tempt
God, yet they dare put the Prophet upon the proof of all that he says, knowing
their coverings are able to stave off a present clear proof in this dark day;
so that the Prophet himself is forced to fly to the Lord of hosts to witness to
the truth of his words, to prove the charge, Verse 5.
the Lord of hosts will be a swift witness against you: and lastly, does the
Prophet, to manifest the infinite riches of the love and mercy of God to
backsliders, exhort them to return to the Lord, holding forth his gracious
promise, that then he will return to them? Verse 7.
Return unto me, and I will return unto you says the Lord of Hosts: their
answer is, wherein shall we return? they are so confident in the neatness and
largeness of their coverings, that they dare tauntingly, put the Prophet to
show if he can, wherein they should return; implying, that they would have him,
and all those that found fault with them, to know that they are in the way of
the Lord, as near to him as they can be, and that they have not backsliden, nor
retreated from the Lord in any thing, by which any such distance should be made
between them and the Lord, that they need to be exhorted to return to him: it
signifies thus much further to me, that their pride and hypocrisy is grown to
such height that they think it an eclipse to their (vain) glory, a
disparagement to them to have the free and rich grace of God tendered to them,
(their answer is a kind of profession that they need it not) upon these terms;
for say they, Wherein should we return? they have nothing to return from, nor
nothing to return to, for they are not gone from God, but are as near to him as
ever they were: although it be the most wicked apostasy that ever this
Commonwealth was guilty of, yet the most refined of any; insomuch as a great
part of those guilty of this Apostasy, are such as are great pretenders to the
love of, and delight in the day of the Lords appearance; hence it is, that the
Prophet tells them, The Messenger of the Covenant whom ye delight in, behold he
shall come says the Lord of hosts: O the curious wrought net-works of this
apostatising day! howneatly are the wicked actions of this day clothed with
glorious pretenses for the Temple, and people of the Lord? their outside seems
so clean and clear in this twy-light day, that they will dare any to prove them
in an error, that they are out of the way of the Lord, or to show them a better
way.

3. For the Persons apostatising, they are of two sorts.

1. The leaders and causers of the apostasy: those leaders that not content to
depart out of the way themselves, but cause the people to err; that Chapter 2.8.
corrupt the Covenant of Levi, and cause many to stumble at the law of God,
laying stumbling blocks of hypocrisy before the people to ensnare them, even
to the causing the worship and service of the Lord to be an abhorring, a
loathsome contemptible thing: upon the head of these men, with their proud and
stubborn abettors, will the Lord the jealous God, send down his cursing
Judgments, he will be a swift witness against them wounding their hairy scalp;
says the Lord of hosts concerning these, Isai: 1.24.
Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemier; Amos
^.10.
all the sinners of my people shall dye by the sword, which say, the evil shall
not overtake, nor prevent us.

2. There are another sort of persons that keep not their garments clean from
the polutions of this Apostasy, though they are not so far engaged as the
other; they are those that please and delight themselves in the thoughts of the
coming of the Lord, the Messenger of that Covenant, by which the Father has
engaged himself to do great and glorious things for his people: these being
pur-blind through the glory of their Ceiled houses, the convenient
accomodations of this life, are not able to see the plain characters of a
loathsome apostasy written in the forehead of the Times, and so run along in
that dirty channel with the rest. they hear the Prophet cry out amain, An
Apostasy, an Apostasy an Apostasy, and ye are cursed; undone forever, the Lord
will raise up another people, ( Mal. 1.11.
My name shall be great among the Heathen) and cast you off if ye repent not;
and they hear those that fear the Lord speaking often one to another of the
evil of the Times, and the sufferings of the name of God at this day: yet
through dimness of sight, and dullness of heart, they know not what to think of
these things, they are not able to adjust the controversy, and pass a right
sentence upon the case, only they please themselves in the thoughts of the
coming of the Lord, and that then he will put an end to these dubious
controversies and hearts-feuds between Brethren, and right the wronged,
punishing the oppressor; when he comes with the breath of his lips he will
destroy the wicked, and wipe away all tears from the face of his people; when
the Sun of Righteousness arises, his bright bcams will disperse all these clouds
and mists of darkness, that we shall see the way of the Lord clearly; therefore
it is good for us to keep our station, and abide in the condition we are in,
til our Lord himself comes; and O that he would come, how would it joy our
hearts to behold him? but ah says the Prophet Chapter 3.^.
Who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appears?
notwithstanding this curious profession of theirs, he gives them to understand,
they would neither stand in that day, nor abide it: These have so far bespotted
their garments with the apostatising defilements of the Times, that they need
the Refiners fire, and Fullers soap to parge and purify them; the Lord of
hosts will turn his hand upon these, after the manner of purifying gold and
silver, to purge away their dross, and take away all their Tin.

Yet in the midst of this dismal Age, there is a handful that fear the Lord,
they keep their garments clean and pure from the polutions of this their day,
speaking often one to another about these things.

Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, and the Lord
hearkened, and heard it, etc.

In the words we have,

1 A description of some persons that exercise themselves in a work
wel-pleasing to the Lord in this provoking day of apostasy, they that feared
the Lord.

2 The work it self; set down in two expressions, they spoke often one to
another, and they thought upon his name.

3 The Lords acceptance of this work; which is held forth

1 By a double Act of the Lord, he hearkened, and heard it, and a Book of
remembrance was written before him.

2 By several rich and glorious promises made to these sincere hearts, and they
are of two sorts.

1 Such as concern reward for work done; which are two.

1 They shall be mine says the Lord of hosts. 2 And I will spare them as a man
spares his own Son that serves him.
The excellency and worth of which promises are heightened by the aggravation of
the time when; in that day when I make up my Jewels.

2 A promise, that is not only a bare reward for work done, but contains
qualification and fitness for the performance of a succeeding glorious work
immediately to come forth; then shall ye return, and discern between the
righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves
him not.

Would you know the persons that are thus valued and prized by the Lord of
Heaven and earth in such a day as this? we have three characters of them in the
Text.

1 They fear the Lord, they worship him, and give glory to him and none other;
they give honor of a Father, and the fear of a Master, they sanctify his name,
giving him those dues which these despisers of his great Name will not: they
fear the Lord; not man, not those great masters of apostasy that dare to speak
proud and stout words against the Lord, and profane the name of God; nor those
workers of wickedness that are set up, on high above their fellows, who by
their Oppressions make their Brethren to howl, covering the Altar of the Lord
with tears and with weeping, and with crying out; they fear not, nor care not
for those that can only kill the body, but they fear the Lord, who can slay both
body and soul; the Lord alone is their fear.

2 They are so heartily and thoroughly sensible of the sufferings of the name
and honor of their God, that their care for that swalloweth up all other
cares: they mind not so much their own sufferings under the oppressions of
these workers of wickedness, as the sufferings of the name and interest of
their dear Lord, under that dishonor and shame these wicked (tho refined)
hypocrites throw upon it; their careful thoughts are solely taken up about the
concernments of the name of their God; They thought upon his name: yet
notwithstanding these excellencies, they are not per-sect. But

3 They are subject to many insirmities; for they stand in need of the sparing
mercy of their God and Father: and I will spare them as a man spares his own
son that serves him.

2 The work it self, which these sincere hearts exercise themselves in, as the
great duty incumbent upon them in this their day is, Consultation about the
concernments of the great name and cause of the Lord at this time. They think,
and they speak both parts of counsel, they thought upon his name, they consult
in their own own hearts and thoughts about the name and interest of God; and
they speak often one to another about it, they are often enquiring of, and
communicating their light to each other, that if possible, by such
communications they may be able to find out something of the mind of their God
and Father, they could not by their more private consultations in their hearts
and thoughts; the subject of these their so serious consultations is, the name
of their God, they thought upon his name; their care is not, how shall we get
from under the unsupportable oppressions of these workers of wickedness that
are set up? nor, how shall we free our selves and our Posterity from the
bondage and slavery of these sons of violence? nor so much, how shall we bring
down these proud and lofty men that speak such proud and stout words against
the Lord, his name, and honor? (though possibly that may be more remotely in
their thoughts too) but all their cares are dissolved into a godly and holy
carefulness, for the name and honor of their dear Lord: they thought upon his
name, how that was dishonored; the Lord had gotten himself a great name, by
delivering his people out of Babylon, rearing up the glorious structure of his
Temple, and building up the ruined walls of Jerusalem, setting up his true
Worship again there, in despite of all those great oppositions of his enemies
round about; and these backsliders despise and dishonor this great name of the
Lord of hosts, doing what in them lies to bury it in Oblivion; now these lovers
of the Name of God, think on this, are very solicitous what they should do at
this juncture of time to wipe off that dishonor is cast upon this great and
glorious name in the view of the whole world; O say they, what shall we do for
the name of our God? wherewith shall we honor it? what course shall we take to
exalt and magnify it in the eyes of the world, before whom it has been thus
dishinored? here is the Center of all their thoughts and consultations, They
thought upon his Name.

3 Let us see how exceeding kindly the Lord takes this at their hands.

1 The Lord by two eminent acts manifests his great acceptance of them: how is
the heart of God taken with this blessed work The Lord hearkened and heard it,
as it implie the lowness, weakness, of the voice of these holy consultations,
that the Lord must hearken and listen (to speak after the manner of men) before
he can hear it; so it also implies great intensness of spirit with delight: he
hearkened; the Lord is so wel-pleased with these blessed consultations, that
rather than miss hearing their voice, he will hearken and listen with the
greatest intenseness of mind; the Lord hearkened; as if the Lord had said,
stand aside Satan, cease thy accusing clamours in mine ears; silence you
exalters of wicked workers, You are of your Father the devil, and the lusts of
your Father ye w ll do, he was a liar from the beginning, and so are ye,
wrongfully charging the innocent with things they know nor: peace ye waiward
froward children, through the noise and din of your peevish wranglings nothing
can be heard: be still all, I will hear what these my Beloved ones say, that
stand up for my name and honor in such a day as this what though they discover
much weakness and infirmity in the management of their work? yet, I delight in
them, and love to hear their voice: The Lord hearkened, and heard it, he
hearkens til he hears all: and he takes special notice of what he hears, let us
nothing slip, and so delightful and pleasing to him is that he hears, that, as
if he were distrustful of his memory, A book of remembrance was written before
him, for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name; here is the
Lambs book, wherein he sets down all the service his servants do for him, that
he may give them a suitable and full reward when he comes into his Kingdom, that
possession his Father has decreed to give him: the Lord is so taken with what
he hears, that he will book it all down, set it all upon Record, not a thought
nor an expression, not a word nor a syllable, will he loose; the heart of God is
so taken with these breathings, that he writes a Book of Remembrance, that when
those Heavenly Records are read, he may remember to do them honor then, who
thus honor him now by their loyalty and faithfulness, clothing them with his
own Robes, his own glory; Thus shall it be done to the man whom the King
delights to honor.

2 The Lords acceptance of the work of these blessed souls appears by those
rich promises he makes to them; which are

1 Such as concern reward for work done. As

1 They shall be mine says the Lord of hosts, this is a note of special
peculiarity, for (as it has relation to other persons.) its put in opposition
unto my Jewels in the next words; says the Lord of hosts there is a day a
coming wherein I will make up my jewels, gather up my treasure, and in that day
they shall be mine, mine in a more special and peculiar way and manner than my
Jewels shall be: as at the first, when the children of Israel were in Egypt,
there were two Mines, my people, and my first born, as as the firstborn in
whose stead the Tribe of Levi was chosen, were Gods in a more special and
peculiar manner then the rest of Gods people of Israel, they were those whom he
chose to be always in his presence, to serve before him continually, his
favorites to whom he manifested his glory, and by whom he revealed his mind and
Will to the rest of their Brethren: so here are TWO MINES too, mine, and my
Jewels, and this mine being put in opposition to my Jewels, signifies thus
much, that in the day when the Lord makes up his Jewels, he will honor them
with more special favor, and higher dignities, than the rest of his Jewels:
they shall be mine, I vvil take them so near to my self, that so great a ray of
my glory shall rest upon them, as that they shall outshine all their fellows,
their luster and glory shall outstrip and go beyond all the rest of my Jewels,
none in all my treasury of Jewels shall be like unto them.

2 And I will spare them as a man spares his own Son that serves him; says
the Lord, there is a fiery refining day a coming, full of troubles, sorrows, and
anxieties of spirit to the professing world, but I vvil spare them.

Spare them! for what? and from what?

Ques For what vvil the Lord spare them, do these holy sincere hearts need
sparing?

Ans: Yes, Although they are so sensible of the suffering of the name of their
God, under the dishonor and evil of the times, yet they have many infirmities,
and come far short of the glory that shall then be revealed, but I will spare
them says the Lord; and although their infirmities be such, as they need not
only a common sparing, but the sparing of a Father, that sparing which
proceeds from the purest and freest love and affection possible, sparing in the
highest degree; yet, I will spare them as a man spares his own Son that serves
him, as a man looks upon the good will of his Son that in serving him seeks his
honor, although through weakness and infirmity he dishonor him, and takes not
notice of his dishonouring infirmities, but of his good aims and ends in his
service, so will I spare them says the Lord of hosts.

Qu: From what vvil the Lord spare them?

Ans: From the painful, sharp, and terrible sorrows of that day wherein I will
make up my jewels: so that now we are come to the consideration of that
weighty circumstance of time, wherein the Lord will perform these precious
promises, the consideration whereof, will mightily enhance the value and price
of our Lord and masters love, manifested in these his promises.

In that day when I make up my Jewels, what day is this? it is that day
mentioned in the beginning of the Chapter, wherein he will be like a Refiners
fire, and like Fullers soap. that the Holy Ghost intends that day in this
place, is clear to me from this double consideration.

1 From the phraise, THAT DAY, in that day when I make up my jewels: when the
Holy Ghost speaks of a day or time to come, that he had not spoken of before,
he calls it the day, as here in the fourth Chapter. Behold the day comes that
shall burn as an Oven, etc. but when the Holy Ghost expresses a day or time by
that day, he points at the time treated of immediately before, as in the Third
and Fourth Chapter of Isaiah; and indeed throughout the whole scripture I find
it is the usual manner of the Holy Ghost so to do: and this Refining-day being
the time treated of immediately before, we cannot rationally conceive any other
day is pointed at by that day.

2 From that other phraise, When I MAKE UP my Jewels; what more genuine and
natural interpretation can be given, than, that these Jewels are the product of
the Refiners fire? the workmanship of this Refiner, and purifier of silver,
forming them into Jewels of gold, and Jewels of silver, a people formed for
himself to show forth his praise.

That we may see somewhat of the terribleness of this day, and from thence
behold the pretiousness of these promises, and be provoked to make it our
business to ensure them to our selves, for our inheritance in this shaking day:
let us consider,

1. The manner of the Lords dealing with his people at this day; he will be to
them like a Refiners fire, and like fullers soap: and what more dreadful and
consuming than a refiners fire, and what more sharp and searching than fullers
soap? and this will he be unto them; He will sit upon them as a Refiner and
puryfier of silver, dealing with them after the manner of purifying gold and
silver til he has Isai: 1.29.
Purged away all their dross, and taken away all their tin: Isai: 31 9.
His fire in Sion, and his furnace in Jerusalem; Ezekiel: 22.18.19, 20, 21.22.
Because they are become dress to the Lord, behold therefore says the Lord
God, I will gather you into the midst of Jerusalem, as they gather silver, and
brass, and iron, and lead, and tin, into the midst of the furnace, to blow the
Fire upon it, to melt it; so, I will gather you, and blow upon you in the Fire
of my wrath, and ye shall be melted; and ye shall know that I the Lord have
poured out my fury upon you.

2 It is such a day, as the Prophet makes it a great question, whether any of
those that profess a delight in the thoughts and expectations of it, shall abide
it, stand in that great day: Even the Messenger of the Covenant whom ye delight
in, behold he shall come says the Lord of hosts; but who may abide the day of
his coming? as if he should have said, you please and delight your selves in
the thoughts of the coming of the day of the Lord, hoping that he will mend all,
and set things to rights when he comes, and make his people a happy people;
Isa. 11.13.
That the envy of Ephraim shall depart, nnd the adversaries of Judah shall be
cut off; Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim; and then
shall these unbrotherly controversies and heats of spirit cease, he will give
them Jer. 31.39.
one heart and one way: you delight in the Messenger of the Covenant that shall
do such things; that day shall come, ah but (says the Prophet) who of you may
abide the day of his coming? he will come in such a way and manner so contrary
to flesh and blood, so contrary to your expectations and apprehensions, as you
will not endure it, nor abide, but be offended and stumble to the hazard of your
souls; and who shall stand when he appears? you think you are well, in a good
and safe station, but when he appears, who of you shall keep your standing?
not one of you: your foundations will then appear but sandy foundations, and
your rests broken reeds; and at what a loss will you then be? such a shaking will
the Lord make in that day, as will shake you all of your standing; though now
you think you are in the right, that your feet stands in a sure place, and
that you could be filled with joy to behold the Lords appearing, yet then none
of you will be able to keep your ground. Who may abide the day abide the day of
his coming? and who shall stand when he appears? these interrogatives
strongly affirm, that none of them can abide it, and none of them shall stand:
and will not this be a terrible day indeed, when such glorious professors as
delight themselves in the thoughts and expectations of the coming of Christ,
shall be found too light, and thrown into the fiery furnace to purhe their
dross, and tinn, and come under the Fullers soap to cleanse their garments from
their unclean and filthy spots?

But would you see more of the terrors of this dreadful day? then consider the
four first Chapters of the Prophet Isaiah; in the first Chapter he speaks of
the same time Malachy does in general terms; in his second Chapter, after an
enumeration of some of the evils of the Times, as the reason why the Lord has
forsaken his people; he tells the particular work the Lord will do in Zion at
this day; from the 10th. verse to the end: in the seven first verses of the 3d.
Chapter; the Prophet tells us what course the Lord will take to bring those great
things to pass, he had spoken of before, from the 16 Verse to the second Verse
of the 4th Chapter, he sets down the punishment and sad condition of the
Capital and Head City of the land: and in the remainder of the 4th Chapter we
have a description of the glory and happy state of the Lords Jewels, those that
are purged and puryfied by this Refiners fire and Fullers soap; by his spirit
of Judgment, and his spirit of burning.

That Isaiahs Prophecy in these Chapters, has relation to the same time
Malachy treats of, is clear to me upon these grounds.

1 Because I find that Isaiah as well as Malachy has relation to three times.

1 To a time of Apostasy: Isa. 1.2, 4, 21, 22, 23.
I have nourished and brought up Children, and they have rebelled against me: A
sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity, they are gone away backward: how
is the faithful City become an harlot? it was full of judgment, righteousness
lodged in it, but now Murderers: thy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with
water: thy Princes are rebellious, and companions of thieves, etc: yea, and
this apostasy is guilty of the same quality Malachy's is, a refined
hypocritical apostasy; though they be rebelious children, corrupters, and are
so far gone backward, that the Lord dispairs of doing them any good by
correcting them at a former rate; but says, Verse 5,
They will then revolt more and more: though they be altogether unsound from the
sole of the foot unto the head: Verse 6.
though they be as the Verse 10,
Rulers of Sodom, and their Verse 15,
hands are full of blood; yet, they cover all with a Verse 11,
multitude of sacrifices, they fill the Lord with them, that they trouble him,
and he is a Verse 14,
weary to bear them; all their performances are guilty of such hypocritical
vanity, that they are an Verse 13, 14.
abomination to the Lord, and his soul hates them.

2 To a time of purifying and restoring Zion to its former glory, from whence
they are fallen; Verse 25, 26.
And I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take
away all thy tin; and I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy
Counselors as at the beginning: afterward, thou shall be called the City of
righteousness, the faithful City: Ch: 4.3.
And it shall come to pass, that he that is left in Zion, and he that remains
in Jerusalem, shall be called holy.

3 To a time of destroying the wicked: Ch: 1.28.3
The destruction of the transgressors, and of the sinners shall be together; And
they that forsake the Lord shall be consumed: and the strong shall be as tow, and
the maker of it as a spark, and they shall both burn together, and none shall
quench them: Read also the second and third Chapters. There is only this
difference, Isaiah has spetial relation to the civil state, of his people, as
a Commonwealth; and Malachy has spetial relation to the Worship and religious
state of this people, as a Church.

Ob: If any should object that it is not probable that Isaiah should point at
the same time with Malachy, for he Prophesied a long time before, and speaks in
the present tence, as if he spoke these things of his own time.

Answ: I Answer 1. That this Prophecy was made known to I. saiah in King
Vzzia's time, 2 King. 15.3
who did that which was right in th sight of the Lord: he was no ruler of
Sodom, therefore this Prophecy refers to another time, not the present: that it
was revealed in Vzzia's time, appears to me, because the Vision seen by the
Prophet sometime after, in the 6th Chapter, is said to be seen in the year that
King Vzziah dyed, verse 1.

2 This is a Vision; the vision of Isaiah the son of Amos, which he saw
concerning Judah and Jerusalem, etc. now visions being concerning things to
come, this must of necessity have relation to a time yet to come.

2 Because I find the Prophet Isaiah as well as Malachy, directs his speech to
three sorts of people: First, To those Apostates, the Lord will in his
judgments be avenged of, Chapter 2.24, and 3.11.
Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies; Woe unto
the wicked, it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given
him. Secondly, To those whom the Lord will purge and purify, Ch: 1.25,
I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take away
all thy tin: who when the Lord shall have thus purged away their filth, by a
spirit of judgment, and a spirit of burning, shall be the holy Jewels of the
Lord. Thirdly, To a company of righteous souls, whom the Lord will spare in that
day; to whom the Prophet is commanded to say Chapter 3.10.
it shall be well with them, for they shall eat the fruit of their doings: though
it go full ill with the rest of their Brethren, yet it shall be well with them,
the Lord will spare them; he has his chambers to hide them in, in this day of
his wrath, wherein he will punish the Inhabitants of the earth for their
iniquities.

3 Because I find the Prophet has wholly relation to the last days, Chap: 2.
verse 2. and it shall come to pass in the last days: the Prophet brings in the
kingdom of the mountain (the kingdom of Christ in its full glory) as the product
and effect of that which before (in the latter part of the first Chap.) he had
said the Lord would do: for, he brings it in with an AND, and it shall come to
pass in the last days: it runs current thus, when Syon (for the faith.
faithful City in the 21 verse, and Zion in the 27 verse I take to be all one)
has so far apostatised, as that she is become an Harlot in Gods account, her
silver become dross, and her wine mixed with water, altogether defiled; then will
God avenge himself of his adversaries the leaders of this loathsome apostasy,
and turn his hand upon professing Zion, bringing her back again to himself
restore her to her former glory, that, She shall again be called the City of
Righteousness, the faithful City; and the wicked, the transgressors and sinners
together, shall be burned with such a burning as none shall be able to quench;
then in these last days, shall the mountain of the Lords house be established
in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all
Nations shall flow unto it: and to confirm our faith, and to keep out unbelief,
that we might not stagger at the promise; in the remainder of this 2d. Chapter,
with. the 3d. and 4th: Chap. the Prophet treats more largely and particularly
of some of the same thing he had spoken of before in the general; telling us
the means by which the Lord would bring those things to pass; doing such
wonders in Zion mentioned in the latter part of the 2d. Chapter, and that by
such a way and course as he sets down in the 3d. Chapter, bringing forth such
blessed effects as are held forth in the 4th: Chap. that indeed the inhabitants
of Zion shall be enabled to burn up the wicked both root and branch; and then
the mountain of the Lords house shall come to be exalted above the hills, and
established in the top of the Mountains, so that all Nations shall flow unto it.

4 Because I find that the glory of the 4th. Chap. which is brought in as the
proper effect and product of what was done in the 2d. and 3d: Chapt: cannot in
any wise be meant of the glory of the mountain of the Lords house, but of some
state of the house of God, before it attains to its mountain-glory; and my
reasons for this apprehension are,

1 Because the Prophet speaks of such a state of Zion, as the glory whereof
stands in need of a DEFENSE; Chapter 4, 5.
upon all the glory shall be a defense: now when Syon, the Lords house comes to
be a mountain, established above (in the top of) all other mountains, it will be
so far above the reach of all its enemies, that it will not stand in need of a
defense from their rage and violence; but this is such a state as must have a
defense upon its glory, least it should be ruined and spoiled by its enemies.

2. Because this state stands in need of Verse 6,
a shadow from the heat, and a place of refuge, and a covert, from the storm,
and from the rain: by which metaphors of heat, storm, and rain, I understand
the violent rage of the enemies thereof, and that stout and powerful op
position they will make against it; I am confirmed in the truth of this
interpretation, by Isaiahs 25 chap: where is recorded a song that shall be the
Churches tune, after the Lord has wrought some of his wonders by Zion thus
refined, and defended by an al nighty creating power, then will she sing forth
praises to her Lord, after the tenor of that heavenly excelling song: wherein
he expresses, first her thankfulness for wonderful things already done,
acknowledging and admiring the truth and faithfulness of God, vowing and
engaging to exalt the Lord, and praise his name; in the 4 first Verses.
Secondly, her sted ast faith, believing without hefitation; those great and
glorious things the Lord has said he will yet do for and by his Syon; in the
rest of the Chap: and amongst the wonderful things the Lord does, to cause his
Syon thus to break forth into praises, there is, Chapter 25.2
The making a City a hoap, and a defenced City a ruin, annihilating the Palace
of strangers, so, as it shall never be builte again; managing this great work in
so glorious a way, that it causes these City of the terrible ones to fear: Verse
3.
now if we observe the means by which the Lord work; these wonders, we shall
find it to be the same defense mentioned in the 4th Chapter, Verse 4,
For thou have been a strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in his
disiress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the blast of
the terrible ones is as a storm against the wall; the Prophet clearly makes
good the interpretion given, bringing in the storm, and the heat as the effects
of the blast of the terrible ones: all which are gain; managing this great work
in so glorious a way, that it in consistant with the glory of the mountain
state.

Ob. If any should object, That the Prophet seems to have reference to the
mountain state; for, he calls it a mountain several times in this 25 Chapter.

Ans: To that I answer, first that it cannot be supposed by anything in this
Chapeer, that the Prophet points at the glory of the mountain of the Lords
house, when it shall be established in the top of the mountains, (that state I
always mean by the mountain state) for that is a peaceful state of glory,
wherein Chap. 2.4. Micha 4.3.
Swords shall be beaten into Plowshares, and spears into pruning hooks; but
throughout the Chapter, the Prophet has relation to that state of Syon,
wherein Joel 3.10.
Plowshares shall be be aten into swords, and pruning books into spears:
wherein Zion is the Lords Jer. 51.20
Battel-ax, and weapon of was, to break in pieces many Nations; his
threshing-instrument, Isai. 41.5.
Threshing the mountains, and bring down the mise of the strangers, bringing
low the branch of the terrible ones, and treading down Chapter 25.10, 12
Moab (the enemies of the Lord) as straw sor the dunghill, laying low, and
bringing down to the ground, even to the dust, the fortress of the high forts
of the walls.

2 To me, the Prophet by his calling Syon a mountain, signifies thus much, That
after the Lord has by this purged, refined, defended Zion, brought down that
great and notable City, then shall Zion begin to be a mountain; begin to grow up
into a mountain; having by this time smitten the great Image so notably, as to
bring down the defenced City, the Palace of strangers; then shall her glory be
such, as shall strike fear into, and she shall be able to cope with, the City of
the terrible ones: and this mountain shall in due time be established in the top
of the mountains. Would any know, who this defenced City, this Palace of
strangers is? I conceive it to be the same with that lofty City mentioned in
the 5th Verse of the next Chapter, which shall be brought down and laid low; by
the foot, even the feet of the poor, and the steps of the needy: which city I
conceive to be Babylon, that lofty City, that fits as Queen and Emperess of the
world; for, to whom can this character be more properly applied, than to that
great and lofty one, that Rev. 17.1, 2
sits upon many water, who has the Kings of the earth for her servants, to
commit fornication with her? as Babylon of old was the great and lofty City,
exalting it self above Dan 4.1.
all people, Nations, and languages that dwelt in all the earth, so, has our
Babylon exalted her selt above the christian world, as they call in So that

3 The Prophet here sets forth, the joyful praising state of the true Church
and people of God, immediately upon the destruction of Babylon: then shall they
be able to sing the songs of Syon again, praising the Lord after this manner.

3 Because in this state there is night as well as day; therefore, there is the
shining of a flaming fire prepared for the nights defense: but the glory of the
mountain state is such, as There shall be Rev: 21.25
no night there.

Because in this state there is a Tabernacle appointed for its defense, which
is moveable and not fixed, therefore not the mountain state, for that is a
fixed unmovable state; They that trust in the Lord, shall be as Psalm. 125.1
MOUNT ZION which cannot be removed, but abides for ever.

And seeing for these reasons, it cannot be interpretred of the glory of the
mountain state of Zion, I shall lay it down as the

And last ground why I apprehend Isaiah and Malachy to treat both of one and
the same time; That this glory here spoken of in this 4th: Chapter, is the
glory of that state of Zion, wherein it becomes Daniels stone smiting the great
Image; the Lords battel-ax, and weapon of war, breaking in pieces the Nations,
and destroying Kingdoms; the Lords threshing instrument, to thresh the
mountains small, and to make the hills like chaff: upon the glory of this state
there shall be such a defense, that neither the heat, nor the storm, nor the
rain of their enemies shall hurt or touch it: the reasons that move me to
adhere to this interpretation, are:

1 This glory is no other but the fruit of Zions purging, and purifying, which
in this Chapt: is called HOLINESS, Every one that it left in Zion, and that
remains in Jerusalem shall be called holy: it is upon this glory, the defense
is created: now this purifying of Zion, and clothing it with this glory, is
performed before, (though but immediately before) the day comes, wherein the
transgressors and sinners shall burn together, and none shall quench them; that
day that shall burn as an Oven, burning up the wicked both small and great,
leaving them neithergoot nor branch: when Zion shall be redeemed, and restored
to this glory, then shall the destruction of the wicked come.

2 The defense that is created upon this glory, carries a great similitude to
the Isratites wilderness state; a cloud and smoakby day, and a shining of a
flaming fire by night, and a Tabernacle: now it signifies thus much to me, that
as the children of Israel had these things for their defense and direction,
when they were traveling through the Wilderness to the Promised land; so,
under these figures the Holy Ghost holds forth to us, that defense the Lord will
create by a wonder working power upon this glory, all the while his chosen are
journying over the worlds hills and mountains, toward that State, which was
tiped out by the Promised Land of Canaan: so that in deed and in truth, the
glory of this State mentioned in this 4th. chapter, which shall have such a
defense, is no other but that qualification and sitness, the Lord will indue his
Zion withal, to enable her to carry on his great design and work in the world,
to bring all the Kingdoms of this world into subjection to his Son, our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ.

Supposing I have sufficiently proved the truth of the assertion, That Isaiah
in these Chapters, treats of the same time Malachy does in his Prophecy: I
shall proceed to consider the Terrors of this dreadful day, as the Prophet holds
them sorth: which will plainly appear to us if we confider,

1 The dreadful work the Lord will make in professing Zion at this day, Isai. 2.
he will humble the lofty looks, and bring down the haughtiness of man; there is
not a man that is proud and lofty, and lifted up, but shall be brought down in
that day: and the day of the Lord shall be upon all the Cedars of Lebanon; that
Timber, of which once the Lord was pleased to make beams and rafters for his
house, becomes now the subject of the anger and displeasure of God, by reason
of its being high and listed up upon its own bottom: and upon all the Oaks of
Bashan; those trees of strength that are so useful in the Common wealth: and
upon all the high mountains and hills that are lifted up; those prodigious lumps
of earth, whose aspiring brows injuriously overtop their neighboring levels:
and upon every high Tower, and fenced wall: those strengths and fortresses: the
works of men's hands, in which they put their trust as in a sure place, and upon
all the Ships of Tarshish; those ways and means by which these men gain their
Idols of gold, and their Idols of silver; which they make each one for himself
to Worship: and upon all pleasant pictures; those rare painted inventions, the
wits of the Times find out, to please the childish world with, now in its
doting old age: and these, with all other Idols, will he utterly abolish, they
shall utterly pass away; and (which is worthy our serious noting, and is very
significant) he does all this as he is Lord of hosts for behold, the Lord, the
Lord of hosts, does so and so; its the day of the Lord of hosts, that falls upon
the particulars forementioned. What a dreadful day of Terrors must this of
necessity prove, when the Lord of hosts arises out of his place to de I with
such sturdy and potent enemies as these are, shaking terribly the earth? the
dread of this glorious Majesty is such, as puts all the Inhabitants of this
professing world to the run, they run into the holes of the rock, and into the
caves of the earth, they then throw away their Idols of gold, and their Idols
of silver, to the moles and to the batt's, though their Whorish and adulterous
hearts run out so strongly to them before, yet then, let who vvil take them
that they may run the lighter into the clefts of the Rock, and to the tops of
the ragged rocks; and poor Jacob, he is put to the run too, he enter into his
rock, the rock of Ages, into those secret Chambers the Lord has provided for
him to lie hid in; and all for dread and fear of the glorious Majesty of the
Lord of hosts at this day: and such glory will be manifested at this day, that
those that are left to praise the Lord, shall wholly cease from man, all men,
all of man, the best of men, the holiest of men, even the holy Inhabitant of
Syon; upon whose heavenly glory the Lord will create so sure a defense; even
from this man, with whose beauty the Lord is so in love as that he will in no
wise suffer it to be defaced; from all men whose breath is in their nostrils
shall the remnant then cease: and they will be able to render a good reason for
their practice from dear bought experience, for wherein is he to be accounted
of? nothing, nor none will then be of any account but the Lord himself, the Lord
alone shall be exalted in that day: this is the end of all, that we may cease
from man, and the Lord alone may be exalied, but before this can be
accomplished, what dreadfulwork, does the stubborn Rebellions and Wickednesses
of men, force the Lord to make in the world? what dissolvtions! what ruining of
mountains and Hills! of Towers and Fenced walls! of Ships, and of men! appearing
in so dreadful a posture, that all men good and bad, run to hide themselves
from his wrath and fury; may we not apply that Scripture to this day? Luke 21.23
Woe unto them that are with Child, and to them that give suck in those days,
for there shall be great distress in the land, and wrath upon this people.

2 Consider somewhat of the way and means by which the Lord will bring to pass
these wonders, to accomplish this great work of exalting himself in Syon at
this day: Isai. 3
For behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts does take away from Jerusalem, and
from Judah, the stay and the staff, the whole stay of bread, and the whole stay
of water: the stay and the staff; whatsoever it is they lean and rest upon for
help and safety, the Lord of hosts will take that away from them: the whole stay
of bread, and the whole stay of water; those ways and means (whether traffic
or otherwise) to which they trust to maintain plenty and prosperity, this stay
will the Lord of hosts take away: do they trust to their power and warlike
strength? the mighty man, and the man of War, and the Captain of fifty; I will
take away that staff says the Lord of hosts: do they rely upon their
alliances and confederacies, with the most interested men in the Nation? the
Judge, and the ancient, and the honorable man; I will take away that staff
says the Lord of hosts: do they lean upon their affinity and good
correspondency with the holy and good men of the Times, that by the prevalent
influences of their good words for them, they may appease and quiet a murmuring
and discontented people, to gain time to take deep root in the earth? the
Prophet, and the eloquent Orator; I will take away that staff to says the Lord
of hosts: do they rest upon their counsel and policy! the Counselor and the
cunning Artificer; I will take away that staff also says the Lord of hosts:
yea, Children shall be their Princes, and Babes shall rule over them; I will so
enfatuate their Princes and Rulers, that they shall act like Babes and Children;
as far below the commendable actions of good and wise Rulers, that act in the
fear of the Lord, as the actions of Babes and Children are beneath the actions
of a wise and prudent man: and what follows? oppression after oppression,
intolerable oppression; and it is no wonder, seeing children and babes, yea
Women, men effeminated, of most pusillanimous, fearful and cruel spirits, (
Isai. 33, 14.^
the sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness bath surprised the Hypocrites)
rule over the people: Oppression in the highest degree, all ranks and degrees
of men broken, The Child behaveth himself proudly against the ancient, and the
base against the honorable; through the unworthiness of him that sits in
the seat of the Ancient, and the degenerated actions of him that occupies the
room of the honorable, those, whose stations are as far inferior to theirs, as
the child is to a man full of days, and the base beggar to the truly
honorable, they behave themselves proudly against them, looking upon them as
the subject of their scorn and disdain, rather than the object of their fear
and honor: The people are oppressed every one by another, every one by his
Neighbor; yea, the imperious oppressions of these wicked Rulers are so
intolerable, and the disgusts and rage of the people so great and high, that as
they are at a loss whom to choose to rule and govern them, so every man will be
so fearful and shie of becoming a healer of these breaches, that when they come
to pitch upon any, he will refuse the honor and dignity, swearing to them, that
he has not those qualifications in him, as they expect should be in a Ruler:
this I conceive is the natural import of the 6 and 7th: Verses, When a man shall
take hold of his Brother, of the house of his Father, saying: thou have
clothing, be thou our Ruler, and let this ruin be under thine hand. In that
day shall he swear saying, I will not be a healer; for in my house is neither
bread nor clothing, make me not a Ruler of the people: these calamities end in
naught else but ruin, For Jerusalem is ruin, and Judah is fallen.

Thus dreadful and terrible will the day of the Lord be to the house of Jacob,
professing Zion; and who is he that trembles not at this word of the Lord? is
there any so curious to enquire into the reason, why the Lords wrath waxes so
hot against his people, those that by a profession gave themselves up to him as
his people? they may by a narrow search find, the Lord proceeds upon good and
just grounds and reasons; from amongst diverse others take these:

1 More generally, relating to the people in the lump.

1 Because Chapter 3.8.
their tongue and their doings, are against the Lord to provoke the eyes of his
glory: their speeches and actions are such, so exceeding provoking, as the holy
and pure eyes of God cannot endure; they are so dishonorable to his great
name, and derogating from his glory that being a jealous God, that will not give
his glory to another, he will not forgive them, but will satiate his justice in
their fall and ruin.

2 Because Ch: 2.8.
their land is full of Idols, they worship the work of their own hands, that
which their own fingers have made, the mean man boweth down, and the great man
humbles himself: they are guilty of idolatry, their own works are their Idols;
which I cannot conceive is the gross idolatry of former Ages, but these Idols
are of another nature, suitable to the refined wickedness of this day: what
they are, I shall not stand to search into; it suffiseth; that they are in the
Lords account Idolaters; notwithstanding all their curious coverings, they
cannot hide their idolatry from the eyes of the Lord.

2 More particular, relating in special to the chief Rulers.

1 Because Verse 6.
they be replenished from the east, and are Southsayers like the Philistines;
notwithstanding all their glorious hypocritical professions, and outside
worship, that men cannot discern what they are without digging very deep; yet,
they are guilty of some of the wicked and provoking abominations of their
predecessors, whom the Lord drove out before them.

2 Because Verse 7.
their Land is full of silver and gold, neither is there any end of their
treasure: their time is spent in getting, and their hearts run a whoring after,
the riches of this world; as it was in the days of Noah, so it is now, they
are wallowing in the delights and pleasures of this world; they are so
swallowed up in the love of the fading glory of this miserable world, that they
cannot find their rest; but there is no end of their treasures, they will never
with the rich man, say it is enough, soul take thy rest; so insatiable are
they; that the treasures of the world are not able to satiate their boundless
lusts; there is no end of their desires, the more they get, the more they would
have; there is no end of their treasure, their Coffers will never be filled, so
long as any thing is behind that may be gotten by any way or means.

3 Their Verse 7.
land is full of Horses, neither is there any end of their Chariots, and they
please themselves in the children of strangers: to secure themselves in the
enjoyment of their carnal and unworthy pleasures, they erect a Mercenary and
powerful Militia; a thing of such a wicked and destructive tendency to the good
and well fare of the people, that the Lord does expressly command that man, whom
he shall choose to be Ruler over his people, that Deuteronomy. 17.16.
he shall not multiply horses to himself; and the wickedness of its tendency is
expressed in this, that it causes the people to return to Egypt, into an
Egyptian bondage and slavery, when the Lord has said, Ye shall henceforth
return no more that way: the Lord knew full well, that man, though a holy man, of
the Lords own choosing, qualified according to the mind and will of God, so, as
that he will choose him before all others; yet, man so qualified, man in the
highest state of grace while this old World stands, would not be able to bear
up against the temptations of the evil one, and his own heart, when once he
has gotten a multitude of Horses and chariots, a powerful mercenary Militia,
at his ownvvil and devotion: David (that upright heart) after he was grown
great by many Conquests, could not withstand a Temptation of this nature,
numbering the people: and such a power vvil necessarily cause the people to
return to Egypt, that is, into bondage and slavery; for it is the high way to
oppression and injustice: To make this Militia wholly his own, to serve his
interest, to be for him him against all his enemies, he must be bountiful and
liberal to them, bestow great gifts upon them; and having not of his own so to
do, he must rob and oppress the pople: this course Saul took, 1 Samuel: 8.14, 15,
and 17 verses: And he will take your fields, and your Vineyards, and your
Olive-yards, even the best of them and give them to his servants; and he will
take the tenth of your seed, and of your Vineyards, and give to his Officers,
and to his servants; he will take the tenth of your sheep, and ye shall be his
servants. And least any should have better thoughts of Saul, and think this
might be meant of some other, read what himself says, Chap: 22.7. Then Saul
said unto his servants that stood about him, hear now, ye Benjamites: will the
son of Jesse give every one of you fields, and Vineyards, and make you all
Captains of thousands, and Captains of hundreds, implying as strongly, that he
had done so, as, that David could not, nor would not do so: O the deep gulf of
wickedness and misery, the horrid Temptations, that man's heart vvil hurry him
into, who falls down to commit adultery with this filthy Idol. But these men
will multiply horses and Chariots to themselves, that they may be a sure defense
to them in their ways of wickedness; yea, they so dote upon this Idol, that
they never think they have enough of her: there is no end of their Chariots,
horse upon horse, Chariot upon chariot, force upon force; there is no end of
them, they never think themselves strong enough; and great enough: and this
brings a necessity for Oppression upon oppression without end, for these must
have their feilds, and their Vineyards, and their Olive-yards, and their tenth
part of the seed, great possessions and riches; otherwise there is no life in
this defense, without this Oil the chariot-wheels vvil not run, and they please
themselves in the Children of strangers; men of a strange degenerated spirit,
that choose to serve the Will and lust of the Prince before the true interest of
their countries good, the vvelfare of the people: men of so strange a spirit
and principle, that they truly deserve the name of strangers, and not Natives
of the good Land; of such a degenerared unworthy principle, that teaches them
obedience to the Imperious will, and unlawful commands of their Prince, although
(with Doeg the Edomite) they fall foul on the servants of the Lord: in such
Children of strangers do these men take pleasure, and with them is their
delight: and therefore will the Lord arise to shake terribly the earth, and
bringing down the lofty looks of these proudmen, save his righteous remnant,
and get himself a name, excellent in all the earth.

These wickednesses are guilty of such aggravations, that they so provoke the
eyes of Gods glory, as he will not forgive them, by no means will he pass them
by, but will deal with them in that dreadful manner spoken of.

But this is not all, the Prophet in the 16 verse of this 3d. Chapter, comes
with a MOREOVER. Moreover the Lord says, because the daughters of Syon are
haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks, and wanton eyes, walking and
mincing as shey go, and making a tinckling with their feet: therefore the Lord
will smite with a scab the crown of the head of the daughters of Syon, and the
Lord will discover their secret parts; in that day will the Lord take away the
bravery of their tinkling Ornaments about their feet, and their Cauls, and
their round tires like the Moon; the chains, and the bracelets, and the
muflers, the honnets, and the ornaments tf the legs, and the headbands and the
tablets, and the earrings; the Rings, and the Nose jewels, and the changeable
suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the wimples, and the crisping pins; the
glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoods, and the vails, and it shall come to
pass, that in stead of sweet smell, there shall be stink and instead of a girdle
a rent; and instead of wel-set hair, baldness, and in stead of a stomacher, a
girding with sackcloth; and burning instead of beauty; thy men shall fall by the
sword, and thy mighty in the war, and her gates shall lament and mourn, and she
being desolate shall sit upon the ground: and in that day shall seven Women lay
hold of one man, saying, we will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel,
only let us be called by thy name, to take away our reproach.

The Prophet had been hitherto speaking of the calamities and sorrows should
befall the whole land, under the name of the house of Jacob; but now he comes to
tell us what should befall the Capital and head City of the Land, which Zion the
City of David was, which great destruction and woeful state, their notable
wantons and naughty pride (over and above their cleaving to their other evils)
brought upon their heads: and let not her antitipe say. she is not guilty of
these things, and so shall not find this portion; for, she has no tinckling
Ornaments about her feet, nor round tires like the Moon, nor Nose jewels: but I
pray consider, she has other needless fashions of the Times, as needlessly
superfluous, and as full of pride and vanity, as the others were; and she is
proud and haughty, and has a stretched forth neck, and wanton eyes, and can go
mincing as notably as her Tipe and predecessor could do; and surely will be
found to have exceeded in all things: therefore behold thy portion and thy
Judgment, the reward of thy folly; there is no preventing it, there is no
redemption for thee, Ezekiel, 14.20
Though Noab, Daniel, and Job be found in thee, they shall deliver neither son
nor daughter, they shall deliver but their own souls by their righteeusness
says the Lord God.

And is this refining day of the Lord, such a day of Terrors to flesh and
blood? O how contrary will it then be to the expectations and hope, of the
greatest part of those that profess a delight in the thoughts of, and a longing
for, its coming? Who may abide this day of his coming? and who may stand when
he appears? In this terrible day, wherein he will make up his Jewels: will the
Lord perform his promises to his beloved Remnant that stand up for the honor
of his name: They shall be mine in that day says the Lord of hosts, and I will
spare them as a man spares his own Son that serves him; so that the
bitterness and sharpness of these calamities and anxious troubles shall not be
their lot; but they shall be mine, though I deal with their Brethren in a way
of anger and displeasure, yet I will deal with them in a way of grace and love,
and spetial favor in that day: as when, the wicked were upmost, and thought to
have ravished my name of all its honor and glory, they thought upon my name
and interest; so, now I am bringing down these wicked workers of wickedness,
and scourging their foolish Brethren that have committed adultery with these
men's apostacies, purging them, and washing their poluted garments clean, I will
think upon them for their good, safety, and happiness, in that day when I make
up my Jewels.

Qu: Who, and what are these Jewels, the Lord takes so much pains, and does
such wouders in making them up?

Ans: I Answer 1. Who they are: They are the Lambs chosen number, mentioned in
the 14 of the Revelation, his 144000 that stand with him upon the Mount Zion:
the Reasons that move me to judge thus, are:

1 Because of that likeness there is between those followers of the Lamb, and
these Jewels of the Lord: they are not only redeemed from the earth, but from
among men; and these Jewels are picked from among men too, from among the
Inhabitants of professing Zion: these are the Lords Jewels; and they are the
first fruits (very precious) unto God, and unto the Lamb; they are without
guile, and without fault before the throne of God; and these Jewels are holy
ones, every one that is left in Zion shall be called holy, they are so
gloriously beautiful, so suitable to the mind of God, that he will create a
defense upon their glory that it may not be lost.

2 Because they are contemporaries, they both belong to one and the same time:
these Jewele are made up immediately before the burning hot day, that shall burn
up all the wicked, leaving them neither root nor branch: the Lambs number, they
are upon Mount Zion, singing their new song, in that part of time, immediately
preceding the downfall of Babylon; there is no interval of time between, only an
Angel preaches the everlasting Gospel to them that dwell on the earth, which is
but as the herald to the other, telling the Inhabitants of the earth, the hour
of the Lords judgment is come, and nothing but repentance and turning to the
Lord of Heaven and Earth, will save them from the destroying Angel that follows,
and is hard at hand, leaving them without excuse, fit for destruction if they
hearken not: Malachies burning day has two parts; the former part makes the
wicked as stubble, fit fuel for the fire, the latter part burns them quite up:
and I yet see no reason why we may not say, that these two Angels answer to
the two parts of Malachies burning day: the Angel that preaches the everlasting
Gospel, makes the wicked as stubble ready for the fire; by this Isai. 11.4
rod of his mouth he smites the earth, and at the Ch: 17.13.
rebuke of God the Nations are made as the chaff of the mountain, and as a
rolling thing (stubble) before the whirlwind; yea, by this breath of his lips
he Ch: 11, 4
slaies the wicked, he does as really slay themsas the following Angel does
with his iron rod; with this rod of his month, this breath of his lips he
smites and slayes their hearts and understandings, takes away their courage
and strength, their consciences flying in their faces their hearts sink, and
their spirits fail: At the Psalm: 76.6.
rebuke of God, both the Chariot and horse are cast into a deep sleep, ver. 5
the stout he arted (that are far from righteousness) are spoiled, they sleep
their sleep, and none of the men of might find their hands, he shall Ver. 12.
cut off the spirit of Princes: and when the Lord has thus slain them by the
sword of his mouth, the breath of his lips, Psalm 2.
speaking to them in his wrath, then will he break them with his rod of Iron,
and dash them to pieces like a Potters vessel; when they are thus made stubble
by the rebuke of the Lord, then shall they be burnt up root and branch: these
things seriously considered, I suppose will be sufficient to prove the assertion.

2 What are they? All their dross, and all their tin is purely purged and taken
away, and they are become holiness to the Lord: they are holy ones, he that is
left in Zion, and that remains in Jerusalem shall be called holy: the Fathers
name is written in their foreheads: they are redeemed from the earths and from
among men; from all of this old world, nothing is of any value or esteem with
them, has their hearts, but the new Heavens and new earth which they look for
according to the promise of God; they are without guile and fault before the
Throne of God; their Offerings are Offerings in righteousness, pleasant unto
the Lord: they are a holy Generation, by the mighty and wonder-working hand of
the Holy Spirit, wrought into an exact conformity to Jesus Christ in all
things: these are the Lords Jewels, upon whom his heart is so fixed; that he
will defend them against the whole world of men and devils, he vvil creat such a
defense upon these, that neither heat, nor storm, nor rain, all the rage,
malice, and power of their enemies, either by day or by night, shall be able to
harm them.

We are now come to the second sort of promises the Lord makes to this people
of his delight; and that is such as contains not only reward for work done, but
also qualification and fitness for a future glorious work immediately to succeed.

Then shall ye return, and diseern between the righteous and the wicked, between
him that serves God, and him that serves him not.

In the words we have,

1 The Persons to whom this Promise is made. 2 The Promise it self. And 3 The
Time of performance.
1 The Persons to whom the Promise is made, Then shall ye return, etc. that
by this YE, cannot be meant the wicked leaders of the Apostasy; against whom
the Prophet had been speaking throughout his Prophecy; seems clear to me upon
these grounds.

1 Because here is a promise made to them: and the promises of God belong not
to the wicked, they are Ephesians: 2.12
strangers from the Conants of promise: the Lord makes not promises to his
enemies, but to his Children and Friends; To Abraham and his seed were the
promises made; b Gal: 3.16
2 Cor. 1, 20
all the promises of God, in him are yea, and in him amen; and its by the Ephesians:
2.13
BLOOD OF CHRIST that any are made nigh to the promise.

2 Because it is a promise of a great gift of the Spirit; a piece of that great
New Testament promise of the Spirit: and what color or shadow of reason can
be given, that this should be spoken to wicked men, the subject of the Lords
wrath and displeasure.

3 Because it is a promise of a spirit of descerning to qualify and fit them
with a sufficient ability, to perform the work of the Lord in the to tal
destruction of the wicked: Now it is not the wicked that shall destroy the
wicked at this day, but it is the feet of them that fear the Lord, that shall
tread them down like ashes, they burn them up leaving them neither root nor
branch. So that,

2 By this YE, we are to understand the Jewels of the Lord: they shall return
out of the fiery furnace of the refiner; and from under the scourings of the
Fullers soap, and have a spirit of discerning given to them, that they may be
enabled to perform that great work the Lord has cut out for them to do upon,
and in the world. But

3 In a more special and peculiar manner, we are to understand by this YE,
those that feared the Lord, and spoke often one to another; those that the Lord
will so own as to spare them in that day of the Lord of hosts, they shall return
out of those places of consultation,, where they have been thinking of, and
consulting about, the concernments of the great name of God at this day, and
shall discern what their work is, in the doing whereof, they may gain honor and
glory to the suffering name of their Lord: one reason why I apply it in such
special manner to these, is, because I find them particularly pointed out by
the same expression in the next Chapter, and YE shall go forth and grow up as
Calves of the stall, and YE shall tread down the wicked; YE; who? why you that
fear my name.

2 The Promise it self we have in these words, and discern between the
righteous and the wicked; between him that serves God, and him that serves
him not: it is a spirit of discerning the Lord promises here, to qualify and
fit them, to enable them to perform the glorious work of the following day,
spoken of in the 1 v: of the next Chter, for the Prophet there renders a
reason, why the Lord would then give them this spirit of discerning, For behold
(says he) the day comes that shall burn as an Oven: implying, as, that that
was the time and season, for the pouring down of the spirit upon them; so, that
there is a necessity it should be given to them, otherwise they would not be
able to perform the work of that burning day, treading down the wicked as
ashes under their feet: as the Children of old, must be directed what to
destroy, and what to save alive; so must these too, have a spirit of discerning
given them, To discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that
serves God, and him that serves him not; otherwise, they will not know which
to burn up, and which to pluck as brands out of the fire, which to lead by the
hand out of the miseries and sorrows of that day, and which to tread down like
ashes under their feet.

3 The Time of performance: THEN shall ye return, etc THEN, when?

1 THEN, When I have gotten to my self honor and glory, by my swift witnessing
against the heads and leaders of this loathsome apostasy.

2 THEN, When I have made up my Jewels: when my Refiners fire, and Fullers
soap, that searching and trying dispensation of mine, has had its full course
amongst my professing people, that pretend to so great a delight in me and my
day.

3 THEN, When I have put forth such Majesty and glory, in executing my
vengeance on these mine enemies, and purifying my Zion, that forces you,
because of that unlikeness and nonconformity that is in you to it, to fly to
the horns of the Altar, to the freeness and riches of my eternal love (my
sparing love) for shelter when the considering how far short you come of that
glory I am about to reveal, makes you to run into your rock, the Rock of Ages,
to shelter your selves under his healing wings.

4 THEN, when I have manifested such glory of love, in such a peculiar way, as
neither you nor your Fathers were ever acquainted with before, taking such an
unwonted unparalleld care of you, sparing you in such a day as this; the glory
whereof shall have drawn you wholy to my self, that indeed I am as really
become yours as you are mine, and that I am fixed upon your hearts, as you are
upon mine; that indeed you can unfeignedly say, My beloved is mine, and I am
his; THEN shall ye return and discern, etc.

5 THEN, When I have brought you to cease from man whose breath is in his
nostrils, by letting you see through the glass of experience, that he is not at
all to be accounted of: when you can cease wholy from man, that you care for,
and look at no man any otherwise than in me, and trust to, and rely upon me
alone.

6 and lastly, THEN, when you know the way to exalt me alone; to give all the
honor and the glory of the wonders I bring to pass in the world to me,
without any competitor, though of the best of men; for, I will be exalted alone
in that day: THEN shall ye return and discern between the righteous and the
wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves him not; and the day
shall come, wherein you shall be delivered out of the hands of your enemies, and
you shall tread them as ashes under your feet, and burn them up, leaving them
neither root nor branch; and in your going forth in the performance of this
work, ye shall grow up as Calves of the stall, be full fed with the love and
fullness of your Lord and Savior.

HAving opened the words, and supposing it in sufficiently evident, that the
interpretation given, is according to truth; let us with a truly religious
sericusness, observe the lessons the Holy Ghost would teach us from them.

1 That the time of the Lords arising to work DELIVERANCE for his people is a
dark day, (yea, a black midnight) of apostasy; then will the Lord come to his
Zion as a Refiner to purify it: when the professing world are running back
again, even to Babylon, then and there, shall deliverance be wrought for the
true seed, Mic: 4.10. Thou shall go even to Babylon, there shall thou be
delivered, there the Lord shall redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies; this
is the state and condition of Sion immediately before the time, when the Lord
will make her horns iron, and her hoofes brass, wherein she shall thresh and beat
in pieces many people, consecrating their gain unto the Lord. In the Mat. 29
midnight of the Virgins sleep, shall the cry be heard, the Bridegroom (the
King, the Lord of hosts) is coming: when professing Zion comes into a Laodicean
Church State, Rev. 3.20
then the coming of our Lord is at hand, he is f at the door. The apostasy
here, is so universal and so gross (notwithstanding all their curious coverings
to hide it from the eyes of men, yet the Lord sees it) that, the Magistracy,
the Rulers, are Rulers of Isaiah 1.10
Sodom; Mal. 3.15
proud workers of Wickedness, the Princes are Isaiah 1.23
rebellious, and companions of Thieves, every one loves gifts, and follows
after reward, they judge not the Fatherless, neither does the cause of the
Widow come unto them: the Ministry, the Priests Mark 2.8
depart out of the way of the Lord, corrupt the Covevenant of Levi, to the
causing many to stumble at the law, the Worship and commands of God; become
Verse 9,
contemptible and base before all the people, because of their straying from
the ways of God, by an irreligious partiality in the law, or accepting of
Faces (as the margent of some Bibles has it) making the Law, by their uncouth,
forced, and private interpretations, to seem to countenance the design of
those, whose designs are not suitable to the design of God, but are against the
Lord, and guilty of so much hypocritical unrighteousness, to the provoking the
eyes of his glory, that he will not forgive them; seeking their own interest,
not the interest and honor of him whom they profess to be their Lord and
master, Jesus Christ: and the multitude of this professing people grow up
profanely wicked, snuffing Mal. 1, 13
at the Ordinances of the Lord as at a wearisom burden, behold what a weariness
is it; the true Worship of God, true Religion, becomes a weariuess to these
outside professors, who Isai. 1.11: 13, 14.
fill the Lord with the multitude of their sacrifices, and weary him with their
new Moons, and their appointed Feasts, their Sabboths, and calling of
Assemblies, with their Fasts; they Mal. 1.14
polute the Altar of the Lord, the Worship of God, with their blind, and sick,
and torn, and lame, and corrupt performances, their cursed deceit; yea, they
are Idolaters in the sight of God, Isai. 2.9.
the mean man boweth down, and the great man humbles himself, to their Idols,
that they are become to God as Mal. 3.5.
Sorcerers, an adulterous Generation: in this sad day of apostasy, will the Lord
come to his Sion, as a refiner and purifier of silver, and as Fullers soap, now
will the day of the Lord of hosts come upon professing Zion, and lay all low
before him, teaching them by a smart and dreadful dispensation, the way to
exalt the Lord alone; in this day will the Lord come as a swift Witness against,
and avenge himself on, his adversaries in Zion, those who are professed friends,
members of professing Zion, but in deed and in truth are his real enemies,
enemies to the righteous and holy designs of God; and deliver his remnant, and
pick out his Jewels from amongst the professing rubbish of defiled Zton.

2 That notwithstanding the gross wickedness of this day, yet Satan transforms
himself into an Angel of light, clothing his Children and followers in his best
livery; they have notable coverings to hide it, whereby they deceive the
multitude of the professing world, and themselves to boot; so that they dare,
not only assert their innocence in putting the Prophet to prove his charge
against them, but when the Prophet preaches to them, the long-sufferance and
tenderness of the heart of God toward them, the grace and love of God in that
promise, Mal. 3.7
Return unto me and I will return unto you says the Lord of hosts, they
scorning to acknowledge their guilt, throw it back in his face, with a wherein
shall we return? impudently asserting their righteousness to be such, as they
know not, nor none can tell them wherein they should return and do better.

3 That the leaders of this apostasy, that cause the people to err,
notwithstanding their curious outside coverings of religious performances, and
good aims and ends, for the good of the Church, people, and glory of God, will
be the subject of the sore displeasure and wrath of the Lord of hosts: the Lord
will be a Verse 5.
swift Witness against them, and come near to them to Judgment, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6
If those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the good word of God,
and the powers of the world to come, fall away, it is impossible to renew them
again to repentance; at the hand of this hypocritical, oppressing, and
persecuting Generation, will God require the blood of his Prophets and Witnesses
that has been shed; Isai: 1, 24.
Ah (says the Lord) I will ease me of (these) mine adversaries, and avenge me
of (these) mine enemies.

4 That the Church State of professing Sion, their outward holiness, with all
their Sacrifices and performances, the Temple of the Lord, shall not, nor cannot
save them from the smart and burden of the heavy hand of an angry God: the day
of the Lord of hosts will come upon them, he will be as a refiners fine, and as
Fullers soap to them; he will fan them til he has thoroughly purged his floor;
Isaiah 27.9
by this therefore (by the smitings of God, as the former Verse has it) shall
the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away his sin.

5 That notwithstanding this universal backsliding and apostasy, in professing
Zion, yet the Lord has a remnant left that fear him; that stand up for his
name and honor, bearing their testimony against the provoking evils and
wickednesses of the Times, Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to
another, and thought upon his name.

6 That this provoking professing world, are beholden to this despised remnant,
for the long sufferance of God toward them, and the mercies they receive at
the hand of the Lord; Isai. 1.9.
Except the Lord of hosts had left us a very small remnant, we should have been
as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah: they are the salt that
season this earth, and keep it from a total purifying annihilation into its
first nothing: it is they, and they only, that lengthen out the patience of God
toward the backsliding professing world, and keep it from being made an
example of the severity of God, to future Ages: and as a necessary and natural
consequent of this.

7 We may observe, The excessive giddines and folly of the great and wise men
of this sick and dying world, who will not endure the application of the
sovereign Remedies, these wholesome (though tormenting) Physicians present unto
them, but look upon them, and deal with them, as enemies, endeavoring their
destruction: what though they handle roughly, and feel hard, that they prove a
real torment to you? that man that will not endure his wounds searching, will
never attain the cure: it is not their want of care and tenderness, but your
corruption and rottenness that causes the pain; the sound limb or joint
shrinks not at the searching hand, but the rotten, that is full of corrupt
putrefaction, that cannot abide nor endure the willing hand of the skilful
Surgeon, to dive to the bottom of the distemper, in order to a safe and
speedy cure: notwithstanding all the disguising Vizards, you represent them,
their ways, and ends, to the world in, it will be found at last, in the Lords
own time (which is best of all) that the interest of your safety and happiness,
is wrapped up in harkening and attending to the Voice of God in their mouth: but
if you will not hear, but set your selves against them, know (there is no middle
way) that Psalm 8.2
out of the mouths of Babes and sucklings, the Lord has ordained strength, to
still the enemy, and the avenger.

8 That before the Lord will execute his Judgments in wrath, upon the profane
antichristian world, he enters into Judgment with professing Zion: 1 Pet. 4.17
for the time is come that Judgment must begin at the house of God; the Lord
will purge and purify Zion, make up his Jewels from amidst all the dross and
tin; and then will he make Zion a fit instrument to perform his great works in
and upon the world, in that day of his wrath that shall burn as an Oven; if it
first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of
God? and if the righteous scarce be saved, where shall the ungodly and the
sinner appear? in that day they shall burn up the wicked, leaving them neither
root for brach, treading them down as ashes under their feet.

9 That this professing Zion, thus defiled by her backslidings and Apostacies,
and being lifted up upon its own bottom, exalting themselves when they should
exalt the Lord alone, is become the subject of the anger and displeasure of
God; the scene on which the Lord will act the sad Tragedy of his Jealousy:
when once the Inhabitants of Zion, become Mountains and hills, and tall Cedars
listed up, and Oaks of Bashan, high Towers, and fenced walls, etc. come into a
strain of self-exaltation, self-confidence, and self-interest, then do they so
provoke the eyes of Gods glory, that he will bear no longer, but enter into
Judgment with them: The Lord is a jealous God, and Isai. 41.8
he will not give his glory to another, he will not suffer any to go away with
his honor and glory, he is so jealous of his honor, least it should suffer
detraction by the lofty assumptions of this foolish professing Zion, that he
falls foul with all her high mountains and hills, tal Cedars, and Oaks of Bashan,
high Towers and fenced walls, and with all her ships and pleasant pictures; he
looks upon them all as Idols, which he will utterly abolish, that the Lord alone
may be exalted in that day.

10 That this coming of Christ (the Messenger of the Covenant) to his Syon (I
do conceive) is not in person, but in Spirit, (though that personal appearance
will take place in due time also) washing and purging his Zion by the spirit of
Judgment, and the spirit of burning: he shall sit upon Zion as a Refiner and
purifier of silver; by a notable trying, refining dispensation, purely purge
away their dross, and take away all their tin, purifying them as gold and
silver, that they may offer up to the Lord an Offering in righteousness.

11 That the Lord will manage his great work of Judgment in Zion, avenge
himself on his enemies there, and search, try, cleanse, purify, and thoroughly
cure those that halt in Zion, in such a way and manner; as he himself will have
the sole honor and glory of that action, be alone exalted in that day: he will
manifest such exceeding Majesty and glory in the way of his Judgments at this
day, that will stain and put out all other glories professing Zion vaunts it
self of, so that she shall hide her self in shame, for fear of the glory of the
Majesty of the Lord, when he arises to shake terribly the earth; yea, the
very remnant of God, to whom his heart is so entirely engaged, shall taste a
little of this cup of shame too, sheltering themselves under the freeness and
riches of the promise, the sparing love of their tender Father; though now
happily, some Children may be in love with themselves, their light and parts,
gifts and graces, being too too apt to think themselves something; yet then,
God knows, the roaring vvind among the Cedar boughs, the bloody Furrows the rod
makes upon the backs of their Brethren, with its shaking over their own heads,
letting them know upon what account or score it is they escape (not merit or
desert, but pure love) vvil teach them another and a better lesson, Cease ye
from man whose breath is in his nostrils; the Lord alone shall be exalted in
that day: a thing which never yet was done in any of the days this old World
ever saw.

12 Behold somewhat of the way and course the Lord will take to do this great
and mavelous work* he will cause the fire to break out from among themselves
that shall consume them: this Earthquake arises from the rending vvind pent up
within the concavities of its own earth; as the scope and tendency of the
Third Chap: intimates: and herein consists somewhat of the Wonder, that a State
defended with such a Force, Cedars, and Oaks, Mountains and Hills, Towers and
fenced walls, Ships and pleasant things, even the mighty man, and the man of
War, the Judge, and the Prophet, the Prudent and the Ancient, the Honorable
man and the Counselor, the cunning Artificer and the Eloquent Orator, should
be brought down and laid in the dust: the Lord so impoverishes those, of the
excellent gifts and qualities they once had, that (being enfatuated) they
become as Children, Babes, and Women: this alteration in the superior orbs,
begets another as dangerous in the lower regions: the Lord stops the fountains
of this professing earth, and for want of those cooling waters that had wont
to keep things in some tolerable poise, the fiery element prevails, and
breaking out of the earth, begets its own likeness, a fiery blaze in the
fountains also; as of old, fire came out from Abimelech and devoured the men of
Shechem, and fire came out from Shechem, and devoured Abimelech; so, here is
fire against fire, which continues burning til Isai. 3.^
Jerusalem be ruined, and Judah be fallen: in this fire will the Lord avenge
himself on his (friend-like) enemies, those to whom the professing world give
the right hand of fellowship as true Citizens of Zion, free denizens of the
holy City: in the management of this fiery work, causing one fire to overcome
the other, consuming its own nature; and overruling it, to the carrying on his
own design and work, will the Lord manifest such an exceeding glory above all
former manifestations, that the best of men shall enter into the rock, and hide
themselves in the dust, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty,
and he alone shall be exalted in that day.

13 That the Prophets Isaiah and Malachy, do not give us any ground (as I can
perceive) to think, the Lord will make use of that beloved remnant of his, that
fear his name, and speak often one to another about his name and honor at this
day, in this great work of his judging professing Zion, in the manner treated
of: Malachy tells us, The Lord will spare them in that day; and Isai says, it
shall be well with them in that day: but not a word do we read of any active
condition they are in (any otherwise than by the word of their testimony) at
that day: I rather conceive, that, the state and condition of the remnant,
mentioned Isaiah 26.20, 21. Come my people, enter thou into thy Chambers, and
and shut thy doors about thee: hide thy self as it were for a little moment,
until the indignation be over past: for behold, the Lord comes out of his
place, to punish the Inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: the earth
also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain.

14 That none are under the saving influences of those rich promises made to
the blessed remnant at this day, but those, who not only speak often one to
another against the apostacies and evils of the times, but think on the name of
God; have this as the moving cause in all their motions, a holy carefulness for
the interest and name of God: for them, (and for them only) is there a Book of
remembrance written; and they (and they only) shall be mine says the Lord in
that day; and they (and they only) will the Lord spare in that day when he makes
up his Jewels; and then shall they return, and discern between the righteous and
the wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves him not.

15 Here is a holy directory to guide, and an unerring touchstone to try, all
our ways and actions by at this day, that in all our motions against the
apostacies and evils of the times, the honor and interest of the great name of
God move us: if that be not our frame and temper of Spirit, we are none of the
number in whom the Lord so much delights; and our work of counsel, is not that,
which the Lord so earnestly lissens and hearkens after, til he hears all,
noting it down in his book of remembrance; and we have nothing to do with those
high expressions of the Lords matchless love in his promises: no, if the name
of God be not solely in our eye, and the exalting the Lord alone be not all our
aim and end in what we do, in stead of Gods peculiars in that day of the Lord,
it will be unto us Amos 5.18, 19.
darkness and not light, as if a man fled from a Lion, and a Bear met him, or,
went into a house and leaned his hand on the wall, and a Serpent bit him.

16 That he high seize, the graces and excellencies, the remnant have
attained to at this day, is far short of the glory of the Lord is about to
reveal* when it comes forth, they will be glad to run to their shelter, the
sparing love of their Father; they themselves shall then be laid in the dust
before the Lord, and the glorious Lord alone shall be exalted and magnified.

17 That the great design of God upon professing Zion at this day is, to purge
and purify, wash and cleanse it, from all its filth, dross, and tin; that they
may become a holy Generation, a peculiar people, formed for himself to show
forth his praise, able to offer up an Offering in righteousness, pleasant unto
the Lord.

18 Behold the way and course the Lord will take, to purge and purify his Zion
at this day, he will do it by the spirit of Judgment, and the spirit of
burning: by such a trying dispensation of fiery judgment; as shall not only
burn up their dross, but their tin also that which now looks so like, and goes
for good silver, for that which is acceptable in the sight of God.

19 Syon thus purged and purified shall have the creating power of God to assist
her, as her defense; upon all this glory the Lord has now clothed her with,
shall be a desence: it is not poluted and impure Zion the Lord will thus defend,
but it is that glory of holiness the counterpaine or image of Gods own
holiness, which will be upon Zion, when the Lord shall have washed away the
filth from the daughter of Zion, and shall have purged away the blood of
Jerusalem from the midst thereof, then shall she be clothed with all the the
defense promised, and not til then: the promise is to a washed and purified
State, not to a State defiled with filth, tho of Zion, not poluted with blood
though of Jerusalem, that which is most like true holiness and purity, and is
not: that which the Lord will defend is nothing but glory, the Image and
impress of himself, upon all the glory shall be a defense; nothing beneath the
glory of Zion thus vvashed and purified by a spirit of Judgment and a spirit of
burning, will the Lord defend at this rate, and after this manner: but Syon
clothed upon, with the glory of her Bridegroom and Lord ( Cant. 9, 5
Who is this that comes up from the Wilderness, leaning upon her beloved?)
shall be defended by a continual assistance of the creating power of God, so
that they shall not be tempted by any necessities whatsoever, to make use of the
same unrighteous politic ways and courses, the Rulers of the world have
hitherto made use of to defend themselves: they shall not make use of the worlds
unrighteousnes, to fence and guard their righteousness from the rape and spoils
of their enemies; but there shall a creating power, such an extraordinary
providence at tend them, bringing down their enemiesunder their feet upon all
occasions, at all times, that the Lord shall be so eminently seen in those
wonderful occurrences of his providence and power, that he shall have the praise
and the glory of all, Glory to God in the highest, will then be the burden of
the song at that day.

20 Until the Lord has purged and purified Zion, he will not defend it against
the rage and injuries of her enemies; when the Lord shall have washed away the
filth of the daughter of Zion, and purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst
thereof, then (and not before) will he create upon all its glory such a defense,
as shall be a shadow from the heat, and a refuge from the storm, and a covert
from the rain, such, as shall be sufficient for all times and seasons, night and
day.

21 When Syon is thus purged and purified, become Gods holy hill of Zion, a holy
generation, such a stamp of holiness set upon them that they shall be CALLED
HOLY, then will the Lord make use of her in his glorious work in the way of his
Judgments upon the profane, antichristian, and hypocritical world: then will
they know how, and be fit, to burn up the wicked, treading them as ashes under
their feet. But

22 Before that day comes, that shall burn as an Oven, wherein the stone shall
smite the great Image, and break it in pieces, the Lord will bring his remnant
and his Jewels, into one entire body, and pour down his Spirit upon them, a
spirit of discerning, such a degree of the Spirit, as shall sufficiently
qualify and fit them for his work and service: says the Lord, when I have
made up my Jewels, then shall ye (all) return, and discern between the righteous
and the wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves him not;
for, the day (then) comes that shall burn as an Oven and all the proud, and all
that do wickedly shall be stubble; and the day that comes shall burn them up,
says the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.

23 Observe the work of the remnant at this day of apostasy, and falling away;
it consists of two parts.

1 Bearing their testimony against the apostacies and evils of the times* they
spoke often one to another; if Jerusalem loose the kindness of her youth, and
the love of her Espousals; Jeremy must be Jer. 1.18
a defenced City, and an iron pillar, and brazen walls against the whole Land,
against the Kings of Judah, and the Princes thereof, against the Priests
thereof, and against the people of the Land: If the house of Israel turn aside
from God, grow impudent and hard hearted, stopping their ears against the word
of the Lord; Ezekiel must have Ezekiel. 3.8, 9
a strong face against their faces, and a strong forehead; harder than an
adamant, against their foreheads: if the house of Jacob, get into an
hypocritical strain of outward holiness; would make the world believe they keep
a fast, a day unto the Lord, when they indeed fast to smite with the fist of
wickedness; and, would cover their fulfilling the will of their lusts, under a
cloak of doing God service; Isaiah must Isai 58.1.
cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and show my people
their transsions, and the house of Jacob their sins: in the performance of
which service, Jer. 1.17
they must not be afraid, lest they be confounded.

Qu: If any should ask, what those evils are, that they that fear the Lord
should bear their testimony against?

Ans: The Prophet makes answer to this question, by his significant THEN in the
16 Verse of his Third Chapter; THEN they that feared the Lord spoke often one
to another: then, when they heard and saw things at that pass the Prophet had
spoken of before, they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another: and it
does not only point out the time when they spoke, but I conceive it also
signifies to us, the things against which they spoke; for the Prophets then
has relation, and alludes, to all the enormities and evils of the Times
enumerated before; and they are of a double nature, matters of Religion, and
matters of a civil concernment.

1 Of Religious matters. And

1 If they behold men in professing Syon, denying God Mal. 1.6.
that honor, and that fear due unto him, despising his great name, robbing the
Lord of those dues they ought to render to him: then, are they that fear the
Lord to be sensible of the dishonor that comes to the name of God thereby, and
speak against that evil.

2 If they behold Inhabitants of professing Syon, a people that are Isai. 1.
from the 2. verse to the 14,
rebebellious children, a sinful Nation, laden with iniquity, a seed of evil
doers, corrupters, that have forsaken the Lord, and gone away backward, having
their hands full of blood, (men's hands may be filled with blood diverse ways)
that they are become to the Lord as Rulers of Sodom, and people of Gomorrah,
provoking the holy one of Israel unto anger; when they see this people in
hypocrisy, filling the Lord with a multitude of sacrifices, and Offerings,
Oblations, New Moons, and oppointed feasts, cloaking over their apostatising
wickednesses with many religious performances, to cozen their consciences; and
the professing world; then, ought they that fear the Lord, to be sensible of
the great dishonor the name of God suffers by this abomination, and speak
against that evil also.

3 When they see men in professing Syon Mal. 2.8
depart out of the way of the Lord, apostatise, causing many to stumble and
fall, taking such offense at the Law, the ways of God, that they stumble into
heathenisme and prophanes: then are they that fear the Lord to take to heart
the great dishonor the name of God suffers by this abomination, and speak a
against it also.

4 Do they see inhabitants of professing Syon that seem to be great worshippers
of God, and zealous for the service of the Lord, and the good of his people,
Mal. 1.13.
snuffing at that part of the worship of God, at doing that piece of the will
of God, that suits not with their worldly interest, of gaining this evil world
with the Goods thereof; crying out, what a weariness is it? something we would
do for God, but that the Lord now calls for, is a wearisome burden to us, it will
quite undo us, oh what a weariness is it? this is an hard saying, who can hear
it? then, ought they that fear the Lord to think upon the dishonored and
despised name of God, and speak against this abomination also.

5 Do they behold men in professing Syon, Verse 14
Vowing a vow unto the Lord, and in a capacity to perform that Vow, having that
Male in his flock, and yet sacrifice unto the Lord a corrupt thing, blind and
lame performances? then also, are they that fear the Lord, to think on the name
of God, how greatly it is dishonored, and bear a full testimony against that
loathsome hypocrisy of him, letting him know he is cursed, who dares so to
trample under foot the name of the great King, whose name is dreadful among the
Heathen.

6 Matters of a civil nature; and as if the Prophet intended to stop the mouth
of the objection of these days, he brings in the evils of this nature in the
last place, that his THEN might clearly appear, to have special and direct
relation to those things.

1 When the proud professors in Syon, that behave themselves proudly and
contemptuously toward their God, and their Brethren, are accounted Mal. 3.15.
the happy men, as those that would make the Nation happy by the ways of their
devising: called happy; congratulated and applauded as the men whom the Lord
has owned and made happy, by his providence and blessing: then, are they that
fear the Lord to think how the name of God is dishonored by this evil, and
bear their testimony against it.

2 When the wicked workers in professing Zion, Verse 15
the workers of wickedness are set up, Children of strangers, of a strange
spirit and principle, Isai. 3.6.
contrary to the Spirit of our Lord, the holy and righteous Spirit of true
Syon, and the work of God; those, whose delight is not in the law of the Lord,
but in ways of their own inventions, suitable to their degenerated and base
interest; who break the law continually, working wickedness indeed, although
they call it (and would have what they do, accounted) righteousness: and to
defend these men in their wickedness, Verse 9
Horses and Chariots, a powerful Militia is fixed as a wall about them: when
such men are set up, over the people, and such things done, oppressing,
vilifying and persecuting the people of the Lord, and the true interest of the
Son of God (our Lord Jesus) among his people and in the world: then, are they
that fear the Lord, to be sensible of the dishonor and reproach is cast upon
the name of God by this evil, and bear their testimony against this wickedness
also.

3 When they see this evil in professing Syon, Mal. 3, 15
they that tempt God are even delivered; while the Altar of the Lord is covered
with the tears, weeping, and crying out of the oppressed, those, who by their
provoking, hypocritical, loathsome wickedness, tempt the Lord to put an end to
his long-sufferance, and execute his vengeance before the appointed time, are
even delivered; their heads are lifted up, and their faces made to shine
through the benign aspect of those, who should and ought to be a terror to
them; they are even delivered, from their fears of receiving the desert of
their ways and actions by a stream of Justice and righteousness; and are set
up to work wickedness against God in oppressions and cruelty, covering the
Altar of the Lord with the tears, sighs, and groans of his people: then, are
they that fear the Lord, to think upon the great name of their God, how
unworthily it is dishonored and trampled under foot, and bear their testimony
against this wickedness also.

4 When the Rulers of professing Syon, be^^^ (and act) like the Rulers of
Sodom, rebel against the Lord, go away backward (apostatise) from God, oppress
the people of the land, yet cover all with a cloak of religious performances,
and outward holiness, good aims and ends for the work of the Lord, and the good
of the Church of Christ, with these coverings hiding their evils and
wickednesses from the vulgar sight; then, are they that fear the Lord, not to
hold their peace, but to cry aloud, and bear their testimony for God against
this abomination also; and of of the fruit of this their doing shall they eat,
and it shall be well with them in that day wherein he will judge those men.

Qu: Possibly it may be asked, why will the Lord have those that fear him thus
industriously engaged against the evils and wickedness of Rulers and people at
this day?

Answ: The Answer is, because his great name, that was so glorious and dreadful
among the Heathen, is so exceedingly dishonored, therefore are they that fear
the Lord, to think upon the name of God, and speak in its vindication: this is
an apostasy in Syon delivered out of Babylon, (though many of Babilons evils
cleave yet close to them) for whom the Lord has done great and wonderful
things; freed them from the slavery and bondage of a sore captivity under the
Babilonish power; blessed them with prosperous success in building their City,
that in spite of the Tobiahs, and Sanballats, of all their enemies that had
maintenance from the Kings Palace, (were maintained by a wretched Kingly
Interest,) they became a Commonwealth, a free people, by which, they had
opportunity and liberty to serve the Lord in doing his whole Will and pleasure;
in doing these great things (far beyond the thoughts and expectations of the
greatest worldly wise men) for this people, the Lord had gotten himself a great
name, dreadful among the Heathen; how did the wicked world tremble at the
thoughts of it? and now for this people to draw back, even to Babylon, to
apostatise from the Lord, (in matter and manner, has been treated of) is none
other but a wicked ravishing and deflouring the honor of the Virgin name of
God, he had so lately gotten to himself, by doing such wonders for this
unworthy people: As our Lord said of his day in the flesh, that if those
Disciples that spoke for him and blessed him, should hold their peace, the stones
would immediately cry out; so may it truly be said of this time also, if they
that fear the Lord should hold their peace, and not speak and plead for the
name of their God, the stones, the dumb Creation would bear a Testimony for God
against man's wickedness; if none else will, the stone shall cry out of the wall,
and the beam out of the timber shall answer it: The name of God, which had been
clouded for a long time, began now to be glorious and excellent in all the
earth, upon which, the heart of God is fixed; and their going about to ravish
this honor, provokes the eyes of Gods glory, stirs up his Jealousy; least it
should be given to others, what overturning work does the Lord of hosts say he
will make in professing Syon? and does this move the Lord himself, and will he
not (think we) have those that fear him moved also? will he act thus like a man
of War and blood to vindicate his honor, and will he not have them to speak for
it? surely yea: so that we see there is great reason why they that fear the
Lord should be of this temper of spirit at this day.

2 A second part of the work of the Remnant at this day is, a sincere and
hearty solicitousness, after what other duty may be encumbent upon them, the
performance whereof may in any measure vinvindicate the honor, and glorify the
name of their God, who is so much dishonored, and whose name is so vilely
trampled under foot, by the hypocritical wickednesses of this day: they
thought upon his name: What shall we do for thy great name?

24. Behold the blessedness of those who sincerely exercise themselves in the
work of the Lord at this day: They shall be mine says the Lord of hosts, in
that day when I make up my Jewels, and I will spare them as a man spares his
own son, that serves him; such blessedness will they possess as their
portion from their God and Father, as none but themselves shall be made happy
with in that day.

Many other useful lessons might be observed to be taught us from these
scriptures; but I shall satisfy my self with what is already written: And to
conclude this discourse, give me leave to address my self in a few words, to
those three sorts of men concerned in it.

1. To the Leaders of this apostasy: Ye Isa. 1.10. Mal. 2.19.
Rulers of Sodom, and ye base and contemptible Priests of the land (the Lord
has made you contemptible and base before all the people, because of your
corruptions:) Hear how Isaiah complains of you, calling the heavens and the
earth to witness against you; and see Malachy turning aside the skirts of your
coverings, discovering all your hypocritical rottenness, to the view of those
who are not quite blinded by Satan's wiles and your disguises; behold! how your
wickednesses have provoked the eyes of Gods glory; Woe, woe, woe be unto you, if
ye repent not: its a certain truth, the Lord will visit his Syon, be a swift
witness against you, and come near to you to judgment, his purging and
purifying Sion, will be your destruction; the Lord of hosts who cannot lie, who
is faithful and has power to bring it to pass, has said it; O therefore (if
possible) turn away the anger and wrath of the Lord of hosts by a timely
repentance chapter 3.7. Return unto me, and I will return unto you says the Lord
of hosts. O that this Pharisaical Answer might not be yours; Wherein shall we
return? But, Isa. 1.16, 17, 18.19, 20. Wash ye make you clean, put away the
evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do
well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for
the Widow; if ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat of the good of the
land; but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword. for
the month of the Lord has spoken it. Embrace the invitation, hearken to the
Counsel of these Prophets, for why will ye die, O ye sons of men? There Is no
way of salvation from that Pit of destruction, your own ways and doings have
dug for you, but that the Prophets have chalked out before you; miss that,
and you are irrecoverably lost, without remedy: you complain of the harsh words
and rough speeches, of a company of men that tell you of your evils; and would
have the world to look upon them, as the only pest of the land, the desturbers
of the Public weal, the only hinderers of good days; thus you cloth them
in the Bear-skin that the Dogs may tear them: But, do you not know? That Isai.
1.9. Except the Lord of hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we should
have been (ere now) as Sodom, and we should have been like Gomorrah: Know that
notwithstanding their fretting, vexing, and tormenting you so much, they are
your best friends, for it is they that stand in the gap, and were it not for
them an inundation of wrath and vengeance would (quickly) overrun you: when
the Lord draws them into their hyding Chambers, those mansions of his peculiar
sparing love; then will your Pro. 1.27
destruction come upon you as a whirlwind: and then at that time, when your
fear comes as desolation, v. 28.
though you call upon the Lord, he will not answer; and though you seek him
early you shall not find him: Why, what is the reason? says the Lord, it is
because verse 25. ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my
reproof: Even the counsel and reproof of God, wisdoms words, in the mouth of
these his servants that fear his name, v. 20.21. who utter their voice in the
streets, and in the chief place of concourse.

2. I have somewhat to say to those Members of professing Syon, who though they
are not ringleaders in this wickedness; yet defile their garments with the
pollutions of the Apostasy: Behold, in what a dreadful manner the Lord will
deal with you, he will make up his Jewels from among you, and consume the rest
as dross and tin: Cast your eyes back upon the refiners fire and fullers
Soape, and that day of the Lord which will come upon you, and reflect upon your
selves and consider, whether you are prepared to meet the Lord of hosts in such
a day as that is; surely, if your examination be taken by a right rule, and you
pass a righteous sentence upon your selves, you will see you are not: you are
not able to abide and sland in that day, when the Lords jealousy will burn
like fire; wherein, he will give to apostatizing professing Sion, blood in fury
and jealousy, being clad with zeal as with a cloak: What anxious troubles and
pangs will be your portion in that day? I entreat you to take notice of these
things.

1. That the defilements of this Apostasy that cleaves to you, makes you so
much unlike to your father, that no less than a Refiners fire and fullers soap
must pass over you, to bring you into your old glory again: though you may be
saved because of the grace and love of your father which is unchangeable; yet
it will be as by fire; and the dreadfulnesse of that dispensation is such, as
deliverance from it, is worth a world of Gems: Look back upon the dread and
terror of the day of the Lord of hosts, and if you believe the word of the
Lord, you will be of my opinion in this matter.

2. That all that pelf, dross and dung, this worlds good, which now blindes
your eyes, and stops your mouths, that you cannot stand up for the dishonored
name and interest of your Lord and Savior at this day, will stand you in no
stead in the day of the Lord that will come upon Syon: you will then be forced
to throw away all those foolish Idols of gold and silver, with which you now
commit folly.

3. That your sacrifices and offerings, your worship and religious performances
at this day, are hateful to the Lord, as very dung unto him, Mal. 2.3.
The dung of your solemn feasts they are a trouble to him and he is weary to
bare them, because of that hypocritical Apostatising guilt that cleaves to
them: Think on that word of the Lord: Is. 66.3.
He that kills an Ox, is as if he slew a man; he that sacrifices a Lamb,
as if he cut of a Dogs neck; he that offers an oblation, as if he offered
swines blood; he that burns incense, as if he blessed an Idol: Here are
glorious outward performances, but behold, how abominable and loathsome your
offerings are to the great Jehovah! What Is the matter? Why, its the offering of
an hypocritical spirit; The sense of the Prophet in this 5. verse prove this.
That oppress and persecute those that tremble at the word of the Lord, yet
can tell how to cloak their doings over with aims at the glory of God; crying
out; Let the Lord be glorified; but the Lord shall appear to their joy, and you
shall be ashamed:

Again, Amos 5.22, 23
I hate, I despise your feast days; and I will not smell in your solemn
assemblies: though ye offer me burnt-offerings, and your meat offering, I will
not accept them, neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts.
Take thou away from me, the noise of thy songs; for I will not hear the melody
of thy Viols. Who are these, whose worship and service is thus rejected by the
Lord? verse 18. they are such, as (in a high profession) desire the day of the
Lord: Why, what is the matter? the guilt of an hypocritical Apostasy cleaves to
them; notwithstanding all their glorious outward performances, and their large
professions; yet, they want those more weighty things, [ as is employed in the
24 v.] Judgment and righteousness; chap: 4.1. they oppress the poor, and
crush the needy. Your silent by standing, makes you abettors and guilty: Hear
what our Lord himself says, Mat. 12 30.
He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathers not with me,
seattereth abroad: your Lord admits of no moderate indifferent medium of spirit
in this matter: your sacrifices are not offered up in righteousness, therefore
are they not pleasant unto the Lord, And because of this he will cast you into
a Furnace, that you may learn to offer up an offering in righteousness, that
your offerings may be pleasant unto him, as in the days of old, as in aneient
years. So that

4. The best and purest standing any of you can brag of under this Apostasy,
will not abide the trial, but the day that comes will throw you off your
ground, the Earth quake shall rend it up that it shall not be found: Who shall
be able to stand in that day? None, no, not one; and if it be so, what will
become of those oppressing stations, many (who I hope have grate in their
hearts) run their feet into, out of too much love to gold and silver, the Idols
of the age?

5. As a natural consequent of the rest, behold your exceeding folly, that for
love of your ceiled houses, the convenient accommodations of this life, you
forsake the interest of the name and honor of your Lord, and connive at, and
cleave to, the evils and apostacies of this your day and time: Have you not
left and forsaken your discipleship? Our Lord says, that except a man take up
his cross and follow him, he cannot be his disciple; every disciple of Christ,
carries his cross at his back; now where is your cross? have you not lost it
in your too eagen pursuit after the profits and pleasures of this present evil
world? and what will this unchilde-like carriage of yours cost you? the
refiners fire and fullers soap will be your portion; God will call thy terrors
about thee as in a solemn day, that in the day of the Lords angen none may
escape; terrors; by reason the sword shall come upon thee, Lam. 2.22. compared
with Ezekiel. 21.12.

Quest. If it should be asked, wherein our times are thus guilty of backsliding
and Apostasy, as in charged upon them?

Answ. Look upon our days through the glass of these Prophecies of Malachy
and Isaiah, with the interpretation given (which I am persuaded will be found
according to truth) and you will behold them of the same countenance and color
those times were of, Isaiah pointed at, and in which the Prophet Malachy, gave
forth his Prophecy, differing in nothing but in many aggravating circumstances.

Obj. But perhaps some may object; you hint to us that the state of the Jewish
Church, was a type and representation of professing Zion in England; and truly
you seem to me, to put a restriction upon the text which it will not boor: For
put the case the parallel be true, that, that time of Apostasy in the Jewish
Church Malachy Prophesied in, was a type and representation of the state of
this Professing Gospel Church imediately before our Lords coming; why may it
not as well have relation to any other part, or to the whole
professing-Gospel-Church as to that part of the professing Gospel Church in
England; and as that was the state of the Jewish Church imediately before our
Lords first coming in the flesh, so, may it not rather be a tipe, of the state
of the Professing-Gospell-Church, imediately before our Lords coming again in
person?

Answ. I conceive a due weighing what has been already said, would
sufficiently answer all objections, but for their sakes who have not the
patience to take that pains, I shall offer some further satisfaction: This
Objection consists of several parts, and requires a distinct Answer to each.

1. I conceive, that this cannot have relation to the time imediately before
our Lords coming again, but must relate to the time wherein it has been
already fixed.

1. Because I find the Prophet speaks not of the personal coming of Christ
the second time, but of a dispensation of the Lord, wherein he will be as
Fullers soap, and as a refiner and purifier of silver, purifying and purging
the true seed from all their dross, and tin, that they may be able to offer up
an Offering to the Lord in righteousness, sit to serve him in that great and
glorious work he has to do in the world.

2. Because the work of our Lord at this time the Prophet speaks of, is, to
bring his people into, to cloth them with, that glory they have lost, the
glory of the day of their espousal, that they may be, as in the days of old,
as in ancient years; but, when our Lord shall come in person, he will bring a
greater glory then that with him, even Mat. 16.27. Luke 9.26.
his own glory, and his Fathers glory, and the glory of his holy Angels.

3. Because I find the Prophet Isaiah, who (as has been sufficiently proved)
speaks of the same time and work, calling this, a coming in spirit; the spirit
of judgment and the spirit of burning: By which the Lord will wash and purge
Syon.

4. Because the great design of our Lord at this his coming (as has been
already proved) is, to sit and prepare his Syon, for the doing that great
work of his in and upon the world, he has decreed she shall carry on before
he comes himself in person, (even the breaking Dan. great Image to pieces, and
powering out Vials of his wrath upon the rebellious world) by giving his Spirit
to them, and causing it to rest upon them. Read what the Prophet Isaiah says
in his 28. chapter, the 5. and 6. verses; In that day shall the Lord of hosts
be for a Crown of glory, and for a Diadem of beauty unto the residue of his
people: And for a spirit of judgment to him that sits in judgment, and for
strength to them that turn the battle to the gate: In that day, wherein the
Lord will in judgment tread under foot the Crown of Pride, the Drunkards of
Ephraim, and all their glorious beauty shall be as a fading flower: wherein,
God will judge the apostatising wickedness, wherewith the people are become
drunken, with the promoters of it in the midest of a professing people, In that
day will the Lord of hoasts be for a Crown of glory and for a Diadem of beauty
unto the residue of his people; those that keep their garment pure and clean
from this apostacy in this their day: But the sword of the Lord of hosts is
not to abide upon the back of his people, but now judgment beginning at the
house of God has run its course there, and the Lord of hosts has magnified
himself, gotten glory and honor exalted himself alone there, by the
righteousness of his Judgments; He will be for a spirit of judgment to him
that sits in judgment, and for strength to them that turn the battle to the
gate: The sword of the Lord of hosts must be removed, and the battle must be
turned to the gate, to what gate? Genesis 22.17.
the gate of his enemies, which the father has promised, that blessed seed of
Abraham (our Lord Jesus) shall possess: And my thinks the reason is strong for
this interpretation, for, after the Lord has judged this wicked (though
professing) generation, bringing a destroying woe upon the Crown of Pride, the
Drunkards among them; and made himself a Crown of glory, and a Diadem of
beauty to the residue of his people, (whether those that kept themselves clean
from the pollutions of the day, or those that he had left as his Jewels, a
people to show forth his praise) he will then be for a spirit of Judgment to
them that sit in Judgment, and for strength to them that turn the battle to the
gate. The battle of the Lord must now be turned hence to another place, to the
gate, which cannot be the gate of this professing people, for it has been
there already; the mighty and strong one of the Lord, has already been as
verse 2.
a tempest of hail, and a destroying storm, as a stood of mighty waters in
their gate, before the residue of his people set themselves to this work: And
the persons to whom these promises are made, are those that the battle of the
Lord in the gate of this wicked-professing-people has left the residue of the
people; so that it cannot be meant of their gate: And what gate can this then
be? But that gate of his enemies, which the Father has promised shall be the
possession of his Son, the seed of Abraham: Judgment begins at the house of
God and ends in that gate; and all this must be done by the Spirit of the Lord,
he will be for a spirit of Judgment, and the same spirit shall be strength to
them that turn the battle to the gate: The Prophet speaks not a word of any
other coming of the Lord than in spirit, so that all the work there spoken of,
must be done by the spirit of the Lord in and by his people, before the coming
of the Son of God in Person the second time.

And the same Prophet Isaiah, in his fifty nineth Chapter the nineteenth verse,
speaks further of this truth, When the enemy shall come in like a stood, the
spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him; clearly holding forth
thus much to us, that the work of God in the last day's, to repay fury to his
adversaries and recompense to his enemies, that combine together against him,
shall be carried on by the spirit of the Lord (as the great agent) in and
amongst his people; he speaks of his personal coming in the next verse, as
succeeding this: And the Holy ghost in the fourteenth of the Revelation,
further confirms us in this truth, there we find the Lord bringing his purged
and refined number upon Mount Zion, martialling them for his work; But how
comes he? As a Lamb; A Lamb stood on Mount Zion with one hundred forty four
thousand: The Lord comes to avenge the blood of his own person, and all the
blood of his Luke 18.7.
Mistical body that has been shed, upon the world as a Lamb: But when he comes
in person he appears after another manner, as a King, Mat. 24.30.
in power and great glory.

5. When the Lord comes himself in person, he will, do his work himself alone,
by his great power and glory he brings with him, he will stain all his Raiment
with the blood of his enemies, Isa. 63.3.
treading the winepress alone, and of the people there will be none with him:
But at this coming of the Lord, he makes use of Syon, as his battle-ax and
instrument of war, of their feet, to tread down his enemies as ashes under
foot.

2. This Tipe cannot represent THE WHOLE OF THE PROFESSING GOSPELL-CHURCH, I
conceive, because the whole house of Israel, the twelve Tribes, being the tipe
of that, this one Tribe MALLACHY prophesied to, was but a tipe of some small
part of the professing-gospel-church which runs parrallel to it: For the
illustrating of this particular, think upon what has been already said in the
beginning of this discourse.

3. THAT IT HAS SPECIAL AND PECULIAR RELATION TO THE PROFESSING-GOSPEL-CHURCH
IN ENGLAND WITH ITS TERRITORIES AND DOMINIONS: will plainly appear if we
consider, First, That the Lord has done these things for ENGLAND (and for none
other) that answer, and are equivolent to, what he did for that one Tribe of
old: He has delivered them from under the Antichristian tyranical power of
Babylon, given them Liberty, Power, Authority, and Opportunity, to BUILD THE
TEMPLE; to return to their first Love, to their God and Father and their
Brethren, to the purity and glory of the day of their espousals, as it was IN
THE DAYS OF OLD, AS IN ANCIENT YEARS, in their Offerings to the Lord, in the
Worship and Ordinances of the Lord Jesus: And the CITY JERUSALEM; to do and
carry on the Lords work, to the praise and glory of his holy name, in this
their day and time: And Secondly, ENGLAND has followed her Tipe, step by step,
in all her Deviations and Apostacies: Building CEILED HOUSES; getting large
Possessions, the curious Mansions and Honors of this world for themselves, and
letting the HOUSE OF GODLY WAST; neglecting the present work of God,
Apostatising from that blessed work of his they once engaged in, and falling
to work of their own, insuring to themselves CEILED HOUSES, their large and
honorable acquisitions of the Mammon of this world: Instead of exalting the
Lord alone, rendering him those honors due unto him for so many matchless
expressions of an infinite love, they exalt themselves and seek their own
honor, to get a great name of renown in the world: Yea, she is gone back even
to Babylon again, to this, the new inventions of the times bear witness; and
were it not that the faithful God has engaged his Word, his Promise, him self,
all his glorious Attributes, Mich. 4 10.
that at this time, Syon being in this condition, he will now deliver his true
seed from the hand of their enemies, they would be surrounded again and brought
under the Iron yoke by a Babilonish power: And Thirdly, she comes not behind
her Tipe, neither in devout and religious hypocrisies: All her doings, though
never so unworthy, must be cloaked over with the service of God, carrying on
the work of the Lord, and the glory of God, and the honor of God, and the
good of the Lords people; and a multitude of Sacrifices must be offered, and
sometimes they will walk mournfully before the Lord: But because they smite
with the fist of wickedness, hidden under these coverings, these their
Sacrifices are iniquity in the sight of the Lord, he cannot away with them, his
soul hates them, they are a trouble to him, he is really a weary to bear
them, and he will be a swift witness against them. These things are all
written in very fair characters in ENGLANDS forehead at this day, and look
round the world, and see if you can read them in any other forehead, I cannot
think they will be found any where but here: And if so, and at such a time of
the day as this, about the ending time of Babilons forty two months (which
here I shall take for granted, and refer you for the proof of it, to those
elaborate discourses already extant upon that subject) it is to me an
infallible argument, that these prophesies, with the interpretation given of
them, fall directly upon these miserable Islands: And, to shut up this part of
the Answer, that VERY MUCH, the Lord speaks in his Word concerning THE ISLANDS,
as an introduction to the coming forth of his great work in the world, is no
small confirmation of the truth of the assertion.

Obj: It may be further Objected, that it does not appear that England is
delivered from under Babilons power, as you affirm; for is not England at
present in a far worse state and condition (as is the censure of the most
prudent, wise, considerate Judgments) than it was in (at least) under three or
four of the last of her antichristian Kings, whether we look upon her, in her
civil, or Religious state?

Ans: I Answer, It is true, that the course of England at present steers, will
undoubtedly lead her into the midst of Babylon, both Civil and Religious, it
will hurry her into a civil bondage, and Religious slavery, irrecoverable; this
will be the inevitable effect of her ways, if an Almighty providence prevent
not: but yet, this makes nothing against the position, that once she had
Babilons yoke broken from off her neck, and was delivered from under the
Tyrannical power thereof, and did enjoy, that (never to be too much valued)
liberty, and those blessed opporrunities to become everlastingly happy, by
following her Lord whithersoever he would lead her, that she will never enjoy
again, until the Lord has made bare the arm of a creating power to redeem her
from the hand of her enemies; even those her unnatural Children, who have sucked
the milk of her breasts, whom she has tenderly nourisht and brought up, that
now inhumanly would pull her very Vitals out of the midst of her body, and leave
her dead carkase a continual Feast for the Birds of Prey to feed upon. And
although our condition be thus sad and calamitous at present, we are running a
pace back again into Egypt and Babylon, yet, I conceive we are not yet entered
the Lists of Babilons borders; though we are gone back even to Babylon, (become
very Babilonish) yet, into Babylon, I trust the Lord will not suffer us to
enter, but according to his promise will visit and deliver his people for his
own names sake.

Qu: But if any honest heart should ask, how may I get clear of the danger I am
in, of possessing the sorrows of this day of the Lord?

Ans: I Answer, Learn that great and good lesson of self denial, taking up your
Cross, and following your Lord; get to be of the number of those that fear the
Lord, that speak often one to another; bearing their testimony for the name of
God, and the inter st of their Lord, against the evils and wickednesses of the
Times: then shall you possess the gracious promises they are under, of the
sparing love of your Father, which belongs to none of those, (though never so
good and righteous in the esteem of the professing world) who are guilty of,
and defiled with the evils of the Times: says the Lord to Isaiah, Say unto the
righteous, that it shall be well with him; for they shall eat the fruit of their
doings. But, woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him; for the reward of
his hands shall be given him: and the Lord will spare those that think upon his
name, and speak often one to another about the concernments of his glory and
interest, as a man spares his own Son that serves him; while their brethren
are burning in the Refiners fire, and smarting under the Fullers soap.

In the last place, somewhat I would say to those that fear the Lord, those
blessed servants of the Lord, who are exercising themselves in that Work so
welpleasing to God, about the concernments of the name and interest of the Lord
at this day: and I would reduce that I have to say, into Instruction, and
Exhortation.

First, for Instruction: And

1 Be instructed in the certainty of deliverance at hand; that day of the Lords
judging your enemies, and bringing forth your deliverance is at hand, even at
the door. Although the Wheel seems to run so fast back again, and men are
unraveling that bottom the Lord has been winding up for some years last past,
and the powers of Heaven be shaken, and men's hearts fail them for fear, looking
after those things that are coming on the earth; though the face of things at
present be thus sad and calamitous, yet, lift up your heads, for your
redemption draws nigh, know that the inexpressible wickedness and sadness of
the times at this season, is an unerring sign, and token of the certainty and
neerness of deliverance: my thinks, what has been already said in the
preceding interpretation of the Scriptures handled, proves this sufficiently;
but, to strengthen your faith, and increase your joy, if the Lord please; I will
offer some further proof; That an hypocritical Apostasy after reformation, is
an unquestionable evidence, that the Lord is at hand, and will delay no longer,
but suddenly deliver the true Seed, to the glory and praise of his holy name,
will be out of doubt, if we consider.

That this was the state and condition of the old World, when Judgment took
hold of it: and the condition of the Jews our Lord found them in when he first
came in the flesh: also, that it is the state and condition of the present
professing Gospel Church, when the day of the Lord of hosts shall come upon her,
wherein he will be to her as a Refiners fire, and as Fullers soap.

That it was the state and condition of the old world, is clear, for after that
great defection and fall of man from his first purity, had proceeded to blood,
manifested it self in that evil effect, the slaughter of righteous Abel by his
wicked Brother Cain; and Seth the succeeder of Abel, had preached many years to
the fallen world; by that time Enoch was born Gen: 4^ ^^
Men began to call upon the name of the Lord, (or as it it in the Margent of
some Bibles) to call themselves by the name of the L. here was a reformation
wrought by the preaching of the righteous; the breach that Cain (the seed of
the Serpent) had made, was now made up again; men would be no longer murderers,
as the children of the Serpent, but they would be the Lords people, called by
the name of the Lord; here is a notable reformation indeed, one would have
thought that there had now been a sure reconciliation made between God and man,
that there was an inseparable union of friendship entered into; but, behold the
inconstancy of the nature of man! afterward Ch: 6.1, 2.
it came to pass when men began to multiply on the face of the earth, and
daughters were born to them, that the Sons of God saw the daughters of men,
that they were fair, and they took them Wives of all which they chose: they
degenerated from their former reformation, they kept not themselves, the
separated people of the Lord, but mingled themselves with the seed of men, the
Serpents brood; and through this defection, the wickedness of man was great in
the earth, and (now) every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only
evil continually; V, 5
this moved the Lord greatly, V. 6, 7.
and it repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him
at his heart; and the Lord said, I will destroy man whom I have created from
the face of the earth. The nature and quality of this Apostasy, the Evangelists
Matthew, Mat. 24.38.3^.
and Luke tell us, They did eat, they drank, they married Wives, they were given
in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the Ark, and the flood came
and destroyed them all: it was not a defection to Caines gross profaneness,
Luke 17.26, 27.
but their hearts ran loose from God, to the good things of this world, they
went backward, and apostatised from God to the world, made Idols to themselves
of the lawful things of this World; no doubt, they solved their consciences
with the lawfulness of the things in themselves, their hearts ran out so
unworthily after, and could find much to say for their practice, against any
that should charge them with evil; The curious refinedness of the apostasy,
appears by this, that but eight persons could attain to escape the temptation;
the hypocrisy of it was such, that it swept away all that called themselves by
the name of the Lord, except upright Noah and his Family, that by close walking
with God, obtained deliverance. And which is very observable, in the
reformation, these men exalted the name of the Lord, called themselves by the
name of the Lord, they buried their own name, and would become as nothing that
the Lord might have all the honor, they would have no name but the name of the
Lord, serve him, and none other, owned none to be their Lord but him, exalted
the Lord alone, they called themselves by the name of the Lord; but in the
apostasy, they forget that name of the Lord, they forsake the interest of the
honor and name of God, and set up their own name, and their own honor, Gen; 6^
4^.
became mighty men, men of renown, exalted their own name, their own renown and
honor, to the dishonor of God, and that glorious name of his, they formerly
called themselves by: give me leave to repeat a little, observe the two grand
remarkables in this notorious apostasy, They assotiate and mingle themselves
with that sort of men, the seed of the Serpent, with that interest, they
formerly separated from out of a profession of love to God and his name, their
calling themselves by the name of the Lord import so much. And secondly, they
set up their own name, renown, and honor, in the place and room of Gods;
whereas before they would call themselves by no name but by Gods name, now
they come under the mighty and renowned names of men; how near these last days
of this evil world, come to these men in manners, lest those who have a seeing
eye judge. This grieves the Lord at his heart; and heresolves to exalt that
blessed name of his (they formerly exalted, and now despise and trample
underfoot to serve their lusts) in their destruction; none shall escape but
Noah, and his Family, that Just and upright man, who vvalked with God, kept
close to the good old principle, the Sons of God walked in, exalting the name
of God: When the old World came into this frame and temper, the Lord would bear
no longer, but comes to vindicate his name and honor, in jealousy and wrath
Judging of her.

And, that it was the state of the Jewish Church, in which our Lord found them
at his first coming, in the flesh, has been cleared up already: and therein
she was a Type and representation, of the professing Gospel Church in the last
days.

Lastly, That it is the state and condition of the professing Gospel. Church,
when Judgment shall begin at the house of God, he will visit her with a SPIRIT
of Judgment, and a spirit of burning, be as a Refiners fire, and as Fullers
soap to her* Matthew and Luke tell us plainly, As it was in the days of Noah,
so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man: and Luke illustrates it by
the condition of Sodom, Luke 17.26, 28, 30.
They did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded
even thus shall it be in the days when the Son of man is revealed: so that upon
the credit of the word of two Evangelists we may believe it for a truth, that,
the professing worlds being in this state and condition, is a clear sign of the
Lords being at hand to deliver his remnant, and destroy his enemies: But will
you have the testimony of a third Apostle, John; the Spirit of the Lord by him,
in his Epistle to the seven Churches in Asia, bears witness to this truth, that
when the professing Gospel Church falls into a refined hypocritical apostasy
after reformation, then the Lord stands at the door and knocks; he stays no
longer but comes to Judgment: for the proof of this let us a little consider
these seven Churches of Asia.

They were Tipes and representations of the various state and condition of the
Church of Christ, from the falling away (the Apostle writes of in his second
Epistle to the Thessalonians, by which the man of sin got up to his seat and
power) until the coming of the Lord to his Syon. for, some things written
(especially) to the Churches in Philadelphia, and Laodicea, cannot be
restrained to literal Philadelphia, and literal Laodicea, but must of necessity
be granted to refer to some other time and persons, tiped out by them: further,
behold the order the Holy Ghost observes in his writing, be begins with an
apostasy, with Ephesus who had fallen from her first works; and closes with an
apostasy with Laodicea, that had fallen into a notable hypocritical strain
boasting of her own gifts and excellencies, saying, I am rich, and increased
with goods, and have need of nothing. If we observe the Church of Sardis, we
shall there see what a low ebb the Church of Christ was once brought unto, Thou
have a name that thou live, and art dead, be watchful and strengthen the
things which remain, that are ready to dye; there were but a few names which
had not defiled their garments; but at the next remove, the Spirit of the Lord
works such a glorious reformation in the Church, that she seems as if she were
perfect before the Lord, he finds no fault at all with her, but commends her
after a high rate, this is represented to us by Philadelphia; now the coming of
our Lord draws near, it is not far off, Behold I come quickly, hold that fast
which thou have; after this, Satan that cunning and implacable enemy to the
Saints happiness, brings his Laodicean temper upon the stage; the professing
Gospel Church falls from so glorious a reformation wrought by the
Philadelphians, into a luke warm hypocritical apostasy; by this time our Lord
is at the door, and ready to enter in: and behold the hypocrisy of this
apostasy, although she be fallen from the glory of noble Philadelphia, into the
loathsome condition of luke warm Laodicea, wretched, and miserable, and poor,
and blind, and naked; yet she says I am rich, and increased with goods, and
have need of nothing; now our Lord stands at the door and knocks, gives notice,
that he is coming, and will not tarry. Thus my Brethren, you have a manifold
testimony to the truth of the assertion, that an hypocritical apostasy after
reformation in the professing Gospel Church, is an unquestionable evidence,
That deliverance to the true seed, and destruction to the enemy is at hand; the
Lord will stay no longer, but will come and will not tarry, for his own Names
sake; if God would not spare the old world, nor his chosen people Israel, (To
whom pertains the Adoption, and the glory, and the promises) when they came
into this temper and frame; what ground has any man to think, that this
present evil world (being come into the same State) shall find more favor at
the hand of the jealous God, than those of old did? The blood of all the
Prophets which was shed from the foundation of the world, Luke 11.50
shall be required of this Generation says our Lord; what Generation is that?
an hypocritical Pharisaical Generation. So that it remains for a certain truth,
that judgment is at the door of this Generation, and deliverance is coming
from Heaven to the faithful that keep their garments pure: and they shall walk
with their Lord in white, for they are worthy.

2 Be instructed, in the design of the Lord at this day, upon you and the rest
of your Brethren, with whom you are contending for the name and honor of your
Lord, it is, to bring you into, cloth you with, the glory of the day of your
Espousals, that it may be with you, as it was in ancient years, in the
beginning: what glory is that? the glory of the Apostles and Saints, when they
received the promise of the Father, when the Spirit of the Lord came with power
upon them, working in them according to the might of his power: the glory of
this day is inexpressible, neither is it my work at this time to dilate upon
it, but I choose rather to leave it to your own meditations to represent it to
your view by chewing the cudd in the consideration of it, as it is set forth in
the holy Writings of the Apostles: when you have attained to this glory, then
will you be defended by the creating power of God, and power from on high will be
given you, to tarry on that great work of God in the world, to the glory and
praise of your Lord, your hearts are now so much fixed upon, in which you so
earnestly desire to be laboring.

Other very useful instructions might be added; but I conceive it will be more
acceptable, and work more kindly if your selves press that wholesome liquor out
of this cluster, therefore I forbear.

2 In the second place, give me leave to Exhort you to these things.

1 Be not weary of, nor undervalue your present work: behold how acceptable!
how delightful it is to your Lord! the Lord is always among you, hearing all
your discourses with greatest delight; the glory of it so ravishes his hear, (
Cant. 4, 8, 9, 11.
Thou have ravished my heart my Sister, my Spouse, thou have ravished mine
heart, with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck, the Lord is thus
ravished with his Spouse, When she looks from the top of Amana, from the top of
Shenir, and Hermon, from the lions dens, from the mountains of the leopard; and
her lips drop as the honey comb: yea, so ravished is he with the glory of your
present Work) as he will keep the Idea of it in his Book of remembrance, he will
have it alvvaies before him: why should you undervalue it, and grow weary of
it, as of a low and mean thing? seeing the Lord prizes it at so high a rate,
that it rejoices the very heart of God, as those peculiar and rich promises
annexed to it manifest: Be not weary of it; but keep close to your Work, and
you shall not only possess rich and glorious Reward, but at the appointed time
shall be accomodated with safficient furniture to carry on that glorious work
of your Lord, wherein you shall grow up as Calves of the stal: Be not weary of
your work think not the time long, nor your Work, stale: the Lord is now in the
midst of you, and it is exceeding dangerous for you to go forth to another
Work, Til the breaker up go up before you, til your King the Lord pass on the
head of you; so long as the cloud abides on the Tabernacle, the Children of
Israel are not to journey; but, when the cloud is taken up, Deuteronomy. 1.33
and goes in the way before them, then is it safe for Israel to go forward:
let not an irregular ambition after a higher and more noble Work, draw you into
a sinful seeming (...) of your Lords care of his Work and cause, that vvil
greive the holy Spirit who dwells in your Temples: Cant. 2* 7
I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and by the Hindes of
the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my Love, til he please: be faithful
in your present Work, and vvait the pleasure of your Lord, and in the very next
Verse, you vvil hear his voice; The voice of my Beloved; and no sooner do you
hear his voice; but, behold, he comes leaping upon the Mountains, skipping upon
the hills: no hills nor mountains of opposition shall hinder him, but you shall
behold him coming to give you your hearts desire, Chapter 3.6.
Who is this that comes out of the Wilderness, like pillars of smoke, perfumed
with myrrh and Frankincense, with all powders of the Merchant? and when he
forsakes that houling desert, he vvil not leave you behind him, Ch: 8.5
Who is this that comes up from the Wilderness leaning upon her beloved? O
then, blemish not your Lords Work by any impatiency of Spirit, but vvait your
Lords leisure, he vvil come, and vvil not tarry: Ch: 3.5.
I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and by the Hindes of
the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, till he please.

Chapter 8.14.
Make haste, my beloved, and be thou like to a Roe, or to a young Heart upon the
mountains of spices.

2 Let your love to your Lord Jesus, and his name appear: seek by all vvayes
and means possible, to convince the professing world, that it is nothing but
love to your beloved that moves you; nothing but love, strong as death: verily,
this vvil prove of much advantage every way: behold, what an advantage was
gained by such a conviction as this, upon the spirits of men, in the 5th; of
the Canticles the Spouse of Christ by a sluggish and ununvvorthy carriage,
having lost the sight of her Beloved, the consideration of the excellency and
glory of his love blovvs up the embers in her sleepy heart into a fire of love,
her soul fails within her, she is ready to dye for want of her Beloved, she
runs hither and thither to seek him, and she calls after him, but all in vain:
in this hot pursuit after her Beloved, she encounters with the Watchmen, but
meets with very unkind entertainment, nothing but smitings and woundings; from
them she turns to the keepers of the walls, and they handle her very roughly,
They took away my vail from me: all this while she suffers loss, she neither
finds her Beloved, nor gains any advantage, her passion of love was such, as
obscured her beauty and excellency, that it appeared not so plainly what in
truth it was; but when her Love brake forth clearly from under those clouds, I
charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my Beloved, that ye tell
him, that I am sick of love; what a wonderful change is wrought! what an
advantage is gained! not only to her self, a good esteem of her person, O thou
fairest among Women, she is now longer counted worthy of stripes, but of the
highest praises: but also to her Beloved; it sets their hearts upon an earnest
enquiry after him, What is thy beloved more then another beloved, that thou
do so charge us? the intenseness and fervency of their mind in the enquiry,
is set forth by the doubling of the question, What is thy beloved more then
another beloved? O thou fairest among Women, what is thy beloved more than
another beloved, that thou do so charge us? O let your love to your beloved
appear; this will wipe off all that dirt and dishonor the wicked world casts
upon you, and the cause of your Lord you stand up for, and provoke the
daughters of Jerusalem to enquire after your beloved, with whom you are so
exceedingly in love.

3 Seek earnestly after a spirit of light and discerning from the Lord, to
enable you to hold forth your beloved to the world in all his glory, the glory
of his person, and the glory of his word of truth: when the Spouse had in
answer to their question (in the 5th of the Canticles,) made a full description
of the glorious excellencies of her beloved, my beloved is white and ruddy, the
chiefest of ten thousand, etc. concluding, This is my beloved, and this is my
friend, O daughters of Jerusalem: behold, what blessed fruit this brings forth:
Whether is thy beloved gone? O thou fairest omong Women, whether is thy Beloved
turned aside? that we may seek him with thee: her Beloved is now become their
beloved also, and they join issue with her in a through search after him: let
this be no small part of your work, to hold forth your beloved to the world in
all his glory and lovely excellencies, convincing them that this is your
beloved, and this is your friend; that it is your love to him that moves you
and acts you in all your ways, that it is the enjoyment of him that is the
mark you shoot at: then will the daughters of Jerusalem be in love with your
beloved also, and account of you as the fairest among Women, the most
excellent: would you have the daughters of Jerusalem be your friends and
assistants, in seeking after your beloved? then set before them his excellency
and glory, let them know who your beloved, and who your friend is: this
practice will prove exceeding serviceable to your Lord; do you but give the
daughters of Jerusalem to understand the glory of the object of your souls
love, which drew you to those harsh incounters with the Watchmen, and the
keepers of the walls, and they will presently become followers of you as you are
followers of your beloved: Whither is thy beloved gone? O thou fairest among
Women? whither is thy beloved turned aside? that we may seek him with thee.

4 Labor with all your might after union; seek out uniting principles, upon
which an honorable union upon the right foundation may be wrought: Union!
union! union! before the Syon of God can become a fit instrument to carry on
that work of the Lord in and upon the rebellious World, your hearts are so much
fixed upon, this glorious work of union must be perfected in her: when Syon is
become a holy hill, a body united and compact together, then is she a fit seat
for her Lord to sit upon as King; yet have I set my King upon my HOLY HILL of
Syon: before Syon will be enabled (by a sufficiency of light and power) to tread
down the wicked as ashes under her feet, and burn them up both root and branch,
there must be a union (as has been already hinted) between the Jewels of the
Lord, and that remnant of his, that fearing his name keep their garments clean
from the defilements of the day, to provoke you unto this blessed union, let me
persuade you seriously to consider these few motives thereunto.

1 This union, is that which our Lord Jesus prays so earnestly for the
accomplishment of; Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which
shall believe on me through their word; that they all may be one, John 17.20,
21.
as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they all may be one, etc.
surely it is of no small concernment to Jesus Christ, but of absolute necessity,
his chosen should be thus united, his heart is so entirely fixed upon it, he
intercedes so particularly to his Father for it.

2 This union is that, the accomplishment of which, is the end, wherefore Jesus
Christ bestows the same glory his Father gave him, upon his people; And the
glory which thou gave me, Verse* 22.
I have given them, that they may be one even as we are one: it seems our Lord
values this union at a very high rate, he gives so great a price as his glory
to purchase it.

3 This union is exceeding excellent and glorious, and therefore deserves
seeking after with the greatest earnestness and diligence: therefore must it
needs be glorious because it is the fruit of glory, And the glory which thou
gave me, Verse 23.
I have given them, that they may be one even as we are one; the giving of
glory to them, brings forth this union among them as it is natural fruit.

4 This union, is the way to perfection, that they may be one, even as we are
one, I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, etc.
Would you become perfect with the perfection of your Heavenly Father? endeavor
then after this union.

5 By this union, you will convince the world, that Jesus Christ your Lord is
the Messiah of the Father; Verse 2^.
That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee; that the
world may believe that thou have sent me: the exceeding glory of this union,
will convince both Jew and Gentile, in a day wherein there are false Christ's,
and false Prophets, showing great signs and wonders if it were possible to
deceive the very Elect, that you Lord you make profession of, is the true
Messiah, the true Christ, sent from the Father.

6 By this union, you will not only convince the world that your Lord is he that
was sent from the Father (and so consequently, that the truth you plead for, is
the truth, the promise of the Father to your Lord) but, that you are the
beloved of the Father, loved w th the same love he loves your Lord with: Verse
23.
That they may be one even as we are one, that they may be made perfect in one,
that the world may know that thou have sent me, and have l ved them, as thou
have loved me: the perfection of this union will put such an excellent glory
upon you, above all other glories, as that the World shall be convinced in their
consciences, that if the Lord has fixed his love upon any company of men in
the World, you are the people; and be forced to report, that God is in you of a
truth.

7 This union, will make you

1 Exceeding glorious in the eyes of your Beloved, and of all that look upon
you; Cant. 6, 9,
My Dove, my undefiled is but one, says the Lord Jesus; here is the union
pleaded for: behold how he commends it, how amiable it is in his eye. She is
the only one of her Mother, she is the choice one of her that bare her; of all
the children she has brought sorth, this is the ONLY ONE, the best beloved; of
all the states and conditions the Spouse has been brought into, this is the
most excellent, the most glorious, the choice one: yea, you will be the subject
of the praises of all that shall behold you; The daughters saw her and blessed
her, the Queens and the Concubines, and they praised her; behold how glorious
you will appear in their eye! Verse 10,
Who is she that looks forth as the morning, fair as the Moon, clear as the
Sun, and terrible as an Army with banners? and who is she think you? why our
Lord tells you, it is my Dove, my undefiled, who is but one: and this union, will
make you.

2 In the second place, fitly qualified for the work of your Lord, like to the
Armies of the Lord indeed; who is she, that looks terrible as an Army with
banners? the answer is, the undefiled Spouse of Christ who is but one: and when
the fruits of this glorious union shall ere you are aware, make your souls like
to the Chariots of Aminadab, carry you on exceeding swiftly and strongly in the
work of your Lord, if any shall then cry, Return, return, O Shulamite, return,
return, that we may look upon thee; the answer will be. Verse 13
What will ye see in the Shulamite? as it were the company of two Armies: if any
would have you stay a while, that they may behold more of the glory of your
united still state, the answer will then be, you are become terrible as an Army
with banners, yea, terrible, as the company of two Armies: O the terrors and
dread! that the glory of this union will strike into the hearts of your Lords
enemies.

8 By this union, you will become as an innocent Dove undefiled; my Dove, my
undefiled is but one; it imports thus much, that it is the oneness of the
Spouse that makes her so Dove-like, and undefiled, unless you endeavor after
this union, which the Apostle calls The unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace, you will not walk worthy of your vocation wherewith ye are called: Ephesians.
4.3, compared with the iv.
while Ephraim envies Judah, and Judah vexes Ephraim, defiling dirt and dust
will be thrown about, and stick to your garments: when the Lord has by his
Refining dispensation, united his Jewels and his Remnant into one, upon his own
foundation, then will they be pleasantness to the Lord, his Dove undefiled; then
will such a glory rest upon them, as the Lord will create a defense upon it, as
has been already suggested in this discourse: my Dove, my undefiled is but one.

9 This union, is the very Image of that glorious union between the Father and
the Son, our Lord makes the union between him and his Father, the pattern of
that union he intercedes for; that they may all be one, as thou, Father art in
me, and I in thee; again, that they may be one even as we are one, I in them,
and thou in me, that they be made perfect in one: this union is a lively
representation of the glorious union between the Father and the Son; and what
an exceeding glory must that needs be? my thinks, the glory of it should even
ravish your hearts, and make your souls like to the Chariots of Aminadab in an
eager pursuit of it, til you have attained.

So that by this time, I hope, you may be in love with union; who can but be in
love with it? the glory of it is so exceeding like the glory of your Lord, who
is the chiefest of ten thousand: but I would not be mistaken by any, It was in
the heart of that blessed servant of the Lord, dear Tillinghast had he had
alonger day to have wrought in to have presented you with some principses of
this glorious union; O that the Lord would anoint some other with the same
Spirit, that some healing balsom might be poured into the bleeding wounds of
distressed Syon.
this union I so earnestly press after, is not dissonant to, but may well stand
with that holy separation from the unclean thing, the Saints are exhorted (and
it is their duty) to separate from; but again, a truly Christian pursuit after
this union, will glorify a right and a holy separation; pursue this holy
principle of Union, and I persuade my self, you will leave very few or none that
have but a grain of sincerity, cleaving to the uncleanthing; if the glory of
this Union be so powerful as to convince the wicked World, how much more than
think you, will it draw that heart that has but the least grace in it? O the
inexpressible advantage, this union of parts brings to the whole body! one part
possesses wisdom and counsel; another, spirit and life; another part, agility
and swiftess in motion: now, while they are not in conjunction; tho the one may
have wisdom and counsel, yet, it may want the spirit and life of the other; and
though that other may have excellent spirit and life, yet it may want wisdom to
direct and guide the agile faculty in a regular motion: but, when there is a
union of parts, the whole body partakes off whatsoever wisdom, of whatsoever
excellency of Spirit and Life, and of whatsoever other noble gift, is in any
part thereof; which must needs be exceeding glorious to behold, and of much
advantage to the cause and work of your Lord. O my Brethren, If there be
therefore any consolation in Christ, Phil. 2.1, 2, 3.4, 5.
if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels of
mercies: fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like-minded, having the same love* being
of one accord, of one mind: let nothing be done through strife, or vain
glory, but in lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better than themselves;
look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of
others: let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus.

5 Take heed and beware of a selfish spirit, a self-exalting spirit; dread and
shun this monster as the greatest precipice of danger your Souls can possibly
fall into at such a time as this: This frame and temper of spirit, the Lord will
contend against, and bow down in that dreadful day of his, which is hastening
upon us; For, the day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud
and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low;
yea, the Lord will not endure the least degree of it, not so much as a losty
look; Isai. 2.11, 12
The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be
bowed down: it is necessary it should be so, and the reason, why the Lord will
have it so, is, that the Lord alone may be exalted in that day: it is the great
design of the Lord in this notable day of his that he is bringing upon Syon, to
exalt himself alone; and til this selfish frame of spirit be bowed down and
brought low, the Lord cannot accomplish his design, he cannot be alone exalted:
this is the reason why the dreadful day of the Lord will come upon the Cedars,
the materials of his Temple, because they are high and lifted up: but one
fragment of this temper of spirit, is one of the 7 things that are hateful, and
an abomination unto the Lord, a proud look, or, haughty eyes; Prove: 6.17.
(as the margent of some Bibles has it) O therefore, my brethren, if we would
be partakers of the rich Promises of the sparing love of our Father, and not
fall under the scourging hand of an angry God, in this day of the Lord that is
coming upon us, let us dread and flee a self-exalting spirit.

Lastly, Seeing it is the design of the Lord at this day, to bring his Syon
into her first state, into the purity of the day of her Espousals; let us in
the name of the Lord, with heart and hand join with one accord, to further this
glorious design of God: O that we would n deavour every one to mend one, and in
love help to mend each other: would you be serviceable in the work of the Lord?
I know you would; why, this is the ready way, the high way, to carry on the
great and glorious design of God upon the world: when Syon is so reformed by
the power of God, as that she can offer up Offerings in righteousness, that are
peasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, as in ancient Years, THEN shall
she tread down the Wicked as ashes under her feet: THEN will the Lord raise up
thy Sons O Syon, Zack. 9.13.14, 15.
against thy Sons O Greece, and make thee as the sword of a Mighty man: and the
Lord shall be seen over them, and his arrow shall go forth as the lightening,
and the Lord God shall blow the Trumpet, and shall go with whirlwinds of the
South: the Lord of hosts shall defend them, and they shall devour, and subdue
with sling stones, and they shall drink and make a noise as through Wine, and
they shall be filled like bowls, and as the corners of the Altar.

THE END.

