AN Easy and Compendious INTRODVCTION For Reading all sorts of HISTORIES:
CONTRIVED, In a more facile way then heretofore has been published, out of the
Papers of MATHIAS PRIDEAVX Mr of Arts and sometime Fellow of Exeter College in
OXFORD.

Cicero de Oratore. Nescire quid ante a quam natus sis acciderit, Id semper est
esse Puerum.

OXFORD, Printed for LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University, M.DC.XLVIII.

D. D. TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sr THOMAS REYNELL And the Virtuous Lady
KATHARINE His Wife: FOR THE USE OF Their Towardly young Sons Mr THOMAS AND Mr
HENRY REYNELL.

TO THE READER.
EXpect no more here (good Reader) then the Title promises, that is, an
Introduction, not to rest on as satisfied, but to lead thee on to larger
Volumnes. The number of seven is here used, not out of affectation, but
experience, as most easy for Memory, which is the prime scope of this
Compendium, to touch at that which may seem most remarkable, and so to dispose
it, that it may be best remembered. The whole consists of three Tracts, The
first of History Ecclesiastical, Deduced from the Creation of the World to
these our times. The Second that is Political, ascends no higher then Nimrod
(for those Anti-Diluvian Dynasties mentioned by some, must be held only
Imaginary) and is continued in the like line downward. Whence the History of
Successions begins: with an Instance given in the Successive Governments of our
own Country. Whereunto a short appendix is added, concerning the History of
Professions, as also Natural, Various, and Vain stories, poynting only at the
heads they may be drawn unto: and in General, what is to be thought of them,
and so an end.

Some are of the mind, that such an Induction may not only prove a Directory to
a beginner, but a Remembrancer to those that have forgotten much they have
read, and will take it well to be Prompted at the cheapest rate. Malmsbur. de
Gestis Reg. Angl. l. 5.
In the like case it was the resolution of a Writer of our own, Mihi debetur
collectionis gratia, tibi habeas electionis materiam, Of what I have collected
you may take your choice, pass by some or leave all. My conclusion is that of
the Poet, -- si quid novisti rectius istis
Candidus imperti, si non his utere mecum. Horat

If you have found a righter way
Impart it if you please,
If not take this then for a stay,
And use it at your ease.


The Heads here especially Treated of Are,
1. A Sum of ten Long-lived Antediluvian Patriarchs.

2. A Brief of the Historical part of the old Testament, as far as the
Apocrypha.

3. A continuation of it by the line of the Maccabees, and their successors, to
the Birth of our Savior.

4. The Life of our Savior and his Apostles, with a touch of the seventy
Disciples, and seven first Deacons.

5. An Epitome of the Popes Lives, from the first to this that now Possesses
the Chair.

6. Political History deduced from Nimrod, by the Four Monarchies, to this
present Emperor Ferdinand the third. And the History of Successions. With an
instance in the History of Britain.

7. Directions for Orderly Reading of the Histories of Professions, Natural
History, Various Collections, and Vain Romances, to which all sorts of
Imaginable Narrations may be reduced.

CAP. I. Of the Antediluvian Patriarchs, or longliv'd Fathers, before the
Flood.
1. HISTORY is a Commemoration of things past, with the Circumstances of Time
and Place, in distinct Distances, Intervals, or Dynastyes, by Lineall discents,
for the readier help of memory, and application.

2. This may either be 1. ECCLESIASTICAL. 2. POLITICAL. 3. Of SUCCESSIONS in
States, Countries, or Families. 4. Of PROFESSIONS, as the lives of Famous men,
in any Faculty. 5. NATURAL, as that of Pliny, etc. 6. VARIOUS, such as we have
from Valerius Maximus, Plutarch, Aelian. 7. VAIN, LEGENDARY, or FABULOUS,
passed by the name of Romances.


3. Ecclesiastical, insisteth especially upon Church Matters; and has
precedence before other, in regard of its Antiquity, Dignity, and directive
Certainty.

4. It falls within the limits of these Intervals, From the 1. Creation to
the end of the Flood. 1657. 2. Flood to the calling of Abraham. 367. 3. Calling
of Abraham to the departing of the Israelites out of Egypt. 430. 4. Egyptian
Exodus to the building of Solomon's Temple. 480. 5. First Temple to the second,
erected by Zorobabel. 497. 6. Second Temple to the Nativity of our Savior.
529. 7. Nativity of our Savior to this present time. 1647.


5. vid. Grafton Chron. page 72. Alsted. Encyclop l. 33. Chronol. c. 3.
The first Intervall or Distance, from the Creation to the end of the Flood,
conteynes the Passages of 1657 years, easily collected out of the fifth of
Genesis, in which we have the ten long-lived Fathers in this Order.

1. Anno Mundi 1.
ADAM, happy in his innocence, whiles he so continued in Paradise with his
beloved Evah. But that was not long, for it is commonly held that (...) he
lodged not one night there, Genesis 3.
so sudden was the Serpents seducing, his Wifes consenting, his yiedling,
Gods execution. 2. After his expulsion from Paradise he had small comfort of
his issue: Genesis 4.
Cain slew his Brother Abel, and was doomed thereupon to be a Vagrant. 3. A
lying book called Lepto genesis names Calmana and Delbora Adams two eldest
Daughters, Comestor. Schedel.
that became Wives to Cain and Abel their Brethren. But this seems as likely as
those Revelations of Adam, set forth by the Gnostics, and the Genealogies of
his Sonns and Daughters, (which are accounted 30. of either Sex by Comestor,)
venred by the Manichees, but condemned by Gelasius. D. 15. C. Sancta Romana.
4. Less hurtful is that Dibre-Adam, contrived in a Box by Simon Sturtevant.
Some conceit that Abel slew the very same Serpent the Devil had formerly
possessed, M. S. Hele on the 3. first chap. of Genesis
to seduce his Mother; but not without a wound in the Heel, before he could
bruise his Head. This is manifest, that good Abel failing without issue, there
was set in his place his Brother. Genesis 4.25.


2. SETH, whom the forenamed Gnostics make also a Writer, entitling him to
seven Books, to which they added seven more of their own. 2. Josephus relates
that his Sons erected two Pillars, the one of Brick, Antiquit. L. 1. C, 4.
the other of Stone, to preserve their Mathematical Speculations to Posterity;
upon a Prophecy from Adam, that the world should be first Drowned, then Burned.
3. C. 2.
Anonymus upon Matthew, mentions another Prophetical writing of his, concerning
the Star, that was the Cynosure to bring the Eastern Kings to Christ. But
such Relations want warrant. His Successor in the holy line was his Son.

3. ENOSH, in whose time men began to call upon the name of the Lord, or to
call themselves by the name of the Lord, or as others render the place,
Broughton. Tremelius.
The Name of the Lord began to be Propha^ed. 2. Hence some gather the beginning
of Idolatry, which other defer till after the flood. A separation is apparent
in this man's days, between the profane Caynites, and those Godly Setheans.
And likely it is, that then began the Assemblies, perchance on the Seventh day,
blessed and hallowed of God for public Worship. De Monach, C. 5. Genesis 5.10.
3. Bellarmine will needs fetch from hence the Original of Monkery, but this
Enosh was married, gat Sons and Daughters, and amongst them to succeed him.

4. CAINAN, of whom we find nothing Registered, but how long he lived, and that
he begat,

5. MAHALALEEL, as he did,

6. IARED, and he,

7. ENOCH, whose Prophesies we have mentioned in the Epistle of S. Jude. Verse.
14.
Origin and the Author of the Testament of the twelve Patriarchs, cite diverse
passages out of them. As, 1. of the number and names of Stars. 2. Of the
wooing of Mortal Beauties, by the wanton descending Angels. 3. Of the Giants,
from that brood. 4. Of the death of Christ by the Jews, and their ruin by it.
5. Of the Drowning and Burning of the World, and more to that purpose. 2. These
were not only in the hands of Origin and Tertullian, but of S. Hierom,
Augustine, Bid and others; notwithstanding S. Augustine brands them for
counterfeit, and none warrant them. 3. This Enoch, the seventh from Adam, died
not as other men, but after he had spent so many years upon earth, as there be
days in a year, he was transsated hence by God, A. M. 987. The most part of
them, For herein they cannot agree.
with whom he had walked though he lived in the state of Marriage. 4. The
Papists say, he is reserved alive in Paradise, (whence Adam was expelled) with
his companion Elias, who shall both come in person to oppose Antichrist, and
then be slain of him, then revive, and so at length be taken up into Heaven.
This is to quit the Pope, Bellarm. de Pontif. Romans L. 3. Aetat. 5.
from suspicion of being Antichrist, seeing Enoch and Elias, have not yet come
in person, to testify against him. Gobeline Parson relates, that such a man
was found by Alexander the Great in the East Indies, lying in a Golden bed, in
the Mountain of the Sun, who well might be thought to be this Henoch. but
let them feed on their fancies. The shortness of this man's time upon earth,
was recompensed by the age of his Son,

8. METHUSALAH, (...), the longest liver we read of. for Adam, and He, take up
all the space between the Creation and the Flood. 2. His age was 969 years;
of which he might spend 346 with Adam, to inform himself, and almost 100 with
Sem, to teach Posterity. But his longest life had a period before the Flood,
and a Successor his Son.

9. LAMECH, different from that Lamech of Caines race, who being a blind
Archer, slew his Grandsire Caine. and the Boy that led him, for directing him
to do it, if we believe Torniellus, who cites diverse Fathers to justify this
groundless Fancy. 2. Of this holy Lamech is registered, the notable
Prophetical speech at the birth of his Son. Genesis 5.29.


10. NOAH, who was to be a Comforter to the world by Rest, in the greatest
extremities, as the name importeh, being derived either from Nacham, to
Comfort, or Nuach, to Rest. the last of the ten Antediluvian Patriarchs. Out
of whose names a great Hebritian has left this observation. Adam, Earthy;
Cain, Possession; Abel, Vanity: shows that all Earthy Possession is Vanity.
Seth, may be set in Abels place, yet not so fixed, but that reason will be, for
naming of his Son Enosh, Sad. man, or Sorrowful. He begets Cainan,
Lamentation, from him succeeds Mahalalcel, a praiser of God. This holds not
among all, but Jared notes a descending. Enoch, that follows in the seventh
place, signifies one dedicated to God among so many wicked. He of the shortest
abode here upon earth of all his rank, leaves the longest liver Methusalah,
whose name speaks thus much, He dying God sends, whom? Lamech, what to do?
his name tells us, to strike, not to destroy all; but as Noah's name Comfort,
to preserve God's chosen in rest. This Noah by the Heathens was termed in
scorn Prometheus, and fained to be chained to Caucasus with a Vulture feeding
on his Intrals, in regard of his foretelling the worlds destruction, and
providing an Arc to escape it, near the mountain Caucasus, 120 years before
it came. Likewise he is called Ogyges, for opening a gate for the preservation
of Mankind. Saturn, as being the worlds Seed, or Seminary. Hercules, the
public Breeder. Deucalion, in whose time fell the great Inundation, described
by Ovid. Janus Bifrons, that found Wine, and looked into both Worlds, both
before and after the Flood. For to this Flood have reference, all the
Heathenish great Inundations. To this purpose runs the verse in Eusebius, Sol
and Osyris idem, Dionysius, Oriu, Apollo.
All those in truth were but the same,
And differ only in the name.


Which may be gathered from Plutarch, who affirms that Deucalion sent a Dove
to try whether the waters were dried. This Flood lasted a whole year, which
confirms, that in the long-lived Fathers, their years were Solar, not Lunar,
or Months, as some have imagined.

2. COntemporary in this Intervall, were the line of Cain, amongst whom we have
1. the first City Enoch. 2. Poligamie brought in by Lamech, who being a blind
Archer is said to have slain his great Grandsire Cain, Genesis 4.
and the Lad that led him for misdirecting him. 3. Jabal, the Father of
Tent-making, and Hearding Catell. 4. Jubal, for isntrumental Music 5.
Tubal-Cain, the first forger of Brass and Iron. Hartman. Schedel.
6. And some say his Sister Naamah began Carding and Spinning to cover
nakedness, rather then with Fig leaves, or with Beasts Skins. 7. Likely
it is, that amongst the Poets, the Garden of Adonis, might have relation to
this in Eden; Nectar and Ambrosium to the Tree of Life. Euridices wounding by a
Serpent, to the Serpent poisoning our Mother Eve. Mercury, Apollo and Vulcan,
to Jabal, Jubal and Tubal-cain. Venus, to Naamah. Their (...), or God-making,
to the translation of Enoch. Their God-wenching, Genesis 6.2.
to the dissolute doings between the Sons of God, and the Daughters of Men.
Which things they might have by hearsay, and work on at their pleasure, to be
noted by the way, not insisted upon.

Matters of Enquiry, and Discourse.
3. WHETHER 1. The World began in Spring, or Autumn? 2. The Seat of Paradise
may be punctually assigned? 3. Abel slew the same Serpent, the Devil had
abused to seduce his Mother? 4. Enoch with Elias be reserved in Paradise, to
come against Antichrist and to be slain by him? 5. The Book of his Prophecies
extant among the Fathers, might pass for authentical? 6. Cain were slain by
Lamech, his Grandchild a blind Archer? 7. Methusalah dyed before the Flood?


CAP. II. The Intervall of the Noachians.
1. An. Mund. 1657.
THE second Distance takes its rise from the end of the Flood, to the calling of
Abraham for the space of 367 years; gathered out of Gen, 11.26.

2. In which succeed,

1. SEM, the middle Son of Noah, Junius.
as some contend, but preferred before the elder Japhet, and the youngest Cham.
2. He is thought by the Jews, Genesis 14. Broughton.
to be Melchizedek that brought provision to Abraham and his company, at their
return from their victory against the four Eastern Kings: which is strongly
opposed by some latter writers. Cuneus Mouli^.
3. In the distribution of the world after the Flood, Asia fell to his share,
and his Posterities; from whence it is likely that they spread themselves
Eastward, and so rounded the earth, that way to people America; as on the
West, they left Palestina, and those Coasts, to Chams issue, the Cananites,
whose proper portion was Afric; as Iaphets was Europe, and the Isles. Sems
Successor was,

2. ARPHAXAD, younger Brother (as it should seem) to Elam, and Ashur, from whom
descended the Persians, and Assyrians. Abulensis out of Comestor and Methodius,
mentions one Ionithus or Ionichus, begotten of Noah 100 years after the Flood,
who informed the Easterlings in Astronomy. Prophesied of the four Monarchies,
and put Nimrod his forward Scholar, first to take state upon him. His picture
you have in Chronica Chronicorum, as also of Persla, Cathastua, and Funda, Sem,
Ham, and Iaphets Wives. But these Monkish Figments, have less show of truth,
then the foysting in here of Cainan by the Greeks, to be Arphaxads Son, whom
all the Hebrews omit, and rank in the next place,

3. SALAH, He is said to have built Salem, by Comestor, and by others, (upon
the passage of his Father Arphaxad over the River Tygris, to seat himself with
his Family in Chaldea) to have named his Son,

4. HEBER; From this man, his posterity were entitled Hebrews. In his time
fell out a double division, first of Tongues, then of Nations, according to
their several tongues. He sticks to the Original Hebrew, and upon foresight
of these divisions amongst others names his Son,

5. Genesis 10.15.
PELEG, in whose time these Divisions fell out. He begets,

6. REU, of whom we read nothing else, but that he begat,

7. Luke 3.
SARUG, whom St Luke terms Saruch, following therein the Septuagint. His
Successor was,

8. C. 24.2. Judith 5.7.
NAHOR, tainted with Idolatrous Leaven, as appears by Josuah's confession, and
Achiors Declaration. Leaves behind him at Vr of the Chaldeans,

9. TERAH. He had three Sonns, Haran, Nahor, and Abram, but upon Harams death
in Vr of the Chaldeans, whether burnt by the Fire, which faithful Abram
escaped (as the Jewsh tradition delivers it) or caused by some other means, he
removes from Vr to Charran, in Mesopotamia with all his Family, (it should
seem upon his Son Abrams motion, Genesis 12.1. A.M. 2020.
who had his call from God) and dies there. His Family at his death stood thus
disposed. Haran (that dyed before him) left behind him one Son named Lot, and
two Daughters, Milcah and Iscah. Milcah was taken to Wife by her Uncle Nahor,
who settled in that place. But Iscah (who should seem to be termed Sarai for
her Beauty and Houswivery) was married to the great Father.

10. ABRAM, of whose travels from Charran to Canaan, and from thence to Egypt
and Gerar. 2. of his Victories against the four Eastern Kings. 3. his
domestique troubles, by means of the dissension between his Wife Sarah, and
her Maid Hagar, (4.) his Circumcision by Gods appointment, (5.) his
entertaining of Angels, (6.) receiving a Son from his Sarah past teeming, his
readiness to Sacrifice him when God commanded, (7.) his second marryage and
issue by Keturah, and other passages of note, From Genesis 12. to the eight v.
cap. 25.
the Scripture sufficiently sets down, from whence other Authors have it. He
is thought to be the first instructor of the Egyptians in good Learning, who
before were ignorant. He ever relied on this sure ground; that there was one
God the Creator of all things, and that all happiness came from his good
pleasure, not from any strength or worth of our own. A Book called Ietzira is
Fathered upon him, but the imposture is manifest, and the piece thought to be
R. Akibah's. The rest of his Children otherwise provided for; his Son Isaac
is left to continue the holy Line, the foreman of the next Intervall.

2. COntemporary with this Period, are reckoned (1.) the building of the Tower
of Babel, (2.) the introducing of diverse Languages, (3.) the Peopling of the
World by Noah's Posterity, (4.) the Foundation of the Assyrian Monarchy in
Nimrod, Ninus and Semiramis, (5.) the Overthrow of the four Eastern Kings, by
Abram and his 318 Household Servants, (6.) the Destruction from Heaven of
Sodom and Gomorrah, Genesis 18. and 19.
withother Cities of the Plain by Fire and Brimstone, (7.) the Incestuous
Original of the Moabites and Ammonites, and Bastard-brood of the Ismaelites.
Also the Poets Ship, Argos, and Gigantomachia the Giants War with their Gods,
may have reference to Noah's Arc, and the Builders of Babel.

Discourse hereupon may be,
3. WHETHER 1. The Flood drowned Paradise? 2. The Arc could contain all sorts
of Beasts, and Foul, with sufficient provision for them for a year, besides
Noah and his Family? 3. Sem were Noah's Eldest Son; and the same with
Melchizedec? 4. His Posterity by an Eastern passage Peopled America? 5. Hebrew
were the only Tongue spoken before the Confusion at Babel? 6. Abram were the
first that had his name changed, the first Victorious Leader in the Wars, the
first Professor of Liberal Sciences, the first Circumcised, and the first
Purchaser of Land we read of? 7. His Revelations mentioned by Epiphanius, and
his Assumption cited by Origin, and the Book Jetzirah put upon him, be
frivolous and fabulous?


CAP. III. Of the Israelites.
1. THE third Distance is from Abram; to the departing of Israel from Egypt;
and contains the space of 430. years, Gal. 3.17.

2. In which succeed,

1. ISAAC, A. M. 2120.
the promised seed given to Abraham and Sarah in their old Age. (2.) He was
forced by Famine to forsake Canaan, and relieve himself with King Abimelech in
Gerar, as his Father had formerly done; where God gave increase of Seed, 100
for one. (3.) Genesis 26.1^.
By distrusting God's protection, he denied Rebecca to be his Wife, (as Abraham
had formerly done Sarah.) But the plot was discovered by Abimelech, and he
reprooved for it, and sent away safely. (4.) Notorious is his strange
deliverance from being Sacrificed by his Father, Genesis 22.
and the birth of his twins Esau and Jacob, of which

2. JACOB, the younger got the Birth right from Esau by purchase for a trifle,
and the Blessing by a stratagem. Genesis 17. and ^^
(2.) Thereupon to avoid his Brothers revenge, he fled into Mesopotamia to his
Uncle Laban, and married both his Daughters, blear-eyed Leah, and fair Rachel.
(3.) Thence after ^a^d service, having gotten many Children and Goods, he
returns unto Canaan; and is reconciled by God's mercy in the way to his
Brother Esau; who came out with 400 men to do him a Mischeife. (4.) After many
Afflictions in Canaan by the deflowring his only Daughter Dinah, by the
murdering thereupon of the Sichemites, by his rash Sons Simeon and Levi; by
the untowardly matching of his Son Judah, his Rachel's death in Childbirth,
and the like which the Scripture has at large; Through envy of his Brethren,
Joseph was sold into Egypt. 5. where after much sorrow, he was at length
advanced to be chief Governor, and by that means preserved his Father; and
Brethren, in a most dangerous time of Famine. Genesis 46.27.
6. Jacob and his Family of 70. persons, repair to Joseph in Egypt, where he
provided plenteously for them in Goshen. 7. Jacob broken with age, (after he
had bestowed upon his Sons a Prophetical Blessing) dies in Egypt, but was
honorably translated thence by Joseph, and his retinue, to be buried with his
Fathers at Mackpelah, in Canaan.

His third Son,
3. LEVI Succeeds, for the Preistly Dignity. Of him besides, Genesis 46. 1. Chron.
6.
we have nothing singular; As also of his Son.

4. COHATH, who descended with his Grandfather and Father into Egypt, where he
begat,

5. AMRAM, in whose time the persecution was hot, through the cruel Law of
Pharaoh Amenophis, for slaying all the Male-Children, Exodus 1.16.
as soon as they were borne. He married Jacobed, Exodus 2.1.
a Daughter of Levi, and had by her first a Daughter, whom he called Miriam,
from the bitter Affliction which they suffered; then a Sonue, Aaron, who
afterward was the first solemnly consecrated High-Preist of the Israelites.
Then,

6. MOSES, of whose miraculous preservation, and Education in Pharaoh Chenchres
Court. 2. flying from thence, and soiourning with Jethro in Midian, and
marrying Zipporah, Iethros Daughter. 3. Returning thence by God's Especial
Commission, and negotiating with Pharaoh, for the Deliverance of his Brethren,
which at last was accomplished after Ten Plagues upon Egypt; and Pharaohs
drowning. 4. Troubles in the Wilderness. 5. receiving the Law in Horeb.
Aprilis. 15.
6. settling Church Discipline. 7. Victories over Arad, Amaleck, Sehon, and Og,
in his passage toward Canaan, Death in Mount Nebo, with all circumstances, the
Scripture is most copious. By the Bye, we read of him in other Authors, that
his foster Mother was the Princess Thermutis, Bitia o^ Zerris Pharaohs
daughter. 2. Iacobus Iustus in the notes to his Map of the Holy Land.
That Balaam, Job, and Iethro were at that time Pharaohs Counselors, who when
the child trampled Pharaohs Crown under his feet, Balaam said it presaged
destruction to the State. Job, would have nothing determined against him, but
Iethro said it was but a childish trick, and therefore not to be regarded.
Whence those 3. sped afterward accordingly, Balaam was slain, Job afflicted,
and Iethro made happy by Moses affinity. 4. The Jews say, he begd done playday
in the week, for his Countrymen; and that fell out by miracle to be the
Jewish Sabbath. 5. Josephus shows how he overthrew the King of Aethiopia, and
married his daughter Tharbis, Antiqui^ l. 3. c. 9.
that fell in love with him. 6. Lyra has from a Rabbyn the combat he had with
Og the Giant of Basan, but these things are Apocrypha. 7. The Pentateuch we
have of his, which may claim the Title de Originibus, above all other
writings, being the first extant of uncontrouleable certainty, some say Joseph,
other that Moses was the same with Mercurius Trismegistus, of the Egyptians,
he is termed (...) in the fragment we have of Orpheus, In Hymno.
which agrees well with his name drawn out of the waters. Scalig.

2. COntemporary with this period (besides the obscure Kings of the Assyrian
Monarchy mentioned by Africanus, Eusebius, the forger Annius Viterbiensis, and
others) fall in 1. the foundation of the Druides, repaired unto for determining
of all controversies amongst the Celts. 2. The great floods of Ogyges. Aventine
Picardus de Celtopaedia.
And (248 years after) that other in the time of Deucaleon, which almost
drowned Greece. 3. Prometheus and Atlas his brother the ancient starre-gazers.
4. Iannes and Iambres, with Balaam the great Magicians. 5. Cecrops of Athens,
Plinius Nar. Hist. l. 7. c. 5. 6.
from whom we have Phaeton, that set the world on fire. 6. Bacchus and Apis or
Serapis, the Idol of the Egyptians. 7. The story of Job, whom some think to
have been the same with Iobab, Genesis 36.33.
of the line of Esau. vid. Torneel. Bellarm.

Inquiries.
3. Whether 1. The sale of Esau's Birthright were legal, he having it not in
possession? 2. A blessing gotten by circumvention, and lying, be fit for
imitation? 3. Jacobs marrying of two sisters, and using their Maidens for
Concubines, may be excused? 4. There be any certainty in the art of
Ouerocritiques or divination by Dreams? 5. Pharaohs Magitians did true
miracles? 6. Moses Ethiopian expedition may pass for truth? 7. Balaam had
his Prophesies from God, or his Ass understood what he spoke?


CAP. IV. Of Judges.
1. THe 4th distance is extended, from the departing of the Israelites from
Egypt, to the building of Solomon's Temple, for the space of 480 years. 1.
Kings 6.1.

2. In it are two Dynasties 1. Judges 2. Kings.


That of Judges follows in this Line,

1. JOSHUA the Conqueror, one and thirty Kings, settled the Israelites in the
promised Land, and divided it amongst them according to their Tribes, with
Eleazar the high Priest Araons successor. 2. He is thought to have written the
last chapter of Deuteronomy, and his own acts, containing the space of
fourteen years. Seven spent in the conquest, wherein diverse of the
Canaanites fled for fear and settled themselves in Afric, which is gathered
by a Pillar mentioned by Procopius that expressed so much; as also by the
Harmony of the punick dialect with the Hebrew, as appears by the fragment of
Gibberish by Plautus in Paenulo, and diverse words in S. Augustine: And the
other seven in the division of the Land. 3. Josh. 2^^
With Eleazarus the high Priest, he held the first Council in Sichem, for
abolishing strange worship, and burying Joseph's bones. 4. He settled the
Tabernacle in Shiloh; where it rested 369. years, till Eli's time; dies
honorably, being a type of Christ, whose name Jesus he carried, to him succeeds

2. OTHONIEL, who (after they of Judah and the Simeonites had cut off
Adonibezeks thumbes, Judges 1.
and great toes, as he had served 70. other Kings) led the Israelites against
Cushan^rishathaim King of Mesopotamia, Ib. 3.
whom he overthrew, and settled peace amongst his Countrymen, till his dying
day.

His successor was

3. EHUD, Ib.
that slew Eglon with his Left Hand dagger, by a stratagem, and so delivered
his Country from the thraldom of the Moabites, who oppressed them by reason
of their Idolatry.

After him was

4. SHAMGAR, the son of Anath, who slew of the Philistims 600 men with an Ox
goade; and he also delivered Israel. but they relapsing again, quickly fell
into the hands of Iabin King of Canaan: notwithstanding upon their repentance
were delivered by the Counsel and Valor of

5. BARAK and Deborah. This Iabin was a redoubted Prince, the rather by the
successful exploits of his General Sisera, Ib. 4.
and the terriblenesse of his 900. Iron Chariots. 2. But all this availes not,
when God arises to defend his own cause. The host is discomfited, Sisera
slain, by Iael a weak woman, to whose tent he fled for shelter. Israel sins
again, and thereby draw the Midianites upon them.

6. GIDEON then is raised, Ib. 6.
who miraculously discomfites them, with the slaughter of four of their
Princes; and punishing of these faithless Israelites that refused to aid him.
2. He refused the government offered him for himself, and his posterity,
stained his former acts by the Idolatry of the Ephod made by him, Ib. 8.
which became the destruction of his house, notwithstanding he had seventy
Sons lawfully begotten. For

7. ABIMELECH his Bastard, slew them all save one, upon one stone, Ib. 9.
then took the government upon himself, was the destruction of the sichemites,
that were his advancers, but at the Siege of Thebez, had his skull cracked by
the hand of a woman, who threw a piece of millstone upon him, but to prevent the
disgrace of being slain by a Woman, his Squire thrust him through by his own
command.

8. TOLA of Isachar takes the government, his residence was in Shamir in mount
Ephraim; nothing is Chronicled of him, but that after 23. years managing the
State, he left it to

9. IAIR the Gileadite, Ib. 10.
he supported it the better by reason of his thirty sons, who were Lords of
so many several Cities, bearing the names of Havoth-Iair in Gilead, 2. But
when Idolatry crept in again amongst them, their enemies got quickly a hand
over them; of these the Ammonites most pinched the Gileadites; who after
acknowledgement of their faults, sent for

10. Ib. 11.
IEPHTHAH their banished countryman to be their Leader. 2. He after some
expostulations of unkindnesse, undertakes the charge, sends two noble
Embassages to the Ammonites, to justify the right of his cause, and declare the
wrong they did him. 3. Upon the refusal of his demands, he joins Battle with
them: 4. Makes a rash vow that if he proved victorious, for sacrificing the
first thing, that at his safe return to his own house, should meet him, this
proved to be his only child and daughter. 5. He overcome, performs his vow, and
afterward being quarelled with by the Ephramites, cut off of them 42000. Ib. 12.
which were discerned by pronouncing Sibboleth for Shibboleth. His successor was

11. Ibzan of Bethleem, much strengthened by his thirty sons, and thirty
daughters, Ib.
who linked him in a large Affinity, Then

12. ELON of Zabulon took the government who after ten years left it to

13. AEDON, noted for his forty Sons and thirty Nephews, that rod on
threescore and ten Ass colts. which argued him to be a man of great Estate
and Honor, yet in strength much inferior to

14. SAMPSON, Manoah's Son of Dan, by a wife that had been formerly barren. 2.
In setting forth his strange birth foretold his parents by an Angel, his
incredible strength, his love, with the success thereof, his wonderful
plaguing the Philistims; his betraying, death, drawn upon himself, Ib. from
chap. 23. to 17.
to be revenged of his enemies that had put out his eyes, and used him with all
extremity and disgrace, the text of Scripture is copious; After him we read of
no Judge until

15. ELI's time, but in the Interim have three notable stories, the first of
the Danites, surprising the loose inhabitants of Laish: and the taking away
Michae's Image, and Levite. which was the Original of the Idolatry that long
after plagued Israel. 2. Of the odious abuse of the Levites. Cancubine, and
his horrible rovenge, which was like to be the utter ruin of the Benjamites,
that maintained the villainy. The 3. of the travells of Naomi and Ruth, with
the happy issue at length, after so great distresses. 2. This Ely was the
High Priest, a good man, but had debosht Sons, to whom being too much
indulgent, ^. Sam. 2.
they were their own ruin, and their Fathers Breakneck,

To him succeeded his servant

16. SAMUEL, obtained of God by his Mother Hannah after many years barrenness.
2. He settled the Church and Commonwealth, much shattered by the looseness of
Ely's time. Kept his yearly Assizes in Bethel, Gilgall, and Mispah, beside his
more particular deciding causes at home in Ramah. 3. His Sons Joel and Abiah
degenerate from their Fathers Piety and Integrity, Thereupon the people require
a King. Saul of Benjamin is anointed, and so the State is altered. 4. The
Priests that concurred with these were 1. Aaron, 2. Eleazar, 3. Phineas; 4.
Abisua, 5. Bocchi, 6. Ozis, 7. Ely. Samuel was only a Prophet of the Tribe of
Levi. He is supposed to have written the books of Judges, Ruth, and a great
part of the first of Samuel.

2. WIth this distance concur 1. The civil Wars with the Benjamites, in which
there fell on both sides 65100 in the field, with the utter destruction of Men,
Women and Children, in all the Cities of the Benjamites, And of Jabesh-gilead
except 400 Virgins. 2. The beginning of the Jubiles of the Jews, and Olympiads
of the Greeks. 3. Iub. 2500.
The six servitudes of the Israelites by reason of their Jdolatry and their
deliverance, upon their repentance. 4. Olymp. 3174
The Charta Magna of Amphiction for preserving the Grecian Liberties. 5. V.C.
3198.
The drunken braule between the Lapithes and Centaurs, with the Expedition of
the Argonautes to Cholcos for the golden fleece under Jason. 6. Thebes and Troy
set forth so largely by Poets. 7. Together with the acts of Hercules. Thesem,
Cadmus, Bellerophon. Perseus. Troy sacked. 2767. Cadmus increases greek
letters 2520.
The rapes of Proserpina, Enropa, Helena. Dedalus flight from Creet, with his
son Icarus, that by mounting too high was drowned. Where note that most of
the Antiquities of the Heathen come not so high as Sampson.

3. Whether 1. Diverse of the Cananites, fled from Joshua, and seated themselves
in Africa? 2. Oaths bind, which are procured by circumvention as that to the
Gibeonites? 3. The whole frame of Heaven, staid at the Standing of the Sun in
Iosuahs time? 4. Iephtha sacrificed his Daughter, by putting her to death? 5.
Sampsons killing himself be imitable or excusable? 6. Ely or his Sons, were
more to be blamed, they for their dissoluteness, or he for suffering it? 7.
The Practice, or Prerogatives of Kings, are set down? 1. Sam. 8.


The second Dynasty intercepts those Kings who had Israel entire under their
government.
In this manner,

1. SAUL the Son of Kish, Benjamin. 2. He sent to seek his fathers Asses
stumbled upon a Kingdom. 3. He was a goodly man, 1. Sam. 10.23
higher then any of the People from the shoulders upward, Anointed by Samuel,
and applauded by all the States in a Solemn Parliament at Mispah. Ib.
4. At his first entry he quitted himself nobly, in raising the siege at
Jabesh Gilead, with the overthrow of the Ammonites. Ib.
But his incroaching upon the Priests Office to Sacrifice, Ib. 13.
and sparing of Agag with the Amalakites, Ib. 15.
contrary to Gods express command; outed him of Gods favor, and gave way for
an evil Spirit to vex him. 5. 1. Sam. 36.14
The valor of brave Prince Jonathan, and his faithful friendship to his
Brother-law David, cover in a manner the Fathers exorbitances. 6. Being left to
himself in his latter time, nothing thrives with him. He grew jealous of his
own Son Jonathan, persecutes his most loyal and deserving Son in Law and
Subject David, most barbarously murdered Abimelech the High Priest with 85. Ib.
22.18.
persons that did wear a Linen Ephod, and destroyed Nob, the Priests City
with all that belonged to it. Consults with a Witch at Endor, Ib. 28. Ib. 31.4.
and last of all Kills himself in Mount Gilboa, leaving his carcass to the
Philistims, and his Kingdom to

2. Iesse, of the tribe of Judah, a man after Gods own heart, designed before,
and Anointed to that purpose. 2. He first grew famous by the overthrow of
Goliahs, Ib. 17.
in single combat. and thereupon after the bringing in for a vantage, three
hundred fore-skins of the Philistims, he marries Michall, Ib. 18.19.
Saul's daughter; who convayed him with her brother Jonathan, from her Fathers
fury. 3. His entrance into the Kingdom was strongly withstood by Ishbosheths
hereditary title, and valiant Abner; but those cut off, all willingly fell to
him without farther questioning. 4. After his once settling, his first care was
for Religion, to bring the Ark of God from Kiriath-jearim, ^. Sam. 6.
Obed Edoms house, to place it in Sion, a more public and consecrated place.
And not therewith satisfied, he plots to build a Temple for it, But forbidden
by Nathan, notwithstanding makes plentiful provision for his successor to
perform it, Ib. 7.
with the less trouble and charge. He held the second Council for ordering
Divine Service. 5. His thankful kindness to Mephibosheth, Ionathans lame
son, Ib. 9. Ib. 16.
is an excellent pattern for men advanced to imitate, but cheating Zibahs that
bearay their trust, should be nearer sifted, and more severely punished. 6. God
gave him noted victories, against the Philistims, Moabites, Sobeans, Damascens,
Edomites, Ammonites, and all other that opposed him. 7. But his taking of
Vriahs wife, and hard usage of the Husband, Ib. 11. Ib. 24.
with his numbering the People are evident tokens of humane infirmity. 8. Upon
these fell the disasters of the deflowring his daughter Tamar, the murder of
his son Ammon, the Rebellion of Absolon, and of Sheba the son of Bichri.
Ib. 13.15.20.
and in his drooping old age the combination of Ioab, with his much tendered
son Adoniah, to bury him as it were alive. 9. We have the Book of Psalms
for the most part his, 1. King. 1.
though perchance not written, yet made by him; the greatest help to devotion,
left of the Jewish Church. 10. His end was most pious and glorious, leaving the
wisest Statesmen, the worthiest Warriors, and inestimable treasure of wealth,
with his heavenly Council and Blessing to his son

3. SOLOMON 1. His piety, wisdom, pitch, beyond any of his ancestors. 2. That
Temple which his Father intended he began, Arc in it, in the Holiest of
Holies, which had formerly been tossed about; from the Desert to Gilgal, from
Gilgal to Shilo, from Shilo, to the Philistims, from thence, to Bethshemesh,
from Bethshemesh; to Kiriathjearim, from thence to the house of O bed Edom,
from thence to the City of David. So that his wisdom brought him in admiration
both at home, and abroad with strangers, who repaired unto him, as to an
Oracle. witness the Queen of Sheba, 1. King. 4.29. Ib. 10.
that came in person from her own Country, to confer with him; And Hiram of
Tire, that joined with him to fetch gold from Ophir. His daily provision for
his household, stables, 2. King 4.22.
and other expenses would be thought incredible, in any other History, but
Canonical. 3. But in the midst of prosperity, wealth, and ease, the multitude
of strange women, wrought him to favor and further Idolatry, which he freed
himself from (as it is thought) afterward, and left his Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes, and Canticum, By De la Cerda, a Jesuit.
a testimony thereof, and directions for all posterity. 4. Those other writings
which are attributed to him, whether pious, as the book of Wisdom, and
Ecclesiasticus; or of late, his 18 Psalm set forth in Greek and Latin: or
Impious, and frivolous, as 1. Incantationes Solomonis. 2. Vid. Pinedam de Rebus
gestis Solomonis.
Clavicula. 3. Amulus. 4. Contradictio. 5. Hydromantia to his son Rehoboam.
6. de Geniis. 7. Liber verborum Solomonis. 8. De umbris Idearum. 9. his
Calender. 10. Chimicks. 11. Epistles between him and Hyram of Tire, and Vaphres
King of Egypt. 12. the Ars memoriae that goes under his name, are rejected all
as forged pieces. 5. His latter days, after so much magnificence, and
pleasure, were pestered with insurrectious, of Hadad, Rezin, and Jeroboam, whom
he lived not fully to quell, but left them to vex his Sonue that succeeded.

2. COncurrent, with these times are made the obscure posterity of Aeneas in
Italy, and our Brute here amongst us. Plutarch. Eusebius. Justin.
2. Codrus the last King of Athens, who purchased by his own death, the victory
for his Country. 3. The birth of Homer. 4. The famous combat between Abners
men, and Ioabs wherein twelve of a side, 2. Sam. 2.16.
slew each man his opposite upon the place. 5. The Giants of the Philistims cut
off at times by David and his 37 Worthies. 2. Sam. 23.
6. The hight of Poetry, Music, and all kind of Philosophy eminent in David's
Psalms, ^ Kings, 4.32
and Solomon's 3000 Proverbs, and 1005 songs, with his books of Natural
Philosophy, mentioned in Scripture. 7. His perfection in the Art of Navigation,
in trading with the Tyrians to Ophir for Gold.

Whether 1. Music have any virtue to drive away Devils? 2. The Dead may be
raised by a Witch? 3. Joab might justify Absoloms killing, having a command
from his Sovereign to the contrary? 4. A Warrior may not build God a House as
well as another man? 5. Solomon repented before his death and was forgiven? 6.
Ophir may be thought to be Pern in the West Indies? 7. The Queeue of Sheba
(named by some Makedah or Nicaules) had Meleck a Son by Solomon from whom
descended Candace, whose Eunuch propagated Christianity amongst the Abissines
now under Prester John?


CAP. V. Kings of Judah.
1 THE fifth Distance is from the erecting of the First Temple, to the Second,
the space of 497 years.

2. Alst. Encyclop. p. 32. c. 17. 5.
And comprehends two Dynasties, The 1. Succession of the Kings of Judah unto
the Captivity. 427 years. 2. Continuance in the Captivity until their
return, and Building the Second Temple. 70 years.


In the Succession of the Kings of Judah are reckoned,

1. Parliament at Sechem, rejecting the advice of his Fathers experienced
Councillors, 1. Kings 12. 2. Chron. 10.
and following the devices of his own Green-headed companions, gave occasion
to the Rent of ten Tribes from him, who sided with Jeroboam the Son of Nebat,
and could never afterward be united. (2.) When he sent his Treasurer Adoram to
demand Tribute of the Rebels; Ib. v. 18.
they Stoned him, and put the King to shift for himself, and thereupon when he
had provided an Army from Judah, 1. Kings 10. 2. Chr. 11.1.
and Benjamin to recover his Right of 180000 valiant men; he was forbidden to
proceed by Shemaiah, the man of God, which he obeyed. (3.) Upon his falling off
into Idolatry, and tolerating Sodomites; 1. Reg. 14. 2. Chron. 12.
Shishak King of Egypt came and rifled the Temple with the Kings Treasure. so
that he was forced to supply Solomon's golden Shieldes, (which were then carried
away) with the like of Brass. Thus he left the State much deminished, and
impoverished to his Son.

2. ABIAH, little better then his Father. (2.) Notwithstanding in a set Battle
against Jeroboam, who brought no less then 800000 into the field; with 400000
only of his side, he slew 500000 of the Enemies, and routed the rest, because
he relied upon the God of his Fathers. 2. Chron. ^3. v. 3. Ib. v. 17. Ib.
(3.) Upon this notable victory he recovered diverse Towns from Jeroboam, and
kept him under, until his dying day. Iddo the Prophet wrote his life, which we
have not. To him succeeded his son

3. ASA, He reformed Religion, by taking away the Sodomites, and demolishing
the Groves, and Images of his Fathers erecting, wherein he granted not a
dispensation to his mother Maacha's superstition. 1. Kings 15. 2. Chron. 16.
Yet neglected the removal of the high places, which had stood since the
Reign of his great Grandfather Solomon. 2. He had an Army as hand, of Judah,
and Benjamin, 2. Chron. 14. Ib. v. 9.
confisting of 580000 valiant men; wherewith he overthrew Zera the Ethiopian,
that brought 1000000 against him. 3. In his Bickerings with his neighbor
Baasha of Israel, 2. Chron. 16. 1. Kings 15. Ib.
he hired Benhadad of Damascus, with the consecrated treasure of the Temple,
and supply of his own, to divert Baasha, from fortifying Raamah, which was
done, but Hanani the Seer checks him for it, for which he was imprisoned
instead of amends. 4. A disease toward his latter end takes him in his feet (it
may be a sharp gout) which increasing upon him; he depends more upon
Physicians, then seeking to God, so dies, and was magnificently buried, leaving
his good Son

4. IEHOSOPHAT his successor. He was exceeding circumspect, for the fortifying
of his Territories, and had an Army in the field that waited on him (besides
those he had in Garrison) under five able leaders, 2. Chron. 17.
of 1160000 mighty men of valor. 2. In reforming Religion, he took away the
High places, and groves out of Judah, Ib. 17.
and sent abroad Preachers to instruct the People. 3. His joining with
Idolatrous Ahab, was like to have cost him his life, in the Battle at
Ramoth-Gilead, for which he was boldly reproved by Jehu the son of Hanani the
Seer, 1. Reg. 22. 2. Chron. 19.
which he took well at his hand. And 4. thereupon took order for the better
settling of affairs, both of Church and State. 5. A mixed company of Moab, Ib.
29.
Ammon, and Seir, that had combined against him, were miraculously defeated
upon his fasting and prayer: by the mutual massacring of one another in
Hazzazon-Tamar, as Iahaziel the Levite foretold him, for which he had a solemn
thanksgiving, in the valley of Berachah. 6. Ib.
All this could not keep his easy disposition from confederating with Ahaziah,
Idolatrous Ahabs son, but their Navies must needs join in a voyage to
Tarshish; what the issue should prove it was foretold him by Eliezer the
Prophet. The Navy was cast away. He soon dies and leaves the Crown to

5. IEHORAM: a degenerate son from so Religious a Father: made far the
worse by his match with Athalia, Idolatrous Omri's daughter, and wicked Ahab's
sister of Israel. 2. His entrance to the Kingdom was (according to the modern
Turkish manner) with the slaughter of his brethren, Ib. 21.4.
and diverse of the Nobles. 3. He had a victory against the Edomites, Ib.
but not to keep them in their wonted subjection, but to rout them for the
present, when Libnah, one of his own Cities revolted from him, because he had
forsaken the God of his Fathers. 4. Wicked courses can never prosper long.
Astinging letter left by Elias before his translation, came to his hands, to
forewarne him, whereto he should trust. 5. The Philistims and ragged Arabians
surprise Jerusalem, and bereave him of all his Wives and Sons except the
youngest. 6. A horrible disease at last seiseth upon him, Ib.
so that his bowels fell out, and he dies loathsomely, not desired, nor buried
in the Sepulchers of his Fathers, leaving only to succeed him

6. AHAZIAH his youngest son; a sprig of Athaliahs, Ib. 22.
altogether ruled by his wicked mothers suggestions. 2. He would needs assist
his cozen Jehoram of Israel, at the siege of Ramoth Gilead, and afterward in a
complement visit him, when he returned to be cured of his wounds in that
bickering received. 3. But that cost him his life, by the hand of furious Johu,
raised up by God to be the ruin of Ahabs house. Notwithstanding for his good
Grandfathers sake Jehosophat, he had a Kingly burial. upon which his violent
Mother

7. ATHALIAH usurps the Kingdom. 1. Her first design was to destroy all the
Seed Royal of the House of Judah, Ib. v 10.
to free her self from competitors. But the pitiful Princess Iehoshabeah,
Ichoiadah the Highpriests wife, conveyed her young Nephew Ioash Ahaziah's
son, from her cruelty, and brought him up in the Temple secretly. 2. Athaliah
Revells it out, for a seven year, supposing all safe, promotes the Idolatry
of the house of Omri. 3. 2. Chron. 23.
But after by Iehoiadah's provident contriving, she had that she deserved, and
the right Heir

8. Ioash took place, when he was but seven years, old, Ib.
1. He did excellent well under the tutorage, and advice of his grave and
Religious Uncle Ichoiadah, took order for the repairing of the Temple, and
reforming of all things amiss, both in Church and State. 2. But the good old
man once gone, Ib. c. 24.
Sychophants insinuated themselves to debosh the young King, that all kind of
goodness was left off, and Idolatry again embraced. 4. Against which when
Zachariah, Ichoiadahs son showed himself (as it became him) free and
resolute, he was Tyrannically stoned to death, V. 12.
by the Kings Commandment, in the Court of the house of the Lord, Ib. v. 2^.
without respect of Place, Cause, or Person. 5. This proved not well; for the
King was thereupon overthrown shamefully, by a small company of the Syrians;
plagued with diseases, and at last treacherously made away by his own Servants,
leaving his Kingdom to his son

9. AMAZIAH, who did worthily in executing those Traitors that slew his Father,
Ib. c. 25.
yet sparing their harmless children. 2. He Mustered 300000 of his own, and
hired 100000 of Israel, to go against Edom; but was forbidden by a Prophet, to
take the Israelites with him. Thus he obeyed with the loss of his pay of a 100
talents. 3. These disbanded and disordered Israelites, rifled Judah in their
return. The King proceeds with his own, and is victorious over Edom. Ib.
4. He takes the Idols of the vanquished Edomites, and foolishly serves them,
for which he is freely checked by a Prophet, which he took not well, nor
obeyed. 5. Upon presumption on this success, and strength, he chalengeth Ioash
King of Israel, Ib. v. 18.
who minds him of his vanity, in a pretty Apology of the Cedar and Thistle.
This diverts him not, but joining Battle with him, has the worst; and is taken
Prisoner, Jerusalem is ransackt. 6. These disasters work no amendment or
repentance in him, for in his Idolatry he is slain, by a conspiracy, that
overtooke him, flying at Lachish. 7. Is brought back to Jerusalem and buried
with his Fathers. his son

10. Ib. c. 26. 2. Kings 14.
VZZIAH or Azariah is settled in his throne by all the People. 2. He proved a
very valiant man, and victorious against the Philistims, V. 3.
and Arabians. 3. Had by the least 300700 Soldiers, in a readiness well
appointed at all assayes, V. 14.
fortified Jerusalem with Mathematical Engines, and other places with all
munition requisite. 4 Was a great sheep-master, Ib.
a planter of Vines, and a lover of Husbandry. 5. But prosperity and pride at
last spoiled all. In a profane humor he invades the Priests Office, to burn
Incense against Gods Commandment, then was stricken with a Leprosy, and
hasted out of the Temple, being afraid of a greater judgment. 2. Chron. 26.
whereupon he was shut up in a several house, being not fit to converse with
others, any longer for managing the State, And so

11. IOTHAM his son took the government upon him. 1. 2. Chron. 27. 2. Kings
15.
He was a great builder, and victorious against the Ammonites. 2. Abstained
from incroaching upon the Priesthood, as his Father had done, is commended for
his good endeavors in reformation. 3. Howbeit the high places were not taken
down, whereby the people continued in their Idolatry. His Son

12. AHAZ that succeeded him, much degenerated from him. 1. He brought in, Ib.
28. 2. Kings 16.
the Idolatry of the Kings of Israel, and after the abominations of the
Heathen, Sacrificed his children by fire in the valley of Hinnon. All high
places, and hills, and green trees were witnesses of his Abominations; so that
the text says This is that King Ahaz, Ib. v. 22.
that carried the brand of infamy with him to his grave. 2. But before he came
thither; the Syrians smote him, Ib.
and carried away a great multitude of his Subjects to Damascus, where he went
to meet Tiglath Peleser of Assyria, and sent home a model of an Heathenish
Altar, 2. Kings ^^.
which Vriah the High Priest set up in the Temple, and sacrificed upon, at such
time as Gods Altar, and the Lavar, were moved from their places, and the Brazen
Sea, took off the stately Oxen of Brass, and set on a pavement of stone.
Besides the Kings entry was turned from the the house of the Lord, to gratify
the King of Assyria. 3. Afterward Pekah of Israel, broke him; whose Champion
Zichri of Ephraim, 2. Chron. 2^.
slew Prince Maassiah his Son, with other chief men about him. At which time
Israel carried away 200000 Captives, that by Oded the Prophets means, were in
pity returned again without hurt, Ib.
or ransom. 4. All this wrought not the King to goodness, but he sends for
the Assyrian to help him against the Edomites and Philistims, and fees him,
with the confecrated treasures of Gods house. But this did him no good. 5. For
after so unworthy a race expired, Ib.
he sleeps with his Fathers, but is not thought fit to be brought into the
Kings Sepulchers.

13. HEZECHIAH his son succeeds him, who proved the better man (out of doubt)
through the good instructions of his mother Abiah, the daughter of Zachariah,
2. Chron. 28 v. 5.
who had understanding in the visions of God, and was so faithful an adviser
to his great Grandsire Vzziah. 2. His first care was to rectify Religion, which
had so much suffered by his Father: wherefore he breaks down the brazen
Serpent, and calls it Nehushtan, when it was burnt. 2. Kings 18.4
Then invites all Israel to the celebrating of the Passover, but they laughed
him to scorn for it. not without a perpetual captivity shortly falling upon
them, 2. Chr. 30.10
who proved ungrateful in the acknowledgement of their deliverance from
Aegypts bondage. 3. 2. Kings 17.
Senacharib the great Assyrian (whose father Salmannazzer had not long before
captivated the ten Tribes) beleagred Jerusalem, but with the miraculous losie
of an 185000 of his bravest Leaders and Soldiers. Ib. c. 20.
4. He falls sick, and through Prayer purchased fifteen years prorogation of
his life, which was confirmed to him by a sign, of the shadows retrogradation
in Ahaz dyall. 5. Whereupon Merodach Baladan of Babylon, Ib.
congratulates him with an Embassage and Presents. Whom he acquaints with the
great treasures of the Kingdom, for which Isaiah the Prophet reprooves him,
and foretells they shall be transferred to Babel. As he lived so he dies
honorably, is interred accordingly, leaves his Kingdom to his son

14. MANASSES, who cancells his Fathers goodness: and erected again the
Idolatry of his Grand father Ahaz. Expiates his Children in the fire of
Benhinnon, 2. Chron. 33. 2. Kings 21.
uses all kinds of Witchcraft, and working by familiar spirits, sets up a
carved Image in Gods Temple, causing Judah to do worse then the heathen. Ib.
2. For this he is carried away captive to Babylon, then expresses his sincere
repentance by hearty prayer, not in the words perhaps, but in the sense, of
that Apocryphal prayer, which goes under his name. 3. Returns again to his
Kingdom, Reformes effectually, dies religiously and leaves

15. Ib.
AMON his son to succeed. 1. This man being of sufficient age, could not be
warned by his Fathers example, but restores Idolatry at the highest, and
humbled not himself but persists in his folly. 2. Till his servants conspired,
and slew him in his own house, which the people took so indignly, that the
Traitors had quickly what they deserved. And

16. 2. Kings 22. 2. Chron. 34.
JOSIAH his son was made King in his steed, of whom too much good cannot be
spoken. He began betimes to reform Religion, and repair the Temple, brings
the book of the Law again to light, which was formerly lost; celebrates a
solemn Passover beyond all the Kings that were before him. 2. In an unadvised
expedition against Necho of Egypt, he got his deaths wound, by an arrow in the
valley of Megiddo, returns, and dies at Jerusalem, and 3. Ib. 35. 2. Chr.
35.25.
was buried with the great Lamentation of the Prophet Jeremiah, and all his
Subjects, who settled his son

17. JEHOAHAZ in his place, but long he could not hold it. Ib. 36.
For after three months Pharao Necho comes upon him, broken by his Fathers
Disasters, and carries him Captive into Egypt. Sets Eliachim his brother in
his place, whom he calls

18. IEHOIAKIM: This man (far degenerating from his Fathers virtues) is
within a dozen years carried prisoner to Babylon, by Nebuchad-nezzar, 2. Chr.
3^.
with all the Riches of the Temple. His son Jechoniah, or Choniah, or

19. IEHOIACHIN is left in his place, young, managed ill, and kept not long.
For within a year, Nebuchad-nezzar was also upon him, Ib.
and carried him away to Babylon prisoner, with his Mother, and all his
Princes, and Officers, even to the very Smiths, and Artizans, where ('it is
thought) he dyed upon the way, and had no better burial then an Ass, as
Jeremiah had foretold. Jer. 22.19.
His Uncle Mataniah is put King in his place, and called

20. ZEDEKIAH. Nebuchadnezzar, contrary to the advice of Jeremiah the prophet,
and his Oath of Allegiance he had taken; Jerusalem (after two years seige)
ransackt, the King laid hold on, 2. Chr. 36.13.
the Temple, City, and all Defaced. 2. He was brought to Nebuchad-nezzar at
Riblah, had his sons slain before him, that he might not only feel, but see
his Woe. Afterward his Eyes were put out, and he carried Captive to Babylon,
where he ended his Woeful days. 3. Ib.
One Gedaliah was left behind to govern the scattered people, who were too
many, and worthless to be carried so far; but he was traitorously slain by
the Treason of Ismael, the son of Nethaniah, and his Confederates. They
hurryed the people with Jeremiah the Prophet into Egypt. 4. Evilmerodach,
Nebuchad-nezzars son and successor, dealt kindly with Jehojachim, in
Babylon, but releaseth not the Captivity.

2. COntemporary with these, were (as it appears out of the second of Kings,
and Chronicles) 1. The Kings of Israel. 1. Politic Jeroboam, who got little
by Treason and Idolatry; for 2. Debosht Nadab his son, was rooted out with
all his House; by 3. Boisterous Baasha. His son, 4. Drunken Elah, with all that
Family were on the sudden made away by 5. Rash Zimri. He reigned but seven
days, before 6. Stout Omri forced him to burn himself, with the Palace in
Tirzah; Omri stood longer, bought Samaria, settled himself there in his
Idolatrous courses, and left 7. Vxorious Ahab his son to succeed him. He with
his Zidonian virago Iezabell, ^. Kings 21.
proves worse then his Ancestors. Extorts Naboths Vineyard from him, where
afterward dogs lickt his blood. Yet left his son 8. Mopish Ahaziah his
successor, 2. King. 1.
who dies by a fall, of which Beelzebub of Ekron could not cure him, And leaves
the Kingdom to his stirring brother 9. Iehoram; This man was taken off by 10.
Furious Jehu, who makes also an end of the Masculine Iezabell, with all the
breed of that Line. He did well in executing the Baalites, but the touch of
Ieroboams politic Idolatry, tainted all his other good parts. His son 11.
vexed Jehoahaz follows, who (notwithstanding Gods favor in easing him) could
not be staved of from Ieroboams Policy. 12. Ioash his son follows in the same
rode. Rifled Jerusalem, when he had overthrown Amaziah. Leaves the 13. Valiant
Jeroboam his successor, who somewhat refreshed the State, and so leaves it to
the 14. Unfortunate Zachariah; he was traitorously slain by 15. Shallum, who
made an end of Iehu's race, but held the Throne but a month, before 16. Menahem
took him off. He left the Kingdom to 17. Pekaiah his son. But 18. Pekah,
the son of Remaliah, soon outed him, and held it. He was traitorously slain
by 19. Hoshea the son of Elah, and he with the ten Tribes carried captives by
Shalmaneser of Assyria. 2. Kings 17.


2. Also Prophets; 1. That Man of God who came from Judah, 1. Kings 13.
and startled Ierobeam in his Calvish sacrificing at Bethel, by the renting of
the Altar, and withering of the hand stretched out to apprehend him. 2. Elijah,
and Elisha, eminent for Miracles. 3. Besides those Greater, and lesser
Prophets, whose Writings we have.

3. With whom fell in 1. the Division of the Assyrian Monarchy, (through
Sardanapalus effeminate Luxury) between Phul-Bellock and Arbaces. 2. The
Founding of Rome by Romulus, with the success of the six Kings following. 3.
Lycurgus and his Laws for the Lacedaemonians. 4. Midas of Phrigia with Asses
cares. 5. The seven Wisemen of Greece. 6. Pharao-Necho's vain attempt, to
join Nilus, with the Red Sea. 7. The building of Carthage by Dido, above 200
years after Aeneas death. Which discredits Virgils Poem, of the hot Affection
between them.

Jnquiries.
3. WHETHER 1. Zachariah, Jehojadahs son, were the same our Savior speaks of
in the Gospel, Mat. 23.35. 2. Vzziahs Mathemeticall Instruments, were of the
same kind with those of Archimedes in Plutarch? 3. The shadow went back only
in Ahaz dyall, not the Sun in the Heavens? 4. The captivity of the Ten
Tribes, peopled Tartary and the West Indies? 5. Iehojachim had any marks of
Enchantment upon him? 6. Elisha Prophesied the better, by hearing of a Musical
instrument? 7. He gave a Toleration to Naaman, to be present at Idolatrous
Worship?


SECT. II. The time of the Captivity of Babylon.
1. THe Captivity of the ten Tribes by Salmanasar, and of Judah by
Nebuchadnezzar, has put a period to the first Dynasty in the succession of
Kings. The second Dynasty here runs along in the continuance of the Captivity
for the space of 70 years, wherein it is sufficient to note these eminent men.

1. Royal, who was carried away but young with King Ioakim. 2. His sober Diet,
and education in the learning of those times, fitted him for greater
employments. 3. The expounding of Nebuchadnezzars two dreams, when all the
Chaldean Wisards were at a non plus; gave the first rise, to his succeeding
advancement, and credit. To Balthazar he interpreted the condemnatory
handwriting against him. Under Darius for his Religion, he was cast into the
Lions don; but there was miraculously freed, to the ruin of his accusers. 4.
His Prophesy (which we have) is partly in the Chalday, partly in the Hebrew
tongue; and contains the History from the third year of Ioakim, to the end of
the Captivity: in which he was a spectator, or actor. As also a foretelling
from thence, the troubles that should befall the Church, under the Graecians
and Romans; The coming of the Messiah after 70 Prophetical weeks. The
Passages from thence in general to the end of the World. 5. The deliverance of
Susanna, is put upon him, and the abbreviating of Nebuchadnezzars
transformation from seven years to so many weeks by his prayers. 6. He is
said to have refused to be coheire with Baltasar in that Monarchy, when it was
offered him by Nebuchadnezzar. 7. He lived 138 years (by Pererius calculation)
which A Lapide his fellow Jesuit finds fault with; who has afforded us his
picture in his Chaldean trowzes, out of the Emperor Basilius Porphygenitus
book, now in the Vatican. where he is also reported with his three fellows,
Sydrach, Mesach, and Abednego, to have suffered Martyrdom, which other
Historians have not observed.

2. ZEROBABEL who with Joshua the high Priest, Babylon, by the grant of Cyrus
after the 70 years Captivity. 2. He set up first the Altar, sacrificed upon it,
and laid the foundations of the second Temple, whereat the old men wept, to see
how far it came short of the former. 3. The work is hindered by Cyrus
successors, Haggai and Zachary the Prophets, incite the builders to go onward.
The Persian gives way, and the work is finished, dedicated, and the Passcover
solemnized.

3. EZRA the Priest a ready Scribe in the Law, comes with a new supply, having
commission from Artaxerxes. 2. He orders all matters concerning Gods worship in
a Council, by the encouragement of Shecaniah, separates the Israelites, that
had taken outlandish wives, digests the Canon of the Scripture as we now have
it; adding the divisions to it, whereas before, it was one entire mass. Begins
the Masoriticall notes for the truer reading, and distincter pronuntiation of
the tongue; which had much suffered in the 70 years Captivity. 3. There joined
with him in this great work (as the Jews would have it) 1. Danicl. 2.
Ananias. 3. Azarias. 4. Misael. 5. Joshua. 6. Zorobabel. 7. Haggeas. 8.
Zacharias. 9. Malachias. 10 Nehemias. 11. Mardochaeus, that makes out a whole
dozen. The third and fourth of Esdras are casheir'd for none of his.

4. NEHEMIAH the Tirshasha or Governor comes after him, and builds up the
walls by Artaxerxes commission, maugre the pestilent opposition of Sanballet,
Tobiah, and Geshem with their confederates. 2. He orders all things prudently,
and with vigilant resolution. Restraines Usurers, keeps hospitality, causes
the Law to be read, and expounded to the People, takes a Catalogue of those,
that returned from the Captivity, and made a Covenant to serve the Lord. 3.
Reformes the violation of the Sabbath, and taking strange wives, is thought to
be the Register of his own Acts. About which time,

5. Benjamite captivated with Iechoniah, proved a worthy upholder of his Nation
under Ahashuerosh, in Shushan. 2. By his provident Council, Esther his orphane
Kinswoman, came to be Queen in Vasti's place, who was divorced for her
sullenness. 3. He discovered a treason against the King, and afterward by Gods
providence, contrived the matter so happily, that Hamon, the Jews deadly
enemy, who had plotted their utter ruin, was hanged on a tree, the fame
gallows, he had erected for Mordecais execution. 4. The King takes a liking to
him, and makes him the chief man under him. 5. In which place he behaved
himself most religiously and prudently, and is thought also to have written
the book of Esther. His Acts are registered in the Chronicles of Media, and
Persia.

3. COncurrent with these times are, 1. The stories of Tobit and Judeth. 2. The
fragments annexed to Daniel, of Susanna, Bell and the Dragon. 3. The Hiding of
the holy Fire in a pit by the Priests, 2. Macc. 1, and 2.
and of the Arc, with the Altar of Incense, in a Cave, by Jeremy in Mount
Horeb. 4. The Prophesy of Baruch, with the Epistle of Jeremy. 5. Ezechiels,
Haggies, and Zacharies predications, and predictions, to their captive
Countrymen. 6. The translation of the Assyrian Monarchy to the Medes, and
Persians. 7 The growing up of the Greeks and Romans.

INQVIRIES.
Whether 1. The Representation of Nebuchadnezzars Image extend no farther then
the coming of the Messiah? 2. Those additions to Daniel, of Susanna, Bell, and
the Dragon, may pass for History? 3. The Books of Tobit, and Iudeth, be only
sacred Poems? 4. Ezra left the old Hebrew letters, to the Samaritans, and
brought in those we now have, from the Chaldeans? 5. He ordered the books of
the old Testament as now we have them? 6. With the grand Synagogue he added the
Hebrew points, and began the Masorah? 7. Xerxes were Hesters husband?


CAP. VI. Chiefetaines.
1. Confer. Alsted. Encyclop. l. 33. c. 3. Graston Chron.
THe sixth Distance from the second Temple to the birth of Christ, containing
the space of 529 years, has three Dynaesties 1. Chiefetaines from the house of
David. 2. Asmonaei or Maccabes. 3. Kings.


These Chiefetaines we have from Saint Luke in this Order.

1. RHESA MESULLAM, of whom nothing is recorded but that he left

2. Ezra came to Jerusalem, with 1500 men. His successor was

3. JUDAS HIRCANUS, when John the High Priest, being provoked by his brother
Joshua, slew him in the Temple. whereupon Bagoses Artaxerxes a powerful Eunuch
in revenge of his friend Joshua, enters the Temple and pollutes it.

4. JOSEPH follows him, The schism between Iaddus the High Priest, and
Manasses his brother falls out about this time. wherein the Antitemple of Mount
Garesim, was built by rich Sanballat, Manasses Father in Law, to put down the
Temple at Jerusalem. Him

5. SEMEI-ABNER succeeded, who saw the fraudulent surprisall of the City of
Jerusalem, with the Temple, by Ptolomaeus Lagi, and captivating of his
Countrymen, in another Egyptian servitude. After him

6 MATTHIAS ELI found small comfort in all those afflictions, Nor

7. M^ATH ASERMAH alias Asar Masat that succeeded him, nor

8. NAGGE, alias Artaxad Nagid, that followed him. About which times, seem to
have grown those horrible projects against the Jews in Egypt, and their
strange deliverance, related in the third of Maccabees: But

9. ESLA alias Haggi Eli, received more kindness in Ptolomeus Philadelphus
days, who procured that translation we have of the Septuagint in Greek, and
set free 120000 Jews from slavery, at his own cost.

10. NAHUM MASHETH, was sharer in the same happiness; whose successor was

11. AMOS SYRACH, It Is said the fosse or Cut, between Nilus, and the Red sea,
which Pharao Necho, and Darius had attempted in vain; was then finished by
Ptolomeus Philadelphus, after Amos

12. MATHATHIAS SILOAH, is only named, his son

13. JOSEPH JUNIOR, alias Arses, is in great esteem with Ptolomeus Euergetes,
as also were Joseph and Hirc anus (of the Priests stock) great Courteors then
in Egypt; about which time Ecclesiasticus was written by Jesus the son of
Syrach. In this line of David

14. IANNES HIRCANUS primus is accounted the last. He defeateth the Arabians in
some Battles, and so wearied with the extremity of the times, is gathered to
his Ancestors.

COntemporary with these were, 1. Highpriests, eminent to be taken notice of
above the rest. 1. Joshua assistant to Zorobabel. 2. Ioachim, who is said to
have written the book of Judith, and Iaddus that met in his Priestly vestments
Alexander the great, coming with an intent to plunder Jerusalem, but he so
pacified him, that he offered Sacrifices to God according to the High Priests
direction; was much taken with the Prophesy of Daniel, then showed unto him,
concerning the Greek Goat, that should break the Persian Ram. Dan. 8.
whereupon he granted to the Jews, whatsoever they demanded of him. Joseph.
Antiq. l. 11. c. 8.

2. External accidents. 1. The Battles of, 1. Marathron, 2. Thermopylae. 3.
Salamina, and 4. Platea, wherein the Greeks had notable victories over the
Persians, and thereupon instituted Cock-fighting. 5. Coriolanus and Alcibindes,
flying off, and vexing their Countries. 6. The Warre^ between the Persian
brethren Artaxerxes, and Cyrus, and the honorable retreat of Xenophon with his
10000 Greeks, with all the business that happened from Cyrus, and his Persian
successors; those of Alexander the Great and his successors unto Antiochus
Epiphanes.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. The forenamed Chieftaines of the line of David, had any
authority of Magistrates amongst their Countrymen? 2. Joseph. Antiq. l. 11. c.
7.
The killing of Iosuah in the Temple, by John his brother, the High Priest,
polluted the Temple and made John irregular? 3. Ib. Ib. l. 13. c. 6.
The Temple in mount Garesim erected by Sanballet, for Manasses his Son in
Law, or that of Onias in Egypt, were any way tolerable? 4. Simeon the
High Priest, were author of the Book called the third of Maceabes, which in
order should be the first? 5. The Greek translation we have under the name of
the Septuagint, be undoubtedly theirs? 6. There were ever a ditch or Cut
perfected to make the Mediterranean, and the Red Sea meet? 7. Jesus the son
of Sirach that wrote Ecclesiasticus, were one of the seaventy Interpreters?


SECT. II. Maccabees.
1. THe second Dynasty, Incidit interregnum Iudaicum per Annos 62. Alst.
is of the Asmonei, or Maccabees, extraordinarily raised up by God, to defend
true Religion.

In this are reckoned.

1. Modin, who 1. killed an Apostate Jew, by the Altar, together with the Kings
commissioner. 2. Afterward destroyed the Heathenish Altars: and circumcised
the Jewish Children by force. 3. Gives directions to his sons to be resolute
in their profession, and defense of their Country; and so dies honorably,
leaving to succeed him in the quarrel, his son

2. Letters which he carried in his Standard, M. C. B. I. which intimate by the
Jews Rashitiboth (...) who is like among the Gods unto thee Ichovah? Exodus
15.11. though others think otherwise. He 1. overthrew Apollonius with his great
host coming against him out of Samaria, and took his Sword from him, which he
after used. And 2. 1. Mac. 4.57.
Seron a Prince of the Army of Syria. 3. Then Gorgias, and Lysias with their
Armies, purifieth the Temple polluted by Antiochus, and (in memory thereof)
appointed the Feast of the Dedication, honored by our Saviors presence Ioh.
10.22. 4. Overcame the Idumeans, Ammonites, and others, 1. Mac. 6.46.
with their great Leader Timotheus. 5. Encounters Eupators huge Host, where
valiant Eleazar slew the Elephant, that crushed him with his fall; makes a
league with the Romans. 6. Defeats and kills Nicanor (Demetrius General) with
all his host. Ib. 9.18.
7. At length venturing with 800 men, upon Bacchides that had 20000 foot, and
2000 horse, after a most resolute rowting of the right wing, he was enclosed by
the left wing, and so slain.

3. JONATHAN his brother succeeeds him. Who 1. John, Ib. ^. 37.
at the great marriage of Ambri: with a few breaks through Bacchides great
Army, endangereth the General himself in his passage, slayes a 1000 men,
swims over Jordan with his company and so quits himself. 2. By the hand of God
stopping the mouth of Alcimus. with a deadly palsy, he is delivered from that
treacherous High Priest, who had mastered the Hasideans, and was pulling down
the Monuments of the Prophets. 3. Discomfited Bacchides before Beth Basim, and
forced him to a Peace. 4. Sticks to Alexander, the son of Epiphanes, who
named him High Priest, and defeats Apollonius the General of Demetrius, and an
host of strangers, when his own men had left him. 5. Renews the league with
the Romans and Spartanes. 6. Is betrayed and slain by the Usurper Tryphon,
leaving his brother

4. SIMON, who was chosen in his place. 1. Tryphon of an 100 talents, which he
sent with Jonathans two sons, to redeem their Father, but lost all. 1. Mac.
c. 13, and 14.
2. He wan Gaza, and the Castle of Jerusalem, continues the League with the
Romans, and Lacedaemonians. 3. Overthrowes by his sons, Cendebeus, Antiochus
Captain. 4. So governes that he is styled the High, and chief Priest,
Governor and Prince of the Jews. 5. Ib. c. 6.
Is betrayed by his Son in Law Ptolomey, and slain with his two Sons
Mathathias, and Judas, at a Banquet in Hiericho, but

5. JOHANNES HIRCANUS, the third brother escaped, Father, and revenge the
parricide. 1. He besieged treacherous Ptolomy in the Castle of Dagon, but left
the Siege, at the woeful sight of the tortures of his mother, who
notwithstanding, animated him to persist in his purpose. 2. Joseph. Antiy. l.
13 c. 14. and 15.
He bravely defended Jerusalem against the siege of Antiochus Sedites, of whom
he purchases his peace with a great sum of Money, supplied, with an
advantage, out of the Sepulcher of David. 3. Ib. c. 16.
He recovereth many places in Syria, and demolisheth the Temple, on Mount
Garisim, which had stood 200 years: causes the Idumeans, to be circumcised,
that resolved to stay among the Jews, renews the League with the Romans. 4.
Utterly razeth Samaria. falls off from the Pharisees to the Sadduces. 5. Being
in a manner, Prince, Priest, and Prophet, after 31. years rule, dies, leaving
his government to his Sons.

1. COncurrent are here. 1. Jewish Priests. 1. Nason that bought the place. 2.
Menelaus, that out bid him, but had little comfort of his bargain. 3. Alcimus
the betrayer of his Country: the last of the race of Aaron. 4. Then Jonathan.
5. Simeon. 6. Johannes Hircanus, of Mathathias stock enjoy it.

2. Onias, building a Mock-Temple, at Heliopolis in Egypt, 2. Macc. 7.
for the Jews of those parts. 2. Heliodorus whipping by an Angel, for
offering to trake the Temples Treasure. 3. The horrible persecution of
Epiphanes, specified in old Eleazarus, in the Mother and her Seven Sons. 4.
In the death of Razis, who to escape Nicanors hands, strangely slew himself.
5. The rising of the Sects of Pharisees Sadducees and

3. 2. Macc. 14.41.
The quarrels with various success between the Seleucidae, and the Lagidae,
until the end of the brethren Antiochus, Grypns, and Cycicenus.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. The second book of Maccabees be the same Authors with the
former, and may be reconciled with it? 2. Mattathias might lawfully slay an
offender, being no Magistrate? 3. Forced circumcision, practiced by Mattathias,
and John Hircanus, may be approved? 4. Hircanus taking 3000 Talents out of
David's sepulcher for secular uses, were not a kind of Sacrilege? 5. He might
not more providently have altered the property of the Temple on Mount Garesin,
then have utterly razed it? 6. The Pharisees, Saducees, and Essenes were
unknown to ancient times, before the Jews commerce with the Grecians? 7. Rasis
resolute killing of himself, may be rather pitied, then defended?


SECT. III. Kings.
1. THe Asmonei thus far contented themselves with the title of Governors or
Highpriests, now they aspire to be Kings, In which descent follows.

1. Johannes Hircanus. 1. He associates to him in the government his brother
Antigonus, but quickly (by his wifes Salomes persuasion) makes him away. 2. He
imprisoneth his three younger brethren, and starved his own Mother, upon
suspcition she affected the Kingdom. 3. For which his conscience torturing
him, after a years Reign he dies miserably.

2. ALEXANDER IANNaeus, his brother, (released by Salome out of prison)
succeeds him, for which kindness he marries the widow. 2. With much ado he
gets Ptoleenais, receives two overthrowes by Lathurus, who was banished
Egypt, by his Mother Cleopatra. 3. The Pharisees are hard against him, of whom
he dispatched at once 50000. 4. Notwithstanding (finding by experience how they
led the vulgar) he exhorts his Wife to close in with them, and to be ruled
altogether by them. This counsel

3. ALEXANDRA alias Salome his wife wisely follows, and so gets the
government. 2. The Pharisees do what they list: and tyrannize over the
contrary faction; The Queen grows to be of 73 years of age, and much broken,
after nine years Reign dies. his eldest Son

4. HIRCANUS (whom she before had made High Priest) succeeded by right. This
(he being but a soft man) hardly maintained by the help of Antipater the
Idumean, and Aretas King of Arabia, who drove Aristobulus his brother, (that
withstood him) out of Jerusalem. 2. The matter came to be disputed (who should
be King) between the brethren Hircanus, and Aristobulus, before Pompey the
Great. He takes with Hircanus, makes a breach on the Temple, lays open the
Holiest of Holies. 3. And having done what he list, hasteneth to Rome, carrying
with him Aristobulus prisoner, with his two Sons and two Daughters, but his
son Alexander escaped by the way. Antigonus was led on, and there kept for a
while. 4. Hircanus held up by Antipater, and the Pompeian faction, at length
falls into the hands of Antigonus (his brother Aristobulus son) who cutts off
his ears, and sends him Prisoner with Pacorus and Barzaphanes the Parthians,
where he was well used by their King Phraates, and returned back again to his
Country. There at the age of 80 years, he was put to death by Herod, who with
his Father and Brethren, formerly had stood so for him. Competitour with this
Hircanus was his Brother

5. ARISTOBULUS the second, he was the more Active man, and by composition had
the Kingdom left to him by his brother Hircanus: but that Antipater with his
sons (backed by Pompey) revived Hircanus title. 2. He being freed from his
imprisonment at Rome by Julius Caesar, to return into his Country, was
poisoned by the way, by some of Pompey's Faction. His son Alexander having
stirred in Iewry as much as he could, to make way for him. 3. This Alexander
had to wife Alexandra, his uncle Hircanus daughter, which bare him the two
paragons of that time, for beauty, Aristobulus and Mariamne. At length,
himself at Pompeys direction is beheaded at Antioch by Scipio. In whose right
and revenge, his Brother

6. ANTIGONUS shows himself; Backed by the Tyrians, Parthians, and other
friends. Invades Galily, takes Jerusalem, held it for a while, but at length is
taken by Socius the Roman leader, after six months Seige. Thence was he sent
to Antony who dispatched him at Antioch. In all this

7. HEROD, had the chiefest stroke, who then had none to withstand his
usurpation. He was the son of Antipater the Idumean, a Rich, Wife, and expert
man, a great friend to Hircanus, and upholder of him against his brother
Aristobulus. 2. In all which excellent parts this second son of his Herod,
came nothing behind him. 3. For executing Ezechias the Thief with his
associates, he is questioned before the Sanedrim, where downright Sanreas tells
him his own, but he was grown too stiffenecked for such a curb. 4. Upon the
death of Caesar, (touching with amorous Cleopatra of Egypt by the bye) he gets
to Rome: There by Antony's means (whom he had well bribed, and still observed)
he is proclaimed King of Judea. 5. Returns and by great industry, valor and
Policy, settles himself in it, makes away with all the Bloud-Royall that
might question his title. Amongst which the sweet Aristobulus in sport, is
duckt to death by his fellow Swimmers, And the beautiful Mariamne his sister,
(through Herod's dearest wife) is executed; (as also her Mother Alexandra
afterward) for pretended Treason. 6. This barbarous cruelty is extended
farther to his own Children, so that Augustus said, he had rather be Herod's
swine then his Son. 7. He was magnificent in buildings, expressed in Samaria
(called by him Sebastia) Caesarea: his own palace at Jerusalem; but especially
in the third Temple by him erected. 8. He escapes many conspiracies, but at
length, after the merciless butchery of the Infants of Bethlem, and other
villainous massacres, the hand of God seazeth upon him, so that he dies of a
most horrible, and loathsome disease. In his time 3959. from the Creation our
Savior Christ Jesus was borne. The beginner of the last period.

COncurrent with these times, were the 1. Highpriests. 1. Alexander Ianneus.
2. Hircanus, first put in by his Mother Alexandra. 3. Aristobulus his brother.
4. Ananelus a base fellow, foysted in by Herod, and outed again by him, to
make way for 5. Aristobulus, Mariamne's brother, who was treacherously drowned.
6. Jesus sone of Phebes, who is deprived, to give place to. 7. Simon Boethus,
whose fair daughter, Herod took to wife, after he had executed Mariamne. Him
succeeded 8. Mathias, who was deposed for a sedition. And 9. Joazar placed in
his room, but deposed afterward by Cyrenius, to make way for. 10. Ananus. 11.
Ismael, Eleazar, Simon, and Joseph alias Caiaphas, execute the office by
turns, with Annas, all our Saviors time upon earth.

2. Wars between Cleopatra, and her son Lathurus of Egypt. 2. Those of the
Romans, with Mithridates and Tigranes, the Eastern Potentates. 3. Crassus
defear after he had robbed the Temple of Jerusalem by the Parthians, at
Charras. 4. The rifling of Jerusalem, and the Temple, by Pompey. The civil
Wars, between him, and Julius Caesar, Augustus, and Antonye.

3. Proscriptions of Cicero, and other eminent men of Rome, till Augustus, got
all into his hands, shut up the Temple of Ianus, in token of a general Peace;
and taxed all the subdued Provinces.

INQVIRIES.
Whether 1. Aristobulus did wisely as the times stood to assume the Title of
King, which his predecessors had so long forborne? 2. The office of High Priest
and King amongst the Jews were compatible? 3. The Biting off of Hircanus Ears
by villainy, might make him irregular for the Highpriests office? 4. Jacobs
Prophesy of the departing of the Scepter from Judah, were fulfilled by Herod's
usurpation? 5. Herod were an Indumean of a base stock as Josephus represents
him? 6. Mariamne his fair wife, might be justly charged of conspiracy against
him? 7. The Temple he built, were more magnificent, then that he plucked down?


CAP. VII. The Life of our Savior.
1. THE seventh and last Distance is, from the Birth of Christ, to this
present year 1647.

2. This (for order sake) may be referred to a triple Hierarchy. 1.
Evangelicall. 2. Apostolical. 3. Ecclesiastical.


3. The Evangelicall, Historically only touches upon the Sayings and Doings of
our Savior, Registered by the four Evangelists, from his Birth until the
descending of the Holy Ghost.

4. According to these heads, or the like, of His 1. Private Life. 2.
Preparation for exeqution of his Mediatorship. 3. Sermons. 4. Miracles. 5.
Conferences. 6. Sufferings. 7. Triumphs.


5. Private Life. Math. 3.
His Private life before his Baptism, for the space of about thirty years,
holds forth unto us. 1. The Prophesied preparation of John Baptist to be his
forerunner; of the Blessed Virgin Mary to be his Mother; of Joseph, Mar. 1.
Luke 3. Luke 2.
to be the faithful Guardian of his Infancy, and Pupilage. 2. His Nativity at
Bethlem Ephratah, in a Stable, welcomed in, and Preached by a quire of Angels,
That sent the Sheepheards to see it, who found it as 'twas told them from
heaven. In which mean place, Math. 2.
(it may be well thought) he was the eight day Circumcized. 3. His visiting by
the wise Easterlings, who schooled by Herod, to bring information where they
found him, followed the directions of a better Master, and returned home
another way. 4. Luke 2.
His Mothers Purification, with Simeons and Hannahs open Testimonies of him in
the Temple, as it were under Herod's Nose, whiles he expected to hear from the
Wise men, or was taken up (perhaps) by more Courtly employments. 5. His Flight
into Egypt, by an Angels direction, whereupon followed the Massacre of the
Bethlem Infants, of two years old, Math. 9.
and under, wherein (some affirm) that 14000, or thereabout, were Butchered.
6. His return, and settling with his Parents in Nazareth. 7. Luke 2.
His going with them to Jerusalem at the Passover, where by his Conference,
and Questioning with the Doctors, he astonished all the hearers at his
understanding, and answers, whence returning with his Parents to Nazareth, he
subjected himself unto them, and exercised as some think the Trade of a
Carpenter. ( Baronius thinks he made yoaks, alluding thereto, in that he
professes, My yoke is easy. Mat. 11.30.) Until

6. His Preparation for the work of his Mediatorship. Preparations.
In which these particulars are most remarkable. 1. His public Baptizing by
John in the River Jordan. 2. The Testimony of his Father from Heaven, This is
my beloved son in whom I am well pleased, reiterated with that addition to
the three Apostles, in the Mount, Hear him, and confirmed more publicly in a
voice from Heaven. Io. 12.28. Mar. 1. Math. 3. Luke 3. Ioh. 1.
I have glorified it, and will glorify it again. 3. The descending of the Holy
Ghost, in a bodily shape like a Dove, and abiding upon him; who thereupon led
him into the Wilderness. 4. His fasting there forty days, and forty nights.
5. His tempting by the Devil, Luke 10.18. Io. 14.30.
whom he vanquished, and beheld afterward falling from Heaven, as lightning,
and returning at last as a Prince of this World, could find nothing in him to
except against. 6. His returning into Galilee, and gathering Disciples, where
we have the distinct callings of Andrew, Mat. 9.
and Peter, James, and John, and afterward of Matthew from the receipt of
Custom, to be his followers. 7. His sorting of them, Twelve he ordained by
name, Mar. 3.14.
that they should be with him, to be sent forth to Preach, and seventy others,
he appointed, to go two and two before him, Luke 10.5.
to such places as he himself would come.

7. Sermons. Math. c. 5, 6, ^.
Of his Sermons upon these preparations (to omit other) we have in Saint
Matthew. 1. His Catecheticall Cap. 5, 6, 7, declaring the qualifications of
those that aim at blessedness, Ib. c. 10.
and the means that lead unto it. 2. His Concio ad Clerum c. 10. or Sermon to
the Clergy, instructing them, what to do, Ib. c. 11.
how to teach, and what to expect. 3. Concio pro Clero, his Sermon in the
behalf of the Clergy, wherein he justifyeth John Baptist, and his Doctrine,
taxes perverse, and censorious hearers, and inviteth the meek and lowly in
heart, Ib. v. 30. Ib. 13.
to come unto him, and undergo his yoke. 4. His popular Sermon, to the
promiscuous Multitude c. 13. concerning the diverse effects of the Word
Preached, the pretiousnesse of it being embraced, and the strickt account that
is to be given of it. Ib. c. 18.
5. His Irenicon, or Sermon for composing differences, wherein the authority of
the Church is asserted, and a heavy doom denounced against such as slight it,
and will not be drawn by Gods forgiving us to forgive their Brethren. Ib. c. 23.
6. His Elenchicall or Sermon of Reproof against the Hypocritical Scribes and
Pharisees c. 23. Whose true Doctrine notwithstanding he will not have rejected,
through hatred or prejudice to their Persons, but their Arrogance to be
avoided, Ib. c. 24.25.
and their pretenses of Religion, for their own wicked ends, to be detested. 7.
His Prophetical of the destruction of Jerusalem, the end of the World, and the
Day of judgment, with the manner of it.

8. Miracles.
His Miracles follow to back his Sermons. Of which some have pitched upon 34.
others have reckoned 57. Simon de Cassia. Salmeron. A Lapide. Io. 2. Math. 15.
Math. 7.
all may be disposed according to the places in which they were performed. As
1. In Galilee. The turning of water into Wine, dispossessing the Woman of
Canaans daughter. The curing of one Deaf, that had an impediment in his
speech, by putting his fingers into his ears, and touching his tongue with his
spittle. 2. In Capernaum, The curing of a Noble man's son, Io. 4. Mar. 2.
Math. 9.
at a great distance, Of the Paralitique that was brought in a bed, and let
down through the roof of the house before him, Of the raising of Iairus
daughter, etc. 3. Beyond Iordane, the dispossession of a Legion of Devils,
Mar. 5.
and sending them into the heard of Swine. 4. On the Sea, in commanding the
wind and waters, walking on the waters, assembling the Fishes at his pleasure
to be taken, whereof one brought money in his mouth to pay tribute. 5. Math. 57.
Io. 6. Math. 14. and 15. Luke 7.
In the Wilderness by feeding 5000 with five Barlie loaves, and two fishes,
and 4000 at another time, in the like miraculous manner. 6. In Judea, The
raising of the Widows son of Naim, and of Lazarus, when he stunke in his
grave, are Wonders never elsewhere heard of. 7. And lastly in Jerusalem, Jo.
11. Io. 5. Io. 9.
The quiting of the impotent man at Bethesda, of his eight and thirty years
languishing: The opening of the eyes of him that was borne blind, with like,
which to these places may be referred.

9. These were intermixed with his Conferences, Conferences.
distinguishable by the parties conferred with, So we have his discourse with
1. Nicodemus of Regeneration, and Salvation, by his lifting up, from the biting
of the old Serpent, Jo. 2.
as the Israelites were cured by Moses Serpent in the Wilderness. 2. With the
Woman of Samaria at Jacobs well: Ib. 4.
concerning the coming of Messiah, and Gods spiritual Worship. 3. With the
Pharisees, of Traditions, Sabbath, math. 15.
and the Author of his Doctrine, and Miracles. 4. Ib. c. 22, Luke 10.
With the Sadduces, concerning the Resurrection. 5. With the Lawyers about the
First and Greatest Commandment, and who may be termed our Neighbor. 6. With
the People, Jo. 6.
touching the Bread of Life, and spiritual Manna, and their senselessness, in
not acknowledging the Messiah. 7. With his Disciples and followers, Math. 20.
Mar. 10.
affecting supremacy, and being disheartened at his low condition, and
foretelling them of greater sufferings that should fall upon him.

10. Sufferings. Math. 26. Mar. 14. Luke 22. v. 52.
These sufferings he endured. 1. In Gethsemane, when he was in his greatest
Agony, exceeding sorrowful, very Heavy to the death, prayed, and his sweat was
as it were great drops of blood. 2. In his apprehending, by the Chief Priests,
Captains of the Temple, Judas, and the rascal multitude. Luke 23.
3. In the Ecclesiastique Consistories of Annas, and Caiphas. 4. In Herod's
Court by Jeerings and Mockings, and returning him to Pilate in a robe of
Scorn. 5. Under Pilates hands, where he was tumultuously voted to be
crucified, against the Judges acquitting of him, and a seditious Murderer
accepted before him. Io. 19.
6. In his Crowning with thorns, spitting upon, scourging, and burdened with
his own cross, by the executioners, after his condemnation. 7. In his torments
on the Cross, by mockings, revylings, relieving only with Gall and Vinegar
piercing his side after he was dead. When the Heavens put on their blacks, the
earth staggered, the Rocks rent, the graves opened, the Temples veil was torn
from the top to the bottom, at such transcendent Impieties, for continual
remembrance of which we have the Sacrament, Instituted solemnly by himself at
his last Supper.

11. Triumphs. Colloss. 2.15.
And upon this Consummatum est, or Finishing, succeeded his Triumphs. 1. Over
Principalities and Powers of darkness, by spoiling them and showing them
openly. 2. Over the Grave and Death by his Resurrection. 3. Over all
oppositions and Impediments, Act 1.
by his forty days conversing with his Apostles, in ten infallible
apparitions, instructing them in those things that pertain to the Kingdom of
God. Io. 20. Math. 28.
4. In giving them full Commission to teach, and list all Nations by Baptism,
In the name of the most Sacred Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and to
remit and retain sins, by virtue of the Holy Ghost, which he breathed upon
them. 5. In trampling the World under foot, by his Glorious Ascension. 6.
Ruling in the midst of his, Psalm. 110.
and his Churches enemies. by the rod of his strength, as he sits at the right
hand of the Father. 7. And last of all by sending of the Holy Ghost, to furnish
his Apostles and their Successors, for the propagating of the Gospel, to the
utter dissolving of all the depths of Saetan, and his incessant Machinations.
The ridiculous parallel of Apollonius Tyaneus with our Savior, by Hierocles,
and the malicious exceptions of R. Nizachon, against his doings and Miracles,
are fully answered, by Eusebius, and Munster, in Math. Hebraice.

12. About this fullness of Time, Gal. 4.
in our Saviors being upon earth, appeared. 1. The great Wits for Poetry,
Virgil, Ovid, Horace, etc. for Oratory Cicero, for History Salust, Livy,
Trogus, Pompeius, Strabo the Geographer. 2. Triumphant Warriors, Pompey, Julius
Caesar, Augustus. 3. Notorious Impostors, Simon Magus who proclaimed himself
to appear, as God the Father to the Samaritanes, Ireneus l. 2.
God the Son to the Jews, and God the Holy Ghost to the Gentiles. Theudas a
Magitian, that missed a multitude, to pass over Jordan, which he bore them in
hand, should divide it self, but himself and those with him, were all slain
or scattered. Act. 5.36.
Judas of Galilee, who would not endure to pay Tribute, or acknowledge any
Lord: which some make the reason that our Savior and his Apostles, were so
punctual against this madness, least they should be thought such Galileans,
Eusebius. E. H. l. 4. c. 6. Dion Cassius in Hadriano.
as favored Rebellion. such a one was Barcochebas, afterward a fatal Comet,
who with his new light was the destruction of 50000 of his followers. 4.
Silencing of Oracles, as that of Delphos, where Augustus Caesar urging the
Devil for an answer, was told that an Hebrew child, had stopped his mouth, and
sent him with a Mittimus to Hell, and therefore, he might spare labor or cost,
Peucer. de Oraculis.
to consult with him any more. The like was the Lamentation for the death of
the great God Pan in Plutarch. 5. The discovery of the Abomination of the Idol
Priests in Rome, upon the abusing of the noble Matrone Paulina, by Decius
Mundus, whom he could not bring to his Lure by money, but had his will of, under
the mask of Anubis to which Dogs head she was devoted, Joseph. Ant. l. 18. c.
4.
which was the destruction both of those bawdy Priests and Temple. 6. The
expelling of Players from Rome for the like villainies. And 7. the fall of
Sejanus, Tyberius great favorite, with the disgraceful and horrible executions
of his Son and Daughter.

Inquiries.
Whether 1. Protoevangelium Iacobi, and the Book of our Saviors Infancy be
altogether fabulous? 2. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 2.
The Epistle of Lentulus, describing our Saviors feature of body, or that of
Pilate to Tiberius concerning his miraculous Acts, may pass for current? 3.
Suidas in verb Jesus.
The story of Jesus registring amongst the Priests, under the title of the
Son of God, and Mary the Virgin in Suidas, be of any credit? 4. Eccles. Hist.
l. 1. c. 14.
Agbarus letter to him, and his answer to Agbarus, in Eusebius, may be taken
for truth? 5. Antiq. l. 18. c. 4. Eusebius. Ecclesiast. Hist. l. 1. c. 12. Ib. c.
7.
Josephus Testimony concerning the Divine carriage of our Savior, and pious
conversation of John Baptist, may be suspected for an Addition of the
Christians? 6. The Eternal Gospel invented by Cyrillus a Monk, to uphold the
Papal tyranny, heresies, and Idolatry, tended to the extinguishing of
Christianity? 7. See forth by Ludovicus de Dieu in the Persia^ tongue and
Latin, with Animadversions.
The mixed Gospel of truth and trash, tendered to Acbar the great Mogul, by
Xaverius the Jesuit to inform him in Christianity, be not Impudent and
abominable?


SECT. II. Hierarch. Apostolical.
1. THE Evangelicall Hierarchy, was seconded by the Apostolical, That
contains the Acts of the Apostles, and their fellow laborers, for the first
Planting and settling of the Christian Church, composed of Jews and Gentiles.

2. These Acts were performed by them either At their being together at
Jerusalem, immediately upon the Holy Ghost's descention. After their scattering
by reason of the persecution, and their mission or designment to their several
places.


3. Being yet together, 1. Act. 1^
They solemnly chose Mathias into the place of Judas the Traitor. 2. Ib. 2.
They are inspired by the visible descent of the Holy Ghost, whereupon Peter
made that first Sermon, whereby he gained to the Church about 3000. 3. Peter
and John cure a Cripple, Ib. v. 14.
at the Temples Beautiful gate, whereby at a second Sermon, the number is made
5000. 4. They are thereupon imprisoned, Ib. 4.
and after convented before Annas and Caiaphas, John and ALexander, but pass
unpunished by reason of the People. A public Thanksgiving is made for it,
and contribution, that no want might be amongst the Poor beginners, which
might make them shrink from their profession. 5. Ananias and Saphira, Ib. 5.
are miraculoussy stricken dead, for their lying dissimulation. 6. The Apostles
continue to do Miracles, whereupon they are imprisoned, but are delivered by
an Angel, had before a Council, but escape with an ordinary beating and
threatening, by the wise advice of Gamaliell. 7. Ib. 6.
A murmuring arises of the Graecians, against the Hebrews, for neglect of
their Widows: seven Deacons are chosen to pacify it, amongst whom Steven
proves eminent, Ib. 7.
for his zeal and abilities, which cost him a stoning, but gained him the
Primacy of Martyrdom.


4. After their separation, or scattering; are especially remarkable, the Lives
and doings of the 1. 12. Apostles. 2. 70. Disciples. 3. 7. Deacone.


These Apostles were,

1 SIMON PETER termed also Cephas, Act. c. 3. Ib.
who was sent by the rest of the Apostles with John, from Jerusalem, to
Samaria; to second Philip, who had there Preached Christ. 2. There he
discovered, and confounded Simon Magus, and thence returns to Jerusalem. 3.
Their going again abroad, to visit and confirm the Churches, he arrives at
Lidda, Ib. 9.
where he cures Aeneas of the Palsy, and at Ioppa, raises Tabitha from the
dead, and afterward stayed many days with Simon a Tanner. Ib. 10.
4. In that Tanners house, he had the vision of the sheet, of clean, and
unclean creatures, clapped together. 5. From thence was directed by the spirit
to go to Cornelius, whom he Baptizeth with his Family, and Friends; and so
returns the second time to Jerusalem. 6. Then being questioned for his going
to the Gentiles, gives a satisfying answer, Ib. 11.
and is taken afterward, and imprisoned by Herod Agrippa, but is freed by an
Angel. 7. Ib. 12. Act. 15.
After that we find no more of him, till he gave his suffrage, in the Council
at Jerusalem. 8. From thence going unto Antioch, is reproved by Saint Paul to
his face, for dissimulation. 9. Gal. 2.11.
Afterward what course he took the Scripture mentions not. only we have two
Epistles of his, the first (as it is thought) from Babylon, the second mentioning
Saint Paul's Epistles, and the abuse of them, by diverse. 10. 2. Pet. 3.16.
His being at Rome cannot be proved, or that he left any more writings behind
him, besides those two Epistles which make rather against Popery then any way
countenance it. His life written by Xaverius in the Persian Language, and
translated by Ludovicus de Dieu; is fraught with impudent fables, as his
soliciting the blessed Virgin, to intercede to Christ for pardon, of his thrice
denying of him, and our Saviors making him and his successors his Vicars here
on earth, and the like) as appears in the Animadversions upon it. St Mark is
reported to be with him at Rome where he wrote his Gospel, (some say) in
Lattine, the Original yet remaining in Venice, afterward translated into
Greek by himself, but this is only Jesuitical Tradition, who make Mark the
Evangelist, S. Peter's convert, differing from John Mark, that accompanied S.
Paul, which the Scripture mentions.

2. ANDREW, was first a Disciple of John Baptist, Jo. 40.
then (upon his testimony) a follower of our Saviors; to whom he brought his
brother Peter. 2. He is said to be the Apostle of the Scythians, Sogdians, and
Dacians, to be Crucified by Aegeas, King of Edessa, and buried at Patras in
Achaia.

3. JAMES of Zebedee was the first of the Apostles, Act. 12.
that suffered Martyrdom, under Herod in Jerusalem, and there buried. his
bones were said to be translated afterward to Compostella in Spain, where
Pilgrims make superstitious journies to visit them.

4. JOHN his Brother, was the Disciple whom Jesus loved; and joined in
Commission with Peter, to confirm the convicted Samaritans, by Philip. 2. It Is
said that he was put into a vessel of boiling Oil at Rome, in Domitians time,
which did him no hurt. 3. It is certain, he was banished into Patmos, where he
wrote his Revelation; and after his return to Ephesus, his three Epistles, and
Gospel; which was published by Gaius his Host, and Deacon. 4. Some think he
slumbereth yet under the earth at Ephesus; where he made his own Grave, and in
a manner interred himself; out of which he Preached. More probable is that of
his recovering of a public Thief, who after was made Bishop.

5. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 20.
PHILIP of Bethsaida, Preached (as it is thought) the Gospel in Phrygia, and
lies buried at Hieropolis.

6. BARTHOLOMEW, is said to have gone as far as India, and to have Preached,
where some say he was cudgelled to death, some, Crucified, some, that he was
flayne a live: some, that he was Beheaded: But Peter de Natalibus affirms that
all these tortures were inflicted on him, successively. Visars in Ps. 22.
Father Ambrose Chircher, (a great travailer of late in the Eastern parts)
tells us of a Tradition they have in China, that one Olo Puen was brought
thither from Iudaea in the Clouds, and Preached Christianity amongst them,
whereof he left 27. Tomes behind him, more ('it is to be thought) then can be
shown of S. Bartholomews.

7. THOMAS is reckoned the Apostle of the Parthians, Medes, and Persians, where
he was slain with a dart and lies buried.

8. MATTHEW wrote the first Gospel, (some think in Hebrew) It is not known who
translated it. 2. He is said to have been entertained, Act. 8.
by the Eunuch of Queen Candace in Aethiopia; where he Preached the Gospel,
converted the People, and was Married.

9. JAMES of Alpheus otherwise called Oblias, or Iustus, succeeded James of
Zebedee in the Bishopric of Jerusalem. 2. Concludes the Council there as
President, notwithstanding the presence of Peter. 3. Leaves a Catholic
Epistle for the animating of Faith by Works. 4. Was Martyred at Jerusalem,
after he was thrown down from a Pinnacle of the Temple, by a fullers club.

10. LEBBEUS alias Thaddeus, Math. 10. Act. 1. Act. 15.22.
or Judas surnamed Barsabas, the Brother of James, from him we have an Epistle
to the same purpose with the 2d of S. Peter. 2. He was made commissioner with
Silas, to carry the Counsels of Ierusalems decrees to them of Antioch. He is
said to have gone to King Agbarus, of Edessa, and to have cured, and converted
him, and his, according to the Letter of our Savior, Eusebius. Eccles^ Hist.
returning an answer to a Letter of Agbarus first sent unto him. And there he
lies buried.

11. SIMON the Canaanite, or Zelotes, is said to have done somewhat in Afric,
to be crucified in Brettannia, (says Dorotheus) Volaterane calls it Betani,
Peter de Natalibus, Bethania, which is most like, that (if he were Bishop as
some say of Jerusalem) he might there suffer.

12. MATHIAS came to be an Apostle by election, into the place of Judas
Iscariot, who is reported to have slain his Father, married his Mother, and
betrayed his Master. 2. His Diocese fell out to be Aethiopia, about the Haven
Hissus, and the river Phasis amongst Men-eaters where he dyed. All which
Relations may be noted for Monkish evaporations. To which these Twelve may be
added.

6. St PAUL, first Saul, a persecutor, Act. 9.
then taken off in a miraculous manner by Christ's call from heaven (2.)
whereupon he lies three days at Damascus in an ecstasy, at what time ('it is
thought) he was rapt into the third Heaven, and made (...) taught by Christ
himself; then restored to his sight, and Baptized by Ananias. (3.) From thence
he goes into Arabia, Act. 9. 2 Cor. 11. Gall. 1 18.
and having spent there three years in Preaching, returns to Damascus, but
hardly thence escapes, in a Basket: and comes to (...) to see Peter, or
confer with him in Jerusale^, after James of Zebedees Martyrdom, and a
little before the imprisoning of S. Peter. (4.) But having notice in a vision
that it would be bootlesse, and dangerous for him to stay there longer, he
betakes himself to Tarsus his own Country, the Metropolitan City in Cilicia,
but staid not long there, before Barnabas came to fetch him away to Antioch,
the chief City of Syria, to help him in his charge, which the Church of
Jerusalem had there designed him, for confirming of those Gentiles which some
of the dispersion of the Jews had formerly instructed. (5.) This they
performed with that Alacrity and success, Act. 11.
that from Antioch, we had first the name of Christians. Thither when Agabus
had repaired to them, and Prophesied of a Dearth at hand; they were sent with a
Collection, by the Church of Antioch, to help the poor Brethren in Jerusalem.
Thence returning they brought John Mark with them. (6.) Not long after, both
of them by express command of the holy Ghost, (after Prayers and Imposition of
hands) are dispatched (taking Mark with them) to that Bienniall Circuit,
wherein Sergius Paulus Proconsul of Paphus was converted, Elymas Bar-Iesu
confounded, many Cities and Countries blessed by the light of the Gospel, Paul
at Listra stoned, where a little before he had bin (with Barnabas) deified.
Notwithstanding under Gods protection (having gotten Titus with them instead of
Mark, (which went to Jerusalem) they returned again to Antioch. (7.) There a
quarrel then being set a foot, by some (...) false Brethren, Gal. 2.4. Act.
15.
concerning the Abrogation of Jewish Ceremonies, he passed to the Council of
Jerusalem, where the business was decided; And then returns to Antioch, where
he made bold to reprove Peter. (8.) Then makes a journey with Silas into Asia
to confirm the Churches, a little before there by him planted. (9.) That being
done he comes from Troas over into Europe, visits Macedon, Thessalonica,
Corinth, Athens, Achaia. (10.) At length returns to Jerusalem, Act. 25, 26 27,
28.
is there Apprehended. Thence sent to Caesaria, answers before Felix, Festus,
and Agrippa, appeals to Caesar, is sent thence to Rome, escapes in the journey
Shipwreck, and the Viper in Malta. (11.) Gets from thence opportunity to make
an excursion to Plant, and confirm Churches: Returns again to Rome. and is
Martyred, (as it is thought) under Nero. (12.) Companions he had of his Travels
and Preaching: Barnabas, Luke the Physician of Antioch, from whom we have this
excellent Gospel, and the Acts of the Apostles, dedicated to Theophilus, who
converted to Christianity converted his house to be a Church. Mark the
Evangelist, Silas, Timotheus, Titus, Aquila, and Priscilla: And in his European
journey, Sopater, Aristarchus, Secundus, Gaius, Tychicus, and Trophimus. (13.)
We have fourteen Epistles of his; some written to whole Churches, some to
particular Men: some before his Bonds, some in them: in this order. Before his
Imprisonment; two, to the Thessalonians, one to Titus, one to the Galathians,
two to the Corinthians, one to Timothy, one to the Romans. In his Imprisonment,
one to the Philippians, one to the Colossians, one to Philemon, one to the
Ephesians, one to the Hebrews, and last of all, a second Epistle to Timothy.
(14.) That Epistle of his to the La^diceans, is merely Imaginary, and those
between him and Seneca forged. The subscriptions for Timothy and Titus being
Bishops of Ephesus and Cr^te, are carped at only by Wranglers.

7. For the seaventy Disciples, we have their Commission from our Savior, Luke
10. but not their names, Peter de Natalilibus tells us of two old Catalogues of
their names, which he found in Rome, under the Name of D^r^theus Bishop of
Tire, the one in Greek, the other in Latin: But just exceptions lie against
both. 1. They disagree one from the other. 2. Instead of 70, the Greek has
72. 3. In both Caesar (perchance Nero) is made a Disciple, and Bishop of
Dyrachium, as Philip and Alexander the Great, are made by some, our Saviors
Ancestors. 4. James, and Cephas (the same with Peter) are degraded from
Apostles to be Disciples. 5. Tarrick Schikardi. etc.
Lazarus is the last of the rank, Bishop of Marsilia, but whether the Beggar,
or the Gontleman of Bethania, it appears not. Ecclesiast. Hist. l. 1. c. 13.
6. Eus^^ius plainly says that the Catalogue of the 70 Disciples is no where
to be found. Petrus de Natalibus, Volateran, and Democharis, who would take
upon them to persect the Catalogue of Dorotheus, dissent from him, and agree
not amongst themselves, See Eusebius in English.
as it appears in Meredith Hanmer's Collation in his Preface to Dorotheus.

8. More certainty is of the seven Dea^ons, Act. 6. who were Ordained by prayer
and laying on of Hands, to make especial provision for the poor.

These are named to be,

1. STEPHEN, whose disputations with the Libertines, we have, 2. Cyrenians, 3.
Alexandrians, and 4. Cilicians. 2. His Apologetique Sermon before the High
Priest, and people. 3. His patient and comfortable undergoing the first
Mar^yredome, Act. 6.7. with him it is said that

2. NICANOR suffered, besides other 2000 Christians (says the Greek Dorotheus)
but two only are found in the Lattaine.

PARMENAS perchance might be one of them; who is said to have dyed in the
presence of the Apostles.

4. TIMON, has not so much mentioned of him, but is left out of the Catalogues.

5. PROCHORVS has more put upon him then belongs unto him; that Foolish-Booke
of the life of S. John. Biblioth. Pat. Hirat. Tom. 1.

6. Revel. 2.6.
NICHOLAS is censured for prostituting his handsome Wife, to quitt himself
from suspicion of ^ealousie, and thence to have given ground to the Sect of the
Nicholaitans.

7. PHILIP called also the Evangelist frighted (with the rest) by Stephens
cruel usage, falls upon Samaria, and there converts them to the Faith; which
Peter afterward seconded 2. Converts, and Baptiseth the Eunuch of Aethiopia.
3. Was rapt thence by the Spirit (as Elias was wont to be) and found afterward
at Azotus. 4. Thence went Preaching to Caesarea, where ^e spent (as it should
seem) the remainder of his Life, Act. 21.
having four Virgin Prophetesses to his Daughters; where he entertained S.
Paul in his passage toward Jerusalem.

COncurrent with these, are 1. Prodigies, forerunning the destruction of
Jerusalem. 1. Charets, and Armies seen in the Air. 2. A Comet like a flaming
sword, perpendicular over the City. 3. At the Passover sacrifice an Ox
brought forth a Lamb. 4. The Brass gates of the Temple flew open of their own
accord. 5. And a voice was heard, to say Migremus hinc. 6. The Horrible
Factions, famine and Sacking of the City by Titus, and the infinite slaughter,
of more then a Million of men. Of the often taking of Jerusalem. vid. Isaacson
page 31.

2. Ill times in Rome by reason of the wickedness, folly, and Pride of their
Emperors, Caligula, Claudius, Nero, etc.

INQVIRIES.
Whether 1. The twelve Apostles in an Assembly at Jerusalem, before their
dispersing, contrived that Symboll which we call the Apostles Creed? 2. It be
likely that if our Savior had designed Saint Peter and his ^uccessors to be
Heads of the Catholic Church, as his Vicars; that himself when he breathed
upon all the Apostles alike. or S. Peter in his Epistles, or Saint Paul to the
Romans, would have given no notice of it? 3. Act. 11.
Antioch having the first Title of Christians, should not be accounted the
Mother Church, rather then Rome? 4. It may be Historically convinced that S.
Peter was either at Rome, or Corinth? 5. Saint Mathews Gospel were first
written in Hebrew, and Saint Marks in Lattine? 6. The Epistle to the Hebrews
be S. Paul^ and Originally written in Greek? 7. Nicholas the Deacon, were the
beginner of the Nicholaitans which our Savior professes to hate. Revel. 2.6.


SECT. III. Good Bishops.
1. THE Apostolical Hierarchy, being thus briefly represented. The
Ecclesiastical takes its turn.

2. This we deduce by the descent of Popes. as being in the Western Church,
not more certain or sincere then others, but notorious.

3. Of these Popes are noted in Peter Crab, Severinus, Binius and others, 1.
Their Lives. 2. Decretall Epistles. 3. Several Decrees. 4. Counsels any way
held in their times. To which may be added 5ly Bulls occasionally sent forth by
them.

4. Here it shall be sufficient, to touch their Lives and peculiar writings,
that are known to be theirs, or are usually put upon them, in their distinct
Classes or ranks.

5. These ranks may be 7. of 1. Good Bishops 32. 2. Tolerable Archbishops or
Patriarks 33. 3. Usurping Nimrods 38. 4. Luxurious Sodomites 40. 5. Egyptian
Magitians 40. 6. Devouring Abaddons 41. 7. Incurable Babylonians 19.


6. The good Bishops succeed in this order, Hierarchy of the Apostles.

1. LINUS, a Tuscan, mentioned by S. Paul in the end of his second Epistle to
Timothy, Clement (they say) was deputed by Peter to his Chair, but he in
modesty puts it off, to Linus (says Ciaconius) and that not without Gods
especial disposing, that an ill example might not thence be taken, for any
Pope afterward to shuse his own successor. 2. He needed not have decreed that
Women should not come into the Temple without a covering, 1. Cor. 11.
S. Paul had taken order for that long before; and few Temples for the
Christians could be showed in Nero's time, under whose first persecution it was
likely this good man suffered. Biblioth Pat. Tom. 1. H^erat. Collon.
The two books put upon him of S. Peter's, and Paul's sufferings, are disallowed
by Bellarmine, and the most of that side, who agree not also upon his successor

2. Athenian, into whose place some foist Cletus a Roman, and turn off this
Anacletus, to follow Clemens, Ciacon. Plat.
some make them to be all one, and thus take up the matter, that the same whom
the Roman Christians call Cletus, the Greeks call Anacletus, no certainty is
here to be had. 2. In his time fell out the second persecution under Domitian,
who caused S. John to be cast into a vessel of boiling oil, out of which
delivered untouched, he is banished into the Isle of Pathmos. This Anacletus
with his Primacy could not help, neither

3. Roman, who should have been first after S. Peter, if his vote would have
carried it, but now follows in the third place. Of him they forge that he
divided Rome into Parish Churches, but got not thereby a poor Vicarage hovell
to shelter himself, from the Banishment of the Emperor Hadrian. 2. S. Paul
acknowledges him (as most let it pass) for his (...) fellow Labourer Phil.
4.3. doubtless he busied himself in better employments, then the setting
forth of Masses, Vestures, and such other Ceremonies. ^olon. 1569.
3. Lambertus Gruterus, has cobled together such Works as are fathered upon
him, by the name of Clementines. which are ten Books of his Recognitions,
with an Epitome of them; containing the Pilgrimages, and Acts of S. Peter;
eight more of the Constitutions of the Apostles, besides 90. Canons, ascribed
also to them, and five decretall Epistles of the same stamp. 4. Since which
time his Epistle to the Corinthians (so much talked of by the Ancients) has
come to light, and is newly set forth in Greek and Lattine, with very Learned
observations, of Mr Patrick Young, Oxon. 1633. 5. Notwithstanding the worth of
this man, he was condemned to hew Marble in the Quarries about the Euxine Sea,
and at length with an Anchor about his neck therein drowned.

4. EVARISTUS, Bethlemite (as Ciaconius would have it) for all this, was not
terrified, from taking the place, whom we may think to have spent his time
better, then in such beggarly constitutions, which are commonly put upon him,
he is said to have been beheaded: And no better sped

5. ALEXANDER, a Roman under Aurelian, Confecton, and use of Holy Water, for
the purging of men's souls, and the driving away of Devils, upon which we have
a merry Lecture of father Busdrakes.

6. SIXTUS then comes by our account in the sixth place, Xystus, though he were
a Roman. 2. He sent (they say) one Peregrine a Priest, to be Bishop amongst
the Gauls, who desired it. 3. Aquila and Priscilla banished from Rome, by
Claudius Acts 18. are said to have continued to this man's time: And that Aquila
to have translated the Old Testament, next after the 72, which will scarce
hold. This man dying also a Martyr left the chair to

7. TELESPHORUS, the son of an Ana^horite, Matrimony) who instituted Lent
from a former tradition of the Apostles, but unwritten.

8. HYGINUS, the Athenian, a Philosophers son, Gossips to Baptism, and set
Iustine Martyr, to make his Apologies for the Christians, whiles he made
Cardinals, (as Ciaconius bears us in hand) and leaves

9. Aquilea to settle the keeping of Easter upon the Lords day, which Hermas
his brother, (that is said to be the Author of the Book entitled Pastor) had
received from an Angel, that he should persuade all men to do.

10. ANICETUS the Syrian that took his place brought in the shaving of Priests
Crowns. In his time Polycarpus met Marcion in Rome and told him to his face,
that he was the first begotten of the Devil.

11. Campanian that follows, is reported to have been a very honest man, and
to have ordained that Marriages should be Celebrated in public, and solemnly
with the consent of Parents.

12. Grecian. To him were sent by our King Lucius, Helvanus and Meduanus, to
request him to supply him, with some faithful Pastors, for the further
instruction of his Subjects in Christianity. Fugacius, and Damianus, were the
men that this Pope dispatched to him with his own Letters, in which he tells
the King that as Christ's Vicar, he might settle matters for Religion within his
own Dominions. 2. To this Pope also Iraeneus is said to be sent from the
Churches of France, to be resolved in some doubts, which Heretics (then
blustering every where) had cast in amongst them. But

13. African his Successor, took more state upon him (by reason the storms
of Persecution in his time, were well blown over) and Excommunicated the
Eastern Bishops, for not keeping Easter upon the same day with him. 2. This
was resisted by Polycrates of Ephesus, and Iraeneus of Lions, and all the
Eastern Bishops, in a full Council of Palestine, who stood for the Tradition
of S. John, and Philip the Apostles; as they of the West did, on that they had,
from S. Peter and S. Paul. This brabble was after agreed at the first Council
of Nice, where the West Church had the hand, and those that would not celebrate
Easter on Sunday, were termed Quartadecimani: Victor being thus Victorious
leaves the Chair, to

14. Roman. This man turned wooden Chaelices into Glasses because (as some
fondly imagined) the precious Blood of Christ, should not soake into them, as
it might into the wood, went barefooted in imitation of our Savior, and
Gelded himself for the kingdom of God. 2. He Moderated in a Disputation
between Proclus, the chief of the Cataphrygians, and Caius that defended the
right, Anathematizing Tertullian, and all others that stood out against him.

15. CALIXTUS of Ravenna that took his place, bold, by reason of the heavy
Persecution under Severus, 2. yet he appointed (some say) the four Fasts,
continued amongst us to this day, but apprehended at length, suffered cruel
Martyrdom, and made way, to

16. VRBANUS a Roman, Pontifical says that he turned the holy Vessels into
Silver, which might seem a matter of great difficulty in those Savage times
under the Beast Heliogabalus. 2. Origines had the hard hap with this, Binius
Ciacon
man's consent to be Excommunicated by Demetrius of Alexandria, but himself
escaped not Martyrdom, nor

17. PONTIANUS his Countryman, and Successor, Cup, in the Isle of Sardinia,
where he was banished, leaving his place to,

18. ANTERUS a Grecian, Acts and Monuments of Martyrs to be Registered, by
approved Notaries; Hunselfe being added to their number by the Tyrany of the
great Cyclops, Maximinus.

19. FABIAN a Roman takes the place, Election, caused by the standing of a
Pigeon on his head. 2. He is said to have Baptized the two Philips, that were
Emperors, and to have addmitted Origene to his Purgation; He suffered under
Decius, Ciacon.
in the seventh Persecution.

20. CORNELIUS a Roman takes his place, Novatianus a Priest of Rome, who
accused Cornelius of Heresy, for receiving those that had fallen into Idolatry
upon their repentance, which the Novatians would not endure. 2. This side of
Novation continued long, in choosing Successive^y a Pope of their own, until
in Celestinus time, they were broken off. 3. Between this Cornelius and S.
Cyprian passed many friendly Epistles, in which Cyprian styles him familiarly
his Brother. At last through the Tyrany of Decius

Incidit in rigidos Praesul Cornelius enses, Says Mantuan.
Cornelius was none of those
Who Kings and Emperors depose.
21. persecution, ventured upon the place, from which be was Banished, but
returns soon again. Cyprian in a loving Epistle gratulates his return. The
same Commerce held between Cyprian and his successor

22. Roman, as it appears in their mutual Epistles, notwithstanding a
difference grew between them, Cor. Cyprian. Ep. ad Cornei. Lucium and Stephan.
concerning the rebaptizing, of the Baptized by Heretics; which Cyprian would
not endure, but Stephanus thought fit: in the carriage of which business,
Stephen bearing himself somewhat too high, is shrewdly taxed by Firmilian.
Apud Cypr. Ep. 75.
He was Martyred by Valerian, and left his Sea to,

23. Athenian, whom S. Laus rence to his power stiffly backed, till he was
roasted on a Gridiron for his resolution. 2. From the grievousnesse of that
times persecution, one Paul fled from Alexandria, and became the first Hermit,
whose life we have in S. Hierome, with his Scholars Hilarions. 3. A book of
430 sentences, in the third volumne of Bibliotheca Patrum, is ascribed by some
to this man, but it falls out to be the work of Sixtus the Pythagorean. His
Countryman

24. Cyprian suffered Martyrdom, and Paulus Samosatenus, vexed the Church with
his Pride and Heresy; which was to his power withstood by this Pope. 2. Who is
also said to have converted Triphonia, the Empress of Decius, and Cyrilla her
daughter with 46000 more to Christianity.

25. Roman that followed him, met with no happier times: in which
notwithstanding, some are so forward to say, that he built Churches, and
appointed Sacrifices for the Martyrs Altars. A Martyr he proved himself and so
was his follower.

26. EUTICHIANUS the Tuscan, Martyrs with his own hands. 2. He is said to have
first blessed Grapes, and Beans, and such like commodities, upon the Altar,
and to have buried the Martyrs in purple vestments.

27. GAIUS of Dalmatia might have better done it, Emperor Dioclesians kinsman:
but for that he sped never the better, neither Gabinius his brother, whose
daughter Sufanna, should have married Galerius the Emperor by the Appointment
of Dioclesian, but she utterly refused it, though it cost her her life.

28. Roman that followed this Gaius, was not so resolute as this Virgin, but
through fear, offered Frankincence to Mars, some say to Isis, and Vesta,
according to that of Mantuan -- victus formidine Christum
Prodidit, and plena Mart is libavit acerra.
Daunted with fear, his Christ he did betray,
And sacrificed to Mars as most men say.
For which he was questioned by the Council of Suessane, as the Traditors were
at Cyrrha in Numidia, for delivering the Bibles to be burnt; but of this he
soon repented, reproved the Tyrant to his face, and dyed a Martyr. His
Countryman near of his name,

29. MARCELLUS follows, Maximinianus the Tyrant; for which he was doomed to
keep Beasts in a stable, made of the house of Lucina a Widow; who in pity had
entertained him, thence he desisted not, to instruct those by writing, whom he
could not by Preaching, until he ended his days in that loathsome place, whom
a Grecian

30. EUSEBIUS succeeded, Maxentius, as fierce as any of the rest. This
Eusebius, Theodoret acknowledges not to be Pope, neither Marcellus, but
Optatus, Augustine, Eusebius, and others do. 2. Some say the Cross of Christ
was found in his time at Jerusalem, by one Judas a Jew, who thereupon became a
Christian, but this bereaves Queen Helene Constantines. Mother of that honor.
3. After much sorrow, and hardness endured by him, he left his place to

31. African, otherwise called Melchiades. In this man's time, Canstantine the
great, is said to have had that great victory against Maxentius, who was
drowned in Tybur, by the fall of the Bridge Milvius. To this Pope Constantine
gave the house of Plantius Lateranus, Ciacon.
proscribed by Nero, which has continued to this day, by the name of the
Laterane Palace, and made him judge of the notable African controversy, between
Cecilianus the Bishop of Carthage, and Maiorinus the Donatist, concerning the
giving up the Bibles to be burnt. Baleue.
But others say, he dyed a Martyr, as all his predecessors did, from the time
of S. Peter. For his successor,

32. Roman, was fetched out from the Mountain of Soracte (where he had hid
himself from persecution) to be Pope. 2. This man is said to have Baptized
Constantine the Emperor, (though Eusebius relate that it was done by Eusebius
of Nicomedia) who thereupon was cured of a Leprosy; and erected S. Peter's
Church in Rome, himself digging the foundation, and carrying away twelve
baskets full of Earth in honor of the twelve Apostles, upon his Imperial
shoulders. And afterward at the instance of this good Pope, built many other
Churches, consecrated to the honor of Saints and Martyrs, made a decree for
celebrating the Lords Day in steed of the Jewish Sabbath. Cod. l. Imp. Tit. de
Feriis.
3. His donation with the rest of his profuse liberality, summed up by
Ciasonius, is incredible. he appointed Sylvester to wear a Crown of Gold, but
he contented himself with a Phrygian Miter. Now a Triple Diadem, is thought
scarce stately enough for his successors. 4. To his time is referred the first
famous general Council of Nice, against Arius: he dyed peaceably in a good
age. And shut up the first order of good Bishops.

2. WIthin the compass of this Intervall, we meet with especial Writers. 1.
Ignatius, accurately set forth of late, by the most learned Primate of Armagh.
2. Justine Martyr. 3. Clemens Alexandrinus. 4. Ireneus. 5. Origin. 6.
Tertullian. 7. Lactantius, with Arnobius, Cyprian and others, who encountered
the damned Heresies of the 1. Basilidians. 2. Valentinians. 3. Marcionites. 4.
Montanists. 5. Encratites. 6. Gnostiques. 7. Novatians. The Synods of Ancyra
for purging the Church from such dross. Of Sinvuessa, against Pope
Marcellinus, that had through fear sacrificed to Idols: diverse for the
settling of Easter to be kept uniformally, and the repressing of Novatians. The
most eminent was that of Nice, against Arius and his faction wherein 318.
Bishops condemned his Blasphemy against the Deity of our Savior, and laid the
ground of that Creed that bears the name of that famous Council. These
troubles were ushered in by the ten noted persecutions by the Heathen
Emperors, which yielded throughout all the Roman Empire an innumerable
company of Martyrs, too many to be Canonized for any Calender.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. That succession may conduce to the Popes Supremacy, which
faultreth and fails in the first foundation? 2. The Decretall Epistles
fathered on the first Popes, may be suspected to be the false ware of Isodorus
Mercator. 3. It be likely that those Religious Popes, in such extreme
persecutions, had liberty or list, to think on making Cardinals or Gossips,
and introduce a rabble of beggarly Ceremonies? 4. Damasus and Anastathius, and
such other Registers of the Popes Lives, be not supposititious Writers, or
shamelesly falsified? 5. Those works fathered on Clemens Romanus, set forth by
Lambert Gruter, be not for the most part of a latter stamp? 6. The Mystery of
Iniquity, began not to work in Pope Victor, when he excommunicated the
Churches of the East, for dissenting about the time of keeping Easter? 7. The
madness of the Gnostiques, Valentinians, Arians, Novaeeinns, and the like, be
not revived and set on foot again by our Modern Fanatiques?


SECT. IV. Tolerable Archbishops.
1. THe good Bishops, having thus sealed their profession with their blood, in
the front of Christ's Army. The second file comes on,

Of 1. Tolerable Arch. bishops. 2. Patriarchs.


The Arch Bishops are 19. for the time of almost two hundred years, in the
ensuing order.

1. MARCUS a Roman, singing of the Nicene Creed, and the giving of the Pall to
the Bishop of Hostia; which afterward when other Bishops procured in like
manner, they sweetly paid for. This Pall was to be of Wool, not of silk, Luke
15.
or any other stuff, to signify the skin of that lost sheep, which our
Savior (by his example) taught to be fetched home, upon the good sheapheards
shoulders from the wilderness. His Countryman

2. JULIUS had a longer time to do more, Athanasius came to Rome, and was
friendly entertained by him; where to give satisfaction of his doctrine,
concerning the Trinity, he made that Creed which we have in our Litturgy,
approved then by Julius, and his Clergy, Ciacon.
and put amongst their Records; from whence it was after taken out, and
published, to be generally received of the Church. 2. By his care also, it was
ordained, that Protonotaries should be appointed to Register the passages in
the Church. But Platina complains that in his time, they were become so
illiterate, that some of them could scarce write their own names in Lattaine,
being foysted into that place from the occupations, of Bawdes, and Parasites.

3. Roman that succeeds him, was not so constant. but either through fear, or
ambition, subscribed to Arianisme, and Athanasius condemnation. 2. Foelix was
clapped into his place, who proved a stouter man, but Liberius recollecteth
himself again, and recovers his seat, in which he dies a Confessor, and
leaves it to this

4. Arians, though he were none himself; but afterward in a tumult, was made
away by them. He made the second Schism with Liberius, and therefore by some
is left out of the Catalogue of Popes.

5. Spaniard hardly got his place, being mainly opposed also by Vrcicinus, who
was elected by the adverse faction; After many bickerings, and much blood shed,
Damasus carried it. 2. He was a great friend to St Hierome, who (as Ciaconius
stiffly maintains) was made Cardinal by him. first, by the title of St
Anastasius, and then of St Laurence. It appears by his procurement, Hierome
much reformed the vulgar Lattaine Edition. 3. He ordered those should be
accursed, that put their money to Use, would pay no Tithes; and appointed Gloria
Patri etc. to close up every Psalm. 4. Some make him the author of the
Pontifical containing the Popes Lives, this is certain, that the Luxury of the
Clergy was at a great height in his time; which gave occasion to the jest of an
Heathen Consul, Make me Pope, and I will straight turn Christian.

6. Roman that followed did less good. He excluded those that were twice
Married, and admitted Monks into Holy Orders. 2. The concei^ he entertained of
the merit of Virginity, made him fierce in prosequuting Iovinian. 3. In his
time, (but not by his means but by the good Emperor Theodosian's,) the Temple
of Serapis in Egypt, was demolished and the Idol broken.

7. errors of Origene; the first that brought up the standing up at the reading
of the Gospel. The doings of

8. Albane are not of much greater note, notwithstanding he was a great
stickler against the Pelagians. 2. In his time Alaricus plundered Rome, but
Innocentius was then at Ravenna, 3. some hand he seemed to have, in the great
conference then held in Carthage, between the Orthodoxe, and Donatists; set
down by Papirius Massonius in Binius. The Grecian.

9. ZOSIMUS did somewhat also that way, Tapers into the Church, 2. forbid
Cleark^ to haunt Alehouses, or Taverns, gave way to

10. BONIFACIUS a Roman, Jocundus a Friest. He was chosen in a Hubbub, being
shrewdly opposed by Eulalius the Deacon, which made the fifth Schism, says
Onephrius. Beda in Collecta in fine, cites a Book of his Miracles, but none of
them are now found Registered.

11. commended, for sending Germanus and Lupus hither into England, Palladius
into Scotland, and Patrick into Ireland, for the rooting out of the Pelagian
Heresy.

12. SIXTUS 3d, a Roman that follows, Bassus, for getting a Nun with Child;
but the matter was decided by a Synod, to Bassus his disgrace. 2. Much he was
for building; and hereby got the title of the Enricher of the Church. 3. At
the Emperesse Eudoxias instance, he made a Holyday, for St Peter's Chair: But
all this could not keep out Gensericus from Plundering Rome.

13. LEO the Tuscan, prevayled better, not only with the same Genserick, but
also with Atylas, whom he dissuaded from the sacking of Rome, which then lay at
his mercy, This is attributed to the miraculous assistance of S. Peter, and S.
Paul, who terrified the Hunnes whiles Leo speak unto him. 2. In his time, the
horrible Earthquakes were assuaged, that ruined many Cities, at the singing of
a new Trisagium, which a Boy rapt up into the Air, learned of Angels, being
this Sancte Deus, Sancte fortis, Sancte and immortalis. Upon the overthrow of
Aquileia by Atylas, the Venetians settled themselves in the Gulf, which now
they have made so famous. 3. Some Miracles are attributed to this man. His
works are set forth in one Volumne by the Cannons regular of S. Martyn in
Lovayne, being 20, Homilyes, and 110 Epistles, to be found in Bibl. Pat. part.
5. p. 789.

14. Hilarus according to Onuphrius) of Sardinia, could not prevail so much
with Odoacer, and his Heruli, as Leo had done with Atylas and his Hunnes, but
that Rome was sacked by their incursion. 2. Two things were notable in this
man's time, the rectifying of the Cyclus Paschatis, or Golden Number, by
Victorinus of Aquitany; and the bringing in of the Letany, (which is yet
retained amongst us) by Mamertus Claudius of Vienna, for the averting of Gods
heavy Judgments, and imploring his mercy. Whence we have the Rogation Week,
about the Ascension. 3. Hilarus is said also to have decreed, that no Minister
should Marry any other Woman but a Maid, by which it appears that Ministers,
might then Marry. But

15. Tiburtine busied himself in no such simple matters. He built Palaces,
took upon him the Jurisdiction of the Church of Ravenna; decreed that none of
the Clergy should hold a Benefice of any Lay man: upon his adorning St Andrews
Church in Rome amongst other, he has these invitatory verses.

Plebs devota veni, perque haec commercia disce,
Terreno censu, regna supernapeti.
Come hear and learn you rowt devour,
To purchase Heaven, out of doubt.
16. Roman Priest, was not so stirring at home, notwthstanding he opposed the
Enoticon, or proposal of Union, by the Greek Emperonr Zeno, to the great
consusion of both Eusterne and Western Churche^.

17. African Bishops son) did more good, in ordering the Canon of Scripture,
and branding counterfeit Books, which passed before for Authentical. 2.
Bellarmine and Baronius be of the opinion, that the Tract under his name De
duabus Christi naturis contra Eutychetem, Biblioth. Pat. Colon. 1618. Tom. 5.
belongs to Gelasins Cycizenus, not to a Pope, who would never have justified
Eusebius, whom he had otherwise censured for an Arian, nor speak against
Transubstantiation. 3. A large Catalogue of Cardinals made by him, is Registered
by Ciaconius, and the Dedication of S. Michaels Church, the Popes Patron, and
the French Kings. Far short of this man, came,

18. ANASTASIUS the second, a Roman, Anastasius the Greek Emperor, (as
Platina reports) for favoring the Heretic Acatius, whose Heresy afterward
himself favored, and communicated with Photinus, till at length with Arius he
purged out his bowels into a Privy.

19. SYMMACHUS the Sardinian then is chosen, opposition of one Lawrence, which
continued some years after. This Onuphrius makes the fourth, but Ciaconius the
fifth Schism. 2. No extraordinary matters were done by him, but that he took
order with the stubborn soul of one Paschatius, to be well chastized in
Purgatory after his death, as Gregory touches in his Moralls, Lib. 4. c. 40.

COntemporary with these were 1. The eminent Fathers of the Lattaine Church,
Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine, and Gregory the great. and those of no less
esteem in the Greek, Athanasius, Basil, Nazianzene, with Chrysostom, which
opposed themselves against the 2. Heresies of the Arians, under whom the whole
World groaned. That denied our Saviors Godhead, and Manicheans that rejected
his word, together with the Pelagians who withstood his Grace, and Donatists
who rent in pieces his Church. In which conflict they were backed, as before
with the famous Council of Nice to quell Arius: so successively, with the
General Council of Constantinople, against Macedonius denying the Deity of
the Holy Ghost: and that of Ephesus which condemned Nestorius for his Blasphemy
against our Savior, and his blessed Mother, upon which followed the Council
of Chalcedon against Euty^hes, confounding our Saviors Natures, to be handled
with the rest distinctly in the History of Counsels. 3. As also, of the
Irruptions of the Goths, Vandalls, Huns, and Herul, which heaped on massaeres
of Martyrs.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. The giving of the Pall were first brought in by Pope Marcus, and
belong only to Arch Bishops? 2. Athanasius Creed depend on the records of Rome,
from whence it was set forth long after the framing of it in the time of Pope
Julius? 3. S. Hierome were ever Cardinal, or wore such a Hat, as the Painters
bestow upon him? 4. Zozimus, Boniface, and Celestine, forged a Canon of the
Council of Nice, to justify their unjust claim of Appeals to the Sea of
Rome? 5. S. Augustine with the rest of the African Bishops assembled in the
Council of Carthage, that withstood them in it, dyed excommunicated by them
for it? 6. The Rogation week and the Letany, had its original from Claudius
Mamercus, of Vienna? 7. Pope Anastasius might legally excommunicate Anastasius
the Greek Emperor?


SECT. V. Patriarchs.
MVch ado has been to pass those nineteen forementioned Popes, for
Tolerable Archbishops, more will be required to justify the fourteen
following for good Patriarchs, of which,

1. HORMISDA of Campania, title from Iustine the Emperor. He was so pert upon
it, as to Excommunicate Anastasius the Emperor, because he stood upon, that it
was the Emperors part to command, and not to veyle bonnet to Bishops.

2. JOHN the first, a Tuscane, that succeeds, Theodoricus King of Italy had
been the death of learned Boethius, and prudent Symmachus, so after he had sent
this John, to Justine the Eastern Emperor, to intercede for the Arians,
(which he did not according to his instructions, but wrote to the Bishops of
Italy to stand out for the truth) upon his return he was sent to Ravenna, and
there died of Famine, in a stinking and noisome Prison. Some strange things are
related of this man, as that when he had once backed a Gentlewomans horse of
Corinth, the Nagge (before gentle) would never permit any after to ride him.
That he restored to a blind man his sight in the gate of Constantinople, and
that after his death he was seen by an Hermit, with Symmachus hi^ Companion, to
throw the soul of the T^r^nt Theodoricke the Arian into Lapari to be
tormented. This man's hard hap deterres not

3. FOELIX the fourth, a Samnite, to venture on his place, Excommunicated the
Patriarch of Constantinople, far enough from him, and at home divided the
Charcell from the Church, commanded extreme unction to be ministered to men a
dying. Benedict the father of Monkery, Priscian the Grammarian, and little
Denise the maker of the Cicle for Easter, ard said to be of this man's time, as

4. Rome was his successor, but with much ado, being strongly opposed by
Dioscours, who dyed shortly in the quarrel, and so this sixth Schism was
appeased. 2. He end eavoured to establish a decree, that every Pope should
choose his successor, but it was so withstood by the Clergy, that he was feign
to disanull it himself, And

5. choosing. 2. This man was surnamed Mercury for his eloquence; had an
Embassage sent unto him, with guists from Justinian the Emperor, for
condemning the Patriarch of Constantinople Anthemius the Arian. An Epistle of
his concerning the Fathers and Sons equality, is much commended. His
successor and Countryman

6. Cardinals son, was sent by Theodotus the Gothish King, to pacify
Justinian the Emperor, who was highly offended, for the death of the Noble and
Learned Queen Amalasunta; upon his coming Anthemius the Eutychian Patriarch
was removed, and Menna set in his place. There is a Confession of Faith
directed by this Agapetus to Justinian: And a tract of his again to the
Emperor, containing good Precepts of Government. He dyed at Constantinople,
but was thence conveyed to Rome to be buried, where

7. Campanian had his Chair, Pope Hormisdah's son, who was somewhat more
then a Cardinal. This man was used hardly by Theodora the Empress, and
Antonia, Belisarita wife, because he would not consent to the putting out of
Menna; and restoring of Anthemius the Eutichean, the Empress favorite. For
this refusal, he was deposed himself, upon pretenses that he dealt under hand
with the Gathes, who then besieged the City. And

8. underminer, was set in his place, and made the seventh Schism. But he had
little comfort of his unjust advancement, for being charged with breach of
promise by the violent Theodora, he was fetched to Constantinople, and there
with a halter about his neck, drawn about the streets, and thence banished. In
return from which he dyed, which made way for

9. PELAGIUS a Roman to take his place; Tottylas besieged Rome, and won it.
Notwithstanding this disaster, this Pope was tampering to claim a Supremacy,
not from Canons of Counsels, or Apostolical Ordinance, but from Christ
himself. It is said that by his Intercession, he somewhat mitigated Tottylas,
But

10. JOHN the 3d his fellow Citizen, Narsete the Eunuch, who turned out the
Goths, and established John in his Chair. There is a decree of his in Gratian
did. 99. c. Nullus, that cutts off any of the Clergy from the Title of Chief
Priest, or universal Bishop.

11. BENEDICT a Roman also, that succeeded, Lombards forraged all Italy, the
grief whereof brought him quickly to his end, That

12. PELAGIUS the 2d might take his place, Roman, in the Besieging of the City
by the Lombards, was made Pope, without Tiberius the Emperors consent, which
Election he sent Gregory to Constantinople for to excuse. The same

13. GREGORY a Roman Succeeded next, Magnus, both for the Extraordinary
matters performed by him, as also for his Learning, though he took the Popedom
upon him unwillingly, and first called himself Servus serverum Dei. 2. He sent
Augustine into England, who spread Christianity amongst the Eastern Saxons,
(The most part of them before being Pagans,) whereas the Britains had at that
time of his coming, seven Bishops and an Archbishop. 3. He translated the
Archbishops Seat from London to Canterbury. 4. Earnestly withstood the claim
of universal Bishop, against John of Constantinople. Plays the Politician
with Mauritius his Preferrer, and graced too much the Traitor Phocas that slew
him. 5. He is said to have staid a Plague, by carrying in Procession the Image
of the Blessed Virgin, and causing the punishing Angel to put up his Sword.
Also to have delivered Traianes soul out of Hell by his prayers, and to have
brought in Candles for Candle. mass, and added four days to Lent. Besides to
have Cancelled his decree against Priests Marriages, upon the finding of 6000
Infant's Sculls in a Fish pond. 6. He is censured by some, to be the last of
the good, but first, of the bad Popes, To be signified by the Angel, flying
between Heaven and Earth. For one that made many Superstitious orders, which
yet take place; but the good he appointed, was never well observed. For of the
Priests he complains, the World is full of them, and yet in the Lords Harvest
there are few Laborers. We take upon us the Office, but discharge it who list,
and I think no dishonor to God can be showed so great, as that which it
tollerateth in Priests, for they are come now to that pass, that they they
Jerre at him that lives humbly, and Continently, and takes better courses then
themselves, with which fall in those Verses of Mantuan, Sordida Gregorij leges
observat Egestas,
Quae teuues scrutatur aquas and flumina summa:
Grande and pinque pecus fundo versatur in Imo.
At sacri proceres qui lina capacia Petri,
Altius immergunt, laqueant genus omne natantum.
Poor Curats only keep Pope Gregory's laws,
And fish in Rills, or Rivers su^ face sweep;
But fatter Jacks and Carpes escape their paws
M^dding themselves in Coverts of the deep.
Now our Peers sinck St Peter's larger Nett,
And in the bottom what they find, they get.


7. His works are set forth in one Volumne in diverse Editions. Containing
upon Job. 35 Books, expositions upon the 7 Penitential Psalms, upon the
Canticles, 22 Homilies upon Ezechiel, 40 upon diverse Gospels. Of a Pastoral
charge, upon the first of Kings. Answer to 12 Questions proposed by Augustine
of Canterbury, twelve books of Epistles, and four books of Dialogues to
Queen Theodolinda, to confirm her, and terrify her Husband with the Horrors
of another World. All which works of his,

14. SABINIANUS a Tuscane, Petrus Diaconus affiemed upon his oath, that he
often saw a Dove whispering at his ear when he wrote, which Dove is commonly
painted with him. This Quarrel grew between Gregory and Sabinian; for that
Gregory freely bestowed Corn amongst the Poor, which Sabinian made them pay
for, whereupon Clamours arose against him, and he to justify himself, said
that Gregory wasted improvidently the Revenues of the Church, to get himself
applause, and persisted in such calumniations to wrong the dead, until Gregory
(believe it who will) appeared unto him, and knocked him on the head, whereof he
dyed, and so put a period to the Tolerable Archbishops and Patriarchs.

2. IN these times may be notice taken of 1. Hillary B. of Poiters, a great
stickler in twelve Books against the Arians: Prosper and Fulgentius, S.
Augustines followers: Orosius the Historian: Priscian the notable Grammarian:
Dionysius Exiguus the setler of the Calendar. 2. The beginning of Regular
Monks by Benedict an Italian Abbot, with his sister Scholastica. 3. The
damnable vexations of Athanasius in the Council of Tire, and otherwise, with
the impostures of Idolaters, Socr. l. 5. c. 16.
discovered in the demolishing of the Images of Cithra and Serapis, and the
stirs upon it in Alexandria, of all which it is sufficient to have given a
touch by the way.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. The Pope may justly challenge a Supremacy over all Bishops, which
so earnestly was opposed in John of Constantinople? 2. Math. 16. Io. 21.
It were not a gross oversight, to have neglected the urging of Thou art
Peter,] and feed my sheepe] If in these Texts, it had been conceived that the
Supremacy was granted by our Savior to S. Peter, and the Popes his Successors?
3. The Clergyes withstanding Boniface the second's endeavor to name his
Successor, were not prejudicial to the Popes Infallibility? 4. Gregory the
great, were the author of the foute books of Dialogues, ascribed to him? 5. He
Got, Trajanus soul out of Hell, by his Intercession? 6. Sabinian brought in
the first use of Bells into Churches? 7. He were knocked in the head by
Gregory's Ghost, for abusing and defaming him when he had gotten his place?


SECT. VI. Usurping Nimrods.
WE have seen the best of the Tolerable Archbishops, and Patriarchs, 38
Usurping Nimrods, become their Successors, for about 250. years, in this order.

1. BONIFACE the third, a Roman. Phocas an adulterous Assassine, (who had most
brutishly slain his Master the Emperor Mauritius) that Popish supremacy,
which to this day, is so much stood upon. 2. Platina.
Then came the name of Pope, to be appropriated to the Roman, which formerly
was usual to other Bishops; and Volumus, and Jubemus, We Will and Command,
Romans 13.
not I beseech you Brethren, to be the style of a Priest. This brought in the
Quaere, that Platina scarce replyeth unto, Quantum reddat Episcopatus? non quot
oves pascuae, in co sunt? What is the Bishopric worth, not what opportunity
is in it, to get souls. 3. Many strange Prodigies, ushered in this supreme
head of the Church. A Commet of a stupendous magnitude, P. Dlaconus L. 18.
Seamonsters, showing themselves to the terror of many, and Mahomets publishing
of his Alcharon, to make work on both sides, for the faithful to defend
themselves. Here then is began the Kingdom of the Beast. Revel. 13. But this
usurper continued not a year, before he was forced by death to part with all
his pomp to

2. BONIFACE the fourth, an other Italian, predecessor. He changed the Pantheon
of mother Cybele, and the heathenish Pagods to be a Fane for the blessed Virgin
and Martyrs, and thereupon instituted Allhallan-day. 2. Turned his Fathers
house into a Monastery, and endowed it with revenues', to farten some Monks he
might make use of. But amidst his many endeavors, he leaves his seat and
business to his Successor.

3. Theodorus another Roman. This man ordered that Gossips should not marry. 2.
Some say he was Cardinal of S John's, Era Christiana, or year of the Lord.
and S. Paul's being so styled by Gregory the first, who first brought in the
account from the Birth of Christ. He is reported to have cured a Leeper with a
kiss, yet in his time such a Leprosy reigned, so disfiguring men, that they
could not be known. And then, Impious Cosroes of Persia, having gotten (as he
thought) the Cross of Christ, placed himself in the midst, Ciacon.
that on the Right Hand, and a Cock on the left, in contempt of the Trinity,
which he paid for afterward.

4. fifth comes in this man's room, of the fame Country. Asyla.
He did little worth the noting, but only privileged Murderers, and Thieves,
that took sanctuary, should not be thence plucked out, to suffer by the hand
of Justice. His Countryman

5. Pope was censured by the third Council of Constentinople, to be a
Monothelite. but Onuphrius, Ciaconius, Bellarmine, and Baronius with diverse
others of that side, labor to quitt him. 2. He clothed S. Peter's Church with
Jupiter Capitolinue coat, and instituted the feast of Exaltation of the
Cross, leaving

6. Roman to do less; from whom Isacius the Exarch of Italy, took away the
Laterane treasury to pay his Soldiers, for which Severinus severity dared not
to Anathematize him, for Popes as yet were the Exarchs creatures, so was

7. Dalmatian, who with the remainder of the Treasury of the Church, redeemed
some exiles of his Countrymen, 2. He busied himself more then need about the
celebration of Easter, and the translating of Martyrs bones. Yet wrote into
England against the Pelagian Heresy. 3. Under this Popes nose, Rhotharis of
Lombardy placed two Bishops in one Sea, the one a Catholic and the other an
Arrian.

8. THEODORUS a Grecian that follows him, Jerusalem's son. He makes bold to
deprive Pyrrhus Patriarch of Constantinople, for the Heresy of the Acephalies,
who differed not much from the Monotholites.

9. first an Italian that comes after him bestirres himself in decking of
Churches, and appoynting of Holy Days, and commanding Priests to shave their
Polls, and to keep themselves single. 2. For being too forward in deposing Paul
the Patriarch of Constantinople, he was fetched to Constantinople by Constantius
the Emperor, De Romans l. 4. c. 12.
and banished into Pontus, where he dyed. Bellarmine strains himself to
justify this Pope against some imputations of the Magdeburgenses. but

10. EUGENIUS I. the Roman that succeeds him, Bishops to have prisons for
their Priests, who were so bold with the Pope himself, that when his Holiness
had received heretical Letters, from the Patriarch of Constantinople, they
threatened that they would interdict him, from saying Mass before he had burnt
them.

11. troublesome time. Wherein Constans the Greek Emperor came to Rome, and
after some complements of kindness, rifles it, especially of the gay Pictures,
and rich Statue's. 2. Maurus Archbishop of Ravenna is excommunicated by this
Pope, but retorts the same kindness upon him again. 3. Theodorus a Greek,
and one Hadrian an African, are sent hither into England by him, to bring in
the Lattaine service, being the year 666. just the number of the Beast; of
which the word (...), and (...), (by Baleus Reckoning) give a shrewd account.
Monkery was much in request in this man's days. Which having a period, way is
given to

12. A DEO DATUS or Theodatus his Countryman, Monk, and in the Popedom did
little, besides the repairing of Erasmus Monastery in Mount Caelius, of which
he ahd been. 2. Ciacon.
He decreed that Maurus Arch bishop of Ravenna, should not have Christian
burial, in regard he denied to stoop to the Sea of Rome, as Reparatus his
successor did. 3. Earthquakes, Comets, and Tempests much amazed men in this
man's time. Amidst which

13. Roman succeeds him, he so lays about him, ^iacon.
that Theodorus Arch bishop of Ravenna submits his Church unto him, upon a pett
taken against his Clergy, for not affording him due attendance. (Which Church
before for standing out against Rome, was nicknamed by the Romans Allo, Plat.
or Autocephelus.) 2. He made a Paradise of S. Peter's Church Porch. 3. In this
man's days, King Dagoberts soul of France, being at the brim of Lippari, to be
thrown in by the Devil, was manfully rescued by S. Denis. S. Martin, and S.
Maurice, whom in his life time he had honored. And Idelfonsus the Spaniard for
defending the blessed Virgins immaculatenesse, against some Heretics of those
times, was rewarded by that Patroness with a new Coat for his labor. A Monk
of Scicily.

14. Chair, and 1. Commands that the Popes sanctions, should be as firmly
kept, as the Apostles. 2. He dispatcheth one John Abbot of S. Martins into
England, Gras. did. 19. Bed. lib. 4. c. 18. Platina.
to have our Church Service in tune; and other Romish injunctions. 3. Two
John's, John Bishop of Portua, and John the Deacon of Rome, are sent to the
sixth Council of Constantinople against the Monothelites, where John of Portua
said Mass in Latin, which took very well amongst the giddy Greeks, he dies
of the Plague, and leaves in his place

15. Scicilian, a man skillful in Greek, as well as Lataine, and an excellent
Musician. 2. He ratified the sixth Synod to confirm the Mass, and restrain
the Western Priests Marriages, brought in the kissing of the Paxe. 3. By the
Emperor Justinians means, he subjected the Sea of Revenna to the Roman
Chair, and put out the eyes of Foelix the Archbishop that stood against it.
All this was done in ten Months. Then^

16. Pope also but of Ten Months sitting, in which he got to be first styled
the Vicar of Christ; and of Constantine the fifth, that the Pope should be
freely elected by the Clergy, without consent of the Exarches, or Emperors.
This was more then was performed by his Successor

17. JOHN the fifth a Syrian, of whom we only have, that he was consecrated by
the three Bishops of Asia, Portua, and Valaterne, which Ceremony was continued
to after ages. 2. He is said to have written a book of the Archbishops Pall.

18. CONON the first, a Thracian, comes next, Peter an Archbishop, and the
Soldiers for Theodorus a Priest. 2. He sickned presently upon his Election,
perchance (as Ball says) through some unwholesome draught. 3. It is agreed
upon, that one Paschalis, an Archdeacon, gave a great sum of Money to John
Platina, Exarch of Ravenna, (one of the six Princes of Italy) to be Pope after
him, but the plott took not, and so all was lost. 4. St Killian the Scotte,
with some others were sent by this man, to convert some places of Germany,
where they were Martyred. He was not Pope a Year, but after Eleaven Months,
left the place to

19. SERGIUS the first, a Syrian, who got it, Paschalis and Theodorus,
competitors before with Conon, who possessing (with their several partisans)
the palace of Laterane, by the choice of this Sergius they were driven out. 2.
For refusing to receive the Canons of Trullo; he was sent for to Constantinople
by the Emperor Justinian, but the Italians rescued him, and forced Zacharias
Protospatarius (who had commission to bring him) to protect himself, by
creeping under the Popes Bed. So small a matter was it then held, upon pretext
of Religion to oppose Authority. 3. This Pope, was shrewdly suspected for
Adultery, and was taxed of our Archbishop Anselme for it.

20. JOHN the sixth a Grecian was put in his place, Premonstratensis says) and
Sergius reinvested. But others go on here with an orderly succession, making
this John famous for feeding the Poor in a great famine, and ransoming
Captives, with the Church Treasure. Some say he dyed a Martyr, but none tells
why, or by whom. His Countryman of the same name,

21. Seventh follows, Noted for nothing but for building some Churches, and
erecting, and varnishing Images. His Son (as Ciaconius seems to make him)

22. Dioscorus. 2. This man by reason of the gout, both in his hands and feet,
could not do much: yet left provision for repairing the City Walls, Baleus.
Nauclerus.
and Temples. It Is thought by some, that Dioscorus set him packing within three
weeks by a Potion.

23. first a Syrian also succeeds him. This stirring man was the first that
permitted Justinian the second to kiss his Feet. 2. He peremptorily resisted
Philippicus Bardanes, with John the Patriarch of Constantinople, for their
defacing of Images, and thereupon would not snffer the Emperors Picture in his
Coin. 3. It Is thought Anthemius was incited to Rebel by his means, and put
out Philippicus eyes with a burning Basin, (which Platina describes.) 4. By a
slight he subjected the Church of Ticene, (that before belonged to Millaine,)
to his Sea. 5. In this man's time Kindred and Offa, two of our petty Saxon Kings,
were persuaded to forsake their callings, and become Monks.

24. second a Roman seconds him, and outvyed him in the defense of Images. 2.
Excommunicates Leo Isaurus the Greek Emperor, for standing against them, and
banisheth Germane Patriarch, of Constantinople, and Damascene, who pleaded for
them. 3. From this man, our Countryman Boniface went, that converted the
Germans, and at length suffered amongst them. 4. He forced Luitprandus King of
Italy to confirm some Donations of his Predecessor Arithpert, and most of the
States of Italy, and Spain, to Revolt from their Emperor, and bind themselves
by Oath to his obedience. And so the Emperors of the East, for their standing
against Images, lost their interest in the West, by this holy Fathers
contriving, Of his Writings see Baron. Tom. 9. ad Annum 13.

25. GREGORY the third, a Syrian, quarrel of Images, (if it may be so said)
thirds his Predecessor, 2. Excommunicates again the Emperor Leo Isaurus,
drives the Greeks out of Italy by the Lombards, and overtops the Lombards
afterward by the French, under the Conduct of Charles Martell, who had a great
hand at that time against the Saracens. 3. He forbids men to eat Horseflesh,
and wrote to Boniface of Germany, that his Priests should have shaven Crowns,
and pray, and sacrifice for the dead, in their Masses. But

26. ZACHARY the first a Grecian, de facto deposes Childerick King of France,
(God knows by what right) and with the same high hand turns off Lachis, or
Rachis King of Lombardy, Plat. Ciacon.
and Carloman of France, from there Thrones, to be Monks. The Papists say it
was their own seeking; but their Prelates should have instructed them better.
2. This Zachary is said to have translated Gregory's Dialogues into Greek. 3.
Virgilius a Bishop is condemned by this man, See Ramus in Praef. Mathemat.
for holding there be Antipodes. One Stephen is reported to have been Elected
in his Room, but dying presently Unconsecrated by reason whereof,

27. STEPHEN the second a Roman near at hand, Place. He wrought so with Pipin
of France, that he came into Italy and outed Aistulphus of Lombardy, which he
bestowed upon the Pope, for freeing him of his Oath to his Sovereign
Childerick, and shaving Childerick again to make sure work, and thrusting him
into a Monastery. 3. Upon this success, he was the first that was carried upon
men's shoulders, him succeeded his Brother,

28. PAUL the first a Roman, Theophylact. He Excommunicates Constantine
Copronimus the Greek Emperor, upon the old quarrel of Images. 2. An Image of
Christ pricked in hatred by the Jews, yielded blood, out of its side that
cured all Diseases, (except stupid credulity) and thereby converted many of
them, 3. he honored much St Petrouell, who was St Peter's Daughter.

29. third a Sicilian, with much ado gets his place. For Constantine (Brother
to King Desiderius of Lombardy was in for a whole year) but was outed again,
Baleus Plat.
because he was but a Layman, and one Philip, that was chosen, lost it for
want of means to defend it. 2. he brought in the worship and censing of
Images, and subjected Millaine to his Sea which fell to

30. first a Roman, a great patron of Images, for which he wrote a Book. 2.
Notwithstanding he could captivate the poor Orphans of Bertha, the Widow of
Caroloman, who were the right Heirs of France, 3. for this he went not
unrewarded by Charles the Great, who confirmed his Fathers gifts to the Roman
Sea, by adding the Dukedomes of Spoleto and Benevent unto it. And when all is
reckoned, this is that which they call Constantines donation.

31. third a Roman succeeds, who as his Predecessor Hadrian by closing in with
Charles the Great, had ruined Desiderius of Lumbardy, and extinguished that
State, which had stood in Italy 200 years. Also this man at his first
entrance, (to curry favor with the same victorious King) prostitutes his
Keys, and Roman Liberties at his feet, which the Romans took so ill, that
having gotten the Sycophant abroad, they plucked him from his Horse, and whipped
him like a Rogue. Victorellus upon Ciacon strongly maintains, that in that
hurry his eyes were plucked out, and tongue cut off, but soon after restored
by miracles. 2. Charles with the soonest has word of this abuse; comes to Rome
for righting of it, the Pope cleares himself from all imputations laid against
him, by his own Oath; the People cry that the Apostolical Sea is to be Judged
by none. Thus the Pope is freed, Charles for his pains, pronounced Emperor,
because they of the East, were too far out of the way, to serve the Popes
turn. The new made Emperor takes Oath to defend and protect the Roman
Church, and obey it. 3. Certain Miracles, voyced to be wrought by the blood of
a Rood at Mantua, are confirmed by this Pope.

32. STEPHEN the fourth a Roman gets his place, Emperors Election, as it was
promised to Charles, by his Predecessors, Adrian and Leo, but by choice of
their own Clergy. 2. This in Person he goes to excuse to Lewis the Emperor in
France, and with some Complements in crowning the Emperor and his Wife, by the
titles of Augustus, and Augusta, salves all the business, 3. Returns to Rome,
and makes a decree, that it shall be in the Clergies Power to choose the Pope,
but not to consecrate him, but in presence of the Emperors Ambassador. So
prettily could these men juggle to delude their best Friends, and work their
own ends. In the same manner, without the Emperors suffrage, his Countryman

33. PASCHALIS the first was chosen, cunningly, to Lewis the Emperor, that he
not only obtained a relaxation of his Right in choosing of Popes, but a larger
donation to the Church of Rome, of territories, and revenues then formerly by
his predecessors had been granted. 2. He was shrewdly suspected for making away
in a tumult, some great men, that withstood his projects in the Emperors
behalf, but his own Oath was sufficient to clear him, whereof he might be
absolved at pleasure. With more ado another Roman,

34. EUGENIUS the second got the Chair, Zinzimus, he is much commended for his
bo^nty to the Poor. 2. In this man's time, Michael the Eastern Emperor, sent
to Lewis the Western, to know what he thought concerning Images. Lewis
referres the matter to Eugenius, what his decision was, none mention. Some say
there was a Conference about it, at or about Paris, Baron. Ciacon. Stella.
and that Eugenius was slain by the Romans: others acknowledge no such
matter, but that he dyed peaceably, leaving

35. Citizen his successor, A man of too good hopes to keep the place long.

Hune tantum terris ostendunt fata, nec ultra
Esse sinunt. --
This man was shown, but must not stay,
The Fates do snatch him straight away.
As Ciaconius says of him. After forty days therefore he left his keys to

36. Citizen, who would not accept of them, without the Emperors approbation.
2. Between whom and his Rebellious sons he went into France, to make Peace,
but could not effect it. 3. Intolerable was the luxury of the Clergy in those
days, against which a Synod was held at Aquisgrave, and Platina mentioning it,
adds Vtinam nostris temporibus Ludovice viveres. would God o Jews thou had
lived in our times.

37. Os porci Hogs-snout, but that was when he was Baptized, the Popedom
proved a greater matter unto him for to change his name. 2. By his example
other Popes have done the like, in changing their Christian names, 3. His
Election was confirmed, by the Emperor Lotharius, whose son Lewis he
afterward Crowned at Rome.

38. Monk, shuts up this third vanke of Popes. 1. He is commended for a great
builder that compassed the Vaticane with a Wall, reedified the Castle of S.
Augelo, and did many such other matters. 2. The Saracens were scared from
Italy, by his Crossing, Blessing, Cursing, and Animating his Soldiers, 3. He
was questioned for plotting to transfer the Empire, from France to the Greeks
again, but from that he cleared himself by his Oath. 4. By his Prayers it is
said, he drove away a Basiliske from S. Lucies Chapel, dispensed with
Ethelwolfe to leave his Monastery and reign in England, for which courtesy the
Monkish King, gratified his Holiness with yearly Peter pence. And these were
the chief employments of these jolly Prelaetes, when once they grew to be
puffed up with Supremacies and Donations.

2. IN this Distance are met with. 1. The Popes excommunicating, and Deposing,
of their fellow Bishops, and Patriarchs, Dethroning, and Monkifying Kings,
Constituting and deluding Emperors, and maintaining Idols against them. 2.
Here about the year 666 (the number of the Apocalypticall Beast) Phocas the
Parricide, that slew his Master Mauritius, Boniface the purchaser of Supremacy,
of that villainy by Symony, And Mahomet the Grand Impostor, brake forth
together, whom the Saracens soon followed, to the devastation, and hazarding of
all Christendom. 3. Which the Learned of those times, Isodorus Hispacensis,
Venerable Bede, Haimo, Strabus, Rabanus, to which may be added, Damascene, whom
(some write turned afterward Mahumetan) and Paulus Warenfredus the first
Postillator, might Lament rather, then withstand.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. Maurus Archbishop of Ravenna served the Pope in his kind, to
Excommunicate him, for Excommunicating him first? 2. It smel't not of
Antichristian Pride in Pope Constantine, to permit the Emperor Justinian to
kiss his feet? 3. The Eastern Emperors were in the right, in withstanding
the having of Images in the Church? 4. It be lawful for Kings to forsake their
Callings, to become Monks? 5. Popes may dispense with the Oath of Allegiance
to Princes? 6. They may Depose Kings, and translate Empires? 7. It be lawful
to eat Horseflesh, notwithstanding the Popes Inhibition?


SECT. VII. The Fourth rank of Luxurious Sodomites.
AMbition having attained the top of desire, melts quickly into Luxury. No
marvel then if after Usurping Nimrods, Luxurious Sodomites come to take their
turns, for the space well near of two hundred years in this order.

1. JOHN the eight, otherwise termed Pope IOHANE, Mentz in Germany, that ran
away with an English Monk of Fulda in Man's apparel, and studied with him at
Athens, till there he dyed. 2. Thence this Virago came to Rome, and so
learnedly trussed her points, that after Leo's death, she was advanced to Saint
Peter's Chair. 3. Where for two years and a half, she celebrated Mass, gave
Orders, freed the Emperor Lewis from his Oath to Aldegisus, Crowns Charles
the Bald, Thomas Harding.
takes up the Controversy between the two Hinomares, established the learned
Photius in the Patriarchship of Constantinople, wrote a learned Letter to the
Prince of Moravia, wanted nothing requisite to an excellent Pope, but the right
Gender. 4. The defect of which discovered it self, in her going to the
Laterane, between Colosses, and S. Clements, where without a Midwife, she was
delivered of somewhat, and her life together, for which her successors have
since, baulk't that unlucky way, and provided a hollow seat of Porphyry, to
prevent such after-claps. 5. This story of Dame Johane, Onuphrius, Bellarmine,
Baronius, Vid. Io. Wolfium in Memorabilib.
and their followers would decry by all means possible, but we have fifty (at
least) of their own suffrages against them.

2. BENEDICT the third, a Roman, her room, but not without putting in
security into the Deacons hand, that he was of the masculine Gender: he was
withstood (says Ciaconius) by one Anastasius, but to no purpose. 2. He made
show of great humility, and therefore would be buried not in, but without the
Threshold of Saint Peter's Church.

3. Great, (a Roman) kept a greater stir, deprives John of Ravenna, for not
stooping unto him. 2. Swaggers with Michaell the Emperor of Constantinople,
about Photius the Patriarch, and writes him an Epistle, which is much stood
upon. 3. Until this man's time Anastasius the Librariaen wrote the lives of the
Popes, but after until Clement the second, one William another Librarian, who
passes under the name of Damasus. 4. Onuphrius, Platina, and Ciaconius
complain much of the negligent registring, and confusion of their Popes Lives,
notwithstanding their succession is made such a convincing argument. 5. He was
stiff against Priests Marriage, but taken down, by a resolute Epistle of
Huldrick a Germane Bishop.

4. second a Roman also comes next. The Emperors Ambassador excepted against
his Election, without their Masters consent, but were deluded by an answer,
that a worthy man was chosen; and so must put up their pipes. 2. He kept a
great stir to bring the Bulgarians under his virge, which was first yielded
unto, but it held not to purpose. 3. By his violence he outed the Learned
Photius of Constantinople, and got Ignatius again into his room, by the
eight Synod of Constantinople. 4. The Emperor Lotharius, came to Rome to
receive Absolution of him, which is much stood upon; as also the platform he
gave of Laws, for the Kingdom of Aragon. After this m^n is named by
Onuphrius, Ciacon, Bellarmine and others, John the 8th (counting Pope Johane
for no body) but Platina their senior, reckons

5. ninth a Roman also. He Crowned three Emperous, Charles the bald, Charles
the gross, and Lewis the Sutterer, for holding too much with whom he was
Imprisoned by the Romans, but escaping, got into France, where he did
somewhat in a Council at Trecas. 2. After returning to Rome, he beat the
Saracens out of Italy, and Sicily, and wrote (as some think) four Books of
the Life of Gregory the Great,

6. MARTINE the second, a French man takes his place, Ciacon, and others
(against Platina) call Marinus the first, so well they agree in their names,
and reckonings, 2. Platina says he got the Popedom by ill means. Bale adds
that his Father Palumbus was a Conjurer, Fasciculus temporum cries our, Heu heu
Domine Deus, etc. and bitterly laments the iniquities of those times.

7. third a Roman that followed made them worse. He decrees the Emperor
should have nothing to do in the Popes Election. 2. The Romans conceived
great hopes of him for his resolution; but Death abridged it. And

8. STEPHEN the fifth a Roman takes his place. Onuphrius, Ciacon, and
Bellarmine, call him Stephen the sixth, misliking Platina's reckoning. 2. No
Act of his is left worth the noting, but that he abrogated the purging of
Adultery, and Witchcraft; by going over burning Coulters, and casting the
suspected into the Water.

9. Portua then recovers the Chair, but not without great opposition of
Sergius the Deacon. 2. This man was held guilty of his predecessor John's
imprisonment, thereupon fled and forsook Rome, and turned Layicke, but Pope
Martino absolves him for money, and sets him right again: so that by the same
Bursae gratia, he gat to be Pope. 3. Wherein he did nothing of note, besides
the varnishing of Saint Peter's Church.

10. BONIFACE the sixth, a Tuscane, three weeks he had the place.

11. STEPHEN the sixth, a Roman, carcass of Formosus his predecessor, (to whom
he had been beholding) divested him of his pontificalls, and clothed him in a
Lay habit, cut off the two consecrating fingers of his right hand, and threw
him into Tyber. But his decrees were voyded, and doings censured by

12. successor, and Countryman

13. Twenty days keeping the Chair, which Platina cries out upon. Bellarmine
leaves out these two for wranglers, and claps in next to Stephen,

14. Roman, who was fiercer for Formosus, then the former two; but was
withstood of the people, whereupon he got to Ravenna, and there cancelled
Stephens Acts, and established those of Formosus, nothing better was

15. Platina here also cries out, that Riches had made the Church Wanton, and
Vice had no restraint.

16. too true, for before he was scarce warm in his place, he was outed by

17. Platina say, he was so base that his Country was not known. This Lucifer
rather then Christopher (says Ciaconius) thrust his predecessor into a
Monastery where he dyed of discontent. But

18. Marozias (a famous strumpet) sweetheart) paid him in his own coin, for
within seven Months, she styed him up likewise in a Monastery, and a little
after, into a stricter Prison, where he miserably ended his days. 2. Then this
man's holiness turns his spleen again, against dead Formosus: once more he
must be had up, and then be beheaded, and the three fingers left on his right
hand be chopped off, and so be cast into Tyber, and all the Priests made by him
new ordered. 3. Platina says, that it was reported, that some Fishermen
finding his carcass, interred it in Saint Peter's Church, at which time the
Images of the Saints there, did it reverence. King Images, that would as well
worship, as be worshipped! After this

19. ANASTASIUS the third, a Roman, good nor harm. As neither did

20. LANDO his Countryman, name. Peter Praemonstratensis says he was Father to

21. JOHN the Eleaventh his successoer; Platina tells us, that he was Pope
Sergin's bastard, either way he had a title that he might pretend to the
Popedom. 2. He carried a military spirit, and was Victorious against the
Saracens, but this could not free him from domestique plots. 3. For by Madame
Marozias means he was taken, Luitprand. l 2. c. 13. Ciacon.
and stifled with a pillow, from which soft death Saint Peter, and Saint Paul
(who were said to have fought for him against the Sarasins) did not free him.
4. John Marozias Heir apparent by Pope Sergius, for the time is foysted in,
but could not then keep the place, being outed by

22. LEO the sixth, a Roman, Countryman.

23. STEPHEN the seventh, that appeared only,

24. JOHN the 12. the famous Cock of the game, Pope Sergius, and Marozia, who
had, given a pill to Leo and Stephen, that stood in his way. 2. This gallant
with his mother Marozia roled all the roste. But Marozia could not so rest, but
after the death of her Husband Guido she must needs take in Hugo King of Italy
(her Husbands own brother for her Husband, a Burgundian without dispensation)
to her bed. 3. A quarrel upon this arose, betwixt her new Husband, and her
son Albericus, for not neatly holding of the basin to his Uncle Father in
Law, when he washed his hands. This grew to that height, that King Hugh was
feign to forsake Queen Marozia, and Rome, and leave the good people as he
found them. John with his mother, flaunts it a while. But at length gives way
to his Countryman

25. Luitprandus) Bozon Bishop of Placentia, Theobald of Millaine, and another
great Prelate, were all the bastards of King Hugh before mentioned, Baleus.
by his three Queanes Bezola, Rosa, and Stephana, which he termed Venus, Juno,
and Semile. Was not this a hopeful breed of Bishops, to do good in the Church
in these dissolute times? Notwithstanding

26. Germane ventures upon the Papacy, but to his little comfort, for the
faction (as it is thought) of Albricus Madame Marozia's son, so abused him,
that he dared not to show his face abroad, by reason of the wounds they had
deformed him with. This took him off from doing any thing of note. And as
little was performed by the Roman that succeeded him,

27. Bellarmine and Ciaconius call Marin the second, but we follow Platina
their ancient. Yet somewhat he did in repairing Churches, and feeding the
poor. 2. About this time an ill favored Chaplain of Madam Guilla's,
Marquess Berengarius wife, was descryed by the barking of a dog, resorting
to his Ladies bed, and thereupon was taken, and dismembered of the excessive
weapons he carried with him. Luitpraudus Lib. 5. c. 15. such was the fruit of
forced chastity. This netled Berengarius to be rough with the Monks, and
Clergy, which caused

28. Roman, to call in Otho of Germany to overtop him, and by that means, an
overture was made to the Germane Dynastye. But

29. Albericus son) was more stirring. By the threatening and Bribery of his
Father, and Marozia his mother, he recovered the place that he formerly had,
but could not keep it. 2. Baleus out of Luitpraudus sets him forth in his
colors, that he was given to all deboshtnesse, Perjury and Sacrilege; that
for inclining to Otho the great, he dismembered diverse of his Cardiualls, by
plucking out their eyes, cutting off their hands, and gelding them, that he
made Deacons in his Stable amongst his horses. that for money, he made boys
Bishops, defloured Raynora a Widow his Fathers Concubine, and Anna another,
with her niece, put out the eyes of his Ghostly father Benedict, brake windows
in the night, set houses on fire, drank a health to the Devil, would say
Mass, and not communicate. 3. for which and other intolerable pranks, he was
deposed by Otho in a Council, and Leo the eight put into his place. But his
Wenches and Friends (when Otho had turned his back) soon got him in again. 4.
From this gallane our Saint Dunstane purchased with a round sum of Money, an
Inhibition against Priests Marriages, which caused here at that time no small
stir. 5. At length taken in the Act with a resolute man's wife, this Pope met
with a gash, that within eight days set him packing to another world. His
friends thrust into his place

30. BENEDICT the fifth a Citizen of Rome. Otho the Emperor returning,
disanulled the Election, and took Benedict with him into Germany, where he dyed
in banishment, settling

31. LEO the eight his fellow Citizen in his place. Otho Emperor, remitts unto
him the right of Choosing Popes; for which was ratified unto the Papacy,
Constuntines, or rather Pipins, and Charles the Great's Donations. 3. Ciaconi^^
therefore calls him an Antipope. It should seem he was too honest, to be well
liked of, or to govern long.

32. JOHN the 14 Bishop of Narvia, John the twelfth) steps into his room. 2.
Against whom the Romans make head, and Imprison him. Bal.
Otho the Emperor frees him, and delivers Peter the Ringleader of them,
Governor of the City, into his hands, whom he most ignominiously put to Death.
3. In his time Bells began to be Baptized, and to have names given them. Harder
was the hap of his Countryman and Successor.

33. sixth. For Cynthius a potent Cityzen of Rome Imprisoned him, in the Castle
of St Angelo, for some prancks he had played, where he was soon made away,
least he should complain, and bring in Caesar upon them, as others had done. 2.
It should seem (says Platina) he deserved to be so used, for that they that
did it, were not called to a reckoning for it. This made

34. second that followed (a Roman also) the waryer of him. 2. The Polonians
desired to have their King Crowned, ^aleus. Plat. Ciac. Chronol.
but sped not, because (as it is like) they came empty handed. 3. Writers much
complain of the obscurity of these times. Vide Soeculum infoelix (says
Bellarmine) Take notice of an unhappy age, in which were not to be found any
famous Writers, or Councels. The Popes little cared for the Common good; but
yet he adds it fell out well by Gods Providence, that there sprang up then no
new Heresies. Neither could there well, because little Religion was then on
foot, besides Superstition, and Heresies. In these times by indirect means
crept in

35 BONIFACE the seventh, France, but the Citizens made head against him; and
he stole away the Church Implements, and Treasure, and fled to Constantinople.
John the 15th is put into his place, but he returns, and buys him out,
recovers the place again, but soon dies of an Apoplexy-Baronius says, he was
rather a Theife, a Murderer, and a Traitor to his Country, then a Pope. His
usage showed him to be such to

36. fifteenth a Lombard, who being made Pope upon Boniface's flying to
Constantinople, at his return was Imprisoned by him, and there made away, some
say by Famine, and stench of the place; others that Ferrareus ( Boniface's
Father) did the deed. Next after comes

37. seventh according to Bale and Bellarmine, but is put before by Platina,
and Ciaconius. 2. He Crowned Otho, with his Wife Theophania, in the Church of
Laterane, and turned out Gilbert the Conjurer from the Archbishopric of Rhemes.

38. sixteenth a Remane (the son of Leo a Priest) begotten in Matrimony, then
follows, a man altogether for the enriching of his kindred, Plat:
whereby the Clergy hated him; but that was after, taken up for a Custom. To
him succeeds another Roman,

39. JOHN the seaventeenth, great Scholar, he found such opposition, of
Crescentius the Roman Consul, that he was feign to quitt Rome, and shelter
himself in in Hetruria. 2. But Crescentius fearing he would bring in Otho the
Emperor upon him, went and so submitted himself, that John returned, and all
was well. Next a Kinsman of the Emperors, one Bruno a Germane takes the plate,
by the name of

40. GREGORY the fifth. Against this man, Crescentius the Consul also makes
head, drives him from Rome, and places John a Grecian in his Seat. But Gregory
returns, and by the Emperors Forces, subdues his Enemies, and puts them to
death ignominioussy. 2. After wards appoints the seven Electors, for choosing
the Germane Emperors, which constitution was then ratifyed, by the then
Emperor Otho. 3. Bale with Platina, reckons this Antipope John amongst the
number of Popes, by the name of John the 18, but Ciaconius and Bellarmine, with
greater reason omit him, and such were the policies and pollutions, under the
Regiment of the great Whore and her Minions.

2. IN this dissolute and sharking period, little good could be expected,
notwithstanding in it may be notice taken of 1. Translating the Empire from the
French (by Pope Agapetus plotting) to Otho Magnus the Germane where it yet
continues. 2. The controversy between Photius and Ignatius for the
Patriarchship of Constantinople. 3. Theophylact Luitprandus, and Erigina Scotus
may pass here for Scholars. 4. The miserable death of Hatto Archbishop of
Mentz by Mice which a Tower, built in the River Rhene, could not guard him
from, nor any other forces he had about him: see the story and picture in
Munsters Geography.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. The story of Pope Johan may pass for a true History? 2.
Maroziahs and her Daughters Pope-making, discovered not the skirts of the Whore
of Babylon? 3. Bastards, Bribers, and Atheists, may be acknowledged for Christ's
Vicars, or Saint Peter's successors? 4. Priests marriages, be not more
tolerable, then Popes insatiable Beastliness? 5. Boniface the seventh,
robbing the Church treasury, and purchasing with it afterward the Popedom
which he had forfeited, include not in it Sacrilege, and Symony? 6. The
quarrelling concerning Formosus and his doings, represent not the snarling of
dogs about a carcass? 7. It were not (...) in the Popes, to take upon them
the deciding of the business of Photius in the Patriarchship of Constantinople?


SECT. VIII. The fifth Rank of Egyptian Magitians.
THE body of the two Witnesses were to lie in the streets of the great City:
which spiritually is called Sodom, and Egypt. Of the Luxurious Sodomites we
have taken a view, Rev. 11.
Glutted Luxury soon degenerates into divellish Sorcery. These Egyptian
Magitians for the next 240 years, take place in this order.

1. SYLVESTER the second, a French man, Abbey of Floriack where Necromancy at
that time, was held an eminent piece of learning. 2. To perfect his skill that
way, he gets to a Saracen in Sivill, and cozens him of his chief Conjuring
Book, by being inward with the Magicians daughter. 3. Then he contracts with
the Devil, to be his wholly, upon condition he would conduct him back to
France, and fit him with promotions. 4. Upon his return into France, he became
admirable for his deep learning, and (amongst others of great State) had these
Chiefetaines his Scholars in the Black-art, Theophilact. Laurence, Malfitane,
Brazutus, and John Gratian. 5. By help of these, and of his other Arts, he
became first Bishop of Rhemes, then Archbishop of Ravenna, and thence to be
Pope, in which seat he concealed (but ever practiced) his divelish mystery,
having in secret, a Brazen head in stead of a Delphique Oracle. 6. Consulting
with this on a time, how long he should live, answer was given, until he said
Mass in Jerusalem. This made him confident of a long continuance, but he was
cozened by the Devils Aequivocation, who seized upon him saying Mass in the
Church of S. Cross, in one of Lent stations, which was otherwise called
Jerusalem. that he little thought on. 7. He is said to have then repented, and
in token thereof, to have requested, that his hands, tongue, and secret members
might be cut off, where with he had offended God, and so to be put into a Cart,
which was done, and the beasts of their ownaccord, drew him to Laterane Church,
where he lies buried. By the rattling of his bones in the sepulcher,
prognosticating the death of his Successors. 8. But all this, Onuphrius,
Ciaconius, Bellarmine, and other modern Papists reject, Benno. Martinus
Poonus. Platina, Stessa. Fasciculus temper. Mesteus. Vicelius.
as a fable. For which they can blame none but their own ancestors. Ciaconius
gives a Catalogue of his writings. A book of Geometry. MS. in Cardinal
Farnesies Library. of Arithmetique, of the Sphere, the Composition of the
Astrolabe, with a volumne of Epistles, which few should seem have met with. He
was held a Magician (say his Advocates) because he was a notable Mathematician,
which was rare in those obscure times. After a little more then four years

2. Siccus (says Blondus) whom those that leave out Pope Iohane, and John the
Greek, ( Gregory the fifth his competitor:) reckon but the 17. Those that take
in both, say he was the 19. We keeping in Dame Joan, and not counting that
John, may best take him for the 18th 2. Benno makes him to be given to Magic,
as his predecessor was, He took off the choice of Popes from the People, upon
this plausible ground, Docendus est populus non sequendus, the people are to be
taught not followed. 3. He appointed the feast of All-soules upon Odoloh's
dreams, and Gregory's Dialogues. It is thought he was poisoned, that one as
good as himself,

3. Fasanus) might take his turn. For from Sylvesters the seconds time, to
Hildebrand, or Gregory the seventh inclusively, amongst Popes (says Benno)
you shall find them all Necromancers. 2. Little was acted in this Popes days,
besides raising (as they pretended) of souls to make people believe Purgatory,
and the need of their suffrages.

4. Roman that succeeded, passes by with the title of a harmless and merry
man. 2. Ciacon puts upon him, that this man was called Bucca Porci, and changed
his name, and that he also instituted the seven Electors of Gormany, which is
not likely, He seemed to be of the same institution with

5. BENEDICT the eight a Tuscane, his successor, Black horse, and confessed, he
was greatly tormented, and desired (the Bishop that thus saw him) to procure
Odilo of Cluniacke to pray for him, and to tell

6. JOHN the 20th his brother, Poor for his Soul. 2. He crowned the Emperor
Conrade, and was always protected by him. This John (with Benedict before him)
was the Bishop of Portuas son, ('it is hoped well begotten.) Their Nephew

7. Chair to the Family, he was formerly named Theophylact, fellow pupil with
Laurence, and John Gratian the Consurers, whom he made Cardinals. 2. They were
wont to wander the Woods, invocate Devils, and to bewitch Women to run after
them. Laurence (one of the crew) could tell the standers by, that a sparrow
brought news to his fellows of a booty ready for them, by the overthrow of a
Cart. 3. Peter of Hungary, was suborned by this Pope to put by Henry the third,
from his succession to his Father in the Empire: to which purpose a Crown was
sent him with this Inscription Petra dedit Romam Petro, Tibi Papa Coronam.
The Rock gave Peter Rome,
The Pope to thee this Crown does doom.
But Peter was quickly quelled by Henry's valor, and Benedict therewith
terrified, sold the Popedom, to John Gratian his Companion for 1500l. 4. After
his death, an Heremite is said to have seen him, by a Mill, having the body of
a Bear, and Head and Tail of an Ass: But between John Gratians bargain, and
the Popedom, steps in

8. Roman, and Bishop of Sabine, Laurence the Conjurers son. This was done
while Benedict was living, who quickly recovers his seat again, outs
Sylvester, and gives the Polonians one Cashimire, a Monk for their King. In
regard whereof, diverse omit this Pope, from him, John Gratian an Italian, by
the name of

9. Keys, so that three Popes were extant here at one time, (which Ciacon
calls the 20th schism. Bellarmine makes it but the 14th) Benedict in the
Laterane, Sylvester in S. Peter's, and Gregory, in S. Mary's. 2. But the
Emperor coming to keep the Peace amongst them, put to flight Benedict, sent
Sylvester home to his Bishopric, and banished Gregory into Germany, with his
scholar Hildebrand, then places in the Chair

10. Bishop of Bamberge. By the authority of a Synod, he caused the Romans to
renounce (by oath) the right they claimed, in choosing Popes. 2. But this netled
them so deeply, that as soon as the Emperor was gone, they set his Pope
going with poison, Bracutus was the Competitor, but

11. Bavarian put him off, that he might possess the place, which he kept but
three weeks and two days, and then Brazutus did as much for him. Whereupon the
Emperor sent Bruno a Germane Bishop to supply the place. He possesses it by
the name of

12. Rome from Germany in his Pontificalibus, Hildebrand falls into his
Company, and persuades the simple man, to put off his Robes, wave the Emperor,
and have a new Election from the Roman Clergy. 2. This he did and then made
Hildebrand Cardinal, who managed all then at his pleasure. At Vercellis he
held a Council against Beringarius, but soon after he had a pass from
Brazutus, leaving his seat to his Countryman

13. Emperor, then any liking to the man. 2. Cardinal Hildebrand is
dispatched into Germany, to design young Henry heir apparent, to the Empire,
upon whose return, Victor was soon vanquished, by one of Brazutus pills, and
so was the Lorayner

14. Caesar's consent, he brought Millayne to veil bonnet, and crouch to Rome,
held a Council at Florence against married Priests, and chose that took
Benefices of Laymen. 2. To reform some such matters, Hildebrand was Legate a
Latere, into Burgundy and other places. But Brazutus near home, sent him the
way of his Fathers. One Mincius a Campanian then steps in, by the name of

15. BENFDICT the 10th, Hildebrands privity, and in his absence, a Council was
held at Sutrinum, in which Benedict was deposed, and Gerardus Bishop of
Florence, Hildebrands Companion, placed by the title of

16. NICHOLAS the second. Benedict thus deprived, banishment, and by diverse is
not reckoned among the Popes. 2. Nicholas bestirres himself, to bring the
election of the Popes to the Cardinals, and to bring Beringarius to a
recantation of his opinion against Transubstantiation. 3. In the mean while,
Hildebrand extorts from the Pope, to be Archdeacon of Rome, and then Brazutus
comes with his Cup, and sets Nicholas also packing. A man would have thought
that then Hildebrand should have sped, but

17. ALEXANDER the second, Millanois happens to be chosen. Cadolus (Bishop of
Parma) is set up against him, and twice coming to Rome with an Army, is twice
repulsed. 2. The Emperor complains, that Alexander was elected without his
leave. Hildebrand stoutly maintains that the Emperor has no right in the
election of Popes. Alexander inclining to yield the Emperor his due, is
soundly boxed by Hildebrand, then imprisoned, and at length poisoned. Now comes
Hildebrand the Hetrurian under the name of

18. GREGORY the seventh, Emperor or Clergy, but only by his own intrusion.
2. He had poisoned some six or seven Popes by Brazutus before he could get
the Popedom himself. 2. In it he had a trick to shake out sparks of fire,
out of his sleeves, by another such, he had brought it about, that the voice of
the people was, Peter the Apostle has made choice of Hildebrand to be Pope. 3.
He mainly set himself against the Emperor, and had plotted, that when he went
to Prayers at S. Mary's in Aventine hill, a villain was set with a stone, to
roll down from the roof to brain the Emperor, but it fell out to the fall
and quashing of the Executioner. 4. He threw the Sacrament into the fire,
because it answered not his demands (as the Heathen Gods did) concerning his
success against the Emperor, whom he Excommunicated, and sent a Crown unto
Rodelphus Duke of suevia, with this verse upon it, Petra dedit Petro, Petrus
Diadema Rodulpho.
That Crown the Rock did give to Peter,
Peter on Ralph bestows in meeter.
To cause him to Rebel against his Master, wherein he had the foil, and dyed
miserably, (as Herman Count of Lucelburg, that was next set up against the
Emperor also did) by the hand of a Woman, tumbling down a stone upon him, as
he was besiedging a certain Castle in Germany. 5. At last he got the Emperor
to such an advantage, that he was feign to come to his Castle at Canusium, Plat:
with his Empress, and Son, barefooted in the cold of Winter, and there to
wait three days fasting, until he might have audience, which at length was
obtained, by the mediation of Madame Matilda (the Popes minion) or (as they
called her) S. Peter's daughter, that left her Husband, to live with this holy
Father, the Abbot of Cluny, Earl of Savoy and others. 6. When he pronounced
the sentence of Excommunication against the Emperor, Ben.
the new seat whereon he sat, unexpectedly rent in pieces. He condemned
Berengarius opinion against the Corporal presence, together with Priests
Marriages, Sainted Liberius the Arian, exercised what cruelty pleased,
especially against a Widows Son, whose Foot he cut off. 7. But at last
vengeance over took him; for in a Synod at Brixia he was Deposed, and dyed
miserably in exile. The Papists notwithstanding commend this man. One Clement
was set up against him, in his life time, But

19. VICTOR the third an Italian succeeds him, Matilda; and therefore defended
all Gregory's doings. 2. T^ is was not long, for his Subdeacon poisoned him in
the Chalice, Christ's Blood in that case, Platina.
being no preservaetive. A Monk of Cluney,

20. VRBANE the second, an Hetrurian takes the place, Hildebrands, and Crony of
Matildahs. 2. He opposes the Emperor, and Excommunicates him, and Cloment the
third whom he had chosen Pope. So that instead of Vrbanus, he was called
Turbanus, because he set all Christendom in a Combustion, quarrelling which
Popes side to take. 3. But Vrbane out stripped Clement, by holding diverse
Synods, and upon the information of Peter the Her^mite, sending 300000, signed
with the Cross to recover the Holy Land, under the Conduct of Godfrey of
Bulloigne. 4. Notwithstanding John a Roman Citizen, at last made him hide his
head, in the house of Peter Leo, where he yielded up his trou^ Iesome spirit,
though St Benedict formerly as it was voyced, had cured him of the Stone by
Miracle.

21. second another of Hildebrands brood seconds him. This man would not
(forsooth in modesty) take the place before the hired shout of the multitude,
Petrus Raynerum virum optimum elegit, Peter has chosen Rayner^us an excellent
man, had heartned him to it. 2. Then he shows himself in excommunicating the
Emperor Henry the fourth, and setting his only son Henry the fifth, against
him, to persecute him to the death. And being dead caused him to lie unburied
five years together. 3. Neither agrecd he better with Henry the fifth. He
denied the right of Investiture of Bishops, and other Imperial priviledgor,
whereupon he was laid in hold by the Emperor; frees himself by a solemn
Oath, not to withstand any more the Imperial right, but as soon as the
Emperor had turned his back, and left Italy, his holiness could dispense for
Perjury, and Excommunicate the son, as devoutly as he had done the Father. 4.
He gave entertainment to Anselme, our Rebellious Archbishop of Canterbury, and
upheld him against his Sovereign, Henry the first, but that understanding
King, kept them well enough at his staves end. 5. Priests Marriages were
reinterdicted, by this Scholar of Hildebrand. He made a great company of
Carnal Cardinals, had Albert, and Theodorick (with others, noted by Ciacon)
set up Anti-Popes against him, But

22. second a Campanian had the luck to carry the place, but not without great
opposition of Cincius Fregepanius who set upon the Conclave, banged the
Cardinals, unhors'd the new Pope, until the people rescued him, and made
Fregepane submitt. 2. Then the Emperor Henry came upon him, and set up one
Maurice Burdine by the name of Gregory the eight against him, so that he was
constrained to fly into France, where he shortly dyed of a Pluresie, having
first Excommunicated the Emperor freed the Templers from the subjection to the
Patriarch of Jerusalem. Burdine the Emperors man could not hold the place. But,

23. second a Burgundian got it, 2. He continues the Excommunication against
the Emperor in a Council of Germany, makes the Emperor yield unto him, and
so absolves him, but abuses his Pope Gregory, whom he had made; by setting of
him upon a Camel with his face toward the tail, and then thrusting him
shaven into a Monast^y. 3. He appointed the four Fasts, decreed it Adultery
for a Bishop to forsake his Sea, was much against Priests Marryages, whereupon
our Simon of Durham made the verses. O bone calixte nunc omnis clerus odit te,
Quondam Presbyteri pot^rant uxoribus uti,
Hoc destruxisti postquam tu Papa fuisti;
Ergo tuum merito, nomen habent odio.
The Clergy the now good Calixtus hate,
The heretofore each one might have his Mate,
But since thou gotten have the Papal throne,
They must keep Puncks, or learn to Lig alone.


24. HONORUS the second an Italian comes next, two others, that were set up
against him. 2. From this man, John Cremensis was sent hither into England, to
dash Priests Marriages. But in his greatest heat of urging his Commission, he
was found a Bed with a Whore. 3. Platina tells us, that one Arnulphus, ( Bale
adds, an Englishman) was Martyred in Rome, for Preaching against the Clergies
pomp and luxury. His Countryman,

25. INNOCENT the second enters upon the place, Antipope ealled Anacletus backed
by Roger King of Sicily, who forced this Pope to fly into Germany, and France
to be righted. 2. The Emperor Lotharius with an Army, settled him in his seat.
3. But Roger King of Sicily has another bout with him, Imprisoneth him, and
his Cardinals, till he had gotten of him, to be pronounced King of both
Scicilies, which was done; and then Scicily, was reckoned St Peter's Patrimony.
So easy it was then for Popes to bestow Kingdoms, in which neither by Divine,
nor humane Law, could they claim any interest. His successor a Tuscan.

26. second put in by Conradus the Emperor, sat so short a time, that nothing
is noted of him, not much longer remained.

17. LUCIUS the second a Bononian, Patricians, and with Soldiers, beset the
Capitol, he was so pelted with stones, by the Citizens, that he soon resigned
his life, and place to.

28. EUGENIUS the third, a Pisan, St Barnards Scholar, Confideration. 2. But
Eugenius more considered the enlarging of his place, and power, and therefore
would not permit the Romans, to choose their own Senators, nor their
Patricians to bear any sway. 3. This grew to such a quarrel that the Pope,
was feign to leave Rome, and fly into France, whence after some time and
matters accommodated, he returned and dyed at Tyber.

29. fourth took his place, a Roman, but did nothing in it worth the noting,
only he gave a great Chalice to the Church of Laterane; whilst William our
Archbishop of York, was poisoned in the Chalice.

30. fourth an Englishman succeeds, before called Nicholas Brack-speare. 2.
This man would not suffer the Consuls in Rome to have any power, and condemned
Arnold of Brixia for an Heretic in holding with them. 3. He quarrelled with
Frederick the Emperor, for not holding Hostler like his stirrup, and
afterward Excommunicates him, for clayming his rights, and writing his name
before the Popes, for which the Emperor defends himself by a Letter. 4. Great
stirs there were also between him, and William of Scicily concerning Apulia,
wherein William had the better, and at length got to be styled King of both
Sciciles. 5. When with his Cardinals, he had conspired to ruin the Emperor,
and had sent a Counterfeit to stabb him, and an Arabian to poison him, he was
choackt with a fly, that got into his Throat, which verified, that he was wont
to repeat often. There is no kind of life upon earth more wretched, then to be
a Pope. Yet this lessened not.

31. third an Hetrurian, but that he opposed his Sovereign in a more
treacherous manner. 2. He was chosen indeed in a strong Faction^ of Victor,
Paschalis, Calixtim, Innocentius, all clayming the place. 3. The Emperor comes
to Papia for to appease the stirrs, sends for Alexander, who instead of
obeying, Excommunicates the Emperor, and his Oposites, and by the French Kings
favor, and his own Purse, settles himself in Rome. 4. The Emperor comes
with an Army to correct his insolency, but Hartman Bishop of Brixia, by
effectual persuasions, turns him from the Pope, against the Saracens. 5.
There being Victorious, and returning, he was surprised by the Popes Treason,
who had sent his exact Counterfeit to the Souldan, that he might not miss in
laying wait for the man. 6. Being apprehended therefore with his Chaplain, as
they went to Bath themselves in a River of Armenia, and brought before the
Souldan; the Picture discovered him. The Souldan uses him nobly, appoints his
Ransom, then guards him home as far as Brixia. 7. The Princes of the Empire
unite, to revenge the prodigious Treason, the Pope betakes himself to Venice,
where Duke Sebastian protects him. Otho the Emperors Son, is sent with an
Army to hemme him in; and not to fight until his Fathers coming. This charge
he neglecting, is overthrown, and taken Prisoner. 8. The good Father, to
preserve his Soune, is forced to submit, in St Marks Church in Venice. He
prostrates himself before the Pope, who setting his foot on his Neck, with
that of the Psalmist in his mouth: Super Aspidem and Basiliscum, Thou shall
walk upon the Serpent, and Adder, and the Emperor replying, non tibi, sed
Petro; the Beast goes on, and mihi, and Petro to me, as well as to Poter. 9.
This end, after much trouble, had that remar kable business. The Pope
gratified the Venetians, (as he had reason) made his conditions with the
Emperor at his pleasure, and so returns to Rome. 10. Henry the second our
King, was much vexed by this Pope, for the death of Thomas Becket of
Canterbury, whom the Pope made St Thomas, for withstanding his King and
Sovereign. And upon the Kings submission to the lash, granted to Him, and his
Heirs, the Title of the Kings of England. Hinc autem observatum est (says
Flatina) ut omnes Anglici a Romano Pontifice. Regni jura recognoscant. Hence it
is observed, that all Kings of England, must acknowledge the Pope for their
Landlord. In this proud Popes time, the poor Waldenses stood up for the
truth, and increased amongst all persecutions. To this Pope, Nicholas
Maniacutius wrote mad verses, extant in Onuphrius, where he concludes: Scimus
Alexandrum per soecula commemorandum.
As long's there is a Goose or Gander,
We must remember Alexander.
He kept the place 21 years, and more.

32. LUCIUS the third his Countryman sooner quirted it. 1. At his Election by
the Cardinals, the Romans were so much exasperated, that they abused all his
Partisans, setting them upon Asses, with their faces backwards, and disgraceing
them, with the like Contumelies, for offering to abolish their Consuls. 2. The
Pope gets to Verona, and condemns their doings, exhorts the Christians to
resist Sultan Saladine in the East, but to no purpose, somewhat he did for
Luca, where he was borne, gives over to

33. VRBANE the third a Millenois. Christians against Victorious Saladine, and
would have Excommunicated the Emperor, Crantzius.
because he honored not his Holiness, in all his projects (whence some termed
him Turbanus) but he was prevented by death. As also was

34. eight an Apulian his Successor, who was very earnest the same way, to set
the Christians upon the Saracens, that the Popes might rule all in their
absence. 2. Endeavoring to agree the Pisans, and Genuans, he was poisoned (as
it is thought) amongst them.

35. third a Roman that Succeeded him, prevailed more in setting forth the
expedition against the Saracens. 2. For upon his instigation, Frederick the
Emperor, Philip of France, and our Richard Cordelion (with other Worthies)
undertook the business, but performed little. 3. Upon the death of William of
Scicily, this Pope puts in to make that Country Tributary to Rome, but the
Scicilians found an Heir, Tancred Williams base Son to hold it. 4. He
Excommunicated the Danes, for maintaining the Marriage of their Clergy; but
composed the dissension about superiority, between the Citizens of Rome, and
the Clergy, by granting the Senators, and Patricians their right. Which
controversy had continued, from Innocent the second, to this Clement the
third, fifty years together.

36. third a Roman that succeeds, being an old man, yet is for this holy War
as his Predecessors had bin, for having a sting at Tancred of Sicily he gets
Constance King Rogers lawful Daughter, out of a Nunnery, and Marries her to
the Emperor, Henry the sixth, with condition, that he should out Tancred, and
admit the Pope a sharer, in the conquered Kingdom. 2. When Henry came with
his Empress Constance, to be Crowned by him in Rome, he did it not with his
hands, but feet; setting it on and spurning it off again, with this saying,
per me Reges regnant, I have power to make and unmake Emperors. 3. He sets all
Princes almost together by the Ears, that Rome might gain, by making them
friends. Whereupon Vspergensis cries out, rejoice o Mother Rome, because all
rivers of Treasures flow into thy Ocean etc. Hellish was this Celestine, but

37. INNOCENT the third a Campanian that follows, name. 2. He held the great
Council of Laterane, under pretense of recovering Jerusalem, but it was for
deposing the Emperor; for witholding (as it was pretended) some Church-rights.
At which time, Anricular Confession was established, and the Cup taken from the
Layty in the Communion. 3. It was this Popet resolution against Philip the
Emperor, (only because he was chosen without his liking) Either I will
Vn-crowne him, or he shall Vn-throne me. Whereupon he raised, the Otho's
against him, who at length slew him. And yet this Champian could not so please
the Pope, but upon claim of the Imperial rights, he must needs be
Excommunicated. 4. He bore a heavy hand over our King John, deposed him,
interdicts the Kingdom for six years together; upon his restoring by his
Legate Pandulph, tynes it at the yearly rent of 1000 Marks, to be held of the
Pope in Fee-farme. 5. He was terrible against Priests Marriages, whereupon we
have these Verses by an Oxford man. Prisciani regula penitus cassatur,
Sacerdos per Hic and Haec olim declinatur,
Nune per Hic solum articulatur,
Cum per nostrum Praesulem Haec amoveatur.
Old Priscians rule hence forth must hold no more,
'Twas Hic and Haec Sacerdos heretofore.
But now poor Hic must lie alone perforce,
For his dear Haec our Prelate does diverce.
And an 100 were burnt in one day in Alsatia, for holding the free use of
meats, and Matrimony. Almericus Bones were burnt after his death, because
living, he had spoken against Images in Churches. This man must have all
differences between Princes, devolved to his Decision. After him

38. third a Roman, continues to be a Stickler for the holy Land. 2. He
Crowns Frederick (the Nun, Constanc's Son) against Otho the 4th, and
notwithstanding for clayming his rights, afterward Excommunicates him. 3.
Confirms the Orders of Dominick, and Francis, and sets them against the
Waldenses; grounded upon certain Dreams, which Innocent his Predecessor had,
foreboading these men's service in that behalf. 4. He caused 400 Scotts to be
hanged, and their Children Gelded, for burning their Bishop (who had
Excommunicated them) in his own Kitching, and exacted by Otho his Legate, of
every Cathedral amongst us Two Prebends, to help to pay scores of Mother
Laterane, which gave occasion to this Rhyme. O Pater Honori, multorum nate dolori
Est tibi decors, vivere? vade mori.
O Father Honori, borne for a sad story,
To live is it glory? Death is to good for ye.
So he died and left a worse in his place.

39. Campanian. This man thrice Excommunicated Frederick the Emperor, whom he
had sent to recover the Holy Land, that he (at the more case) might get Apulia,
and Lombardy from him in his absence. 2. With much ado, and at a dear rate,
the Emperor gets his absolution, but his Holiness raises new stirs against
him, that so exasperate him, that Satynicall verses (as it were of defyance)
past between them. Many of the Clergy suffered in the broils; amongst which
the Popes brother was hanged for his Treasons. 3. Dominick, Francis, and
Anthony of Padua are Canonized, a deadly feud fell, between the Papaline
Guelphes, and Imperial Gibelines, which in a manner, to this day continues. 4.
To affront the opinion that the Pope was Antichrist, (strongly urged by the
Waldenses, and the Emperors Preachers, out of the Revelation of S. John)
Cyrill a Grecian, the third president of the White Friars, or Carmelites,
obtrudes certain tables of silver, written (as he said) by Gods own finger, and
delivered him to publish. which show an other gats progress of the Church then
the Apocalips foretell; and are illustrated, by the Comments of Abbat Ioachim,
Gulielmus Cisterciencis and John de Rupe-Scissa. 5. Raymund of Pinnasort, a
Spaniard of Bercinona, composeth the book of Decretalls, Plat. Ciacon.
whi^ this Pope allows. In these courses especially against the Emperor, old

40. CELESTINE the fourth a Lumbard, persisted, but that almost at his first
entrance, he took a potion, that marred his stomach, and sent him to his
predecessors? One Robert Sommerton, or Sommerlet an English man, because he was
upon election to be Pope, by the like means was set going the same way. 21.
weeks the place lies void, till the Emperor (at the request of Baldwine the
Eastern Emperor, and Raymund of Tholose) freed the Cardinals he had in
Prison, to go to an Election. Revel. 13.
This pack of Sorcerers by some is termed the Kingdom of the Dragon.

2. IN the compass of this Period are found, 1. Besides a knot of Conjurers,
and Poysoners. 2. A Crew of Divelish Rebels, abusing Religion to varnish their
damnable designs. 3. A rabble of Orders of Munks, that disorder all things. 4.
Wrangling Sophistry set on foot, by Lanfranch, Lombard, Albertus Magnus, with
otheir Sects and Factions. 5. Canonists, glosing and descanting upon their
Master Gratian the Collector of the Decrees. 6. Comestor with lying
Legendaries. 7 Hildegardis, Katherine of Seen, and some other such
Shee-Prophetesses; notwithstanding, Anselme, and Bernard, and the Hugoes de
Sancto Victore, and de Sancte-Claro, are of better account. The vexations of
the poor Waldenses, and barbarous usage of Learned Beringarius, were
wonderful, and of long Continuance, as their Histories set out at large do
manifest.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. Necromancy may be a tolerable way to Ecclesiastical
preferment? 2. Pope Sylvesters Brazen head, were the same with our Roger
Bacons, or of any other temper? 3. John Gratian the Conjurer, had the Popedom
at an easy rate, for 1500l of Benedict the 9th? 4. The Subdeacon that poisoned
Pope Victor the third in the Chalice, and Hildebrand that threw the consecrated
host in to the fire, believed Transubstantiation? 5. Hildebrand alias Gregory
the 7. poisoned six or seven Popes, before he could get the place for
himself? 6. Saladine with the Saracens, did less hurt to Christianity in the
East, then the Popes with their Accomplices in the West? 7. The Waldenses in the
maine, held the same opinions with the Protestants of latter times?


SECT. IX. The sixth Rank of Devouring Abaddons.
FRom Egyptian Magitians, we fall upon Devouring Abaddons, who strengthened
their side by multitudes of Monkish Ianizaries; that wasted (for about 250.
years following) all that lay before them, the leader of these was

1. INNOCENT the fourth of Genua, fourth Excommunication against the Emperor
Frederick, who had been his greatest friend, held a Council at Lions, and
deposed him, set Henry of Thuring in his place, and after him William of
Holland, and a great company of Crusiados (that the Pope had marked for his own
beasts) but the Emperor crossed their Crowns as he met with them, and Nobly
defended himself, until he was poisoned at length by the Popes means, and
finally smothered by his bastard Manfred. 2. This Pope was the only Patron of
the four orders of begging Locusts, Dominicans, Franciscans, Carmelites, and
Augustines, who hatched under him those addle eggs of Summaries, Sophismes,
Repertories, Reductories, Quodlibets, Exorcismes, Breviaries, Ritualls and the
like, 3. He offered to sell the Kingdom of Sicily to Henry the third at a
reasonable rate, being none of his own, and quarrelled with our Robert Grostead
Bishop of Lincoln who withstood him stoutly, and contemned his
Excommunication. 4. And after his death (is said) to have minded the Pope by a
thumpe on his side, with his Crosyers staff, and this Item, Veni miser in
judicium Dei, come wretch to Gods judgment, and so eased the world of this
Tyrant: He left behind him Apparatum ad decretales, an Apology against Peter de
Vineis, with other tracts mentioned by Ciacon, and his successor a Campanian,

2. ALEXANDER the fourth. Apulia, Excommunicated Munfred, diverted the money
gathered to recover the Holy Land, to work his own ends at home, pilled England
so far, that Fulke Bishop of London, exclaimed against him, one Leonard told
his Legate that Churches were under the Popes tuition not fruition, to defend,
not to expend; and a Clearke he sent to be Prebend of Paul's, against the Kings
Chaplain, was slain in a tumult. 2. He made for money, Richard Earl of
Cornwall ( Henry the thirds brother) King of Germany, whereupon a rhyme was
made, Nummus ait pro me, nubet Cornubia Romae,
My purse tells me a quick dispatch,
'Twixt Rome and Cornwall for a match.
Condemns the books of William de Sancto Amore, leaves,

3. Jerusalem. He continued his sting against Manfred of Sicily, and wrought
Charles the King of France (his Brother) to be his death. 2. Withstood the
Romans as much as he could, who had set up a new Magistrate amongst them,
called Bandenses, having power of life and death. 3. Upon solicitation by Eva
an Anchoresse, but (as Onuphrius will have it) by a drop of blood, distilling
from the host in a Priests hand, he instituted the feast of Corpus Christi day.
4. Albertus Magnus, and Aquinas are referred to this man's time.

4. French man is next; who had before a Wife and three children. 2. He brings
in the French to get Naples, sent Octobonus into England, to take the value of
all Church Revenues. But (he summoned by Death to a reckoning) in a great
Hubbub of the Cardinals,

5. Lombard was thrust into his place: whereupon came the verses, Papatus munus
tulit Archi diaconus unus,
Quem Patrem Patrum, fecit discordia fratrum.
An Archdeacon, the Papal Incomes gathers,
Whom Brethrens discord, Father made of Fathers.
2. He held a Council at Lions, at which was present Mychael Paleologus the
Greek Emperor, and acknowledged the Laterane tenent, of the proceeding of the
Holy Ghost, from the Father, and the Son, which twelve times before, they had
withstood. 3. Bonaveuture was by him made Cardinal, and Peter de Turantesia
Cardinal of Hostia, Radulphus of Auspurge Crowned Emperor, but would not go
to Rome to have it. Quia vestigia (as he said) ipsum terrebant, because the
Fox saw no safe return. Peter de Tarautasia succeeds him by the title of

6. INNOCENT the fifth, a Burgundian, Friars, being the same Peter Tartaret
that wrote upon the Sentences and other works. 2. He endeavored to set Peace
amongst all, but dyed before he could effect any thing.

7. HADRIAN the fifth a Genoway follows, Octobonus, the same that kept so
great a stir here in England, in the Reign of Henry the third. 2. Platina.
Vide Pitgah Evang. p. 182
He dies before he was consecrated, some say by the fall of a new house. But
others say this was the end of

8. JOHN the 21. a Portugal Physician. Platina passes him for a vain man, and
thereupon inferres Nescio quo pacto compertum est, ut viri quidam admodum
literati, ad res agendas parum idonei videantur. We see for action Learning
availes not when,
The greatest Clearkes proves not the wisest men.
2. He was a Writer notwithstanding, and favourer of Scholars, which was the
least care of

9. NICHOLAS the third a Roman. Warren of Hares for his holiness recreation.
2. Was ravennous for his kindred, raised the quarrel between Peter of Aragon,
and Charles of France, for Sycily, whence grew the Massacre of the French,
called Sycilian vespers, wherein all sorts of French upon the Toll of a Bell,
were cruelly Butchered.

10. Frenchman that succeeded, thereupon Excommunicated Peter of Aragon, but
he contemned it, and strengthened himself by Paleologus. 2. He kept the
Concubine of his predecessor Nicholas, and removed all Pictures of Bears from
his palace, least the beholding of them should cause his sweet heart to bring
forth a Bear. His Excommunication of Peter of Aragon, is continued by

11. Roman, who did little else, but confirm the Augustine Friars, and cause
the white Carmelites, to be called our Ladies Brethren, so much was not
performed by

12. Franciscan Italian, who dyed (some say) of grief, to see both Church and
State in such remediless Combustions. After two years scolding of the
Cardinals,

13. Italian (formerly an Anchorite) was chosen, He resolving to be strict in
reforming the Church, was guild by one that fained himself to be an Angel,
and spoke through a Trunk in a wall, Celestine, Celestine, give over thy
Chair, for it is above thy ability. 2. The French King persuaded him to hold
it, but he decreed, that a Pope might quit his place, as he did, to turn
Hermit again. But that preserved not his life from the jealousy of

14. Campanian that thus cheated him: for he caused him to be imprisoned, and
made away. 2. Of this Boniface it is said that he entered like a Fox, reigned
like a Lion, and dyed like a Dog. 3. He threw ashes into the Archbishop
Porchets eyes on Ash Wednesday, because he was a Gibelline; brought in the
Jewish Jubely, carried two swords before him, and showed himself as well in
Imperial Robes as in Papal habilliments, to express that he had power of
both swords, in that Church, out of which there is no salvation. 4. For his
Excommunicating Phillip the Fair of France, and his cruelty against others, he
drew upon himself an infamous death, by the hands of those, he had formerly
banished. 5. John Cassiodores Epistle in Bale, shows how lamentably England
suffered by him. A much better Pope was little

15. BENEDICT a Lombard, a Sheapheards son, poor mother when she came to him
Lady like, but caused her to put on her Shepherdess apparel. He absolved the
King of France, Excommunicated the murderers of his predecessor Boniface,
desired to compose all brawles, but was poisoned at length in a fig.

16. CLEMENT the fifth a French man that succeeds, Avignion, where it continued
70. years, governing Rome the while, by deputy Cardinals. 2. At the pomp of
his Coronation much hurt was done, by the fall of a Wall, and the Pope lost a
Carbuncle out of his Mytre, valued at 6000. Florens. 3. He rooted out the
Templers, favored the Knights of Rhodes, Excommunicated the Florentines,
Lucians, and Venetians, whose Ambassador Francis Dandalus, sent to pacify him,
he chayned under his table to feed with the dogs. 4. From the Council held by
him in Vienna, we have the Clementines of the Canon Law. Henry of Lutzenburg
the Emperor, a little after was poisoned in the host by one Bernard a Monk,
whom presently he forgave, and wished him to shift away to save his life. The
Pope dies of the flux, after two years. His Countryman

17. JOHN the 22. succeeds him. Thomas of Aquine, and Thomas of Hereford, flead
a Bishop and afterward burned him, because he had offended him. 2. Challenged
a Supremacy over the Greek Church, but they wished the Devil to be with him,
as God was with them: would by no means Crown the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria,
who contemned it, and was otherwise Crowned King of the Romans: Whereupon he
deprives him but not without stout opposition. Occam Marsilius, and Iandunus
taking the Emperors part. 3. He held the souls to dye with the body, but was
condemned for it, by the Parisians, the Council of Constance, Durandus, Thomas
Wallis an English man and others. He lived longest of any Pope, and dyed
richest.

18. French man succeeds him, opposes at first Lewis the Emperor, but
afterward falling out with the French King, takes the Emperors part, who
notably had defended his Royalty, in an assembly of the Peers of Germany. 2.
He reformed some Orders, or rather disorders of the Monks, bought Francis
Petraches beautiful sister, with a great sum of Money, of her brother
Gerard, to make some use of her. Had these Rimes made on: him when he was gone,
Hic situs est Nero, laicis mors, vipera olero,
Devius a vero, cuppa repleta mero.
Laics bane, Clerks viper, here lies Nero's trunk,
Fardle of Lies, a Butt of Wine stark drunk.


19. sixth his Country man proves more violent then his predecessor. 2. To
diminish the Emperors authority, he creates Vicount Vicars to rule the Empire,
which caused the Emperor to institute such other Vicars to govern the Church.
3. This and other things so netled his Clemency, that upon no Terms he would
be reconciled with the Emperor, except he put himself and all his into his
Holiness disposition. 4. For quietness sake, and to prevent the shedding of
Christian blood, the Emperor does it; The Princes of the Empire, exclaim
against the Popes tyrannical conditions. The Archbishop of Mentz is deposed,
for but speaking on the Emperors behalf. The other Electors bribed: set up
his son Charles, to be King of the Romans, he to settle himself, morgaged
special portions of the Imperial Revenues, never again recovered, whereby
the weakened Empire, was exposed to the Turks invasion. 6. In England also this
Pope made so bold, as to bestow Bishoprics and Benefices at his pleasure. But
our Edward the third, would admit of no such intrusion. 7. It Is thought by his
means, the hated Emperor was poisoned, and his Holiness breathed his last,
Bale.
by an Impostume, after he had tyrannized so long, and cozoned the World by his
year of Inbilee and blasphemous Indulgences. His Countryman

20. sixth a Lawyer, by pinching and deminishing his Housekeeping, cast about
to keep up money. 2. It was well that he commanded Priests to be resident, and
to give good Example unto their Charge by their temperare lives. 3. Richard
Arch bishop of Armaught, urged before this Pope Nine Articles against the
begging Friars, that were never answered. 4. And John de Rupe Scissa, foretold
such shrewd things of Antichrist, that proved afterward too true. For which he
was burnt at Avignion. 5. Whilst the Lance, and Nails that tormented our
Savior, were graced withan Holiday and this Elogy. Ave ferrum triumphale,
Intrans pectus tu vitale,
Coeli pandis ostia,
Hail Iron triumphall,
Piercing a breast vital,
That opens Heavens gate,
Faecundata in cruore,
Faelix hasta, nos amore,
Per te fixos saucia.
Bles'd spear steeped in blood
With love make al us wood
The Heretics to hate.
An Englishmans Son (though borne in France.)

21 URBAN the fifth comes next, a great stickler, Popish priveledges, and set
forth the State, and Authority of the Papacy. 2. John Huncash an Englishman was
his Champian, for Wars. Briget of Sweveland, was entertained, Platina.
and had the order of St Briget conformed by him. 3. About the same time; Vide
Crisp. Sabellinus volater. Baleum.
an order of the Jesuits with the Scopetines appeared, which differs from our
modern Pragmatists, as Lydius notes. 4. Determining to return again into
Italy, he was poisoned (as it is thought) at Marsils,

GREGORY the cleaventh that succeeded, Nephew to Pope Clement the sixth, made
Cardinal by him, before he was 17 years old, and then sent to School to
Baldus the greet Lawyer of Peruse. 2. By the persuasion of whom, and St
Katherine, St Dominicks Sister, of Scene, most of the Cities of Italy revolted
from him. 3. Upon which occasion, as also by the admonition of Briget, returned
from Jerusalem, and the reproof of a bold Bishop, (who told him he could not
blame him for Non-residency, that had left Rome to reside in Avignion.) He left
Avignion, and with 12 Gallyes returned again to Rome, Anno 1376, after the
Court had bin at Avignion 70 years together. 4. Upon his return, he
Excommunicated the Florentines, and regayned by the sword, what before was
lost, repaired Romes Dilapidations, by the absence of former Incumbents. 5. A
sect of Bedlam. Dancers, of men and women Enthusiasts to se in those days,
which the world thought not well Christened, by these bawdy Priests. 6. At this
Popes death the Palace of Avignion was fired by chance, that unclean Birds
might no more roust in that Cage. for

23. sixth a poor Neopolitane that succeeded expressed himself against
returning into France. Whereupon a company of French Cardinals, chose Clement
the seventh against him, beginning a Schism that lasted almost 40 years. 2.
At this man's first Election, he was much graced by Jane Queen of Naples, and
Otto of Brunswick her Husband, but the rude beast soon forgot it, and afterward
was the cause of both their deaths, to make good that saying, Asperius nihil
est humili cum surgit in altum,
Cord stat inflato, pauper honor dato.
None looks to be accounted,
More then a Beggar mounted,
He struts with heart full blown.
when honor's on him thrown.


3. He was much in the beginning for Charles King of Naples, with an eye to the
Princifying of his Roguish Nephew Francis Batillus; But this friendship was
soon turned to spite. And Batillus after his Uncles death, was stripped of all
that he had heaped together, according to the saying, Cum moritur praesul
cognatio tota fit exul.
When once the Prelate fails,
His Kin may pare their nails.


4. The brutish Tyranny of this Pope, against some of his Cardinals, (whom he
suspected to be underhand for Clement) is described by Theodoricus a Niem, who
was his Secretary, and present at their usage. Berthold Swarts a Chymick, then
invented Gunpowder. 5. He held a Iubilee to gather money, made 54. Cardinals,
to back him against his opposite.

24. CLEMENT the seventh, French man of a Noble house, with whom sided the
French and Spanish, as our English Dutch, Italians and others, did with Vrbane.
2. This quarrel grew so high, that Rome it self was miserably plundered by
Clement, and his adherents. 3. One Popes Bulls roared against the others,
Christendom was divided, Johannes de Ligniaco writes in defense of Clement,
and a Council at Paris made good his title. The Abbat of St Vedast apologizeth
for Urban. Platina omits Clement, as an Intruder, and after Vrbane puts

25. BONIFACE the ninth another Naples man, Urban. 2. He was scarce thirty
years old, when he was made Pope, so ignorant, that he could neither sing nor
say, nor understand the supplications put up to him, or matters discussed
before him. 3. Yet was he the notablest Huckster for selling Church livings,
that ever came in that Sea. Any dolt might be then preferred for money, and be
sooner traded with, then a more deserving man. 3. His Mother and two Brethren
in the Court, help to make his markets for him. He married his Sister to the
Duke of Adria, who quickly slew her, and forfeited his own life for it. 4. In
this man's time Chrysolaras brought from the East the Greek Letters, which had
been neglected in the West for 500. years, in propagation of which learning
Guarinus, Victorinus; Philelphus, Leonard Aretine, with others, joined with him.

26. Spaniard (called Peter de Luna) is not numbered by the Romanists, amongst
their Popes, because he succeeded Clement the seventh in the schism. 2. At
his Election he took an Oath, to give over the place, if the Cardinals should
think it meet; but being put to it, he easily dispensed with that Oath,
complies with the King of France, to hold him in, whiles

27. Italian, Elected in Boniface the 9th place, Poped it in Italy, but falling
out with the Citizens of Rome, by reason that his Nephew Lewis has
treacherously butchered some of them, he was feign to fly from Rome, to
Viterbium, with great difficulty. 2. But matters composed he returned at last
again, made diverse Cardinals, demanded the moyty of Ecclesiastical
Revenues, but was stoutly denied, both in France and England. In this man's
place, was chosen by the Cardinals,

28. Venetian, but on this condition, that for the Peace of the Church, he
should be bound to resign. 2. Many delusions past betwixt Peter Moon, and him,
which the Cardinals perceiving, called a Council at Pisa, and outed them
both, and put into the place,

29. Cretane. 2. He deposed Ladislaus King of Naples, and Apulia: by a Bull
confirmed St Francis five wounds, to be accounted an Article of Faith. The
Cardinal of St Eustace that poisoned him, took his place, rather then was
chosen, by the name of

30. Neopolitane, At a Council summoned by him at Rome, to Crown the Emperor
Sigismund. A great Owl twice so affronted him, that he could not go onward,
but Madge howlet lost her life for her undacity. 2. By his consent, a Council
was then assembled at Constance 1414. in which this Pope for diverse
intolerable villainies was deposed, as was Peter de Luna, and Gregory the 12.
who upheld the schism stubbornly till that time. Whereupon these verses begin
his Epitaph.

Baltasar imprimis vocitabar, and inde Johannes.
Deposicus, rursus Baltasar ipse vocor.
First Baltasar, and then Pope John I was,
But now deposed, for Baltasar must pass.
31. Roman, was by the Council put into his place, which decreed a Council
to be above the Pope, and condemned John Wickliffe and burned John Husse, and
Hierome of Prague his followers. 2. He knew very well to Complement, which
gained him more respect then the harshnesse of others. Hired our Thomas
Waldensis to write against Wickliffe and left to succeed him

32. EUGENIUS the fourth a Venetian, Romans upon his first entrance, and was
feign to fly thence, to Pisa disguised. 3. He was cited to appear, to come at
the Council of Basil, but was terrified by the Censure of John at Constance.
To prevent that therefore, he refuses utterly to appear. But summons the
Council of Florence, to divert it. 3. They of Basil depose him, and choose in
his place Amadeus Duke of Savoy, that had turned Heremite calling him

33. FoeLIX the fifth, a better disposed man, predecessors. He accounted the
Poor his Hounds, with which he hunted for the glory of Heaven, which the
Cardinal Aquilegia (of the same time) little thought upon, when he maintained
hounds and horses instead of the poor, for the Peace of the Church. After
ten years, he un- Poped himself, and contented himself with a
Cardinallship, left his place to

34. NICHOLAS the fifth of Genua. Iubilee this man celebrated, there were 136.
slain in the crowde in the streets of Rome. 2. Constantinople was then taken
by the Turk, to the great loss and shame of all Cristendome. 3. He built the
Vatican, he was a favourer of Learning. An old decrepit Spaniard,

35. CALIXTUS the third gets the place, John Capistranus, and Robert Licius,
Minorites notable hypocrites, by their devices, and Mountebankismes, to incense
the Christians against the Turks. He should seem to be a man of no great
reach, of whom a Cardinal said at his Election.

Quam fatue, fatui, fatuum, creavere Calixtum. Pantanus de Magnif. c. 12.

How foolishly were those Electors mixed,
That have been fooled to choose the fool Calixt.
36. PIUS the second an Hetrurian succeeds him, before Aencas Sylvius, he was a
great man in the Council of Basil, against Pope Eugenius, but after he came
to be Pope, all was forgotten. 3. His saying was, that marriage was better for
the Clergy then single life, and turned out diverse Cloystered Nuns, to take
their Liberty 3. Great discord grew in Germany for his turning out of the Arch
bishop of Collayne, his Works are bound together in one volumne, which show
him to have been a far better Scholar then his Successor,

37. Venetian, for he was altogether for getting Jewels, to adorn his
Diadem, could not endure the name of an University, made scarlet to be
peculiar to his Cardinals, repined (for his contemned daughters sake) that the
Clergy might not Marry. If worse might be,

38. Ligurian, his successor was, who provided for his Concubine Tyresia shoes
covered with pearl, builded stews at Rome, which brought incomes to his
Holiness yearly 2000. ducats, granted to the Cardinal of St Lucia the use of
unnatural lusts, for three months in the year, June, July, and August, cursed
Laurentius de Medicis, for justly executing his Nephew Raphaell; has this
pass (with diverse others as tart) put upon him, Non potuit savum vis ulla
extinguere Sixtum,
Audito tantum Nomine pacis obit.
No humane force could raging Sixtus sway,
Yet at the name of Peace he dropped away.
This man was wont to call all University Scholars heretics: plagued and
racked poor Platina, who in him ends his History, Onuphrius continues it and
goes on with

39. Genoway, a dull ignorant block, that would take a Cup too much in the
midst of the greatest affairs. 2. He was all for his base Children, gave a
great dowry to his daughter Theodorina: Mantuan lived in his time, and with
this pass he is dispatched. Octo Nocens pueros genuit, totidemque puellas,
Hunc merito poteris, dicere Roma patrem.
Eight Ladds and twice four girls Nocens got,
And might not Rome him Father term? Why not?
The height of Villainy came after him Roderique Borgia, called

40. ALEXANDER the sixth a Spaniard, plagued them that chose him, heaped all
upon his Bastards, took money of Bajazet the Turk, to make away his brother
Gemes, that had committed himself to the Popes protection, carnally used his
own Daughter Lucretia, the Wife to three Princes. upon whom these verses are
extant. Hic jacet in tumulo Lucretia nomine, sedre
Thais, Alexandri, filia, sponsa, nurus.
Ergone te semper rapiet Lucretia Sextus?
Heu fatum dici nominis hic! Pater est.
Sextus Tarquinius, Sextus Nero, Sextus and iste,
Semper sub Sextis, perdita Roma fuit.
Lucrece by name here lies, but Thais in life,
Pope Alexanders child, spouse, and Sons Wife.
And must a Sextus Lucrece always Ravish,
Cursed name! but here is his Father that is most Knavish.
Tarquinius, Nero, this a Sextus too?
Sextus was ever borne Rome to undo.
He gave himself to the Devil, who at length fetched him, being poisoned with
the same Cup, he had provided for his invited Cardinals.

41. PIUS the third an Hetrurian, with much ado, Valentine Borgia was chosen;
whose purpose was to hunt the French men out of Italy, but dyed in the interim
with an ulcer in his leg.

2. COntemporary of chiefest note are here. The Famous 1. Schoolmen, Albertus
M. Halensis, Aquinas, and Scotus, the Patrons of the Dominicans, and Minorites.
Occam and Durand, that make bold some times to dissent from them. 2. Notorious
Lawyers, Accursius, Bartholus, Baldus, Parnormitan. 2. Writers of Account,
Lyra, Gerson, Mirandula, Regiomontanus, Agricola. 3. Made known by the Art of
Printing, which (with the invention of Gunpowder) was found out in this Period.
4. In which also the Popes removing from Rome to Avignion: the Sicilian
Vespers: the taking of Constantinople by the Turk are exceeding remarkable.
Together with the deposing of Popes in the Counsels of Pisa, Constance, and
Basil, which they are loath to hear of. 5. In the mean while Wicklevists,
Hussites, and their followers go to wrack, until God raised up the valiant
John Ziska to yield them some comfort.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. The Schoolmen with their Niceties, of the Canonists by their
Extravagancies, more corrupted the Simplicity of the Gospel? 2. The malicious
throwing of Ashes by Boniface the eight into Archbishop Porchets eyes, were a
way to cure his blindness? 3. Rome could be counted the Mother Church, as long
as the Popes kept their residence in Avignion? 4. The chayning of Francis
Dandalus under the Popes table, with the dogs, were a fit entertainment for an
Ambassador of State? 5. It savoured of Divinity or Humanity, in Paul the
second, and Sixtus the fourth, to pronounce all University men, to be
Heretics? 6. The Inventions of Printing and Gunpowder, have done more harm
then good? 7. Alexander the sixth, had a pattent from the Devil, to bestow the
West Indies upon the King of Spain?


SECT. X. The seventh Rank of Incurable Babilonians.
AFter Devouring Abaddons, to fill up the mystery, and measure of Iniquity,
succeeded for the space, to this time, almost of an 150 years Incurable
Babilonians, Curavimus Babylona and non est sanata, for the rest of the men
that were not killed by those Plagues, repented not of their 1. Rev. 21.9.
Murders, 2. Sorceries. 3. Fornications. 4. Thefts, as it appears in the
particulars of,

1. second a Genoway, Sixtim the fourth his Nephew, (perchance his Son) he
was more addicted to War, then Writing, or teaching his flock. 2. Whereupon
he is said to have thrown Peter's Keys into Tyber, with words to this purpose.
Hic gladius Pauli nunc nos defendat ab host,
Quandoquidem clavis, nil juvat ista Petri.
This sword of Paul's. must us defend from foes,
Since Peter's keys, serve not to bear off blows.
3. He breaking his Oath, in not celebrating a Council, (as he had sworn to
do) moved some Cardinals to assemble at Pisa and Depose Him, but he easily
avoided that, by a Counter-Councell, at Laterane. 4. Lewis of France was
Excommunicated by him, but he reckoned little of it, and coined Money with his
inscription, Perdam Babilonem. I will destroy Babylon. 5. He dispensed with our
Henry the eight, to M^rry his Brother Arthurs Wife. Abused two ingenuous
Youths, sent by Queen Anne of France, to be bred in Italy, of which one wrote,
Venit in Italiam spectabilis indole rara,
Germanus, redijt de puero mulier.
To Rome a German came of fair aspect,
But he returned a woman in effect.
And the Pope himself is passed with this Tetrastick. Genua cui Patrem,
genetricem Graecia, Partum
Pontus and unda dedit, number bonus esse potest?
Fallaces Ligures, mendax est Graecia, Ponto
Nulla fides, in te haec, singula IVLE tenes.
He that from Greece and Genua had his blood,
And on the Waves his Birth, can he prove good.
The Genoway, cheat, the Greeks, men liars call,
The Sea perfidious, Julius has these all.
He sainted one Mother Frances, a Roman Matron, for preserving her chastity by
melted Lard, etc. At Mantua was then Preached by Ptolomy Lucensis a Cistertian,
that our Savior was not conceaved in the Virgins Womb, but in a place near
her heart, of three drops of blood; Of these times Maximilian the Emperor was
wont to say, Deus aterne nisi vigilares, quam male esset mundo, quem regimus
nos; ego, miser venator, and ebriosus ille, and Sceleratus Julius. O eternal
God if thou should not watch over us, how ill would it go with the world which
we govern? I a miserable Hunter, and that Drunkerd, and wicked Julius. After
this martial Pastor, came joviall

2. LEO the tenth, the Duke of Florenc's Son, Cardinal at thirteen years
old; and Pope at 38. 2. He favored Scholars because they should claw him, as
Erasmus and others did; not that he set more by Learning, then the profession
of Christianity, which he told Cardinal Bembus, he esteemed to be but a
profitable fable. 3. In the making 30 Cardinals, to strengthen his own
designs; a tempest arose that shook the Statua of Christ, out of his Mothers
arms, and Peter's Keys out of his hands. (As in his predecessors days,
Alexander the sixth, the like tempest had beat down the Angel, from the topp
of St Angelo, and the Owl that appeared to the Council of Laterane, pretended
no good. 4. At the Council of Laterane, held by this Leo, (to void that of
Pisa) he was termed by Sycophants, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, to whom all
power was given, both in Heaven, and in Earth, whom all Kings must adore. Ps.
72. But as Mancimellus, Machiavell, Guiccardine, Mantuan, Sanavarola, had
partly discovered, the Popish Impostures before in Alexander the sixth, so
Philippus Decius, Stapulensis, Budeus, Mirandula, Erasmus, make way for Luthers
reformation in these times, which began on this occasion. 5. Leo's luxury
wanted money, of his own store, to bestow on his Sister Magdalon for a Dowry.
This must be raised by Indulgences sent into Germany. The Friars quarrel who
should have the honor, and profit of the sale. The Dominicans carry it from
the Augustines. Luther stomachs at it, and writes against the Huckster
Tercelius. The Pope is interessed in the business, Luther stands out, is backed
by Princes, and learned men, who were weary of the Popes tyranny. 6. The French
urge the pragmaticall sanction, and the Council of Constance for their
liberty; who having an overthrow in Italy, so overjoyed his Holiness, that
immediately thereupon he dyed: of which Sannazarius, Sacra sub extrema si forte
requiritis hora,
Cur Leo non poterat sumere? vendiderat.
Why Leo dyed unhousled then 'twas told him,
He could not have such rites, for he had sold them.
His successor was,

3. Low Country man, He makes a great show in his first entrance, to urge a
Reformation, for which purpose he instructs his Legate Cheregate, to the
Princes of Germany. They are much animated by this overture, and furnish the
Legate, with an hundred grievances of their Nation, Centum Gravamina. vid.
Fascical. Rerum Expetendarum.
which they desire might be redressed. 2. But greater matters diverted his
Holiness. Then Lutherans began to spread, the Turks to approach. These and
the like Corrosiues, (and perchance a dram to help it onward) so broake him,
that in the second year of his Papality, he left this Inscription on his Tomb,
Hadrianus Sextus hic situs est, qui nihil sibi infaelicius in hac vita, quam
quod imperaret, duxit. Here lies Hadrian the fixed, who held it his greatest
unhappiness that in this life he had been Pope. He wrote upon the fourth of
the sentences, and a Large Epistle to the Duke of Saxony. A far worse man
came after him,

4. CLEMENT the seventh a Florentine, Leo the tenth, he matcheth his Neice
Catherine, with the House of France, whereby she came afterward to be the
Famous Queen Mother. 2. For falling off from the Emperor to France, Rome came
to be sacked by the Duke of Burbon, and the Pope himself (with his Cardinals)
to be taken Prisoners. 4. For crossing our King Henry the eight, and deluding
him in the Divorce from his brothers wife Queen Katharine, he lost his
Supremacy here in England, and for his lewd life otherwise, made his See
infamous. Roma vale, vidi, satis est vidisse, revertar,
Cum leuo, aut Meretrix, Scurra, Cinaedus ero.
Vile Rome adieu, I did thee view, but hence no more will see,
Till Pimpe, or Punke, or Jade or Spade, I do resolve to be.
4. Palengenius that lived in his time, sets out the corruptions of these days
in his Capricorn; some say he died of the lowsy disease, others by the
poisonous smell of a Torch. This Pope might pass for a Clement, and merciful
man indeed, in regard of his successor a Roman,

5. PAUL the third, Julia Farnesia to Alexander the sixth, that he might be
made Cardinal, committed incest with his own daughter Constantia, and poisoned
her husband Bosius Sforfia, to enjoy her the more freely: so (in a jealous
humor) he used his own sister, upon suspicion she played false with him, but
for pressing on his Neice Laura Farnesia in the like matter; Nicholas Quercen
her husband (taking him in the Act) gave him a mark that he carried with him
to his grave. 2. Being Legate at Ancona, (under Pope Julius the second) he
cozened a Lady, under pretense of marriage to yield to his Lust, who upon
discovery of the delusion, fell almost distracted: yet brought him that Peter
Aloysius, afterward Duke of Placen^ia, where he was slain for his horrible
villainies, especially that, upon Cosmus Cherea not to be named. 3. To this
Incest (and maintaining 45000. Courtezans) his Necromancy comes as a
Complement. He conferred with Gauricus Servita, and other of the damned Crew,
who were always at his Elbow. 4. From this Popes piety, we had the Council of
Trent, and Order of the Jesuits, and King Henry the eight Excommunicated, and
our England given Primo occupaturo, some will say a worse there could not be.
But let them consider his successor, and Countryman, and Legate in the Council
of Trent,

6. Cardinals hat to a Sodomiticall boy (whom he had abused) called
Innocentius: to the repining Cardinals who asked a reason of it, What reason
had you (says he) to choose me Pope? Fortune favors whom she pleases. 2. John
Casa Archbishop of Benevent, and Deane of the Apostolical Chamber, in this
man's time, Printed a Book at Venice in defense of Sodomy: By whom Francis Spira
was seduced to revolt, and dyed desperately. 3. This Pope was the man, that
would have his Porke (forbidden by his Physician) Al despetto de dio, in
despite of God: and maintained that he had more cause, to be angry for the
keeping back of his cold Peacock Pie, then God had to cast Adam out of Paradise
for eating of an Apple. 4. From the same man we had, the Reconciliation, and
blessing of the Mother Church, so submissively taken, from the hands of
Cardinal Poole in Queen Mary's days, that cost the lives of so many
Innocents, by various Executions. 5. Whereupon one Vvalterius describes the Sea
of Rome under him in this Tetrastichon. Roma quid est? quod te docuit
praeposterus ordo.
Quid docuit? jungas versa elementa seies,
Roma Amor est, Amor est? qualis? praeposterus. unde haec?
Roma Mares. noli dicere plura scio.
What Is Rome? even that preposterousnesse does show,
What Is that? spel't backward, then thou soon may know,
Backward it is Amor love, what love? nay hold,
It is a male love, odious to be told.
And Beza plays upon three evacuating Basins which this Pope was wont to have
at hand in his beastly surquedry, I nunc Pontifices Germania dira negato,
Omnia Clausa suo jura tenere sinu.
And now will cursed Germany deny,
The Pope has * Alluding to the word that signifies Laws and Broth.
Iura that he thus let fly.
No sure this Pope let it fly at both ends, and his life went after. Another of
the Tridentine Legates,

7 MARCELLUS the second an Hetruscan, sickly, and in likelihood could not keep
it long. 2. He had been School Master to Peter Aloysius esteemed the Lutherane
worse then Turks, and perswadeed Charles the fifth, and Ferdinand, rather to
turn their forces against them, then the Mahometanes. 3. Paulus Vergerius must
not stay in the Council of Trent, but why forsooth? He believed not the Legend
of St George, and S. Christopher, whom Paul the third before had left out of
the Breviary. The Bishop of Claudia Fossa James Nanclant, must be likewise
discharged, for holding the Scripture to be above Traditions, and William of
Venice, for saying the Council was above the Pope. But the short time he Poped
it, abridged his farther proceedings, which being but 23. days, a Neopolit^ne

8. PAUL the fouth continues the Line, Church, to Paul the third, when he was
Cardinal, wherein he taxed most of the same abuses, that Luther did; but the
case was altered, when he came to have power in his own hand. 2. He was a great
Patron of the Jesuits, and Inquisition, which had made away (by Vergerius
reckoning in his time) 150000. persons under pretext of Religion. England had
her share by Queen Mary's Clergy. It was this Popes Legate, Cardinal Caraffa,
that gave this blessing to the devout Parisians. Quandoquidem Populus
decipivult, decipiatur, In as much as this people will be deceived, let them be
deceived. He was so hated for his cruelty, that immediately upon his death, the
people burnt the Prison or rather slaughterhouse of the Inquisition, beheaded
the Popes Statua, and threw it into Tyber, and razed all the Arms of the
Caraffa's they could fall upon. One of the house of the Medices, by the Spanish
faction, is after four months, thrust into his place,

9. Acts of his predecessors, and persecutes his kindred, makes Charles
Borromeus Cardinal, who after proved a Saint. 2. The National Council the
King of France held at Poyters, he handsomely defeats, by setting on foot again
the Council of Trent. 3. Thither he cites the Protestant Germans, and French
Hugonotes, with Calvin among the rest, by the Bishop of Cumane; But their
answer was, that the Pope had no Authority to call Counsels, much less to
carry things at his pleasure. A free Council they were willing for, where Gods
Word might take place, and not be overswayed with politic Projects. 4. Queen
ELIZABETH took order that none of his Legates should set footing here in
England, which has sped the better for it ever since. 5. She was designed to
be Excommunicated for it, but that was hindered by some by respects: much moving
there was for Reformation by the Legates of France and Germany, at least for the
Communion in both kinds, hopes thereof were given, but the Council was broken
off, and nothing performed. 6. Venery, and Luxury (as 'twas thought by this
Popes best friends) shortened his days. More pious his successor was esteemed^

10. fifth a Lombard, especially for Curbing the Whoores about Rome, whom he
commanded to be married or whipped, and if they died in that Course to be buried
in a Dunghill. 2. He showed himself resolute also against the Turk, and was
of confederacy with the Spanyard, and other Christian States, in the Victory at
Lepanto. 3. But otherwise amongst Christian Princes, that were not wholly at his
beck, played the Turk himself. Had a hand in the Death of Prince Charles of
Spain; in the making away of our King James his Father, in most of the
Treasons against Queen Elizabeth, whom he solemnly Excommunicated by a Bull,
which one Felton set up, upon the Bishop of Londons Gate, for which he was
Executed. This Bull our Bishop Jewel so bayted, that his Piety dared not to
reply. His instruction was to Caesar by his Legate Commendinus, Nec fidem, aut
Sacramentum infideli esse servandum. Neither Faith, nor Oaths, is to be kept
with Infidells, an excellent position to convert Infidells, and credit
Christian Religion. The Bononian

11. GREGORY the 13th follows, Queen of Navarre had bin poisoned by a pair
of Gloves,) was that Butcherly Massacre in Paris, which was celebrated at Rome
with public Triumphs. 2. He interposeth for the disposing of the Kingdom of
Portugal, void by the Death of Sebastian in Africa, But Philip of Spain
laying hold of it, he congratulates the Conquerours. 3. He alters the Calendar,
but could not effect with Caesar, and diverse other Princes, his new style
(which anticipates 10 days in the old account) should be followed, which is
done notwithstanding amongst some States, for politic respects. 4. The
Archbishop of Cullayne, Gilbert Truchchesius, is outed of his Archbishopric by
his Excommunication, because he Married, and the doting Governor of Malia,
sang a Nunc dimittis to him, adding postquam oculi mei viderunt salutare tuum,
For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which his Holiness took in very good
part, as belonging to him. Next comes blustering in from Marca Ancona,

12. SIXTUS the fifth, Henry the third of France, for killing the Guises, and
not plaguing the Protestants, as he would have him to have done, then he
Excommunicates him, and when he was Butchered by a desperate Monk James
Clement with a poisoned knife; his Holiness praises the fact, in a set
Panegerick amidst his Cardinals; comparing it with the works of Creation, and
Incarnation. 2. He blesieth the Banner of Spain against England, in the famous
expedition of 88; but to no great purpose. Afterward commends Queen Elizabeth
for a very excellent Governesse. 3. Quarrels with Spain for Naples, and
carried such a heavy hand over the Jesuits, that he wiped them of a great mass
of money, so that they forged, that the Devil carried him away in the habit of
a Coachman, two years before he should have done it by Compact. But the Pope
had bestowed those two years of his own age to make a Youth, (otherwise under
age) ripe for the Gallows. Whereupon Bellarmine being questioned what he
thought of this Popes ending, sagely gave his censure, Quantum sapio, quantum
cap^o quantum intelligo, Dominus noster Papa descendit ad infernum, and yet to
this Pope he dedicates his Controversies. Less ado there was with the
Gennoway that ascended the Chair.

13. seventh who kept it but a fortnight, and then left it to,

14. Millaine, one of the Tridentine Grandees as his predecessors were, but
there he held a shrewd position, that Bishops by Gods Law, are tied to
refidency. 2 He held also a Iubilee, and exhausted the Treasury of the Church,
in the Wars of France, which Sixtus before had sealed by an Oath to be
employed for the recovery of the Holy land. 3. He Curses Henry of Navarre, as a
relapsed Heretic, but the Parliament of France laughed at his Bulls, and
adjudged them to the fire by the hand of the Hangman. 4. The King wished the
Prelates to cramme the Papacy with no more Annals from France, but to create a
Patriarch of their own. 5. The Pope sends hi^ Nephew Francis, General to the
French Wars, but could nor resist the Fever and Stone at home, which ended
him, before he could end one year in his Papacy, a Bononian

15. INNOCENT the ninth could not hold in so long. months he was in, he
expressed an hatred against the King of Navarre, and a good liking of the
Jesuits. 2. It may be observed here, (to show the frailty of humane Condition,
and poor assurance of great places) that one year, four months, and three
days made an End of four Popes. The Florentine,

16. CLEMENT the eight kept the place longer, mischeife. He begins with Henry
of Navarre, and presses him so close, that at the last he made him to turn
Papist before he could be quiett in his Kingdom. 2. Neither then was, for
first a woman, then Botrerius his own Cup Bearer, through the instigation of
the Jesuits, afterward John Chastell (a student of theirs attempted his death.
Which Ravilliac their Villain at last effected,) and all for sooth because he
had entered upon the Kingdom, being absolved only by the Bishop of Biberico,
and not by the Popes Clemency. 3. To get a plaster therefore for this Sore,
Perron the Apostata must be sent Ambassador to Rome, where (...) the Pope
gives absolution, reciting the 11 Psalm, and at every verse gently striking
with his rodd, the prostrated suppliants, which he should have lashed more
roundly. 4. As he did indeed Caesar Estensis, whom he Excommunicated, and got
from him, the Dukedom of Ferrara, and added it to St Peter's Patrimony, which
was more then the poor Fisherman's own Father could ever get him. 5. He
dispensed with Cardinal Albert of Austria, to marry Isabella, Infanta of
Spain, but afforded not the title of King to the great Duke of Moseovia,
desiring it of him, because he inclined too much to the Greek Church 6. The
Alexandrians (some say) submitted unto him. He dispensed with Henry of France,
to put away Queen Margaret, and marry with Maria de Medices, labored what he
could, that King James should not succeed Queen Elizabeth here in England, was
much troubled with the Gowte, (but eased as he says) when Archduke Maximilian
kissed his gowty Golls. Hi^ Countryman,

16. LEO the eleventh that took his place, this Motto over his Arch-triumphall
Pageant. Diguus est Leo, in virtute Agni accipere librum, and solvere septem
signacula ejus. But four times seven days had not past, before a burning
Fever, (or somewhat else) put the Lord Cardinals upon a new Election of

17. fifth an Italian, Bellarmine and Baronius were named with him, but the
place needed not so much learning, whatsoever learning this Pope had, such
Inscriptions were afforded him and well taken. PaV Lo QV Into VICe Deo.
Christianae Reipublicae Monarchae invictissimo, and Pontificiae omnipotentiae
conservatori acerrimo, Morneus in praef. Myster. Iniquit.
out of which inscriptions in the three first words, we have the number of the
Beast 666. 2. Of no less importance are those other Attributes, Gens and
Regnum quod non servierit illi, in gladio, and in fame, and in peste, visitabo
super gentem illam, ait Dominus, Ier. 27. And, Dedit dominus potestatem, ut
omnes populi ipsi serviaut, potestas ejus potestas aeterna, and regnum ejus,
quod non corrumpetur, and crunt Reges Nutritij tui, etc. Vultu in terram
demisso, pulverem tuorum pedum lingent, Isa. 49.3. For not stooping therefore
to his power, and titles, a powder- plote was set on foot by Garnett the
Jesuit, and others his Accomplices here in England, to blow up the King and the
whole State. 4. The state of Venice was interdicted notwithstanding this Popes
vsurpatious, whereupon the Jesuits (that sided with him) were banished, diverse
of other Orders stuck close to the state against the Pope, and his learned
Cardinals, Bellarmine and Baronius; where Baroniu's exhortation to his
Holiness, Surge and Manduca arise and eat the Venetians, would not well go
down, till Cardinal Joyous of France, was feign to patch up the matter,
without the least disparagement to the Venetians. 5. The Oath of Allegiance
which our King James, (most justly required of his Subjects) was forbidden by
Breves from this Pope; but that learned King with His own Pen, so justified
his own right, that his Holiness declined the encounter. 6. Suarez,
Bellarmine, Becan, and others that interposed against the Supremacy of Kings,
within their own Territories, were censured by the Sorbon of Paris, and other
Papists. At length in France, Cardinal Peron Cowed them, to allow in some
sort, of the Council of Trent. 7. In the breach between Caesar and the County
Palatine, a great tax was laid upon all the Clergy of Italy, toward the
upholding of the Catholic cause, and a new Order of Knighthood erected at
Vienna, under the patronage of the Blessed Virgin, St Michael, and St Francis,
to root out all Heretics. Saxon joins with Caesar against the Protestants,
contrary to the determination of his Divines of Jene, and Wittemberg. 8. The
great Controversies between the Jesuits, and Dominicans, concerning the
immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin, is sm^thered, rather then decided,
a Jubilee held to bring in money, and so Mort VVs est VICeDeVs.

18. GREGORY the 15th of Bononia succeeds him, Adoration. 1. He instigates the
French against the Protestants, Saints Ignatius Loiola, with Teresa, Isodorus,
Gonzaga, and Koska of the same Society, quarrels with the Venetians for
entertaining Greeks, when they warred not with Infidells, to whom the Venetians
replied, that they held all Infidells, that opposed their Commonwealth. 2. The
Illuminati in this man's time, keep a great quarter in Spain, which some hold a
kind of Protestant Roundheads, and multiplied to that height that the
Inquisitors were feign to wink at them. After two years blustering with much
ado among the Cardinals.

19. VRBANE the eight, Florentine (that now holds it) was chosen in his place:
24. Cardinals grew sick, in this hot business, whereof ten lost their
lives, with diverse others. 2. He first casts about to advance his kindred,
among whom Cardinal Barbarino is now the man. 3. The jarres between the French
and Spanish for the Valtoline could not be composed by him: the French were
first blamed for favoring the ^rotestants cause in Germany, and entering into
League with them, But now the Spaniard is disliked, and upon the King of Sweeds
victorious proceedings, the Spanish Legas was told by his Holiness, that the
tyranny of his Master, gave just cause of rejoicing at the Heretics
prosperous success. 4. The Jesuits found no friend in him, for he has quite
cashiered the she Iesuitesses, which under hand grew to an Order very
advantageous to that society. Garassius one of their Company, wrote a sum of
Divinity, which their General had approved, but the Sorbon utterly condemned:
And upon a Pett taken for being stopped from a Bishopric (which the King of
Spain through Count Olivares procuring) had bestowed upon a Jesuit, That
Jesuit writes directly against the Popes power, and Contends, that he can do
no more out of his Diocese, then another Bishop, and that his Bulla Coenae,
thundered (for formality against his Master every year) is but a Babble. 5. The
Archbishop of Spalata playing Jack of both sides, and passing from hence to
Rome, met with worse entertainment there, then he found here. Father Paul was
wounded for standing for his Venetians, and one Barnes an Englishman led
Captive to Rome, for expressing himself too much against the Jesuits in the
behalf of Kings. This Pope seems to be a more polite Scholar, then many of
his predecessors by the books he has written, and not so Barbarous as many of
them have been. The Lord open the eyes of all those that sit in darkness, whom
the God of this world has blinded, that they may see the truth and em^race it.
AMEN.

2. INto this Period fall so many varieties of high concernment, that they can
hardly be glanced at. 1. The erecting of new Universities, Wittemberg,
Frankeford, Marpurg. etc. Especially in Germany. 2. Famous writers of the
Reformation, Luther, and Melanctho^ in Saxony; Zuinglius and Oecolampadius in
Helvetia; Calvin, and Beza in France; Peter Martyr, and Zanchius from Italy;
with others in other places of no less eminency, which with admired Learning,
and Industry, have maintained Gods truth against the Tridentine Engineers of
the Romanists, and the voluminous Jesuits their Emissaries: As also against the
domestique underminings of Socinus, Armi^ians, and their partisans. 3. The
wasting combustians, between the Imperialists and Sweadish, France and Spain,
Polonians and the Turk, each requiring a particular History.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. Luthers Reformation were not at first undertaken out of
Emulation rather then conscience? 2. The Difference between Lutherans and
Calvinists stands in such terms of opposition as may admit of no
Reconcilement? 3. The conventing of the Council of Trent, were not rather for
politic ends, then Reforming of any thing amiss in Religion^ 4. The
voluminous Disputes and Comments of the Jesuits be not more for ostentation in
Divinity, then Edification? 5. The Madness of the Auabaptists, and their
Enthysiasts be not as dangerous to States, as the projects of the Jesuits? 6.
The Dissentions of Christian Princes, be as advantageous to the Pope, as to the
Turk? 7. Socinianisme, and slighting of all Antiquity, be not an Introduction
to Paganism, and Atheism?


So much for Ecclesiasticalll History in General.
OF POLITICAL HISTORY IN GENERAL, Deduced From NIMROD ACCORDING TO THE four
Monarchies, by a continued Line of Succession to these times.

With a touch in every Period of some Principal Concurrent Matters to be Taken
notice of.

TOGETHER WITH Inquiries for Discourse.

Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula Cautum.
Foelix quem faciunt aliorum praemia promptum.
OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the Vniersity, 1648.

FIRST MONARCHY. CAP. I. Of Political History.
PERIOD. I.
1. TO Ecclosiasticall History thus briefly comprehended, Politieall in the
same method succeeds, that touches especially on Civi^ matters, in Kingdoms,
States, or Commonweals.

2. And is carried along in these Periods, From 1. NIMROD, to Cyrus. 2. CYRUS
to Alexander the Great. 3. ALEXANDER, to Julius Caesar. 4. CaeSAR, to
Constantine the great. 5. CONSTNTINE, to Charles the Great. 6. CHARLES to Ralph
of Auspurg. 7. RADULPHUS Auspurgensis, to Ferdinand the third, of these times.


3. The first Period, sets up the Assyrian Monarchy for the space of 1903.
years. In this line of succession we find in Moses.

1. NIMROD characterized to be a mighty one in the earth. So mighty a Hunter
before the Lord, that it grew to be a Proverb, Genesis 10.8.9. Aben Ezra.
as great a hunter as Nimrod. 2. This some take, as spoken to his praise, that
he destroyed Wild Beasts, to make room for better inhabitants, which he builded
Cities to defend, and keep together; and ordered by strict Laws, to civilize
their rudeness: but others carry it by suffrages to his disgrace; that he
dealt with Men as with Beasts, by altering Paternall Government (continued from
the Creation to these times) into forcing Tyranny. 3. In this humor associating
to himself Ioktan of the house of Shem, and Suphena of Japhets family (if some
may be credited) He undertook the building of a City and Tower, Methodius
Chron. Chronicor. S. W. Rawleigh. Genesis 11.4.
whose top might reach up unto Heaven, but that plot was dashed by the
confusion of Languages from heaven, and the place had the name of Babel that
signifies confusion. 4. His departing thence into Assyria, and building
Nineveth there, with three Cities more, as he had done four before in Babel
(all named in the Scripture) stands upon a nicity of transsating the 11. verse
of the 10. chap. of Genesis, which Junius would have run thus, Out of that
Land he went into Assyria, But we read without straining the original, Out of
that Land went forth Ashur of Shems race, who builded Ninineh, and gave the
Name to Assyria, He (perchance) had been with Nimrod at Babel, and observing
his courses, would get himself also a name by building, which might thrive
better in another place, then his did. 5. This eminent Giant (as S. Augustine
terms him) is said to have reigned 114. DeCivit. Dei l. 16. c. 3.
and then leaves his Dominions to his Son

2. Nimrod but on uncertain grounds. 2. He should seem to be of a more
contenting disposition then his Father, some think he employed himself most in
drayning the Fennes about Babylon, ^awleigh.
and carrying off the Water, to make the Country the more useful. 3. His
pleasing government deified him with his Subjects; and made him the sire of
many petty gods, as Bell, Baal, Baalber^th, Baalzephon, and the like. The
Chaldeans prefixed Bell, or Bal, as an ensign of honor to their names as
Baladan, Balihasar, the Carthagineans added it to theirs, as to Asdrubal,
Hannibal. 4. This Babylonian Belus was long before that Phenicun of Tire,
Virgil Aenead. 1.
whose great Bowl Dido filled with Wine for the entertainment of Aeneas: Him
follows of a more stirring spirit, his son,

3. NINUS, It is observed by one, Ancients used to term the Founders of
Kingdoms Saturnes, the Setlers, Xenophon in Aequivocis.
Jupiters, and the Inlargers Hercules. Whence we having Saturnus Nimrod, and
Jupiter Belus, must needs take this third to be Hercules Ninus. 2. This man
inlargeth Nineveh, founded before by Asshur, and imparts unto it his own Name,
Jonas 3.3.
continuing to be an exceeding great City in Jonas time, of three days Journey
about. 3. The incredible number of almost two Millions in his Army, which he
brought against Zoroastres the Magician of Bactria, Diod. Sculus,
(who met him with few less, and was overthrown by him,) discredits the
whole narration. 4. That is more probable, the setting up of his Father Belus
statua to be worshipped, he gave the first hint to Idolatry in Image worship,
which Image of his (some say) continued until Daniels time, when it was
destroyed by Darius Medus or Cyrus, upon the discovery of the Imposture of
Bells Priests, shown in that Apocryphal fragment of Bell, and the Dragon. 5.
His death is said to be procured by a trick of his Wife,

4. SEMIRAMIS, Royalty put into her hands, for the space of 5 days or some
such matter, to try how she could King it; In that space she made him away,
Pezelius.
and then under the habit a while of her careless Son Ninias first governs,
and afterward by her self. 2. Ph^tarc^^.
Her original is made to be from Ascalon of Palestina, where Derceta a
beautiful Reeluse, gotten with Child by some Triton or Dagon, exposed her, to
take her fortune amongst the Reeds of the Lake, where she was fed by Birds,
and thence had her name, which in that Country speech signifies a Bird. 3.
Grown up, she was Married to one Menon, who accompanied Ninus in his
expedition against Zoroaster. There being noted for her Wit, Resolution,
Diodor. sicul. Valor Maximue.
and Beauty; was taken by Nintu to be his Queen, whom she fitted as is
mentioned. 4. All agree that she enlarged the City of Babylon to admiration,
which once being like to be surprised, upon hearing of it, she rescued with her
hair half hanging about her Ears, not staying to dress it wholly, and
therefore is so Pictured. 5. For her Lusts she is branded to be insatiable,
killing those she had accompanied with, and at length soliciting her own
Son, was slain by him. 6. Others allow her a more honorable death, that
marching against the Indians with an Army of three Millions, Ravvleigh.
of foot, besides fifty thousand Horse and an hundred thousand Chariots, she
was overthrown by Staurobates upon the banck^ of Indus, C. 25. v. last. a
facie irae columbae. See a Lapide, and Tirin. Stephanus.
and so turned into Venus Bird, a Dove. Whence it came that the Babilonians
carried a Dove in their Banners alluded unto, by Jeremy clear in the vulgar
Latin, which the original will bear, though our Translation with others,
have it otherwise. Upon his Mothers death,

5. Zameis creeps out from amongst his Wenches. Diod. sicul. l. 2 Pezelius.
Athenaus passes him with this Character, (...).

To eat and drink he proved flush,
For better things, cared not a rush.
6. Of little better mettle were those that followed him, though Arius be said
to have done somewhat, Berosus. Africanus. Eusebius.
against the Bractians and Caspians, others about 20 are named only until we
come to,

7. stand is made (as it were) to view a Monster, a man womanuified, having a
terrible name. Pezelius.
For Sar notes a Prince, Dan a Judge, Niphal an overthrower, or Conqueror, no
otherwise applyable to him, but that his Luxurious carriage overthrew both
Sovereignty, and Indgment. H^rt. Schedel.
2. He is voted by one to be the first inventor of Cushions. His retiredness
from his Nobles to spin and dally with his Curtizans, drew upon him, Herodot.
Justin.
his Stomachfull Leaders, Arbaces, and Beloch, who after some Bickerings, drove
him to sacrifice himself with his Wealth and Wenches, to Vulcan in a Wood
pile. 3. His Ethics were, Ede, Bibe and lude post Mortem Nulla voluptat.
Eat drink and play whiles thou arthere,
For Death invites to no good cheer.
His Epitaph Haec habui qui edi, quaeque exsaturata libide
Hausit, at illa jacent multa and praeclara relicta,
That which I eat, and took I did enjoy,
All that I left behind proves but a toy.
What Epitath (says Aristotle) could fit an Ox better? It were good therefore
for great ones so to live, that they meet not in the end, with the Death of a
Dog, the Burial of an Ass, and the Epitath of an Ox. 4. Arbaces and Beloch
having thus dispatched their Master, share his Dominions between them. 5.
Arbaces settles himself Eastward amongst the Medes and Persians. But the
Royal Seat (though then of less Command) is continued by,

8. BELOCH, Beleser, or Belosis, the same with Pull, Phul of the Hebrews. 1.
Diodor. sicul. 2. Kings 15. 1. Chron. 5. Iose^. Antiq. l. 9. c. 11. 2. Kings
15, 16.
This is said to be that King of Niniveh, that humbled himself and all his, so
notoriously at the preaching of Jonah. 2. He afterward invaded Israel in the
time of the Tyrant Menahem, (that ripped the Infants of Tiphsah out of their
Mothers Bellies, because their Fathers opened not the Gates unto him) but was
contented to take a vast contribution which was levied on the people, and so
returned home again. This contented not his successor.

9. TIGLATH Pilesar, Pekah the son of Remaliah, (who had rooted out bloody
Menahems brood) and carried away Captives most of the Inhabitants on the East
side of Jordan. 2. Chron. 5.
Who had grown to a high pitch, as long as they served the Lord by their
Victories over the Hagarites, but afterward turning Idolaters, were so
transported into the East, that they never returned. 2. 2. Kings 16.
With this Tiglath-Pilesar, Ahaz of Judah also complemented, and hired him with
the sacred treasure of the Temple, Ib. v. 21.
to protect him against Rezin of Syria, and Pekah of Isracl, goes to meet him
at Damascus, and fancying there an Altar, must needs have the like to be made
for Gods house, which Vriah the high Priest, did according tothe Pattern sent
him, yet all this would not stave off.

10. Galil^e, ^. Kings 17.
and those beyond Jordan: so this man sets on Samaria, and after three years
Seige ruinates it, with their King Hoshea who had not kept touch with him. v. 6.
The Inhabitants he transplanteth to Halah, and Habor by the River Gozan, Tob.
1.2. Iosep. Antiq. l. 9. c. 13.14.
the Cities of the Medes. 2. Tobit was led away in this Captivity to Niniveh.
In assisting wicked Ahaz, he sacked Damascus, sharply assaulted Tire, but
failing to take it, Plundered the Country about it. 3. His cruelty is taxed in
the taking of Betharbel, Hoseah, 10.14.
where the Mothers were dashed in pieces upon their Children. This uncontroled
success of his, animated his successor,

11. Judah, and Jerusalem, 1. 2. Kings 18.
From whence being diverted a while by a great sum of Money, paid him by
good King Ezechiah; he promises to withdraw his Forces, but performs nothing.
2. Rabshakeh and others are sent to summon Jerusalem. In the mean while,
Iosep. Antiq. Herodot.
he besets Pelusium in Egypt, but thence is put off by the huge Army of
Taracha King of Aethi^pia, some talk of an Army of Mice that shapt his
Soldiers Bow-strings, making them unfit for service. 3. Believe that who list,
but this is Canonical, that returning and Beleaguering Jerusalem, 2. Kings 19.
by Ezechias prayers, and Isaiahs concurrence, 185000 of his formidable Host in
one night were slain by an Ange^, which startled him into an abrupt return
into his Country, where he ended his days (as some say) in this manner.
Demanding on a time of some about him, Biblia. Castali. ni^^ Tabu. c. 1.
what might be the reason, that the unresistable God of heaven, so favored the
Jewish Nation, as he had found by sad experience? Answer was given, that
Abraham fromwhomthey descended, sacrificed unto him his only son, which
purchased this protection to his progeny. If that will win him (says he) I
will spare him two of my sons, to procure him to be on my side: which
Sharezar and Adramelech his sons hearing of, they prevented their own deaths,
by his, 2. Kings c. 19.
as he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch his god, and flying thereupon
into Armenia, left their brother

12. ESARHADDON to Reign in his steed. disheartened by the hard hap of his
Father, and broken by the Rebellious opposition of his bloody Brethren; was set
upon by

14. MERODACH BALADAN, Governor of Babylon, Medes in Artices time, and denied
all subjection to Sennacherib of Assyria. 2. 2. Kings. 20, Isai. 39.
Some such matter may be gathered by his Complementing with Hezekiah, in
sending him Letters, and a present, to congratulate the recovery from his
sickness: In which there was some Aim, to make him his friend, for his
strengthening, to cut off Sennacheribs issue, and to transfer the Monarchy
from Niniveh to Babylon, which he performed. 2 He is guessed to be the same
with Nabonassar of Ptolomy, from whom the famous Epoch is taken that diverse
follow, but concerning him and his successors in this Babylonian line there is
such confusion, and variety, De 4. Summis Imperiis. Ierem. 50. Rawleigh.
that judicious Sleidan waves it all, to stick to the certainty of Scripture,
where Merodach is put either for the Idol or state of the destinated to be
destroyed, and

15. NABUCHODONOSOR the Great for his successor. Monarchy to its highest
pitch. 1. Rawleigh Hist l. 3. Ezech. 26.2.
By his victories over the Jews and all the bordering Nations. 2. Tire
rejoiced at the tuine of jerusalem: but her turn came speedily after; her
situation in the Sea, and the strength of her Navy could not save her. This
was the great secvice sooken of by the Prophet, Ezechiel. 29.18. Herod^tus.
Dioder. Siculus.
wherein every head was made bald and every shoulder made bare, in filling up
that straight of the Sea which separated it from the Continent before it could
be taken. 3. For this the Conquest of Egypt was allotted him by God for wages,
which he victoriously achieved, Isay 19. Ezech. 29. cap. 3.
as it was fore-prophesyed. 4. Then Nineveh, for Rebellion was ruinated by him,
as Nahum foretold it should. 5. Puffed up with this success, He sets up a
monstrous Statua of his own fancying, to be under pain of burning adored. 6.
Was not Schooled sufficiently by the miraculous deliverance of Sydrach, Mesach,
and Abednego, and the divine Informations of Daniel, to acknowledge the true
God's supremacy, until at length in the midst of his vaunting humors, he was
strooken stark mad, and doomed for seven years to converse with Wild-beasts:
but then was, 7. restored, acknowledged Gods Infiniteness, and man's Impotency,
Theodoret. Lyra. Carthusian.
repented, and according to S. Augustines charitable censure (whom some others
follow) was saved, leaving his large Dominions to

16. Kingdom (as some think) in the time of his Fathers Madness. Rawleigh.
2. Afterward having it in his own right, he dealt kindly with Jehojachin his
Captive, 2. Kings 25.27.
whom he advanced from Prison to feed at his own table, perchance the rather,
because his father Nabuchodonoser had not kept the conditions agreed upon, when
he surrendered himself unto him and Jerusalem. 3. Nitocris (some say his
sister, some his wife) was a notable stirring virago in those dases, that
passed Semiramis. 4. But all this could not hold up Babylon, which was
destinated to fall. Rawleigh.
5. The Medes and Persians prove victorious against him, thereupon Egypt takes
occasion to Rebel, where he lost all that his father had gotten. 6. He was
slain in a Battle, wherein his multitude of deboshe Soldiers were defeated, by
the well armed sturdy Medes, and leaves his vast dishartered Empire to his
degenerate Son

17. Lust, and a fit object for a Conqueror to work upon, which was well known
to his enemies, and drew them the sooner upon him. 2. Diverse presages there
were of thi^ man's mischievous disposition, tending to ruin. For in his fathers
time, he slew a young Noble man, that should have married his sister, only for
that he saw him gore two wild beasts with his Iaveling, that he himself had
missed to do: And an other Lord he gelded, because a Lady said in his
commendation, that that woman should be happy, who should have him for her
Husband. Cap. 27.7.
3. In this man was fulfilled the Prophesy of Jeremy, All Nations shall serve
Nebuchadnezzar and his Son, and his Sons son, until the very time of his
land come: and then many Nations and great Kings shaell serve themselves of
him. 4. The unparalleld upshot of which, C. 5
is described by Daniell in the midst of his surquedry, and prostituting of the
consecrated vessels to his Wives and Concubines, which had been taken out of
the Temple of Jerusalem by his Grandfather, and till that time laid up
untouched, with addition of the magnifying of his Idol Gods, and sleighting
the God of Israel: A hand writing for his execution from Heaven, Dan. 5.30.
was signed on a wall over against him, which as soon as it was denounced, was
dispatched, For in that night (says the Text) was Belshazzar King of the
Chaldeans slain, (the neglected Besiegers dividing Euphrates, and surprising
the City and Court) and Darius the Median took the Kingdom, Xenophon Cyroped.
l. 7.
together with Cyrus the Perfian, as it is gathered by conferring of Dan. 5.31.
with 2. Chron. 36.20.

2. COncurrents in this Period to be taken notice of, may be, 1. The Originalls
of Monarchical Government, amongst all the dispersed Nations. 2. The building
of Cities and Fortresses, for their Honor, Safety, and civilizing their
subjects. 3. The Seminaries for learning and spreaders of it, whence we meet
with, Cockmah Misraim, Sixtus Senensis.
the wisdom of the Priests of Egypt, derived from Abraham, Joseph, and the
Trismegisti, wherein Moses was perfectly instructed. The Magic of Balaam, Acts
7. Mat. 2. Numb. 24, 17. Sixtus Senems.
which took with the Eastern nations, and directed the Magi to Christ by the
star foretold by him. Cockmah Chasdim, the wisdom of the Chaldeans, which
Daniel was versed in, and surmounted, Besides Kiriah Sepher of the Cananites,
Najoth and Ramah, and Jericho, Schools (and as it were Universities) of
Students and Prophets amongst the Jews. 4. The calamities and deliverances of
the Church, Pezelius in Mellificio. Alsted in Histori^is.
in her oppressions, captivites, and wonderful preservations. 5. The clashing
of Nations for supremacy, in the Assyrian, Egyptian, Theban, Trojane wars.
6. The depopulations, ruins, or translations of States, and People, (too vast
to be piled up in a Compendium.) 7. Yet the concurrence of the line of Arbaces,
sharer with Beloch, (in the mentioned division of Sardanapalus Empire) must not
be omitted: Apud Photiu^ in Biblioth. Justin. Herodot.
Ctesias Gnidius here gives us the names of nine successors, some of which
others touch upon, but Iustine passing them as nominall, insisteth only on
Astiages, whose daughter Mandana, married to a mean Persian Gentleman
Cambyses, brought forth Cyrus, whom Astiages, plotted in vain to make away:
but drew him on rather to out him of his Kingdom, and with Darius Medus his
Vokle, to extinguish the first, and set up the second Monarchy.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. Any certainty may be had of story (besides that of Scripture:)
concerning the Assyrian Monarchy? 2. Ier. 29.22.
Bell destroyed by Daniel were Belus statua, the first Idol, and Zedekiah, and
Ahas the two Elders that assaulted Susanna? 3. Semiramis were slain in the
Indian War, or at home by her son Ninias? 4. Hos. 5.13. and 10.6. Isajah 20.
Iareb and Sargon mentioned in Scripture, were distinct Kings of Assyria? 5.
Nebuchadnezzar were really transformed into a Beast? 6. Upon his recovery, he
acknowledged the true God, repented, and was saved? 7. The Handwriting against
Baltasar, were in strange Characters, or a known Alphahet?


SECOND MONARCHY of the Persians.
PERIOD II.
1. THE second Period includes the Persian Monarchy, continued for about 200.
years, and has in it these Kings.

1. CYRUS, Josias was 300. to destroy the Idolatry of Bethel before it was
performed) He was Grandchild to Astiages, the great King of Media, by his
daughter Mandana, whom he married to Cambises a mean gentleman of Persia, to
frustrate a deposing, Herod^tus Justin.
which he had dreamed should grow upon him, out of his daughters Loins: but
men's purposes rather stoop to, then stop Gods purposes. 2. Of his strange
preservation from his Grandfathers cruelty, Education among Rustiques, Acting
the King amongst his play-fellowes, in chastizing a Noble man's son, that
resisted his authority, His bringing thereupon before his Grandfather, and his
undaunted behavior, with the discovery who he was, and the barbarous revenge
taken upon Harpagus for not making him away, as he was commanded, we have in
Herodotus and Justin at Large. 3. His first expedition was a against his
Grandfather Astiages, whom having overcome, he granted him his life, and being
unwilling to return again to rule among the Medes, he placed him in a
Government among the Hircaneans. 4. From thence he Marches against Craesus of
Eydia, whom he vanquished, saves from the fire, and takes to be his chief
Counfellor, who proved faithful unto him. 5. Then he falls upon the Greeks of
Ionia, and by Harpagus subdues them. 6. Afterward he sets on Babylon with his
uncle Darius Medus, (whose daughter he had married) and takes it with the death
of Baltasar, after which exploit, his Uncle (as it should seem) quickly dyed,
so the whole Monarchy came unto him. 7. His last expedition was against the
Scythians, where after his defeature of the young Prince Spargapises by a
stratageme, his Mother Tamoris in a second conflict overthrew him, and cutting
off his head, threw it into a vessel full of blood, with this bitter taunt
satia te sanguine, now glut thy self with blood, which in all thy life thou
have thirsted after. In this most Histories agree, yet Xenophon leaves him a
peaceable departure in his bed, Institut. Cyr. l. 8.
with an excellent farewell to those that were about him. Asia (says he) never
saw the like Governor. A worse ('it is plain) his Son

2. Egyptians, Herodotus l. 3.
with their King Psammenitus, the son of Amasis, whose patience and prudence
in misery, melted the fierce vanquisher into mercy. 2. Then intending to fall
upon the Carthagineans, could not get the Phenicians his Seamen to undertake
the business, in regard of a league between them and the Carthagineans. 3.
Whereupon he sends part of his Army against those borderers on the
Mediterranean Sea, called Hammones, from the Oracle of Jupiter Hammon, amongst
them, but they were all overwhelmed with the sands and never seen after.
Notwithstanding all this, he would needs have a bout with the Aethiopians, to
whom he dispatched Ambassadors, to know in what estate they stood, which being
slighted by their King, he furiously marches against them, so far, that he
hardly escaped an overthrowing in the Libian Dosarts, with his whole Army. This
forced him to a shameful retreat. 5. It is a passage worth the noting of, his
deriding and wounding Apis the God-calfe of the Egyptians, and the fleaing of
Sisamnis a corrupt Judge, and hanging his skin over the Tribunal, to be a
warning to his son Othanes (whom he put into his place) to do better. 6. But
the killing of his own Brother Smerdis, with his sister (his own wife) for
pitying him; as also, the shooting of an arrow through the heart of Prexaspe's
son, and seeking to do the like by Craesus, who admonished him of his
furiousness, are transcendent marks of Cyclopicall Tyranny. 7. His end was by
a wound in the thigh of his own sword, falling out of the Scabbard, as he was
taking horse to go against the Magi, who had Rebelled against him. Their
pretense was that Smerdis the Kings brother was not slain (as he commanded)
and thereupon they set up a Pseudo-Smerdis of their own to reign, which was
soon discovered by his cropped ears, made away by the Nobles. And one of the
seven in the Action.

3. Histaspis got the Scepter by the timely Neighing of his Horse at the Sun
rising. 1. Herodot. Justin.
He marries Atossa Cyrus daughter for the strengthening of his title. 2.
Recovers Rebellious Babylon by a stratagem of Zopyrus, one of his Nobles, who
cutting off his own Lips and Nose, and pitifully disfiguring himself, got in
with the Babylonians to be their leader against the Tyrant; whom he pretended
had so martyred him, which done, he found the opportunity to subject it again
to his Master. From this he Marches against the Scythians, but had but a cold
bout of it, they jeering him with the presents of a Bird, a Frogge, a Mouse,
and five Arrows, which by Hieroglyphicall interpretation meant nothing else
but, That if the Persians got them not quickly gone from them, as Birds in the
Air, or duckt as Froggs into a marsh, or erept not into Mouse holes, they
should have their Arrows in their sides to set them packing, which was soon
done with shame. 4. Better was the success he had a while against the Greeks,
that upon his defeat by the Scythians rebelled against him. 5. But when he came
with 600000 to make a full conquest of it, Herodot. l. 6. Justin. l. (...)
he was shamefully overthrown by Miltiades the Athenian, bringing against him
but 10000, in the Field of Marathron, registered (as Plutarch says) by almost
300 Historians. In this fight Themistocles the Athenian gave proofs of his
Valor, and one Cynegeris a Soldier was so feirce, Sustin. l. 2.
that when both his hands were cut off he set his teeth to stay a Ship of the
flying Persians. 6. This ignominious loss, when he cast about to repair the
Robellion of the Egyptians, and 7. The quarrel between his Sons, who should
sncceed him quite ended him, Artabasanes the eldest, claymes it as Heir, but
in regard he was borne, (his Father being but a Subject) the Younger,

4. Cyrus Grandchild by Atossa. His 1. Expedition was against the Rebellious
Egyptians, wherein proving successful, he returns and makes that great
Feast mentioned in the book of Hester, who becomes his Queen in place of
Vasthi: 2. Then is wholly for the revenging of his Fathers quarrel upon
Greece, Herodoru^. Justin.
against which (he is said by some) to have led five Millions of men, by others
a Million and seven hundred thousand, all which notwithstanding were
entertained, by one Pythius at Sardis, who presented the King besides, with
2000 Talents in Silver, ^awleigh.
and in Gold four Millions. 3. Thence passes forth by making Mount Athos an
Island, and Hellespont to give way unto him by a Bridge of Boats. 4. But at
Thermopilae, he lost near 20000 of his Army, by the opposition of Leonidas,
and 300 Lacedaemonians, upon which followed a defeat of his Navy at Artemisium
in the straits of Eubaea. 5. This was seconded by an other overthrow by
Themistocles, at Salaminis, increased by the Land-Victory, which Pausanias had
against his General Mardonius at Plateae, and Leutychidas the Athenian, with
Xantippus the Lacedemonian Admiral, got the same day near Myca^e a Promontory
in Asia by Sea. 6. Which laid together so terrified this Burdener of the Sea
and Land, that he was persuaded to return toward his Country, over Hellespont
in a Cock-boate. 7. Where after his Sacrilegious assaulting of the Temple of
Delphos, Barbarous dealing with his Brother, and his chaste Wife, prostituting
himself to all base villainies, he was Treacherously slain in his Bed at last
by Artabanus his Uncle, leaving his Son he had by Hester.

5 ARTAXERXES to succeed him, some make this Longhand to be Hesters Husband,
Rawleigh.
but Cronology will hardly bear it. 1. His entrance was good in doing sustice
on his Treacherous Uncle, for the death of his Father and Brother. 2. His
Courtesy likewise is much commended to the brave Themistocles, that was forced
by his ungrateful Citizens to cast himself upon such an Enemy. 3. He could
not choose but be more favorable to the Jews then others had been, for his
Mothers sake, Ezra. 4.9. Stephan. in Artaxer.
yet such strong oppesition was made by the faction against them, that the
building of the Temple (that was in a good forwardness) was by this man's
Decree prohibited. 4. To him succeeded,

6. DARIUS Nothus, some say so termed, Longimanu's Son by a Concubine, more
received is that, that he was his Son in Law by Marrying of his Daughter
Parysitades. 2. Two Brethren he had, Xerxes and Sogdianus that reigned before
him, but their behavior was so unworthy, and their reign so short (ending
within compass of a year) that there is no reckoning made of them. 2. Against
Nothus (at his first settling) Amyrteus the Egyptian rebelled, and delivered
his Country from the Persian servitude. 3. Amerges likewise a Subject of his
own, of the blood Royal, Lieutenant of Caria joined with the Athenians
against him, but these were soon broken. 4. One policy he had beyond his
Ancestors, that seeing his multitudes of Soldiers had bin so often rowted; to
use the Purse, rather then the Pike. 5. By this project he closed with the
stout Lacedaemonians, and recovered most of the losses of his Predecessors in
Asia. 6. Ezra. 6.
He is credited in Scripture for setting forward the building of the Temple,
which by his Father had bin interrupted. 7. By his Wife Parysitades he had two
Sons of which the Elder,

7. ARTAXERXES Mnemon succeeds him. 1. Cyrus stomakes at, and being backed by
the Queen Mother, and freed from his Fathers displeasure, was sent to his
charge in Lidia. 2. But that contents him not, his high thoughts undervalued
his elder Brothers softer temper, and nothing but Monarchy must content him. 3.
Having hired therefore a Company of resolute Greeks, to enhearten his own
Forces, he Marches hastily toward his Brother that had far the greater
preparations. They meet, the vantage is the Invaders, which puts him upon a
needless Gallantry, wherein he lost his Victory, and life. 4. The notable
Retreat afterward of the Grecians (mauger all the huge Forces of the Persian)
is notably set down by Zenophon, Lib 7. de expedit. Cyr^^ust^n l. 10.
which was their Leader. 5. This Mnemon is said to have had 115 Sons by
Concubines, Plutarch affirms 160. Only three in Matrimony, of which Darius
was Exequted for Rebellion, with 50 more of his Brethren, whom he had drawn
into the Conspiracy. This breaks the Fathers heart, his youngest son.

8. Turks continue it) made away his Brethren, that he might Tyrannize
securely without Competitors. 2. Forty thousand Sydonians, that as peaceable
Supplicants sued to him for his favor, were barbarously Butchered by his
command. 3. Notwithstanding he recovered Egypt (that had fallen off from the
Persian in his Grandfathers time) by his Generals, Mentor and Bagoas, whom he
seemed to value, whiles they served his turn. But his Tyranny proving
unsufferable, Bageas sets him packing with a Potion. And murdering the rest of
his Brethren, places,

9. Arsames in his Throne. It was not long before this young King had resented;
and detested Bagoas villainies, which he perceiving, and fearing due punishment,
prevented by sending also this man the way of his Fathers. This extinguishing
(as it were) of all the blood Royal, put the Nobles to a stand who should
succeed. But Bagoas had fitted them with a friend of his, who was received by
the Title of,

10. Codomannus. Cosen Germane he was to Arses, Diod. siculus.
and of high esteem in the Court, by reason of a Duel he undertook against a
Chalenger of the Persian Army, and performed it to the honor of his Country.
2. Bagoas notwithstanding soon distasts him, and prepares to dispatch him with
the Potion of his Predecessors. Of this the King having notice, Forces Bagaos
that brought him the draught, to drink it up himself, whereby he was
presently freed from such a dangerous Cup Bearer. 3. Hence wallowing in all
Luxury and riot securely. Alexander the Macedonian comes upon him and gives him
three fatal overthrowes, 1. at Granvick, where his Forces (having all
advantages of their Enemies) shamefully fled. 2. At Issus; where Darius (with
the loss of his Brother, Captivating of his Mother, Wife, and all the train
of Court Ladies, besides the utter defear of his huge Army, casting his Crown
away from him, hardly escaped. 3. To venture the stock upon it, he recrewted at
Arbela, and there having a final overthrow, was betrayed in his flight by
Nabarzanes and Bessus, two of his own Commanders, and so, miserably murdered.
Nabarzanes was afterward by intercession, spared by Alexander; But Bessus
prosequted and taken, was delivered to Tortures, to receive the extremest
vengeance of Treason, which in the highest measure he had deserved. And so we
have the Period of the second Monarchy of the Persians.

2. COncurrent with this Period, may be notice taken of 1. The state of the
Church (perchance upon the Prophecy of Isaiah showed unto Cyrus by Daniel.) A
relaxation of the Babylonian Captivity, was from him obtained, Ezra. 19.
for those of the Jews that would return to Jerusalem, and build the House of
God, with restitution of the sacred Vessels carried away by Nebuchadnezar,
which Building although it were hindered by spiteful opposition, under
Cambises, Ezra. ^.
Histaspis, Xerxes, Artaxerxes, and put at a stand; yet Darius Nothus at length
gave way to the Finishing of it, which was performed by Zorobabel. Ezra then
comes with a new supply to settle Gods Worship in Doctrine, and Discipline, and
Nebemiah, (notwithstanding all Projects, Threats, and Difficulties) raises up
the walls of the City. 2. The progress of Learning from the Chaldeans, is here
continued in the Colleges of the Magi, which spread it self far to the Indians
Eastward, and Westward to the Greeks. 3. Whence sprang up (as it were) the
Fathers of Faculties. for not to mention the seven Wise men of Greece, (all
within this compass) Hypocrates, Herodotus, Papirius, Euclide, Democritus
Abderita, so eminent for Physic, History, Law, Mathematiques, and anatomizing
the bowels of nature, are all in this standing. 4. In which besides the
mentioned persian Invasions and overthrowes, the Peloponesian, Messenian, and
Theban Wars are notorious, amongst the Greeks, and the Carthaginian, between
them and the Romans. 5. Whence we have the Catalogue of the famous leaders,
Miltiades, Cymon, Themistocles. Leonidas, Agesilaus, Epaminondas, Alcibiades of
the Greeks, Coriolanus, the Scipios, and diverse others of the Latins, with
Asdrubal and Hannibal amongst the Carthaginians. 6. Peculiar notice may be
taken of 1. Queen Artemisia of Caria, that gave Xerxes the best Council, and
help that he had against the Greeks, and quitted her self with most honor,
from their eager prosequution of her. 2. Thrasybulus delivering his Citizens or
Athens, from the thirty Tyrants. 3. And that excellent bringing off of about
ten thousand Greeks by Xenophon from all the forces of Artaxerxes Mnemon, as
he has himself most excellently in seven books described. 7. Lastly the
Accomplishment of the Prophesies, concerning the ruin of Babylon, Isaiah. 45.
Dan. 5.
Cyrus named for the restoring the Jews to their Country. The breaking off the
two Horns of the Persian Ram, by the great horn of the He Goat of Greece
may here be especially thought upon, too ample in a summary to be farther
enlarged.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. Xenophons Cyropedia, be a better pattern of a good Prince, then
a Relation of that which was performed? 2. Cyrus were more enriched by the good
counsel of Craesus, then benefited by all his wealth he had from him? 3.
Cambyses were that Nabuchodonosor, whose General Holophernes, Judith slew, as
Beda and the Jews would have it? Vid. Anno^ Iuni^ in Iud^^tia (...)
4. He destroyed the Egyptian Idols, rather in scorn of all Religion, then
hatred of Idolatry? 5. Zopyrus stratagem for recovering Babylon to Darius
Hystaspis, by cutting off his own nose and lips be fit for imitation? Herod.
l. 3^
6. It be credible that Pythius a Subject of Sardis, should feast Xerxes Army
of a million and half of men, and present the King besides with above four
millions of coin? Herod^t. l. (...)
7. Prudence rather, and good Leaders, then personal valor, wanted in Darius
Codomannus to withstand Alexander that so soon overthrew him?


THIRD MONARCHY of the Greeks. PERIOD III.
1. THE Third Intervall or Period, is from Alexander the Great, to Julius
Caesar, and includes the Third Monarchy of the Greeks for the space of 280
years. In this therefore we have

1. Great, son of Philip King of Macedon, who being brought up under the
famous Theban Epaminondas, laid by his Policy, and Prowess, the foundation of
his sons Greatness; for the finishing of the Photensian or sacred war, in
maintenance of Religion and Justice (as it was pretended) wan him no small
repute, and his old Soldiers, were the setters up and upholders of young
Alexander. 1. He having a design on Persia, thought it wisdom so to settle
Gracia, that domestique distractions recalled him not from foreign
proceedings. In performing which, as stubborn Thebes tasted off his
Indignation by ruin, so the race of Pindarus therein preserved, and the Lady
Timoclea pardoned, expressed his generous respects to Virtue and Learning. 2.
Passing thence into Asia with an Army of about 30000 Foot and 5000 Horse, the
greater forces of Darius (having besides all advantages of the river Granvick)
could not stop him, but he breaks through and routs them, and so forrageth
Phrygia, and all those coasts at his pleasure. Iustia. Curtius. Diodor. Arion.
Where the cutting of Gordius knot a sunder with his sword, (otherwise
untiable) was a sufficient fulfilling (as he thought) of the Prophesy depending
on it, and his reckoning of Achilles happy (when he viewed his Tomb) that had
a Homer to register his Actions; expressed an heroical emulation loath to be
outvyed by any. 3. In Syria his advancing of Abdolominus from a poor Gardener
to be King in Sidon, his taking of Tire (after seven months siege) with
incredible charge and resolution: Ioseph^^
His Reverend and admired carriage toward Iaddus the High Priest of the Jews,
not sparing only but gracing with immunities Jerusalem, and the Temple; farther
set forth his High spirit, and Noble disposition. 4. This fame attended by
perpetual success, surrendered him Egypt, as soon as he set foot in it. From
whence his journey through the Lybian Sands on pilgrimage to Jupiter Hammon
(whose son he would needs be thought to be) might for his honor, and profit
have been well spared. 5. But his victories at Issus, and Arbela over Darius,
are the more graced, by his Heroicke carriage to the captive Ladies of Persia,
and the vengeance taken upon Bessus that betrayed his Master. 6. After which
India tasted of his Greatness and Goodness, expressed in conquering Porus,
and others which there withstood him: All which could not excuse his hard usage
of old Parmenio, and his son Philotas, exequted for Traitors upon slight
grounds: His killing of his Foster brother Clitus, in the height of Distemper,
and Burning the fair City Persepolis, at the motion of a strumpet. 7. Not long
after which he met with (as it is thought) his death in Babylon by poison,
Antipaters sons were suspected for it, some say Aristotle and Calisthenes
were accessory, but upon no proofs. His Ring he left to Perdiccas, but his
Dominions (...) to the worthiest. this set up competitors, every one in his
selfe-esteeme claiming a share: but after some sharp bickerings between them,
who should have most, According to Daniels Prophesy, Cap. 8.^.
of a bout a dozen that are named, only four stood up that quelled the rest,
and continued. Of which we take for deducing the line in this shattered
Monarchy, next to Alexander,

2. A.M. 3629. tust. l. 84.
ANTIGONUS, taken for the son of Philip by a ConCubine. 2. He settling
himself in the lesser Asia, first assumed the title of a King, whom in
emulation the rest followed. 3. His greatest conflicts were with the valiant
Eumenes, who held him hardly to it, until he was shamefully betrayed by the
stubborn Agyraspides, termed Silver-shields, proud of their services under
Alexander: but Teutamus their leader paid dear for it. 4. Perdiceas that with
his accomplices strugled against him, lost himself in Egypt. 5. After diverse
other changes of victories, and defeats near Ephesus at Ipsus, he met with the
fatal blow that ended him, from Seleucus, Ibid.
Lysimachus, and Ptolomy's united forces. At which time also was rowted his
hauty son

3. Poliorcetes, so called for his skill and success in subduing Cities. 2.
He was a great help to his Father in most of his achievements. 3. Coming
himself to reign he passed Euphrates in the East, and subdued Babylon; Perel.
part. 1. p. 437^
Athons also in the West, was so hardly put to it by him, that a quarrel arose
between a Father and his Son, who should have a dead mouse, that by chance in
the famine, fell from a roof betwixt them. 4. He supposed that he had very
politiquely married his daughter Stratonice to Celeucus of Babylon, but it
proved otherwise; for this Son in Law of his, soon after, sides with Ptolomy
of Egypt, and outs him of his Kingdom. 5. More we shall find of him
afterward, in the line of Macedon. In the mean while,

4. CELEUCUS Nicanor would not leave him without an heir, but annexeth all his
Asian Dominions to his, whose line we follow here as the most illustrious. 2.
From this man we have the Era or Account used in the Books of Maccabees.
Appl^^ in Gy^iaci^.
3. Besides his continual wars to enlarge his Territories, he was a great
builder, and erected nine Cities calling them all by his name Selenciah. 4. He
was contented to bestow his fair wife Stratocias, upon his son

5. Soter, who so desperately doted on her, that without that salve his wound
was incurable. 2. It was not for any great good he did, the name of Savior was
afforded him, but because he did not much hurt. Notwithstanding he is said to
have carried a hard hand over the Jews. 3. Not much better proved his son by
his Mother, wife Stratonica.

6. ANTIOCHUS, howsoever termed Theos, and made as it were a god by the
Milesians for freeing them from the tyranny of Timarchus. 2. Great quarrels
fell between him and Ptolomy Philadelphus of Egypt, which were partly skinned
over, by his putting away his wife Laodice (by whom he had two sons Seleucus
Callinicus, and Antiochus Hierax) and marrying Berenice the daughter of
Ptolomy. But this held not, Dan. 1^.6.
(as it was foretold by Daniel) For upon Theo's death, enraged Laodice falls on
disconsolate Berenice, and caused her to be put to death, with her young son
she had by Theos, which was basely performed against the solemn oath of.

7. SELEUCUS Callinicus, Berenices Hair, is continued an Asterisme in the
celestial Globes. 2. Ptolomy Euergetes of Egypt sets upon him, to revenge the
murder of his sister Berenice, takes part of Syria from him; Callinicus (by
the help of his brother Hierax) recovers it again, makes peace with Ptolomy
without his brothers consent. 3. Hierax thereupon exasperated, wars on him,
and expells him out of Syria. 4. Upon these dissentions. Eumenes in Bithynia,
Arsaces in Parthia, and the Gaulls plundering every where, make more work. 5.
Hierax is slain by Ptolomies Soldiers Gallinicus dies by the fall from a
horse. He left two sons behind him Seleucus and Antiochus, of which

8. SELEUCUS reigned next after him, Ceraunus which signifies Lightning. 2. But
as Lightning, soon flasheth, pierces, and fades: so this spark passing ^ver
the Mountain Taurus, was by his own Soldiers extinguished, leaving his
Dominions to his brother

9. ANTIOCHUS afterward called Magnus, on Philopater of Egypt, but was feign
to make his Peace with him: opposed the Romans, who had taken upon them the
Wardship of young Ptolomy Epiphanes of Egypt, by whom being often Beaten, he
was forced to retire himself beyond Taurus, and leave the Territories on this
side of it to the Conquerours. 3. To him Haenniball fled, being defeated in the
second Punick Wars, but could not be protected by him, and therefore made
himself away to prevent his delivering to the Romans. 4. His end was by an
enraged multitude, in defense of their God Belus, whose Temples and Treasures
in Syria, he went about to rifle. 5. Of his three sons surviving him,
Seleucus Philopater, Antiochus Epiphanes, and Demetrius,

10. Philopater the fourth of that name succeeds him. 2. He is foretold by
Daniel to be a raiser of Taxes, Dan. 11.22. ^. Macch. 3. v. 38.
having heard of the Treasure in the Temple of Jerusalem, he sends Heliodorus
his Treasurer to seize upon it for his use, but Heliodorus met with such a
Lashing from Heaven, that he told his Master at his return, If he had any
Enemy or Traitor, he should send him thither upon the like employment. 3.
whiles his two Brothers Epiphanes and Demetrius, were Hostages at Rome, this
man addicts himselfs securely to all Licentiousness, but Epiphanes breaking
from thence, and taking his opportunity, was quickly found to ease him of his
Government, This

11. Epiphanus took upon him. 1. Of his entrance it is said as of Boniface the
eight, that he entered as a Fox, reigned as a Lion, and dyed like a Dog. 2. He
took upon him at the first only to be a Guardian to Demetrius his Brothers
Son; but once settled, quickly dispatched him, and takes all to himself. 3.
Sets upon Egypt, but staved off by the Romans from that enterprise. 4.
Returns furiously upon the Jews, whose Temple and Religion he would needs
extinguish. 5. Old Eleazarus, and a Widow with her seven Sons are Martyred
by him. 6. Jupiter Olympiu's Image, must be erected upon Gods Altar, and
Incense and Sacrifices offered unto it. 7. This made the seven Asmonei or
Maccabees, succesfully to stand up against him, for the vindication of Gods
honor, to the defeating of diverse of his Generals, and Forces. 8. Polybius
terms him Epimanes, a mad man, and Christian Divines a Type of Antichrist, a
vile man (says Daniel) that had not one commendable quality to speak for him.
Having at last spit his Venom and wasted himself, he would needs into Persia
to rifle the Treasures of the Temple of Nannea, to whom he pretended to be a
Suitor in Marriage, and to take that wealth for a Dowry; but the Priests there
so Polted him, that the Match was broken, and the Dowry left behind, whence
returning with disgrace, Gods vengeance ended him on the way, leaving
Inheritour of his Infamy, and Kingdoms his Son,

12. ANTIOCHUS Eupater, Jews, in regard he perceived that it was in vain to
oppress them. 2. But within two years his Uncle Demetrius, the third son of
Antiochus Magnus gets loose from Rome, (where he had bin a pledge with his
Brother Epiphanes,) kills him, and succeeds under the title of,

13. DEMETRIUS Soter a preserver, preserved himself. 2. Upon a complaint of
Treacherous Alcimus, 1. Macch. 7. 2. Macch. 14.
he sent his General Nicanor to subdue Judas Maccabeus; but he with 3000 men,
defeated the Host of Syria, and slew their General. For which a Feast was set
a part, to be celebrated. By an other General of his Bacchides, Judas
(deserted by his own men) nobly sold his Life. 3. 1. Macch. 10.
But Soter had small time to Triumph in it, for in a set Battle he was
overthrown and slain by,

14. ALEXANDER his Nephew, Epiphanes. He is termed otherwise, Alexander Bala,
or Veles. 2. Philometor of Egypt gives him his Daughter, but afterward taking
his advantage, deprives him of his Wife, and Kingdom. 3. The poor man flies
into Arabia, where he was slain, and his head presented to Philometor. Soter
that was before this man's intrusion, had two sons, the younger Antiochus
Sedetes, and the elder,

15. DEMETRIUS Nicanor who succeeded, content he had in it, for Sedetes joining
with Tryphou (a great Commander in those days) with the concurrence of the
Valiant Asmonean Jonathan, ^oseph. Anti. 13. c. 9.
quickly outed him. 2. Tryphan had a plot to King himself, but businesses were
not ripe, he goes therefore into Arabia, and thence procures from one Malchu's
tutorage, young Antiochus the son of Bala, or Veles forementioned, to have a
plausibletitle, this Child,

16. Entheus therefore is invested for a state, ^oseph. Ib.
but after a defeat given to Nicanor by Arsaces of Parthia, who took him
Prisoner, and the Coast (at it were cleared,) young Antiochus must sleep with
Fathers, and Triumphing,

17. Apamean ascends the Throne without pretense of Title. 2. He overcomes
Nicanor. 3. Treacherously, inveigheth Jonathan, and put him to Death. 4. Simon
Ionathans Brother (chosen the Jews General) Beseigeth this Trifler (as Joseph
terms him) in Dora from whence escaping to Apamea, Antiq. l. 13. c. 12.
he was there taken and slain by,

18. Sedetes termed Soter, and Pius son of the former Soter, and Brother to
Nicanor. 2. He dealt not well with Simon the Father, and Hircanus his Son. 3.
Who purchased a Peace of him for money. 4. Invading Arsaces, he was slain by
him. 5. By means whereof, his Brother Nicanor returns out of Captivity, and
reigns three years. Upon his death,

19. Sebenna is foysted in by Physcon of Egypt, Joseph. Antiq. ^. 13. c. 17.
but is quickly outed again by

20. ANTIOCHUS Gryphus who slew him in battle, this Gryphus was son of
Nicanor, Cyzicenus, that perpetually Warred upon him with variable success. 2.
This ennity of the Fathers was continued by,

21. CYZIZENUS, Seleucus, Philippus, and Demetrius, the Sons of Gryphus, and
Antiochus, the Son of Cyzizenus their Uncle; until (that wasted by such
irreconcilable dissentions.) They were surprised by Tygranes of Parthia; who
put a Period to the Line of the Seleucidae, but himself was soon after
subdued by the Romans, and Syria made a Province.

2. Cnotemporary with this Period must be paralleled, the Line of the Ptolomies
or Lagidae of Egypt, taking their rise from. 1. Ptolomeus Lagus a By-blow of
Philips of Macedon, the third sharer in Great Alexanders Dominions. Joseph.
Antiq. l. 12. c. ^.
He surprised Jerusalem by a Stratageme, taking the vantage of the strict
celebration of their Sabbath; and carried multitudes of them Captives into
Egypt, which 2. Philadelphus his son redeemed with his own Treasury, and
set at Liberty, who was famous besides for his exquisit Library, and procuring
the Translation of the Septuagint. Far short of him came. 3. Evergetes his
son, commended notwithstanding, for revenging of his Sisters Beronices death,
upon the bloody Callinicus of Syria. But devilish proved his son Nicknamed.
4. Philopater for Butchering his own Parents, from whose tyranny the Jews in
Egypt were miraculously delivered, by Gods frustrating his projects, and
turning his Elephants prepared for to destroy the Jews, to the destruction of
their Leaders. See the Book of Symion the high Priest, commonly called the 3.
of Maccabees. 5. Epiphanes was too young to be so Villainous, upheld by the
Romans his Gardians, against Philip of Macedon, and the great Antiochus. 6.
Philometor comes next in the Line, so called from the deadly hate his Mother
bore him. 7. Phiscons great Panche wallowes in next, that sent his son to be
eaten of his own Mother, as bad or worse proved. 8. Lathurus that vexed the
Jews, and forced his Prisoners to feed on dead Carcases, whereupon outed by
his Brother. 9. Alexander, Alexander kept the place, until his Mother
Cleopatra plotted to kill him, which he prevented by Matricide; Deposes
himself and gives way for Lathurus his return to Reign again. 10. Then
Auletes the Fiddler comes on, but by Pompeyes persuasion, was banished by the
Romans, to give way to 11. Dyonisius his son, that proved Pompey's
executioner, when he fled to Egypt from his overthrow in Thessalia. Only 12.
Cleopatra his Sister remained to succeed, Minion first to Julius Caesar, then
to Mark-Anthony, whose overthrow at Actum brake her heart. Antony made himself
away by poison, she by Aspes, applied to her Breasts. And the date of the
Lagedae exspired, Egypt falls also to be a Roman Province.

3. The next parallel is the line of Macedon. In which the 1. Arideus,
Alexanders half brother, did nothing but by direction of stirring Perdiccas,
to whose tutorage he was committed, but both of them quickly cut off. 2.
Cassander, Antipaters son did more then he should, in barbarously making away
Olympias Alexanders mother, ^ustin. l. 14.
Cleopatra his sister, with his two Wives Roxane and Barsena, and their
Children Alexander and Hercules: the cry of whose blood found revenge in his.
3. Antipater that succeeded, and Alexander his brother, who were the ruin one
of another, and the whole bloody family. This was especially performed by 4.
Demetrius Poliorcetes who outed from Syria, by overthrowing the wrangling
brethren, setles himself here. But 5. Pyrrhus of Epyre soon got the Kingdom
from him, and as quickly left it to 6. Lysimachus of Thrace, that stout
commander of Alexanders, who strangled the Lion he was exposed unto, without
weapon, to be torn in pieces. But this valor defended him not against the
undermining and forces of the Egyptian, 7. Ceraunus who outs him, grows in
with his Wife, cheats them, and abuses them all. But before a whole year past
8. Meliager another of Alexanders leaders dispatches him, he Reigns but two
Months, before 9. Antipater the second had gotten the Scepter from him, and
about 45 days after, left it to 10. Sosthenes, who freed the Kingdom from the
plundering Galls, but could not free himself from 11. Antigonus Gonatus
Poliorcetes son, who recovered the Kingdom after five intervenient intruders.
To him succeeds 12. Antigonus the second, his Son. He leaves Antigonus the
third, termed Doson, for promising much and performing nothing, but his
government ended, with the nonage of 13. Philip, Gonates son, to whom Doson
was only Protector. Philip has great overthrowes by the Romans, who
captivated at length his son. 14. Porseus by Paulus Aemilius, And so Macedon
also fell to be a Roman Province.

4. With these fall in the beginnings and growth of the Romans Greatness
under their Kings, Consulls, Tribunes, and Dictators upon occasion 2. Whence we
have their Victories in Europe, in the Italian, Scicilian, Spanish, Macedonian,
German, Illyrian, and wars with Pyrrhus in their own Territories. In Asia the
Syrian, Parthian, and strong opposition of Methridates and his adherents. In
Africa, the three famous Punick Wars, until Carthage was razed by them. And
the stubborn resistance of Jugurtha, at larg recorded in particular Histories,
as Insurrections amongst themselves of their discontented slaves, of Catiline
and Sertorius, the bloody ruptures between Marius and Scylla, Pompey and
Caesar, Tantae molis erat, so weighty a matter i^ was to lay the foundation and
erect the Trophies of the Fourth Monarchy of the Romans.

5. As for matters of the Church, and progress of Learning, in this Period
between Alexander and Caesar, We find the Temple of Jerusalem surprised by
Crassus and Pompey, with their disasterous ends upon it, and the Jews brought
under the yoke of Herod the Idumean. But humane Learning never attained that
splendour, as then it did amongst the Grecian Philosophers, especially severed
by their distinct Schools, of Academicks, Peripatetiques, Stoics, Cynicks,
Epicures, Pythagoreans, and Sceptiques, too numerous to be rehearsed.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. Alexanders expedition against the Persian, were rather of
ambitious venturing, then of just cause given? 2. ^^v. Hist. l. 9. c. 17.
If he had turned his Forces Westward, he had met with his match in Papyrius
Cursor amongst the Romans? 3. His entitling himself Jupiter Hammons son,
distasted him more with his own, then advantaged him with strangers? 4. His
proceeding against his old valiant General Parmenio, and his brave son
Philotas, had sufficient ground to exequte them for Traitors? 5. Antiochus
Epiphanes may pass for a fit type of Antichrist? 6. The first Library of note,
were that of Ptolomeus Philadelphus in Egypt? 7. The change of Kings of
diverse families, in the Macedonian line, were the chief cause of subduing
them by the Roman Conquest?


FOVRTH MONARCHY of the Romans.
PERIOD IIII.
1. THe Fourth Period, from Julius Caesar to Constantine the Great, begins the
Fourth Monarchy of the Romans, and takes up the space of about 355 years,
under forty Pagan Emperors, whereof the first was,

1. JULIUS CaeSAR. exploits are famous in the 1. Gallish, 2. Germane, 3.
British, 4. Civil wars against Pompey, and his adherents. 5. Alexandrian,
for settling Cleopatra, with whom he was too intimate. 6. African, against Cato,
who slew himself at Vtica. And 7. Spanish Wars against Sextus Pompeius. In
all which he is reckoned by some to have been victorious in fifty set Battles.
2. Having gotten the perpetual Dictatorship, Plutarch.
He reformed the Calender, as now we retain it in the Julian years account,
and left the Month Julius for continuance of his name. 3. To this valor he
wanted not Learning or Language, for the Registring his own Acts, a touch
whereof is extant in his seven Books de Bello Gallico, and three other de
Bello Civili. 4. Cicero cries him up also for a most pertinent and accomplished
Orator. 5. In Martial affairs Plutarch so paralells him with Alexander, that
he carries the Bucklers from him, though from spotts (which are usually noted
in Heroical dispositions) Alexander may be observed more Free. 6. This honor
he gained to leave the name of Caesar to all his successors, whereof his
Parallel came short. His quick dispatch is noted in Veni, Vidi, Vici, I came,
saw, overcame, the great forces that Pharnaces Mithridates son of Pontus had
levied against him. 7. His Motto was SEMEL QVAM SEMPER. Ibid.
Better it is once to dye, then to live always languishing. It fell out with
him accordingly. For sitting in the Senate House, he was brutishly murdered
with 23. wounds, the most part given by them whose lives he had preserved,
which (it should seem) he intimated to Brutus in his last words (...); What?
and thou my son? His successor was his sister Julias, natural, and his
adopted son,

2. Caesar, borne in Cicero's Consulship, who exhorts his brother Quintus in
his Government, to immitate the prudence of Octavius, who was Augustu's father.
2. Before he could secure himself, Anthony, and Lepidus were wisely to be
dealt with. A Triumvirate was patched up between them, for signing of which
Lucius Caesar, Augustus own Uncle, old Cicero his faithful Advocate, and
Paulus the brother of the High Priest Lepidus, must be proscribed to be
executed; so little reckoning is made of other obligations, where the condition
runs for Sovereignty. But this knot was quickly dissolved, the three sons
growing into one. Lepidus dies, Anthony overthrown at Mutina, and Actium made
himself away. 3. Augustus having vanquished all his opposites at home, and
Enemies abroad, with incredible success and Celerity (except in that one
shameful defeat of Q. Varus against Arminius) shuts up the Temple of Ianus, in
token of an universal peace. Vid. Alsted. Hist. c. 21.
4. Then was the Prince of Peace our Savior borne the 42. of this Emperors
Reign, and in the year of the world (as amongst 28 differences, we pitch upon
with Luther and Lucidus) 3960. some think this variety of account (especially
between the Greeks and Latins) happened, by reason it was usual amongst the
Ancients by these figures 1.2.3.6, mystically to insinuate the Sacred Trinity,
in 1.2.3. and unity in 6. which mixed with the years of the World (by those who
knew not what it meant) brought the account so much out of square, that by
subduction of that additament may be thus rectified. Eusebius counts from the
Creation to the Nativity 5199 years, from which subduct 1236 (the forementioned
mystical sum) and the remainder will be 3963. but three years exceeding
Luthers reckoning, which we follow. 5. But those matters were least thought on
by those, whom Gods providence made chief actors in it. Psalm. 49.
Man in honor may be compared to Beasts that Perish. Augustus thus advanced in
the eye of the world finds his discontents at home, in his Children. His
daughter Iulia, by his wife Scribonia, and her issue, had not the best report.
It is doubted whether Ovid were too familiar with her, somewhat there was more
then his books de Art Amandi, that caused him to be banished. He was wont to
wish that he had never been Married, or been a Father, Sueton.
and to term his daughter the Impostumes of the World. 6. Vomicas and
Carcinomat^.
Yet this rigid Father could take Livia Drusilla, from her Husband Taberius
Nero, when she was great with child with Drusus, and she humored him so
pleasingly all his life, (though he had no issue by her) that his last words
were, O Livia, remember our marriage, and Adieu: so she did, Toci^m.
and it is thought, had a finger in setting him going. 7. He affected Maecenas
for his secrecy, Agrippa for his patience, and Virgill for his rare gift in
sublime Poetry, was wont to say that he received Rome of Brick, but had left
it Marble. His Motto was FESTINA LENT. (...). Eucipid. in Phaenissis.
SAT CITOSI SAT BEEN: (...), which hinders not a speedy execution of that which
is deliberately resolved upon. His successor was

3. Augustus, which his wife Livia brought him, begotten of her former husband
Tiberius Nero, and his brother Drusus in her belly to boot. 2. In his first
employments he proved victorious against the Germans and others, with his
brother Drusus, which caused Augustus to adopt him, and marry his daughter
Iulia to him, from whom he was quickly divorced by her Fathers consent. 3. He
made himself shye in undertaking the charge of the Empire, but entering like a
Fox (as it is said of Boniface the eight) reigned like a Lion, and dyed like a
Dog. 4. In the 15, some say the 18th year of his Tyranny our Savior
suffered, whom he would have deified, but the Senate withstood it. 5. Seianus
his great Favorite was worryed by him, and his daughter deflowred by the
Hangman, to make her liable to accompany her father. 6. His latter time was
most unnaturally spent in prodigious cruelty, and bestiality, Sueton.
so that he was rightly Characterized by Theodorus Gadareus his Tutor, (...),
Dirt kned with blood, and by others, instead of Claudius Tyberius Nero, Caldius
Biberius Mero. 7. Lastly as he and his Mother Livia, had a hand in making away
Marcus Agrippa the right Heir to Augustus: so ('it is thought) his successor
took a course to hasten his passage to his Ancestors. Then after he had
contrary to his Motto, (which was MELIVS EST TONDERE, QVAM DEGLVBERE) a long
time not only fleeced, but devoured the sheep, a worse (if worse might be)
follows him.

4. Caligula. It must be remembered, that Livia brought with her to Augustus two
sons by her former Husband, Tiberius, and Drusus; Tiberius reigned next after
him, Drusus died in the Germane Wars, leaving two sons behind him,
Germanicus, and Claudius. This Caligula was the son of Germanicus by
Agrippina, Daughter of Julia, and Grandchild to Augustus, who after many rare
Atchivements died in Germany. 2. In the beginning of his Government he vented
his spite to the Jews, for denying him religious worship, sets up his Statue
in the Temple of Jerusalem by the title of Jupiter Caius, Enseb. Eccles. Hist.
l. 2. c. 6. Joseph. Antiq. l. 18.
gave favorable Audience to Appion declaiming against them, but would not
hear Philo, in their defense. 3. His Lust was Monstrous in erecting Stews in
his Palace, Deflowring his own Sisters, sparing neither Matrones, nor Maids
that he had a mind unto. 4. His cruelties Devilish exercised (as it were) in
hatred of maenkind, and fretted that no heavier calamities fell upon the world
in his days. 5. His courting of the Moon to be his Paramour, bringing
Cockleshels to Rome from Germany, as spoils of the Conquered Ocean; Inviting
his Horse Jncitatus, and entertaining him with a Golden Manger full of
Provender, and vessels of the best Wine to drink, Sueton.
promising to make him Consul, with the like freaks of frenzy, need not to be
insisted upon. 6. His Tragical Motto was ODERVNT DVM METVVNT, he passed not
for the hatred so he might be a Bugbeare to all men. To which purpose, he must
be Jupiter Hercules, and what not? Yet any Crack of Thunder drove him to
shelter himself under his Bed. 7. A good end for such a Monster could not be
expected, which befell him from Cassius Charea, and Cornelius Sabinus, his
officers near about him, His Wife Caesonia and Daughter were slain together
with him, into his place was hoysted his Uncle,

4. CLAUDIUS in a strange manner, Soldiers in a hurry, going to Plunder the
Palace, one perceiving the feet of a man hidden in a hole, plucks him out by
the heels. This proves to be Claudius, who falling on his knees, and desiring
his life might be spared, the Soldiers lift him up on their shoulders and
proclaim him Emperor. This took so with the multitude, that the Senate, for
their own safety were feign to give way unto it. 2. At his first entrance, he
showed more discretion then was expected from him. He would not be honored
with Sacrifices. Banished the Jews out of Rome for their tumults, provided for
the Poor in a great Famine, Act. 18.^. Act. 11.28.
foretold by Agabus. 3. Neither were his Atcheivements abroad of less
consequence, in Germany and Africa by his Commanders. In our Brittany he was in
Person, and so settled affairs, that he returned with the title of Britannicus.
A Phoenix in his time was seen and seldom before, or since. 4. Sextus Aure^.
Victor.
His Mother was wont to term him a Monster begun not perfected by nature, so
that it past for a Proverbiall disgrace stultior Claudio, a veryer fool then
Claudius. But he lost himself not so much by doing as suffering indignities.
His Wife Messallina was not satisfied to outvy all Strumpets in the Stews but
needs she must Marry publicly a young Gallant C. Sylius in her Husbands
absence: but this impudence cost her her life. 5. Pallas, Narcissus, and other
ministers about him, took the vantage of his easy disposition egregiously to
cheat him, and deride him. Of this crew Faelix was preferred to be Governor
in Judea, Act. 23.
whom St Paul's Sermon of Temperance, and Judgment to come in the presence of
his Minion Drusilla, made to tremble. 6. In his time Simon Magus played his
pranks in Rome, and got to be honored as a God, but that St Peter encountered
him there to his neck-breaking, we find not. It would do well that this
Emperors Law against freed men ungrateful to their Patrons, (should be
retracted to their former slavery,) were severely exequted in these Rebellious
times. 7. Sparks of a generous mind, (howsoever damped by a crazy body)
appear in his Motto, GENERIS VIRTUES NOBILITAS. It is virtue, not Scutchions,
or Images of Ancestors makes men Noble. 8. His Wife Agrippina (worse, if it
might be then his former Messalina) poisoned him at length in a Mushrome (of
which Seneca makes good sport, In Apocolocyntosi de Morte Cloudii.
and of his deifying) to assure the succession of her son,

6. Domitius Aenobardus, who was wont to say that from him, and Agrippina,
nothing could proceed but for public mischeife. 1. The first five years of
his Government were such, that Traiane was wont to say, none ever had attained
to the perfection of them. 2. But afterward he brake out into all Villainies of
Lusts, with Catamites and Strumpets of all sorts, wherein he spared not his
own Mother, and slew her afterward, with the most unnatural abusing of her
dead Corpse; Of Butchery in making away his Wife Octavia, and kicking to death
(being great with Child) his beloved Poppaed, not sparing Seneca, and Burrhus
his faithful Councillors, sending Lucan the Poet to accompany them. 3. He set
Rome on fire, and for excuse thereof, laid it upon the Christians. 4. Was
Author of the first grand Persequntion, wherein St Peter (as it is said) and St
Paul were Martyred at Rome, with others innumetable, and Jacobus Justus at
Jerusalem. Whereupon Tertullian inferred that the Gospel must needs be a
precious thing, because Nero hated it. 5. The Company he most affected, were
Witches, Bauds, Sycophants, Fidler^, Coachmen, Stageplayers, guelded Ganimeds,
of who^ he would have turned Sporus into a woman and Married. Whereupon one
wished that his Father had had no other Wife, whence past these Pasquils upon
him. (...) Nero, Orestes, Al^maeon, registered for Kill-mothers. 6. Although he
used for a Motto QVAEVISTERRA ARTEM ALIT, All Countries yield a being to aman
of Parts and Arts, in reference to his own skill, which he chiefly stood upon,
yet that was more genuine unto him, (...), not only whem I am dead, but while I
live, let Heaven and Earth be turned into a Chaos. 7. Continuing to be so
intolerable, his Soldiers fell off from, and the Senate adjudged him to be
whipped to death like a Rogue, which exeqution he prevented by killing himself,
having no friend, or foe left that would do so much for him. His successor was
old,

7. GALBA a sour Soldier, and strict in Discipline, Army, the buzz went
amongst the vulgar. Disce Militare miles, Galba est non Getulicus. Stand to
your tackling, Galba comes amongst you, not remiss Getulicus. 2. As the Army
advanced him for hope of promised gain, so for non-payment, they quickly
Rebelled against him. 3. His Motto could not stop their mouths, LEGENDVS EST
MILES NON EMENDVS. A Soldier must be chosen, not bought. Whereupon they basely
slew him, and set up in his place,

8. OTHO a Complementing Courteour, Skirmishes rather then Battles, despaires
of his condition. 3. His Motto VNVS PRO MVLTIS, he would rather dye himself,
then draw on the death of a multitude. This he wrought by his own hands.
whereupon Aus^nius passes him with this Epitaph, Fine tamen laudandus erat qui
morte decora,
Hoc solum fecit ^obile, quod perijt.
Whatsoere his life was, sure his death was fair,
Noble in this for being his own slayer.
His Competitor that forced him to it,

9. credit and comfort in his place, a debaucht wretch, and bloody beast, whose
word was BONVS EST ODOR HOSTIS, MELIOR CIVIS OCCISI. The smell of a dead enemy
is good, but better of a dead Citizen. 2. But such divillish dispositions are
most commonly paid in their own Coin. 3. He was quickly forsaken of his
Partisans, dragged through the street, pelted with mire and filth, hackt and
tormented with Weapons, and so per scalas Gemonias, by the growning stayres
thrown into Tybur, as he had barbarously used the Brother of

10. Virtue, Valor, and moderation overtopped them. 2. He was designed to
quell the Jews that rebelled, wherein he prospering with the best approbation,
Upon the Soldiers setting up elsewhere other Emperors after the death of
Nero, his followers took upon them to do the like, and Galba, Otho, and
Vitellius in a trice cut off, their Choice stood by the applause of all. 3. At
his entrance he repaired the Cities ruins, showed himself averse from
Flatterers, base lusts and revellings, by which his Predecessors became
infamous. ^ueton.
4. It is said that he miraculously cured a blind man, and one that was lame,
but this might be but a device to gain popular reputation. 5. His easiness to
pass by injuryes appeared, in the bestowing nobly of Vittelliu's his
Competitors Daughter, and giving a large Portion with her. 6. He much relied on
Predictions. Josephus the Historian foretold him he should be Emperor, and
then should free him from Imprisonment. 7. His Covetuousnesse is taxed by most,
which his Motto imports, LVCRI BONVS ODOR EX RE QVALIBET. But this is capable
of a good meaning, which his practice verified. Of gain contenting is the
smell,
If gotten, and disposed well.
His end was manly in this parting resolution, Oportet Imperatorem stantem
mori, an Emperor should dye standing as he did, leaving his place to his son,

11. TITUS, before his coming to reign, Luxury (in entertaining of Beronice,
and her train, from whom afterward he was unwillingly severed;) Of crueliy, in
murdering Aulus Caecinna through a jealous humor, when he friendly inv^ted him
to supper; of Avarice, in extorting from others, that belonged not to him; so
that diverse misdoubted he would prove another Nero. But his sweet and prudent
Government quickly wiped off all those aspersions. In so much that he was
termed Delitiae humani generis, the delight of mankind. 2. It was a principle
he held, that the courtisie of a Prince, should dismiss no Suitor with a sad
Countenance. And sitting on a time in company, O my friends (says he) I have
lost a day, in regard he had spent it without doing some good. 3. His Conquest
of Jerusalem made him famous, not only for the difficulty of the thing, as for
his moderate carriage in it, bearing with the desperate stubbernesse of the
Beseiged, and shedding Tears at the burning of the Temple, when he could not
help it. 4. The imprecation of the Jews at our Saviors voting to Death, His
blood be upon us and our children. There took place in full measure, and in the
same, met to their M^ssias. For so many of them were then Crucified, De Bell^
Iud. l. 6. c. 32.
that by relation of their own Josephus, there remained no more space to set
Crosses in, nor any more Crosses to crucify bodies upon. Thus was accomplished
the Abomination of Desolation spoken of by Daniel, and repeated by our Savior,
being 490 weeks of years, as the more passable opinion is, from the second
year of Darius Nothus, who gave way to the reedifying and finishing of the
second Temple. 5. Upon this success a suspicion grew, that he affected the
Deposing of his Father, but his hasting to him, and continued observance of
him, soon cleared him from any such intention. 6. His brother Domitian, could
not be so excused for plotting against him, whom notwithstanding convicted he
freely pardoned 7. His Symbol was PRINCEPS BONVS ORBIS AMOR. All the world
falls in love with a good Prince. He seemed the better through the wickedness
of his Brother,

12. DOMITIAN that followed him. 1. Never towardly from his childhood. 2. Being
Emperor he would retire himself frequently to stab flies, whence one asking
who was with his Majesty, Beelzebub. Muscicapitaveus.
it was aptly applied, truly not a Fly. 3. He set on foot the second grand
persecution against the Christians, wherein St John was banished into Pathmos,
and wrote his Revelation; Arrogated to himself Divine Honors, and would be
styled Dominus and Deus noster, our Lord and God, to which afterward the
Canonists entitled the Pope. 4. The Months December and October are designed to
bear his name, as July and August, do of Julius Caesar, and Augustus, but this
change of the Calender took not. 5. When men were weary of him, a Chough is
said to have spoke Greek from the Tarpeian rock (...), All shall be well. 6.
Which could not be until the Tyrant was slain outright, by his own servants,
which the Devil might inform Apollonius Tyaneus of, when he cried out at
Ephesus the same time, To him Stephen, strike him, kill him. 7. His word was
FALLAX BONVM REGNVM, A Kingdom is a deceiptfull good. He found it too true,
and a better successor then himself Cocceius

13. Prince of the Commonwealth, he set things right, that his predecessor had
disordered, revoked St John out of Banishment, provided for poor, forbad
incestuous marriages. 2. His Motto sums up his excellencies, Seneca in
Thyeste.
MEN'S BONA REGNVM POSSIDET, my mind to me a Kingdom is. 3. The shortness of
his good government, was continued by his adopted son and successor Vlpius

14. Spaniard, the first stranger that reigned among the Italians, his justice,
moderation, and valor, got him the title of Pater Patriae father of his
Country. 2. Notwithstanding the third persecution against the Christians was
raised by him. This was so me what mittigated afterward by the Testimony of
Plinius Secundus, concerning their harmless conversation. 3. Plutarch was his
Instructor, and Lucian that scorner of all Religion, lived in his time, who
thought it a disparagement to their great wits, to stoop so low as
Christianity. Notwithstanding Oracles ceased (especially at that time) amongst
the Heathen, And frequent miracles were amongst Christians. 4. The Jews (not
lessoned by the late ruin of Jerusalem) raise insurrections against him, in
which 200000 of them perished. 5. His word was QVALIS REX TALIS GREX, Subjects
prove good by a good Kings example. His cosen Aelius

15. ADRIANUS takes his place, Memory, Wit, and other abilities. 2. By the
Apologies of Aristides and Quadratus, the fourth persecution begun in his time
was much stayed a against the Christians, who at length had so gained his good
opinion, that he would have builded a Church for them without Images, if some
about him had not told him, that it would be dishonorable to all the rest of
the Gods. 3. The Jews possessed with a fatal frenzy, are up in Arms again,
under an Impostor Barchocab, a son of the star, that should rise in Jacob,
but he proved but Barchosbah, a son of a lying cheater, this drew upon them
their grubbing up, root and Branch, the Plough upon the City, the erecting of
another out of its ruins, by the name of Aelia from the Emperor, with the
statua of a sow set over the Gate in detestation of Judaisme. 4. After many
Journeys, and settling affairs abroad, and here in Brittany, by building a wall
of 80 miles, to sever the Romans from the Natives, he returns to right
matters at home. 5. His word was NON MIHI SED POPVLO, consonant to that of the
twelve Tables, Salus Populi suprema lex esto, the Peoples good must be the
chief scope of the Ruler, to be promoted by him as a Protector, and Guardian,
not as a Servant, or Officer, to be accountable to his Subjects (if he do not
his duty) but to God only who is his only Superior. He dies Poetically
desperate, with this farewell to the world. Animula vagula blandula,
Hospes comesque corporis,
Quae nunc abibis in loca?
Pallidula rigida, nudula,
Nec utsoles, dabis jocos.
having adopted to succeed him

16. ANTONINUS Pius, who erected a Temple for clemency: he better affected the
Christians, after he had read the Apologies of Iustine Martyr, and others. 2.
He had learned men in great esteem, as Galen, (who was his Physician) but
detested Jdlelers, as the bane of the Commonwealth. 3. His Motto shows his
gentle disposition. SATIVS EST SERVARE VNVM CIVEM, QVAM MVLTOS HOSTS PERDERE.
one Citizen is preserved with greater credit, then a thousand enemies
destroyed.

17. ANTONINUS Philosophus follows, who associates to him his brother Lucius
Verus, of a contrary disposition. The Philosopher furnished with all virtues,
his brother with vices, but Verus continues not long, so that the whole
government returned to him. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 5.
2. He raised in a blind zeal, the fifth persecution against the Christians
wherein Polycarpus and Iustine Martyr suffered. But his distressed Army in
Germany, being miraculously preserved, by the prayers of the Christians, calmed
him into a more favorable conceit of them. The Legion that obtained this help
from heaven, was thereupon termed (...), for not only procuring rain to the
thirsty Soldier, but Thunder and Lightning to route the E^nemy. His word was
REGNI CLEMENTIA CVSTOS, Clemency is a Kingdoms best preserver His son.

18. wresch and shame to his family. 2. He kept 300 Curtizans, and so many
Boys: would needs be accounted Hercules the son of Jupiter, and so encounter
Wild Beasts with his club and Lions skin, had an ambition to have some months
bear his name, as Julius Caesar and Augustus had; but met at length with a
draught of Poison from his Sweetheart Martia and a strangling upon that, to
dispatch him quickly. 3. This forted not with his Emblem PEDETENTIM though it
ran with all his Subjects desires, who in a manner thrust into his place
Helvius

19. PERTINAX an experienced soldier, Praetorian bands. 3. His motto is said
to be MILITEMVS, Let us March on. His march was soon cut off by

20. DIDIUS Iulianus, Money gets any thing, but he had small incoms by his
purchase. Niger in Syria, and Albinus in Britany lay claim to it, and he being
slain in his Palace by those he traded with,

21. SEPTIMIUS Severus fucceeds, Soldier, and otherwise a worthy man. 2. He
set on foot the sixth Persecution, it being the Devils policy to employ
especially men noted for moral honesty and abilities, to massaker Gods Saints,
that the world might believe, that those could not choose but be most
abominable, whom such wise and pious men were so earnest to extinguish. 3.
After some Victories in the East, and building a wall here between England and
Scotland, he dyed at York, his word was LABOREMVS, Let Us be doing, which was
ill applied by his son that succeeded.

22. BASSIANUS Caracalla, cassock that he wore, reaching down to his ancles. 2.
He professed that in all his life, he never learned to do good. He slew his
brother Geta in his stepmother Julias arms, whom afterward he took to wife,
and slew Papinian^u the famous Lawyer, because solicited by him to defend his
fratricide, his answer was, that it was a crime sooner committed then defended.
3. In a frantic humor he would be accounted Alexander the Great, and Achilles,
conforming the posture of his body to their statues. His Motto was, OMNIS IN
FERRO SALVS, All safety lies in the sword: but the sword could not protect him,
for going to untrusse a point, in his expedition against the Parthians, he was
slain by one Martial a Centurion, by the setting on of Opilius.

23. Macrinus an unworthy wight, who took the government upon him, which
Audentius an able man waved, when it was offered unto him. 2. He made a
dishonorable peace with the Parthians, associates his son Diadumenus to be
Coemperour with him. 3. His word is said to be, FERENDVM ET SPERANDVM: Bear he
might, but no good he could hope, from such detestable beginnings. His Son
with himself were s^aine together by their own Soldiers, to make way for
Antoninus

24. monster, the bastard of Caracalla by Simiamira a strumpet, whom he is said
incestuously to have used. 2. He erected a Temple to the Sun, whose Priest he
was, and would constrain the Christians to worship in it; Married a Vestall,
and defended the fact to the Senate, that he might do it being a Priest. 3.
His setting up a Senate of Women, was a new fetch of Policy, and their
Ordinances were correspondent, as what attire each Woman should use, Pezel^us
ex Aurel. Herod. an. Capitolin.
how they should take place, when salute etc. set down by Authors. His word was
SVVS SIBI QVISQVE HERAES OPTIMVS, Every man should be his own Heir, no matter
for posterity. Those soldiers that chose him exequted him in a Privy, and sent
him to cleanse himself in Tybur. His cosen Alexianus succeeded him by the name
of

25, Severus: He was somewhat harsh to the Christians in the beginning, but
afterward favored them so far, that he had the picture of Abraham, and
Christ in private, and would have built a Temple for Christians, if Vlpian the
Lawyer (whose advice he much used) and some others, had not diverted him from
it. 2. His Mother Mammea sent for Origin, and was instructed by him in grounds
of Christianity. 3. He was a strict exactor of Discipline, an utter enemy to
Idleness, buying and selling of offices, cheatings in matter of trust:
whereupon he adjudged one to be stifled with smoke, that had vented smoke in
stead of substance. His Motto was that of our Saviors, QVOD TIBI HOC ALTERI,
Do as thou will be done unto. Yet all these excellencies, could not shield him
from his barbarous Soldiers, who slew him together with his good Mother, near
Mentz in Germany. Of whom the Cyclopean ringleader was

26. MAXIMINUS Thrax, in a hurry made his successor. stature, two foot and a
half higher, then any in the Army, devouring forty pound of flesh daily, with
about six gallons of wine to digest it. 2. Advanced by Severus, he furthered
the conspiracy against him, and persecuted the Christians more spitefully,
because he favored them. 3. As this seventh persecution was the shortest, so
it was most violent, not of the common sort so much, as of their especial
Leaders, who were either cut off from them, Chrysostom. in Heb. 13. v. 17.
or hireling intruded for them, or their flock set up against them. 4. His
boisterous tyranny so exasperated his Soldiers, that they set up one
Quercianus against him, but he quickly made away, the Gordiani with the like
success appear in Africa, of whom the younger was slain by Capellanus,
Maximinu's friend, and the elder, strangled himself. 5. For the Senates
favoring those Competitors, he hastened with his Army to Rome, to be revenged
of them, but was slain in besieging Aquileia, where the women cut off their
hair to make bowstrings, to shoot against him. 6. At which siege his Soldiers
mutiny, slay him and his son, professing that of an ill breed, not a Whalpe
must be left. 7. His word was, QVO MAJOR HOC LABORIOSIOR, Greatest pains
taking, should attend the greatest abilities, but not to do mischief, but
good. As this man's competitors Balbinus and Puppianus were like to have done,
but they were cut off before they were settled, and therefore not reckoned in
the line of Emperors.

27. Gordianus the elder, He had good success against Sapor of Persia. 2. The
Symbol ascribed unto him is PRINCEPS MISER QVEM LATET VERITAS, Unhappy is that
Prince from whom truth is concealed. This was this young man's cause, who was
basely made away by

28. Arabs his General. 1. It is said that he was Baptized with his Mother,
and Family, but Scaliger denies it, he was never observed to laugh, was a deep
dissembler, according to his Motto, MALITIA REGNO JDONEA, Pomponiua Latus.
wickedness fits to Govern. He found the fruit of it, being with his son
slain by the Soldiers, to make way for

29. Senate and Soldiers, a man beyond exception both for Valor and
conversation. 2. But whether it were for hatred to Philip, that seemed to
favor Christianity, or to get a mass of money which Philip had left in Pope
Fabians hands, or some other secret aim: He became the author of the 8th
terrible Persecution, wherein Orignae faultered, Niceph. l. 5. c. 27.
Apollonia had her teeth beaten out, and the seven that slept 129 years in a
Cave, from that time to Theodosius, with diverse other are Registered. 3. In his
time Paul an Egyptian betaking himself into the Wilderness to avoid
persecution, became the first Hermit. 4. His word was, APEX MAGISTRATVS
AVTHORITAS, and his sons, Fugitivo nulla Corona, authority he had sufficient
but that freed him not from the Treason of

30. Gallus, who basely betrayed him to the Goths, by whom he and his son
young Decius, perished. 2. But the same Lot quickly befell Gallus with his
son Volusian, from Aemilianus. 3. Good Symboles are attributed to these, as
to Gallus, NEMO AMICVS IDEM ET ADVLATOR, No Flatterer can be a true friend; to
Volucian PVBLICA FAMA NON EST VANA, That all report, is likely to have some
truth in it; To Aemilian, NON GENS SED MEN'S, NON GENVS SED GENIUS. Not Race or
Place, but Grace truly sets forth a man. These had only the title of
Emperors, but soon fell before

31. VALERIAN, Egyptian Magician. He raised the 9th persecution against the
Christians. 2. In this (besides infinite others by unusual torments) Cyprian
the famous African-Father suffered, and Laurence that resolute Champian was
Roasted on a Gridyron. 3. But the cry of blood is prevalent, soon after, (it
is thought by Treason of some about him) he fell into the hands of Sapor King
of Persia, who used him for a footstool as often as he took Horse, to the
utmost vilifying of Majesty, and regret of diverse Princes that were
intercessours for him. His word was NON ACERBA SED BLANDA, not bitter but
flattering words do all the mischeife. He associated unto him in the
Government his son

33. GALIENUS, Lump of flesh that never stirred to relieve his Father, but was
all for his panch, and plays. 2. Thirty Competitors were then on foot,
Pezelius in Sleidan.
under the title of Emperors, who confounded one another. 3. His Motto was
PROPE AD SVMMVM, PROPE AD EXITVM, near the top, near the end. In which the
Goths grew upon him, the Christians eased from their perseqution, and he slain
by

34. CLAUDIUS, who settled all right in two years, overthrowes of the Goths of
300000 by land, and their Navy by sea. 2. when these Goths had gotten an
infinite number of books, ready for the Fire; Nay, burn them not (says one)
but leave them to take off the bookish Greeks from Martial affairs, that we
may the sooner overcome them. 3. He is said to have the moderation of Augustus,
the virtue of Trajane, and the Piety of Antoninus. 4. His speech was REX, VIVA
LEX, a King is a living Law, which was made good in him. 5. Upon his death by
sickness, his Brother Quintilius, stirred to have succeeded, but finding
himself too Weak to oppose, made himself away by opening of a Vein, and
left it to

35. AURELIANUS, famous for many Victories, those over Tetricus his opposite,
and the brave Queen Zenobia of Palmerina, whom he brought in Tyiumph to Rome
in golden chains. 2. Incensed against Tyana, he vowed he would not leave a Dog
in it but having taken it, upon a frighting by the Ghost of Apollonius Tyaneus
the Magician dead long before, he commanded his Soldiers to kill all the Dogs,
but spare the Citizens. 3. QVO MAYOR EO PLACABILIOR was his Motto, the greater
the gentler, which he forgot in his latter time. Porphyzius that furly
Antichristian Praedicabilist grumbled against Christians in his time. Against
whom the Emperor being about to figne a Perseqution, was terrified by a
Thunderbolt which stopped it, when his cruelty grew intolerable, he was
betrayed by his Secretary and so slain.

36. complementing between the Army and Senate, but the Senate carried it. 2.
His word was SIBI BONVS ALIJS MALVS, he that is too much for himself, fails
to be good to others. 3. He kept not the place a year, but dyed of a Fever.
His Brother Florianus put in to succeed, but finding his weakness, quitts the
pursuit by opening a vein, and leaves it to

37. Germans in the West, and Persians in the East, with diverse other of the
Romans enemies. 3. His Motto was PRO STIPE LABOR, no fight, no pay,
Freequarter was not then in use, the unruly Soldiers that chose him, made him
away to have a worse in his place.

38. Thunderbolt. His son Carinus for his lewdness, was as soon dispatched,
but his other son Numerianus of better temper, was basely made away by his
Father in Law Arrius Aper. 2. Carus saying was BONVS DVX BONVS COMES, A good
Leader makes a good follower. Numerianus was wont to repeat. Esto quod audis,
be thou as good as thou art reported to be, and Carinus comes in with his
Cedendum multitudini, most voices must carry it. 3. Aper thought to have
carried the Empire by the murder of Numerianus, but he was flaine by

39. DBOCLESIAN, Emperor after he had slain a Wild Boar, which he took to be
this Aper. 2. Being puffed up by diverse victories against the Persians and
others, he would needs be adored as a God, and whereas the meaner sort used
formerly to kiss the Emperors knee, the better his hand, Eusebius Eccles. Hist.
l 8. c. 2. Socrat. Hist. l. 1. c. 2.
all must kiss this man's foot. 3. He raised the tenth, and extremest
Persecution, wherein Churches were overthrown, Bibles burnt, whole Cities
razed, Women hanged upon trees naked with their heads downward: the bones of
Princes and Nobles dug out of their Sepulchers and cast into the sea: a
whole Legion of Soldiers with their Commander Maurice cut off, for refusing to
sacrifice to Jdolls, by which unheard of Tyranny, he presumed to perform that
which he openly professed, that he would root out the profession of
Christianity. 4. Isai. 32.
But God has a hook for such Wild Beasts noses. In his government he makes
Maximianus, Augustus with him, to whom five Caesar's more are assumed, who
agreed not well amongst themselves. 5. Growing old, and weary in seeing that
his mischievous plots took not wished effect, he persuaded his partner
Maximianus to depose with him all government, and to live as private men, which
was done according to his Motto, NIL DIFFICILIVS EST QVAM BEEN IMPERARE,
Nothing is more difficult then to rule well. 6. When the government fell
amongst the Caesar's, they justled one the other, some for, some against the
Christians. 7. He that favored most the Christians sped best, who was

40. CONSTANTIUS Chlorus, trial, he proposed to his Soldiers, who would
sacrifice to Jdolls, or stand to the grounds of Christianity: he discarded the
Jdolaters, and retained the Christians, whose fidelity he might depend upon. 2.
After diverse victories against his opposites, he dyed peaceably here at York.
His saying was VIRTUES QVAE PATITVR VINCIT, Jnsuffering virtue overcomes. His
associates sped much worse, as it will appear in the Empire of his son, who
begins the next Period.

2. IN this Period (besides the Birth, and Life, and Sufferings of our Savior,
with his Resurrection, and Ascension, the descending of the Holy Ghost, and
spreading of the Gospel by the Apostles before touched upon) 1. The storming
of the Christian Church, at her first appearance under the ten notorious
Persecutions, is especially remarkable; Wherein not Rebellious opposition, or
deluding projects, or hypocritical tergiversations, but prayers, and tears,
and resolute profession, and martyrdom, proved at length victorious. 2. Here
comes in the ruin of Jerusalem, foretold with tears by our Savior, of which
one says Lege and Luge. S^ Paul gives a hint to the Romans, Romans 11.21.
If God spared not the natural branches, take heed least he also spare not
thee. Their City and Temple were ransackt by Titus, but put under the Plough,
and the whole nation scattered (as at this day) by Adrian, for their obdurate
perverseness. 3. Here appears the greatest opposition that Philosophers,
Orators, Politicians, and Magicians could make against the Gospel, but ever in
the end were worsted. Celsus, Porphyry, Hierocles, with his Apollonius Tyaneus,
and the like Mountebankes, how palpably were they convinced, and made
ridiculous, by Iustine Martyr, Tertullian, Origin, Eusebius, etc. in their
Apologies remaining at this day? 4. Neither was Satan permitted as formerly to
hold up his party by his Oracles, Enthysiasts, and other delusions, which were
silenced and discovered to be cheats, and as Dagon broken before the Arc, to
the wonder of their wisest votaries. 5. Notice may be taken of the reiterated
breaches in this Monarchy, under the brutish Lusts, and Tyrannizing of diverse
of their Emperors, which those of better temper were not able to repair. 6.
Insolency of Soldiers, who made and unmade whom they pleased, and often so
many at one time, that one devoured an other. 7. And lastly, by the irruptions
of the Goths and Persians, who took the hint to overthrow that, which they
found so tottering, may persuade domestique unity, to prevent foreign enmity.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. Tiberius or Nere were the more insufferable Tyrant? 2. Caligula
or Caracalla were the veriest Monsters? 3. Massilina or Agrippina proved the
worst wife to Claudius? 4. Domitian or Commodus more degenerated from their
Ancestors? 5. Antoninus Pius or Philosophus were the greater Scholars? 6.
Trajan or Adrian were the better Governors? 7. Decius or Dioclesian were the
heavier persecutors?


FIFTH MONARCHY of Eastern Greeks. PERIOD V.
1. THe Fifth Period, is from Constantine the great, to Charles the great, and
contains the Dynasty of the Eastern Greeks for the space of 455 years, in a
line of thirty three Emperors, Wherein we have,

1. Great, the son of Constantius Chlorus, not by his second Wife Theodosia,
(which Dioclesian put upon him) but by the virtuous Helena, his first Wife,
^^crat. l. 1.
a British Lady, who found the Cross of our Savior in Iernsalem, for which
the Pope set up an Holy Day. 2. He translated the Imperial seat from Rome to
Bizantium, which he builded (as it were a new) and called after his own name
Constantinople; built Churches, encouraged Scholars, and was so respective of
the Clergy, that he professed, If he found any blemishes in Bishops, he would
rather cover them with his own parple robe, then they should be divulged, to
the disgrace of the calling. 3. The Famous Council of Nice was assembled by
him, and graced by his presence: wherein receiving diverse papers of dissenting
Bishops, accusing each other, he burnt them without farther ado, to persuade
them to unity. 4. The hard dealing with his worthy son Crispus (whom he had
by a Concubine) through the wrong suggestions of his lustful wife Fausta, is
excused by none, and the truth afterward appearing, the Empress deservedly
suffered for it. 5. The Donation of the Church of Rome put upon him, is found
to be a forgery. In his time Iberia and India received the Gospel, his
Subjects were freed from taxes, and protected against the incursions of
Foreign enemies. 6. In his latter time he was wrought by his sister
Constantia, to favor the Arians, whom the Council of Nice had condemned.
Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia (the chiefest prop of that Heresy) is said to have
Baptized him a little before his death, not Pope Sylvester the first, as the
Romanists have fained. 7. His Symbol was IMMEDICABILE VVLNVS ENSE RESCINDENDVM
EST, When there is no hope of curing, men must fall to cutting. Of his three
sons, (amongst whom he divided his large Empire) the youngest,

2. East, whose line we take as most eminent, and less interrupted touching on
the other Brethren, as Contemporaries, Of which Constantine the eldest (not
content with his share of France, Spain, and Britain) would needs encroach
upon his brother Constance, who had Jtaly and Afric, but was quickly slain
in the prosecution. 2. Constance thus having gotten all the West, proves a
great upholder of Paulus Patriarch of Constantinople, and Athanasius of
Alexandria, the most eminent sticklers against the Arians, whom Constantius of
Constantinople stood for. But Magnentius (whose life he had formerly saved from
the Soldiers fury) treacherously Rebelled against him, and slew him, but
received the same measure from Constantius his brother, who remained then sole
Emperor, all competitors being so happily extinguished. 3. He admitted his
Aunt Constantia, ( Lucinius relict) to live with him in the Court, Her an
insinuating Arian Priest had perverted to be of his sect; she infects the
Emperor, who becomes so eager in furthering it, Hierom.
that Jngemuit totus Mundus the whole world (says a Father) groaned under the
pressure of that Heresy. 4. Paul of Constantinople is banished, Athanasius
tossed up and down the World to save his life, from his persecutors, one
George usurps his Sea of Alexandria, who afterward for his cruelty being slain
by the Pagans, was Sainted by his Partisans, and some would have him to be our
Saint George a Horse back, which is not likely. 5. Manifest it is that this
persecution of the Arians, was no less bloody, and barbarous, then the worst
of the former ten, amongst the Pagans. 6. His Motto was PATIENS SIT PRINCIPIS
AVRIS, A Prince must have a patient care, but to faithful Counselors, not
fawning flatterers. 7. He associats to himself his Nephew Gallus, who growing
(upon some performed service) too Insolent, was soon rid out of the way, and

3. Constantius (by reason of his death intervenient) could not hinder from
being his successor. Socrat. l. 3. c. 1.
His success against the Galls, and Germans cried him up amongst the
Soldiers. 2. Constantius suspecting his pronenesse to Paganism, sent him to
be carefully grounded in Christianity, to Nicomedia, where he caused himself
to be shaven, and became a Lecturer in public: but he frequented by stealth,
the company of Libanius the Sophist, and Maximus the Philosophical Magician,
with Jamblicus the Pythagorean, who warped him wholly to their bent, which
brake out afterward. 3. In the beginning of his Government, he recalls the
Orthodox Bishops, banished by Constantius, for hatred to his predecessor, not
for any respect to Religion, as also he endeavored to reedify the Temple of
Jerusalem, not in favor of the Jewish profession, but to spite the Christians,
to whom he forbad the use of Heathen Writers, telling them in scorn, that
their own more sublime Learning might suffice. And when they complained of
injuries done them by Heathen, your God (says he) has taught you to swallow
all such things with patience. 4. He learned Rhetorique of Ecebolius the
weathercock for any Religion. In which he so much prided himself, that all
night he would spend to contrive Orations, to vent the next day before the
Senate for applause. 5. All his predecessors are Satyrically taxed by him,
especially Constantine the Great, in his scoffing Pageant, See his works set
forth at Paris in Greek and Latin. 1630.
which he entitled Caesares. His Misopogon and other tracts, are of the same
leaven, except those books which he wrote against Christianity, mentioned by
Saint Hierome, and answered by Cyrill of Alexandria, wherein he is more openly
vitulent. 6. His Motto was, PENNIS PROPRIIS PERIRE GRAVE, It is a heavy case,
to be slain with a man's own weapons, as the great leader C. Marius is said to
be slain, with the same sword he made when he was a Cutler. 7. Leading a well
provided Army, with great confidence, against the Persian, he was betrayed by a
fugitive into a straight, to fight with disadvantage, where having an arrow, or
stab (not known from whence) fastened on him, he is said to have desperately
ended his days, with these last words vicisti Galilee, Now thou Galilean
(meaning our Savior Christ) have overcome me.

4. comely stature, valiant, and a lover of Learning, Being put to his choice
in Iulians time, to sacrifice to Idols, or to be cashired, Socrat. l. 3. c. 19.
he resolutely threw away his Soldiers belt, which the Emperor took not
notice of, standing in need of his service. 2. When he was voted Emperor by
the Army, he told them in express terms, he was a Christian, and would not be
a Leader of Pagans, whereupon they replied, that they were all of his
profession, which not wartanted them to take up Arms against Julian, who went
about to extinguish it. 3. Necessity (drawn on by his predecessors rashness)
forced him to a dishonorable league with the Persian, which some too tartly
censured. Socrat. ib. c. 21.
4. To the Bishops, several complaints presented to him, I tell you (says he)
J love not contentious persons, but such as stand for unity. he was much for
liberty of Conscience, and had a high esteem of Athanasius, whom he recalled
from banishment. 5. His Motto was SCOPVS VITAE CHRISTVS, that expressed his
sincere affection to Christianity. 6. As he returned from the East, he was
found dead in his chamber, some suspect by treason, others say that he was
casually smothered with wet coals in a new plaistered room. 7. Upon notice of
his death, the Soldiers choose into his place,

5. Rope-maker, virtue exalts the meanest, when villainy tumbleth down the
noblest. This man was known to suffer for Christianity, which made for his
advancement, being banished by Julian, for boxing of a Pagan Priest, that
besprinkled him with his holy Water. 2. His Symbol was PRINCEPS SERVATOR
IVSTVS, A Prince by Justice must preserve his People. 3. Being himself
Orthodox according to the Nicene Creed, he settles himself to govern in the
West, and leaves to rule in the East, his brother

6. Arian, and a bitter persecutor of those that dissented from him. 2. He was
somewhat stopped by Procopiu's Rebellion against him, whom having subdued, he
cruelly rent in sunder, between two trees, artificially forced to that purpose.
3. In stead of righting the wronged Orthodox, he caused to be murdered 80
supplicants, that were sent unto him. 4. His saying ALIENVS AB IRA, ALIENVS A
IVSTITIA, He will be slack in justice, whom anger sometimes pricks not forward,
discovers, that his anger brake forth to the prejudice of Justice. 5. In an
expedition against the Goths, that brake in upon him, he was rowted by them,
and being wounded in his flight, was burnt in an obscure cottage. His brother
Valentinian (that disliked his courses) dying in the west, his son

7. him and his Uncle Valens. 1. His Education was by Ausonius whose Poems are
extant, St Ambrose was known unto him, and much esteemed by him. 2. He
associats unto him in the government Valentinian his brother, but too young to
yield him much help, and the less by reason that Iustina (mother to
Valentinian the second) was a great patroness of the Arians, and persecutrix
of Saint Ambrose, that stood against them. 3. The issue was, that Gratian being
treachero^sly slain by Andragathius, and Valentinian, strangled in his bed by
Arbogastus, Justina was left together with the Empire, in a woeful plight,
which soon ended her. 4. Gratians Motto is said to be, NON QVAM DIV, SED QVAM
BEEN, It is not to be looked after how long, but how well we run our race.
Valentinians was, AMICVS VETERRIMVS OPTIMVS, An old friend is the best. Such a
one God raised to these two unfortunate Princes.

8 Magnus a Spaniard, who was assumed for his experienced valor, and virtue,
to join with him and his brother Valentinian, to make head against their
potent enemy. 2. Which he performed, not only by revenging their untimely
deaths upon Andragathius, and Arbogastus, but also upon Maximus, and Eugenius,
their Generals, whom he utterly defeated. 3. Remarkable are the Verses of
Claudian, De 3. Consul^. Honorii.
concerning the miraculous support of God, fighting for him, against those
combined Rebels. O nimium dilecte Deo! cui fundit ab antris
Aeolus armatas hyemes, cui militat ether,
Et Conjurati veniunt ad Classica venti.
O much beloved of God, from Heaven who sends,
Armed Tempests for thine aid: sor whom the air
Courageously does fight, its Force thee lends
Confederate winds, which at that call repair.
4. He carried the name of Christ in his Victorious Banners, being reproved by
St Ambrose, Ruff. l. 2. c. 2^. Theod. l. 5. c. 17.
for the rash Massacring of the Citizens of Thessalonica, and denied entrance
into the Church at Millayne, he was so far from taking it as an affront, that
he humbled himself by Penance, and Tears, Theodoret. lib. 5. Hist. Ib. c. 26.
till he received Ecclesiastical Absolution. To which may be added the taking
in good part of the bold reprofe of Amphylochius, Bishop of Iconium, for being
more tender of his sons neglect, then he was of the honor of the son of
God, which he suffered the Arians to diminish. 5. His saying was ERIPERE TELVM,
NON DARE IRATO DECET. An angry man should be disarmed rather, then furnished
with a Weapon. 6. His death was as his life, full of honor. 7. Of the two
sons left behind him, Honorius the younger succeeded in the West, as

9. East, whose line we follow. But as Sitllico appointed Gardyan to his
brother Honorius, proved false to him in the West: Ruffinus his Tutor in the
East, took the same course to betray him to the Goths, which discovered in
time, deservedly cut him off. 2. Freed from this hazard, Eudoxia his Wife, and
Gaina his General, led him at their pleasure, whereby the famous Chrysostom,
(reproving freely their plotts for Arianisme) was twice banished, and from the
last never returned. 3. His Symbol was, SVMMA CADVNT SVBITO. The higher the
ascent the more subject to ruin, and danger in the fall. After his death his
son,

10. second succeeds him. He was commended by his Father to the Tuition of
Isdegird King of Persia, but Anthonius at home, and his Sister Pulcheria, were
his best instructers. 2. His sweet disposition and love to Learning, appeared
in his readiness to pardon offenses, and erecting a Library little short of
Ptolomeus Philadelphus in Egypt. 3. By procurement of his Sister Puleheria, he
took to Wife Eudocia the Daughter of one Leontius a Philosopher, for her rare
parts of behavior, Learning and Beauty, of whom he became afterward
causelessly Jealous, which put her upon a Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, where the
Priests had got a Text, Domine in Eudocia tua, to put her to great expenses to
Build for their convenience. * (...) Ps. 51.18.
4. Goths and Vandalls under their Leaders Attyla and Gensevick much infested
the Empire. For withstanding of whom, he associates unto him his Cozen, passed
by the name of Valentinian the third. His General Aetius, gave the great
overthrow to Attila, in the Feilds of Catalaunia, whom his ungrateful Master
requited with death for his service. Better sped Ardaburius, for his rooting
out John ^he Usurper, having his deliverance (as it is conceived) wrought by
Miracle. 4. It may not be omitted, what course Pulcheria took with this Prince,
to make him the more wary for signing Bills which were brought unto him,
without reading them, or considering what they contained. Among a bundle
brought unto him, she puts in one, wherein was contained, that he sold his
Empress for a Slave. This passed under his hand amongst the rest, which when
he saw he was sufficiently lessoned to consider what he granted. 6. A care was
taken by him, to gather out of a heap of unordered Laws, such as were of
special use for his Government, and so to be set down, that those which were
to observe them, might know them. 7. His Motto was TEMPORI PARENDVM, we must
fit us (as far as it may be done with a good Conscience) to the time wherein
we live, with Christian prudence. He dyed with a fall from his Horse, and left
to succeed him

11. man, and an experienced Soldier. Pulcheria (that had the chief hand in
her Brother Theodosius days for most matters of Government) was content to
take him for her Husband, to rule as she had done in a manner before. 2. He
aimed at Peace above all things, being superannuated for action. 3. Wherefore
his saying was PAX BELLO POTIOR. Give me peace, and let others quarrel. In
which he dies, and

12. worthy man, and so propense unto mercy, that his Emblem was, REGIS
CLEMENTIA VIRTUES, No virtue sets forth a Prince more, then Clemency. 2. He had
much ado with Asper, a potent Gothe, who forced him to design his son
Ardabarius to be his successor, but it was done with such dislike of the Senate
and People, that the Heads both of father and son paid for it. 3. He
professed that he rather would have Philosophers then Soldiers in his pay,
designs his Grand child to succeed him by the title of Leo the second, but he
waved it by a rare example, and conferred it upon his Father

13. Crowns with his own hands, and dies soon after. This man was as
misshapen in body, as untoward in manners. 2. Whereupon his Wife Berrina thrust
in Basiliscus her brother into his Throne, who held it for a while with little
content to the Subjects, which made him to be soon discarded, and Zeno
returns to govern again. 3. Where continuing his habitual disordinarilesse,
it brought him to a kind of Apoplexy. In a fit of which, he was buried alive,
but recovering in his Sepulcher, and crying for help, his Wife Ariadne was so
kind to deny it him. His word was MALO NODO MALVS CVNENS, an ill wedge to an
ill block, must be fitted accordingly. No sooner was he so disparched, but

14. Dicorus had his place and wife together, so called for having the pupills
of his eyes of diverse colors, one black, the other gray. 2. He proved a great
patron of the Eutychians, which procured great stirs in the Church, and hard
measure to the right believers. In his time Bizantium was delivered, by the
burning glasses of Proclus, which set the Beseigning Navy on fire, and Cabades
of Persia escaped out of prison, by prostituting his fair Queen to the
Goalor. 3. His word was MELLITVM VEN ENVM, BLANDA ORATION. Smooth talk proves
often sweet poison. He is said to have bin warned in his sleep to do no hurt
to Justine, and Justinian, whom he had designed to be made away for plotting
against him. Himself was slain with a Thunderbolt, and

15. Swineherd, then a Herdsman, then a Carpenter, from thence a Soldier and
so Emperor. 2. He proved a great upholder of the Nicene Faith, though himself
had no Learning at all. 3. It it worth the noting how so low a Swain, should
come to that top of honor. Upon Anastasius death, Amantius a stirring, and a
rich Courteour, put a great sum of money into his hand, to purchase the
Empire for his friend Theocritianus, which plott, if it took, would easily make
both them gayners by the bargain. But Justin wisely employed the money for
himself, got the thing, and soon took order with the Hucksters to have a
Quietus est from restitution of the money. 4. Much ado he had with Theodorick
that perfidious Arian Gothe, who put to death the worthy Symmachus and learned
Boethius. 5. The ruin of Antioche by an Earthquake, almost brake his heart.
His word was QVOD PVDET HOC PIGEAT, That should greive most which is shameful
in it self, and done against Conscience. He took order that his Sisters son

16. Father of the Civil Law, which by the Judgment and industry of Trebonian
and other Coadjutors, was digested in that form we now have it. 2. The
stubborn Goths, and Vandalls were never so shattered, as they were by his
Valiant Leaders. Of which Belisarius may be paralleld with any of former times,
he brought Vitiges, and Gillimer their Kings Captives to his Master, and
cleared him from the rest of all his Enemies. And yet Theodora the Empress in
favor of the Euticheans, so persecuted him, that in his old age his eyes were
put out, and at the Temple of St Sophy (built newly by the Emperor) forced to
beg Date panem Belisario, quem virtus extulit, invidia depressit. Give a Crust
to old, Procoplut.
blind Belisarius, whom virtue advanced, but envy has brought to this misery.
3. All the rest of his actions, as the sending the holy Vessels, taken by Titus
out of the Jewish Temple, to Jerusalem to be disposed of, by the Christian
Bishops; The revenging of the death of Queen Amalasunta, upon the Barbarous
contrivers of it; can no way wipe of his savage ingratitude to so worthy a man.
4. In his latter time (it should seem) he began to forget himself, and he
that had prescribed Lawet to the world, was feign to submit at home to
Gynaecocracy. His word was SVMMVM IVS, SVMMA INIVRIA. The rigor of the Law may
prove injurious to conscience. He forgott not to leave his Daughters (some say
his Sisters son)

17. second to succeed him, a man that had nothing commendable in him, a
coveteous wretch, a Pelagian, and altogether ruled by his wife Sophia. 2. She
envying the prosperous success of the Valiant Narses, against the Goths, sent
him word that she would have him come home from Italy and spinne, but he
returned such a message, that he would spinne such a Thread, that neither she
nor hers should be able to untwist. And so he did, thereupon by bringing in the
Lombards, which the Emperors ( Exarches then first set up) were not able to
expel. 3. His Motto was LIBERTAS RES INESTIMABILIS, Liberty is unvaluable. He
associates to himself,

18. Tiberius the second, but this was a Christian, and a worthy man, Tiberius
Nero was neither. His religious care of the poor was rewarded (as it were) by
miracle. For walking on a time and observing a cross in the Pavement under his
feet, He commanded it should be removed to a place of more reverent esteem.
Which being performed, such a mass of Treasure was discovered under it, that
furnished afterward his liberality, and employments. 2. The proud Cosroes of
Persia, (who at first rejected his Ambassadors) at last was made stoop by a
potent Army, which he durst not grapple with, the conceit whereof so brake his
heart, that he willed his Successor not to oppose the Roman Empire. 3. By
reason of his employment in the East, the Goths strengthened themselves in the
West. Amongst which, Lemugildus a King in Spain proved so feirce an Arian,
that he executed his own son Elmingildus, for being a Catholic. 4. His
saying was STIPS PAVPERVM, THESAVRVS DIVITVM, The truest Treasure of the Rich,
is the Alms given to the Poor. 5. The best Epitaph for a Prince (in his
opinion) was to leave a good Successor behind him. Whereupon growing old, and
weak he chose

19. successor, to whom he gives Constantina his daughter, together with the
Empire, in Marriage, and so dies in Peace. 2. The Abilities of this man, were
found by the Persians, to their loss; and Caganus with his hardy Scythians,
which he suppressed, and drove the Hunnes out of Pannonia. 3. His Symbol was,
QVOD TIMIDVM, IDEM ET CRVDELE, None so cruel as a Coward, He found it so by
his Tragical experience. For upon denial of redeeming some of his captive
Soldiers from Caganus at an easy rate, whether it were out of covetousness
(for which he was branded) or dislike, of their rashness, that had inthralled
themselves, vantage was taken by

20. PHOCAS, a barbarous saucy Centurion of his Army, affront, depose him, and
make him most brutishly away, with his Empress, and all their Children, and
kindred. 2. This is the right craggy Rock upon which the Popish Supremacy is
built: so that Boniface the third, Act. 22.28.
might well use the text of Claudius Lycius to St Paul, with a great sum
obtained I this freedom. 3. Some fear of vengeance discovered it self in his
Motto, FORTVNAM CITIVS REPERIAS, QVAM RETINEAS, It is easyer to get, then to
hold an unlawful booty. When his baseness, lust, cruelty, and ignominious
ruining of the Empire, had incensed all men against him: He, with all his, were
served as he had used his master Mauritius, and in some measure more
shamefully, his Privy parts were cut off, and his mangled body boiled in a
great brazen Furnace, called the Ox by

21. HERACLIUS that succeeded him, Lieutenant of Africa, He recovered to the
Empire Syria, Egypt, and Jerusalem, together with the Cross of Christ, which
the Pagans had gotten. This thence was carried to Constantinople, and afterward
to Rome. 2. Cosroes of Persia, that insolently incroached upon the Empires, was
so rowted by him, that upon his discomfiture, he was slain of his own son,
who succeeding, a peace was straight concluded. 3. His Motto, A DEO VICTORIA.
It is God that gives victories, forted well with his former Actions, but the
sequel was not correspondent. 3. He turns Monothelite, Incestuously Marries
with Martina his own brothers daughter, and makes a Law, that others might do
the like. This drove on the Saracens, who for want of pay, revolted from him,
and followed the Impostor Mahomet, who about that time set forth his nonsense
poisoning Alcoran. 4. The Emperor struggles to make head against the^, but
Gods hand was not with him: the Saracens give him a great overthrow, and
another time (like the loss of Zanacherib) 52000 men of his Army, were found
dead in one night, without any apparent executioners. 5. His incest was
followed by a strange priapisme, which together with a dropsy ended his days.
His son

22. Martina his stepmother, to make way, for her son Heraclionas. 2. But
the plot held not, Her tongue was cut out, and her sons nose cut off, both
were banished by the Senate of Constantinople. 3. His word is said to be,
INSANIA LAETA VOLVPT AS EXCESSIVE, Pleasure is but a kind of Madness. His son

23. Monothclite, for withstanding which Heresy, he dealt barbarously with
Martine Bishop of Rome, whose hands and tongue he cut off, and then banished
him, shamefully plundered Rome, which he said he would make glorious. 2. The
Saracens overthrew him, and prevailed mightily every where, with their new
Alcaron dotages. 3. His word was PARENDVM NECESSITATI, Necessity must be
obeyed. He was slain in Scicilia by his Soldiers, and

24. place: He was termed Pogonatus for his bringing home a beard with him
from the Wars, whereas he went forth without it. He slew Mezentius his
competitor, who was cause of his Fathers death: overthrew the Saracens, and
made them tributaries: made Peace with the Bulgarians, by leaving them Misia to
inhabit. 2. He held the great Counceli in Trullo against the Monothelites, in
which Pope Honorius was condemned for maintaining that Heresy. 3. His word was
QVOD CITO FIT, CITO PERIT, Quickly come, quickly gone, Have makes wast. About
this time the Bishop of Rome assumed the title (...) to be uncontroleable,
which Luther takes notice to be about the year 666 the number of the Beast.
Apoc. 13.
To Pogonatia succeeds his son

25. League with the Saracens and Bulgarians, to the dishonor of Christianity,
and their great advantage, was led to all mischief by two Favorites, Stephanus
and Theodorus, who paid for it at last in the Belly of a glowing Brazen Bull.
2. For his intolerable tyranny Leontius a Noble man about him, apprehends him,
slits his nose, and banisheth him, and supplies his place. But Absimarus set up
by the Soldiers and People, soon serves him in the same kind, and thrusts him
into a Monastery. This holds not long, but Justinian is restored, by the
kindness of Terbellis Prince of Bulgary, tramples Leontius, and Absimarus
(brought to him) under his feet, and so caused them to be beheaded 3. His Motto
was, MVLTI NIMIVM, NEMO SATIS, Many have too much, none is content. His
carriage (nothing mended by his sufferings) discontented all men, so that he
was slain by one of his own Servants, set on by

26. PHILIPPICUS Bardanes, Votes of the Army and People takes his place. This
man showed himself to be a Monothelite, in that he was so fierce against the
sixth Synod that condemned them, that the Images and Statuas of the Bishops
must be demolished, that had a hand in it. 2. Here began the bloody controversy
between the East and West Church, concerning Images: Constautine the Pope
(whose feet Justinian the second had lately honored with a kiss) in pity
stood for those harmless things, that could not speak for themselves,
Bardanes was valiant against them. The Pope takes upon him to Excommunicate
him, and deprive him of his Sovereignty for Heresy, but upon what sure grounds
it remains yet to be showed. 3. His Motto well fitted his condition, FORTVNA
CITO REPOSCIT, QVAE DEDIT, That which fortune gave, she will again soon have.
For he was deprived of sight and life by his own Secretary.

27. ANASTATHIUS succeeds him, a man of good parts, SI NON DES, ACCIPIT VLTRO,
If thou give not to some, they will make bold to take it, This fell to his lot,
for before he was settled in his Throne

28. THEODOSIUS 3d an obscure man, Soldiers to Rebel against him, and having
the better of him, only shaved his crown, and thrust him into a Monastery. 2.
He was for restoring Images in Churches, to strengthen himself by the Popish
faction. His saying was, PATIENTIA REMEDIVM MALORVM: He was soon put to
practice of it, for as he had dealt with his predecessor, so

28. Isaurus used him, overcomes him, shaves him, and claps him into a
Monastery, which kind of life (some say) he voluntarily embraced. 2. The
quarrel against Images is with greater vigor by this man revived, whence the
Monks term him Jconomachus, Theomachus, Cononsceleratus, and what hot? He
holds a Council in the East, to justify the demolishing of them. Pope Gregory
the second, in the West assembles a great company for their upholding: This was
that Gregory who is thought (by some) to be the Author of those fabulous
Dialogues, which he wrote to terrify Queen Theelindahs husband into
Christianity. 3. The Saracens for more then two years together, besiege
Constantinople, but were forced to leave it, through famine and other
disasters. 4. While the Emperor is taken up for defense of the East, against
these subverters of Christianity, He is Excommunicated by the Pope in the West:
who takes in the barbarous Lombards to make good his party, and works the
Subjects in the West, to fall off from the Eastern Empire, who never returned
afterward to their due obedience. 5. His common saying was, OCCVLTI INIMICI
PESSIMI, A close Enemy, is far worse then an open; yet nether prevailed so
against him, nor the anger of the Saints, for burning or breaking their Images,
but he reigned long, and dyed honorably, leaving his place to

29. son. This man was Nicknamed Copronimus, because (say the Image-patrons)
at his Baptizing, he polluted the Fount: others term him Antichrist, the seed
of the Serpent, an instrument of the Devil, an Inchanter, and all this, for
persisting in his Fathers zeal, for exterminating Idolatrous Images. 2.
Artabastus the Governor of Armenia set up against him, was quickly quelled by
him, and the Saracens and Bulgarians, tasted deeply of his undaunted Valor. 3.
As in his Fathers time, so in his, Counsels and Anathema's must be thundered
against him from the West, in the behalf of Images: this might have been left
to the Saints righting themselves, whose Images were broken, as Joas told the
men that would plead for Baal; but the Pope had a farther plot in it, to make
his market, which was manifested shortly after. 5. His saying was QVID SINE
PECTORE CORPUS? What is a body without a spirit? This in him was not daunted to
the last, he dies and leaves his Dominions to

30. LED the fourth his son. same mind with his Father, and Grandfather
against Images, which drew on all the reproaches the Monkish Historians could
lay upon him. 2. In an expedition against Syria, he returned with loss, which
disheartened him (perchance) to the shortning of his days. 3. He had to wife
Irene a wilye Athenian, who practiced to shuffle and cut for her own advantage.
His word was QVO FORTVNA, SI NON VTERIS? To what purpose is a fortune, that use
is not made of. His Empress Irene, showed her self somewhat too forward in
that behalf, for upon her Husbands death, she took upon her, the protection of
her son,

31. CONSTANTINE the sixth, that succeeded, child) and the managing of the
whole estate. In which she had such projects and windings, that here doings
were not well liked of by the wisest. 2. She was all for Images, not (as it
should seem) out of Conscience, but to ingratiate her self to the West, which
grew to appear the stronger side. For this purpose was assembled the second
Conucell of Nice, that brings such proofs for Idolatry, that the Images
themselves (if they were sensible) would blush to hear repeated. 3. Her
Government so disliked her son, that grown to discretion he set her aside,
and took it wholly unto himself: Which she stomaking, as the greatest
indignity, circumvents him, puts out his eyes, and imprisons him, where with
hearts grief he ended his days. 4. His word is said to be, MVLIERI IMPERARE,
RES DESPERATA, It is a desperate thing for a Woman to rule: which though it be
not general, yet he found it so by woeful experience. 5. But the Mother had
little content in her sole government after her sons death, although her
Motto was, VIVE VT VIVAS, Live that thou may live: being quickly deposed and
banished by Nicephorus in the East, when Charles in the West lays the ground
for the Government of the Western Frankes that follow.

2. COntemporary with this Period fall in to be noted, especially. 1. The
divisions of the Empire, First between the sons of Constantine the great,
Constantius, Constantine, and Constans, but the two latter passing away without
Issue, the whole returned to Constantius, In whose successors, the second
Division was between Arcadius and Honorius, the sons of Theodosius the great,
Wherein, (with the line of Arcadius which is taken as most eminent) the
successors of Honorius, are usually ranked, as contemporary in this descent. 1.
Honorius much vexed by Alaricus the Gothe, drawn upon him by his perfidious
leader Stilico. 2. Valentinian his Nephew, by Ataulphus, and his sister
Placidia; who ill rewarded with death his noble leader Aetius, that gave the
great overthrow to the Hunne Atila. 3. Maximus an usurper, soon in, soon out.
4. Avitus. 5. Majoranus. 6. Severus, with 7. Anthemius, by mutual plots
consuming one another. 8. Olibrius, and 9. Glycerius of no better note. 10.
Julius Nepos, who depoieth Glycerius. 11. Orestes that outed Nepos. 12.
Augustulus Orestes son, leaves all to Odoacer King of the Heruli, and so, as
this Western line of Emperors, began in Augustus, it had its Period in
Augustulus. With these fall in 3ly the irruptions of the Barbarians, to the
renting and plundering of the Empire, 1. by Alaricus. 2. Genserick, 3. Atila,
4. Totilas, 5. Radigisus, 6. Ricimer, 7. Odoacer who sacked the City of Rome it
self. And the Heruli brought in by Odoacer, the Goths under Theodoricus, and
the Lombards conducted by Alboinus, erected Kingdoms in Italy it self, which
the Exarches of the Emperors were feign to comply with. 4. Against these,
Belesarius, Narses, Aetius and others, appeared in the defense of the Church
and State, not inferior to any famous Chieftains that had gone before them, or
succeeded, though they were requited (as diverse others have been) with most
barbarous ingratitude. 5. In this Period also are conspicuous, three monsters
(as three heads of Cerberus) thrust out about the same time, Phocas, the Arch
traitor, that butchered his Sovereign and all his Family. 2. Boniface the
third, that purchased by the basest Symony, the Antichristian Supremacy from
that Arch-traytor. 3. And Mahomet the Arch-impostor, appointed by God to be a
scourge to all Christendume, for the Ambition, Luxury, and Idolatry that then
so reigned in it. (...) Notice may be taken of the virulent persecution by the
Arians, and fraudulent plots of Julian the Apostate for Paganism, and Popes
for Images, proving far more dangerous and divellish to right believers, then
the violent persecution of the Heathen Emperors. 7ly To stand in the gappe
against all which, Fathers to confute, Counsels to convince, Princes to uphold
and protect them, Martyrs to seal the truth with their blood, never appeared
more, or more resolute, then within the compass of this Period, which may well
be held the (...) or chief vigor of the Church.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. Constantine the Great before his death became an Arrian? 2. The
Donation to the Church of Rome fathered upon him be forged? 3. Christianity
received any prejudice by Julians prohibiting the reading of Heathen Writers?
4. St Ambrose austeere carriage to his Sovereign Theodosius, in point of
discipline, may be warrantably imitated? 5. More Law were lost in Justinians
digesting of it, as it is, then preserved? 6. The Graecians were in the right,
in withstanding the Popish patronizing of Images in Churches? 7. The Turkish
Alcoran or Popish Legends be more fabulous, foolish, and pernicious?


SIXTH MONARCHY of Western Frankes. PERIOD VI.
THe Sixth Period from Charles the Great to Rodulph of Auspurge, sets forth the
Government of the Western Frankes, for the space of 472 years, and had in it
25 Emperors.

1. CHARLES the Great Son of Pipine, Charles Martell of France, whose great
service for Christendom against the Saracens, trod a path for this man to go
further. 2. He settled the French distractions, queld the Saxons often
Rebellion, subdued the Danes, pacyfied Bobemia, overthrow the Saracens, and
Hunnes, expelled the Lomberds with their King Desiderius, after their long
tyrannizing in Italy. 3. Proceeding afterward to Rome, and composing the
differences there between the Pope and People, to the seeming content of all
parties. Pope Leo the third (seriously and solemnly, as though it had bin in
his gift.) bestows upon him the title of Emperor, with the applause of all,
and his modest acceptance. 4. Notwithstanding to strengthen his interest, he
transacts both with Ireno the Empress then of the East (between whom and
himself, and their son and daughter was a treaty of Marriage, which took
not,) and also with Nicephorus, Irenes successor, which quitted him from
usurping that, he had by composition. 5. His averseness from allowing the
Popish upholding Images, appears in a Council he held at Frankford, and his
writiag against the 2. Council of Nice. He Erected three Universities,
Bononia. Papia. Paris.
of which Paris the chiefest, had its especial rules and ordering from
Alcuinus our Oxford man, who was the Emperors Tutor. 6. Whatsoever is
pretended of Constantines, it was Pipines, and Charles Donations that set Rome
on floate, and the rather, for the good service Pope Zachary did in the
Deposing Childerick, the lawful King of France, which was the advancing of
Pipine to be a King, and his son an Emperor. 7. His Motto was, CHRISTVS
REGNAT, VINCIT TRIVMPHAT. Christ reigns, Conquers and Triumphs, expresses his
Christian humility in all his greatness. After so many Battles and hazards, He
dies peaceably in a good age, leaving his son

2. Pius to succeed him. This man is said to have confirmed all the Donations
of his Father and Grandfather to Rome, with remitting unto them the choice of
their Popes amongst themselves, Distinct. 63.
but that Canon, Ego Ludovicus, where the Grants are contained, is suspected to
be forged. 2. Pezelius.
He renewed the League with the Greeks, repressed the Tumults amongst the
Britons and Bulgarians, cut of his Cosen Bernards head King of Italy, for
affecting the Empire. 3. For adhering constantly to his second wife Judith,
which the Clergy pretended was too near of Kin to him by their Canons, the
sons of his former wife Rebel against him, and imprison him, and his Clergy
makes bold to Excommunicate him, but he was soon restored again upon better
consideration, and all matters well composed. 4. He caused the Bible to be
translated into the Saxon Tongue, without contradiction for ought we find of
the Popes then being. 5. His saying was OMNIVM RERVM VICISSITVDO. Every thing
takes its turn, and seldom comes a better. It proves here in his son,

3. Jews, and Charles, was twice overthrown by them. Charles getting from him
for his share, France; and Jews, Germany; leaving only to him Italy, with
Gallia Narbonensis, and Austrasia which he termed by his own name Lotharingia,
to uphold the title of the Emperor, which they sought not after. 2 In his time
the Saracens Plundered Italy, which he could not help, and Pope Johan had
gotten St Peter's Chair, whose sex could not be so well discerned, says
Chalcondilas, because the Popes usually shave their Beards. 3. He is passed
with this Symbol VBI MEL, JBI FELL. Gall commonly accompanies honey, which broke
him so much that he qu^^ted his Empire, and betook himself to a Monastery,
where he ended his days, leaving his charge to

4. LUDOVICUS the second his son. 1. Saracens in Italy, subdued the
Slavonians, and brought them to Christianity. Wanted not will, but power to do
more good. 2. At the Election of Adrian the second, without notice given to his
Ambassadors then being in Rome, he was slighted with this excuse, that no
contempt was meant therein, but a prevention of an ill conceit, that a Pope
could not be chosen, if such a presence were wanting. 3. His saying was PAR SIT
FORTVNA LABORI, I ask but success according to my pains taking. He dies
without Issue, and left the King of France his Uncle

5. CHARLES the Bald to succeed him in the Empire. Jews of Germany, but his
death ended the quarrel. 2. He expells the Saracens out of Rome and reigned
not so long to do any great matters. Bertram was set on work by him
concerning the Corporal Presence, which then began to be grossly maintained in
the Sacrament. 3. His saying was QVOD PASTORI HOC OVIBVS, The flock never
thrives in the Pastors miseries. He is thought to be poisoned by a Jew his
Physician in Italy, leaves his son

6. JEWS the Stammerer, Crowned by Pope John in France, Rome. 2. He meant
well, but wanting health and time performed little. 3. His Motto was that of
Galba's, MILES LEGENDVS NON EMENDVS, he dyed quickly and left his Cosen of the
elder house his successor,

7. Fat. He had France, Germany, and Italy, together with the title of the
Empire. 2. And notwithstanding his unwildinesse of body, did much against the
Saracens, and drove them from Italy. The Normans and Belgians, put him to more
trouble, to whom he was constrained to grant those Territories they ever since
have kept. 3. Those sad times set on some to write, Threnos Germaniae, the
Lamentations of Germany. according to his Motto OS GARRVLVM INTRICATOMNIA, A
prating tongue puzzells all business of consequence. He proving unfit for
Action, some say was deposed, others, that he dyed with grief and want. All
agree that

8. Normans, and in managing other affairs of the Empire showed himself an
able man. 2. But falling upon Rifling of Churches, Gods vengeance overtook his
Sacrilege, most say he died of the lowsy disease, others, that he was poisoned
by Guido's wife, whose Husband he had caused to be ignominiously hanged. 3. His
word was FACILE VOCABIS CACODEMONEM, SED NON FACILE REPVLERIS, It is easy to
raise a Devil, but not so easy to be rid of him. His son

9. this man's days. Beringarius and Lewis the son of Boson in Italy, the
Hungarians, Germans, and Saracens on all sides come upon him. In Rome all
things were carried by Maroziah the strumpet, and her breed, with who^ the
Lombards were associated. 2. His word was MVLTOKVM MANVS. PAVCORVM CONCILIVM,
Few directors will guide many hands. 3. In him (some say) ended the line of
Charles the Great. The Imperial dignity being conferred upon

10. Franconia. It was offered by the Nobles to Otho Duke of Saxony, but he
excused himself through his age, and commended Courade unto them, which some
make to be of the kindred of Great Charles^ 2. He grew Jealous of Henry old
Otho's son, and carried a hard hand over him, but at length commended him to
his successor. 3. His word was, FORTVNA CVM BLANDITVR FALLIT, Fortune fails
when she fawnes. This

11. HENRY the first that succeeds, Germane line, was termed Auceps the
Faulkoner, because he used much that kind of recreation. 2. Chron. Chronicer.
He was so far from sueing to the Pope to be Crowned, that he refused that
complement offered unto him. 3, Purchased (as one says) the holy Lance
wherewith our Saviors side was pierced, Hedio.
with some of the nails to the bargain of Radulphu^ King of Burgundy, giving
him great gifts, and part of Suevia for it, which shows that he was religious
in his way. 3. He overcame Arnold of Bavaria his competitor by persuasion, the
Hungarians, Bohemians, and Dalmatians by force, Sleidan.
pacified all Germany, and divided it into Marquisates. 4. He founded
Bishoprics, brought in the martial exercise of Tilting. 5. His word was
TARDVS AD VINDICTAM, AD BENEFICENTIAM VELOX, It is a Princely mind to be
readier to gratify then to take revenge. Upon his peaceable death.

12. OTHO the first, his son, takes his place, Symbol showed his generous
disposition, AVT MORS AVT VITA DECORA, Better it is to dye bravely, then to
live ignominio^sly. 2. In France he freed King Lewis imprisoned by his
Rebellious Subjects. In Bohemia he expelled Bolislaus for murdering his own
Brother. From Italy he drove Beringarius King of the Lombards. in Rome deposed
that monster John the 12. and settled Leo the 8. in his Chair. 3. For marrying
a second Wife, his son Laitholdus (which he had by Editha his first wife our
King Edmunds daughter) rebelled against him, but being overcome, and
submitting, out of a fatherly affection was received again into favor. 4
Howsoever he was contented (being in Rome) to be Crowned by the Pope, yet he
left a decree that no Pope should be elected without the Emperors consent. 5.
After manifold Heroical exploits achieved by him in all parts of his
Dominion, he attained the Epethite of Magnus with Constantine and Charles, dyed
in the bed of Honor, and left

13. royalties and virtues. 1. His opposite, the quarrelling Henry Duke of
Bavaria was quickly quelled by him. 2. He was termed, the pale death of the
Saracens, for the often overthrowes, (especially in Apulia) given them. 3. The
Greeks notwithstanding, under the conduct of Basilius their Emperor, and
Constantine his son, had the hand over him (in a set Battle) in such sort,
that he was feign to swim for his life, and escape in a Fishers boat, whence
falling amongst Pirates, he hardly freed himself. 4. His word was, PACEM CVM
HOMINIBVS CVM VITIIS BELLVM, Let Us quarrel with our faults, not with our
friends. 5. His Wife was Theophania, the Eastern Emperors daughter, by whom
he had

14. prophetique verse, Otho, post Otho, regnabit tertius Otho. 1. Being but
ten years old at his Enthronizing, his towardliness was such, that he
attained the title of Otho the kind, and (as the phrase went then) Mirabilia
Mundi, the Mira^le of the World. 2. Some put the Institution of the seven
Electors upon him. A more difficult business he found to rectify the unruly
Popes, whose damnable ambition, brawles, and Schisms, took off the best
Emperors, from better employments abroad. 3. His word was, VNITA VIRTUES VALET,
United valor performs. It Is thought he was poisoned in Rome by Crescentius
widow, in a pair of gloves.

15. seven Electors to succeed him, he had the title of Henry the holy, and
Lame, before, Duke of Bavaria, being of the blood of Otho the great, some say
his son, others his Nephew. 2. Having subdued all the enemies of the Empire,
he dealt so effectually with Stephen of Hungary, that the most of them were
brought to embrace Christianity. 3. His word was NE QVID NIMIS, Least
overdoing, prove undoing. Kunegundis his Empress, is said to have lived (by
mutual consent) untouched with him. This accompanied with other virtues, was
made meritorious to Saint him. Some difference arose amongst the Electors
concerning his successor, but

16. CONRADUS the 2d, called Salicus as much as to say, Aulicus a Courteour
ended it. Alsted. Pezelius fetches the name from the river Sala in Franconia.
The great commotion in Italy, he appeased with singular valor and dexterity,
where besieging Millaine, he was deterred by a vision, (the Monks would have
it of frowning St Ambrose) which caused him to leave the enterprise. 2. The
deadly Feud betwixt the Guelphes and Gibellines, brake out a fresh in this man's
days, in regard he was a Gibbelline as all the Franconians, whereas their
neighbors of Suevia were entirely for the Guelphs. 3. His Motto was a notable
rule, OMNIVM MORES TVOS IMPRIMIS OBSERVATO, Observe all men's carriages, but
especially thine own. He was buried at Spire with his Empress, in the
Cathedral of his own erecting, amongst the rest of his Lineage, as the
inscription shows, Filius hic, Pater hic, Avus hic, Proavus jacet istic,
Hic Proavi Conjux, hic Henrici senioris.
his son

17. HENRY the third, surnamed Niger, Black Henry, Canutus the Dane, then
Reigning here in England. Subdued the Hungarians and Bohemians, who were
always mutining. But thence was called away to Italy, to keep the peace
amongst the Popes, who were like to pull St Peter's chair in pieces between
them. Three of them he deposed, Benedict the 9. Gregory the 6. and Sylvester
the 3. And chose successively Clement the 2. Damasus the 2. Leo the 9. and
Victor the 2. Taking an oath of the Citizens, that they should not any more
choose a Pope without the Emperors consent. In him decayed the glory of the
Roman Empire. 3. His saying was, QVI LITEM AVFERT EXECRATIONEM IN
BENEDICTIONEM MVTAT. He that stinteth strife, changes a curse into a blessing.
The remediless ruin of Church and State, hastened (as it should seem) his
death. His son very young,

18. education of his Mother, proved a valiant, and wise, though an unfortunate
Prince. 2. In 62. Battles which he waged in person (for the most part) he
became victorious. 3. For standing for his right in Election of Popes, he was
crossed, especially by Gregory the seventh, known by the name of Hildebrand,
and his accomplices: who twice Excommunicates him, then sets up Rodolph Duke of
Saxony his sworn Subject, to rebel against and depose him, bestowing on him
as freely a Crown and Empire, as ever the Devil offered all the Kingdoms of
the World to our Savior: Math. 4.
but this project failing, with the desperate and deplorable ruin of Rodulph.
4. Notwithstanding his unimperiall submission in an unparalled manner, at the
Castle of Canusium, and receiving there Absolution: His own sons Henry and
Conrade, must afterward be set up against him. 5. Whereby at length wearied and
broken, after ten years Reign, he was deposed, and driven to that exigent,
that he desired only a Clerkship, in a house at Spire of his own foundation,
which was Barbarously (by the Bishop of that place) denied him. 6. Whereupon he
brake out into that speech of Job. Miseremini mei amici quia manus dei tetegit
me. 7. His usual speech was, MVLTI MVLTA SCIVNT SE AVTEM NEMO. Many know much,
but few (as they should) know themselves. Grief killed him, and made way for
his son,

19. fifth to succeed him. 1. He urged by Pope Paschall to renounce his right
in choosing Popes and Bishops Investiures by Staff and Ring; utter refuses it.
The Pope thereupon makes no more ado but Excommunicates him. 2. The Emperor
rights himself, by casting the Pope into Prison, which brings him to covenant
with the Emperor, that he would lay no farther clay me to those Imperial
rights. 3. For confirmation of which agreement and privileges, the Pope takes
the Consecrated Host, and deviding it into two parts, gives the one to the
Emperor, and reserves the other to himself, with an Excoration in these
words. Magdeburg. Hist. Cent. 12. c. 8.
Let him be divided from the Kingdom of Christ, who shall presume to violate
this Covenant Bound up between you and me. 4. Yet this held not, no sooner had
the Emperor turned his back, and the Pope had liberty of breathing, but this
knott is easily loosed by him that tied it so solemnly, and Calixtus his
Successor, so haunted the Emperor with furies, that he was forced to quirt
all his rights in that behalf. His word was MORTEM OPTARE, MALVM, TIMERE,
PEIVS. It is not good to wish for death, but worse to fear it. He Married Maud
the Daughter of our King Henry the First, but dyed Childlesse. His successor
was,

20. second Duke of Saxony chosen by the Nobles. 1. He was much opposed in the
beginning by Conrade, and Frederick his predecessors Sisters sounes, but by
mediation of St Bernard of great esteem in those days, a reconciliation was
made between them. 2. For the settling of Pope Innocent the 2d, whom the Romans
had violently unchayred, he marches to Rome, soon right's all that was amiss,
is Crowned by the reestablished Pope, which (as a transcendent accident is
pictured on a wall with these subscribed verses. Rex venit ante fores, jurans
prius urbis honores,
Post homo fit Papae jurans quo dante Coronam.
The King came to the gate and swear,
he would uphold the City,
Crowned by the Pope became his flave,
alas the more's the pity.
3. He reformed the Civil Law by Vernerius directions, and commanded it to be
read in Schools, and executed in places of Judicature, which the French took
from him. 4. He drove Roger King of Scicily out of Apulia, and Campania which
he had long forraged, is equalized with Charles the great. 5. His Emblem was
most usual, AVDI ALTERAM PARTEM. A good Judge must have an ear as well for
the Defendant as the Plaintiff. He also (as his predecessor) left no Issue, but
by consent of the Electors.

21 third of Suevia had his place. At first he was opposed by Henry the proud
of Bavaria, and his Brother Guelpho, but that storm was quickly blown over.
2. From this Guelpho, some derive the Guelphes of the Popes factions who
Mortally hated the Gibellines that stood for the Emperors. 3. This hatred is
said to have grown first, at the Seige of Winsperg in Germany by Henry of
Gibelline the Emperors son. They of Guelpho's held the place, but their
crying a Guelpho a Guelpho, could not free them from the Gibellines Forces. 4.
Wherein the condition of the surrender being, that the men should expect the
sword, but the women (upon their Petition) should pass away, with as much as
they could carry upon their backs: They abandoning all other necessaries, came
forth Laden only with their Husbands, which the royal Gibbelline applauding,
dismissed them all with pardon. 5. He made three Voyages into the Holy Land
without success, was treacherously dealt with by Emmanuel Emperor of
Constantinople, who promising to supply him with Victuals (which he depended
upon) basely sent him Meal, mingled with Lyme, whereby his Army was poisoned,
and he disabled to perform that which he intended. His saying is registered to
be, PAVCA CVM ALIIS TECVM MVLTA, Say little to others, but more to thy self.
Death surprised him before he was formally Crowned, his successor was

22. first named of his Red Beard Barbarossa, a Nephew of Conrades. He subdued
the Rebellious Italians, sowed Millayne with Salt, made the Rebellious Count
Palatine carry a Dog for Penance, exalted Bohemia to be a Kingdom, and
Austria from a Marquisate to be a Dukedom. 2. With this man Pope Adrian, (he
that was afterward Choakt with a fly) was displeased because he held not his
stirrup Hostler-like on the right side. But his successor Alexander quitted
that injury, when he trod on his Emperors neck, with his super Aspidem and
Basiliscum, in Venice as has bin forementioned. 3. He was of such a ready
memory, that whomsoever he had once known, though never so long absent, he
could readily discern and call by his name, as though he had bin always
conversant with him. 4. Many means were used to make him away, especially by
the Popes whom he withstood, and stopped Appeals from them. 5. In his time the
Fathers of the Schoolmen, Canonists, and Legendarians were hatched by Lombard,
Gracian, and Comestor. His saying was, QVI NESCIT DISSIMVLARE, NESCIT IMPERARE.
He that cannot dissemble, knows noe how to rule. Amongst his many Heroic
Acts, he was forced to swallow many indignities, by reason of the iniquity of
the times. Being drowned in a River of Palestina, his son

23. HENRY the 6th was declared Emperor, Asper for his rigidnesse. No Wife
could be found fit for him but Constantia the Daughter of Rogerius King of
Scicily, must by the Popes dispensation, be taken out of a Nunnery, (where she
was a votresse) and Married unto him, on condition that he must out Tancred
King of Scicily, that the Pope might have the greatest benefit of that
Kingdom, which was done accordingly. 2. Francis and Dominick the ringleaders
of the Dominicans, and Minorites peep up in his days to be supporters of the
Popes Arms. Some tumults in Italy were suppressed by him, and some Forces (but
to no purpose) sent into the Holy Land. 3. His saying was QVI NESCIT TACERE,
NESCIT LOQVI. He that knows not how to be silent, is ignorant how to speak.
His son Frederick being a Child when he dyed,

24. Electors was put into his place. This was done to the dislike of Innocent
the Pope, who thereupon Excommunicated him, but he quickly made his peace, and
then Otho the Duke of Saxony was by an other faction set up against him, at
first favored by the Pope, but afterward also Excommunicated. 2. An agreement
at length was made, Otho Marries Philips Daughter, and is assured to succeed,
and Richard the Popes Nephew, takes to Wife the other Sister, and so his
Holiness rests contented. 3. This agreed with his Motto, SATIVS EST
RECVRRERE QVAM MALE CVRRERE. The nail must driven that will go. Better it is
to retire, then to run upon the Pikes. But humane plotts often fail, Philip
is treacherously slain by the Count Palatine, and Otho had little joy of his
succession, for he was Excommunicated by the Pope, quickly overthrown, and
never acknowledged to be Emperor.

25. Henry the 6th, and Constantia the forementioned discloystered Nun is
chosen by the Peers. 1. He was Crowned at Rome, bestowed on the Church the
Dukedom of Fundanus, confirmed what Privileges they desired, makes a voyage
into Palestina, frights the Enemies into an advantageous composition for the
Christians, returns with honor. 2. Yet all this could not content Honorius,
Gregoriy the 9th, Innocent the 3d, and Celestine, in those days the Roman
Chayre-men, but needs he must be about five times Excommunicated, then
proscribed or sequestered from all his Royalties and means, which must be
ratified by a Bull, Apoc. 13.
commanded (in steed of a Sermon) to be read in every Church, and begins thus,
Ascendite Mari Bellica Bestias so well his Holiness can point out the
accomplishment of Prophecyes. 3. But this not daunting his Heroic magnanimity,
Henry Lantgrave of Thuring, William Earl of Holland, nay his own sons Henry
Caesar, and Frederick of Austria, are wrought (to their own ruin) to Rebel
against him, so operative were the Enchantments of the Whore of Babylon. Lastly
to make sure work, in a Council of France at Lions by Innocent the 4th, he is
Deposed. 4. Notwithstanding: the Germane Bishops forsake him not, but devoted
the Popes Legate Behavus to the Devil, for urging such treacherous
Proscriptions, the ground of which were the Emperors doing Justice, upon some
of the Popes Cronyes that had Rebelled against him, and for writing his Name in
public Instruments before the Popes. 5. The deadly fewd between the
Gibellines and Guelphes, at that time was in the height. In which also fell the
Scicilian Vespers, wherein the French for their Insolences had their Throats
cut in Scicily, and the Inquifition, and Cardinals Hatts had their first
Blockings. 6. His usual word was in the greatest threatening of his
adversaries, MINARVM STREPITVS, ASINORVM CREPITVS, He that dies with threats,
deserves the funeral of an Ass. Of this Emperor runs the distichon.

Principe in hoc patuit Romanae injuria Papae,
Et quantum sceleris Curia tota tegat.
7. His last wife was Matilda our King John's daughter, he had married before
Iolam the Kings daughter of Jerusalem, by whom he was entitled to that
Kingdom, some say he dyed a natural death, others, that he was strangled by
his Bastard Manfred. His son Conrade, and our Richard Duke of Cornwall, with
others were named to succeed him, but none enjoyed the place for the space of
22 years, until Radulphus the beginner of the next and last Period.

2. WIth this Period concur. 1. The Emperors of the East. 1. Nicephorus who
expelled Irene, and agreed with Charles the Great, that he should have the
Empire of the West to him and his successors. 2. Michael Curopolites his Son
in Law, who ratified the same composition. 3. Leo Armenius an intruder, who
banished his predecessor, and was slain himself by 4. Michael Thraulus an
unworthy Amorite. 5. Theophilus his son was better, but the Saracens brake
his heart. 6. Michael his son comes in with his mother Theodora protectrix,
but he mued her quickly in a Monastery, and was slain himself by. 7. Basilius
Macedo, a man of a better temper, he left his son to succeed. 8. Lee more
addicted to Astrology then careful in his calling. 9. His brother Alexander
follows, that killed himself with gurmundizing. 10. Then Constantine Leo's
son, who is said to have converted some Turks to Christianity. 11. Romanus
his son, on the contrary, caused his Mother and Sisters to turn strumpets,
and himself was poisoned. 12. Nicephorus Phocas that usurped the place,
pretended to do somewhat against the Saracens, but oppress^d only the Subjects
with taxes. 13. John Zimisces out off all his race, did somewhat against the
Bulgarians, and was poisoned. 14. Basilius, and 15. Constantine being brethren,
pass on without performing any thing worth the notice. 16. Romanus Argyropilus
did somewhat in the beginning, but was quickly choakt in a bath by the means of
Zoe his adulterous Wife, and 17. Michael Paphlago a driveling slave, after him
by the same Zoe is thrust in. 18. Michael Galaphates a base dissembler, who
soon outed his patroness, but proved so intolerable himself, that she was
recalled from banishment and made Empress: she marries. 19. Constantine
Monomachus a slugge, they drop away together. And 20. Theodora Porphyrogenita
Zoes sister takes the reins in her hand. This holds not, but 21. Michael
Strato an old man, is thrust in by the Courteours, and soon outed by 22.
Isaacus Comnenus, who proved somewhat better, yet could not give content. but
23. Constantine Ducas must have his place. This he soon left to his wife
Eudochia and her Children, who married that she might the better hold it. 24.
Romanus Diogenes, victorious against the Turks, but ungratefully deprived of
his sight, and banished, by those whom he had preserved. 25. Nicephorus
Botoniatos succeeds, by thrusting the right heir into a Monastery. 26. Alexius
Comnenus does as much for him, and treacherously used the Lattaines in their
passage by him to recover the Holy Land. 27. Much better was his son Calo
Johannes, who prevailed against the Turks, and dyed by the prick of a Dart
himself had envenomed. 28. Emanuel his son was he that mixed chalk with the
flower he sent the French, for provision for the Army, and put out the eyes of
Dandalus the Venice Ambassador, contrary to the Law of Nations. 29 Alexius his
young son, was villanously made away by his Tutor. 30. Andronicus, who had
soon his deserved punishment. by 31. Jaacius Angelus, who royally entertained
Frederick Barbarossa passing to Palestina, but was most barbarously deprived of
his sight, and imprisoned by his own brother, whom he had redeemed from Turkish
slavery. 32. Alexius Comnenus the fratricide, he was soon outed by his Nephew.
33. Alexius the third, who restored his blind father Isaacius, he soon dying,
left the place to him, which Myrtillus or Murziphlus, a base fellow
treacherously extorted from him. He was cut off by the French and Venetians,
that settled the first Lattaine in the Greeking Empire. 34. Baldwin Earl of
Flanders. He left for his successor 35. Henry his Brother. 36. Peter
Altisidorensis follows him, betrayed and slain by Lascaris. 37. Robert his
son succeeds, and leaves the place to his son Balwin the second: In him
ended in Constantinople the Government of the Lattines, who had held it about
60. years, under five Emperors, although Theodorus Lascarus, John Ducas, John
Theodore, styled themselves Emperors of Greece the same time in Adrinople,
until 38. Michael Paleologus recovered Constantinople again, about the year
1270. which falls in with the time of Rodulphus Haspurgensis. 2ly In the
compass of this Period, sprang up the seven bloody controversies, that set
all Christendom in combustians. Concerning 1. The Popes Supremacy over,
Bishops, Counsels, Princes. 2. Their Elections without and against the
Emperors consent. 3. The Investiture of Bishops by Staff and Ring. 4. Priests
Marriages. 5. Images. 6. Transubstantiation. 7. And Indulgences. 3ly In the
same compass Postillators, Schoolmen, and Canonists, In Warenfride, Lombard,
and Gratian, had their first beginnings and countenancing. 4ly The diverse
expeditions for recovering the Holy Land. 5ly The persecutions of the poor
Waldenses. 6ly The multiplying of Monasteries and Orders of Friars. And 7ly
decay of Polite Learning, may be within this circle evidently taken notice of,
as matters of no small concernment.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. The agreement of Charles M. with the Greek Emperors, imply
not, that he held Pope Leo's pronouncing him Emperor of the West, and Crowning
him, to be no sure title? 2. That Crowning de facto were a sufficient ground
for the succeeding Popes to claim the same privilege de Jure, as essential to
the being of an Emperor? 3. In vite Careli.
Those stories and wonders of Oliver and Roland, and the four sons of Ammon,
related by Archbishop Turpin, and others, are for the most part fabulous? 4.
The Western Emperors had more trouble to keep correspondence with the
incroaching Popes, then to quit themselves from the invasions of other Enemies?
5. Christianity were more abused and corrupted, by the Schoolemens affected
nicities, then by the gross figments of the Legendaries? 6. The recovering of
the Holy Land were of more importance, then the maintenance of unity amongst
Christian Princes, to stop the Infidells from coming any farther? 7. Pious and
prudent Preachers, might not have prevailed more for the Enemies conversion,
then the Swordmen performed for their subversion?


SEVENTH PERIOD of Austrians.
PERIOD VII.
THE Seventh and Iast Period yet current, has continued for the space of 360.
years and more, From Radolph of Ausperg, to Ferdinand the second, and numbers
in it 18. Emperors.

1. Electors, after 22 years vacancy of the Empire. 2. He overthrew Ottacar
King of Bohemia, and pacified the tumults in Germany, was free to the Church of
Rome, by bestowing on it the power of the Exarches, and Romandiola, to stop (as
some say) Cerberus chapps with such bits, least they should worry him, as they
had his predecessors. Notwithstanding he had no mind to travel to Rome for his
Coronation. Quia me vestigia terrent (faith he) as the fox observed concerning
repairing to the Lions den, many paths lead thither, but few tracts appear
of returners. 3. He had many children and matched six of his daughters to so
many Princes, the seventh remaining a virgin. His usual Motto was, MELIVS EST
BEEN IMPERARE, QVAM IMPERIVM AMPLIARE, Better it is to govern well that a man
has, then to enlarge his Dominions, many Cities in Italy purchased their
freedom of him before his death, he endeavored to settle the Empire upon his
son Albert, but it was carried against him, especially by the Elector of
Mentz. and

2. Nassau had the place, a man of too mean a fortune, to uphold the Majesty of
it. Our Edward of England, sent him a round snmme of money, to uphold his
rights, but he was forced to use it to supply his want. 2. His saying was,
ANIMVS EST QVI DIVITES FACIT, It is the mind not the Purse, which makes man
rich, but he found by experience, they would do well together. 3. In a
quarrel between him and Albert of Austria, who had the better purse, he was
forsaken of his friends, and slain by his Enemies, of whom

3. Radulphus the first, surnamed Austriacus, in regard of his wife Elizabeth,
he got Tyrol and Carinthia to be annexed to it. 2. Victorious he is said to be,
in twelve several Battles, the most of which might be rather termed
Skirmishes. Of 21. children which he fathered, eleaven came to age, and were
honorably disposed of. 3. In this man's time, seven things happened very
remarkable. 1. The removing of the Papal seat from Rome to Avignion in France.
2. The subversion of the Knights Templass. 3. The settling of the Knights of St
John's in Rhodes. 4. The Scaligers in Verona, and the 5. Estei in Ferrara. 6.
The firsti Iubilee at Rome in the West. And 7. the beginnings of the Ottomans
in the East. 5ly His Motto is said to be, QVOD OPTIMVM, ILLVD ET IVCVNDISSIMVM,
That which is best, should most take us as in it self most pleasant. He was
treacheroufly slain by his Nephew and his accomplices, in which place his sons
afterward built a Monastery. His successor was

4. Lutze^burg, a pious, prudent, and valarous Prince. 2. Having composed
matters in Germany, he hastneth to do the like in Italy, where all discipline
was out of frame. Was Crowned in Rome in the Popes absence, by three
Cardinals, omitted no opportunity to give all content: notwithstanding he was
tumultuously droven out of Rome, by the faction of the Vrcini, and through
hatred of the Florentines poisoned in the Eucharist by one Bernard an hired
Monk. 3. That passes for his Motto, which he uttered upon the first feeling
of the operation of the Poison, CAL^X VITAE, CALIX MORTIS, The Cup of life is
made my death. Which made way for the succession of

5. LEWIS of Bavaria, an able and resolute man, Popes faction, and some
Electors was set up. Frederick of Austria Alberts soune, and Lewis was twice
excommunicated, which he little regarded, and was told by our Occam, who stood
up in his defense, with this resolute saying, Defendas me o Imperator gladio,
and ego defendam te verbo, protect me with the sword, and I will justify that
thou do by the word. 2. In this siding on all sides, Lewis having the better
of Frederick, they come to an agreement, both keep the title of Emperors, but
Lewis has the Power and right. In his time the Countess of Holland is said to
have had as many Children at a Birth, as there be days in a year. He deposed
Pope John the 22. and put Nicholas the fifth into his place. Lyra then
flourished, whose Comment upon the whole Scripture, is Worthily esteemed at
this day. 3, His Motto was, SOLA BONA QVAE HONESTA, Those things are only good
which may stand with honesty, others attribute to him this, HVIVSMODI
COMPARANDAE SVNT OPES QVAE CVM NAVFRAGIO SIMVL ENATENT, Englished by our Queen
Mary, which we have in a Breviary of hers, under her own hand, to a certain
Lady, when she was Princess, to be seen in the Archives of our Oxford Library,
Get you such goods which may in a Shipwreck be carried away with you. Some say
he dyed of an Apoplexy, others, that he was poisoned by the Austrian faction of
his competor, at a Banquet in a Burgraves house in Norimberg. This is agreed
upon, that

6. fourth the Kings son of Bohemia succeeded him. Against him were set up
our Edward the 3d of England; Frederick of Misnia, and Gunter of Swartzburg,
but Edward waved the dignity with such trouble, Frederick was satisfied with
money, and Gunter poisoned. 1. In his journey into Jtaly to be Crowned, all was
fish with him that came to nett, so that for his capacity he was termed the
Stepfather of the Church, and this put upon him, that he would sell the Empire,
if he might find a Chapman to gain by the bargain. 3. But with these
enormities he had joined many excellencies. As himself was Le^rned, so he much
favored Scholars, Founded the University of Prague, set forth that Golden Bull
called Lex Carolina, wherein he requires that Emperors should be good
Linguists to confer themselves with Ambassadors, and prescribes what
solemnity should be used in electing, and authorizing Emperors according to
the Eminency of their place. 4. In this time flourished Wicliffe, and Richard
Armacanus for Divinity, Bartholus and Baldus for Law renowned ever since. A
Rattcatcher led forth with Taber and Pipe, most of the Children of the Town of
Hamel in Germany, who followed him into the side of a Mountain opening, and
were never more after heard of. The number also that dyed of the Plague in
those days is incredible. 5. His Motto was, OPTIMVM EST ALIENA FRVI INSANIA.
It is a wise way to make use of other men's Madness, which his son

7. Noringbergers for a Load of Wine, executed Barthold Swartz for inventing
Gunpouder. 2. Bajaz^^^ the furious Turk, this time was like to have overrunne
Europe, but was recalled, and overthrown by the unresistable Tamberlane, and
carried about within a Golden Cage, to be trod upon as a footstool when he
mounted on Horseback. 3. The Motto put upon him was, MOROSOPHI MORIONES
PESSIMI. None are more pernicious Fools, then those that are between Hawk and
Buzzard, sots in serious matters, but wise enough to do mischeife. He was
Deposed for his untowardlinesse, and

8. Bavaria is Elected into his place. He was also Count Palatine, and from him
came the four Palatine Families, Heidleberg, Neuberg, Simmeren, and Swibrooke.
2. He endeavored to reform much, but could perform little. In his time two
Popes were Deposed by the Council of Pisa. 3. His merciful Motto was, MISERIA
RES DIGNA MISERICORDIA. Misery is to be pitied from what fountain soever it
flows. To him succeeds.

9. SIGISMUND the brother of Wenceslaus, Charles the fourth. He took great
pains and travels to settle Peace amongst Christian Princes, yet new troubles
still grew on him. 2. The Council of Constance then held, Deposed three Ropes,
and chose Martin the first, which without the leave of the Electing Cardinals
stood for good. So the Council of Basil afterward deposed Eugenius the
fourth, and put into his place Amadeus, Duke of Savoy, but he soon resigned it
again: hence notwithstanding it may be concluded, That the Papists in those
days, held not the Pope, to be above a Council. 3. Upon the perfidious and
shameful Martyring of John Husse, and Hierome of Prague, the Bohemians united
themselves under John Zi^ca to vindicate their rights and liberty of
conscience. 4. This Zizea (though at the beginning having but one, and
afterward never an eye, was Victorious in 11 Battles. At his Death he defired
his Skin might make a Drum, the sound of which would put a panick fear
upon the persecuters of Gods Truth, and in truth a panick fear Rowted once the
Emperors Army, Pezel.
when the Hussites or Taborites were in a poor case to resist them. 5. This
Emperors Motto was, CEDVNT MVNERA FATIS, Rewards always attend not deserts,
but fortune. He is reported nine times to have assailed the Turk, but never
with success, he dies Childlesse, and

10. Anstria the second his son in Law succeeds him, who held not the place
so long as to do any matter of consequence. 2. He carried a heavy hand over
the Jews, withstood the Hussites, subdued Silesia, but could not preserve the
Christians from that ruinous blow given by the Turks to the Hungarians in the
fields of Varna. 3. His Motto was, AMICVS OPTIMA VITAE POSSESSIO. Aright friend
is this life's best inheritance. It Is thought he dyed of a surfeit upon Pumpions.
His successor was,

11. Austria, his kinsman: a man accomplished with all parts fit for so high a
calling. 2. Some place in his time, the overthrow of the Hungarians in Varna,
but a greater blow then that, was the taking of Constantinople by Mahomet. A.C.
1553. to the shame and confusion of all Christendom. 3. Printing was the^
invented by John Guttenberg at Mentz, thence increased at Strausberge, and so
communicated to Rome. 4. Upon the Turks possessing Constantinople, the Greeks
flying for shelter into the West, brought the riches of their tongue with them,
which before was not so much respected. 5. His Motto was, RERVM
IRRECVPERABILIVM FAELIX OBLIVIO. It is happiness to forget that which may not
be recovered. After his long Reign, his son

12. first ascends the Throne. So great a Scholar, that he elegantly spoke
Latin, and other tongues: and in imitation of Julius Caesar, wrote his own
Acts. 2. Great stirs he had with the Venetians, whom he brought at length to
submit. Having an interest in the Low Countries, by his marriage with Mary of
Burgundy, he was coursly used amongst them, by a company of rude Mechaniques,
detained in Prison, which he endured with patience, and freed himself from,
after nine months with admirable prudence. 3. His Motto was, TENE MENSVRAM, ET
RESPICE FINEM, keep thy self within compass, and have an eye always to the
end of thy life and actions. Scaligers testimony of him was, If I should say
that this Prince excelled all his predecessors, I should say less then the
truth. His Grandchild, son of Philip, Arck-Duke of Austria

13. Austria. At his Baptizing the Abbots offered a Bible with this
inscription, Scrutamini Scripturas. Joh. 5. which was Luthers rule, whereby he
set on foot the Reformation. and the Protestants in Spira, whereby they
withstood the Tyranny, Idolatry, and Heretical Doctrine of the Pope and his
Clergy. Adding a hundred grievances, which they petitioned might be reformed,
according to this rule. But the deaf Adders stopped their Ears. 2. He liked
to read three books especially, Polybius History, Machiavel^ Prince, and
Castalions Courteour. 3. In fifteen wars which he waged (for the most part)
he was successful. The lust of which was by Cortez and Pizarre, in the newly
discovered parts of America, where in 28 Battles, he became Master of so many
Kingdoms. 4. Near home, he took Rome by the Duke of Burbon. Captivated the
French King Francis in the Battle of Pavia. Frighted Solomon the Turk from
Vienna. Settled Mully Hassen in his Kingdom in Africa. Defeats Barbarossa the
Sea Bugbeare, and takes Tunys. 5. By the Popes continual instigations, he
carried a hard hand against the Protestants, whose patience and perseverance,
with other intervenient crosses, at length abated his edge. 6. So wearied with
the worlds incessant troubles, he divests himself of all Imperial authority,
and betakes him to the repose of a Monastery. 7. His Motto was PLUS VLTRA,
opposite to that of Hercules, For in the world a pious contemplation must not
be bounded, but seek farther for a safer Haven: Spain and the Low Countries he
left to his son Philip, but the Empire, by the consent of the Electors, to

14. FERDINAND the first, his brother, Prince. Under him in the Treaty of
Passaw, was granted liberty of Conscience, to the professors of the Augustane
confession, which much startled the Fathers of the Trent Council, As the grant
also did to the Bohemians, for receiving the supper in both kinds. 2. He
subdued John Sepusius of Transylvania, entrenching upon the Crown of Hungary,
and strongly kept back the Turk from farther encroaching upon his dominions.
3. His Motto was, FIAT JUST ITIA ET PEREAT MVNDVS, Let right be done and come
what may of it. His son

15. MAXIMILIAN the second, Tenent, that men's consciences are not to be forced
in matters of Religion. 2. In his time began the Wars in the Low Countries,
chiefly through the Spanish Tyranny, executedby the Duke of Alva, on the
grieved people, and otherwise on the Earls of Horn and Egmond which yet
endures: The five Civil Wars in France, the barbarous Massacre of the
Protestants began at Paris, The famous defeat of the Turks, in the Seafight at
Lepanto. His pious Motto was, DOMINVS PROVIDEBIT, The Lord will provide for
such as depend upon him: under whose protection he breathing out his last, his
son

16. Chimistry. 2. He granted liberty of Religion to the Protestants, obtained
diverse victories against the Turk, with whom afterward he made a Peace, but
according to the Turkish manner, it was kept no otherwise then it might
advantage them. 3. But a closer advantage was taken upon him by his own brother
Mathias; who extorted from him Hungary and Austria, with some other of his
Dominions, to bury him as it were alive, and take his place before he had
fairly left it. 4. Archduke Leopold showed himself somewhat in the Emperors
behalf, but to no purpose. 5. His Symbol was, OMNIA EX VOLVNTATE DEI, All
must be as God will have it. And God would have his brother

17. Gabriell Battery playing false, and tyrannizing over the Pregeny of the
Saxons, in Transylvania, was slain of his own Soldiers before Verradine. 2.
The Protestants standing for their privileges in Bohemia, were withstood by
some of the Emperors Council, of whom they threw Slabata^ and Fabritius
Smesantius, with a Secretary out of a window at Prague. 3. Bethlem Gabor is
chosen Prince of Transylvania by the States. The Jesuits expelled Bohemia,
Cleselius the Cardinal is violently taken from the Court, Bucquoy and Tampier,
are sent to pacify the Bohemians: Over whom the Emperor assigns his Cosen to
be King. 4. The Moravians banish the Jesuits: consine the Cardinal
Dithrighst^in, and Zerotine. The Earl of Thurne enters Moravia, and Bethlem
Gaber Hungary, to force those places from the Emperor. 5. Whose Motto was,
CONCORDIA LVMINE MAYOR,
Con^cord is more then light,
To set things right.
Which prevented by death, he could not do, but leaves to be performed by his
kinsman,

18. FERDINAND the second, Bohemia: The Bohemians except against his election,
and choose Frederick Count Palatine of Rhene King of Bohemia, He accepts of it,
enters with the Lady Elizabeth his wife, and is Crowned in Prague. 2. Bucquoy
the Emperors General enters Bohemia, Bethlem Gabor stirs on the other side
in Hungary, to make a diversion, The Protestants assemble at Nurinburg, and the
Papists at Wortzburg, to make their parties good. The Emperor sets out an
Edict against the King of Bohemia, and sends him monitory letters to desist, to
which he replies and stands to justify his right. 3. Spinola is brought to
invade the Palatinate, and takes diverse Towns in it: Sir Horatio Vere with
the English would have encountered him, but the Marquess of Anspacke General
of the Protestant Army stopps it. 4. Bohemia with his Queen, for saken of the
States of that Kingdom, are forced to save themselves by flight. He is
proscribed and put out of his Electorship, which is conferred upon the Duke of
Bavaria. Tampier and Bucquoy the Emperors eaders are both slain. 5. Duke
Christian of Brunswick, and Count Mansfield, stir for the King of Bohemia.
Heidelberg is taken by Tilly, the Emperors General, and Frankendale delivered
to the Spaniard. The King of Bohemia settles himself with his Queen and
Children at the Hague. Tilly drives Maurice Lantgrave of Hassia out of his
Country. The King of Denmark makes head against him, but to his great loss.
Mansfield having left his forces with the Duke of Saxonweymer, dies near
Venice, who with the Husbandmen men of Austria, head against the Imperialists,
but with no success. 6 Gustavus Adolphus King of Swedia, like a Tempest falls
on Germany: Frees the oppressed Princes of Pomerania and Brandeburg: restores
the Dukes of Meckelburg, Takes Wrutzburg, Mentz, and all that lies in his way:
Overthrowes Tilly in two great Battles, at Leippseike, and Leick: Overruns a
great part of Bavaria. In a third Battle at Lutzen, puts Walsteene Duke of
Freedland to the worst, slew the valiant Pappenheim, with diverse other of note
of the Imperialists, But was there slain himself, whether by the Enemy, or
Treason of his own it is controverted by many: with whom we also end. 7. This
Emperors Motto is said to be, LEGITIME CERT ANTIBVS, It is the better for them
that do so, and undertake no War but upon just grounds.

2. MAtters of Consequence may be noted with this Period. 1. The Contemporary
Emperors of the East, 1. Andronicus Paleologus, son of Michael Paleologus
(mentioned in the former Period) that recovered Constantinople, this man would
not stoop to the Lattaines, Neither his Nephew. 2. Andronicus Paleologus
junior. Him follows John Paleologus, under the protectorship of John
Catachucenus, with whom Calo Johannes Catachnzenus son in Law, for some ten
years pertakes in the government. 4. Then two Calo Johannes 5th 6th 7ly
Andronicus, with a 8th Junior Manuell, follow in a confused and shufling
manner, Constantine the 11. In whose time Constantinople the famous seat of the
Eastern Emperors, was made the Imperial City of the Turks, by Mahomet the
Great, who thereupon was styled their first Emperor, so that as the Western
Empire began in Augustus, and ended in Augustulus: so the Eastern had
Constantine the Great that erected it, and Constantine the unhappy that lost
his life together with it, and was buried in the Empites ruins. 2ly Within
this Period may be also observed seven Expeditions for the recovery of the Holy
Land, with infinite charge and loss, and no answerable success. 3. The
discoveries of the West Indies by Columbus, and Americus Vespucius, and the
conquest in them by Corte^z, and Pizarro. 4. The sailing about the whole world
by Sir Francis Drake, Sir Thomas Candish, and Oliver Van-North: to whom
Ferdinando Magellane had showed the way, but died before he came to his
journeys end. 5. Within this compass besides, fell the famous inventions of
Gunpowder and Printing. They of China boast, they had Printing long before, but
their untowardly characters show the vanity of that vaunt, and what may be
expected from them, that never attained to the perfection of an Alphabet. 6.
Hereupon follows the Reformation of Religion, by Luther, Zuinglius, and other
pious and Learned Doctors beyond the Sea, which was perfected here with us, by
our domestique Bishops, Martyrs, and Professor^, to the admiration and envy of
friends and opposers. So that our Constantine has been reckoned the first
Christian Emperor, our Lucius the first King Christened, and our Henry the
eight the first that broke the neck of the Popes usurped authority, which are
blessings never to be recounted, without continual thanks to God, that has
so graced this Isle above so many famous Kingdoms round about us. Tamberlane,
Zis^a, Huniades, Scanderbeg, and Gustavus King of Sweden of this Period, may be
justly paralel'd with the most famous Leaders, that we read of amongst the
Ancients.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. Jewish Iubilies may be turned into Christian Marts, to make sale
of Pardons, and to get money? 2. To be Crowned or approved by the Pope, confer
any Title or Power to the Roman Emperor? 3. Wenceslaus the Emperor did well
in putting to death Barthold Swartz, for inventing Gunpowder? 4. The invention
and practice of Printing, have done more hurt then good? 5. Machavills
Princeps, were a Book worthy of the esteem it had from Charles the fifth? 6.
Anabaptisticall Anarchy, be not more intolerable in Church or State then
Popish Supremacy? 7. Supremacy, Vbiquity, and the new found Discipline, may not
proceed from the Apocalypticall froggs, that set most Churches and States at
variance one with another?


So much for the Political History in General.
OF THE HISTORY OF SVCCESSIONS In States, Countries, Or Families. WITH A
Particular Instance in the Succession of Governments, and Governors, in this
our own Country, which may serve for a Directory of Contrivance for other
States. According to the Method observed in the two former Tracts.

Ne te quaesiveris extra,
Domi Talpa, foris Linceus.
Abroad let not thy Fancy roame,
Until thou know what is done at home.
OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the University, 1648.

The Dynasty of the BRITANES.
1. TO Ecclesiastical, and Political History in General, succeeds in
particular, The History of Successions, which may be in Kingdoms, States, or
Families: the latter we leave to their peculiar Registers, Heralds, or
Genealogists: and amongst the diversities in the first, pitch only upon a
Brief of the Chronicles, of this Kingdom of England.

2. In which may be observed, the several Dynasties or Governments Of 1.
BRITANES. 2. SAXONS. 3. DANES. 4. NORMANS. 5. PLANTAGENETS. 6. TUDORS. 7.
STUARTS.


3. The Dynasty of the Britans, is so interlarded with Fables, and perplexed
through Confusion; that Authors herein consent not, where to begin, how to go
onward, or when to end, that the parts of it may tollerably hang together. To
touch on all therefore that is usually said, as well upon obscurer, or surer
grounds, These Distances (for memory) may be taken notice of,

4. From. 1. SAMOTHES to Albion. 2. ALBION to Brute. 3. BRUTE to Dunwallo. 4.
DUNWALLO to Cassibilan. 5. CASSIBILAN to Lucius. 6. LUCIUS to Vortigerne. 7.
VORTIGERNE to the Saxons.


5. THE first Distance in the British Dinasty, from Samothes to Albion, (for
distinctions sake) may pass under the title of Samotheans from the first
Governor in it.

1. SAMOTHES. This man is said to have been the same with Mesech the sixth
son of Iaphet, Genesis 10.
but if Berosus (brought to light by Annius Viterbiensis) had not said so,
Bale. Caius. Hollinshed.
those that take it upon his trust, would hardly have gathered it from any
Records of credit. 2. He is passed for a great Scholar in Philosophy and
Mathematiques, neither was he negligent in Religion and Church Discipline,
Baleus de scriptor^b. Archilochus. Xenophon. Josephus.
but wrote a book of rituall Canons, for the more orderly preservation of it,
and that in Phaenician Letters, to whom the Greeks have been beholding for
their Alphabet, which diverse of our latter Antiquaries are loath to grant. 3.
From him (they say) this Island was first called Samothea, in which flourished
Samothei a Sect of excellent Philosophers. But when this is asserted by some
out of Aristotle, and Socion, mentioned by Diogenes Laertius; an exquisite
Philologist of ours, M. Seldom.
will convince them of their mistake. For Samothei may rather be deduced from
(...), Semidei Heroes, a kind of reverend Gods, then from this Samothes to whom
his son,

2. MAGUS is brought to succeed as the right Heir. The name should not be
offensive to Christians, Math. 2.
by reason of the coming of the Magi to Christ. When^ we may distinguish
between natural Magic, and Diabolical, and wise Magi, and Witches. The word
fetches his root from Persia, where the Magi were the Kings chief
Councillors, Iustine, others.
and upon occasion once usurped the Throne. 2. From this Fairy King, some
deduce the Pedigree of those Persians, but it is a large leap, and unknown,
how they got over the Water. What manner of Professors they were amongst the
Persians the Poet shows, Ille penes Persas Magus est qui sidera norit,
Qui scit herbarum vires cultumque deorum,
Persepoli facit ista Magos prudentia triplex.
The Persians him Magus term
that course of Sarres does know,
The power of Herbs, and worship due
to God that man does owe,
By threefold knowledge, thus the name
of Magus then did grow.
3. Some are of a mind, Sir Thomas Eliot. George Lilly.
that the names that end in Magus here amongst us, as Neomagus our Chester,
Niomagus our Buckingham with other, had their appellation from this King of
Samothea, whose virtues were continued in his son

3. SARRON. For this man founded Schools and public places for Learning to
Civillize his wild Subjects, with who^ nothing else would work. 2. From hence
grew that Sect of Philosophers, mentioned by the name of Saronides in Diodorus
Siculus, without whose presence, no act of Religion was thought to be well
performed. 3. A better Prince could hardly be wished for, yet he was much
outstript by his son

4. DRUIS, who is set forth to be the Master of Pythagoras, for his immortality
and transmigration of souls from one body into another. And the founder of the
Druides, Lazius de Gent. migrat. l. 2. ex Marcellino.
from whom Timagines is said to have brought the Greek Letters first to Atheus.
2. Their chief seat was the I Will of Man or Anglisey, and most sacred and of
highest esteem, were Oaks and Misselto. That which they taught must be
committed to memory, not writing. They took upon them the determining of all
causes Ecclesiastical and Civil. Excommunicated those that obeyed them not,
were so expert in telling Fortunes, that the Saxons afterward termed every
Wysard a Dry. Caesar. Picardus in Celtopae did. M. Seldom.
Their Opinions are collected by diverse, some passeable, other frivolous and
superstitious. 3. For their barbarous sacrificing of men, to devine thereby
what was to come, and others abominations, they were scattered by the Romans
in Gallia, in Tiberius, and Claudiu's times, and afterward here extinguished
by the Preaching of the Gospel, long before which time

5. BARDUS possessed his Father Drui's place, To his Ancestors Philosophy,
Magic Politiques, Rites, and Ceremonies, this man added Poetry, and set all
their Excel encies at a higher key. 2. From him we have the ancient Bardi, the
Chroniclers of all Heroic Actions, and Commenders of their Performers to the
Imitation of Posterity, Avent. Hist. Brior. l. 22.
whom an ancient Poet thus bespeaketh Vos quoque qui fortes animas belloque
peremptas,
Laudibus in longum vates deducitis aevum,
Plurima securi fudistis Carmina Bardi.
Then you brave Bards securely song,
the pray ses of dead Pears,
In lofty strains for to prolong,
their fame for many years.
3. Their esteem was such amongst the greatest Commanders, that if two Armies
were even at the push of pike, and a Bard had stepped in between them, they
would have held their hands, hearkened to his advice, and not have offered to
strike until he were out of danger. 4. Famous amongst those Bardes (before the
coming of our Savior) were held Plenidius and Glaskirion, Leland. Price.
LLoyd.
and of late years Davye dye, David ap Williams and others. They say the Island
Bardsey, had Insula Bardorum its name from them, and Aquila, Perdix, Patrick,
Maddoch, and both the Merlyns the Wysards, were from this Institution.
Successors to him are numbered by some to be

6. LONGHO-BARDUS his son who gave the name to the Lingones in France, but

7. CELTES that came after him, gained the repute to have France, and most of
the Western parts to bear his name. In regard whereof John Picardus, called
his five books of the Learning of those times Celtopaediae. But these are named
only, and may be well left to those fancyes that begat them.

2. COntemporaries here are not to be expected, except Jonithus Noah's fourth
son, and Nimrods Tutor, Hercules of France which he had with his Galathe,
Grafton.
the Daughter of Jupiter Celtes, and the Battle between him and the Giants,
the sons of Titan in Italy, may be ranked with these Samotheans, all of a
like being and credit.

INQVIRES.
3. Whether. 1. Those Pieces of Berosus, and other Ancients set forth by Annius
Viterbiensis, may be rejected as Fictions? 2. This Island ever were known by the
name of Somothea in any ancient approved Records? 3. A Phaenician Alphabet were
extant in Samothes time, more ancient then the Hebrew, from which the Greeks
derived their^? 4. The Magi of the Persians had their name and Learning, from
our King Magus? 5. The Sarronides in Diodorus Siculus, and the Druides in
Caesar, had their Titles rather from hollow Trees of Oaks, then from the Kings
before mentioned? 6. Pythagoras had his Metempsychosis from the Druides, or
they from him? 7. Merlins Prophesies may be well passed under the title of Old
Wives Tales?


Albionists. DISTANCE II.
THE second Distance of change in this British Dynasty, is from Albion to
Brute. In this appears in the forefront, the terrible Giant.

1. ALBION, He is set forth to be the son of Neptune the Sea-god, Genesis 10.13.
the same with Naphtuhim in Moses, of the house of Cham. These Chamites had
conspired and slain Osyris the father of Hercules Libicus, Ib.
called by Moses Lehabim. To revenge whose death Hercules (like a good son)
bestirred himself, and having made short work with Tryphon and Busyris in
Egypt, Anteus in Mauritania, and Gerion in Spain, Lestrigo in Italy must not
escape him. Against whom hastening to execute his Club-law; In Gallia he was
encountered by this our Albion, and his brother Bergion. 2. Albion had easily
brought under the Samotheans of Iaphets line, who were given only to idle
speculations, for to assist him. And Bergion had no less power amongst the
Gauls. The Battles join, Hercule's part gives ground, store of Stones being
at hand, by command (being no better furnished) they use them, and that with
such success, that Albion and Bergion are both slain, and their Forces
utterly defeated. Whereupon Poets took the hynt, that Jupiter threw down
those stones from heaven to make his son Hercules victorious. 3.
Notwithstanding this disaster, this Impe of Cham is said to have left the name
of Albion to this Island, which others deduce From Albina one of Dioclesians
daughters King of Syria; or of Danaus, who caused them to cut their Husbands
throats, for which their punishment in Hell is to carry water in Sives, pretty
Poetry, but peevish History: These Lasses are said to have companied with
Hob-goblings, or men as monstrous as them, and so to have peopled this Country,
but Hollenshed (otherwise credulous enough) confutes this mainly by naming the
50 daughters of Danaus, whereof none was called Albina 4. Others therefore more
judiciously, think it called Albion, either from the white Clifts by the
Lattins, or from (...), happy (by reason of the plenty of all things in it) by
the Greeks, which conjectures are far more passeable. 5. Lastly this Giant of
ours is made to be the same with Albion, mentioned by Pomponius Mela, and the
Author of some Geometrical Demonstrations, touched by Bale and Gesner in his
Bibliotheca. 6. A Rabble of Elves are named to be his Successors, as Galates, 2
Allobrox, 3 Ramuis, 4, Paris, 5 Lugdus, 6 Francus, 7 Pictus, etc. Invented by
Idle Monks, to give a reason of the Originalls of some people or Cities they
undertook to write of. 7. Yet David Pencair a British writer, and Nennius are
brought to give Evidence for Danaus daughters floating hither, and naming the
place, which is more unlikely, and dishonorable then the Legend of the
Giganticall Mathematician Albion.

2. COontempories here need not to be looked after, in as much as it is
questioned, whether their have bin such men as Albion and his successors or no,
except we would fit him with the company of Poliphemus of Scicily, Finmacoel
the great hunter of Scotland, Holingshed. Saxo Grammaticus.
of no less then seven Cubits height, Starkater the huge Ki-lcow of Sweden,
and Fian-Machon of Ireland, who slew Glass King Logers Swin-heard of that
Country, of a hundred foot in length, as it was made appear to St Patrick and
his twelve Disciples, that at their request, by the sign of the Cross made
upon his Tomb, called him forth to show himself, and then baptized him after
he had been dead, and in Holl, it is not known how long, and so remitted him
again to rest in his Grave, according to the relation of John Capgrave in the
life of St Patrick.

INQVIRIES.
4. Whether. 1. Albion in Pomponius Mela, be the same Giant that subdued the
Samotheans, and reigned thereupon in this Island? 2. See Hollinsheds description
of Britain.
It be likely that any Giants were heretofore of vaster Stature, then
extraordinarily have been since found in latter ages, or may be now in diverse
Countries? 3. Albion had its name from the forementioned Giant, or from the
Lady Albina, or some other occasion? 4. The Geometrical Demonstrations
mentioned by Gesner, be Richard's of Wallingfords, framed for the Clock of St
Albons, without relation to the Giant Albion? 5. It be not a bold wresting of
the Text of Scripture to derive Hercules and Neptune, from Lehabim and
Napthuhim Genesis 10.13? 6. There be any likelihood in the Tale of the floating
hither from Greece of the thirty two Daughters of Danaus, or Dioclesian? 7. It
be not detestable and scandalous to deduce the ancient Inhabitants of this
Island from incarnate Hobgoblius?


Trojanes. DISTANCE III.
1. THe third Distance may be termed of the Trojanes, which ends at Dunwallo,
and begins with,

1. BRUTUS ap Sylvius, ap Ascanius, ap Aeneas, Father, by shooting at a Dear,
leaves Italy, and betakes himself to Greece. 2. With the help of diverse of
his Countrymen Trojanes, there repairing unto him, he forces King Pandrasus,
to give him his Daughter Immogen to wife, and furnish him with a Navy to seek
his fortune. 3. This Navy upon a two days sailing, brought him to an Island
(that few Geographers have met with) named Leogitia or Lergetia. There he
stumbled upon an Oracle (which in great devotion he consulted with) in this
Poetical rapture.

Diva potens nemorum, terror Sylvestribus apris,
Cui licet aufractus ire per aethereos.
Infernasque Domos; Terrestria jura resolve,
Et dic quas terras nos habitare velis.
Dic certam sedem, qua te venerabor in avum,
Quae tibi virgineis templa dicabo choris.
Thou Goddess that do rule
The Woods, and Forests green,
And chasest foaming bores,
That flee thy awful sight;
Thou that may pass aloft,
In any skies so sheene,
And walk in dismal cells,
Through places void of light;
Discover fates behest,
Direct our cause aright,
And show where we shall dwell,
According to thy will,
In seats of sure abode,
Where Temples we may dight,
For Virgins that shall sound,
Thy praise with voices shrill.
It is to be supposed he was told, that it was a she Oracle of Diana, with
whom he complements accordingly, and from whom, in his sleep, he receives this
gentle answer, in the same strain he had courted her, Brute, sub occasum
solis trans Gallica Rogna,
Insula in Oceano est, undique clausa mari:
Insula in Oceano est, habitata Gigantibus olim,
Nunc deserta quidem, gentibus apta tuis;
Hanc pete, namque tibi seeds erit illa perennis,
Hic fiet natis altera Troia tuis.
Hic de prole tua reges nascentur, and ipsis
Totius terrae subditus orbis erit.
Brute far by West beyond the Gallish land is found,
An Isle, which with the Ocean sea, enclosed is about:
Where Giants whilom dwelt, but now is desert ground,
Most meet, where thou may plant thy self, with all thy route:
Make thither ward with speed, for there thou shall find out,
An everlasting seat, and Troy shall rise anew,
Unto thy race, of whom shall Kings triumphant sprout,
That with their mighty power, shall all the World subdue.
4. More here is said then verified, and promised then performed: upon this he
goes on, and meets with the valiant Coroneus, and other Trojans in his way,
whom he associate to them he had. 5. They arrive in France, overcome Goffarius
the Pictish King of Britain, who quarrelled with them to his cost. 6. From
thence hoysting sails, he arrives at Totnesse in Devon. Coroneus in wrestling
breaks the neck of Gogmagog the Giant, some say over Dover Rocks, others over
the Clifs of Plymmouth How, For which, and other services, he is made Duke of
Cornwall, so called after his name. 7. Brute settles the government in the rest
of Albion, and changes its name into Brutaine and builds Troynovant now
London: leaves to his second Son Camber, that portion then named from him
Cambria, now Wales: to his youngest Albanack, the nor therne parts, termed from
him ALbania: But Loegria now. England, designed was for the inheritance of his
eldest son

2. LOCRINE. Albanact's death, that was invaded and slain by Humber King of
Hunnes, together with his brother Camber, sets upon the Invader, slaies him,
and throws his body into the river near the overthrow, which thence at this
day, retains the name of Humber. 2. In this Battle was taken the fair Lady
Elstrild, whom he kept for his Paramore, until his jealous wise Guendolen,
Coreneus of Cornewalls daughter slew him in Battle, captivated the distressed
Elstrild, with the young Sabrina her danghter, which she had by Locrine: both
were thrown into the River, which of the daughters name is termed Sabrina, or
Severne. 3. Afterward for a while she took the government into her own hands,
and managed it in the nonage of her son

3. MADAN, whom she had by Locrine, Lusts, and Mothers fierceness: and is
noted to be monstrous in the one, and tyrannical in the other. 2. Ranulph.
Cicestren.
His death is reported to be correspondent to his beastly life, being devoured
by Wild beasts, amongst which he fell in hunting, leaving behind him his son

4. MEMPRICIUS to succeed him. Manlius callengeth an interest in the Kingdom,
but under color of a Treaty, he was soon dispatched out of the way. 2. S^cured
then from Competition and opposition, he plungeth himself into all kinds of
unnatural Lust, which made him odious to his Subjects, and rendered him as a
prey, to be intombed (as his father was) in the Paunches of wild beasts, to
make way for a better successor, his son

5. builder, from whom we have the Cities of York, and Edinburgh in Scotland.
2. He is farther noted to have subdued some parts of France and Germany, by his
20 Sons, which he had by 21 Wives, whereof the forwardest was Assaracus that
led on the rest. 3. His thirty daughters, sisters to those Sons, were sent
into Italy, to Alba Sylvius, to be married to Trojane Nobility, to whom the
Sabines refused to join their Daughters. Thus having plotted the propagation
of the breed of Troy, he leaves the prosecution, to his son

6. Greene-shield, but he did less then the Green Knight is said to have done,
in the tale of Valentine and Orson. Some say he attempted somewhat upon France,
and built somewhat in Britain, all as much as nothing. His Son

7. Caerleill continued amongst us: where he built a Temple, and placed a
Flamen; Acts of devotion neglected by his predecessors: In this Temple he was
intombed.

8. Hurdibras his son that succeeded, is more commended, he appeased the
stirs raised in his Fathers time. 2. Builded Canterbury, and Winchester, and
Mount Palladoure (now Shaftbury) where Aquila, nor a bird (as Geffery of
Monmouth tells us) but a Wisard so called, was held an Oraclist. 3. Some what
he was also for Temples and Flamins. But his son

9. Athens, and thence returned a great Mathematitian, and Magit^an, brought
four Philosophers with him, which he placed in Stamford, Professors having
made that place a kind of an University. 2. Builded Bath, and by art produced
those Hot Waters, which yet there continue, committing the conservation of them
to Minerva. 3. But presuming to fly with artificial Wings and Spells, he fell
from Apollo's Temple (now Poules) in Troynovant, and so ended his days:

10. LEAR his son took the Government, Leicester. Famous for his three
daughters, Gonorilla, Ragan, and Cordeilla. The two eldest professed great love
unto him, till they had gotten all that he had, and his Kingdom between them:
then their Husbands Hunnius Duke of Cornwall, and Maglanus of Albany, took the
advantage of the forlorn old man, to dethrone him. 3. He repaires to the
misunderstood Cordeilla, who had married Aganippus a Prince of France, she
dutifully receives him, and her Husband with the help of confederates, restores
him to his former dignity, in which he dying leaves the place to his thankful
daughter

11. CORDEILLA, Nephews Morgan, and Cunedag (sons to her mentioned sisters)
and by them subdued and imprisoned, pitifully made her self away, and leaves
to them the Kingdom,

12. Morgan and Cunedag, Morgan of the elder sister, contending that the whole
belonged unto him, ventured upon his Cosens part, and so lost all with his
life: leaving his name to the place in which he was vanquished, of Glan-Morgan,
continued ever since; and the whole Kingdom to Cunedag, who had it not long,
before his death transferred it to his son

13. RIVALLO, In whose time it reigned blood, flies: which a contagion follewed
that consumed multitudes. This Perdix the Wisard of those days, might
foretell, but not withstand. This calamity wrought not his son that succeeded,

14. GURGUSTUS, to forsake his beastly surquedry,

15. SYSILLIUS his successor to augment it,

16. strain, and dies without Issue.

17. Kinmartu (some say) his brother is named only to bring in

18.

19. Porrex, They quarrelling with one the other (as the manner is in such
cases) met in Battle: wherein whether Ferrex slew Porrex, or he his brother, it
is uncertain: all agree, that the Mother with her own hands flew the snrviver
in his bed, when he least thought of it, and so put a Brutish Period to the
line of Brute, after it had continued about 700 years. Then upon much bickering
for about 50 years space, the Monarchy degenerated into a Pentarchy, wherein
first Staterus became King of Albania. 2. Yevan of Northumberland. 3. Pinnor of
Loegria. 4. Rudac of Wales, and Cloten of Cornwall, whose son Mulmucius
Dunwallo, brought it back to a Monarchy as before, the leader in the next
Distance or Rank.

2. With these fall in the times of David, and his successors, until the
return from the Captivity of Babylon. Grafton.
2. The building of Rome, and diverse other Cities here amongst us. 3. The
originalls of the names, of some Places and Rivers, which carry small credit
with them.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. The story of Brute and his Line, be as uncertain as that of
Samothes and Albion? 2. Britain had its name from Brit painted, and Tania a
Region, and Cornwall from Kern a horn, which it resembles, and Wallia to
which it relates, and not from Brutus and Coroneus? 3. Greek Oracles ever
used to give answers in Lattaine Hexameter and Fentameter? 4. Coroneus worsting
Gogmagog in wrestling, left a pattern to the Cornish to prove such skillful
Wrestlers? 5. Stamford were made an University by King Bladud? 6. The hot Baths
in the City of Bath, were ever so naturally, before King Bladud built there a
Temple, and committed them to Minerva's trust? 7. Aquila's and Perdix'
Prophecies, be mere forged delusions?


British Monarchs. DISTANCE IV.
1. THe fourth Distance of British free Monarchs ends at Cassibellane, and
takes his rise from Mulmuci^^

1. Duke Clotons son of Cornwall, he subdued the other Rulers in the
Pentarchy, and was the first Crowned King of Britany, whereas others before
were but termed Rulers, Dukes, or Governors. 2. He constituted good Laws,
translated out of British into Latin by Gildas Priscus, and afterward by King
Alfred, into English, and mingled amongst his Statutes. Notable was the
privilege he granted to Heathen Temples: that those that fled unto them,
should be there protected, and thence pass untouched to shift for themselves.
3. Blackwell Hall, Malmsbury, and the Vies, are said to be built by him, and
the four cross ways began, which were finished by his son Beline. 3. Most
affirm that he brought in Weights and Measures, and ordained strict Laws for
the punishment of theft: being a great favourer of Learning and Chivalry, dies
honorably, and leaves his two sons to Reign after him jointly,

2. Brennus, Brennus by north Humber, and Beline in the Southern parts
remaining, with Cornwall. 2. Brennus not contented with his dividend, for
strengthening of himself to get more, sails into Norway, there marries King
Elsings daughter, but lost her in the carriage homeward, to Guiltdake her
former sweetheart King of Denmark: This King by storm is driven with her,
upon the coast of Northumberland, and entertained by Beline, Brennus follows,
and requires of his Brother his Wife and Patrimony: both are denied him, they
join Battle, Brennus with his Norwaies is routed, flies into Gallia, marries
Seginus daughter Duke of Allabrog, returns with his Father in Lawe's forces
upon his brother Beline. Being upon an unnatural encounter, the Mother steps
between, and fully accords them. 3. Brennus returns, (some say, accompanied
with his brother Beline, it is well he had his best furtherance) and conquereth
a great part of Gallia, whence furnished with forces, he passes into Italy, and
after a great overthrow given, surprizeth Rome. Livius.
The chief leaders in which finding their weakness, fortify themselves in the
Capitol: to which the Galls having found a secret passage, and thinking to
have taken them napping, were discovered by some geese, and so disappoynted,
whence afterward the Romans had a Goose feast, in the honor of Juno. 4. In
the mean whiles, the ancient Senaters sitting with great gravity in Chaires at
their Doors, and thereby at first awing the pillaging Soldiers into
reverence: upon a box given by Marcus Papirius, to one that played with his
beard, he enraged thereby, cut his throat, and emboldned his fellows to do
the like to the rest. 4. A composition is made for surrendering the Capitol,
the money to be paid from the Romans is weighing, the Galls throw in their
swords to the balance, to augment the sum agreed upon. A quarrel thence
arises, in the heat of which Furius Camillus (recalled from Banishment and
made Dictator by the Senate) comes with forces, expells the Galls out of Rome
and Italy. 5. Thence falling upon Greece, they are said to have subdued Sosteme
Duke of Macedon, where plundering all Temples they met with, and attempting to
do the like at Delphos, Apollo (as it should seem in anger) so pelted them
with haile-stones, and with an Earthquake, and a fall of a piece of Pernassus,
that he slew most of them, and so wounded our Brennus, that in despair he fell
upon his own Sword. 6. All this while Beline at home spent his time, Graston.
Leland. 1.
in settling Archflamines in London, York, and Carleon: Built Billings gate and
the Tower of London. 7. and so died honorably, and was buried with great
pomp, leaving his son

3. Beline by Guiltdake King of Denmark, he passed thither with an Army, and
by Force recovered the continuance of the Payment of it. 2. In his return he
met with Captain Partholine with a company of vagrant Spaniards that sought a
place to dwell in, whom he fixed in Ireland. 3. This Partholines brother
Cataber is said in earnest by some, to have Founded the University of
Cambridge. Gaius.


4. Martia, from whom the Saxons had their Laws Marthehelog translated unto
them by King Alfred, 2. He is said to have built Warwick about the time that
Alexander the Great was borne, leaves to succeed his son.

5. Picts got footing in the Marches of England and Scotland, whom his son

6.

7. son or brother that took his place in only named, whose Bastard

8. mettell in him, and was much magnified for his comely personage and
courage, but rashly encountering alone a Sea Monster that devoured all before
him, after a furious conflict, he was also devoured by it, leaving five sons,
of which

9. Temples, Grafton. ^ellinsh.
promoted Sacrifices according to the blind devotion of those days. Built
Cambridge and Grantham, which others deny, and say it was Canta another Town
enclosed with walls wherein some Philosophers were placed, destroyed afterward
by the Saxons. He dying without Issue,

10. ARCHIGALLUS his brother takes the place, Nobles for his oppression, until
the third brother

11. ELIDURUS, finding him discontented in a Wood, Hunting, lovingly restored
him to his Royalties, and then upon his death Reigned after him, which was not
long before

12. Peridurus the two youngest brethren bandied against him, and shared his
means betwixt them. Vigenius dies, and Peridurus for his cruelty was slain by
his Nobles, so that Elidurus was freed out of Prison to Reign the third time,
between whom and Helie, there passing about 180 years, Monometensis and others
have made bold to name 33 Kings to take up that time. But herein there is no
agreement in names, number, or whether they were before Dunwallo, or succeeded
Elidurus, Graston. Hollinsh. Polltdor Virgil.
whereof Hollinshed has a digression in the History of England, lib. 3. c. 8.
The names therefore of these Fayrie Kings may be well omitted, (of whom nothing
is noted but the name) to pitch upon

13. HELIE. From him some think, I Will of Elie took his name, others say noe, but
from a multitude of Eales, into which the Married Priests with their Wives and
Children were transformed, that refused to obey St Dunstanes Ordidinance, that
Priests should live single, but that derivation is more probable that is
deduced from Helig, LLoyd.
which signifies in British a Willow, by reason of the plenty of Willowes
which there grew. 2. This Holy had three sons, Lud, Cassibilane; and
Nennius; Nennius came not to reign, but

14. LUD succeeded his Father, and reformed Laws, Troynovant, and thereupon
called it Ludstowne, now London. His brother Nennius was offended with it,
conceiving thereby that the name of Troy should be forgotten, Ludgate more
plainly bears his name without offense. 2. Some say Baynards Castle, others
that the Bishop, of Londons Palace was built by him for his Court. 3. He left
two sons behind him, Androgeus and Theomantius, who in their Nonnage fell
under the protection of their Uncle Cassibellane the foreman in the next
Distance.

2. With those times concur, 1. The latter Kings of the Persian Monarchy,
and former of the Greeks. 2. The beginning of the Scottish Monarchy by
Fer^usius, crowned upon the fatallstone brought by Gathelus out of Spain that
has this Inscription.

Ni fallat fatum, Scoti quocunque locatum,
Invenient Lapidem, regnare tenentur Ibidem.
Except old sawes do feign,
and Wissards wits be blind,
The Scotts in place shall reign,
where they this stone shall find.
3. Aspiring of the Romans to overtop all those that had gone before them.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. Any of Mulmutius Dunwallo's, or Marcian's laws may be now
distinctly shown. 2. Brennus that sacked Rome were a Britan, or a Gaul? 3.
Irelands first Inhabitants were Spanish exiles, under the conduct of Captain
Partheline? 4. The University of Cambridge were Founded by Cantaber Captain
Parthelin's Brother? 5. Morindus encountering alone the Seamonster expressed not
more vanity, then va^lour? 6. The Transforming of Married Priests into Eales,
be not as hansome a Metamorphosis as any in Ovid? 7. It were not surly
vnadvisednesse in a Senator of Rome, to hassard his own head, and of many
others, for some incivility offered to the gravity of his Beard?


Roman Tributaries. DISTANCE V.
THE fifth Distance is extended to King Lucius, the first Christian that
Reigned among the Britains, and begins with,

1. Britains were first Conquered, and made Tributaries to the Romans. 2. He
was brother to Lud, and had the Kingdom cast upon him, by reason of the
non^age of Luds sons, Androgeus and Theomantius. 3. Julius Caesar at that
time employed in the subduing Gallia, being informed they had underhand
supplies from Britain, takes vantage thereupon to invade the I Will, where partly
by Storms at Sea, that wracked his Navy, partly by Valor of the Inhabitants,
under this Kings conduct.

Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis.
He Britanes sought, but Force to quell did lack,
And like a Coward showed his fearful back.
As Pompey in the Poet object's to his disgrace. 4. Lucan.
Our writers say farther, that Nennius the Kings brother meeting with Caesar
hand to hand, got his sword from him, but with it a knock on the pate,
Monomelens.
that cost him his life within fifteen days after. 5. At length upon a
quarrel between the King and his Nephew Aadrogeus, concerning one Evelin who
had slain the Kings kinsman, and was countenanced therein by the young Prince,
matters came to that height, that Androgeus revolts, and calls back Caesar from
France, and assisteth him to the overthrow of his Country. This rendered him so
hateful, that Cassibellane dying without Issue, the younger son of Lud

2. Romans, which his uncle had promised to Caesar: administered Justice at
home, and protected his Subjects from Foreigners, which made a fair way for
his son

3. Savior Christ was borne. 2. Some say that upon denial of the Roman
Tribute, Augustus Caesar was thrice upon the way to invade Britain, but was by
other businesses diverted. The contrary relation is more likely, that
Kimbelline being bred in Rome, and graced much by Augustus, never gave
afterward occasion of distaste. whose good example his son and successor

4. valorous, and of a haughty spirit, held it a disparagement for a King, to
be Tributary unto any. No Tribute therefore may be had from him. 2. Caligula
the Roman Emperor storms at it, goes in Person against him, brings his
company as far as the Belgique shore, causes his Army thence to gather Coccle
shells, and so ridiculously returns triumphantly to Rome with the spoils (as
he accounted it) of the Ocean. 3. Claudius (as 'twas thought) a simpler man,
took a better grounded course. for by his Leaders, Plautius and Vespasian, he
brought the Britains to more submissive terms, Grafton. Hollinsh.
and conquered Guiderius, our stories relate it in this manner, One Hamo
(siding with the Romans) put on British formalities, by that means came near
to the King, and slew him, to repair which loss

5. Kings Ornaments (to prevent discouragement of the Soldiers who knew not
what was done) and so continues the fight, in which they were, and had the
better: pursues Hamo to the Sea side, where he slew himself; whence the place
took the name of Hamo's Haven, and now with a little change is called
South-Hampton. 2. Arviragus holds up stoutly, after diverse conflicts, keeps
his own and is at length reconciled to the Emperor, by marrying his daughter
Genissa. 3. Hence swelling and esteeming it an indignity, to be perpetually
jaded with taxes, withstands the payment, is invaded by Vespasian, who lands at
Totnesse, the King encounters him, in a doubtful Battle nere Exceter. The
Queen interposes and makes them friends, for quietness sake, the Tribute is
continued. 4. How redoubted this King seemed to be to the Romans, may be
gathered from that piece of the Satyrist, Regem aliquem capies aut de Temone
Britanno Invenal ^at. 4.

Excidet Arviragus. --
It boads great honor to thy self, some King thou shall restrain,
Or shake the fierce Arviragus out of his British wayne.
Says the Parasite to the Emperor, making it no small triumph to unhorse
Arviragus: who by some is styled the Hector of Britain. 5. After such brave
achievements he dies peaceably, and leaves his virtues and Kingdom to his
son

6. MARIUS. The Picts invading this Country, Roderick, at Stanes More in the
North, so called from a stone crected in that place, as a memorial of that
Victory. 2. Some call this man Westmer, to deduce from thence, with more
probability the name of Westmerland, others make him the same with Arviragus,
whose heroic wife Voadicia, for an unsufferable abuse offered unto her, and
her two daughters, gave notable overthrowes to the Romans, until at length
she was defeated by Pa^linus Suetonius, which she took so indignely, that she
made her self away. In these heavy and desperate times

7. Marius undertakes the government, which he might manage with less danger,
in regard he was brought up amongst the Romans, and could humor them best for
his own quiet. 2. He constantly paid the tribute unto them, which prevented
the greatest quarrel. 3. Colchester is thought to bear his name, and commend
him to posterity: but that was more really done by his son Lucius, the chief
in the ne^ Distance.

2. WIthin compass of this Distance, especially notice may be taken of. 1. The
eminent Invaders and oppre^^ors of this Island, which are storied to be. 1.
Julius Caesar. Holinsh.
2. Vespasian under Claudius, who gave thirty overthrowes to the Inhabitants.
3. Aulus Plautius a Roman Senator called out of France, and preferred before
Narcissus the Emperors minion, by the Soldiers crying out O Saturnalia. 4.
Osterius Scapula. 5. Paulinus Su^tonius. 6. Julius Frontinus, and 7. Julius
Agricola, Father in Law to Cornelius Tacitus, who with advantage sets forth his
History. 2ly Those that worthily resisted them, deservedly should be remembered,
who were 1. Cassibellane that confronted Caesar. 2. Nennius his brother, who
got his sword from him. 3. Guiderius, who manfully stood up for the liberty of
his Country, until he was treacherously slain by Hamo. 4. Arviragus, the
Hector of Britain, who stroke a terror to the Romans. 5. Voadicia that
resolute Queen, that made them smart for the abusing her, and her two
daughters. 6. Caratack that incomparable Welsh man, that was so basely
betrayed, by that strumpet Catismandua of North Wales, who had turned off her
Husband, to marry with her ignoble Paramour: but Caratacks refolution and
behavior, so took the Emperor Claudius, and the Romans, that her betraying,
and carrying to Rome with his Wife and Children, heightened him to a greater
esteem. 7. Lastly, the two Noble Scots, Corbrid and Galgalus, supporters in
these extremities, leave them in fames Register never to be forgotten.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether. 1. In relating these former passages, the Romans or our own
Records, are rather to be credited? 2. Caesar conquered Britain by valor,
rather then domestique dissentions and Treason? 3. It be likely that Kimbaline
were Knighte^ by Augustus? 4. Arviragus marriage with Genissa the Emperor
Claudius daughter, were not worthy mentioning in Roman Histories if it were
true? Bale. Ponticus. Viramnus.
5. There were ever such a virago as Brunduca, that terrified Rome more then
Hanniball, and dyed in going to subdue it? 6. She were not the same with
Voadicia? 7. South-Hampton had its name from Ham^ slain thereby Arviragus?


British Christians. DISTANCE VI.
1. THe sixth Classi^ or Distance amongst the Britains, is bounded with
Vortiger, and begins with

1. Coilus forementioned. This is the first King we read of that embraced
Christianity. 2. He sent to Elutherius then Bishop of Rome, Elvanus and
Medvinus learned men of his own, to receive farther instructions from him: an
answer is returned him from thence by Faganus and Danianus in these words, You
have received in the Kingdom of Britain by God^ mercy, both the Law and faith
of Christ; Ye have both the New and Old Testament, out of the same, through
Gods grace, by the advice of your Realm take a Law, and by the same through
Gods sufferance, rule you your Kingdom of Britain, for in that Kingdom you
are Gods Vicar. What could be more solid and punctual? but how the style was
altered afterward in that Sea, the World felt and lamented. 3. Upon this the
King altered the three Pagan Arch-Flamins, and twenty eight Flamins, into so
many Arch-Bishopricks and Bishoprics. The Archbishops were of London, York,
and Gloucester: the Bishops of other places: Idol Temples were destroyed:
Westminster built in the Isle of Thorny, the place where it now stands, being
then so called. 4. Privileges and means were granted for the honoring such
sacred places. 5. The King dies without Issue: wherefore to continue the line
of Government, we are forced to take in the Emperor

2. Person, to appease the tumults amongst the headless and heedlesse
multitude, orders that the Country should have no more Kings of her own. 2.
Built a Wall between England and Scotland, of 112 miles in length, to stop the
sudden incursions of the Scots and Picts: at least repaired that wall, which
Adrian had erected before. 3. He dies here in York, and left his son the
Monster,

3. BASSIANUS to succeed him, Geta, and other villainies, mention is made before
in his life. Of him

4. Britain purchases the Government of the shattered State, Eutropius.
wherein when he presumed to King it,

5. Rome by the Senate to out him, which he quickly did. And was as soon dealt
with in the like kind, by

6. ASCLEPIODOTUS Duke of Cornwall. disgarrisons the Roman holds, besieges
London, carries it, kills the Roman Governor thereof Livius, and throws him
into a Rivellet thence called Wall-brook. But differences falling out between
him and Coill Earl of Colchester, it grew to a set Battle, wherein
Asclepiodotus was slain, and

7. COILL takes his place. Constantius Clhorus is sent by the Roman Senate to
subdue the tumultuous: but matters were so politiquely contrived between them,
that in steed of outing Coill, Clhorus takes his fair, and peerclesse Daughter
Helena to wife, and with her, the Kingdom after her Father: He is highly
commended, for his moral virtues, valor, moderation, and in those sad times,
for favoring the Christians. After an excellent exhortation on his deathbed
to those that were about him, he quietly breathed his last, and lies buried at
York, leaving

8. Augmenter of his worth, whom he had by the British Helen. As Lucius had the
honor before to be Registered for the first Christian King, so this Great
Constantine, is famous to all ages, for the first Christian Emperor: of whom
more is said in his life amongst the Emperors. After him expired the Roman
vassalage, which had endured 483 years by the intrusion of

9. Cornwall. Against him Constantine sends Traherne his Uncle by the Mothers
side, but he was quickly encounterd by Octavius (that had great means and
friends) and overthrown near Winchester, but Traherne recruting his forces,
at an other Battle in the North, had the better of Octavius, who thereupon fled
into Norway. 2. Thence understanding that Traherne was slain, by an Earl that
was his friend: he returns again to his Estate, and governs peaceably. 3. And
for the strengthening of his Title, to make it good to posterity, he sends for
from Rome

10. Maximus, a kinsman of the Great Constantines. For this man's harsh dealing
with the Ghristians, he is set forth by most writers as a Tyrant. 2. Quarrels
fell out between him and Conan Meridoc Duke of Cornwall, and some conflicts,
with various success, but they agreed at last, Maximianus bestowing Armorica,
which he had conquered upon Conan, who called it Little Britain, and having
made away the ancient Inhabitants, sent into Cornwall for Wives, to people it
with British blood, 11000 Virgins were shipped thither by Diothen, then Duke,
whereof Vrsnla his fair daughter was one, but they were barbarously slain in
the passage, by Guanus Captain of the Hunnes, and Melga King of Ficts, who
afterward were forced into Ireland by Gracian, a Leader sent from our
Maximinian. 3. Who puffed up with wealth and success, Rebelled against his
Master Gratian the Emperor, whom he slew in France, and proclaimed himself
Emperor, but quickly lost that dignity with his life, by Theodosius the great,
In Orat. funeb. de exitu Theodofii.
near Aquilea, concerning whom St Ambrose has this passage, Maximus occisus
est, nunc in inferno docen^ exemplo miserabili, quam durum sit, Arma suis
Principibus irrogare. Maximus is slain, and now in Hell by his miserable
example, teaches what a hard matter it is for Subjects to take up Arms
against their Princes.

11. Britain by birth and education, yet so Tyrannized over his Countrymen,
that in a short space he was slain amongst them. 2. Whereupon Guanus and
Melga, finding them destitute of a Leader, come upon them out of Ireland. The
Scots and Picts break in upon them from the North, and Civil dissentions
plague them as much in the midst, so that nothing but Famine, Blood and
desolation was before their eyes. 3. In this extremity they repair to Aetius
the Roman Leiftenant in Gallia, with this pittyfull complaint. The Barbarous
people drive us to the Sea, and the Sea drives us back unto them again.
Hereof arise two kinds of death, for either we are slain, or drowned, and
against such evils, have we no remedy, or help at all. Therefore in respect of
your Clemency, succor your own we most instantly desire you. 4. But finding
cold comfort, either for that the Roman regarded them not, or had his hands
full otherwise, they dispatch Ambassadors to Aldroenus then King of little
Britain, who consented to aid them, if they would accept his brother to be
their King. 5. Necessity enforces them to embrace the Condition, and so

12. CONSTANTINE is made their King. Totnesse, slayes Guanus the Hunnish King
in the Field, and defeateth the rest of the oppressors, but soon after was
treacherously slain himself by a perfidious Pict. 2. He left three sons
surviving Constantius, Aurclius Ambrose, and Vter Pendragon. Constantius that
for his blockishnesse was Cloystered in a Monastery, was thence taken to Reign
after him, but was wholly guided as a Ward by Vortiger Duke of Cornwall, who
caused him to be made away that he might enjoy the Place, and appears the
foreman of the next, and last Classis or Distance in the British Dynasty.

3. WIth this Distance falls in, 1. The great Question concerning the first
Planter of Christianity in Britany. Whether it were 1. St James the son of
Zebedee, or 2, Simon Zelotes, or 3, St Peter, or 4, St Paul, or 5, Joseph of
Aramathea, or 6, Aristobulus, or 7, Timothy, or all these, or any other at
diverse times, and on diverse occasions, may be said to have put their hand to
the work. 2, The damnable Heresy of Pelagius, first hence taking his rise
with its progress, and chief abettours and opposers of it. 3. The woeful
estate of the British Christians under the Roman servitude, and persecutions,
wherein St Albon had the honor to be the first Martyr, and the shameful
desertion of them and leaving them to the mercylesse Irruptions of the Hunnet
and Picts. All which and much more you have most accurately, and judiciously
discussed by the most Reverend Father in God Archbishop Usher Lord Primate of
Ireland, in sifting (as one says of B. Bradwarden) to the Branne the British
Churches Antiquitice.

INQVIRES.
3. Whether. 1. It can positively be set down who brought Christianity first
into this Island? 2. Lucius was the first King read of, that ever embraced it?
3. The passages betwixt him and Pope Elutherius, especially the answer of
Elutherius terming him Gods Vicar in his own Kingdom, be forged? 4. He
disposed Arch-Bishopricks or Bishoprics as it is related? 5. Helena the mother
of Constantine the great were King Coills daughter, or as others say a Wench of
an Inn? 6. The story of Vrsula and the 11000 Virgins Massacred in their
passage to little Britain, be of any credit? 7. A Monkish Cell could render
Constantius fit for a Kingly Throne?


British struggling with Saxons etc. DISTANCE VII.
1. THe Seventh and last Classis or Distance, proposes the Britains
entangled and struggling with the Saxons to hold their own, notwithstanding
they had entertained them for their assistance. This reaches as far as the
dynasty of the Saxons, and begins with

1. VORTIGER or Vortigerne, Constantius, though to set a color of his
innocence, he caused the Actors to be executed, whom himself had set on work.
Anrelius Ambrose, and Vter Pendragon, the younger brethren of Constantius, are
conveyed away from his tyranny by their friends, into little Britain. 2.
Whereupon being streigthned extremely by the Picts and Scots, and fearing the
return of these brethren to require their right to the Crown, he invites the
Saxons to come and strengthen his party: some say they casually landed here,
and were only entertained by him. Their Leaders were Hengistus and Horsus, two
brethren descended (as they vaunted from Wooden and Fria, the Saxon dieties. By
the help of these and their followers, he repelleth his foreign, and
appeaseth his domestique enemies. 3. Heugist thus growing in high esteem,
obtaines a favor of the King, but to grant him so much land as an Ox hide
might compass. This petty suit was soon had, but the hide cut into small
thongs, incircled so much ground, that a Fort thereon was builded, by the name
of Thong Castle, where Hengist settled himself. 4. Then Ocea and Ebusa more of
Hengists breed, are sent for out of Germany, who bring his fair daughter Rowan
with them: the King is invited to Thong Castle, Rowan set forth to the utmost,
presents him with a Wassayle, or Dutch health: he falls in love with her, puts
away his lawful Christian Wife, to take this Pagan stranger. 5. The Nobility
except against it, and to prevent the overgrowing of the Saxons to their
destruction, they forsake him, and put his eldest son

2. Saxons, in four maine Battles, in the second of which, his brother
Catigerne and Horsus the Saxon, hand to hand slew each other. 1. They in these,
and diverse other conflicts being thus defeated and broken, shelter themselves
in the Isles of Wight, and Thenet, thence Petition for leave to return into
their Country: which they did, leaving their Families and Possessions behind.
But Queen Rowan finds the means to have Vortimer poisoned, by reason whereof
Vortiger recovers the Kingdom, Hengist returns from Germany with fresh
supplies: Vortiger with his British Nobles makes head against him. 2. A Treaty
is agreed upon, the place appointed for it, is now known by the name of
Stonehenge, where the British coming unarmed, according to agreement, At the
word given by Hengist, Nempt your sexes, had their throats cut most
treacherously, with the knives the Saxons brought covertly thither for that
purpose. 3. Only Earl Edole of Gloucester (some say Chester) got a stake by
good hap, wherewith he defended himself, and dispatched 17, some say 70 of the
miscreants, and so escaped with his life to Salisbury. Hengist seizes upon
Vortiger, as his Prisoner, mue's him up with his Wife in a Castle in Wales.
Where we leave him to speak of the right heir and successor

3. Ambrose, who made acquainted with the mentioned stirs, comes with his
brother Vter out of Little Britain, and first falls upon Vortigers Castle,
where he was immured, and burns it with the King and all in it. 2. Others
report it was fired from Heaven, by reason of the Incest that Vortiger
committed with his own daughter, Rowans brat, by whom he had a son named
Faustus, who wept himself blind, for the Abominations of his Parents. 3.
Aurelius warreth successively against the Saxon, takes Hengist (by Earl Edolls
means, that escaped from the Treason at Stone-henge) and beheads him. Erects a
monument of huge stones, transported (some say by Merlins enchantment) from
Ireland, in memory of the slain Nobility by the Saxons, and named the adjacent
Town Ambrose Bury, now Amesbury. Overthrowes Pascentius the youngest son of
Vortiger, that came with Guillamore King of Ireland, to claim the Kingdom of
his Father: was poisoned at last, by a counterfeit Physician, that pretended to
cure him being sick, and so leaves the Government to his brother

4. VTER-PENDRAGON, fierce countenance, and sparkling eyes: others say from a
Dragons head carried in his Banner. He made short work in cutting off Ebusa
and Occa, Hengists sons. 2. Fell inamoured with Igerne, Gorolois wife Duke of
Cornwall, whom he flew in prosecution of his dishonorable affection, and
afterward by Merlins juggling, had his will of her, in Tintagill Castle in
Cornwall, who bore unto him the renowned

5. ARTHUR to succeed him: Stone-heng, as his brother Ambrose was, and had none
to take his place, but this stripling of fifteen years old, who expressed
beyond his age, a manly courage. 2. Such incredible things are put upon him by
Monkish Legendaries, that make his true Achievements questionable, Grafton out
of Nennius.
twelve Battles are recorded wherein he defeated the Saxons. In the last at
Baden hill, some say he slew 140 Saxons with his own hands, others bring the
number to 800: it is sufficient to think he wanted not ability of body, or
correspondent courage. 3. Cerdicus, Ella, Porth, (who gave the name to
Portsmouth) and other adversaries put him hard to it: he is said also to have
quarrelled with the Romans, and Marching thitherward, to have flaine a Giant
in Spain, which might have had some show of truth, if good Authors had related
it. 4. Relics are shown of his Round Table at Winchester, and of the 24 seats
thereof amongst the Welsh. Lancelot du Lake, Tristram, and Gawen, are named for
his chiefest Knights, and these names at this day, are commonly given in
Baptism amongst us. whereupon most conclude with Ieffry of Monmoth, and
Leland, that there was such a valiant man, against Newbrigensis and Pollidore
that question it. but all except against the Monkish fictions, that are put
upon him. 2. King Henry the second, upon bearing of a Welsh Bard, chanting his
Acts and death, with his interring at Glassenbury, sent to search the place:
where his corpse were found, with his fair Queen Guenevers, the British
Helena's, as her name imports. In a Battle with his Cosen Mordred (who laid a
claim to the Kingdom) at Commelford in Cornwall, he received his deaths
wound, but slew outright the Rebel. Duke Cadors son of Cornwall

6. Mordreds sons that stood for their right, at length flew them both
(having taken sanctuary) whereof Gyldas pitifully complains. But himself
soon found the like measure, by a Nephew of Arthur's,

7. Conanus, a man sufficiently valiant and liberal, but harkening too much to
Sycophants, and embrewing his hands in the blood of his kindred, he became soon
odious, and left his place to his son

8. Saxons, yet Gildas declaimes against him also as a Tyrant, and a dissolute
libertine, which made way the easier for the Nephew of Aurelius Conanus.

9. Britain: He was a most personable man, and therewithal a hardy King. Yet
his Imperfections, were so notorious, that he could not escape Gilda's lash,
who terms him a Tawny Butcher, a Bear, a contemner of Religion, and an
oppressor of the Clergy, words unfit for a Clergy man to give, or a King to
bear: some say that thereupon, out of remorse of Conscience, he betook
himself to a Monastery, but quickly threw off his cowle again, and ended his
life in such desperate courses. One worse then himself

10. CARETICUS is put into his place. Saxous soon espied, and finding the
dislike between him and his Subjects, (which he delighted in rather then
appeased) They aim at a Conquest of the whole Land, and get Gurmundus an Arch
Pyrate of Norway, others say a King of the Africans then being in Ireland to
assist them in it. 2. He comes with all his Forces, The King flies to
Chichester: the befiedgers by a stratagem of tying fire to Sparrowes, ang so
leting them fly into the Town amongst Thatched houses, and dry straw, quickly
fired it, Careticus escapes into Wales, which was (with Cornwall) the chief
hold left for the poor Britains. Saxons then roame up and down at pleasure,
and (as some say) called the whole Country Hengistland, which now we call
England. 3. After 24 years of this streightning of the Britains.

11. North Wales becomes Governor of his Country. Austine the Monk, had
before arrived amongst the Saxons, sent by Pope Gregory, and converted many of
them to Christianity, but carrying himself too high, at a meeting with the
British Bishops, at a place thereupon called Austines Oak in Worcester shire,
no agreement was made between them: not long after, a Massacre was executed
upon the harmless Monks of Bangor, wherein 2000 were slain, (some say not
without Austins instigation) by wild Ethelfrid, the Pagan King of
Northumberland. 2. This barbarous cruelty, Gadwan leads his Forces to revenge,
but the matter by mediation was so composed betwixt them, that they ever after
continued friends, until his dying day, to whom succeeded his son

12. CADWALLO, Penda King of Mercia, killed Edwin King of Northumberland, with
his son Osfride, in the Battle at Hethfeild, for which he it bitterly taxed
by Beda: but Beda being a Saxon, is observed not to speak the best of the
Britains, and soothed by the Roman Faction of Austins breed, accounted the
dissenting Britains (though better Christians then themselves) little better
then Pagans. 2. Others acquit Cadwallo for a Noble Prince, and a great defendor
of his Country, and scourge of their adversaries. His son

13. successful. Notwithstanding at the beginning, he had the better of those
Saxons that opposed. 1. In a great famine, that fell upon all his territories,
he was forced with his Nobles to forsake his Country, and sojourne with his
Cosen Alan, King of Little Britain. 2. In the interim, his Pined Subjects were
oppressed by the Saxons. He about by his return to relieve them, is diverted
by a Dream, some make it the appearance of an Angel, and so goes to Rome on
Pilgrimage, there turns Monk, dies, and is there buried. Where interred was
with him, the last of the British Monarchs. Such an influence had Dreams, and
fancied apparitions, and forged Sawes, and the like delusions, upon suspicious
dispositions.

2. WIth this last Distance or Rank in the British Dynasty Contemporize. 1.
The Sourse of Mahumatisme, by the Alcaron in the East. 2. The Propagation of
Papal Pomp and Superstition in the West: betwixt which, it was no marvel if
3. Paganism also tyrannized, being conceited as senior to both, as here it
did, by the barbarou Saxons, upon the Poor, Wasted, and forsaken Britains.

INQVIRES.
3. Whether 1. Vortiger with Rowan his Saxon wife, were consumed with wild fire
from his besiegers, or with Lightning from Heaven? 2. The Rocks of Stone-heng,
were brought thither out of Ireland by Merlins Enchantments, or Vter-Pendragons
forces? 3. Igren the Duchess of Cornwall, could be so deluded without some
connivence of her own, as to mistake Vter-Pendragon in stead of her Husband? 4.
The story of Arthur be for the most part fabulous? 5. That Pattent be
undoubtedly from him, that is alleged to justify the Antiquity of the
University of Cambridge? 6. Austine the Monk arriving for the Saxons
conversion to Christianity, might not be suspected to have had a finger in the
Massacre of the 2000 Monks of Bangor? 7. Cadwallador may be excused, that
forsook his distressed Country to become a Monk?


Saxon Heptarchie. DINASTY. II.
1. THE Dynasties of the Britains having been exhibited, in the former seven
Parcells. The second of the Saxons succeeds, and expires at the beginning of
the Danish Government.

2. It usually is divided into the Saxon, 1. Heptarchy. 2. Monarchy.


3. The Heptarchy is intricated with diverse bickerings, and Changes, that
puzzell the Memory, and may be so far only touched upon, as they preface to
the Monarchy, which brings us to our direct discending line again.

4. In it are reckoned these seven petty Kingdoms. 1. KENT 2. SUSSEX. 3.
EAST-SAX. 4. EAST ANGLES. 5. MERCIA. 6. NORTHUMBERLAND. 7. WEST-SAX.
Of all which some particulars only may be picked out, which are most remarkable.

In KENT with Hengist the first invador seventeene or eighteen are said to
Reign, Ethelbert was most eminent, for first receiving the Christian Faith,
brought from Rome by Austine, and for converting Sebert King of the East Angles
to Christianity, and assisting him in building Paul's in London, and St Peter's
in Westminster, as he himself built the Cathedral of St Andrews in Rochester.

6. Ella to Adhumus, had about ten Kings (Authors agree not in the
reckoning,) of which Adlewolf was the first Christened. It quickly fell into
the hands of Ina of West-Sax.

7. Erchwin to Swithred had thirteen Kings, whereof Sigebert the third was the
first Baptized by Mellitus Bishop of London.

8. Amongst the fourteen Kings of the EAST ANGLES, Vffa to Edmund, Kadwallus
appeared the first Christian, but held not so long. Etheldreda King Inah's
Daughter twice Married, kept her Virginity, and thence gained the Title of St
Audrie. Edmund the last King for his profession was shot to death by the
Danes, honored from Rome with a Sain^-ship, and at home (instead of a Tomb)
with the Title of the Town of St Edmunds Bury.

9. twenty Kings of MERCIA from Crida to Elfird, Christianity was first
received by Penda that Founded Peterborough, as Ethelbald did the Monastery of
Crowland, and Offa of St Albans.

10. Diera, and Bertitia, which in their several Governments had about 24
Kings, from Ida to Ethelbert: five Danes thrust in amongst them, Reigned
successwely for a while, till the Government returned to the West Saxons in the
time of Ethelstane, and his brother Edmund. Here Edwin was the first King
Christened, Speed.
whose deliverance from the furious Ethelfride by faithful Redwall of the
East Angles, and the glorious Victory he had over him afterward, his Marriage
with Ethelburg the Kentish Princess (a great means of his conversion) his
preservation from a desperate Villain, by the interposition of his servant
Lilla, who undertook a fatal thrust of a poisoned weapon, to save his Masters
life, and lastly his overthrow, and death by Penda, are matters of especial
note; as also the Acts of Oswall that was Sainted, and left the name to
Oswalstere in Shropshire. The humility of Oswin, Beds. Speed.
and the piety of Oswie, that miraculously overthrew the Tyrant Penda of Mercia
are worth the reading.

11. Amongst the 19 Kings of WEST SAXONS from Cerdicus, Kingills is registered
to be the first Christian. Ive or Ina to have made good Laws, set forth in the
Saxon and Latin Tongue by Mr William Lambard, and to have granted to Rome
Peter Pence. Ethelburg King Bithrick's Wife that sled for attempting to poison
her Husband, into France, where by reason of her exceeding beauty, she was put
to the choice, to Marry either Charles or his Son, she pitching on the Son
missed both, and was thrust into a Monastery. From the Tyranny of this Bithrick
fled

1. first to Offa of Mercia, and then into France, where he served in the
Wars under Charles the great. There he became so accomplished a Soldier,
that returning he vanquished the petty Kings left behind him, and turned the
Heptarchy into a Monarchy. 2. He was Crowned at Winchester King of the whole
Kingdom, which then of his Angles brought with him, and followers in all his
Conquests. He caused to be called England. 3. The Danes then beginning to
Invade are repelled. His Daughter Editha the Nun is Sainted, his Eldest son.

2. first wife Osburga his Butlers daughter. Has good success in diverse
Battles against the intruding Danes. 2. For placing the Lady Judith the King of
France's Daughter, (whom he had taken for his second Wife) in a Chair by him
at his right hand, he was threatened to be Deposed by Adelstane Bishop of
Sherburne his own son by his former Wife, who in those days was a Prelate
of great power, as was also Swithene Bishop of Winchester, by whom the King was
much advised to his advantage. But this presumption was intolerable, and by
Royal Prudence soon hushed. 3. He ordained that Tithes, and Church Lands
should be free from all Taxes, and Regal services. Of the diverse Children
that he had by his first Wife, his Eldest son,

3. Valor and Policy, by taking Judith his Stepmother to be his Wife, so that
she must lie in Bed by his side, who might not fit in a Chair by his Father.
2. This prodigious Incest was soon punished from heaven by his untimely death.
His Wife without Issue returning to the Emperor her Father, was intercepted by
the way, and forced by Baldwin Forrester of Ardenna, who at length appeasing
her Father, was made by him Earl of Flanders, from whom and this Judith,
descended Maud the Wife of our William the Conqueror. 3. In this Vacaency, the
next brother to Ethelbald,

4. ETHELBERT takes his place. Danes, who swarmed continually about him, he
withstood them manfully, for the time and Forces which he had, but by his death
a greater storm fell upon his Brother,

5. ETHELRED that Reigned next. In his time Hungar, Hubba, men of excessive
strength and feirenesse, entered this Land with great Forces, and harrowed
wheresoever they set footing, especially (being Pagans) Levelled all Sucred
places with the ground. 2. To avoid their fury, and preserve their own
Chastity, the Nuns of Codingham (by a rare example) cut off their own Lips
and Noses. St Edmund by these Barbarians gained the Crown of Martyrdom, and
to make them the more irresistible, Streg and Halden two Danish Kings, furnish
them with fresh supplies, whom the Earl of Berkshire ropelled near
Englefield, and cut off one of the new-come Leaders. 3. This while Ethelred is
not Idle, but every where so bestirres himself, that he proves Victorious
against them in nine set Battles fought in one year, wherein with one of
their Kings, nine Earls of the Danes were slain. In the end at Merton he
received his deaths wound, and left his torn Kingdom to the brave

6. ALFRED or Alured his Brother. Danish Kings (as though Hell had bin brake
loose) Guerthren, Eskittle, and Ammond are poured like haile-shott, with their
innumerable followers. 2. To whom by Wilson, Exeter, and Abingdon, he gave
great overthrowes, and no less then seven times in one year Routed and
Scattered them. 3. Notwithstanding by their obstinate reinforcing, he was once
brought to that extremity, that he was forced to leave his Companies, and lurk
in Somersetshire Marshes, where righting his bow and arrows by the fire, in a
poor Cottage, he was sharply blamed by the housewife, for letting a Cake on
the hearth burn for want of turning. 4. From thence under the habit of a
Fiddler he ventures among the Enemies, and having noted their looseness, and
many secret intentions, returns to his sad Companies, surpriseth the Enemy
unprovided, takes Rufan their Danish Banner, which had a Raven of needle-worke
in it, that had good fortune ever attendant, and so scatters their Forces, that
they could not soon be reunited to endanger him. About which time the
Devonshire men slew Halden the Danish King, with new supplies brought by his
Brother, of whom the place near Exceter bears the Name. 5. As his Valor and
Prudence, so his Studies and Piety were beyond compare. Of the natural days
24 hours, eight he allotted for Devotion and Contemplation, eight for
refection and recreation, and the eight remaining for matters of the
Commonwealth. 6. He Translated Gregory's Pastoral, Bedes History, and
Boethius de consolatione Philosophiae into the Saxon Tongue, and began to do
the like with David's Psalms. 7. He restored the decayed University of Oxford,
by fixing therein a College, (now bearing the name of University College) and
annexed ample maintenance unto it. Honored Scholasticall Exercises, with his
Kingly attention, and encouragement. And so passing to his Fathers with the
greatest applause, left the Heir of his renown and virtue his son

7. Elder to follow him, no way inferior in Valor to his Father, and not much
in Learning. 2. His many and dangerous conflicts which he had with the Danes of
Northumberland, proved far the more hazardous in regard of his Nephew
Ethelwald's Rebellions, who joined with them, but to their own overthrows 3.
By his singular humanity, he gained Leolyn the insolent and surly Prince of
Wales, to meet him in the Severne breast-hie, and to embrace his Boat, and
afterward to do him Homage. 4. His Sister Elfreda was a great help unto him,
not only by her wise directions, but more then manly Valor which the Danes in
diverse bickerings felt to their Cost. 5. After all these troublesome passages,
he peaceably at length with honor dyed at Faringdon, leaving behind him by
three Wives, fix Sons and nine Daughters, whereof Editha was Married to the
Emperor Otho the great. Edburga having the Bible and royal Apparel set
before her at her choice, she waving Royalty, laid hold on the Bible, and
became a Votaresse. Of his sons,

8. ADELSTANE that succeeds him, first Anointed King of this I Will. He Married
his Sister to Sithick the Danish King, that held Northumberland, on condition
he should be Baptized, which was done, but to little purpose, for the ends
intended, of furthering Peace or Religion, 2. with Constantine of Scotland he
had great Conflicts, whom Anlafe of Ireland assisted, and taking upon him the
habitt of an Irish Harper, had plotted to have surprised Adelstane, which was
prevented by the discovery of an honest Soldier, and revenged by the loss of
five petty Kings, and five Dukes of his Enemies in prosecuting the project. 3.
Passing into Scotland he offers his knife (for good luck's sake) to St John of
Beverly, subdues the whole Kingdom, makes a miraculous dynt in a stone at
Dunbar, with one stroke of his Sword, of an Ell deep^, to testify his right
to that Kingdom. 4. Welsh Princes, Howell, and Wolferth are suffered there to
Reign under him, professing that he held it more honorable to make, then to
be a King. 5. Near Winchester he was challenged by the insulting Danes, to
provide a Champion to encounter one Colbrond a Danish Giant, which they held
invincible, and none of his venturing to undertake it, he gat a Pilgrim from
among the Beggars, (as he was directed in his sleep) that entered the Lists,
and slew him. Lidgate. Rous. Papulwick. Graston.
This proved to be Guy of Warwick, of whose Valor, and of his Wives Felices
faithfulness, tradition has bin very prodigal. 6. In what esteem this King
was with Neighbor Princes, may be gathered by Presents sent unto him from Otho
the Emperor, a Lanscip of Precious Stones, set to admiration. From the King of
Norway a Ship with a guilt Stern and purple Sails. From the King of France
Constantines Sword, and Charles the great's Spear, the same that had wounded
our Savior, with a Nail of the same Implements. 7. Which Riches and Relics
(according to the Devotion of those times) he bestowed on Consecrated Places,
dies peaceably, and leaves his Brother

9. Danes, whom he beat in the North, and bestowed Cumberland upon Malcolme of
Scotland for his faithful assistance. 2. The good Laws he made are extant in
Saxon and Latin, by the Industry of Mr William Lambard. Where the Curse that
he lays upon non-payment of Tithes should be more regarded. 3. In parting of a
fray between two of his Servants, he is said to be wounded to death, others
report, that it was done by a Villain that he lay hold on too unadvisedly,
which Dunstane foresaw by the Devils dancing before him, and made Duke Elstane
do the like, only by Crossing his eyes. In the Nonage of his son Edwy and
Edwin; his Brother

10. Eldred assumes the Government. 1. The Danes in Northumberland oppose him,
being animated under hand by Wolstane Archbishop of York, and calling in
Anlafe the Dane from Ireland, whom they made their King, and upon dislike of
him, put one Hericus into his place, but matters at length were composed by the
Kings Lenity, and an Act of Oblivion obtained. 2. Dunstane Abbot of
Glassenbury got such a hand over him, that he committed most of his Treasure
into his hand, whereof there appears no account. 3. He made St Germans in
Cornwall a Bishops Sea, translated afterward to Kyrton by Canutus the Dane,
and settled at last by Edward the Confessor in Exceter. His two sons left
behind him, came not to the Crown but his Nephew

11. Edmunds Eldest son had it by right. 1. This man favored not the Monks
which made them to write so scandalously of him: he thrust them out of
Malmsbury and Glassenbury, placing married Priests in their room, and banished
Dunstane into Flanders their great Champion. 2. This made the Devil to laugh
(as the Monks fable it) whose calumniations so set the people against him. 3.
That some say he was Deposed, which brake his heart: Graft.
he left behind him no Issue, and therefore the right descended to his brother

12. EDGAR, a man of a higher spirit, carriage. 1. He recalled Dunstane from
banishment, and was altogether ruled by him, and his accomplices: this restrained
not his Incontinency, for by Wolfchild a Nun he begat St Edith. At Andevor
plotting to lie with a Western Dukes daughter, he was fitted by the Mother,
with a substituted waiting Creature, whom he retained afterward for his
Concubine. 2. More Tragical was that of the Duke of Devonshires daughter,
whose Husband he slew for beguiling him of her, whom he had trusted to Pander
for him. For these pranket and other, he was enjoined by B. Dunstane, not to
wear his Crown for seven years, which he penitently submitted unto, but held
on his lascivious courses. 3. It was a successful device to free his Country
from Wolves, by injoyning the Prince of North Wales, to bring him yearly 300
skins of them for a Tribute, and another Ordinance he made for putting pinnes
in cupps, that none should quaffe whole ones. 4. Upon the river Dee, he had
seven petty Kings to row his Barge, to show his greatness. 5. After his
death, great stir there was who should succeed him. Elfrida the Queen, and
the Duke of Mercia interposed strongly for her son Ethelred, but Dunstane and
the Monks carried it for

13. EDWARD the son of his former wife, Ethelfreda the White. In this man's
time the greatest troubles were between the Matried Clergy and Monks. Duke
Alfarus standing for the Married men, and Dunstane for the single. 2. At an
Assembly in Winchester, the married Priests lost the day, by the decision of a
Wooden Rood, which never spoke before nor after; and at another meeting the
ruin of the House (with the preservation in it of St Dunstane and his party)
ruind the poor Priests cause, although manifest delusion appeared in both. 3.
The end of this young King was lamentable, being stabbed (by his Step-mothers
treachery) when he was drinking a cup of Wine on Horseback, when he in
kindness came to visit her: through which wound, fainting and falling from his
Horse, he was dragged to death by his foot entangled in the stirrup. This made a
bloody way for the succession of his brother

14. Egelred, who had little comfort in it: For the Danes grew upon him so
fiercely, that he was forced to purchase his Peace from them, with great sums
of Money, to the undoing of his poor Kingdom, who yet never rested contented,
but multiplied the oppression of the Subject, enforcing them to drudge to
maintain these Lurdan's idle. 2. To put a period to this insufferable
Vassalage, a Bloody Massacre was executed upon them, by the Kings secret
Commission, Brices day, but such brutish courses never find a wished close. 3.
The Danes rather exasperated to revenge, then any way thereby dismayed, return
with Swain their King, and desolate all the Country. The perfidious Earl
Edrick with other of the Clergy and Nobility underhand abet them: the King
opposes to his power, but with extreme difficulty. 4. After the death of
Swain, (who, some say, was miraculously gored by St Edmunds Sword, for his
Sacrilege in Thetford) Canutus his Son arrives with greater forces. The King
dies after a lingering sickness. 5. His second Wife was Emma, termed the
flower of Normandy, Duke Richards daughter, by whom he had diverse children:
but more by his first Wife Elgiva, of which

15. EDMUND, surnamed Ironside, succeeded, in valor and performance, if not
beyond, surely not inferior to any of his Predecessors. 2. He raised the Siege
of London, worsted the valiant Canutus four times at least in plain field,
and had in all likelihood rid England of him, if the Traitor Edrick, and others
of the perfidious Clergy and Nobility, had not secretly assisted him. 2. In a
Duel between him and Canutus in the I Will of Alney, he overmatched the stout
Dane, and wounded him to be supplicant. By compact they divide the Kingdom
between them. 3. But that Villainous Duke Edrick found the means to have this
excellent Prince gored, as he sat on a Draught, for whose head presented to
Canutus, he had his own exalted upon a Pole, above the rest of his Peers as it
was promised him, An Advancement fit for betrayers of their King and Country.

2. THis Distance runs a long with the Period of Charles the Great and his
successors, from whose Military Discipline, our Egbert learned to Conquer, and
bring dismembered Polyarchies and Heptarchies, into the best kind of Government,
which has been approved by all, to be Monarchy. 2. Notice may be here taken of
the continued irruptions of the Northern Nations to infest the Southern, whom
they excelled most commonly so much in boisterous strength, and number, as they
came short of them in Learning, Civility, and Policy; wherein the providence of
God appeared; that the Conquerors should be Conquered by those they had
subdued, being of Pagans made Christians, and of boisterous Tyrants, submissive
brethren, so that malum ab Aquilone, became bonum Aquiloni, by Divine
disposition, which permiteth not evil, but to produce good out of it. 3.
Learning so stifled by tumults of former ages, begins here to bud again, by
Alcuinus, Beda, but especially by King Alfreds liberality, encouragements, and
good Example.

INQVIRES.
3. Whether 1. The Saxon Heptarchy, were distinctly visible at any one time, or
grew up more successively by degrees? 2. Alfred were the first founder of the
University of Oxford, or only a munificent Reviver? 3. The Relations of the
humorous carriage, and strange achievements of Guy of Warwick, be for the most
part put upon him without ground? 4. The Nuns of Codingham did well, by
mangling their faces to preserve their chastity? 5. The miracles ascribed to St
Dunstane were rather deluding sleights, or Divelish Magic, then Acts of Piety?
6. Edward basely stabbed by his Step-mothers treachery, may be justly held a
Martyr? 7. Ethelreds Massacre of Danes, may pass for warrantable Policy?


Of the Danes. DYNASTY III.
THe third Dynasty that outed the Saxons, and possessed their Dominions, is
that of the Danes: who partly invited by Beorn Bocador Viceroy of
Northumberland, Speed.
to revenge the ravishing of his Lady by Osbright, and partly taking occasion
from the murder of Lothbrook, alias Lether-breech, by Benick St Edmunds
Faulkouer, (for which no satisfaction could be obtained) never desisted to
Invade the whole Realm, till they became sole Masters of it. In this Dynasty
or Government, we have but three Danes, and two others in this succession.

1. CANUTUS the Conqueror, Dissemblers, Traitors, and Flatterers: for the
Nobility that to curry favor with him, assented to the Disinheriting of
Ironsides Issue, were ever after slighted by him, and came to Dishonorable
ends. The Traitor Ederick, vaunting his good service, in murdering his
Sovereign, he caused to be executed, with the extremest, and disgraceful
tortures; And a company of Flatterers, that extolled his Greatness and Power
to be unmatchable, he caused to place him in a Chair, where the Sea Ebbs and
Flows at South-Hampton, that by the disobedience of the Tide, that would not
stop at his Command, but presumed to dash his Royal Garments, they might
learn how Low man is at the Highest; and not to applaud his fortune, but fear
his fall. 2. By the valor of Earl Goodwin, and English, he drove the Vandales
out of Denmark, which fell to him by his brother Swaynes death, and got the
neighboring Norway, by subduing Olave the King, who had quarrelled with him,
without any provocation. In like manner he vanquished Scotland, so that
England, Denmark, Norway, (some add also part of Sweden) together with
Scotland were wholly subject unto him. 3. His Iealousies of Ironsides Children
moved him to send his sons, Edward and Edmund to Swanus King of Denmark, to
be dispatched, but he abhorring such Vill^ny, transferred them to the King of
Hungary, where Edmund dying, Edward Married Agatha, the Emperor Henry the
fourths Daughter, by whom he had Edgar Etheling, the surviving Heir of the
Crown of England, which he could never recover. 4. To strengthen his Title
(what he might) he takes Emma to wife King Etheldreds Widow, M. Lambard.
makes good Laws extant in the Saxon tongue and Latin, gave one hundred
Talents of Silver, and one of Gold for St Augustince Arm, which he bestowed on
Coventry, as a memorial of his Zeal, though not according to knowledge. 5. He
had Issue by Emma his second Wife the fair Gunhilda, and Hardy-Canutus.
Gunhilda was Married to the Emperor Henry the third, where falling into
suspicion of Incontinency, she was vindicated by her English Page, overthrowing
in her quarrel a great Giant. Hardicanutus was designed to succeed by his
Father here in England, but was put by in his absence by his Brother

2. Harefoot by reason of his swiftness, Earl Goodwin withstands his
entrance, but by secret prevailing means, was soon made his friend. 2. A
Letter is forged in Queen Emma's name, to bring over her sons Edward and
Alfred, (which she had by Ethelred) to claim their Right to the Crown. Alfred
comes and by Earl Goodwin is made away, with all those that came with him at
Gilford. 3. Emma is banished, but courteously entertained by Baldwin Earl of
Flanders, Harold thus secured (as he thought) from Competitors, lives loosly,
dies speedily, and without Issue leaves the Kingdom to

3. first work to disintombe his Predecessors Corpse, and threw it into
Thamisis: but some Fishermen more courteous, recovered it, and buried it again
in St Clements near Temple-Barre. 2. His recalling his Mother Emma, and half
Brother Edward, and entertaining them respectively, deserves commendations. As
also the prosecuting Earl Goodwin, and the Bishop of Worcester, for Prince
Alfreds death, but the Earl quitted himself by his Oath, and a rich Present,
and the Bishops questioning is said to be for the Murder of the Kings
Taxe-Collectors in Worcester, by the enraged Citizens, for which their City was
afterward consumed with fire. 3. His Epicurismo left an ill Custom to all
posterity. Four times a day, his Table must be covered, to invite men to
Intemperancy, Through which at a Marriage, he is thought to have Choked
himself at Lambeth, most rejoicing to be rid of him, in memory whereof
Hock-tide a Feast of scorning was a long time continued after. In this third
Heir expired the Danish Line, and the Saxon revived again in

4. EDWARD the son of Ethelred, and Emma, Confessor. 1. To gain the more
love of his Subjects at his first entrance, he remitted the Tax of Danegilts
so grievous to the Commonds, collected the Laws of his predecessors into a
body for the administrationof Justice, which some say are the ground of our
Common Law, though the Pleading be altered since the Norman Conquest. 2. He was
threatened by the Dane, See M. Lambards Archnom.
and vexed by Griffith the Welsh Prince, who was quelled by Harold especially,
who was employed against them. Between him and the potent Earl Goodwin, were
such debates, that twice came to the hazard of dangerous Battles, if wise
mediation of the Nobles had not prevented them, the death of which Earl is
reported to be his Choking with a bitt of Bread, upon an imprecation laid on
himself, that that might be his last, if he had a hand in the death of the
Kings Brother Prince Alfred, though some say he died of the deadpalsie. 3.
Grafton.
In this man's time Coventry purchased its Freedom from Earl Leofrie, by the
Riding of his Countess Godina naked through it, but such order was taken by
the Townsmen, that shutting up all Doors and Windows none beheld it. 4. His
unnatural dealing with his good Mother Emma, and virtuous fair Wife Editha,
Earl Goodwins Daughter, cannot be excused. For upon a poor surmise of
Incontinency with Alwin Bishop of Winchester, his Mother in his presence was
put to the Ordalium to pass Blindfolded between nine glowing Coulters, which
she did untouched: and his spotless Queen Editha, denied Marriageright,
(perchance for hatred to her Father,) and with one Waiting-maid to live
disrespected in a Nunnery. 5. Such actions so opposite to Gods word should
Saint no man. The first curing the Kings Evil, is referred to him, and thence
to have continued to his Successors. More Laudable was his respect to Edgar
Etheling, (Grandchild to to Ironside by his son Edward the Outlaw that died
in banishment) whom he intended for his successor, and he had the best right
to it, but he being young, and wanting means and friends to support him.

5. Goodwin makes bold to take the place, a man of excellent parts, and
approved valor, as the Welsh and others which he subdued in his Predecessors
time, found to their cost. 2. He, droven by Tempest into Normandy, was
affianced to young Adeliza Duke William's Daughter, with whom he Covenanted
upon Oath to make him successor to Edward in the Kingdom of England. 2. But
this contract he held as a nicity, or complement, and constrained Oaths no way
to bind, wherein he soothed himself, but God is not mocked, and usurpations
thrive not long. 3. Three Enemies at one time assault him. Tosto his own
Brother, Harold Harefager, or Fairelocks, of Norway, and William Duke of
Normandy. The two former he manfully quelled, but fell under the hand of
William in that famous Battle of Hastings in Sussex, the setter up of the next
Dynasty.

2. IN those times whiles Princes sought the ruins one of another, Popes grew
up to dispose of them, and their Kingdoms, and those that protested against
such deformities, and enormities could not be heard.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. Canutus had the largest Dominious of any that ever Ruled in this
Kindome? 2. St Augustines Arm were worth so much as he gave for it? 3. Edward
the son of Etheldred, deserved the Title of Confessor? 4. Our Common Law
have its grounds from his Collections? 5. Ordalium by hott Coulters, be fit to
purge suspicion of Incontinency? 6. Stopping the rights of Marriages without
consent for a time of both Parties, be not directly against Gods word? 7.
Harold were bound to keep his Oath to William of Normandy for the Crown of
England, in prejudice to Edgar Etheling the apparent right Heir?


Of the Normans. DYNASTY IV.
THe Fourth Dynasty is of the Normans, to the Plantagenets, and has in it

1. Conqueror, the seventh Duke of Normandy: the son of Robert, begotten on
Arlot, a poor Skinners daughter, whom he affected for her handsomeness, and
comely dancing (which by chance he beheld) among her country companions. 2.
After the overthrow of Harold with little less then the loss of 68000 men on
both sides in Battle field, he quickly brought under the rest of the Kingdom.
The Kentish men circumvent him by a stratageme, and thereby retained their
ancient Customs and Liberties. 2. Edgar Etheling the right heir, formerly
wronged by Harold, with the discontented Earls Edwin, and Morcar, make some
resistance, but to no purpose. Edgar flies with his Mother and Sisters, into
Scotland; where King Malcolme entertaining them nobly, takes Margaret his
Sister to Wife, and by his constant and effectual standing for him, Edgar was
reconciled unto the Conqueror, and had Royal allowance from him. 3. To those
insurrections that here vexed him, his eldest son Robert added a more
unnatural in Normandy, which he hastening to appease, was in Battle Unhorsed
by his own son, whom upon submission he was content to pardon for the time.
4. The Church found no friend of him, whose Revenues he alienated, and
burdened with unusual taxes, not sparing the poor means of University
College in Oxford, which must be diverted from the Students. 5. Besides the
imposing of the Norman Laws, he left the Doomesday Book in the Exchequer,
containing a Survay in general of all England. For a groat to short in payment
of some dues required, he forced the Monks of Ely, to lay down a 1000 marks:
notwithstanding for all this, the Pope bucks him, and allows his doings and
Title. 6. He depopulated about thirty miles in compass, Cambden i^. Hantshire.
and outed the Inhabitants to make a forest for Wild-beasts, which pleasured
not himself so much, as it proved unluckie to his Posterity. The plainness of
these times of Letting Lands is worth the comparing with the intricate
prolixity of our times. Then it passed for good. From me and mine, to thee and
thine,
As good and as fair, as ever they mine were,
To witness that this is sooth,
I bite the white wax with my tooth.
But now we find it otherwise. 7. After all these transactions abroad, he is
summoned by Death, as he was in Normandy, but had the place of his burial
compounded for, before he was interred, and then the Grave proved too little
for him that had proved so great a Conqueror in the World. His second son

2. Rufus by Archbishop Lanfrankes working for him, gets the place. 1. He is
strongly opposed by his elder brother Robert: whom he calmeth with promising
fair words, without performance, and Robert joins in the famous expedition to
the Holy Laud, with Godfrey of Bullaine. 2. As his Father began, so he
persisted to withstand Papal intrusions. He slighted the Popes Binding and
Loosing: and held it bootlesse to invocate Saints. Curbed Anselme Archbishop
of Canterbury, and taxed the then swelling Clergy for their Pride, Luxury,
Idleness, and Avarice. Heard a Disputation of the Jews, (who bribed him to
favor them) against the Christians, but they lost the day, and their money
together. 3. A Groom of his chamber, on a time bringing him a pair of
Breeches of three shillings price, was blamed of him, and commanded to furnish
him with a pair fit for a King, that should cost a mark. He goes, and
presenting him with a meaner pair, which he said cost so much, yea Bellamy (or
by St Lucies face says the King) they are well bought: such was the frugality
of those times, and difference from ours. 4. His liberality to Religious
persons and places, shows that he was not void of Religion, though he could
not endure Appeals to Rome, and his building the Tower in London, and
Westminster Hall, of 270 foot in length, and 74 in breadth, are sufficient
testimonies of his Magnificence. 5. His death was casual, by the glance of an
arrow from a tree, Cambden in Hantshire ex G. Mapes.
shot by Sir Walter Tirrell at a Stagge, in the New Forest, wherein four
Abbeys, and thirty fix Parish Churches, had been demolished: with the removing
of all the Inhabitants, to make room for Beasts or Dogs game as one calls it.
Rex cervum insequitur, Regem vindicta, Tyrellus
Non been provisum transfixit acumine ferri.
The King the Stagge, vengeance the King does chase,
Tyrells hard hap concludes this Tragic case.
Also Richard his brother, and Robert his Nephew, came to their untimely ends
in the same place: so dangerous it is to prove Abaddons, especially in
consecrated things. A Colliars Cart that removes him thence, brake in the way,
and left him in the dirt, whence he was after taken, and buried as a King in
Winchester: dying without issue, his Scepter descended to his brother

3. Beauclark for his Learning. He was wont to say that an unlearned King was a
Crowned Ass. 1. Great stirs he had with his brother Robert, who returning
from Jerusalem, where he was made King to possess England but missed of it:
and at length lost Normandy, together with his eyes, by his unnatural brother.
2. He Married Maud King Malcolmes daughter of Scotland, by her Mother Margaret
lineally descended from Edmund Ironside, to strengthen his title to the
Kingdom. 3. As his predecessors did, so he stoutly denies the Popes
incroachings, Curbs Anselme, that continued Romes agent, establishes the Laws
of Edward the Confessor, Holinshed.
and adds other convenient of his own. 4. Parliament, which he ordained
should consist of Three Estates, of which himself was the Head. Martin.
A great Bickering began in his time, between Canterbury and York, for
priority, which continued a long time after, till Canterbury carried it. And
Cardinal Cremensis the Popes Legate, sent hither to interdict Priests
Marriages, was taken in the Act with a common strumpet, which he excused, in
saying he was no Priest himself, but a corrector of them. 5. The drowning of
his son William, with diverse other Nobles, was repaired in some sort, by the
Marriage of Maud his Daughter, first with Henry the fifth Emperor of Germany,
and he dying without Issue, next with Jeffery Plantagenet Earl of Anjoy, by
whom she had Henry Fitz Empress Heir apparent to the Crown. But his
Grandfather dying unexpectedly, by eating of Lampresse, and he not upon the
place,

4. STEPHEN of Blois steps in; Adeliza daughter to the Conqueror, and holds
it. which was the cause of no small stirs, and bloodshed, especially it
being against his Oath, which he had taken with the Nobles, for the Empress
Mauds succession, and first brake it. The Bishops excused it, that it was for
the good of the Church, but Perjury promotes not Piety. 2. Less he could not
expect then continual oppositions from the Empress, and her son Henry, to
recover their right, wherein after various success and windings on either
side; At the Battle of Liucolne (notwithstanding his Herculian laying about him
with his slaughtering Axe) the King himself was taken Prisoner, Math. Paris.
which in likelihood might have ended the business. 3. But the Empress upon
this victory, carries her self so high, and disrespective, that she lost the
hearts of her party, so that Stephen was freed, and she forced to shift for her
self, from Oxford Castle in a great Snow, and other places. 4. Until her
son Henry comes with better provision. The Armies confronting one the other,
an agreement is made, especially by the earnest mediation of the Archbishop of
Canterbury. Stephen is to hold the Kingdom for his life, and Henry is
proclaimed his Heir apparent, which took the surer effect, in regard of the
drowning of Prince Eustace, Stephens son who might have been a block in the
way, and a shrewd suspicion there was (intimated some say by the Empress her
self) that Stephen had more interest in Henry, Holinsh.
then Jeffry Plantagenet. 5. What became afterward of the Empress may well
(says one) be made a Quere. But the King soon takes his leave of the World,
wanting nothing to rank him with the Eminents of his predecessors, but only a
good Title, which the Pope was feed to justify, but it could not stave off
Henry, from bringing in the next Dynasty.

2. With this Dynasty may be ranked. 1. The intolerable Insultations of the
Popes now in the Zenith of their Exaltations, upon the superstitious and missed
devotions of Christian Princes, which our Normans stooped not so much to, as
others. 2. The needless wranglings of Archbishop Anselme, with Rufus and Henry
the first, his Soveraigues, unbeseeming his Learning, which receives at this
day scandal by it. 3. These quarrels between Canterbury and York, for
priority, more befitting Women, and Duelists. then men of their Places and
Profession. Notwithstanding St Bernard may be well noted for an eminent
Preacher, though Abailardus Scholars say, it was all the Learning he had.
Lombard and Gratian must be acknowledged for Witty and painful men, and
Avicenna Averroes, and other Arabians, and Schoolmen for great Philosophers.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. The Laws of Edward the Confessor, were any way bettered by
those of the Conqueror? 2. The Kentish Gavelkind be not prejudicial to elder
brothers? 3. Harlot be a name of reproach, derived from the Conquerors Mother?
4. William Rufus in some sort might not be termed a Protestant? 5. See
Holiaesis in his life.
Parliaments had their first beginning from Henry the first? 6. His Dealing
with his brother Robert, were not unnaturally Tyrannical? 7. King Stephen
might not as Lawfully put by his Daughter, and Grandchild from the Crown, as
he did his Elder brother Robert?


Plantagenets Vndevided. DINASTY. V.
THE Normans thus expiring, give way to the fifth Dynasty of the Plantaginets.

This represents it self, 1. Before the division of the Houses of YORK and
LANCASTER. 2. After that division.


3. Before the division there run on evenly in an unquestionable Line, eight
Kings in this manner.

1. second called Fitz-Empresse, otherwise Shortmantle, who curbed the Clergy
at his first entrance, by seting on foot again his Grandfather Henry the
first's Laws. 2. He had great bickering with the Pope, and Thomas Becket, that
Traitor Saint, made by him Archbishop of Canterbury, but made away by Pickthank
Courtiers, who flew him (some relate as he was at Mass) for which the penitent
King Footed three miles afterward upon his bloody bare feet; to visit this
Idol shrine, and submitted himself futher to be breeched by the Orbilian
Monks, who bestowed eighty Lashes upon him. 3. His love to fair Rosamund whom
he Mewed up in Woodstock Labyrinth, wrought him much forrow, through the
Jealousy of his Queen, who at length there Poisoned her, leaving her to be
buried at Godstow near Oxford with this Epitaph. Hic jacet in Tumbo Rosa
mundi, non Rosa munda,
Non redolet, sed olet, quae redolere solet.
Rose Of, not To the world here Rosamund lies,
Sweet once she was, but now it is otherwise.


Her Well, a fair spring by the Manor of Woodstock continues there her name
at this day.

The King had two Sons by her, William Longsword, and Ieffery Archbishop of
York. 4. He subdued Ireland by occasion of Dermott Ningals falling off from
his Countrymen; appoints Judges of the Circuits in England. 5. Crowns his
Son Henry Copartner with him in the Kingdom, who not using his Father well,
and untimely dying, left Brethren too many to break the Old man's heart by their
opposition, of which

2. RICHARD the first, Cuer de Lion succeeds him. 1. Borne in Oxford; howsoever
odious at last to his Father, yet dutiful to his Mother, whom he freed from
12. years Imprisonment, when he came to the Crown. 2. Afterward goes to the
Holy Land, Conquers Cyprus, and becomes King of Jerusalem, which Title his
Father requested, by the Patriarch Heraclius had refused. In his absence the
emulation between William Longshampe Bishop of Elye left Viceroy, And John the
Kings Brother (who deservedly with others stormed at it) brought all things
into a Combustion; so that in these storms brake out the famous Out-lawes,
Robin Hood and Little John, of whom read Grafton. As also on William with the
Longbeard, a notable Imposter then deluded the credulous people. This man's
Valor an old Pees of theirs expresses. This King Richard I understand,
Yet he went out of England,
Let make an Axe for the Nones
Therewith to cleave the Sarasens bones.
The head in footh was wrought full we will,
Thereon ware twenty pound of steel.
And when he came in Cyprus land,
This ilkon Axe he took in hond.
3. His return cost him dear, by falling in to the hands of Leopold of
Austria, and Henry the sixth Emperor, his exasperated Enemies. 4. His Wife
Berengaria, the King of Navarres Daughter, was neglected by him at first, yet
afterward received, never had Issue by him. 5. A French Priest one Fulco told
him, that he had three Daughters, Pride, Covetuousnesse, and Lechery to be
bestowed abroad of him, to prevent Gods punishments. To whom he suddenly
replied, that the Templers and Hospitallers should have his Pride, the
Cistertian Monks his Covetuousnesse, and the rest of the Clergy his Lechery.
6. The Motto of DIEV ET MON DROIT is attributed to him, ascribing the Victory
he had at Gisors against the French, not to himself but to God, and his might.
He was death-wounded by a poisoned Arrow at the Seige of Chalons, by one
Bertrand Guerdon in revenge of his Father and Brethren whom the King had
slain, which Bertrand resolutely avowing before the King, the King pardoned
him. 7. At his Mothers intercession, he was reconciled before to his Younger
brother

3. Lackland. 1. The Faction of the Clergy cast the Crown upon him by
Election, whereas Arthur Plantagenet the son of his Elder brother Ieffery was
the right Heir, and stickled for it, by the French Kings abetting, till he
lost his life in the Quarrel. 2. The Clergy forsook him for opposing Pope
Innocent the third in Stephen Langtons preferment, to the Sea of Caterbury; and
sleighting the Monks and vexing them. 3. Their Combinations forced him (after
the Interdicting of the Realm for six years three months. and sixteen
days,) to render his Crown to Pandulphus the Popes Legate, and take it again
in Fee-Farme at the Rent of a Thousand Marks yearly; which exasperated his
Nobles against him, howsoever it warped the Pope and Clergy to be for him. 4.
His Bickering abroad with the French, and at home with his Barons, made his
Reign very Tragical, which ended at Swansted Abbey by Simon the Monks Poison
(as some say) and gave way to his son

4. third, who Crowned between nine or ten years Old, 1. Cleared this Realm
of the French, (who had Invaded it by the Popes interdiction) by William
Martial Earl of Pembroke his Protector. 2. Hubert De Burgo Earl of Kent did
him much good service, for which he had small recompense. 3. His immoderate and
exasperating favors cast on Strangers, drew on the Barons Wars, in which an
Insanum Parliamentum held at Oxford, appointed twelve Peers in prejudice of
his Regality. The Earls of Leicester and Gloucester are the greatest sticklers
in it; who took Prisoners the King, with his brother Richard King of the
Romans, and his son Prince Edward, in the Battle of Jews in Sussex. 4. He
confirms Magna Charta. The Earls fall at deadly fend between themselves,
Prince Edward tells the King of it, and joining with Gloucester Rights himself,
by the Ruin of Leicester in the Battle of Eversham in Worcestershire. 5.
London is threatened to be Burnt by the King, for taking the Barons part. 6.
Glocesters service failing of expected Favors, repines to no purpose, and
undertakes to go to the Holy Land, but shrinking; that enterprise is performed
by Prince Edward, and his Heroic Princess Elianor, who sucked out there the
poison of an invenomed wound given him, with the hazard of her own life,
whereby he recovered. He did there great service, until he was called back to
succeed his Father, that dyed after fifty six years Reign, by the Title of

5. EDWARD the first, commonly called Longshanks, Welsh with their Valiant
Prince Lewillin under the English Subjection. 2. Conquered Scotland, being at
Variance, who should be King, brought thence the Marble Chair, in which the
Scottish Kings were wont to be Crowned, spoken of before. 3. Hesleighted the
Popes Inhibition to forbear Scotland, and in the Parliament of Lincoln, under
the subscription of the Peers, utterly renounced Pope Boniface his Supreme
Authority. 4. He banished the Jews for their Exactions, and Censured the
Judges and Officers for their Corruptions. 5. Upon his Deathbed charged his
son to continue the Banishment of Pearce of Goveston, and to convey his Heart
to be buried in the Holy Land. 6. Of his sixteen Children which he had by two
Wives, Elianour of Spain, and Margaret of France.

6. second surnamed Carnarvan (the first English hereditary Prince of Wales)
succeeds him. 2. He against his Oath, calls Gaveston twice out of Banishment,
permits him to convey beyond the Seas his Jewels, with a Table and Tressels all
of Beaten Gold. 3. In place of Gaveston beheaded by the Nobles, he takes the
Spencers, Father and son to be his Favorites, worse (if it might be) then
Gaveston. 4. At Estreveline, and twice afterward, he received three notable
overthrowes by the Scotts, to the loss of all his Interest there, and the
Devastation of the Northern parts of his Kingdom. 5. Upon these preposterous
events, John Poydrus (an Exeter man) would needs prove the King a Changling,
and said himself was Long-shanks son; But his claim was quickly strangled
with an Halter. 6. To right these wrongs, the Barons by a Parliament get the
Spencers banished. The King recalls them, the Barons take Arms, receive a
great overthrow, and two and twenty of them are Behoaded. The Spencers the more
insult. 7. The Queen flies with the Prince into France, is deserted by her
bribed Brother the French King, and commanded to return by the Pope, finds
favor with Robert of Artois Earl of Henalt, and Sr John his brother, returns
by their help into England, is assisted by the Barons, takes the King and the
Spencers at Bristow. The Londoners behead Walter Stapleton Bishop of Exeter for
withstanding the Queens proceedings: The Spencers are executed, the King is
Deposed in Parliament, sent to Killingworth as Prisoner, and thence to Barkly
Castle, where he was barbarously Spitted to Death, leaving his son

7. third, (otherwise calied Edward of Windsor) to govern better. 1. He
surprised Mortimer the Minion of his mother, and Executed him at Tyburne, who
had by his pernicious plotting, caused King Edward the second to be made away
by an Amphibologie. Edvardum occidere nolite timere bonum est,
To shed King Edwards blood
Refuse to fear I hold it good.
And the Scottish Ragman to be redelivered in the Nonage of this King, whereby
the English laid claim to Scotland, together with their Black Cross, so that
the People cried out Vae pueris terrae, saepissime sunt ubi guerrae.
Woe to the Land where Rulers age.
Is not mature to stop men's rage.
2. Notwithstanding the King repaired this afterward by the overthrow of the
Scotts at Hallidowne Hill, which wiped off their contumelious Rhyme made upon
their Victory over the English in his Fathers days, being this Long Beards
heartlesse,
Painted Hoods witless,
Gray Coats graceless,
Make England thriftlesse,
And also in taking their King David the valiant Bruces son Prisoner at
Nevils Cross, in his absence in France by the Queen, and placing in Edward
Balioll to be King. 3. Against the French, by himself and this Valiant son
Edward the Black Prince, He obtained eminent Victories at Cressay and Poycters;
In the last of which their King John was taken and brought into England. 4. He
Founded the Order of the Garter, first quartered his Arms with France. In his
old age was much abused by a Strumpet Alice Pears. 5. After he had seen the
death of his Victorious son Edward the Black Prince, he died peaceably at
Sheene in Surry, leaving to succeed him his Grandchild, the Black Princes son

8. RICHARD the second. 1. Michael De La Poole, and other Syeophants, incurres
the hatred of his People. John Wall Priest, Watt Tylor, lack Sraw, and Jack
Shepherd, raise a Rebellion against him, which happily was quieted by the Mayor
of London's, William Walworths mortal blow, given Watt Tylor. 2. Thirteen
Commissioners were appointed to see matters reformed, but it came to nothing.
3. An Invasion of French with twelve hundred Ships under Sail against England,
by Gods providence were utterly scattered. John of Gaunt his Uncle, Warreth
successively in Spain, and himself in Scotland. 4. He continues his hatred
against his Nobles, executes diverse of them, Banisheth his Cosen Henry of
Bullingbrook, for his freedom to have things reformed; In his absence se^zeth
upon his whole estate. Bullingbrook returns when the King was in Ireland. The
People flock to him. The King resignes his Crown to him, is committed to
Pomfred Castle, there assaulted by eight Assassines, valiantly kills four of
them and so is slain himself.

2. WIthin compass of this Section are remarkable, 1. The strange Usurpation
of Popes to make good, or disanull the Titles of Kings, and Demising of
Kingdoms to Farm. 2. The bringing in of Auricular Confession, and
Transubstantiation, not for informing, but infatuating Gods People. 3. The
persecutions of the poor Waldenses, not for detestation of their Tenants
(which they labored not to examine,) but out of a Jealousy, lest these men's
plain dealing should discover their drifts, and mar their Ma^kets. 4. The
protestations of Wicliff, and his followers, against the gross Superstition
brought in by Monks and Friars, in Doctrine and Discipline, notably scourged
by Ieffery Chaucer the Learned and Famous Poet of those times, 5. Lastly upon
remissness in Government, and neglect of execution of Justice, the breaking
out of such Out-Lawes, as were Robin Hood and Little John, with their Comrades,
or starting up of such Impostors and Villains, as were, 1. William Longbeard
under Richard the first, a sharp reprover of Vice and Disorders in the Common
Wealth. Himself at last being found to be a Murderer, that had fleaed a man,
and a Whoremaster that had used his Concubine in a Church, and a Witch that
worshipped at home a familiar in form of a Catt. 2. John Poydras a Tanners
son of Exeter, that stood upon it that Edward the second was a Changling
substituted in his Cradle for him, who was the right Heir to the Crown. 3.
John Wall a Priest. 4. Wat Tyler, 5. Jack Straw. 6. Jach Shepherd, with 7.
William Lister their Captain, would make all Leveli without distinction of
King or Subject, Master or Servant.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. Henry the second consented to the Murder of Thomas Becket
Archbishop of Canterbury? 2. The cause he suffered for, were pertinent to saint
him? 3. Expiatory Penance enjoined for that murder, were fit for a Priest to
propose or a King to undergo? 4. King John could forfeit his Kingdom to the
Pope, or the Pope let it to Farm? 5. He were poisoned by a Monk or dyed
otherwise? 6. Queen Isabell were not more to blame for prosecuting her Husband
Edward the second, then the King was for sticking so close to Gaveston? 7. King
Richard the second were starved to death, or barbarously Butchered by St Piers
of Exton?


Lancastrians. DYNAST. V. SECT. II.
THus far the Plantagenets have continued in an unquestionable right line;
Now follows the division of the Houses of Lancester, and York, three of each
succeeding in their order. Of Lancaster we have

1. fourth surnamed Bullinbrooke. 1. This man backed his usurpation of the
Crown by Parliament, Wherein John the Religious, Learned, and resolute Bishop
of Carlisle openly contradicted, but could not be heard: whereupon the Duke of
Anmerle his Cosen, Then the Percyes joining with the Scots, and French,
together with Owen Glendore and his Welsh, make a strong head against him. 3.
But in the Battle of Shrewsbury, Henry Hotspurre is slain outright, Douglas
the valiant Scot taken, but released without ransom; The Earl of Worcester
beheaded, Owen Glendore pursued by the Prince into Wales, and famished there in
the Woods. 4. The like success he had, in discovering and suppressing the
Earl of Northumberlands Rebellion, with some Nobles, and the Scots his
Accomplices. 5. Intending a voyage into the Holy Land, he is arrested by an
Apoplexy, acknowledged to his son (who had seized upon his Crown upon
supposall he was dead) the little right he had to its and so by his Death
leaves it to his eldest son,

2. Monmoth. 1. At his first entrance, he cashiered all his dissolute
companions that followed him when he was Prince: Reformes abuses in the
Commonwealth, grows upon the Clergy, but was Politiquely diverted by Henry
Chichesly Archbishop of Canterbury, to employ his forces for the recovering of
his Title to France. 2. Upon which he enters (having cut off Richard Earl of
Cambridge, brother to the Duke of York, who by Treason would have prevented
it) takes Harflew, gave the French with the odds of about six to one, an
admirable overthrow at Agencourt, where more Prisoners were taken, then their
surprisers, whose throats were cut upon an after Alarm by Robinet of Bonvill.
3. In a Sea Fight before Harflew the French had another extraordinary
overthrow. 4. He subdues all Normandy, and takes Cane and Roane. 5. The Dolphin
of France, being in disgrace by rifling his Mothers treasure, and murdering
John the young Duke of Burgoyne; an agreement is made that Henry should marry
Katharine the Kings Daughter of France, and so succeed him in the Kingdom. 6.
This was Proclaimed and Performed accordingly: He keeps his Court at Paris, as
Regent, with incomparable Magnificence; Returns with his Queen into England,
who is delivered of a Son at Windsor, upon which he is said to have spoken
Prophetically, I Henry of Monmoth shall remain but a short time, and gain
much, but Henry of Windsor shall Reign long and loose all. 7. In his return
into France. to rescue his friend Philip Duke of Burgoyne, he sickneth and dies
at Bloys, leaving his Son to succeed him, but of nine Months old.

3. HENRY the sixth of Winsor. 1. Protector was Humphrey Duke of Gloucester.
Regent in France, John Duke of Bedford. Manager of many weighty businesses at
home, Thomas Duke of Exeter, his three Uncles. 2. All went well in Erance (of
which he was Crowned King in Paris) until the Seige of Orleance, where Ioane
the Sheapherdesse of Lorraine, put in with her devices, which wrought much
mischief, but at length she was taken and executed. 3. Mountecute the valiant
Earl of Salisbury, and the Lord Talbot failing, all things in France went to
wrack till all was lost. 4. Humphrey Duke of Glocesters murder, the Kings
Marriage with Margaret (poor King Rayners daughter of Scicily) with the
Rebellion of Blewbeard and Jack Cade, weaken the affairs at home. 4. Richard
Duke of York sets on foot his Title to the Crown; got it by Parliament, so
far forth as to be Heir apparent to Henry, who was taken Prisoner in the
Battle at St Albone, but in prosecution of that business he lost his life,
with his Sons, young Rutland. 5. Notwithstanding at length Edward, Richards
Son, the right Heir, overthrew the King in Towton field, and so recovered
his Due.

2. FAlling in with these times may be observed. 1. That as Popes had deposed
Kings, now the Counsels of Constance and Basil deposed Popes, and set other
in their places, without the suffrages of Cardinalis. 2. The perfidious dealing
with John Husse, and Hierome of Prague, which the Bohemians then complained of;
and yet sticks to Rome as an indelible Character of Antichristian cruelty. 3.
The success of usurpations, which as most commonly they are undertaken, with
treacherous cruelty, so ever they are attended with Repinings, Insurrections,
Massacres, and ending always in shame and confusion.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. Henry the fourth for Policy, Henry the fifth for Valor, Henry
the sixth for Sanctity, exceeded most of their Predecessors? 2. Those may be
justly censured for Traitors that take up Arms against a manifest V. surper?
3. Henry the fourth, repented on his Deathbed, the wrong usurping of the
Crown? 4. Henry the fift's dissoluteness in his youth, experienced him the
better to govern? 5. King Henry the sixth, were a better Christian then King?
6. His Queens violentstirring, did not rather hurt then further his cause? 7.
Joan of Orleance, were no other but as Magdalene, Blewbeard, and Jack Cade
amongst us, a cheating Impostrix?


The House of York. DYNAST. V. SECT. III.
THE three of the House of Lancaster having thus Acted more then their parts,
three other of the House of York succeed upon a better Title, of whom the
first was

1. fourth. 1. He by main Valor overthrew Queen Margaret and her Partisans
that opposed his Title. 2. But by sudden Marriage at home with the Lady Gray a
Widow, when he had engaged himself by the Earl of Warwick to the Lady Bona
of France; he exasperated Warwick against him, who with much bloodshed at
length, Vn^rownes him, and restores Henry again yet living. 3. Edward by the
Duke of Burgoyne recollects himself, and with the help of his Brethren Richard
of Gloucester, and George of Clarence, (who formerly had taken part with
Warwick) overthrowes Warwick with his Accomplices, and kills him in Bornet
Fields, Imprisoneth King Henry again in the Tower, where he is Murdered, most
say by the Duke of Gloucester; as his son Prince Edward was afterward at
Tewxbury, where the House of Lancaster had the last overthrow. In those
catching times, a Jest of one Burdet a Mercer in Cheapside, telling his son
if he would ply his book, he should be heir to the Crown, (meaning his own
house that had that Sign) cost him his life. 4. He sets on foot his Title to
France, enters upon it with an Army, but comes to Composition, represses the
Scottish incursions by Gloucester his Brother, and brings them to such Terms
as he liked. 5. George Duke of Clarence his brother clapped into the Tower (some
say) for Treason, others from a Dream the King had, that one whose name began
with G^should ruin him and his posterity, was shortly after found drowned in a
Butt of Malmesey. The King sickneth upon this, (and it is thought) hastened to
his end by the same hand, and leaving the Crown to his son

2. EDWARD the fifth, thirteen coming from Ludlow to London to be Crowned,
was Traitorously seized on by his perfidious Uncle, the Duke of Gloucester, the
Duke of Buckingham, and the Lord Hastings. 2. Gloucester gets himself to be
Protector, and under pretense of safe Custody, mewes up the King with his
younger Brother Richard in the Tower, procures himself to be Proclaimed King
by the name of

3. RICHARD the third. 1. League with the French, was deservedly rejected for
his Villainies. 2. By means of Sr James Terrill, Forest, and Dighton, King
Edward the fifth with his brother Richard, were Smothered in the Tower between
two Featherbeds. 3. The Bishop of Elie Doctor Morton put the Duke of Buckingham
upon the Plott of unkinging Richard, and setting the Crown on Henry of
Richmond, then beyond the Seas: who to make good his Title, should Marry with
the Princess Elizabeth King Edwards Eldest Daughter. 4. Buckingham loses his
life in the pursuit, Morton escapes to animate Henry, in the prosecution. 5.
Richard plotted by corruption to have Henry made away, but to no purpose. His
Queen Anne dies suddenly, to make way for his plotted Incestuous Marriage,
with Elizabeth his Niece. 6. Henry of Richmond Lands at Milford Haven, the
Welchmen and others flock unto him. 7. Henry and Richard meet at Bosworth
Field, where the Tyrant (after desperate Valor shown) is slain by Henry his
Corrivall. How odious his Tyranny was to all, appears somewhat by these Rimes
made against his Partakers. The Ratt, the Catt, and Lovell the Dog,
Rule all England under the Hog,
And Lockey of Norfolk be not too bold
For Dickon thy Master is bought and sold.
This put an end to the bloody contentions between York and Lancaster. In
which were Fought here in England, ten set Battles, five in Henry the sixth
days. The Battle first of St Albones, 2. Black Heath, 3. Northampton, 4.
Wakefield, 5. Tawton, and so many more in the Reign of King Edward the fourth,
1. Exham, 2. Banbury, 3. The Battle of Loosecoats. 4. Barnetfield, 5.
Tewxbury, besides this concluding Bettle at Bosworth, which put a period to the
Reign of the Plantagenets.

2. COoncurrant with this Dynasty, were 1. the continued persecution of the
Waldenses, and Hussites, which here in England had their share under the name
of Lollards. 2. The Deposing by the Pope of George Pogeibracius King of
Hungary, for Favoring them. 3. The base and blasphemous Rosary of the
Dominican Friars, set on foot by Alanus de Rupe, who swear that the blessed
Virgin was Married unto him, who^ he makes a Midwife, and a Gossip, to one
Lucia, calling her son Marianus, which being worthyly inveighed against, by
our Mr Fox in his Martyrology, out of an old Manuscript, yet has of late been
set forth again (with more trash of the same sink) expressed with artificial
Pictures, and Dedicated to the Princes Isabella Clara Eugenia. 4. With these
notwithstanding contemporize, the never to be forgotten, Scourgers of the
Turks, John and Matthew Huniades, with the renowned Scanderbeg, and nearer
home. 5. the French maintainers of the Pragmaticall sanction, and our Fortescue
a great Assertor of our Laws with others.

INQVIRES.
2. Whether. 1. Edward the fourth be more to be commended for his Vabour, then
censured for his Lascivious Vanities? 2. His Death were hastened by finister
means? 3. Burdet of Cheapside had not hard measure to be hanged for a lest,
concerning his Sign of the Crown, which had no relation to the Crown of the
Kingdom? 4. Edward the fifth were Smothered in the Tower, or dyed of grief
and sickness. 5. Perkin Warbeck were a Counterfeit or really Richard Duke of
York conveyed out of the Tower? 6. It were likely that Richard the third had
His is Arm withered by the Witchcrafts, of the Queen Mother, and Jane Shore?
7. The horrid Crimes, and deformities he is charged with, were rather forged by
Malevolents, then proved?


The Tudors. DYNAST. VI.
THe fourteen Plantagenets thus expiring with Richard the third. Five Tudors
take their turns in this manner.

1. Elizabeth the eldest daughter of Edward the fourth, unites both the Houses
of York and Lancaster. 2. He was much vexed by Lambert Simnell, and Ferkin
Warbeck, two counterfeits, set up by Margaret Duchess of Burgoyne King Edward
the fourths fister, but wisely and valiantly he quitted himself of them. 3.
The Cornish Rebels under Michaell Joseph, and Thomas Flammoch made a great
head against him, distressed Exceter and Tanton, but in the end, were
overthrown at Blackheath in Kent. 4. His cruelty in executing the harmless
Earl of Warwick cannot be excused. 5. The King and Queen of Castile driven
into Waymouth by a storm, were entertained Nobly by Sir Thomas Trenchard, and
afterward by the King, with great Pomp. 6. His eldest son Arthur married
Katharine, Ferdinando's daughter of Arragon, and dies not long after. 7. The
King executes Penal Laws, to the great grievance of the Subjects, by Empson
and Dudley, which at his death he repents of. 8. He was buried in the stately
Chapel he built at Westminster, where most of his successors lie. His Son

2. eight succeeds. 1. Marries his brother Arthurs wife Katharine, by a
dispensation from the Pope. 2. He had Wars with the French and Scotts, who
received a shameful overthrow by the Earl of Surrie, in Flodden ^eild, with
the death of their King, while our King was in France, where the Emperor
Maximilian was in his pay, with this Motto ICH DEIN, I serve. 3. His favorites
Cardinal Wolsey, and Thomas Cromwell, after much honor, were at length cut
off by him. 4. Exceptions were taken against his Marriage, with his brothers
Wife, and the Popes dallying with him in the business, lost him his Supremacy,
and Bishop Fisher, and Sir Thomas Moore for standing for it, lost their Heads.
5. The Rebellions against him of Captain Cobbler, and the Pilgrims under
pretense of Religion, were quickly appeased. 5. He is blamed for his change of
Wives. Was the first that wrote himself King of Ireland: set out a book against
Martin Luther, and gained the title of Defender of the Faith. He grew in his
latter time to be very harsh and bloody. Dying he left to succeed him his son,

3. EDWARD the Sixth, Jane Seymour, who lost her own life in his Birth, to
preserve her Sons. 1. He being Crowned in the 11th year of his Age, had for
Protector his Uncle Edward Seymour Duke of Somerset. 2. The Scots breaking
their promise for the Marriage of the young Queen with King Edward, received a
great overthrow at Muskleborough. 3. Three Rebellions against him, The first
from Cornwall and Devonshire, by Humphrey Arundell, and some Popish Priests and
seduced Gentlemen, whom he distressed at Exceter, The second in the North, by
Ombler a yeoman, and Dale a Parish Clearke, for Religion, The third by Kett the
Tanner of Norwich, with his Accomplices, for Enclosures; were successively
extinguished by his worthy Chiefetaines. 4. He excellently purged the Church
from Popish Superstition, and settled the true Service of God, and Preaching of
his word. 5. The unlucky dissentions of his two Uncles, the Lord Protector and
his brother Thomas Lord Admiral, arising from the siding of their Wives, who
should take Place, was the Breakneck of both of of them: Thomas suffered for
Treason, the Protector for Felony. Upon which the Kings Death soon follows;
leaving by his will the Lady Jane, (the Duke of Suffolkes daughter) to succeed
him: but it prevailed not against the Title of his Sister,

4. Norfolk men. 1. Beheaded the Lady Jane with her Husband Gilford Dudly, and
Abettors. 2. Upon her resolution to Marry with Philip of Spain, Sir Thomas
Wiat dangerously Rebels, under pretense to oppose it, and enters London as
far as Ludgate, but was at last taken, and executed. 3. The Lady Elizabeth is
accused, as accessory to Wiats Insurrection, thereupon is committed to the
Tower, afterward removed to Woodstock, but at length enlarged by the
unexpected favor of King Philip. 4. Who prosecutes the Quarrels between
England and France, takes St Quintins. The French recover themselves, and get
Callice, which stuck in the heart of Q. Mary, and with some other disasters,
cast her into a mortal Melancholy. 5. She was ridiculously reported to have
been with Child, and some triumphing there was at home and abroad for her
deliverance, But it was but a Popish invention. 6. Cardinal Poole was recalled
and made Archbishop of Canterbury. Her brothers Reformation which abrogated the
Popes Supremacy, she restored, with the rest of that annexed Idolatry. 7.
Gardener of Winchester, and Bonner of London play the Butchers, upon the
Professors of the Gospel. Archbishop Cranmer, with the Bishops of Worcester
and London, Latimer and Ridley were burnt at Oxford, with others of all sorts
and conditions otherwhere. 8. The Duchess of Suffolk miserably flying to save
her life. To all which Troubles and Persecutions, the Queens death after five
years Reign set a Period, and the most happy succession of her Sister.

5. Marry never consented. 1. She banished all Popish Idolatry, and restored
the Purity of Religion. 2. Pope Pius the fifth, deprived her by his Bull, fixed
to the Bishop of Londons Gate, by desperate Felton, but it proved but a Calfe.
3. The Insurr^ctions thereupon, of the Earls of Northumberland, and
Westmoreland ended with the Ruins of the Rebels, as also infinite plots
against her Person and State had the same Issue. See B. Carletons desc^ption of
them in a Table.
4. Her protecting of the Low Countries, overthrow of the Invincible Armado of
the Spaniards, in the Sea fight of 1588. Aiding Henry the fourth of France, to
settle him in his Kingdom; Quelling the Irish Rebels, and such eminent
Achievements, renowned her throughout all the World; insomuch as the Proud
Turk by an honorable Embassage acknowledged her Excellency, and desited her
friendship. 5. For her merciful returning home certain Italians, that were
taken Prisoners in the 88 Jnvasion, she was termed St Elizabeth by some at
Venice, whereof one told the Lord Carleton (afterward Vicount Dorchester) being
there Ambassador, that although he were a Papist, yet he would never pray to
any other Saint, but that Saint Elizabeth.

2. WIthin the Compass of this Government, may be observed. 1. The
Protestations of Christian Divines and Princes against Romes Tyranny, Errors,
Idolatry, Cheatings, and Delusions, of which a necessary Reformation was began,
and prosecuted. 2. The Politic Plotts and combustions in the Council of
Trent to interrupt and frastrate it. 3. The censures, Treasons, and Massacres,
inflicted upon them that any way stood for it. 4. In the mean while brave
Huniades and Scanderbeg purchase immortal Glory, in their Heroical exploits
against the Turk, Columbus, and Americus Vesputius for discovering, Cortez and
Pizarro, for Conquest of the West Indies. Our Sir Francis Drake, and Mr Thomas
Candish for compassing the Globe of the world. 5. But the chiefest thing of all
was the cutting of the Comb of the Popes Supremacy, so that it may be said. As
King Henry the seventh Courted him, King Henry the eight Unhorsed him: King
Edward the sixth Banished him, Queen Mary indeed recalled him, and with some
hot Waters revived him, so the Heroic Queen Elizabeth set him packing again,
And her Learned successor King James has so stabbed and branded him with his
Pen, that his Son our Sacred King CHARLES, is too well Catechized, and
thoroughly grounded, for permitting him to have any settling here, or countenance
hereafter. To these times are referred the famous Sea Fight of Lepanto, and 88.
wherein Turk and Pope felt Gods hand against them.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether 1. Henry the seavenths surest claim to the Crown, were from his
Queen Elizabeth the eldest daughter of Edward the fourth? 2. The executing of
Edward Plantagenet the young harmless Earl of Warwick, ill became a
Statist, that professed Christiaenity? 3. Henry the eight, proved a better
Defender of the Faith, by rejecting the Popes Supremacy, then retaining it? 4.
Edward the sixt's Reformation, be free from the most and greatest exceptions,
that Novelists have made against it? 5. The Martyring of Protestants in Queen
Mary's days, were not rather through the blondinesse of some Praelates, then
out of her own disposition? 6. There were ground to suspect, that Queen
Elizabeth ever conspired against her Sister? 7. Her passing the Statute of
improvement, has not conduced more to the benefit of the Church and
Universities, then the Benificence of many of the chiefest Founders put
together?


The Stuarts. DYNAST. VII.
THE Tudors breathing out their last Excellent in Elizabeth, STUARTS take their
turn by an Unquestionable Title, as Lineally descended from Margaret the
eldest Daughter of Henry the seventh, of these we have enjoyed

1. JAMES the first of England, but sixth of Scotland, Rex Pacificus. 1. He
attained the Crown without the least Contradiction, but greatest applause of
all. 2. For his Constancy, and admirable Ability, in maintaing the Truth of the
Gospel against Popery, Two Treasons were Plotted against Him, that of the
Priests, Watson and Clarke, with others misled by them, and that Prodigious
Project of the GVNPOWDER VILLAINY. Pope Clement the eight had formerly charged
his Cronies here in England by a Bull, not to admit Him King, without a
Toleration first obtained; But God be praised it lay not in his Holiness
disposing. 3. His exquisite Learning, and exact Judgment in Divinity, was
eminently apparent; in the Conference at Hampton Court; in his Public
Disputations in the Universities, and interposiing his Censure in the
weightiest Matters; And last of all, in his excellent Works set forth to the
view of the World in one Volume. 4. Now as these admirable Parts of his, were a
Curb to the Schismatic humors at Home, so his Advice and Aid, availed
especially in composing differences abroad amongst the Reformed Churches. To
this end He sent certain Select and Worthy Divines to the Synod of Dort, and
his Letters to others; whereby the world might witness, how truly he stuck to
his Motto REX PACIFICVS. He caused the Bible to be Translated into English by
Select Devines, and set forth more exactly then formerly it had been done. 5.
And so this blessed Peacemaker, when He had Peaceably Reigned Twenty two Years
and upward, in Peace departed in his Bed, leaving his Peaceable Reign and
Virtues to his SON.

2. CHARLES the first, whom God of his Infinite mercy preserve to Reign long
over us, etc.

2. MEmorable things in King James' time serioussy to be commendad to
Posterity* are 1. The Translation of the Holy Scripture into English, more
accurately then it had been formerly performed. 2. The Conference at Hampton
Court for the examining and settling Church Discipline against nibbling
Sectaries. 3. His sending Divines to the Council of Dort, and interposing for
upholding Truth and Virtue against Innovators abroad. 4. His quelling the Popes
utmost forces drawn up by the Jesuits, in point of Supremacy, so that since
that defeat, we have little heard of it. 5. The setting forth of his Works
concerning matters of Divinity and State, and sending them to be Libraried in
both his Universities, the like cannot be showed of any Prince whatsoever. 5.
His enlarging the Privileges of the Universities, by granting them Burges in
Parliament, and Augmenting the Professors places in Divinity, Law, and Physic,
with ample and magnificent Additions. 6. His miraculous discovery of the Popish
Powderploet. And thereupon the contriving of the Oath of Allegiance, to
discover truehearted Romanists from Traitors, and setting a day apart for
solemnizing the remembrance of so admirable a Deliverance. 7. Lastly in his
time brake out that desolating Germane War, which he endeavored to prevent,
but God has reserved to himself wholly to extinguish, for which and the like
pacifications all true Christians are bound to PRAY.

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether. 1. Parsons, Doleman against King James' Title to the Crown of
England, were not as ridiculous, as perfidious? 2. Learning ever more
flourished in these Kingdoms, then in King James' and Queen Elizabeth's
days? 3. The like Library can be shown, to that Erected by the Famous Sr
Thomas Bodley, in the University of OXFORD, throughout the World? 4 The
Beneficence of Sr Henry Savill for Mathematique Professors, or Mr William
Cambden Clarentius for History, or Sr John Sedley, and Dr White for Philosophy,
and of other for other Faculties, have not exceeded the Liberality of most
former times? 5. The Building in these times for private or public Uses, have
not equalized or outvied the Magnificence of former Ages? 6. Discoveries,
Plantations, and Trades abroad, were ever more frequent or better Thrived? 7.
Any Nation have proved more ungratfull for such Multiplied Blessings then this
of Ours, for which especially, we now justly Suffer?


Concerning History of Professions, As also, Natural, Various, and Vain
Narrations.
1. FRom the Histories of Successions in States or Families, there will be an
easy descent to the Histories of Professions, Designing the Famous men in all
kind of Faculties.

2. Wherein a brief may be taken of the Lives and Works of 1. PHILOLOGISTS.
2. HISTORIANS. 3. MATHEMATICIANS. 4. PHILOSOPHERS. 5. PHYSICIANS. 6. LAWYERS.
7. DIVINES.


3. These make up the Seven courses of the Encyclopaedia, so much aimed at by
roaving Wits, which catch at all, and take nothing, in regard they fix not
upon one certain Study, and make not the rest subservient unto it.

4. PHILOLOGY takes up in its walk. 1. Grammar. 2. Rhetorique. 3. P^etry. 4.
Logic. 5. Anagnosticke, or the method of reading Authors profitably. 6.
Critiques, See Polanus de legendi^ Authoribus cum fructu. Alsted Encyclop.
Vossius de Historicis.
corrective, and directive. 7. Didactiques, or the Art of teaching others with
facility, which we have learned by great industry.

5. In HISTORY, the Lives of the Ancient and Modern Writers, may be looked
after in that particular especially we desire to be informed of, which is
observed by diverse of our Chroniclers, more fully by Mr Isaacson, and Sir
Richard Baker.

6. For MATHEMATIQUES, the Lives of 1. Arithmeticians. 2. Geometricians. 3.
Perspectivists. 4. Astronomers. 5. Geographers. 6. Architectonists, or
Builders. 7. And M^sitians, will yield matter to work upon. And so

7. In PHILOSOPHY (as it is termed) those that have written 1. Metaphysics. 2.
Pneumatology or the doctrine of Spirits. 3. Physics. 4. Ethics. 5.
Oeconomiques. 6. Politiques. 7. Thaumaturgicks, in working strange conclusions,
are almost innumerable, and therefore require the more painful search. After
which among

8. The Physicians, See Zacutu^ Lucitan.
He that gathers the Histories of the 1. Latins. 2. Greeks. 3. Arabians,
and Jews. 4. Paracelsians. 5. Galeno-chymicks. 6. Prophylacticks, and 7.
Empericks, shall find more to do perchance then he expected. As also in the
throng of

9. LAWYERS that have written concerning 1. Lawgivers and Laws in general. 2.
Then distinctly, of the Law of Nature. 3. Nations. 4. Of the Laws of the
Hebrews. Melchior Adamus.
5. Of Civil. 6. Canon. And our 7. Municipall Laws, great judgment will be
required, upon representation of so many in History, to pitch upon the best to
follow.

10. Lastly DIYINITY requires a larger scope: for the History of 1. Natural.
2. Chatecheticall. 3. Exegeticall in Commentators. 4. Polemicall, in all sorts
of Controversies: 5. Syneideticall for cases of Conscience. 6. Prophetical
concerning Preaching. And 7. Guberneticall, Divinity for settling of Church
Government. either of which, are distinctly handled by Authors of great
Learning, and Piety, that worthily deserve to be Registered by them who intend
to receive directions from them. neither are the 1. Glossators. 2.
Postillators, 3. Sententiaries, 4. Summists, 5. Cabalists, 6. Dictionarists,
(...). Heb. 5.14. Ier. 15.19.
7. Or Conciliators wholly to be rejected, especially of those, who have
exercised senses, to separate the precious from the vile, and (as one said) to
gather Gold out of Enniu's dross. Amongst all which the History of the 1.
Pelagians, 2. Donatists, 3. Anabaptists, 4. Waldenses, 5. Bannians, 6. That of
the Tridentine Council, And 7. Thhose of diverse Subjects set forth by
Hospinian in seven volumes, are worthy of especial perusal.

1. See the Catalogue of Sir Francis Bacon L. Verulam, and Vicount of S.
Albons, proposing no less then 130 particulars in this kind. Gerards and
Perkinsous Herballs etc. Gesner, Aldrovandus, Topsell, etc. Laurentius,
Spegelius, Grooke, etc.
THe Fifth sort of History (which by Pliny in termed NATURAL, describes 1.
The Heavens with the fixed Stars and Planets, the Eclipses, New stars, or
any other changes that have happened in them. 2. The Elements, Fire, Air, Water,
Earth, with the strange alterations and contingencies in them. 3. The Mete^rs,
with their fearful Storms, Apparitions, and Prodigies, recorded in all Ages.
4. The Inanimate treasures in this inferior Globe, made up of Earth and Water,
as Precious stones, Mettalls, Mineralls, etc. 5. The Vegetant or Growing
Creatures, as Herbs, Shrubbs, Trees. 6. The Sensible, that have motion
annexed, as Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, 7. And last of all, the rare structure of
Man's Body, peculiarly called Anotomy. All which are comprised in the Hexameron
or sixth days Work, under the Titles of Heaven and Earth, and Sea, and all
that is therein. For contemplation of which (that should mount our souls to
the Admiration and Celebration of the Omnipotent Creator, and preserver of
them) one Day is set a side of seven, to be employed especially in the study
of this Grand History.

2. In a VARIOUS HISTORY no other Method is to be expected, but the noting of
the time and place as things come to hand: In this kind may be taken,
Aristotle's wonderful relations: Aelians various History: Valerius Maximus
Memorialls: Hackluits Navigations: Mr Purchases Pilgrims: Wolfius M^morialls:
Pancerollahs Nova reperta, and vetera amissa, John Latius of the West Indies,
etc. Gallobelgicus News, and all the rest of the Mercuries and Journals that
daily multiply in the same strain, last of all

3. ROMANCE'S or the Bastard sort of Histories, may be noted not for any great
uses in them, See S. Augutine confess. l. 1. c 23. ^ossivine Icsuit Biblioth.
select l. 16.. 4. c. 3.
but for manifold abuses by them, 1. In wasting precious time which might be
better employed, 2. In stuffing the Fancy and Memory with ridiculous
Chimerah's, and wandering Imaginations, to the excluding or stifling of more
serious and profitable meditations, 3. For transporting and deluding the
affections, with languishing Love, impossible attempts and victories,
stupendous enchantments, wherewith the weak Reader is often so taken, that he
makes himself (as it were) a Party in the business, and rejoices or is
sorry, as matters are brought to succeed according to his Fancy, or otherwise.

4. Such Brats of Invention, and Spawne of Idle hours, are well most found to
be, either. 1. Rude, or 2. Endless, 3. or Depraved, 4. or Superstitious, or
else, 5. Moral, 6. Political, or 7. Satyricall.

5. Rude, those may be reckoned, which neither favor of Ingenuity, Language,
or Invention, as that of Huon of Bordeaux, Valentine and Orson, Arthur of
Little Britain, Fortunatus, seven wise Masters, four sons of Am^n, Mervin
Gerilion of England, Bellianis of Greece, and others not worth the naming.

6. Endless may be accounted Amades de Gaul, Palmerin, and Primalion of
Greece, the Mirror of Knighthood, with the like, which though they may have
some taking incitements to Nobleness and Valor, yet continuing boundless, by
Conjuring up new Spirits, they lead the Reader like an Ignis Fatuus into an
endless maze, and leave him at length in a Quagmire.

7. To the Tattle of depraved Romances belong such Pieces as we have of King
Arthur, Camden. Mills. Heylin in his Geog.
and his Knights of the Round Table, Guy of Warwick Bevis of Southampton, to
which may be added Father Turpins Rolando or Orlando, Sr William Wallis of
Scotland and the like. Who although they were truly Famous in their times, and
deserved an Homer or Virgill to set them forth, yet falling into the hands of
Illiterate, and sorded Monks, their Stories are so depraved, that the Persons
are made ridiculous. And

8. Metaphrastes Lippoman. Melchior. Canus.
What should we call the Legends of Abdias Babilonius, James de Voragine, and
our John Capgrave; to omit infinite others, but superstitious Romances, of
whose impudency, and doltish forgery, their own men complain, yet Dominus
opus habet. Popery must have such props to uphold its policy, and hoodwinke the
vulgar, and therefore the like Wares are at this day set forth to sale by
Ribadineira, Thenaft, Messengham Yangas, and our Miracle-mongers in English,
where the stuff is the same, though the dress be neater, the cuts more
artificial, and a new gloss set upon it. In a different way from these,

9. The wandering Knights, Spencers Fairy Queen, Sir Philip Sydnies Arcadia
with other pieces of the like strain may pass with singular Commendations for
moral Romances, being nothing else but Poetical Ethics, that with apt
contrivance, and winning Language, inform Morality. In which sense Heliodorus
Aethiopicall History, and Achilles Statiu's his Clitophon and Licippe, were had
in esteem among diverse of the Ancients, And Horace tells us that Homer in his
Iliads and Odysses, under those stories of Achilles and Ulysses. -- Quid sit
pulchrum, quid turpe, quid utile, quid non,
Before, and melius Chrysippo and Crantore dicit.
Informs us better for our complete behavior, then Chrysippus or Crantor, or
the exquisite Athenian Philosophers.

10. To Romances that point at Policy. Xenophons Cyropaedia, Sir Thomas Moors
Vtopia, Lord Verulams Atlantis, Barkley's Argenis, and Euphormio. The Vocal
Forest, Raynard the Fox, diverse passages in Chaucer, and many other in the
same kind may be referred. The vanity especially of the four first kinds is
wittily scourged by the

11. Satyricall Romances of Don Quicshot, Lazarillo de Tormes, Gusman,
Pantagruell, Don Diego's visit of the Inhabitants of the Moon, and the like.

12. Concerning all which it were to be wished, that 1. The Ruder, Endless,
Depraved, and Superstitious were utterly abolished, or restrained at least from
Youth of both kinds, for preventing of Fantastical Impressions. 2. That the
multiplying of new Follies (as that wild Romance of Romances) Pol Alexander as
pernicious as the former, were strictly forbidden, and 3. That the Moral,
Political, and Satyricall, might be permitted only to those that can read them
with Judgment, and make use of them with discretion.

2. TO this pile of Histories are reducible. 1. All Catalogues, as those of
Gesner, Molanus, Draudius, those of Libraries and Marts continually increased.
2. All Journalls, Navigations, and Discoveries. 3. All Jesuiticall and other
relations of strange things done in China or the like, which to continue the
method (all along observed) may be shut up with these

INQVIRIES.
3. Whether. 1. Upon a resolution to Study any Faculty, it would not do well,
to have an Historical Catalogue of the Professors that have bin Eminent in it?
2. Sir John Mandevills Travels, with the strange adventures in them, or
Binjamin Tudelitanus Jewish Iournals of multitudes of his Countrymen found
abroad, deserves the greater credit? 3. Hartmanus Schedels, Men-monsters
inhabiting diverse Parts of the World, or Olaus magnus Witches and Giants in
the Northern Regions, be the hansomer creatures? 4. Giraldus Cambrensis
relation of the black Rook under the North Pole, or Ferdinando's de la Quir, of
the Civil Inhabitants near to the South-Pole, be the truer History? 5. Prince
Meredith of Wales discovered not the West Indies, long before Columbus was
borne? 6. The Irish St Brendons Travels to the Land of Beheast in the English
Legend, or Owens Travels through St Patricks Purgatory, described by Messengham
amongst his Irish Saints, be the likelier Narration? 7. An Index, or rather
Ignis Expurgatorius, be not more profitable, and proper for such delusions,
then for castrating, and castigating such Authors as relate disliked Truths?


LAVS SOLI DEO.

