A BRIEF POLEMICALL DISSERTATION, concerning the true Time of the INCHOATION
and DETERMINATION OF THE LORDS DAY-SABBATH.

Wherein is clearly and irrefragably manifested by Scripture, Reason,
Authorities, in all Ages till this present: that the Lordsday begins and ends
at Evening; and ought to be solemnized from Evening to Evening: against the
Novel Errors, Mistakes of such, who groundlesly assert; that it begins and
ends at Midnight, or day-breaking, and ought to be sanctified from Midnight to
Midnight, or Morning to Morning: whose Arguments are here examined, refuted as
unsound, absurd, frivolous.

Compiled in the Tower of London, and now Published, for the Information,
Reformation of all contrary Judgment or Practice.

By WILLIAM PRYNNE of Swainswick Esquire.

Levit. 22. 32. From Even to Even shall ye rest, or Celebrate your Sabbath.
Capitula Caroli and Ludovici Imperatorum lib. 6. cap. 186. 202. Diem Dominicum
secundum Reverentiam colite; Opus servile, id est, Agrum, pratum, viniam, vel
si qua graviora sunt, in eo non faciatis; nec causas, nec calumnias inter vos
ditatis, sed tantum divinis cultibus serviatis, and a vespera ad vespera^ dies
Dominicus servetur: Placuit ut fideles Diem Dominicum, in quo Dominus
resurrexit, omnes venerabiliter colant. Nam si Pagani, ob memoriam and
Reverentiam Deorum suorum quosdam dies colunt, and Judaei more carnali Sabbatum
carnaliter observant, quanto magis iste dies a Christianis honorifice colendus
est, ne in illo sancto die vanis fabulis, aut locutionibus, sive cantationibus
vel Saltationibus, aut divisionibus, stando in biviis and plateis, ut solet, in
serviant: sed ad Sacerdotem, aut ad aliquom Sapientem hominem and veniant, and
eorum praedicationibus and bonis locutionibus, quae ad animam pertinent,
utantur, and illo die seu Sabbato ad Vesperas, and ad Matutinas, sive ad Missam
cum eorum oblationibus, si fieri potest, omnes cavendo, Kyrie eleision,
decantent. Similiter Pastores pecorum eundo and redeundo in campum, and ad
domum faciant, ut omnes eos vere Christianos, and devotes cognostant. LONDON,
Printed by T. Mabb for Edward Thomas dwelling in Green Arbor, 1655.

To the Christian Reader.
Kind Reader, Give me leave to inform thee of the true Original cause
impelling me to compile this Dissertation at least 20 years since, whiles a
Prisoner in the Tower of London.

When I was a Student and Puny Barrester in Lincolns Inn, it was the constant
custom of that House and all other Inns of Court from All Saints Eve, to
Candlemas night, to keep open Revels, Dancing, Dicing and Music in their Hals
ever Saturday night (as we usually call it) till eleven or twelve of the clock,
and many times till 4. in the morning or later; by reason of which abuse, the
Lordsday was much profaned, and God public Ordinances on the Lordsday
morning, neglected, by the Revellers, Students, Officers, Gamesters, Musicians
and Spectators, who slept out the Forenoon Sermons and other divine Exercises
for the most part, either in their Beds or at Church, if they resorted to it:
Which being a great corasive to my Spirit, grief to my heart, and scandal to
many Religious Lawyers, Students and our Lecturers. I used my best endeavors
to reform this long continued abuse; and by my interest in some pious Benchers
of Lincolns Inn, procured them by an Order of Counsel to suppress all
public Gaming and Dicing in the Hall, with all Grand Christmasses and
disorders on that abused Season; and likewise to restrain the length of their
Revels on Saturday nights, by confining them to a certain hour, though they
could not totally suppress them, as they and I desired, being over ruled
therein by the majority of the Benchers, pleading long prescription, custom,
and unwillingness: to displease the Revellers and young Students, for their
continuance: Whereupon I did in my Histriomastix printed 1632. (Dedicated to
the Sea the epistle Dedicatory.
Benchers of Lincolns Inn) produce the Decrees, Laws, Statutes, Canons of many
Christian Emperors, Kings, States, Councils, and Resolutions of Fathers,
Casuists, Schoolmen, and Protestant Divines Foreign and Domestic, to prove
the unlawfulness of Stage Plays, Revels, Dancing, Gaming, Sports, and Pastimes
on the Lordsday, and on Saturday nights, (as we usually styled them) proving at
large page 638. to 647. by sundry Reasons and Authorities in all ages (there
cited) and likewise in the Table: That the Lordsday begins Saturday Evening,
not at Morning or Midnight following; that so, I might in point of Conscience,
suppress all Revels, Gaming and disorders used in our Innes of Court and
elsewhere throughout the Realm, on Saturday nights, being part of the Lords own
days, fit to be spent in better exercises of Piety and devotion.

This Assertion of the Lordsdayes inception at Evening, being contrary to the
received Opinion of most of our Modern Writers and Divines, was looked upon as
a strange novelty by many, as well as my Histriom^stix, and censure of Stage
Plays as unlawful, unchristian Pastimes; for which (though licensed by
Archbishop Abhots Chaplain) I was committed Prisoner to the Tower b See a New
Discovery of the Prelates tyranny, ^. 1. etc
of London by the Lords of the Council, Febr. 1. 1632. and afterward severely
censured in the Star Chamber, for it, as scandalous to the King, Queen,
Court, State through Lawds and others malice and prevailing Power; which
Sentence was since reversed by the unanimous Vote of both Houses of Parliament,
as illegal and given without any cause at all.

Hereupon for the satisfaction of some Christian Friends as well Lawyers as
Divines, who scrupelled this Opinion of the Lordsday^s Evening Inchoa^ion
(though they could not answer, nor deny the Reasons and Authorities there
produced by me, for its justification) I did in the year 1633. compile this
Dissertation, in the Tower^ which I communicated to my learned friends of the
Law and Ministry, who professed themselves abundantly satisfied with it; some
of them transcribing Copies thereof for their private use. After which, to
pass my Solitary Prison hours with as much public benefit, as I could, I
went through all the Controversies touching the Sabboath, Lordsday, and more
especially concerning the use of Pastimes on it; which the Kings (or rather
Lawds) Declaration for Sports, occasioned; and Bishop White, Dr. Heylin, Dr.
Pocklington, and others had then raised, debated in their Discours^s, and
Histories of the Sabbath; with an intention to have published them at that
Season. But the Printing Presses being locked up and strictly watched by Lawd
and the Bishops then swaying, against all Treatises of this Subject in
opposition to the Anti-Sabbatarian Pamphlets, I was necessitated to lay them by
for that season, and to communicate some of them to such friends, who made use
of them in some of their printed Discourses of the Sabboath, and Lordsday,
since the Prelates power was Ecclipsed: Only I then contenting my self with a
Preface to my brother Burtons Divine Tragedy, or Examples of Gods Judgments
upon Sabbath Breakers; and some necessary Additions to the Second Impression of
his Dialogue between A. and B. concerning the Sabbaths Morality, and
unlawfulness of Pastimes on the Lordsday, both printed in the year 1636.
beyond the Seas, to the great satisfaction of godly Christians. After which,
Gods Providence diverted my Thoughts and Studies to other seasonable Subjects
and Publications, See my unbishoping of Timothy and Titus; Breviate,
Qu^nch-coal, Catalogue of testimonies in all agres, Quaeries to Bishops,
Instructions for Churchwardens. A Looking Glass for all Lordly Prelates.
Antipathy, Appendix to Flagellum Pontifiess. Remonstrance against ship money,
with some others not yet printed.
against our Lordly Prelates pretended Divine Right, Popish Innovations,
Usurpations on the Kings Prerogative, and Peoples Liberties, Treasons, Schisms
in all ages, which occasioned their downfall not long after. These wily Foxes
being unable to answer my Books against them, thereupon by A A New Discovery of
the Prelates tyranny.
Second unrighteous Tyrannical Censure in Star Chamber, and extravagant Council
Table Orders sent me close Prisoner, first to Carnarvan Castle in Northwales,
and from thence to Mountorguiel Castle in Jersey, debarring me the liberty of
Pen, Ink, Paper, Books, access of friends, and all humane conversation, to
hinder me from writing; seized all my Books, Writings, Papers they could meet
with, searching diverse of my friends houses as well as my Chamber and Study for
that end: Yet God^ Providence preserved this small Treatise (with some others
touching the Sabbath Lordsday, and unlawfulness of Sports or Pastimes on them,
against which I mustered up the concurrent opions of Fathers, Councils,
Christian Emperors, Princes Edicts, Popish, Protestant Writers of all sorts in
all Ages, yet unpublished) from their Clutches, and the strict Seaches of other
late Grandees since; and brought them safe to my hands again, when I deemed
them quite lost. Whereupon, conceiving it agreeable to Gods good pleasure (who
miraculously preserved this Dissertation above twenty years space, during all
my Troubles, and amids our public Wars and revolutions) that it should be
made Public for the Information and benefit of his Church, People, and not be
buried in Oblivion; and being the only complete Treatise of this Subject, I
ever yet beard off; which others have but briefly, slightly touched, rather
then HANDLED in their Discourses os the Sabbath or LORD'S DAY; I thereupon
resolved to make it public, and committed it to the Press, in this Skeptic
all age, when too many Divines, as well (as See Thoms Campanella de Monarchia
Hispaniae c. 25. 27. and the false Jew, or Ramsy his Examination at Newcastle,
printed 1653.
Jesuits and Sectaries) make it the main part of their Divinity and Religion,
to vent and cry up New, empty, frothy notions, Whimsies, fancies, old forgotten
Herefies, and uncouth conceits, in a kind of new canting language, (which
themselves and others hardly understand) to Acts 20. 30.
draw away disciples after them, and undermine those ancient settled truths and
Principles of Religion, which all Orthodox Christians in former ages have
constantly believed, received, practiced without dispute; which has produced
very sad effects, eaten ^ut the sinew, Practice of Piety; the life 1 Timothy 3. ^.
to 7.
Power of Godliness, as well as the form thereof, and made many sorward
professors heretofore mere Seekers, Self-seekers, Sc^pticks, Anti-Scripturists,
Ranters, Nullisidians, Heretics, Separatists, Blasphemers, Covenant-breakers,
Antinomians, (trampling all laws of God and men under feet like dirt) and some
professed Atheists as well as Anarchists. To prevent which mischiefs for the
future, I shall recommend this advise of the Apostle to all sincere Christians,
1 John 4. 1. Beloved believe not every spirit, but try the spirits (by the word
of God) whether they are of God; because many false Prophets are (now) gone out
into the world. Pro^. 23. 23.
Prefer ancient Truth, before new pretended light, as most Luke 5. 39.
do old wine before new. Tertullian de Praescript. adv. Haereticos.
Illud verius, quod Antiquius: And if so, then they need not doubt, but in this
Controversy, I have the truth on my side, because all Antiquity concurs
unanimously with me, as well as the Scriptures. I shall conclude with Jer. 6.
16. Thus says the Lord, stand ye in the ways and see, and ask for the old
paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye sholl find rest to your
Souls. And though many now say (as the obstinate Israelites did then to God) we
will not walk therein: yet I trust all the true Saints and Servants of God,
will readily obey this divine and safe command in these 2 Timothy 3. 1, etc
pe^illous times of novelty, desperate Apostasy, and Antichristian Pride, when
too many 2 These. 2. 3, 4.
oppose and exalt themselves, above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped, obeying no Laws of God or man, and carrying all Laws Divine and
Humane in the arbitrary Rols and Records of their own breasts, like so many
Roman Pontifs, making their own Jam. 4. 13. 15.
wills and lusts their only law; to Gods dishonor, Religions slander, all good
men's grief, the ill example of future ages, and hastening of Gods judgments on
us to our Scourge or Ruin.

Farewell.
A Brief Polemicall Dissertation concerning THE TRVE TIME of the INCHOATION AND
DETERMINATION of the LORD'S DAY.
IT has been a great Question of late times among private Christians, and
Divines, when the Lord's Day (being no artificial, but a Genesis 2. 2, 3. Exodus
20. 7, 8, 9 10. Levit. 23. 32. Neb. 13. 19. Luke 23, 54, 5^ c. 29. 1.
natural day consisting of 24 hours, as they generally acknowledge) should
begin and end? Whether at Evening, Morning, or Midnight? Certainly, if I may
freely vent my thoughts without offense, I conceive (under correction of graver
judgments) that in divine and true account, it begins and ends at Evening,
immediately after Sunset, when the Twilight ends, and the Neh. 4. 21. Anselmus
de Imagine mundi* l. 2. c 4 Alcuinus de Eccles. Officiis c. 43. Col. 1128.
Evening Star begins to shine: A truth so manifest, in my poor apprehension,
that it is uncap^ble of any dispute.

For the clearer resolution whereof, I shall in the first place admir, that men
in civil respects may begin and conclude their days at several hours,
according to the received computation of their Countr^y: Po^idor Virgil. de
Inventor. rerum l. 2. cap. 5.
Some nations commencing and closing up the day at Morning; others, at Noon;
oothers, at Midnight, others at Evening. Pupilla oculi pars 9. c. 6. Summa
Angelica. Tit. Dies Hostiensis Summa l. 2. Tit de Feriis f. 149. Lindwood
Provinc. Constit. l. 2. Tit. de Feriis f. 74.
And the Canonists likewise beginning and concluding the day at midnight in
regard of Contracts; at morning, in respect of judgments passed; in at Evening
regard of sanctification and religious observation. But yet in all divine
relations, men are not left at liberty to setwhat bounds or limits they please
to days appropriated to Gods more special worship, but they must observe
those meets, which God himself (the Psalm. 74. 16. Don. 2. 20, 21. Acts 1. 7.
Conclusion.
Sovereign Lord of days and times) has prefixed to them, beginning, ending
their sanctication of them (being a part of his own worship and service) at
such time as he has appointed, which is none other than the Evening, the
boundary he first set to days, both for natural and sacred uses.

To put this out of further Controversy, I shall first of all propound such
reasons and authorities as irrefragably evidence; That the Lords day ought to
begin and cease at Evening: then answer such Objections and Replies, as are, or
may be opposed against it. And here for the more perspicuous manifestation of
the truth, before I proceed to any punct^all probation of the point in
question, I shall premise and make good these five couclusions, which will soon
overruled and resolve it.

First, That all days in Scripture and divine calculation, begin and end at
Evening.

Secondly, That the seventh day Sabbath in Scripture account, did always
commence and determine at Evening; and that the Jews did ever solemnize it from
Evening to Evening.

Thirdly, That the very first day of the week whereon our Savior rose again,
began and ended at Evening, in divine computation, or Scripture account.

Fourthly, That this beginning and concluding of days at Evening, is
perpetual and immutable.

Fifthly, That Christ's Resurrection in the morning, did no ways alter the
beginning or end of days, nor yet translate the beginning of that first day
whereon he arose from Evening to Morning; nor change the former limits thereof.

For the first of these, That all days in Scripture and divine calculation
begin and end at Evening; it is most apparent. Conclusion. 1


First, by Genesis, 1. 5, 9, 19, 23, 31. where the Scripture is express in
point; that at the very Creation of the Proof 1.
world and beginning of time and days, the Evening and the Morning made the
first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, (and by consequence the seventh)
first days that ever were; the only patterns for the inchoation and
determination of all days since: the In Genesi no^ no^ praecedentis dici est,
seasubsequentis, id est principtum futur^ non finis praeteriti. Hierom. in
Jonam c. 2. Tom. 5. p 137. G. Proof 2.
Evening, being here placed before the Morning (as Expositors observe) by God
himself, because the day in natural and divine account begins at Evening, the
Evening and darkness being preceding to the morning and light, even in point
of time, Genesis 1, 2, 3.

Secondly, it is evident by Exodus 12. 3, 6, 12, 29, 42, 51. compared and
paralelled with Levit. 23. 5. Numb. 9. 11. cap. 28. 16. Deuteronomy. 16. 4. Josh. 5.
10. 2 Chronicles. 30. 15. c, 35. 1. Ezra 6. 19. 20. and Ezech. 45. 21. (all treating
of the time when the Passover was to begin) In the tenth day of this Month,
they shall take to them every man a Lamb, a Lamb for an house, and ye shall
keep it up, until the fourteenth day of the same Month, and the whole
Assembly of the Congregation of Israel shall kill it in the Evening: For I will
pass through the Land of Egypt this night, and will smite all the first born
of the Land of Egypt both of man and beast. In the fourteenth day of the first
month at Even, is the Lords Passover; the fourteenth day at Even shall they
keep it. And the children of Israel went away, and did as the Lord had
commanded And it came to pass that at midnight the Lord smote all the first
born in the Land of Egypt, etc. It is a night to be much observed unto the
Lord, for bringing the chilaren of Israelout of the Land of Egypt, And it came
to pass the self same day that the Lord did bring the children of Israel out
of the Land of Egypt by their Armies. From which words it is apparent;

1. That the fourteenth day of the Month Abib, on which the Passover was kept,
began in Scripture account, at Evening:

1. Because they were to keep the Paschal Lamb, until the fourteenth day, and
then to kill it in the Evening; therefore that day began at Evening.

2. Because the feast of the Passover, with the killing, dressing and eating
of the Paschall Lamb did commence at Evening; thererefore the day too, which no
doubt the Feast began: for if the day began not till the following morning, the
Passover had been kept before it, not upon it, upon the thirteenth not the
fourteenth day of the month.

2. That that Evening and night on which the Passover was kept, was part of
the following, not of the foregoing day.

1. Because this Feast of the Passover was to be kept the whole fourteenth
day, in remembrance of Gods passing over the Israelites, slaying the Egyptians,
and delivering his people out of Egypt: Since therefore they began not to kill
and eat the Passover in the mornning, but at Evening, the Evening must
necessarily begin the day, and be a part only of the following day, not of the
day preceding it; else it would have been but an half-holy day, and no more,
the whole preceding day being not solemnized, but the night alone; or at least,
a holy day made up of the Evening of the fourteenth, and the morning of the
fifteenth day, not of the fourteenth day alone; both which are directly
contrary to the Text.

2. Because this celebrating of the Passover the fourteenth day at Evening,
was done in memory of Gods passing over them, and slaying the Egyptians at
midnight following; and bringing them out of Egypt with their Armies the next
morning: this Evening therefore must be part of that day to which Midnight and
the Morning following did belong, which must necessarily appertain to the
fifteenth, not the fourteenth day, if the fourteenth day began the midnight or
morning before, and not that very evening; and so the fourteenth day should be
solemnized for a deliverance happening on the fifteenth day, not on it; which
were absurd to think. The deliverance therefore happening the midnight and
morning which succeeded this Evening, it must doubtless be solemnized as part
of the subsequent, not of the precedent day.

3. Because the Text says expressly, Exodus 12. 51. The same day the Lord
brought the children of Israel out of Egypt by their Armies: therefore this
Evening and Midnight were part of the ensuing day, because the Israelites
departed not out of Egypt with their Armies till the Sea Exodus 13. 3, 4, 5.*
morning following, as that Chapter manifests: and yet the Scripture says;
that they departed out of Egypt the same fourteenth day, whereon they did eat
the Passover, and God slew the firstborn of Egypt. This fourteenth day
therefore in divine calculation, both as a natural day, and as a Passover day
too, began and ended at Evening; and so by consequence all other days.

Thirdly, it is most clear by Exodus 12. 18, 19. compared Proof 3.
with Levit. 23. 5, 6. and Numb. 28. 16. In the first month on the fourteenth
day of the month at EVEN: Seven days shall there be no leaven found in your
houses: seven days shall unleavened bread be eaten. This Feast of unleavened
bread was to continue seven days: but these days and this Feast by Gods own
limitation did begin and end at Evening: for the Text is express, that on the
fourteenth day at EVEN they should eat unleavened bread till the twenty first
day at EVEN: The Evening therefore was both the Alpha and Omega of this Feast,
of all these days in Scripture reckoning, and so by consequence of all other
days.

Fourthly, this is as clear as the Sun at Noonday, by Proof 4.
the Ceremonial Laws concerning uncleanness. On any days or seasons of the
year, if any of the Israelites chanced to be legally unclean, in some cases
they were to remain unclean for one day: in others, for seven days. But how
did these days begin and end, in Gods account? Certainly at Evening: For all
the Texts run thus concerning him who was unclean for one day; He shall be
unclean until the Even: and when the Evening comes on, he shall wash himself
with water, and when the Sun is down, he shall come into the Camp again. And
thus concerning the other: On the seventh day he shall purify himself, and
shall be clean at Even, witness Deuteronomy. 23. 11. Number. 19. 7, 8, 11, 12, 16, 19,
21, 22. Letit. 11. 24. to 40. c. 15. 5. to 27. c. 17. 15. c. 22. 6. All days
therefore in divine computation, began and concluded at Even, since all the
days of men's ceremonial uncleanness did so; which uncleanness might befall
them upon any day whatsoever.

Fifthly, it i^ perspicuous by the Israelites solemn Easting-dayes, which
commenced and ended at Even, For Proof 5.
they usually fasted until Even, Judges 20. 23. 26. 2 Samuel 1. 12. Their days
therefore b^ing but the limits of their Fasts (for they fasted sometimes See 1 Samuel 7. 6. c. 31. 13. 1 Ch^on. 10 12. Neh. 1. 4. Esth. 4. 16. Jer. 36. 6. Dan.
6. 18. Proof.
one day, sometimes two days, sometimes three, or more) did question less
begin and determine at Even: in their own and Scripture computation.

Sixthly it is apparent, by Deul. 21. 22, 23. If a man be p^^ to death, and
thou hang him on a tree, his body shall not remain all night upon the tree; but
thou shall in any wise bury him that day: compared with Joshua 8. 29. and cap.
10 26. 27. And the King of Ai he hanged on a tree until eventide: and as soon
as the Sun was down, Joshua commanded that they shouldtake his careasse down
from the tree, etc. And he smote the five Kings, and hanged them on five trees,
and they were hanging upon the trees until the Evening, and at the time of the
going down of the Sun, Joshua commanded, and they took them down off the trees,
and cast them into the Cave wherein they had been hid, etc. compared with Joh.
19. 31, 38. Mat. 27. 57. 58. Mar. 15, 42, 43. The Je^s therefore because it was
the preparation, that the bodies should n^^ remain upon the Cross the Sabbath
day (for that Sabbath day was an high day) besought Pilate, that their legs
might be broken, and that they might be taken away. And when the Sea Josh 8. 29.
Even was come (that is the Evening of the Day about Sunne-setting, or Evening
tide:) Joseph of Arimathea went to Pilate and begged the body of Jesus; then
Pilate commanded the body to be given him. And he took it down and wrapped it
in linen, and laid it in his own tomb. Which Texts (paralelled with Ephesians. 4.
26. Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath:) do fully evidence, that the day
in divine resolution begins and ends at Even; because the bodies of
Malefactors, which were to b^ buried the same day, and might not remain on the
tree all night, were then taken down and interred.

Seventhly, That speech of David to Jonathan; 1 Samuel 20. 5. Let me go that I
may hide my self in the fields unto the Proof 3.
third day at Evening: annexed to that of 1 Samuel 30. 17. And David smote them
from the twilight, even to the Evening of the next day; is a direct proof, that
the Scripture begins the day at Even, making it part of the subs^quent, not of
the precedent day, as these phrases, unto the third day at evening, and to the
evening of the next day, import.

Eighthly and lastly, It is clear by the joint confession of all sorts of
Authors, of all Commentators on the forequoted Proof. 8
and the ensuing Texts, that the Penmen of the Scriptures (who were guided by
the Holy Ghost, with the whole Jewish Church, Nation, directed by the same
Spirit, and the Scripture computation) did ever begin and end their days at
evening, not at morning, or midnight, as the Jews Anastatius Sinaica. Quast.
lib. quaest. 152.
yet do. A truth so evident that our Opposites in this point of the Lordsday's
inchoation, for the most part grant it, without any contradiction; having
naught else to plead for themselves but this, that Christ's resurrection in the
morning did translate the beginning of days, from evening to the morning.
Therefore it is undoubtedly true, that all daves in scripture and divine
resolution, begin and end at Evening: So that this first Conclusion is
uncontrolable.

For he second, That the seventh day Sabbath, in Scripture account, did ever
begin and end at Evening; and that the Jews Conclusion. 2
did constantly solemnize it from Evening to evening: it is most apparent.

For first, All days in Scripture and Jewish computation Proof. 1
commenced and concluded at Evening, as the former Conclusion manifests;
therefore the seventh day Sabbath too.

Secondly, the Scripture peremptorily commands this Proof. 2
beginning and close of the Sabbath. Levit. 23. 32. From EVEN to EVEN, ye shall
celebrate your Sabbath: which though it be specially meant of the Sabbath of
Atonement, yet it is true of the seventh day sabbath too, it being the
original pattern, by which the Sabbath of atonement was squared, and thus
bounded out.

Thirdly, It is apparent by Nehem. 13. 19. And it came to pass, that when the
gates of Jerusalem began to be dark, before the Proof. 3
sabbath (that is, when the twilight began) I commanded that the Gates should
be shut, and charged that they should not be open till after the Sabbath: and
some of my servants set I at the gates, that there should no burden be brought
in on the sabbath day. By which it is evident that the seventh day sabbath
began at Evening, not at morning, or midnight. For why should Nebemiah command
the gates of Jerusalem to be shut just as it began to be dark, a little before
the Sea Neh. 4. 21
Evening star began to appear (when the Evening and Sabbath actually begin) but
to prevent Carriers and others who brought burdens into Jerusalem, from
profaning the Sabbath, which would have begun before they could have passed to
their Innes, and unladed their burdens, had they admitted them to have entered
the gates so late; the Sabbath being to begin almost presently after when the
day light ceased, and the stars began to appear: which had it not commenced
till midnight or morning following, he would not have closed up the gates so
early, since they might have unladed their Carriages a good space before the
Sabbath, though they had not entered Jerusalem till the twilight ended. His
timely shutting up of the gates therefore to prevent this breach of the Sabbath
by unlading burdens, is a See Neh. 13. 21. which makes it maninifest. Proof 4.
pregnant evidence, that it began at Even, soon after, or just when the gates
were barred.

Fourthly, it is clear by Luke 23. 54, 55, 56. compared with Luke 24. 1, 2.
Mark 16. 1, 2. c. 15. 42, 43. John 19. 31, 38. cap. 20. 1. etc. Matthew. 27. 57.
58. By all which it appears, that our Saviors body was taken down from the
Cross and laid in the Sepulcher upon our Friday at Evening a little before
night, and that they took it down, and buried it then, that it might not remain
on the Cross upon the Sabbath day: to which Saint Luke adds this as a
Corollary; Luke 23. 54. 55, 56.
And that day was the Preparation, and the Sabbath drew on, and the women also
which came with him from Galilee followed after, and beheld the Sepulehre, and
how his body was laid: and they returned, and prepared Spices and ointments,
and rested the Sabbath day according to the Commandment. And when the Sabbath
was past (writes Mark 16. 1, 2.
St Mark) Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Salome had bought
sweet spices, that they might come and anoint him: And very early in the
morning, the first day of the week, they came unto the sepulcher, at the rising
of the Sun, as it began to down (says Mat: ^. 1.
Saint Matthew) whiles it was yet dark, (writes John 20. 1.
Saint John) and they found the stone rolled away from the Sepulcher: By all
which it appears, That the Sabbath begun and concluded at Evening.

For first, Saint Luke says, the Sabbath drew on; when Christ was taken down
from the Cross about the Evening, implying that it was then almost ready to
begin.

Secondly, they took him down them, because he should not hang upon the Cross
any part of the Sabbath.

Thirdly, the women shortly after their return from his burial began their
Sabbath days rest.

Fourthly, The Sabbath was past, the first day begun, and our Savior risen,
before the women came to his Sepulcher: yet they came thither at day-dawning;
whiles it was dark: and their apparelling themselves, their buying of spices,
and coming from their houses or lodgings to the Sepulcher (all after the
Sabbath was fully ended) would take them up some hours time perchance, or more.
It is apparent therefore by all these particulars, that the Sabbath even in the
Evangelists account, both at and after our Saviors Passion and Resurrection,
commenced and ended at Evening: So that Saint Mat. 28. 1.
Matthews; In the end of the Sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first day
of the week: (which some object to the contrary, as if the Sabbath then ended
not till the morning) must be interpreted by Saint Mark 16. 1.
Marks; after the Sabbath was ended; and the other Luke 24. 1. John 20. 1. Mark
16. 2. 9.
Evangelists, On the first day of the week (that being the true sense and scope
of his words;) else Christ, in his account did rise again upon the seventh-day
Sabbath, not on the first day of the week: and so by consequence, upon the
second, not the third day after his Passion; which is directly contrary to all
the other Evangelists, and Scriptures, to the Article of our Creed, and to
Christ's own predictions of his rising again the third day, recorded thrice by
Saint Matthew himself, Mat. 12. 40. c. 16. 21. c. 27. 63, 64. which he would
never contradict in the history of his resurrection.

Fifthly it is certain by the constant practice of the Jewish Church, who both
before and since Christ's time (even Proof 5.
to this present day) did ever begin and end their Sabbath at Evening. Witness
Josephus that famous Jewish Historian, Contra Apionem l 1. c 833. Hierom
comment. in Jonam, c. 2. Tom. 5. p. 137. Eusebius de Praeparat. Evangel l. 8.
c. 2. Tom. 1. p. 141. S. Augustine de Tempore Sermon. 251. Chrysostom, Homil. 4.
in Genes. Tom. 1. Col. 26. B. Hom. 62. in Matthew. Tom. 2. Col. 559. B.
Anastatius Sinaita, Anagogicarum Contemplationum. He^am. l 2 and Question, 152.
153. Eibl. Patrum. Tom. 6. pars, 1. p. 634. E. 794, 795. Hospinian de O^igine
Festorum, fol. 31. 72. b. 68, 69. 161, 162. Marlorat in Matthew. 28. v. 1. Joseph
Scaliger, de Emendatione temporis, l. 92. and 6. p 119. 532, 533. God win his
Jewish Antiquities, ^ 3. c. c. 3. p. 131. Ainsworth, his Annotations on Genesis
1. v. 5. Levit. 22 32. together with most ancient and modern Commentators upon
Genesis 1. 5. 9. 13. Levit. 23. 32. Exodus 12. 18. Matthew. 12. 40. c. 16. 21. c. 28.
1. Mark 16. 1, 2, 9. Luke 23 54, 55, 56. c. 24. 1. John 20. 1. Acts 10. 40. 1
Cor. 15. 5. with those Authors quoted in my Histriomastrix. p. 643, 644. and
S^e Chemnisius Examen Concil^i Tridentini, pars 4. De Festis p. 150 Wolphius
Chronol l 2. c. 1. Dr. Bound of the Sabbath. Edit. 2. 1606. p. 103, 104. Dr.
Boys his Postils on the Decalogue, p. 51. Purchase Pilgrimage l. 2 c. 4 p. 121.
Amesius Medulla Theologicae, l. 3. c. 15. sect. 36. Mr. Wemes, in his
exposition of the Laws of Moses l. 1. p. 226. to 207. when the day begins.
Conclusion 3.
others in the margent: who all subscribe with one consent, that the seventh
day Sabbath, (and all other days else) in the Scripture and Jewish account,
did ever begin and determine at Evening;

This second Conclusion therefore, is past all question.

For the third; That the same first day of the week, on which our Savior rose
again, began at Evening in divine computation: it is most certain.

1. Because all days in Scripture account did then begin, as the Premises
evidence: Therefore this day too. Proof. 1.


Secondly, because that seventh day Sabbath, on which our Savior rested in his
grave, began and end^d at Evening: Proof. 2.
as is clear by Matthew 28. 1. compared with Levit. 23 32. and other fore
quoted Scriptures: by the joint attestation of all divines and Expositors on
these Scriptures: and by the second Conclusion: Therefore it must necessarily
begin at Evening, when this Sabbath ended: else the Evening may and night
between the end of the Sabbath, and our S^viours resurrection should be part of
no day at all (like that of Job, Job 3. 3, 6. being no parcel of the Sabbath,
nor yet of that first day of the week on which Christ arose) which can-not be.

Thirdly, All the Evangelists with one consent, record, Proof 3.
that our Savior rose again upon the first day of the week, very early in the
morning, whiles it was dark, before the women came to his sepulcher, and after
the Sabbath was past. Mark 16. 1, 2, 9. Matthew. 28. 1, 2. Luke 23 56 c. 24. 1,
2. John 20. 1, 2. the chief reason alleged by all (especia^ly by our opposites
in this Controversy) why Christians solemnize this day as their Sabbath. If
then he arose upon the first day, the day was certainly begun some space before
his resurrection; else he must rise with it, or before it, not upon it. Neither
did or could this day-begin at Morning, day-dawning, or Sunrising in divine
compute, because our Savior was risen, and the women were come to the grave
before that time, as these Texts affirm; and yet then the Mark 16. 1, 2, 9.
Sabbath was past, and this first day begun; which could not be if the day
commenced not before the morning; (beginning but at break of day, or
Sunrising:) neither did it begin at midnight, because the Scripture, Jews, and
Ecclesiastical Writers know no such natural or divine incep^ion of the day;
therefore questionless it began at Evening; as the generality of Expositors on
these Texts acknowledge, it being the true time of the days Inchoation in
divine account.

Fourthly, Mat. 12. 4 c. 16. 21. c. 27. 63. Mark 8. 31. c. 14 Prnof 4.
58. Luke 13. 32. Hosea 6. 2. Acts 10. 40. 1 Cor. 15. 4. and all our Creeds
assure us, that our Savior rose again the third day from his Passion: which he
predicting to his Disciples, uses this expression, Matthew 27. 63. and Mark 8.
31. After three days (that is, after the beginning of three days, or of the
third day from my Passion, not after three days ended, for then he had risen
again upon the fourth day, not the third) I will rise again: which Phrase
(being all one in sense with, upon the third day I will rise again, as appears
by Matthew. 16. 21.) implies that a good part of the third d^y on which he arose,
should be past before his rising, which could not be, had the day b^gun just at
morning or midnight, not at Evening; he being risen very early, whiles it was
dark, John 20. 1, 2. The question then for the clearing of this Article of
Christ's resurrection upon the third day, will be only this; What is meant here
by three days? How these days are and ought to be computed? and from what time
they did begin? To which all See Ignatius, Martyr Epist. 5. ad Trallianos.
Bibl. Patr. Tom. 1. p 79. b. Theophilus Antiochenus Comment. l. 2. in
Evangelia. Ib. Tom. 2. p. 152. C. Hierome, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Beda,
Anselmus, Theophilact, Christianus Grammaticus, Paschatius, Rabbertus; in their
Commentaries, on these Texts, and on Mat. 28 1. Mark 16. 1, 2 9. Luke 24. 1.
Calvin, Luther, Musculus, Bullinger, Melancthon, Bucer, Marlorate, Junius,
Zanchius, Beza, Lyra, Rabanus, Maurus, Hugo Cardinalis, Carthusian, Tostatu^,
Iansenius, Cornelius a lapide, and others on this Text, Gregory Nyssen, Oration
1. and 2. de Resurrectione Christi, Cassianus de Incarnat. Domini. l. 5 Bibl.
Patr. Tom. 5. pars 2. p 8. f. 6. Hierome Comment. in Jonam, c. 2. Tom, 5. p.
137. b. Augustine, quaest. super Evangelia, quaest. 6. 7. Anastatius Siniata.
Quaestionum l. qu. 152, 153. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 6. pars 1. p. 794, 795. Together
with Saint Cyprian de Symbol, Dr. lack son, Mr, Byfield, and all Expositors on
the Creed, who jointly accord in this truth.
ancient and modern divines, who have commented on the Evangelists, or written
of Christ's resurrection, reply with one accord.

1. That by three days in these Scriptures is meant, not three entire days,
(for Christ lay not three whole days in his grave) but one whole day and a
part of two other days,) but part to wit part of the sixth day whereon he was
crucified; the whole Sabbath day following it, and the Evening or night which
was part of the first day whereon he arose.

2. That these days must be thus computed, and did thus begin and end. The
first of them being our good Friday) began at Evening and ended at Evening,
shortly after our Savior was taken down from his Cross and intombed. The
second of them (being the 7th day Sabbath) began and ended at Evening; all
which day Christ rested, and kept a Sabbath in his grave. The third day (the
Jews first day, and our Lord's Day) began at Even, when the Sabbath concluded,
and ended the Evening following, a little after our Saviors appearance to his
Disciples, John 20. 19. By which calculation, our Savior lay part of the
first, the whole second, and a good part of the third day in his grave, (to
wit, the Evening and greatest part of the night) and so well nigh half the
third day, was past before his Resurrection; so that he might well be said to
rise again the the third day; and by a Synechdoche Membri, to lie three days
in his grave, and Mark 8. 31. Mat. 27. 63.
after three days, (that is, after the beginning of three days, the latter
part of the third day being included, and the forepart only excluded in this
Phrase of speech) to rise again: which he could not be properly said to do, had
this third day, begun at morning, he being risen again when it was dark John
20. 1. Matthew. 28. 1, 2. and so upon the second day; before not on or after the
third day, in this strange account, which no Divine in this particular of
Christ's resurrection ever followed; all of them jointly resolving, that the
third day on which our Savior arose, and the two preceding days, according to
divine computation, began and ended at Evening. Wherefore this third
Conclusion, even by the unanimous consent of all men, is indubitable, and quite
overturns our Antagonists foundation for the Lords days inc^ption in the
morning, to wit, that Christ's Resurrection in the morning, did translate the
beginning of this first day, from Evening to morning; which is but a gross
mistake, directly contrary to all the recited Scriptures, the resolution of all
judicious Divines, and writers in all ages, as I shall anon more fully manifest
in its proper place.

For the fourth, That this beginning and concluding of days at Evening is
immutable (I mean in divine respects, not of Conclusion 4.
civil;) it is most clear for these ensuing reasons.

First, Because it is that bound which God himself (the Dan. 2. 2. c. 21. c 7 9
13 Ps. 74 16. Acts 1. 7.
Lord of times, and Ancient of days) has prescribed them, Proof 1.
both by his word, his works, and own divine calculation, as the three
foregoing Conclusions evidence: and what God himself has thus limited and
prefixed, cannot be altered but by himself alone (who never changed this
beginning or period of days for ought appears in Scripture) Eccles 3. 14. Jer.
31. 35, 36. c. 33. 20, 21.

Secondly, because it is that termination of days which God himself instituted at
the very Creation, whenas he prefixed Proof 2.
such limits to days and times, as were to contiue in all succeeding ages, till
time should be no more, witness Genesis 1. 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, to 20. 23. 31. where
God made darkness to precede the light, the Evening antecedent to the Morning,
and to begin the day; the Evening and the Morning, (not the Morning, and the
Evening, I mean in point of priority) making the first seven days, and so by
consequence all succeeding days; the days and weeks being now the same, and
of the same dimension, as they were at the Creation; and therefore retain the
self same beginning and end now, as God designed to them then; and that by a
natura; unchangeable Ordinance. For God at the Creation ordained the Sun, the
Moon, and Stars, to rule over the day and night; to divide the light from the
darkness, (that is, to bound out the day and night) to be for signs and for
seasons, and for days and years: Genesis 1. 14. to 19. Psalm. 136. 6, 7, 8. Psalm.
104. 19. And that so long as the world should endure, or the Sun and Moon have
a being. witness Genesis 8. 22 While the earth remains, seed time, and ha^vest,
and cold and heat, and Summer and Winter, and day and night shall not cease:
that is, they shall observe the bounds and times that I have pr^scribed them at
the Creation, without any alteration. Jer. 31, 35, 36. and c. 33. 20. 21. makes
this m^st clear. Thus says the Lord, which gives the Sun for a light by day,
and the Ordinances of the Moon and of the Stars, for a light by night: if
these Ordinances depart from before me, or if you can break my Covenant of the
day and of the night, that there shall not be day and night in their season
(that is, at the time which I appointed at the Creation) Then also might my
Covenant be broken with David my servant. Which Texts do fully evince the
beginning, end of days, and limits of time instituted at the Creation, to be
unalterable so long as the world remains: which is likewise backed by Psalm. 74.
16, 17. Ps. 72. 57. Ps. 104. 19. Ps. 121. 6. Ps. 136. 9, and 148 3, 5, 6. The
day is thine, the night also is thine, thou have prepared the light and the
Sun, thou have made Summer and Winter. He appoints the Moon for seasons,
the Sunknoweth his going down: Thou make darkness, and it is night. Praise
him Sun and Moon, praise him all ye stars of light, for he commanded and they
were created, he has also established them for ever and ever, he has made a
Decree which shall not pass. From all which Scriptures it is infallible, that
God at the Creation fixed immutable limits to days and times, both for their
beginning, end, length, which shall and must continue the same for ever; (the
days, weeks months and years, being of the same extent for the present, as
they were at the beginning) Therefore the inception and ending of the day at
Evening, being settled at the Creation, does and must remain unalterable.

Thirdly, This inchoa^ion and conclusion of the day Proof 3.
at Evening, is ratified by the fourth Commandment, a moral and perpetual
precept, founded on the very course and L^w of nature at the Creation, as most
assert, Genesis 2. 1, 2. 3. For this Commandment enjoining men, Exodus 20. ^. to
12.
To keep holy the Sabbath day, to do no manner of work upon it, and to labor
six days, and do all their wor^: For in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth, the Sea and all that in them is and rested the seventh day: wherefore
the Lord blessed he Sabbath day, and hallowed it: does her^ in apparently
confirm for ever, the beginning, and, and limits both of days and weeks, as
they were ^^ttled at the Creation. For this precept having a retrospect to Gods
six days work, and his seventh days rest, when he created the world; and
enjoining men to work six days, to rest the seventh day, and keep it holy, as
God did then; does apparently intimate, that these foresaid seven days, were
as so many royal Standards of time, by which all subsequent days and weeks
must be measured: which must begin, end, and have the same dimen^ions, with
that original week, and those first seven days. Wherefore since they began
and ended at Evening then, as I have proved: all other days likewise must do
so, by virtue of this command. The rather, because it prescribes men, to finish
all their work in six days, and then to begin their rest, when their work
ends, as God did his: but their six days work usually Psalm. 104. 22, 23. Neh.
21. 4. cap. 13. 19.
ends at Evening; therefore their six days also should then d^termine, and
their Sabbath or seven days r^st begin; and so by consequence all the six
days, the Sabbath day, and so all days (for ever) should commence and end at
Evening, so long as this commandment is in being, or days and weeks shall
last.

Fourthlv, The beginning of days must needs be immutable, Proof 4.
because the alteration of it from Evening to morning, or midnight (which
thwarts the Scripture computation) would falsisie, corrupt many Passages and
Texts of Scripture; call into question the truh of our Saviors Resurrection on
the third day; and somewhat alter the Scripture Chronology, which is most exact
and punctual; neither of which are sufferable by God or Christians.

Lastly, this beginning and close of days, has an influence Proof 5.
into Gods worship: who as he has prescribed men, how; so likewise, when to
worship him: to wit, especially on the Sabbath, which he has appropriated to
himself; stiling it, his own Sabbath, and holy day, Exodus 16. 23, 25. Levit.
23. 3. Deuteronomy. 5. 14. Neh. c. 14. Isa. 58. 13. Exodus 20. 10, c. 31, 16. The
sanctification therefore of the Sabbath being a part of Gods worship, and the
Sabbath his own peculiar day; See Mr. Fox, Dr. Fuller and others on Rev. 1. 10.
M. Sprint Mr. Bownd, Mr. Widly, Mr. Bernard, Dr. Twisse, Mr. Cawdry and others
of the Sabbath.
which most hold, Christ and his apostles, and the Primitive Christians by Gods
warrant translated to the Lords day) that beginning and limits of it, which God
has fixed, must not be changed but by God; because it would alter both Gods
day and worship too. To prevent which inconvenience, God has given not only
general commands to sanctify this day, but likewise a special precept to
begin and end it at Even, Levit. 23. 32. From Even to Even you shall celebrate
your Sabbath: there being no such particular precept given for the limits of
other days, (which are bounded out in more general terms) it being both
dangerous and absurd, to leave the inception, or bounds of the Sabbath
arbitrary unto men, to begin and end it when they please; the day being Gods
not theirs; the sanctification thereof, a special part of his service, which
men have no power to alter or diminish: and whatsoever in God^ service is not
of faith (warrantted or prescribed by his word) being sin and will worship,
Romans 14. 23. Col. 2. 18. 20, 21, 22, 23. From all which I may safely affirm;
that this beginning and ending of days at Even (especially of the Sabbath day)
is immutable, and so my fourth Conclusion undeniable.

For the fifth; That Christ's Resurrection in the morning did Conclusion 5.
no ways alter the beginning or end of days, nor yet translate the inception
of that day whereon he arose, From Evening to morning; it is unquestionable.

First, Because this commencement and conclusion of days at Evening, is
immutable; as I have manifested in Proof 1.
in the fourth Conclusion, therefore not altered by Christ^ Resurrection.

Secondly, because Christ's Passion and Resurrection abolished or changed
nothing, but that which was typical and Proof 2.
ceremonial: witness Gal. 4. 9, 10, 11. Col. 2. 14. to 22. Acts 15. 24. 28,
29. Heb. 9. 10, 11. c. 10. 1. 2, 9. with the unanimous suffrage of all Divine^.
But the beginning and end of days at Even; was no ways typical or
ceremonial, but rather natural and moral, being instituted at the Creation,
ratified by the fourth Commandment, and immutably fixed for ever, as the
premise^ testify. Therefore it was not abolished, or translated by Christ's
Resurrection or Passion from Evening to morning.

Thirdly, Christ abrogated or changed nothing, but what was necessary to be
abolished or altered upon warrantable Proof 3.
reasons and substantial grounds: See Heb. 8. 6, 7, 8. c. 9. 9. to 16. c. 10.
1. to, 11. Col. 2. 16, 17, 22, 23. Ephesians. 2. 15. Gal. 5. 1. to 7. Acts 15. 10.
28. But there was no necessity, reason, cause, or ground at all, of altering
this beginning and end of days at Evening: therefore Christ's Resurrection did
not alter or abolish it.

Fourthly, the alteration, limitation, of times, days, and seasons, is a
Peculiar Prerogative of God the Father, reserved Proof 4.
in his own power, not in Christ's, as is manifest by Acts 1. 7. Matthew. 24. 36.
Mark 13. 32. Levit. 23. 2. etc. Psalm. 118. 23, 24. Exodus 13. 2, 3, 6, 14. Exodus
20. 1, 8, 10, 11. compared with Daniel 2. 20, 21. Psalm. 74. 16, 17. Jer. 33.
20. c. 31. 35. Psalm. 136 1. 7, 8, 9. upon which Privilege Royal none
anciently durst encroach, but that presumptuous Horn, typifying the Papacy.
Dan. 7. 25. Christ therefore by his bare Resurrection made no such alteration
of the days inchoation, having no special Commission from his Father so to do.

Fifthly, there is not one word or syllable in all the Scripture, which either
affirms or intimates, that Christ's Proof 5.
Resurrection made any mutation of the beginning or end of days, neither can
any man produce one substantial reason, grounded on Scripture, why Christ's
resurrection should cause such a change as this: or why his resurrection should
do it, rather than his Nativity, Passion, or Ascension. Therefore I may saf^ly
conclude, that it made no such change until the contrary can be proved.

Sixthly, the Scripture is express, that Christ's Resurr^ction did no ways
change either the order, name, or Proof 6.
nature of that day whereon he aros^. For all the Evangelists speaking of it as
Christ's Resurrection day in their Histories of the Resurrection (penned some
space after it) ever style it, The first day of the week, Math. 28. 1. Mark 16.
29. Luke 24. 1. John 20. 1. 19. the very name that was given it at the
Creation, Genesis 1. 5. which was still retained after our Saviors Resurrection
and Ascension: Acts 20. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 2. having no other title at all imposed
on it but this in Scripture. (that of Revel. 1. 10. to wit, the title of
Lord's Day, being applied by some to the seventh day Sabbath; by others, ^o Psalm
12. ^. 14.
Easter day only: yet by See Mr. For, Dr. Fulk and others on Apoc. 1. 10 D.
Bownd and others of the Sabbath.
most to the Lord's Day) for ought that certainly appears. Which name implies,
that it continued the same after Christ's Resurrection, as before; the First day
of the Week, for number, order; beginning the week as before; and so by
consequence commencing at Evening as before; it being the same in name, in
order, in nature (though not in use and observation amongst Christians) as it
was at the Creation: Therefore the same in its inception too, and so not
altered from Evening to morning.

Seventhly that very first day on which Christ arose in Scripture and divine
account began and ended at Evening Proof 7.
(not at morning or midnight) as I have undeniably proved at large in the third
Conclusion: Christ's Resurrection therefore, did no ways alter or translate the
beginning of it from morning to Evening, as some f^lsely affirm, but never
prove: And if it made no such mu^ation of the beginning and end of that same
First day on which he arose; much less then of any other that succeeded it, or
of the other week days on which he did not rise again. Christ's Resurrection
did not actually translate the beginning of that first day on which he
arosegain from Evening to Morning: For had that day begun at Morning, just at
or from the time which he arose ((...) some pretend) then he had not risen
again upon the third, but on the second day from his Passion; which directly
oppugnes the Acts 10. 40. 1 Cor. 13. 4.
Scripture, and the Article of our Creed, that he rose again the third day from
the dead, not the second. To make this reason evident. The Morning of this
first day began not till day breaking, or daylight: and if this first day
began then too, Christ certainly did not, could not rise upon it, but before
it, and so on the second day: For the women came to the Sepulcher when it was
yet dark (before daylight appeared, or the Saint Luke says it was in the very
profundity or beginning of the morning, Luke 24* 1.
day began in this account) and yet Christ was then risen: John 20. 1, 2.
therefore before the day began in this computation. And if they will begin it
from the time that Christ arose, since Christ's resurrection was the cause (as
they said) of this its new inception, or the Terminus a q^o, from whence it
began; they still sti^k fast in the same mir^. For if Christ's Resurrection
changed the commencement of this day, he must be actually risen ere this change
could be made, since the cause must necessarily precede the effect; which must
begin from and after it, not before, or with it; and if the moment of Christ's
Resurrection was the Terminus whence this day began (as they affirm;) his
Resurrection must needs precede the day, that point of time, from whence the
day begins being exclusive, as precedent to it, not inclusive, as any part or
parcel of it: and so Christ must necessarily rise, before this first day (to
wit, upon the Sabbath or second day) not upon or Mat. 27 63. Mark ^. 31.
after it began; and so, not upon the third, or first day of the week, as the
Scripture affirms: and by consequence not upon that Lord's Day which they
solemnize, from morning to morning, in memory of his Resurrection on it; which
by their own reasoning and computation was before it, not upon it. All which
considered, I may undoubtedly conclude, that Christ's Resurrection did no way^s
alter the beginning or end of days, (no not of that first day on which he
arose) from morning to Evening: So that this last Conclusion is infa^lib^.

These five Conclusions being thus premised, and I hope undeniably proved; I
shall now deduce five unanswerable Arguments from them to prove, that the
Lord's Day, does and ought of right to begin and end at Evening; not at
Arguments to prove that the Lords day begins at Evening.
morning or midnight.

1. If all days in Scripture and divine account do always begin and end at
Evening (not at morning or midnight) then the Lord's Day (being the first day of
the Argument 1.
week, and included in the universality of days) must do so too: But all days
in Scripture and divine computation, do always begin and end at Evening, (not
morning or midnight) as the first Conclusion mani^ests. Therefore the Lord's Day
does so too.

2. If the seventh day Sabbath in Scripture account did Argument 2.
always commence and determine at Evening, and the Jews did ever solemnise it
from Evening to Evening; then the Lord's Day (which succeeds it, and begins when
the Sabbath ends) must then begin and conclude; seeing all the week-dayes are
of the self-same length, and must have the same inception and Conclusion: and
since this Sabbath was thus solemnized long after our Saviors Resurrection by
the Apostles, Jews, and Christians too. Matthew. 24.. 20. Acts 13, 14, 27. 42. c.
14. 1. c. 15. 20, 21 c. 17. 1, 2, 10. c. 18. 4. But the seventh day Sabbath in
Scripture calculation did always commence and determine at Evening, and the Sea Mr. George Widly his Doctrine of the Sabbath. and others forecited.
Jews did ever solemnize it from Evening to Evening; as the second Conclusion
testifies: Therefore the Lords day must then begin and conclude.

3. If that very first day of the week whereon our Savior rose again, began
and ended at Evening in divine account, even as it was his Resurrection day:
then the Lords day (kept in memory of his Resurrection on that Argument 3.
day) being the self same day of the week, and having the self same limits as
that day had; must then begin and end likewise. But that very first day of the
week, whereon our Savior rose again began and ended at Evening in divine
compute, even as it was his Resurrection day: Therefore the Lords day in
respect of its weekly observation and solemnization in memory of our Savlours
Resurrection on it, must commence and detemine at Evening too. The s^quel is
u^deniable; the minor is fully proved in the third Conclusion; so the Argument
is unanswerable.

4. This beginning and determination of days at Evening Argument 4.
be natural and immutable, therefore the Lords day must have, can have, no
other inception or conclusion, but at Evening.

5. I Christ's Resurrection in the morning did no ways alter the beginning or
end of days, nor yet translate the Argument 5.
beginning of that day whereon he arose, from Evening to morning; then we ought
to make no such alteration; (for that were to be wiser than Christ, yea to
usurp Gods special Prerogative, to alter times, Dan. 2. 20, 21. c. 7. 25.) and
so must keep the Lord's Day from Evening to Evening, not from morning to
morning, or from midnight to midnight. But Christ's Resurrection in the morning,
did no ways alter the beginning and end of days; nor yet translate the
beginning of that day whereon he arose from Evening to Morning; Therefore the
Lord's Day ought to be kept from Evening to E^vening, not from morning to
morning, or midnight to midnight. What can be truly and substantially replied
to these five Arguments, I cannot conjecture, they being of sufficient weight
to oversway the balance of this Controversy.

Now to clear this truth more fully; I shall to these five Arguments,
accumulate ten reasons more, proving, that the Sabbath, and Lords day, ought to
begin at Evening.

First, because this inception of the Sabbath and Lords day, is most suitable
to the nature of these days. For the Reason 1:
Sabbath being nothing else in proper speech, but a day of rest, and being often
times styled in Scripture a Sabbath of rest, Exodus 16. 23. c. 23. 12. c. 31.
15. c 34. 21. c. 35. 2, Levi. 16. 31. c. 23. 3. 32. c. 15. c. 25. 21. c. 34.
21. Deuteronomy. 5. 14. (both man and beast being enjoined to rest from their labors
on this day:) it is most agreeable to reason, and the equality of the day, that
this resting day should begin at Evening, when men naturally and customarily
begin their rest, and end their labors: rather than at morning, when they
commonly begin their work; or at Midnight, when as they are in the mid^est of
their rest and sl^ep. For when can a day of rest so aptly commence, as when men
begin their rest? their resting on it from other labors, being one part of the
solemn zation of it? This therefore being the fittest time to begin the day; no
doubt, but God (who does all things wisely and in the Eccles 3. 1. etc. Psalm.
104. 23, 24.
aptest season) has ordered that it should then commence, (^s I have
manifested in the foregoing Conclusions) it being most proportionable to the
nature of the day.

Secondly, this commencement is most agreeable to Gods own example, and to the
fourth Commandment: Reason 2.
for God began his seven days rest, For his work that he finished on the
seventh day, was only his Creation, ^lessing and Sanctification of that day
alone: as Pascatius Ra^bertus in Mat. 28. 1. Rabanus, Maurus and others teach.
Reason 3.
so soon as ever he ceased from his six days works of Creation, Genesis 2. 1, 2.
3. Exodus 20. 9, 10. yea the fourth Commandment prescribing us to labor six
days, and to do all our work, and to rest the seventh day; implies, that we
should b^gin our Sabbath days rest, when as we finish our six days wo^k: and
that is at Evening, not at morning or midnight. Therefore we should then
commence our sanctification of it, and rest upon it.

Thirdly, this beginning of the Sabbath and Lord's Day, is every way best for
men, as most consonant to the course of nature, and their common practice, for
men naturally and customarily (and that by Gods own appointment, and the
Scriptures approbation) end their weekday labors at Evening and b^gin their
rest at See 6 H. S. c. 3 7. H. 8 c ^. 3 Eliz c 4 Rastabl. Labovers, 35. 3^.
which appoint Laborers to ^ begin their work at morning, and ^^d it a^ Evening.
or night, witness Ps. 124. 22, 23. The Sun arises man goes forth unto his
work, and to his labor until the Evening, John 9. 4. I must work the works of
him that sent me, whiles it is called to day, the night comes when no man can
work, Judge 19. 16. Behold there came an old man from his work out of the field
at Evening, Z^ph. 2. 7 In the houses of Askelon they shall lie down in the
Evening, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 7 Those that sleep, sleep in the night, together with Genesis
19. 1, 2. Exodus 18 14. Genesis 2^. 11. Numb 29. 19. Levit. 19. 13. N^b 4. 21 Judge.
19. 4. 11. Eccle^ 2. 23 Number 22: 21. Judge. 9. 33. c. 20. 19. c. 19. 8. Hos. 7.
6. Is. 5. 11. whereas as by a natural insti^ct, and Gods command they usually
begin their work in the morning, not their rest, as is evid^nt by Eccles 11. 6.
In the morning sow thy seed, Mat. 20. 1, 2, 3. The Kingdom of heaven is like
to a man that is an householder, which went out early in the morning to hire
Laborers into his vineyard, and by Genesis 19. 15 c. 28. 24. 54 44. 3. Exodus 20.
1. c. 18. 14. Judge. 20. 19. Ruth 3. 13, 14. Psalm. ^ 27. 2. 1 Chronicles. 23 30. Mat.
27. 1. Psalm. 104. 22. 23 Now the Sabbath being a day of rest from labor, and
being likewise made for man, no^ man for it. Mark. 2 27. and men naturally and
ustomarily in all ages, all ^l^ces, by Gods own ordination, determining their
weekly labors, and beginning their rest at Evening; it is most fit, mo^^
proper, and convenient, in respect of men, and this their natural use, that
the Sabbath, and Lords day should begin at Evening, when as they voluntarily
and naturally ce^se their secular labors, and devote themselves to r^st. But
most unsuitable and inconvenient to begin it in the morning, the time when work
begins, or at midnight, when half their rest is past. Neither is this reason to
be sl^ighted; For all things being made Mark 2 27. Genesis 1 28, 29: 1 Cor. 3 21.
22 Heb. 2 7, 8. Psalm. 8. 4, 5.
for man, and the Sabbath too, no doubt but God did accommodate and suit them
in such manner, as should be most commodious and convenient for men, and most
consonant to the natural course of their affairs. This Inchoation therefore of
the Sabbath and Lord's Day, being most proportionable to the natural order of
men's working, See Eccles. 3. 1. ^0 12. 1 Co^. Cor. 14. 33. 40.
and rest (and so the more easy and possible to be observed by them) is no
doubt the truest, the properest of all others; and therefore ought to be
embraced.

4. That the beginning of the Sabbath, and Lord-day Reason 4.
which is easiest for Christians to observe, and does best of all begin the
sanctification of them, is questionless, the best, the tru^st: But this
beginning them at Evening is such:

1. Because men then naturally end their worldly employments, and begin their
rest, ^ven of their own accord without constraint: and what so easy, as that
which is naturally and voluntary?

2. Because all men that have any Religion or show of Christianity in them, do
then constantly fall to their private devotions and family duties, the Evening
being a fit time for holy meditations, prayers, and religious exercises, Genesis
24. 63. 1 Chronicles. 16. 14. 2 Chronicles. 13. 11. Psalm. 55. 47. Psalm. 65. 8 Dan. 9. 21.
Now what time so fit to begin the Sabbath and Lord's Day (appropriated Exodus 20
8. to 12. Isa. 58. 13 Deul. 5. 12. to 16.
wholly to Gods worship) as that whereon most Christians voluntarily and
constantly apply themselves unto his immediate Service in their closets or in
their family devotions?

3. These days are days of Exodus 20. 8. to 12. 6. 31. 13, 14, 15. 6. 35. ^.
Levit. 23. 2, 3, 4. Deuteronomy. 5. 12 Isa. 58. 13. Neh. 9. 14.
bolynesse, and being such, ought always to begin and end with holy duties.
Every Christian will grant it fitting and convenient, if not necessary, that
the Lords day should be begun and ended with private, and continued with holy,
public exercises, suitable to the day. Which being so, if it should begin and
end at Midnight, what Christians usually do, or can conveniently begin and end
it thus? they being then at rest yea Acts 12. 6. Hosea 7. 6.
fast asleep in their beds, and that by the course of nature, and Gods own
appointment, without any sin at all, 1 These. 5. 7. Mat. 25. 5, 6. c. 26. 45.
And for men to be tied to rise up at midnight, or to sit up til then, to begin
then the Lord's Day, with holy duties, what an inconvenience and burden would
it be? Again if it should begin and determine at morning, so soon as daylight
begins; how many Christians are then up through the whole year on Lord's Day
mornings, and the mornings following, to commence and conclude it with holy
duties? yea what a vexation, and trouble would it be (especially to aged and
sickly persons) to rise every Lords day, and Monday at day-dawning, or some
space before, to begin and close it with meditations, prayers, praises,
devotions? Certainly if the Lord's Day should commence and end either at morning
or midnight, and Christians were tied in As most affirm they are, who differ
from me in this controversy.
point of conscience, to begin and conclude it with holy exercises, most men
would grow weary of observing it, and cast off the sanctification of it as an
intolerable burden. But now if we begin and end it at Evening (when every man
is up, and ends his labors, and goes unto his private devotions and familiar
duties of his Psalm. 55. 17 and 141. 2.
own accord, and then enjoy this rest as on other Evenings) how easily and
conveniently without any toil or inconvenience may all sorts of men begin and
conclude it in an holy manner, without any disturbance of their na^ural sleep,
or endangering their health? and how sweetly, how comfortably may they embrace
the inception, and take their farewell of the conclusion of it? with what
delight, pleasure, ease and conuenience, may they sanctify it: This beginning
and ending therefore of the Sabbath and Lord's Day, being the easiest of all
others, the best for all Christians to take hold of without any pain or
inconvenience; the best for the true, and pious commencement and conclusion of
these days with holiness and devotion, is undoubtedly that which Godhimself
has instituted, and all Christians must retain; this being one main cause why
God commanded the Jews to sanctify their Sabbath, and keep their Festivalls
from Evening to Evening; Lev. 23. 32. Exodus 12. 18. because the Evening in all
the foreuamed respects, was most convenient and proper, to begin and end all
sacred days.

5. The Lord's Day (as all of the contrary opinion acknowledge) is substituted
in the place of the seventh day Reason 5.
Sabbath, in memorial of our Saviors resurrection upon it: But that Sabbath
(as the premises evidence) began and concluded at Evening: therefore the
Lord's Day should do so too, it being but the ancient weekly Sabbath transl^ted
to another day; and there being no preceptnor president in Scripture, to begin
the Sabbath or Lord's Day at morning or midnight; but both Precepts and examples
to commence and end it at Evening, as the foregoing Conclusions prove. The
rather because It is confessed by all my Opposites in opinion; That the
Lord's Day succeeds the seventh day Sabbath, and is to be weekly, wholly and
entirely consecrated to Gods public and private worship; and that by the very
Equity and Morality of the fourth Commandment. Which is the received opinion
not only of most of our own Writers, who have written of the Sabbath or
Lord's Day, and commented on the fourth Commandment by learned Henry Bullinger,
Decad. 2. c. 4. Joannes Pappus enar. in Isaiam c. 58. and very many of the
Learnedest Protestant Writers in foreign parts, quoted by learned Wallaeus in
his Disputatio de Sabbato, to which I refer the Reader for fuller satisfaction;
But likewise of the learnedest popish Schoolmen, Commentators, and writers of
all sorts; as namely of Peter Lombard lib. 3. sententiarum: Distinctio 37.
Richardus de media Villa, Joannes Scotus, Henricus de Veru-Maria,
Christopherus, Silvestranus, Gulielmus Estius and others in lib. 3.
Sententiarum. Distinct. 37. Dionysius Carthusianus, in lib 3. sententiarum.
Distinct. 37. and in Fxod Enarratio c. 20. where he thus writes. Memento ut
diem Sabbati sanctifices, id est, in sanctis operibus diem illum expendas, and
divino cultui arplicas eum: Per quod and nunc DIEI DOMINICI JVBETVR
CELLEBRITAS. Bonaventura in lib. 3. sentent. Distinct. 37. Sermones de december
Praeceptis. Sermon. 4. operum, Tom. 7. p. 8. and speculum Animae c. 2. ibid. p.
35. where he determines thus. Per hoc autem in Lege NOSTRA DOMINICA
intelligitur Observatio siquidem DIEI DOMINICI E^T DE JVRE DIVINO, scilicet
PRAECEPTUM DIVINVM, ut habetur in Exodo: Memento ut Diem Sabbati sanctifices,
etc. sancti Raymundi Lumina. lib. 1. Tit. de Feriis ac Festis, p. 110. 111.
acute Thomas Aquinas in lib. 3. sentent. Distinct. 37. Artic. 5. and 2. Quaest.
122. Artic. 4. with all his fo^lowers on these places. Hugo Cardinalis Comment
in Exodus ^0. Tostatus Abulensis in Exodus 20. qu. 11, 12, 13. (an exc^llent
pregnant Discourse to this purpose) and in 1. Regum Tom. 1. p. 128. Joannes
Gerson Compendium Theologiae in 3. Praeceptum Operum Tom 2. p. 56. Astensis
summa lib. 1. Tit. 22. De observantia Sabbati, Ang^lus de Clavatio, summa
Angelica. Tit. Praeceptum sect. 2, 3, 7. Bernardinus senensis. Sermo. 10. de
Observantia Sabbati, (an excellent, full, pious Discourse) Paulus de sancta
Ma^ia, sc^utiniun: Scripturarum, pars 1. Distinct. 8. c. 14. Antonius
Cadubi^nsis Quastionarii lib 1 qu 5. Jacobus de Valentia adversus Judaeos. qu.
2. Soto, de justitia and jure, lib. 2. qu. 3. Art. 5 qu. 4 Domincus Bannes 2a
secundae qu. 44. Artic. 1. Didacus stella Comment in Luc. c. 14. Couarruinas,
Resolutionum lib. 4. c 19. Conclus. 4. and 5. Joannis Nyder, as also Michael
Marspurgiensis in 3. Praeceptum. Enchiridion Christianae institutionis, set
forth by the whole Council of Colen, An. 1536 in 3. Praeceptum. f. 270. to 276.
Hector Pintus: Comment. in Isaiam cap. 56. and in Ezech. cap. 20. Ambrosius.
Catherinus Enar. in Genesis c. 2. p. 122, 123. Petrus Binsfeldius Enchiridion
Theologiae Pastoralis pars 3. c. 10. p. 320. Cardinal Bellarmin, de cultu
sanctorum, lib. 3. c. 11. Azorius the Jesuit. Instit. Moralium pars 2. lib. 1.
c. 2. Lorinus Comment. in Deuteronomy. c. 5 p. 222, 223, 224. Petrus Vincentius de
Marzilla, Annotatio in Exodus c. 20. Annot. 3. p. 249. Corne^ius a Lapide
Comment. in Deuteronomy. 5. p. 975. Leonardus Marius Comment. in Exodus c. 20. Number. 47.
p. 504. Vincentius Filiucius. Moralium Quaestionum. Tom. 2 in 3. Praecepium
Deoalogi c. 1. sect. 7. to 11 p. 250. etc. 2. p. 251. Ludovicus Ystella
Comment. in Exodus 20. p. 124. To whom I shall annex our own irresragable
English Doctors, Alexander Alensis, summa Theology pars 3. qu. 32. Memb. 2.
Nicholaus de Lyra, a converted English Jew, Comment. in Exodus 20. John Peelham
Archbishop of Canterbury, and William Lyndwood Constit. Provincialium. lib. 1.
de officio Archiepresbyteri, f. 40. 41. Thomas Waldensis; Doctrinale Fidei Tom.
3. Tit. 16. c. 140. De celebrando festive, DIEM DOMINICUM sine mundanis
operibus. The Flower of the Commandments of God on the third Commandment.
Dives and Paurer on the third Commandment, c. 11. f. 120. printed in times of
Popery: all of them resolving, the fourth Commandment to be Moral still in
force, obliging all Christians under the Gospel to the weekly observation and
sanctification of the entire Lord's Day, That TOTVS ILLE DIES TVTALITER DIVINO
CVLTVI APPLICANDVS EST; and NIHIL ALIUD AGENDUM NISI DEO VACANDUM: and that
because DIES INTEGER, and SABBATUM TOTUM cultui divino SACRATUR: not two or
three hours of it only devoted to the public exercise of Gods worship in the
Church as some new Bish. White. Dr. Heylin Mr. Ironside, in their Treatises and
History of the Sabbath, Dr. Joh. Pocklingtons Sunday no Sabbath, p. 6, 7.
printed sincei this was first penned, see Canterburies Doom, p. 222, 223, etc.
Doctors assent; who allot the rest to Sports, Pastimes, and wordly labors or
affairs; being more lic^ntious and profane than Papists in this point, who are
generally as strict as the greatest Puritan writers in their Doctrines, for
their entire sanctification of the Lords day; and against the use of all
ordinary labors, sports, pastimes, dancing, enterludes, and carnal pleasures
on it or any part thereof, even from Evening to Evening, when they begin and
end it. Now if the Lord's Day it self, be thus to be sanctified and solemnized
by Christiaans, even by the equity and Morality of the fourth Commaudement it
self, literally commencing only the sanctification of the seventh day Sabbath,
which began and ended always at Evening. Then it must by the very equity and
morality of the sourth Commandment, be sanctified and solemnized by Christians
from Evening to Evening, as the seventh dae Sabbath was, both by Jews and
Christians, heretofore by virtue of this Precept, which Reason our Opposites
can no ways evade.

6. Our opposites themselves, apply all Texts and precepts in the Old
Testament, for the sanctification of the Reason 6.
seventh day Sabbath unto the Lord's Day Sabbath, as being all one with it in
substance. Why then should they or any other, reject that Text of Levit. 23.
32. From Even to Even ye shall celebrate your Sabbath. refuse the usual
Scripture computation of the beginning and ending all days, all Festivalls at
Evening; and affix a new incep^ion or and to the Lord-day (and all other days
too) at Morning or midnight, which the sacred Writ does no ways warrant: As
therefore they apply most other things concerning the seventh day Sabbath to
the Lords day, so must they now the time and Texts for its beginning too,
unless they can give good Scripture reasons for it, which no man can do.

7. The beginning of the Lord's Day and Sabbath at Evening, as soon as the Sun
sets, or the Evening-star begins Reason 7.
to shine, as it is most certain, (whereas the beginning of it from the hour or
moment of Christ's Resurrection, which is not certainly known nor expressed by
the Evangelists, is arbitrary and uncertain, and so not to be embraced:) so is
it m^st consonant to that rest or Sabbath in heaven, of which these Sabbaths
are a real type. Heb. 4. to 11. For our heavenly Sabbath ever begins in the
very Evening, and Sunset of our days, when death puts a period to them, Rev
14. 13. Job 3. 17, 18. or at least at the Evening and period of this world,
when days shall be no longer, Rev. 10. 6, 7. Therefore by the analogy of the
type to the substance, those Sabbaths should begin at Evening too, when the
daylight ends: the rather, because the Evening usually puts an end to our
Labors, and begins our ordinary rest, as death (the Evening of our days)
concludes our earthly toyls and travels, and commenceth our heavenly rest, Rev.
14. 13.

8. This beginning of the Sabbath and Lords day at Evening, does best prepare
men for the sanctification Reason 8.
and duties of it, and most of all prevent the profanation of it.

For first it makes men to put a timely period to their weekly labors on
Saturday Evening, and then to begin the sanctification of it with private
meditations, prayer, singing of Psalms, reading the Scriptures, catcchifing of
their children, and families, examination of their own hearts and ways, and
such like holy duties: where as the Doctrines of its beginning at midnight or
morning light (as woeful evperience witnesses) makes many spend a great part
of the Satturday Evening and night, (when the Sabbath and Lord's Day begin in
true calculation) especially in Cities and market Towns, in buying, selling,
drinking, gaming, who^ing, and such like worldly or carnal employments; which
this Doctrine of its commencement at Evening would easily redress.

2. It causes men to go to bed, and take their rest In due season, to rise the
more early in the morning, to come to the public duties of Gods Worship, with
greater cheerfulness, and better Preparation, and so to receive more profit by
them: to resort more timely to the Church, to dispatch their own private
devotions, before they go to the public Assemblies, and to be every way more
holy and active: whereas the other Midnight or morning inception of it, makes
Trades men and others to set up Saturday nights (as we erroneously both call
and repute them, very late about secular, or vi^ious, sinful employments
(there being more sins for the most part, and disordrs committed that Evening
and night, then on any, or all the other six: to lie long in bed the Lords day
morning; to come very late to Church, or not at all; to repair to public
duties without any, (or at least with small) preparation, bringing along with
them heads, and hearts full of worldly cares, of sinful thoughts, of
unlamented iniquities, and as full of deadness, and drowfinesse; which makes
them either to sleep out prayers and Sermons too, or not to observe and mind
them, as they ought: all which the Evening, beginning thereof would readily and
best prevent. Wherefore I may safely conclude, that the Sabbath and Lord's Day
ought of right to b^gin at Evening since God (being Romans 16. 27.
only wise) would certainly institute such an inchoation of them, as might best
prepare and enable men to their Sanctification, and most anticipate their
profanation; the cause why he prescribed the celebration of the Sabbath from
Even to Even, Levit. 23. 32. if I righly conjecture.

9. It is confessed by all, that in the Scripture and Israelites account, all
days began at Evening, as I have proved Reason 9.
at large before: It is likewise most certain that Christ and his Apostles
being Israelites, did ever constantly observe the Scripture, and their own
national computation of the beginning and end of days, it being that which
Christ himself, and all the Evangelists follow, as I have evidenced at large,
in the third and fifth Conclusions; neither is it any way probable that Christ
and his Apostles, (or the Primitive-Church and Christians, who were in all
things guided by them) did or would alter this their National and divine
beginning, or concluding of days, there being no ground or reason for it, for
ought that yet appears. If therefore the Lord's Day were instituted and
consecrated for a Sabbath, by Christ himself, as many or by his Apostles, as
most; or by the Primitive Church Christians only, soon after the Apostles
time, as others affirm; (one of which three opinions is and must be granted by
them for undoubted truth) then it is most certain, that it must and did (at its
very first institution and observation) begin and end at Evening (not at
morning or Midnight or because Christ himself, his Apostles, and the Primitive
Church did ever constantly observe this computation; Therefore they would not,
did not institute any other beginning of it, but this alone: which reason (in
my poor weak apprehension) is so solid, that it admits of no evasion or reply.
Lastly, That beginning and end of the Lord's Day, which Reason 10.
the Church and people of God in all ages, from the first institution of the
Lord's Day to this present age, have constantly observed, and the Church and
learned in those ages pofitively in express terms resolved, to be most true
and genuine, is Quicquid enim omnes vel plures, uno eodemque sensu, man feste,
f^^quenter, pe^s^veranter, v^lu^ quodam sibi consentiente magistrorum Conc^lio
accipiondo, tenendo, tradend, fi^maverint id pro indubitato rato, ritoque
habeatur Vincentius Lirinensis. contra Haereses c. 39. q In his Chronol. l. 2.
c. 1.
questionless the proper infallible inception and conclusion thereof (This no
man I presume, either will or can deny.) But this beginning and ending of the
Lord's Day at Evening, which I here pl^ad for, is that which the Church and
people of God in all ages, from the first in stitution of the Lord's Day to this
present age have constantly observed, and the Church and learned in those age,
have positively in express terms resolved to be most true and genuine: none
^ver oppngning i^ till q Wolphius, about some sixty years since, the first I
find or hear of, that broached ^^ is new opinion of its beginning at morning,
because our Savior did then rise again; whose authority and sophistical
reason (a mere Non sequitur, as I shall prove anon) has s^duced and drawn
over many unto his opinion, both in their judgments and practice too)
Therefore it is questionless the proper infallible inception and Conclusion
thereof. The Minor which is only liable to exception (and may seem a Paradox
to some, who over-rashly style this Position of the Lords-dayes beginning at
Evening, an upstart novelty never heard of in the Church of God till this
present age, in truth because th^mselves are ignorant in Antiquities, and
versed only in late modern writers, who fome^t the contrary Error, which I
da^e affirm, to be the late sigment of some modern Auth^^u^s, not once so much
as heard of in any former ages, which I here challenge them to disprove:) I
shall make good by unanswerable Reasons and Authorities, (as I conceit them)
even from the very Apostles time to this present Century; and that in a
Chronologicall method, beginning with the Primitive times, and so descending in
order to this present age.

It is a Querie, not yet resolved amongst Divines, when and by whom the
observation of the Lord's Day for a Sabbath, was instituted? Some hold it was
instituted by Christ himself between his Resurrection and Ascension: Others
that it was instituted by the Apostles after Christ the Ascension, but at what
certain time they do not accord. A third sort affirm, that it was ordained
only by the Primitive Church, and Christians a little after the Apostles
times, or as the Anno 1557. a pud Bochellum Decret. Eccles. Gal. l. 4. Tit. 10.
c. 1. p. 596.
Council of Paris and others affirm, by the Council of Laodicea, about 360
years after Christ, but not by Christ or his Apostles. For my own part, as I
shall not peremptorily resolve in this place, which of these opinions is the
truest, it being not the scope of this present discourse: ^eferring you to Mr.
Sprint, Dr. Bownd, Mr. Widly, Mr. Dod, Mr. Cleaver, Mr. Bernard, Dr. Twisse,
Bishop Andrews, the Practice of Piety, Mr. Elten and others, who have written
of this subject, and on the fourth Commandment, for satisfaction herein, which
requires a particular Tract. So I shall on the other side positively affirm,
that let the Lord's Day be instituted either by Christ himself, or the Apostles,
or the Primitive Church and Christians succeeding next after the Apostles,
about the end of the first Century after Christ, (at which ti^e it is clear by
the testimonies of Ignatius, Clemens Alexandrinus, Justin Martyr, Tertullian,
Irenaeus, Pliny, and others, that the Lords day was usally solemnized by
Christians) yet the first Institutors of it, and the Primitive Christians who
first observed it, did ever begin and end it at Evening, which I shall make
good by these reasons, (there being no direct convincing authority ^^^ant,
either when the Lord's Day was first instituted, or ^t what time it was first
appointed to begin.)

1. If Christ or the Apostles constituted it for a Sabbath, it is more then
probable, if not certain, that they Reasons.
ordained it to begin and end at Evening.

1. Because they being all Jews, and ever exactly following the Scripture, and
their own National account, of commencing the day at Evening, as I have
formerly euidenced; we cannot conceive that they should institute any new
beginning of the Lorde-day, at Midnight or Moruing, contrary to the Scripture,
and their received Count^ey account, but that they still observed this usual
and divine computation, even in the Institution, and Solemnization of this day.

2. Because this beginning of this day being immutable, and in Dam. 2. 21.
God the Fathers power only to alter, not in theirs; it had been a presumption
in them to change it, without a special Commission from him; the times being
still in his power, even at Christ's Ascension, not in Christ's or his Apostles,
Acts 1. 7. But we never read of any such Commission granted them to alter this
day from Evening to morning, therefore it is presumption, yea folly to believe
or assirm it.

3. Because the Lord's Day (as all sides accord) was instituted in memory of
Christ's resurrection on the first day of the week. Now the first day (as I have
manifested) began and ended at Evening in divine Evangelicall account, even as
our Saviors Resurrection day; neither did his Resurrection on it alter its
beginning from Evening to morning: Therefore the Lord's Day being but the first
day of the week, and having the same beginning and setting as Christ's very
resurrection day had, must begin, and end at Even, at its Primitive Institution
and observation: neither did or could the Institution of the first day of the
week for a Sabbath, in memory of Christ's Resurrection, change the beginning of
the day, since Christ's resurrection it self in the morning, (the supposed cause
of this alteration) did it not.

4. Because Christ, or his Apostles* would never consecrate a day in memory of
the Resurrection on it, within the compass of which day Christ did not rise
again: for that were a great absurdi^y: But had they consecrated a Lord's Day to
begin at Morning from day-breaking, or from the very time that Christ ar^se
(which is uncertain, unknown, and so this Lordsdayes beginning too) they had
instituted such a Lord's Day within the compass of which Christ did not rise,
he being risen before daybreak, whiles it was dark Matthew. 28. 2. John 20. 1.
and his Resurrection being but the point, from which the day begins, and so not
within it, on it, but before it. Therefore they instituted it to begin at
Evening, not at morning.

5. It is certain, that Christ himself, his Apostles, and the Primitive
Christians, for some good space of time did constantly observe the seventh day
Sabbath, after Christ's Passion, and Resurrection; the Evangelists, and Saint
Luke in the Acts, ever stiling it, the Sabbath Day, (which name it yet retains
in Dies Sabbati being the Latin name for Saturday.
Latin) and making mention of its conscionable solemnization by the Apostles,
and other Christians. Mark 16. 1. Luke 23. 56. See Mark 15. 42. and Luke 23.
54. Matthew. 24. 20. Acts 1 12. c. 13, 14, 27. 42. 44. c. 14. 1. c. 15. 20, 21.
c. 17. 1, 2, 10. and c. 18. 4. it being still solemnized by many Christians,
after the Apostles times, even till the Council of Laodicea, about the year of
our Lord 360. as Ecclesiastical writers, and the 29th Canon of this Council
testify, which runs thus, Surius Council. Tom. 1. p. 436.
Quod non oportet Christianos Judaizare, and otiare in Sabbato, sed operari in
eodem die. (which many did refuse at that time to do:) Praeferentes autem in
veneratione Dominicum diem (there being then a great Controversy among
Christians, which of these two days, the seventh day Sabbath, or the Lord's Day
should have precedence, Athanasius de interp. Psalmi and 302. A. and Homilia De
semente p. 365. Ignatius Epist. 6. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 1. p 81. and Epist. 8. p.
84. E. Clemens Romanus, Constit. Apost. l. 2. c. 63. l. 7. c. 36. l. 8. c. 39
Surius Council Tom. 1. p. 68. 105, 110. a. Primasius Comment in Retor. 83.
Sozomenus Histor. Ecclesiast. l. 7. c. 19, Tom. Bibl. Pat. 5. pars 2. p. 435.
F. 6. Socrates Scholasticus Ecclesiast. hist. lib 5. c. 21. p. 35. 3. Nice
phorus callist. Eccles. Hist. lib. 12. c. 34 p. 357. Centur. Magdeburg. Centur.
1. pars 2. cap. 6 col 493. l. 50. 503. De Festis, Centur. 4. c 6. col. 410 c.
15. col. 1466. Centur. 5. c. 6. col. 648. Centur. 8. c. 6. Col. 342. l. 40.
Beda in Lucae Evangelium. l. 2. cap 4. Tom. 5. Col. 263. Apost. Canon. Can. 65.
Surius Council. Tom. 1. p. 30 Chrysostom. Hom. 11. in Genesis 2. Tom. 1. Col. 58 B.
C. Synodus Parisiensis, Anno 1557. apud Bochellum. Decret. Eccles. Gal. p. 598.
Concilium Laodicense. Diem Sabbathi in diem Dominicum mutavit, ne Judaismum
imicare videremur, writes this Council of Paris.
both of them being then observed by some) si vacare voluerint, ut Christiani
hoc faciant; Quod si reperti fuerint Judaizare Anathema sint a Christo. Since
thererefore the seventh day Sabbath was thus solemnized by Christ, the
Apostles, and Primitive Christians, after the resurrection till this Laodicean
Council did in a manner quite abolish the observation of it: it necessarily
follows, that they began their Lord's Day celebration at Evening. For the
seventh day Sabbath, (as I have proved in the second Conclusion) did ever begin
and end at Evening, and is so solemnized and begun by the Jews at this day:
Wherefore they concluding this day at Evening, they must necessarily begin the
Lords day then, because the first day of the week which they celebrated as the
Lord's Day, did then commence? the Evening following the seventh day Sabbath,
being apart of it in their account, and one day ever necessarily beginning when
the other ends. To these sive Reasons I might add those others formerly
alledg^d to prove that the Lord's Day ought to begin at Evening. All which being
laid together, are an infallible proof; that admit the Lord's Day instituted by
Christ and his Apostles, yet it was ordained by them from the very first, to
begin and end at Evening, and so to be solemnized, and that themselves did thus
begin it. If it were only instituted by the primitive Christians See Breutius
in Levit. 23. 2. and 25 8.
succeeding them, no question but they at first concluded, that it should be
sanctified from Evening to Evening, many of them being Jews, who kept all their
Sabbaths and Festivals from Evening to Evening, to whom the other Christians
did readily conform in this particular, because it was the Scripture
computation, even from the Creation, and for other premised Reasons. For the
Apostles themselves, and other Christians condescending to them for a time, in
the point of Circumcision, Purification, and other such Ceremonies, quite
abrogated by Christ's death, Acts 21. 20 to 28. 1 Cor. 9. 20. Gal. 2. 14, 15. c.
6. 12. would certainly concur with them in the beginning and ending of their
Sabbaths, and sacred festivities, which were no ways ceremonial, nor altered,
nor abrogated by Christ's death. From which premises I conclude; that let the
Lord's Day be instituted, when or by whomsoever, yet it was ordained in its
primary institution to be solemnized from Evening to Evening, and that it was
sanctified in this manner by its original Institutors. To put this out of
question, I shall descend from the alleged reasons, to direct Authorities,
culling out some few of the chiesest in all ages, and pretermitting all the
rest for brevity sake. I shall begin with the ancientest first, and so proceed
in order to our present times.

The first Authority I shall insist on, is, that of Acts 21. 7, 8, 11. (which
many object against me, though it be most pregnant for me) And upon the first
day of the week, when About Ann. Christi 56.
the Disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to
depart on the morrow, and continued his speech until Midnight: And there were
many lights in the upper chamber where they were gathered together, etc. When
therefore he was come up again, and had broken bread, and eaten, and talked a
long while, even till break of day, so he departed. This is the very first and
best Scripture Authority properly alleged for the solemnization of the
Lord's Day, by the Apostles and Christians of that age, who began the
celebration thereof at Evening, not at morning or midnight, as is plain by this
Text.

1. Because their solemnizing of it begun no doubt at that time, when as they
came together to break bread; that is, to receive the Sacrament, as most, or to
keep their Agape or Love Feasts, as others interpret it; or rather (in truth)
to do both: But the Christians in that time did both celebrate the Sacrament
and keep their Love Feasts at See Centur. Magd. 2. l. 2. c. 6. Col. 493.
accordingly, cent. 2. c. 6. col. 120. Augustinus de tempore, S^r. 25 1.
Tertullians Apology. c. 39.
Evening, in imitation of our Savior, who first instituted and kept the
Sacrament at Evening, after Supper, Luke 22, 20. John 13. 2, 4. c. 21. 20.
whence it is called the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11. 20. See Luke 14. 12, 16, 17,
24. Rev. 19. 9. 17. This is manifest by 1 Cor. 11. 20, 21. When ye come
together therefore into one place, this is not to eat the Lord's Supper: for in
eating every one takes his own supper; and one is hungry and another is
drunken: Now this Text styling the Sacrament, the Lords Supper, and informing
us, that the Corinthians did usually receive it after they had eaten their own
Suppers; and that some were drunk when they came to receive it (and in those
times, They that were drunk, were drunk in the night, 1 These. 5. 7.) ascertains
us, that this their coming to receive the Sea Acts 20. 31.
Sacrament and keep their Love Feasts, was at Evening or candletining, when it
was Supper time.

2. Because the Text says, There were many lights in the upper room where they
were gathered together; and that Paul preached from the time of their coming
together till midnight: Both which do manifestly declare their Assemblies begun
at Evening, as they anciently did, because there were many lights in the room
where they met, which were lightted (as the Text insinuates) before, or so soon
as they assembled in it: and because it is not probable that Paul (who begun
his Sermon when they came together, as the words imply) did preach from
Midnight, or the morning before, till midnight following, there being never
such a Sermon heard of: but only from Candle tining till midnight, the space
of four or five hours.

3. Because the Christians in the next succeeding ages, (as is manifest by
Epist. l. 10. Epist. 97.
Pliny and Apolog. c. 39.
Tertullian) did begin their Christian meetings, and Love Feasts at Evening,
whence they likewise styled them a Supper; which Tertullian thus describes,
Coena nostra de nomine rationem suam ^stendit. Vocatur enim Agape, id quod
penes Graecos dilectio est. Non prius discumbitur quam oration ad Deum
praegustetur: Editur quantum convenientes capiunt; bibitur quantum pudi^is est
utile: ita saturautur, ut qui meminerint, etiam PER NOCTEM adorandum sibi Deum
esse: which shows that they began their Feasts and Christian exercises, (which
he here conjoyns) at Evening, and continued them all night, as Saint Paul, and
the Disciples at Troas did. (Which meetings Theophilus Alexandrinus in his
Epist. Paschalis 3. 3. Bibl. Patrum, Tom. 4. p. 723. calls Vespertina
congregatio.) Post aquam manualem ac LVMINA (which manifests they kept their
Assemblies by Candle light, and so begun them at Evening) ut quisquis de
scripturis sanctis, vel de proprio ingenio potest, provocatur in medio Deo
canere; (which Epist. l. 10. Epist. 97.
Pliny the second styles, carmenque Christo, quasi dicere secum invicem;) hinc
probatur quomodo bibent. A^que oration convivium di^imit: Inde lis disceditur,
non in catervas caesionum, neque in Classes discursationum, nec in ^ruptiones
laseivorum, sed ad eandem ^uram modestiae, and pudicitiae, ut qui non tam
coenam coenaverint, quam disciplinam. Which usage well explains this place of
the Acts. It being apparent then (as the subsequent Antiquities will more
abundantly manifest) that this meeting of the Disciples at Troas, and Paul's
preaching to them began at Evening. The sole doubt will be what evening this
was? whether that which we call Sunday night (as many erroneously mistake) or
Saturday night? (which is the Lord's Day night if any:) For my own part I
conceive clearly, that it was upon Saturday night, (as we falsely call it) not
the ensuing Sunday night. For admitting the Lord's Day was then instituted for a
Sabbath) (which those of the opposite opinions grant and I consent to) there
will be no great question of it.

1. Because if the Christians at Troas observed this first day of the week as
their Sabbath, no doubt but this their meeting to solemnize it, and receive the
Sacrament on it, was rather that Evening which began, than that which ended the
Lord's Day, in their account; else they should have begun its solemnization
only when it ended, which is improbable. But our Sunday Evening (on which some
affirm this meeting) ended, not commenced the Lord's Day in their account, they
ever beginning their days the Evening before, as the premises manifest:
Therefore this Assembly, was on our Saturday Evening, there being no mention of
any meeting, the day or Evening before.

2. Because the Christians, in the next succeeding ages, (as I shall prove by
the following testimonies) did ever begin their Lord's Day assemblies and
solemnities on Saturday Evening; solemnizing it from Evening to Evening,
because the first observers of it did so. Therefore it is more than probable,
that these Christians at Troas did so too.

3. Because Saint Luke records that it was upon the first day of the week, when
this Meeting was, and this Sermon of Paul's made; therefore it must needs be on
the Saturday, not on our Sunday Evening, since the Sunday Evenning in S. Lukes,
and Scripture account, was no part of the first, but of the second day; the day
ever beginning and ending at Evening, in their computation, as the premises
evidence.

4. All my opposites confess, that the Disciples met at this time, upon the
first day of purpose to sanctify it for a-Sabbath; and can they then think
that they would defer their meeting till our Sunday Evening, when all the day
in their account (and the best, the chiefest part of it in their compute, who
begin it at midnight or morning) was expired? Certainly, this had been to make
the Lord's Day no Festival day at all, or at most not so much as an half-holy
day; which we cannot presume these Disciples, and S. Paul would dodid they
observe it as their Sabbath: From all which reasons I may more then probably
conclude, that it was the Saturday Evening (when the Lord's Day began) not the
Sunday night (when it ended) when this Divine Assembly was kept; the rather
because they received not the Sacrament, nor brake this bread till after
midnight, as the Text affirms; and so after the Lord's Day ended even in the
account of such who affirm it ends at midnight: And because this beginning of
their Assembly when the day begins, makes most for the Apostolical divine
Institution and sanctification of the Lords day; for the which this Text will
little avail, if this Assembly on it, were on our Sunday night, when the day
was either wholly or for the most part expired, and so this meeting no warrant
for its total sanctification.

But against this it will be objected, First, that Saint Paul departed from
Tro^ the very next morning at daybreak; Objection.
which he would not have done, had it been part of the Lord's Day, for he would
not have taken this journey then, l^st he should have profaned it. Besides,
the Text says, That he was ready to depart on the morrow; which signifies
another day, not the same: therefore this night must needs be our Sunday night,
his departure being on the morrow, to wit on our Monday, the next day after it.

To this I answer, First, that it is clear by Acts 20. 6. that Saint Paul ^ame
to Troas upon the Lord's Day: For he Answer.
stayed there seven days, And upon the first day of the week, he thus
preaches till midnight, ready to depart in the morning: so that the first day
was the last of those seven days, and ^he first day of the week preceding it,
the day on which he came to Troas: Paul therefore might as well depart on this
day from Troas, as he came unto it thereon. And that without profanation of
the day: for he came and went by ship, verse 6. 13, 14. and so might sanctify
the rest of the day a ship board, (as our mariners and passengers who sail on
the Lord's Day, as well as other days, use to do) because the wind and ^ide
then serving, and the ship in which he was to sail, being to depart that
morning, there was a necessity for him then to go a ship board, else he might
have lost his passage: which necessity and circumstance of sai^ing away that
day, made this his departure on it, no violation of the day: works of
necessity, being no breach of the Sabbath, as Mat. 12. 1. to 13. Luke 14 3. to
6. John 7. 22 23.
Christ himself, and all Divines resolve: the rather here, because he might
preach and spend the rest of the day in the ship as profitably as on the shore,
and the Mariners might likewise now set sail (the wind and weather serving)
without profanation of the day, as they still usually do in all places.

2. I answer, that the Morrow, has a double signification in Scripture.
Sometimes it is taken for the next See Mat. 6. 34. Luke 13. 32 33. 1 Samuel 9, 16
19. ^. 5. 3, 4. Jan. 4. 13. 14.
Evening or natural day: Other times it is taken for the next morning or
daylight, or that which we usually call day, in opposition to the night: not
for the next natural day, which begins at Evening, but the next artificial
day of twelve hours day light, which begins at Morning. In this sense it is
used most commonly in Scripture, witness Levit. 22. 30. When ye will offer a
sacrifice of thanksgiving to the Lord a^ your own will: on the same day it
shall be eaten up; ye shall leave none of it until the morrow: compared with
Levit. 7. 25. which speaking of the same offering, says, He shall not leave
any of it till the morning. (See Exodus 12. 10. c. 16. 19, 23, 24. where there
is the same expression) In which Texts the Morrow, is nothing else but the
morning following: for had this offering been at Evening, or night, whenthe
natural day begins in Scripture account, yet they might, not have reserved any
of it till the Morning, for that had been to morrow, as morrow is opposed to
the night not to the natural day. So in 1 Samuel 19. 11. Saul sent Messengers to
David's house that night to watch and to slay him in the morning: and Michall
told him, saying, if thou save not thy life to night, to morrow thou shall b^
slain. Where morrow is not put for another natural day (that morrow in
Scripture and the Jews account being part of that natural day, of which this
night was the beginning) but only for the daylight, or artificial day, being
the same natural day on which these words were spoken. Thus it is used in 2 Samuel 11. 9, 12, 13, 14. Esther 2. 14. So Zeph. 3. 3. Her Judges are
Evening-wolves, they gnaw not the bones till the morrow, that is, till the
morning following. And Acts 23. 31. 32. Then the Soldiers took Paul by night
and brought him to An^ipatris: on the morrow they left the horsemen to go with
him. In all which places the morrow is put only in opposition to the preceding
night, and for the day light following; (which night and morrow make up the
same natural day) not for the beginning of the next en^uing natural day, or
for another day. Hence the Scripture uses this phrase: The morrow after that
day, or after the Sabbath. Levit. 23. 11, 15. Josh 5. 12. 1 Chronicles. 29, 21.
because there is a morrow opposed to the night, wherein a thing is done or
spoken, which is a part of the same natural day, that the night is. In this
sense morrow must needs be taken here: for this meeting beginning but at night,
and Paul continuing his Preaching until midnight following, ready to depart on
the morrow: this morrow was nothing but the next morning; which was a part of
that first day, on which the disciple met, as it was a natural day consisting
of twenty four hours, and beginning but that Evening; not another day of the
week, or our Monday morning, as some affirm. This morrow therefore being but
the next morning, and opposed to the night only, (not to the natural day on
which this Assembly was kept at Troas; and this night being part of the first
day of the w^ek (which as a natural day in Scripture account b^gan at Evening)
could be no other but the Lord's Day morning, not the Monday following; and this
meeting (^s the promised Reasons prove) could be no tim^ else, but our Sa^u^day
night, notwithstanding this O^j^ction. So that I may safely conclude, that
Saint Paul and the Christians of Troas (the first solemnizers of the Lord's Day
that we ^ead of) did begin its solemnization at Evening, not at morning or
Midnight: Wherefore we ought to begin it then. This is my first Authority in
point of practice, to prove, that the Primitive Christians began the
Lords-dayes sanctification at Evening.

My next evidence is that of Epist. l. 10. 96. Epist.
Pliny the second, who Ann. Dom. 106.
writes thus to the Emperor Trajan, concerning the time, and manner of the
Christians solemnization of the Lords day. Soliti erant STATO DIE ANTE LUCEM
CONVENIRE carmenque Christo, quasi Deo dicere secum invicem; Seque SACRAMENTO
non in scelus aliquod, astringere, sed ne furta, ne latrocinia, ne adulteria
committerent, ne fidem fallerent, ne depositum appellati denegarent, etc. By
which it is evident, that the Christians in that age (a time of persecution)
and after ages too, did See Centuriae Magd 4. c 6. Col. 140. Theodoret. Eccles.
Hist. l. 2. c. 13. Socrates Scholasticus Hist. l. 6. c. 8. Sozomenus Hist.
Eccles. l. 8. c. 21 Victor de Vandalica persecutione. l. 2. Cent. Magd. 5 c. 2.
Col. 647, 648.
usually meet together to receive the Sacrament, and perform their holy
Exercises, at night, when it began to grow dark, and concluded them at
daylight or about daybreak, (as the disciples did at Troas, Acts 20. 7. to
12.) which Assemblies some Ecclesiastical Histories call, Antelucani coetus;
Night-Assemblies, or meetings, before day light; not because they began in the
morning about daybreak, as some would have it; but because they both began and
ended before day-dawning; the Christians in that time of persecution, not
daring to meet publicly in the day time for fear of apprehension. Now this set
night on which they kept those Assemblies was not our Sunday, but our Saturday
night, on which our Savior arose whiles it was dark: and in Honor of his
Resurrection did they begin and keep their Lord's Day solemnization, on this
night, not the night ensuing, as is evident by Justin Martyrs second Apology,
with other ensuing testimonies. And these their night conventions were the
Occasion of those slanderous imputations which the Gentiles cast upon the
Christians; See Tertulliani Apologia, Justine Martyrs Apologies, Anaxagoras
Oration pro Christianis.
that after their Exercises of Religion ended, they did use to put out the
lights (used to expel the darkness of the night, Acts 20. 8.) and then couple
promiscuously one with another, yea murder and eat up children, and commit all
manner of villainy. Since therefore they began their Lord's Day exercises at
Evening, before day light began; as this Heathen Author and all
Ecclesiastical Historians writing of this age, accord; we need not doubt, but
the day in their acc^mpt did then begin; since they would not begin the
exercises of the day till in truth it began.

My third Authority is that of Tertullian about 200 Anno 200.
years after Christ; in his A^ol^gy for the Christians, c, 38, 39. (the words
whereof I have already alleged) and de Corona militis c. 3. where he writes
thus. Eucharistiae Sacramentum in tempore victus, and mandatum a Domino,
ANTELVCANIS CAETILVS, nec de aliorum manu quam praesidentium sumimus: which
expressly shows; that the Christians of that age did begin their public Lords
day meetings, and Love feasts in the Evening, and spending the Saturday night
(as we falsely deem it) in Gods worship, receiving the Sacrament and other holy
duties; which night assemblies he styles, Ad exam. lib. 2. cap. 3. See
Augustinus de t^mpore, Sermo 251.
Nocturnae Convocationes; because they spent the greatest part of that night in
them: nocturnae properly, not morning, or early risings and mee^ings before
day, but a watching or fitting up all night, without going to bed, or taking
rest, as the common proverb, Nocturnae lucubrationes periculosissimae sunt;
compared with its opposite Adagie, Diluculo surgere saluberimum est; and Isa.
30. 29. Luke 2. 8. c. 5. 5. c. 6. 12. John 3. 2. Genesis 31. 39, 40. Number. 14. 1.
Josh. 10. 5. Prove. 31. 18. Psalm. 119. 75. with other Scriptures, testify.

But to pass by examples, and come to direct Authorities.

4. My fourth testimony is that of Athanasius, the great Anno 340.
Anti-Arrian Bishop of Alexandria Quaestiones ad Antiochum: Quaest. 52, 53. p.
380. Neque contra nos afferrent Judaei, quod in Sabbat^ surrexerit Christus,
ideo eorum or a long ant^ obturavit Deus, lege illis data; ut A VESPERA
OR^INENTVR DIEM SABBA^I. Cur hanc ^b causam and nobis Deus praecepit, A VESPERA
SABBATI ORDIRI DOMINICUM? Responsio. Non ob eam causam: sed postquam Deus
Gentes ex tenebris ignorantiae, and ex lege ad Lucem cognitionis Dei and
Evangelii vocavit; Convenienter san^ nobis PRAECEPII Resurrectionis ipsius
diem, A VESPERA INCHOARE and ad Lucem perducere. INDECORUM enim, and
INCONCINNUM FUERAT A LUCE ORDIRI, and in noctem and tenebris desinere Christi
verae lueis dies A most express resolution, that the Lord's Day ought to begin
from Saturday Evening, and that it is both unseem^y and unfit to begin it from
the morning. Answerable to which is that of Anselm. Enarrationes in Math. 28.
v. 1. 2 Operum, Tom. 1. p. 116. O do temporum habet, ve^peran magis
tenebrescere in noctem qu^^ lucescere in di^m: sec mystice dicit lucescere, pro
gloria resu^^^^^ionis immin^n^is. Huc usq^e dies noctem dicebatur praecece^^.
Nune ordo mutatur* and NOX QUA SURREXIT, D^E^, QUA SE OSTENDIT, ADJUNCTA EST.
Et congrue^^ us drem nox s^^u^batur, quia a luce homo in tenebr as cecide^^^.
NUNC VERO DIES SEQUITUR NOTEM, quia per Resurectionem a peceatis ad vitam
reducimur. Which Passage is almost verbatim recorded by Haymo Halberstatensis
Homiliar um pars Aestivalis; Coloniae 1531. Hom. in die sancto Paschatis p. 7.
8. and by Christianus Grammaticus Expositio in Matthaeum Evangelistam (c. 28 v.
1.) Bibl. Patrum Tom. 9. pars 1. p. 491. D. E. by Zacharias Crysopolitanus in
unam ex quatuor Bibl Pat um Tom. 12 p^rs 1. p. 203, 204. A. Isidor Hispalensis
de natura ^erum. c. 1. p. 246. Gratian. sentent l 2 Distinct 13. E. and others.

My fifth Authority is ^^^ C^uncil of Laodicea, about the year of Christ 360.
which as i^ first settled the observation of the Lord's Day, and prohibited,
abolished the keeping Anno 360.
of the Jewish S^^b^^h under an Anathem^. Can. 49. fo^^^i^ed So it th^^
posi^ively determined: Vt A VESPERA USQUE AD VESPERAM DIES DOMINICA SERVETUR:
as is recorded Capit. Caroli and Ludovici Imperatorum. lib. 1. c. 15. collected
by Ansegisus and Benedictus Levita; and Fredericus Lindebrogus Codex Legum
Autiquarum p. 833.

My sixth Evidence is the express testimony and resolution of Saint Augustine,
the eminentest of all the Fathers, Anno 400.
De Tempore Sermo 251. Observemus ergo. diem Dominicam Fratres, See Rabanus
Maurus Opevum, Tom. 5. p. 604.
and sanctificemus illam, si^ut antiquis praeceptum est de Sabbato. (Levit. 23.
32.) A VESPERA USQUE AD VESPERAM celebrabitis Sabbata vestra. Videamus ne otium
nostrum vacuum sit; Sed A VESPERA DIEI SABBATI USQUE AD VESPERAM DIEI DOMINICAE
sequestrati a ruralt opere, and ab omni negotio, solo divino cu^^ui vacemus.
Ve^iat ergo cu^cunque possibile sit ad VESPE^^NAM atque NOCTVRNAM
CELEBRATIONEM, and ^r^t ibi incouveniu Ecclesiae pro peceatis suis D^um, etc.
An authority so full for the celebration of the Lords day from Evening to
Evening, in that age, that it cannot be shifted nor avoyd^d, and a direct
resolution in express Terms of our present Qu^stion.

My seventh. is Pope Leo the first, Epistolarum Decretalium Anno 450.
Epistola 79. which y^u shall find in the second part of his own works, in Juo
Carnotensis Decretalium, pars 6. c. 71. Gratian. Distinctio 75. and de
Consecratione Distinctio 3. and in Surius Conciliorum Tom. 1 p. 789. where he
thus resolves our Question: Quod ergo a patribus nostris propensiore cura
novimus esse servatum, a vobis quoque volumus custodiri, ut non passim diebus
omnibus Sacerdotalis ordinatio celebretur, sed post diem Sabbati, ejusdem
noctis quae in prima Sabbati lucescit exordia deligantur, hoc est sub Lege
Divini officii substiuantur, in quibus his qui consecrandi sunt jejunis, and
^ejunantibus, Sacra benedictio conferatur. Quod ejusdem observantiae erit, si
mane ipso Dominico die continuato Sabbati jejunio celebratur a quo tempore
PRAECEDENTIS NOCTIS INITIA NON RECEDUNT; QUAM AD DIEM RESURRECTIONIS, sicut
etiam in Poscha Domini de laratur. PERTINERE NON EST DUBIUM. So that it was
past all dis^ure, and doubt in his time, that the Lords day began at Evening,
and that our Saturday night was part of it. Then it follows. Nunquam
benedictiones nisi in Die Demini^ae Resurrectionis tribuuntur, Presbyteri vero
ad vesperam, quae magis ad Dominicam pertinet, consecrantur, Honorius
Augustodanensis, de antiqu^ rit^^ Miss. l. c. 19. Patr. Tom 12. pars 1. p. 1043.
CUI A VESPERE SABBATI INITIUM CONSTAT ASSCRIBI From which Text of his, Juo
Carnotensis: Anno Dom 1100 Gr^tian Anno 1170. in their for^n^med pl^ces,
together with Panormitan, Antonius de Bru^io, Joannis Thye^ey, Bartholomeus
Brixiensis: and all other Can^nists in their Glosses on the fore-quoted Texts
of Gratian (where these words of Leo are recited) resolve without dispute: QUOD
DIES DOMINICA INITI UM HABET A VESPERA SABBATI: quod probat per consuetudinem,
and etiam per doctrinam Apostolicam. Quod VESPERA PRAECEDENTIS NOCTIS TRAHITUR
ADDIEM SEQUENTEM, ut sive de vespere in Sabbato, sive de mane in Dominico
ordines conferantur, semper in die Dominico videantur conferri: All of them
according, that the Lord's Day begins and ends at Evening, not at morning or
Midnight. A truth so clear in that age, as it was past all doubt, the Sea
Bishop Vshers Treatise of the Religion professed by the ancient Irish. c. 4. p.
34. Edit. 1631. Anno 610.
Scots and Irish Christians about the year 597. and before, beginning the
Lord's Day at Evening, as Bishop Usher attests.

My eighth Testimony, is the second Council of Mascon, Canon 1. apud Surium;
Council. Tom. 2. page 682, 683. Custodite diem Dominicam quae nos denuo peperit,
and a peccatis omnibus liberavit. Nullus vestrum litium fomitibus vacet, etc.
Estote omnes hymnis and laudibus Dei animo corporeque intenti. Si quis vestrum
proximam habet Ecclesiam, properet ad eam, and ibi Dominico die semetipsum
precibus, lachry misque afficiat. Sint oculi manusque vestri toto illo die ad
Deum expansae. Then it follows; NOCTEM QUOQVE IPSAM quae nos insperatae luci
inaccessibili reddidit (to wit our Saturday night before Easter, on which
Christ rose again) SPIRITUALIBUS EXIGAMUS EXCVBIIS: NEC DORMIAMUS IN EA, SED
OREMUS and VIG^LEMUS OPERIBUS SACRIS, ut digni haberemur cohaeredes fieri in
regno Servatoris. Which Canon proves, that the Christians of that age did
solemnize our Saturday night (before Easter especially) and sp^nd it all in
holy vigils, prayers, and religious exercises, because Christ rose upon it,
accounting it a part of the Lords-d^y, and beginning their Lord's Day exercises
on it, not on our Sunday night.

My ninth Proof is, the fourth Council of Toledo in Sp^in, Canon 8. Apud
Surium. Tom. 2. p 729 Lucerna and Cereus in Anno 620.
pervigiliis, apud quasdam Ecclesias non benedicuntur and eur a nobis
benedicantur, inquirunt Propter GLORIOSVM enim NOCTIS ILLIUS SACRAMENTUM hae^
sol mniter benedicimus, ut SACRAMENTUM SACRAE RESURRECTION^S CHRISTI MYSTERIUM
QUOD TEMPORE HUIUS NOCTIS VOTIVE ADVENIT, BENEDICTIONEM SUSCIPIAMUS. Et quia
haec observatio per multarum loca terrarum Regionesque Hispaniae in Eccles^is
commendatur, dignum est ut propter unitatem pacis, and Gallicanis Eccles^is
conservetur. Nulli autem impune erit, qui hoc contempserit, sed Patrum regulis
sub acebit. By which Canon it is most apparent, that the Christians of this age
did solem^ize our Saturday night with holy vi^ils, prayers and exercises of
Religion, beginning their Public Assemblies and Lords-dayes duties on it,
because the glorious Sacrament, and Mystery of Christ's Resuriection happened on
it, the blessing whereof they expected to r^ceive by this nights
sanctification. Therefore questionless they began their Lord's Day at Evening,
and made this night only, not our Sunday night, parcel of it; because Christ
in their account did rise again upon it. Neither was the celebration of this
night the practice only of some few private Churches, but of all Christian
Churches in that centurie, since this Council lays it down as a prevailing
argument, why all Churches should consecrate their Candles and Tapers on it, as
well as the Spanish Church, and Churches in France; which had been no motive at
all, had not the solemnization of this night in memory of Christ's Resurrection,
been universal, though the superstitious Ceremony of Hallowing Lights and
Tapers on it was not so. Which general received practice of solemnizing this
night, and spending it thus, in vigils and prayrs, even from the apostles time,
till long after this Council, is a satisfactory argument to me, that Saint
Paul's and the Disciples meeting at Troas upon the first say of the week (where
they spent the whole night together in preaching and other Christian exercises
Acts 20. 1, 9, 10, 11) was on our Saturday, not Sunday night, it being no doubt
the original pattern from whence this custom sprung which this Council
mentions.

My tenth Evidence is the express inanswerable Authority of Anastatius
Sinaita, Anagogicarum Contemplationum lib. Anno 640.
2. Quaest. 86. 152. 153. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 6. pars 1. p. 634. E. 778. 795.
Propterea Scriptura tenebras ponit ante lucem, quoniam prius eramus in errore,
deinde transeamus ad lucem. Propterea PRIOR EST VESPERA, DEINDE DIES. LEGE EST
CONSTITUTUM (it seems there was then some express Law and Canon for i^ in
force; as these forecited) UT INCIPERETUR A VESPERA, DOMINICA, quoniam a morte
objeu^a, proce ^imus ad lacem Resurrectionis. NOS DOMINICAM A VESPERA SABBATI
AUSPICAMUR (so that ^^ was the constant practice of Christians in that age to
begin the Lords day on Saturday at Evening QUEMLIBET D^EM A VESPERA COMPUTARE,
ET CUM PRAE^EDENTE NOCTE SEU UNUM COPU^^RE SOLEMUS (which last word implies a
constant Custom in that time) Sedenim and Moses vaeationem a laboribus in
Sabbato it a d^scripsit, VT ET RAECEDENTE NOCTE, ET SEQVENTI DIE OTIVM AGERENT.
Testes do Judees QVI VSQVE INHODIERNVM DIEM ID OBSRVANT. Qui^pe qui non illam
noctem quae Sabbatum subsequitur, SED illa^ QVAE ANTEGREDITVR cessatione ab
operibus quiet colunt. (this therefore was and is the Jewish and Scripture
computation) ET NOS IN OBSERVATIONE DIEI DOMINICI PRAECEDENTEM NOCTEM TANQUAM
CUM DIE COPULATAM, ET NON SEQUENTEM NOCTEM VENERAMUR. An Evidence so express,
so punctual, as may satisfy all the Opposites, and cannot be evaded.

My eleventh Testimony, is the positive Resolution of an whole General
Council, and so by consequence, of all Christian Churches in that age; to wit,
the sixth General Anno 670.
Council of Constantinople, Can. 56 Surius Conciliorum. Tom. 2. p. 1052.
Dominicis genu flectere a divinis nostris PATRIEVS, Christi Resurrectionem
honorantibus, canonice accepimus (The first general Council of Nice, Canon
20. having so decreed:) Ne ergo hujus observationis evidentiam ignoremus,
fidelibus manifestum fa^imus, QUOD POST VESPERTINUM SACERDOTUM AD ALTAR
SABBATO INGRESSUM, EX CONSUE^UDINE QUAE SERVATUR NEMO GENU FLECTIT USQUE AD
SEQUENTEM VESPE^AM, IN QUA POST INGRESSUM IN VESPERTINO SEU COMPLETORIO, GENUA
RURSUS FLECTENTES, DOMINO PRECES OFFERIMUS, Servatoris enim nostri
Resurrectionis veluti praecursorem NOCTEM quae suit ante Sabbatum, accipientes,
HYMNIS AB EA SPIRITV ALITER INCIPIMVS: Festum ex tenebris in lucem finientes,
ut in persecto ae integro DIE AC NOTCE, nos Resurrectionem celebremus. A most
full unanswerable Authority, if a little explained. It was the received Custom
of the Primitive Church, as this Canon and all Antiquity witness, to pray
standing not kneeling, all the whole Lord's Day in memory of our Saviou^s
Resurrection, and standing up again from the dead: Whence these their Lord's Day
Exercises were called, See Tertullian and others
Stationes (a stando; in English Stations) because they ever stood, and never
kneeled in them. Now this Custom of praying standing, used only on the
Lord's Day, and between E^ster and Ascension day, began and ended with the day.
The question then will be, when, and at what time of the day, this praying
standing, began and ended? This Canon resolves it in plain terms, (and that by
way of Declaration only, not of new Constitution,) that all the Churches and
Christians of this age (ex consuetudine quae s^rvatur) even by an ancient long
continued Custom received from the Christians and Church^s of former ages; and
then observed only, not begun; did always begin to pray standing, after their
Saturday Vespers, or Evening prayers were ended, (to wit, at the time of the
Evening, when the day in divine and natural account begins) and concluded them
after the Lord's Day Vespers, or complein ended, to wit, the Lord's Day at
Evening, when the Lords day does properly and truly end. By which it is most
apparent, that they began and e^d^d their Lord's Day and Lord's Day exercises at
Evening, not at morning or Midnight; and that it was the constant custom of
all Christians in former ages so to do. Again it assures us, that it was the
custom of all Churches, then, and in foregoing times, to couple the Saturday
night, and the Lord's Day together, and to solemnize them in memory of Christ's
Resurrection, as one entire Lord's Day; b^^inning and spending all the Saturday
night with Hymns and spiritual duties. So that this Council is a most clear
satisfactory proof both in point of Doctrine and practice, that the Lord's Day
ought to begin and end at Evening, and was actually so observed by all
Christians of this and former ages. I wonder therefore why some, who think
themselves learned, should so far for^et themselves, as to call it an upstart
Novelty, not heard of in the Church till now of late, it being ever the
received doctrine and practice too, of all Churches, Christians, till within 70
years last past.

My twelfth Proof is the famous English Council at Berghamstede, under Withred
King of Kent, An. Christi 697. in Spelman: Council. Tom. 1. p. 195. Can. 10, 11.
Si In VESPERA A^no 697.
praecedente diem Solis POST QUAM SOL OCCUBUIT, aut in Vespera praecedente diem
Lunae post oceasum solis fervus ex mandato Domini sui, opus aliquod servile
egerit, Dominus factum 80. Solidis luito. Si servus hisce diebus itineraverit,
Domino pendet 6 solidos, ^ut flage^o caedatur. Si liber homo id faciat, tempore
vetito, sit reus Collistrigii mulctae: and qui eum detulerit dimidium habeat,
tam mulctae tam Wi^gildi By which Law it is most evident; that the Lord's Day
began and ended at Evening after Sunset; and was to be sol^mnized from Evening
to Evening, without doing any ser^i^e work on Sunday nights after sun set, as
well as on Saturday nights, though the Lord's Day then actually determined. To
which I shall add that of Venerable B^da our learned Countreyman, in his
Homily on Matthew 28. verse 1. quoted by Bartholomaeus Brixiensis in his Gloss
upon Gratian Anno 720.
Distinct. 75. In die ista (to wit, the Lord's Day, NOCTES INCIPIUNT PRAECEDERE
DIES, ideo forte ut tres dies and noctes haberi possint, in quibus Domin^s fuit
in ventro terrae, quod nec sic habetur nisi Synechdo^hice, vel declaratur: quia
Missa non decantatur in Sabbato, sed in principio sequentis noctis, and
dicitur; Deus qui hanc SACRTISSIMAM NOCTEM, etc. and ita est die Dominica Nox
illa. A Passage so plain for the Lords days beginning on saturday at Evening,
that it needs no gloss, and this was the doctrine and practice of our Nation
then.

My thirteenth Authority is the Synod of Franckford, Anno 793.
under Charles the Great, famous for the Doctrine of Images therein condemned,
the 22. Canon whereof (apid Achuini opera Col. 1893) resolves our question
thus. Vt Dies Dominica a vespera usque ad vesperam servetur. A direct
determina^ion of the point in difference. That the Lord's Day is to be kept from
Evening to Evening.

My fourteenth probation, is the express decree of the Emperor Charles the
Great himself, and Ludovicus Pius, Capit. Anno 80*
l. 6. Tit. 186 apud Fredericum Lindebrogum Codex Legum Antiquarum p. ^^8. and
apud Bochellum Decret. Ecclesiae Gallicanae l 4. Tit. 3. c. 39. p 589. A
Vespera usque ad Vesperam Dies Dominious servetur. What can be more full and
punctual than this? Which is seconded Capit. l. 1. c 15. as a decree of the
Council of Laodicea.

My fifteenth, is Concilium Foro-Juliense under the same Charles, c. 13. apud
Suriu^ Tom. 3. p. 266. Diem autem Dominicum Anno 800.
Inchoant. Noctis initio, id est, Vespere Sabbati Quae in prima lucescit
Sabbati, quando signum insonuerit, vel Horaest ad Vespertinum celebrandum, non
propter honorem Sabbati ultimi, sed propter sanctam illam Noctem p^imi Sabbati,
id est, Domini^i Diei, cum omni reverentia and honorifica Religione Venerari
omnibus mandamus. A Canon so apparent for beginning the Lord's Day at Evening,
that it needs no illustration.

My fixteenth, is the Synod of Towers under the same Anno 806.
Charles Canon 40. apud Surium. Tom* 3 p. 227. Itemque interdicat ne mercata
and placita usquam fiant die Dominica, qua oportet omnes christianos a servile
opere in laud Dei and gratiarum action, Usque ad Vesperam perseverare; which
compared with the former Canons, is a direct proof, that the Lord's Day begins
at Evening, because then the celebration of it by this Canon, is to end.

My seventeenth is the Council of Mentz, Anno 813. recorded Anno ^13.
by Juo Caruotensis, Decretalium part 4. c. 16. which decres thus. Omnes Dies
Dominicos a Vespera in Vesperam cum omni veneratione and observatione
decrevimus observare, and ab illici^o opere abstinere, etc. A pregnant
testimony in this point.

My eighteenth, is that of H Rabanus Maurus, Homil^ de Dominicis diebus, in his
works at large, Edit. 1616. Tom. 5. Anno 840.
p. 605. where he thus resolves this question on my side. Observemus ergo diem
Dominicam and sanctificemus illam sicut antiquis de sabbato praeceptum est,
dicente Legislatore, A Vespera usque ad Vesperam celebrabitis sabbata vestra.
Videamus ne otium nostrum vanum sit. Vespera Diei Sabbati, usquead Vesperam
Diei Dominici sequestrati a rurali opere and omni negotio, solo divino cultui
vacemus. To whom I may add his Coetanian Haymo Halberstattensis, Homilia in
die Paschatis p, 7, 8. who there resolves in punctual terms, that the
Lord's Day begins and ends at Evening, not at morning; and so ought to be
solemnized from Evening to Evening.

My nineteenth, is the Council of Compendium, apud Radulphum Tungrensem, de
Canonum observantia, Propositio 15. Anno ^60.
Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 11. p. 445. F. Tom. 14. p. 242. and apud Alexandrum
Alesium, Summa Theologiae pars 3. Quaest. 31. Artic. 2. p. 145. Both these
Authors being of the same judgment with this Council, which decrees thus.
Omnes Dies Dominicos a Vespera usque ad Vesperam omni v^neratione, devotione
observari, etc. words most direct in point.

My twentieth, is the Authority of Amalarius Fortunatus, Bishop of Triers, who
flourished about the Anno 920.
year 920. De Ecclesiasticis officiis, lib. 1 c. 12. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 9. pars
1. p. 311. F. Dominica Nox in magna gloria celebratur, ut liquet omnibus qui
morem nostrae Eccl^siae ^enent. Unde Augustinus ex Sermon ad Populum vigiliis
Paschae. Deinde Sabbati Dies a sua nocte incip^ens, finitus est vespere
incipienti^ noctis: Quae pertinet ad imtium Diei Dominicae, quoniam Eam Dominus
suae Resurrectionis gloria consecravit. Illius itaque Noctis ad in^tium Diei
Dominicae pertinentis, nunc istam solenniter memoriam celebramus. What can be
more plain to testify, that both in the judgment and practice of that age the
Lord's Day did begin and end at Evening, and that Christ by his Resurrection
consecrated this night for his service, not the Morning and day following it
only, excluding it.

My 21. is the Ecclesiastical Laws of Edgar and Canuius, Anno 96^.
two ancient Kings of this Island, recorded in Lambards Saxon Laws, and in Mr.
Fox his book of Mart^rs, Edit. 1610. p. 715. and Spelmanni Concilia p. 445,
446. who both enacted, That the Lord's Day should be kept holy from Saturday
Vespers at three of the clock till Monday morning; beginning the solemnization
of it on Saturday Evening at Bishop Alley mad^ (...) 9. of the clock in his
poor man's Library.
3 of the clock, not at Midnight or morning following, and continuing it till
Monday morning; for preventing all profaneness and disorders on our Sunday
night, as being more fit to be spent in holy duties, than servile works, or
pastimes; it being fitter to give God more time than he commands, than to rob
him of the least minute. From these Kings raigns, it was the constant custom
of this Kingdom for Lab^u^ers, servants, and all others, to give over their
week day works about Saturday Noon, or 3 of the clock, some space before
Evening service, that so they might repair to Evening prayers that day, and
after that begin the sanctification of the Lord's Day at Evening, as is evident
by the statutes of 4 H. 4. c. 14. 6 H. 6. c 3. and 23. H. 6. c. 13. which
enact, That no Laborers whatsoever, should take any hire for the Festival
days, nor for the half days for the Evens of Feasts when they do not labor.
Which custom has been observed in some places till of late (within the memory
of such who exceed not 50 years) the Saturday being esteemed an half holy day,
and servants recreating th^mselves upon it a little before night, that so they
might avoid all Pastimes on the Lord's Day, and keep it holy from Evening to
Evening. Which (together with the custom of observing Holy Day Eves, because
those days began at Evening) is a manifest and direct evidence, that the
Church of England (till of late some taught the co^trar^) did begin the
Lord's Day on Saturday Evening, even from these Kings time, and long before; and
therefore should proceed to do so now. The same Law was enacted by William King
of Scots. Anno 1203, which was likewise ratified by a Scottish Council, as
Hector Boethius Anno 1203.
lib. 13. de Scotis; and Centuriae Magdeburg. Cent. 13. Col. 932. lib. 48. and
Col. 788. l. 40. accord. viz. That Sunday should be kept holy, from Saturday at
3 of the Clock, till Monday Evening; that none should do any worldly business
thereon, but be employed only in holy actions, and King Alexander the third of
Scotland in a Parliament, An. 1314. decreed, That none should fish in the
waters, from Saturday Vespers til Monday morning.

My 22. is the Decree of the Council of Lions, concerning Holy days, recorded
by Juo Carnotensis. Decretalium pars 4 c. 14 and Gratian de Consecratione
Distinct. 3 fol 663. Anno 1020.
Pronunciandum est Laicis ut sciant tempora feriandi per annum, scilicet, Omnem
Dominicam a Vespera usque ad Vesperam. Upon which Ba^tholomaeus Brixiensis. (on
Gratian's Text) gives this Gloss: usque ad Vesperam. Hi^ habes Quando incipiat
Di^s secundum Canones; s^i^ic^t A VESPERA. Gratian, Juo, Panormitan,
Hostiensis, with other Canonists being of the same judgment too. What can be
more direct or ^ositive than this?

The 23 Is Honorius Augustodunensis, de Imagine Mundi, lib. 2 c. 27. de initio
and fine dierum, Bibl. Patrum Tom. 12. p 497. Anno 1120.
R. Christiani Diem Dominicam a Vespera usque in Vesperam finiunt.

My 24. Is the Synod under Simon and Galo the Legate, apud Bochellum,
decret-Eccles. Gal. lib. 4. Tit. 7. c. 14. p 578. and Tit. 10. Anno 121^.
c. 12. p. 595. Pronunciandum est Laicis ut sciant tempora feriandi per annum
id est, Omnem Dominicam, a Vespera usque ad Vesperam. Nec ali^uis a vespera
Diei Sabbati, ad vesperam Diei Domin^cae ad molendina aquar^m, nec ad aliqua
alia molere audeat. A ull resolution in this Controversy.

My 25. Is Pope Gregory the ^i^th, Decretalium lib. 2. Tit. 9. de Feriis. c. 2
p 595. Who determines thus. Omnem Anno 1273.
Dominicam Vesperam a Vespera usque ad Vesperam ^eriandum Sanctam D^em
Dominic^m Ab ho a Diei Sabbati Vespertina inchoandam. It ne^ds no Gloss being
so di^^ct

My 26. Is the Canon of the Synod of Angiers. Apud Bochellum Decret. Eccl^s. l.
4. Tit. 10. p. 14. p. 578. Inhibemus molitoribus Anno 1280.
etiam quibuseunque sub poena interminatione praedicta, and molendinarum
Dominis, Ne ipsi Diebus Dominicis, maxim a vespera Diei Sabbati, usque ad
vesperam Diei Dominicae molendina molire faciant aut permittant, non obstante
longi temporis abusu, qui non usus censendus aut consuetudo, imo verius
corruptela, cum tanta sint graviora peceata, quanto diutius infoelicem animam
detinuerant obligatam, cum aliqua praescriptio contra praecepta decalogi locum
sibi vindicare non possit. A direct evidence.

My 27, is a domestic Provincial Constitution under Anno 1320.
Simon Isleep Archbishop of Canterbury recorded by Lindwood, Constit.
Provincialium l. 2. Tit. de Feriis fol. 74. B. And by Joannis de Aton: fol.
148. a. Inprimis sacrum diem Dominicum ab hora vespertina Diei Sabbati
inchoandum, which needs no other Gloss but Lindwoods, who thence concludes,
That the Lord's Day ever begins at Evening: the constant ancient Doctrine of our
Church:

My 28. is an ancient English Dialogue upon the Commandments, Anno 1496.
entitled Dives and Pauper, first Printed Anno 1496, and after reprinted by
Thomas Berthelet the Kings Printer, Anno 1536.. Which Book on the third (our
fourth) Commandment chapter 14. f. 132. etc. 6. f. 11^. demanding this Question;
How long ought the Holy day to be kept and hallowed? resolves it thus, From
Even to Even; as Raymundus, says, and the Law. (Extrau. l. 5. Tit. de Feriis.
Omnes dies) We have ordained that all Sundays be kept with all manner of
worship, From Even to Even; and holy Writ says also, and God himself: From
Even to Even shall you celebrate the Sabbaths.

My 29. is an old English Treatise entitled, The Flower Anno 1521.
of the Commandments of God, Printed at London, by Wynkin de Ward, Anno 1521.
chapter 3. on the third (our fourth) Commandment, f. 31. 32. Which thus
determines. Nothing is to be done on the Sunday, but to be besied toward God,
him for to Honor. Question, Who so should demand, At what hour a man should
begin to celebrate the Feasts. The Answer, Regularly, men say, that from the
one Evenson unto the other Even-song the Chyrk make solemnity. It is written
Extrau. de Feriis, and de consecratione distinct. 1. cap. Missas; Omnes dies
Dominitos a vespera in vesperam decernimus observari. In like wise, says the
Scripture, in many places. a vespera ad vesperam celebrabitis Sabbata vestra.
This scripture reproves the fully of some simple men, the which reputeth not
to be sin to labor and work late on the Saturday at night, and ween that it is
sin, to work only on the Monday in the Morning. These two last authorities I
h^v^ cited at large, because they are punctual, the books unknown to most; and
^ully manifest the Doctrine and practice of the Church of England in that and
sormer ages, to be fully consonant to my opi^ion; though now out of ignorance
of Antiquity, r^puted a strange, unheard of Novel^y, by ^ome who repute
themselves no mean Rabbis, and scorn the Title of Ignoramus, wherewith they
upbraid all Lawyers, though more knowing, more learned, than many of themselves.

30. To these I could h^ve added sundry others; but to avoid prolixity, I shall
only remember the names and From Anno 1^00. to 1620.
works of some late Authors, from Anno 1100. till this present, who expressly
resolve. That the Lord's Day begins and concludes at Evening. N^^ to mention Juo
Carnoten-Gratian, Alexander A^ensis, Radulphus T^ngrensis,
Barthol^mae-Brixiensis, Joannis de Thiery, Antonius de Brutio, Gulielmus
Lindwood, Joannis de Aton, Laurentius Surius, or Laurentius Bechellus, who all
concur in this opinion in their f^re-named works, where the precedent Canons
and Decrees are registered; I shall only refer you to Thomas Aquinas in 3.
Sentent. Distinct. 37. Art. 5. Distinct. 11. qu. 2. Art. 2. qu. 3. ad 2m 2a
s^cundae. qu. 122. art. 4. Tostatus Abulensis in in Exodus c. 20. qu. 12.
Hostiensis sum. l. 2. Tit. de Feriis sol. 142. Joannis de Burgo (Chanceilour of
Cambridge in Henry ^he sixth his reign) Pupilla oculip^rs 9. c 6. de Feriis B.
E. Baptista Trouomala in his Summa Rosella Tit. Feriae. sect 4, 5. Angelus de
Clavasio, in his Summa Angelica, Tit. Dies sect. 1. Cavarruvius l. 4. c. 13.
Tom. 2. with all other Canonists in the titles De Feriis, and Diehus Festis,
who all resolve in these very p^^si^ive terms. Abstinendum est ab op^ribus omni
die Dominica. Ab Hora D^ei Sab^^ti vespertina inchoando, non ipsam Ho^am
praeveniendo. Quod feriation^m diet Sabbati tenere d^bemus, a vespera ad
v^speram, sci^icet ab ultima part diei praecedentia vigiliae, Quod dies quoad
celebration^m divinaerum consideratur de vespera in vesperam: and That the
whole day is to be wholly dedicated to God, and spent in his Service and
Worship. Which resolution is likewise seconded by Fridericus Lindebrogus in his
Glossarium: in Cod: Legum Antiquarum. Tit. Dominicus dies, by learned Hospinian
de origin Festorum. fol. 31. 68, 69, 70. 161, 162. by Mr. Sprint in his
Treatise of the Sabbath, with See Histriomastix p. 643, 644. and the Table.
sundry others: Wherefore I shall close up these authorities with that of
Jacobus de Graffiis, Decisionum aurearum casuum Conscientiae, Pars 2. lib. 2.
c. 13. De Diebus Festis, sect. 8. 9, 10. p. 136, 137. Qua ad feriationem
INCIPIT DIES VESPERA PRAECEDENTI, ET FINITUR IN SEQUENTI VESPERA, etc. Igitur
SECUNDUM SCRIPTURAM ET ECCLESIAM FESTUM INCIPIT IMMEDIATE POST OCCASUM SOLIS
DIEI PRAECEDENTIS USQUE AD OCCASUM SOLIS DIEI FESTI. Igitur ex his colligitur,
QUOD NULLA CONSUETUDO POTEST EXCUSARE LABORANTES SABBATO POST OCCASUM, vel in
praecipuis solemnitatibus, CUM FIAT CONTRA JUS DIVINUM. For which he quotes
Pisanus, verbo Feriae, as concurring with him. From all which express
concurring authorities (which none ever contradicted before Wolphius, for ought
that can be proved) to which I might subjoin the opinions and practice of Mr.
Cotton, Mr. Hooker, with sundry other Ministers and Churches in New England; I
hope I may safely conclude; That the Church and people of God, together with
the Fathers, Councels, and learned of all ages, from the very first institution
of the Lords day, to this present, have constanly resolved, both by their
Writings and practice too, that the Lord's Day does, and ought of right to begin
and end at Evening; not at Morning or Midnight, and that all former ag^s have
thus constantly solemnized it; as all these several Testimonies clearly
manifest, beyond all contradiction or dispute.

I have now (I hope) by all the premises sufficiently proved the truth of this
Posi^ion; That the Sabbath and Lord's Day does and ought of right to begin and
end at Evening, not at Morning or Midnight; and manifested it to be the
resolved Doctrine and constant practice of all fotmer age. There is nothing now
remaining but that I should answer those Pretenses or Ojections, which are or
may be made against it; and take off one Cavil which may be made against some
of the premises: when this is dispatched, the truth will be most perspicuous,
so that none can further doubt or question it, (as I suppose) for the future.

The Arguments produced for the proof of the adverse opinions, (or rather only
for one of them, to wit, that the Lord's Day begins and ends at morning) are
six; which I shall answer in order.

The first of them is this. That what the Law of nature settled for a time, to
wit, that the Sabbath and other Objection 1.
days should begin at Evening, See Wolphius, Chronolog. l. 2. c. 1. Dr. Bound
of the Sabbath, l. 2 p. ^6. with others
that Christ's Resurrection, a part of his Redemption, has now changed to the
morning; the work of redemption being far more excellent than the work of
Creation. Which if we reduce to a Logical Argument is but this. Christ's
Resurrection a part of his Redemption, is more excellent than the work of
Creation, Ergo it changed the beginning of the Lords day, and by consequence of
all other days, from Evening to Morning.

To which I answer, 1. It is very dangerous, unsafe for any Mortals to make
comparison between the glorious works, actions, attributes, and ordinances of
Almighty God, and to prefer one of them so highly before the other (as many do)
without an express warrant from God himself in his word, which has been the
cause of many Hene^ Aquinas prima secundae. Quaest. 100. Artic. 5. ad s^cun.
concludes, Inter omnia benefi. cia Dei commemoranda PRIMUM ET PRAECIPUUM EST
BENEFICIUM CREATIONIS, quod commemeratur in sanctificatione Sabbati, unde Exodus
20 11. PRO RATIONE QUARTI PRAECEPTI PONITUR: with which [3 Synod Parisiensis,
Anno 1557. apud Boshellum, Decret. Eccles. Gall. p. 589. concurres, and
Chrysostom Hom. 4. super Matthaeum.
gross errors and practices amongst Christians. I grant the work of Christ's
Redemption is a most glorious work, and signal testimony of Gods transcendent
love to the world of Gods elect and redeemed ones, John 3. 16. Romans 5. 8.
Ephesians. 2. 4, 5. c. 5. 2. 25. 2 These. 2. 16. Rev. 1. 5. But was not his creating
of us, in holiness and righteousness after his own image and likeness, as
transcendent an act of love as this? Genesis 1. 26, 27. Psalm. 8. No doubt it is.

2. That no Scripture, (to my best observation) prefers or advances the work
of Redemption (much less our Saviors Resurrection from the dead on the first
day; being but one part or branch thereof) before the work of Creation; both
these works being very great and glorious in themselves: wherefore I cannot
believe the work of Redemption, or Christ's Resurrection alone, to be more
excellent and glorious than the work of Creation, without sufficient Texts, and
Scripture grounds to prove it; but may deny it as a presumptuous fancy or
unsound assertion, till satisfactorily proved, as well as peremptorily averred
without proof.

3. If such comparisons may be admitted, or made without presumption, in my
apprehension, Genesis 1. and 2. compared with Psalm 8. Psalm. 104. Psalm. 19. 1. 2,
9. Psalm. 95. 6, 7. Psalm. 100. 1, 2, 3, 4. Psalm 148. Job 36. and 39. Eccles.
12. 1. 1. Isa. 37. 16. c. 40. 28. c. 43. 1. c. 44. 4. c. 45. 12. 18. c. 51. 13.
Jer. 10. 11, 12. c. 14. 22. c. 27. 5. c. 32. 17, 18, 19. c. 51. 15, 16. Jonah
1. 9. John 1. 3. 10. Acts 2. 24. c. 14, 15. c. 17. 24, 25, 26. Romans 1. 19, 20.
Col. 1. 16, 17, 18. Heb. 1. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 4. 19. Rev. 4. 11. cap. 10, 6. and the
fourth Commandment it self, Exodus 20. 8, to 12. seem to prefer the work of
Creation before the work of Redemption, as most of all manifesting, declaring,
magnifying the infinite power, wisdom, greatness, glory, majesy, providence,
bounty, sovereignty, Deity of God; and as the strongest motive and obligation
to all his Creatures (and redeemed Saints likewise) to adore, worship, love,
fear, serve, reverence, obey God as their Creator, and to depend, rest, trust,
commit themselves to him alone.

4. These reasons seem to advance the work of Creation before the work of
Redemption.

First, it is the First and most ancient of all Gods visible works, Genesis 1. 1.
Deuteronomy. 4. 32. Mark 13. 19. Rev. 3. 14. 2 Pet. 3. 4. far antienter than Christ's
Resurrection or work of Redemption. And that which is Antientest, is usually
best and honourablest, Psalm. 77. 5. Isa. 3. 2. c. 9. 15. c. 44. 7. c. 24. 23.
c. 51. 19. Jer. 18. 15. Dan. 7. 9. 13. 22. John 1. 2, 3. 1 Kings 12. 6. Jer. 6.
16. Acts 22. 16. 1 John 2. 7. Rev. 3: 14.

Secondly, the work of Sabbatum inter caetera Festa tantum praescribitur in
D^calogo quia figurabat GENERALIA BENEFICIA DEI scilicet, CREATIONIS and
beatitudinis, Aquinas prima secundae quaest. 100. Artic. 5. secund. Qu. 102.
Art. 4. 10m secunda secundae qu. Artic 4. ad 2m Alensis Sum. Theol. Tom. 3. qu.
32. m. 1, 2. 3 Bernardinus Senensis Sum. 10. Artic. 1. c. 1. 2. Bonaventura and
Media villa. in l. 3. Sent. Did. 37.
Creation is the very greatest of all Gods works, and more universal,
general, extensive than the work of Redemption: extending to all the Glorious
angels, Sun, Moon, Stars, Heavens, Air, Earth, Sea, with all the several
creatures in them; whatsoever and to all mankind. Genesis 1. and 2. Psalm 83.
Psalm 104. Psalm 148. 4. 5, 6. Isa. 40. 26. c. 42. 5 c. 45. 12, 18. John 1. 3.
Ephesians. 3. 9. Col. 1. 14. Rev. 4. 11. c. 10. 6. yea, to Jesus Christ himself,
styled; the beginning of the Creation of God. Rev. 3. 14. Therefore, more
excellent, greater, glorious than the work of Redemption, Ephesians. 1. 4. ^0. 15.
Col. 1, 2, 14 Rev. 5. 9. 1 Pet 1. 2. 19. Heb. 2. 16. Jude 6.
peculiar only to Gods elect, the smallest part of men; not universal to all
Mankind; much less to Angels, and all other Creatures: Now it is a received
Maxim in Divinity, Morality, Policy, Reason; Bonum quo communius, eo melius.
See Psalm 145. 9, 10, 14, 15, 16. whence Philo the Jew, de Opificio Mundi,
styles the Sabbath in memory of it; Festum non unius populi Regionisve, sed in
universum omnium: quae sola digna est ut dieatur Popularis Festivitas.

Thirdly, God himself created all things at first, very good, perfect, pure,
excellent; and man himself after his own image, in Holiness, true
Righteousness, Integrity, ^erfection, without Sin, Corruption, Imperfection
or obliquity, Genesis 1. 18. 25. to the end. c. 5. 1. c. 9. 6. Eccles. 7. 27. 1
Cor. 11. 7. Ephef. 4. 24. Col. 3. 10. Man being depraved, corrupted by Adams
sin and fall, which brought a Genesis 3. 17, 18. 19. Levit. 26. 14. to 40. Deuteronomy.
28. 14. to 68. Psalm. 107. 33, 34. Mal. 3. 9. 11. c. 2. 2. Romans 8. 19. 20. 21,
22.
curse upon Mankind and all other creatures too: Christ's Redemption, though it
has freed all his Elected, called, justified, sanctified ones from Hell, death
and damnation, the condemning, ruling power of sin, and curse of the Law; yet
it has not redeemed them (much less the generality of mankind and other
Creatures) from the pollution, corruption of Sin, l^st and ^ll those
temporal miseries, curses, plagues, Judgments, imperfections in this life,
which sin has brought upon them: nor yet restored them to such a glorious,
happy, perfect condition here, as that wherein man was first created: the best
of Saints on earth, having many remainders of sin, corruptions, defects and
infirmities in them till they come to heaven, 1 Kings 8. 46. Eccles. 7. 20.
Romans 7. 7. to the end, James 3. 2. 1 John 1. 8, 10. c. 2. 1. 2. Therefore in
this respect, the work of Creation excells that of Redemption, in relation to
all the creatures corrupted, vitiated by man's fall, and of the redeemed
themselves, whiles they continue on earth, and have cause to celebrate Sabbaths
and Lords-Dayes, to sanctify and make them holier.

4. Some of the creatures, as the Angels, Christ himself, as man and a
creature, (if not the Sun, Moon, Stars, heavens) the works of Gods creation;
are more excellent and gloious than man, or any Saints on earth, the ^ubject of
Christ's Redemption, Psalm 8. Heb. 1. Rev. 3. 14. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. Psalm 103. 20.
Mat. 25. 31. Heb. 2. 7, 9. c. 12. 22. Rev. 14. 10. Luke 20. 36. compared
together. Therefore the work of Creation is more exellent than that of
Redemption.

Fifthly, without the work of Creation, there could be no work of redemption;
the chief end whereof is to restore us to that felicity, See Philo Judaeus de
op sicio mundi.
Happiness in the enjoyment of God and his creatures, which man in his
innocence, (had h^ p^rsevered in that estate) should have enjoyed by the work
of creation. Therefore the work of Creation is at least as excellent as
glorious, as the work of redemption, if not more eminent than it.

Sixthly, the excellency and glory of the work of redemption consists
principally in this, that it was wrought by Jesus Christ himself, the only
beloved Son of God Luke* 1. 6. 8. 99. Rev. 3. 24. Gal. 3. 17 Col. 1. 14. Heb.
9. 12 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Rev. 5. 9. But this cannot advance it above the work of
creation; God created all things by Jesus Christ (as well as redeemed his
elect) Ephesians. 3. 9. Col. 1. 16. and that only as he was God, and the word,
Heb. 1. 2. John 1. 1 2, 3. Genesis 1. 1, 3, 26. not as God and man.

Seventhly all accord, that it is a work of Magis praecipitur observatio
Sabbati quam al^arum sol^mnitatum, quia b^neficium Creationis in hoc
commemora^ur. QVOD EST PRAECIPIUM INTER PRAE^ERITA Angelus de Clavasio. in
summa Argelica. Tit. P^aecep^um sest. 6. ^. 194.
greater excellency, omni^ot^n^y, power, love, to create and make all things
out of nothing, then to repair, restore, rectify things already created when
deprav^d, defiled, cap^ivated or impaired. See Basil and Amb^ose in their
Hexamerons, most Commentators on Genesis 1. and Isa. 45. 5. to 20. c. 40. 48. Re.
4. 11. Acts 17. 24. Heb. 3. 4. Therefore I may safer conclud^, that the work of
Creation is See Zanchius de operibus Creationis lib.
greater and more excellent than the work of Redemption, from these Texts and
Reasons; then my Antagonists aver the work of Redemption to transcend the
work of Creation in excellency and greatness, without Scriptures or solid
reasons grounded on it.

5. Admit the whole work of Redemption wrought by Christ, to be better,
greater, excellenter than the work of Creation: Yet none can prove or
demonstrate, that Chrstsi Resurrection (one part only of his work of
redemption, on the first day of the week) is greater than the whole work of
Creation. Therefore they cannot conclude from it alone, that this his bare
Resurrection should alter the beginning, end, limits, nature of times, and
days, settled by God at the very Creation; as they here argue.

6. Admit Christ's Resurrection and work of Redemption, to be greater, better,
excellenter than Gods work of Creation, (which I deny) will it thence follow;
Ergo, it altered the work of Creation; the cause of Sun, Moon, Stars,
Days, weeks, years; the beginning and end of the Sabbath, or first day of the
week, and by consequence of all other days and times settled by God himself at
the Creation by an unalterable Law? Genesis 1. 5. 8. to 20. 23. 21. c. 2. 2, 3.
Exodus 20. 8. to 12. Psalm 148. 5. 6. Eccl. 3. 14. Jer. 31. 35, 36. c. 33. 20,
21. 2 Pe. 3. 14. Certainly all these Texts wi^^ others forecited, resolve, and
experience proves the contrary, the days, weeks, months, morning, Evening,
course of Sun, Moon, and Stars, being still the same they were from the
Creation till this present; and every thing or action that is greater, better
than another, not abrogating or altering their course or limits which God or
men had formerly settled.

7. The ends of Christ's Resurrection and Redemption were merely spiritual, to
redeem, justify, raise up from sin, from the dead, and avance to heaven at
last, all those whom Christ redeemed, John 5. 29. c. 11. 25. Romans 1. 4. Romans 5.
5. to 16. 1 Cor. 15. throughout, Phil. 3. 10. 11. 1 Pet. 1. 1. 3 c. 21. Rev.
20. 5. 6. Romans 4. 24, 25. c. 8. 11. 2 Cor. 4. 14. Ephesians. 2. 6. Not to alter the
beginning or ending of days, times, *seasons: not one of all these Texts (nor
any other speaking of Christ's Resurrection, and the ends or benefits thereof)
ass^rtin^, importing, much less resolving any thing: Therefore it did not,
could not alter the beginning or limits of the first day, ^i^her as a natural,
or as his Resurrection day, as these Writers aver.

8. Christ's Pa^sion, Isa. 53. throughout. Romans 3 25. c 3. 9. c. 4. 25. Ephesians. 1.
5. c. 2. 13. col. 1. 20, 21, 22 Heb 9 7. to 26. c. 10. 10 c. 12. 24 c. 13 c.
13. 11, 12. 1 Pet. 1. 2, 18 19. John 17. Romans 5. 9.
bloodshed, was the principal part of his Redemption, yea his Nativity,
Ascension (to omit his whole life on earth, and perpetual mediation in heaven
for us) were parts thereof; the one the first part, the other the last of all:
B^t it is clear that our Saviors Passion and bloodshed in the Evening, (though
it were the chief^st part of his Redemption) made no alteration in the
b^ginning or end of days, so as to change the beginning of Goodfriday from
Evening before, to three of the clock in the afternoon; that his Nativity
(about Midnight) or his Ascension (about Noon or eleven of the clock in the
morning, as is most probable) did not translite the beginning of those days,
or any other, to Midnight, Noon, or Morning, though they were the first and
last parts of of his work of Redemption; why then should his Resurrection only
in the Morning (a less principal part of his work, than his Passion, or
perchance than his Nativity or Ascension; the one of which preceded the other
followed his Resurrection) make such a change in days beginnings, when neither
of these three other did so? If it be, because it was a part of Christ's
Redemption. So were the other three, and yet they produced no such mutation;
and why a part of Christ's Redemption should cause such an alteration, only
because it is a part: or why one inferior part of it alone, should do it, and
not the chiefest; why the intermediate, not the first, or last part of it,
transcends my apprehension. If it be because God ordained it should effect such
a transmutation, then show me express Scripture for it, (as none can do) or
else reject it for a groundless fancy, as in truth it is, But more of this in
the Answer to the next Objection.

The second Objection is this, Christ's Resurrection on the first day of the
week in the morning, did actually Objection 2.
change the beginning of the day from Evening to morning, and constitute the
Lord's Day to begin at morning. Therefore it ought to begin at morning. If we
c^st this into a sormall Argument, it will be more perspicuous. Christ's
Resurrection, the cause of the Lord's Day, was not till the morning, Ergo the
Lord's Day must not begin till morning, because the effect must needs be with or
subsequent to the cause, and cannot precede it; whereas the effect should
overreach ^^e cause in point of time, if the Lord's Day should begin at
Evening, Christ's Resurrection beginning not till the morning. This reason and
argument is the main foundation whereon the Opposites build their error;
wherefore I shall be more copious in discovering the sandinesse, falsehood, and
fallaciousnesse of it.

First therefore, I answer, that this whole Argument, is but a chain of
several gross falsehoods and mistakes, Answer 1.
contrary to the Scriptures: I wonder therefore why so many grave, judicious
men should be ensnared by it.

1. The first of them (the ground work of all the rest, and of this error
concerning the Lord's Day beginning at morning is this, That Christ's
Resurrection did alter the beginning of that first day of the week, whereon be
arose, from Evening to Morning: which I have manifested to be an apparent
Error contrary to the Scriptures; which testify that that day began at
Evening, and that Christ's Resurrection did nothing alter it; as the third and
fifth preceding Conclusions prove at large. Wherefore I shall here demand of
the Objectors, how it appears that Christ's Resurrection made such a change as
they pretend? If by Scripture, show one Text, that necessarily proves it: this
I am sure they cannot do. If not by Scripture: then it is a mere groundless
conceit of their own forging. Yea, but though they want Scripture, yet they
have this sound reason to prove it: Christ rose again upon the first morning;
therefore he translated the beginning of it from Evenig to morning. To which I
reply, that this main Capital reason is but a gross in consequent, and a
circular Argumentation; For if the Argument be denied, as justly it may be;
then they prove it by that very medium which was next before denied, and they
ought to make good; that Christ's Resurrection did chan^e the day from morning
to Evening (there being no other medium but this to confirm it) therefore if he
rose again upon it in the morning, he made such a change as they pretend. So
that this their reason is but Idem per Idem, a Petitio principii a Circular
dispute, a gross Non sequitur, and so to be rejected as false and idle. But
yet a little more to lay open the falshhood of this Proposition; That Chists
Resurrection made such an alteration of that first days beginning (which has
neither Scripture nor Reason to back it.)

I would first demand this Question of them. Why Christ's Resurrection should
produce such a Change, when as his Nativity, Passion and Ascension, (parts of
his Redemption too, as beneficial to Christians as his Resurrection) had no
such effect?

2. How they come to know, that such a Change was de Facto made, when no
Scripture rev^als or intimates it?

3. How was it possible for Christ's Resurrection to call back and adnul that
beginning of the day, which was irrevocably past, and gone before it happened?
since by their own Rule, the effect cannot precede the cause; and so by the
same Reason, Christ's Resurrection in the morning could not operate a part
ante, to change the beginning of that day, which was actually past at Evening.

4. Where they did ^ver read, that occasions happening upon any days, did
alter or bound on^ the beginning and end of days? the days ever bounding out
the occasions (which we say happened upon such a day and hour) not the
occasions the days?

5. How Christ's Resurrection could change this days beginning, when as it
altered not its name, nature or order, (it being still the first day of the
week, as it was at the Creation, the week remaining yet the same) and seeing it
made no change in the course of the Sun, and Moon, of day, and night, which
rule bound out, and make up the natural day?

6. How that which has no limits of its own, but that which it had from the
day on which it happened, (the first days morning being that which limited the
Resurrection in point of time, and reduced it to a certainty) can possibly put
bounds of time unto the day, which bounds outit? If they cannot resolve all
these, Queries they must then disclaim this main fundamental Conclusion, upon
which they build their false grounded Error, as I have formerly proved. This is
the first falsehood.

The second is this, That Christ's Resurrection was the cause of the Lord's Day.
This I say, is both a falsehood and a fallacy. To make it more evidently so, we
must consider the Lord's Day, either as a natural day, consisting of 24 hours,
measured out by the Sun or primum mrbile, and made up of the night and
artificial day: or as a Lord's Day; that is, a day devoted and sequestered unto
Gods immediate worship. If we consider it materially, or m^erly as a day, it is
clear, that Christ's Resurrection was no cause of the first day; for that was
instituted by God at the Creation, Genesis 1. 5. who then appointed the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, to rule, limit, govern both the day and night, and to be the
sole causes of them, Genesis 1. 14. to 22. Psalm 74. 16, 17. Psalm 136. 6, 7, 8.
Psalm. 104. 19. Jer. 31. 35, 36. c. 33. 20. Neither could Christ's Resurrection
be the cause of that day on which he arose; for it was begun before he rose
again; and it had been and continued a day, though he had never risen on it;
therefore it was no cause of it as a day. Besides, all time is the measure of
motion, and so the motion of the Primum mobile the alone cause of it, and of
this day too. Christ's Resurrection thererefore being no cause of the Lord's Day,
as a day, could not alter the beginning of it in such manner as is prtended;
since the Lord's Day has no bounds or limits, beginning or end, neither is it
properly a part of time, but only as it is a day, not as a Lord's Day.
Wherefore when you affirm that Christ's Resurrection was the cause of the
Lord's Day, and therefore it changed the beginning of it; your meaning is and
must be, that it was the cause of it, and that it changed the beginning
thereof, as it was a natural day (the change here r^l^^ing only to the time
and limits of the day, not simply to the quality, as it is a Lord's Day, it
having no limits at all, as it is a Lords day, but merely as it is a natural
day;) which is a gross Christ's Resurrestion is no more the cause of the
Lord's Day as a day; then Baptism is (...) cause of the Sac^am^ntal water, as
water; or Christ's consecration of the Sacramental Bread and wine the cause of
them as they are bread and wine; or the O^dination of M^nisters, the cause of
them as they are men.
untruth as I have proved, yea a fallacy too, in applying that to this day, as
a day, which is spoken only and intended of it, merely as a Lord's Day. To
illustrate this by an example. The first day of the week, is like to water in
Baptism, to Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, to a Church that is consecrated,
or to one abou to enter into Orders: Now as we use to say, that Baptism does
change the water, the Sacramental consecration the bread and wine,
Consecration Canonical the Church, and ordination the man; if we mean they
change their very nature, essence and substance, the speech is merely false;
for they continue in nature, in substance, the same they were before; if we
intend they only alter their use, which is true; and yet apply this alteration
to the substance (as the Papists do in case of the Sacament, arguing thus; the
Fathers say, that the Bread and Wine are changed after Consecration, to wit, in
their use only; Ergo they are transubstantiated and changed in their
substance;) then it is but a fallacy or equivocation which being explained
proves but a mere Non sequitur, fince the change in the use or quality only,
infers no necessary alteration in the Substance. So when the Objectors say,
that Christ's Resurrection did change the first day of the week; if they mean
only that it was the occasion why the use of it was altered from a common day
to an holy day: or when they affirm, that Christ's Resurrection was the cause of
the Lords day, that is, the cause why the first day was and is solemnized as a
Lord's Day: their words are true in this sense only; but then they neither
prove nor imply any change at all in the limits, beginning or end of the first
day, or in the day it self, but in its use alone; and so the day continues the
same in all these respects, as it was before. But when they go thus far, as to
prove that Christ's Resurrection on it did alter the very beginning and end,
(and so the nature and limits) of the day, because it was the occasion of
altering its use (which is the thing they intend in both these Propositions)
then the Argumentation is sophistical, and the Conclusion this gross
inconsequent; Christ's Resurrection was the cause of turning the first day of
the week into the Lord's Day; Ergo, it translated the beginning of that day from
morning to Evening. An Argument so absurd, that the Objectors may now do well
to blush at it. Again, if we consider this day only, as it is a Lord's Day,
(that is, as a time consecrated to Gods public worship) if the Objectors
intend by this Proposition (Christ's Resurrection in the morning was the cause
of the Lord's Day) that is, it did actually consecrate that very first day,
whereon he arose, and all others succeeding it, for a Lord's Day, even that very
morning on which he arose again, as in truth they do; then I say it seems to me
an apparent untruth. For though it be true that his Resurrection on that day,
was one general original occasion of solemnizing it for the Lord's Day; yet it
is untrue that his bare Resurrection only was the immediate efficient,
constitutive cause of sanctifying it for a Sabbath or Lord's Day; or that it did
sanctify that very day on which Christ arose for a Sabbath or Lord's Day, even
at that very time of the morning when he arose.

For first, Gods resting from his work of Creation on the seventh day, is
parallel in reason with Christ's Resurrection on the first day, in point of
constituting either of them for a Sabbath or Holy day, as all acknowledge. But
Gods resting on the seventh day, was only the original impulsive, not the
immediate efficient, constitutive cause of the seventh day Sabbath; for it was
not a Sabbath as soon as God began to rest, or only because he rested on it;
but because he blessed and consecrated it for a Sabbath, and commanded Adam and
his posterity to sanctify it for a Sabbath, as is clear by Gen 2. 2, 3. Exodus
20. 7. to 12. for he sanctified it for a Sabbath because he had rested on it:
so that his rest was only the occasion why this d^y was consecrated for a
Sabbath, rather than any of the other six; but that which made it a Sabbath,
was Gods peculiar blessing, consecration, and institution of it for a Sabbath.
So Gods passing over the Is^aelites, and slaving the Egyptians, was the
occasion why the 14. day of the first Month was solemnized ^or a
Pass^ov^r-day: but that which constituted it to be such a day, was not his
passing over the Israelites, but his express command to them to observe it
throughout all their generations. Ex^d. 12 4. to 40. The Jews deliverance from
Haman and th^i^ other Enemies, was the cause or reason, why they Esth. 9. 20,
21, etc.
annually observed the fourteenth and fifteenth days of the Month Adar, as
solemn Festivals; and the deliverance from the Sea 3 Jac. c. 1
Gunpowder-Treason, the occasion why we observe the fifth of November, as an
annual Festival (which Feast we generally begin at Evening, since we then
usually begin to ring our bells in memory of our deliverance the morning
following) but the imm^diate efficient constituting cause of these days for
Holy Days, was neither the Jews deliverance nor ours; but the Law and
ordinance of the Jews, Esth. 9. 20 to 29. and the Sta^ute of 3 Jac^bi^c. 1.
which ordained those days to be solemnized and kept holy. So it is in all
other days solemnities whatsoever, not the occasion of their celebration, but
the authority and command to sanctify them, is that which See 5, and 6. E^. 6
c. 3. All Laws and Canons touching Lords-days, Holy Days, Feast-dayes, and
Thanksgiving days, and the Canonists Tit Feri^, and dies F^sti.
constitutes them Holy Days; therefore by the self same reason, Christ's bare
Resurrection was only the occasion why the Lord's Day was afterward sanctified
and observed; but that which constituted and made it a Lord's Day or Christian
Sabbath, was some Precept or Ordinance of Christ, or his Apostles, or of the
Primitive Church, without which it had not been actually a Lord's Day or Sabbath
in point of sanctification, though Christ did rise upon it.

2. If Christ's bare Resurrection without more Ceremony, did actually consecrate
that very first day on which he arose, and all others for a Sabbath or
Lord's Day, what need then those many large Discourses of Divines, concernning
the time when, the persons by whom, or the Authority by which the Sabbath was
translated from the seventh day to the first, or this instituted sor a
Lord's Day? Certainly if the very Resurrection of Christ did actually perform
all this, that very morning on which he arose, all these disputes were at an
end. But few or none have been so absurd as to make Christ's bare Resurrection
the immediate constituting cause of the first day for a Sabbath or Lord's Day,
much less of that very day upon which Christ arose, which all the Sea Mat. 28.
1. Make 16. 2, 9. Luke 29. 1. Joh. 20. 1. 19.
Evangelists style, the First day of the week, Even as it was Christ's
Resurrection day; which shows, that it was not then actually constituted for a
Sabbath or Lord's Day, but continued an ordinary weekday, as before. Therefore
it is not probable that it made ^uch a change or consecration of that very day.

3. None of the Evangelists in their Histories of Christ's Resurrection, make
mention either in direct terms, or by way of necessary inference, that our
Saviors bare Resurrection consecrated that very first day whereon he arose, or
any succeeding it, for a Sabbath or Lord's Day; much less that it changed the
beginning thereof from mornning to Evening. Therefore certainly no such
alteration as is su^mised, was actually effected by it.

4. Had Christ's Resurrection actually constituted that day on which he arose,
and all other first days ensuing for a Sabbath or Lords day, without further
Ceremony, even on that day when he arose; then that day had been consecrated
for a Sabbath or Lord's Day, and the seventh day Sabbath hadbeen translated to
it, before any man did or could take notice o^ this alteration; before any knew
this day was instituted for a Sabbath or ^ords-day; yea, before it was known or
believed that Christ was risen again, to or by his Disciples. For the Mat. 28.
17. Man. 16 11, 13 14. Luk 24. 21, 22, 25, 26. 37. to 41. John 20, 19, 24, 25.
26. 1 Cor. 15. 4. to 9.
Scripture is express, that he appeared not unto them till toward the Evening
of that day; at which time Thomas was absent, and some of them doubted, whether
he were risen again, or whether it was he or no: so that it is certain, they
observed not that first day, as a Sabbath or Lord's Day, in memory of his
Resurrection, But it is altogether improbable, that Christ would consecrate
that day for a Sabbath or Lord's Day, before his Disciples or any other knew of
it; or that he would make an alteration of the Sabbath, (which so much
concerned the Apostles and Church) in private, without their presence or
p^ivity: o^ that he would consec^ate that day for a Sabbath or Lord's Day, in
memory of his Resurrection, before it was certainly known that he was risen; or
before he had showed himself to his Disciples after he was risen; or before any
did know it to be a Lord's Day or Sabbath it being made so only for man, Mar. 2.
27. not for Christ himself, or Angels, who were only present with him when he
arose. For Christ being only wise, did all things in John 2. 4. c. 12. 23. c.
13. 1. c. 17. 1. 1 Timothy 6. 15. Romans 56. Gal. 2. 4. 2. 4.
the fittest season, and in a public manner, in the presence of his disciples,
who were to be witnesses of all his actions, speeches, Acts 1. 2, 3 c. 2. 32.
c. 10. 40, 41, 42, 43. 1 John ^, 1, 3. 2 Pet. 1. 16, 17, 18. Luke 1. 2.
Therefore he would not, he did not institute that very day whereon he arose for
a Sabbath or Lord's Day, at the time when he arose, which the Evangelists
certainly would have mentioned (being a matter of such moment to the Church and
Christians) had it been done in truth, as pretended only, but not proved,
neither in truth can be. If therefore the Objectors affirm; that Christ's
Resurrection was the cause of the Lord's Day as a Lord's Day; that is, an
immediate constituting cause of it, and that at the very moment when he arose,
then it is a palpable untruth, as the premises manifest: If they mean by cause,
only the impulsive cause or original occasion of its future consecration or
institution for a Sabbath or Lord's Day, then their Argument is but this.
Christ's Resurrection (the occasion of Christians solemnizing the Lord's Day, as
a Lord's Day or Sabbath) was in the morning; Ergo the Lord's Day must being at
morning: which is but a mere Non sequitur; because the occasions of
sanctifying any days for Sabbaths or Holy Days, do not bound out the
beginning or end of the days, for then these days must begin and conclude when
the occasi^ns of their solemnization do; But on the contrary, the days do ever
limit the occasions and F^stivalls, which must begin and end with the days to
which they are confined. This I shall make mani^est by examples, and make good
by unanswerable reasons. For Examples, we have all the Festivalls in Scripture,
which together with their occasions, are restrained to the bounds of days, not
the limits of days to them. To instance in particulars. When God himself
instituted the seventh day for a Sabbath, because on it he had rested from all
his works of Creation; he confined the Sabbath and his rest, to the seventh
day; not the seventh day to it: blessing the seventh day and hallowing it; not
changing the beginning, ending, limits, or order of it in the week, but the
use, Genesis 2. 2, 3. Exodus 20. 7. to 12. When God instituted the fourteenth day
of the Month Abib, for a Passover day, in memory of his passing over the
Israelites, and sl^ying the Egyptians at Midnight, he ordained that Feast to
begin at Evening, because the day to which this Festival was confined, did
then begin; not at Midnight, when the occasion of its sol^mnization happened,
Exodus 11. 4. c. 12. 3, 6. 12. 10 40. Lev. 23* 5. Numb. 9. 11. Deuteronomy. 16. 4.
Josh. 5 10. So all the other Jewish Feasts Exodus 12. 18. Deuteronomy. 16. 3, 4 1. Sam.
30. 17.
began and ended at Evening, as the days on which they were solemnized did;
the limits of the day being the bounds of the Festivalls, not the Festivalls,
or their occasions, the boundaries of the day; a Festival or Holy day being
none other, but a common day set apart and dedicated to Gods special honor
and service: Therefore being but a common day consecrated, must needs begin and
end, ^s the day does This is manifest by Exodus 12. 18. c. 13. 3, 4. c. 14. 30.
c. 35. 2. Levit. 23 3* to 43. Numb. 29. 1. Josh. 10. 12, 13, 14. Judges 5. 1. 1 Samuel 14. 23. Neh 8, 9, 10, 11. Esth. 8. 12. c 9. 17, 18, 19, 22. Psalm 81. 3.
Psalm. 118. 24. Isa. 22. 12. Matthew. 28. 1. Mark 16. 1. Luke 23. 56. c. 21. 1.
Where all Festivalls, Fasts, and memorable occasions, are regulated by days,
not days by them; the Festivalls and Feasts ever beginning and ending with the
days to which they are appropriated, not the days, or Festivalls, or Fasts,
with the occasions of their solemnization. So in all annual or weekly
Holy Days, Feasts, or Fasts instituted by men, let the occasions of their
institution happen what hour or time of the day they will, at morning, noon,
or afternoon, yet we still begin the solemnization of them, when the day
begins. For Example, our Saviors Passion on the Cross, was not till about
three of the clock in the afternoon, John 9. 14 Mark 15. 34. Yet we solemnise
our Goodfriday, in memory of his Passion, from the time the day begins. So our
Saviors Ascension (as is probable by Acts 1. 9 10, 11, 12. 13. Luke 24. 50*
51, 52.) was about Noon or after, yet we begin the Festival of his Ascension
with the days inception, whereon it was. So the descent of the Holy Ghost upon
the Apostles in cloven tongues' was about nine of the clock in the monring,
Acts 2. 15. Yet we solemnize our Whitsonday in memory thereof, from that days
inception. Our deliverance from the Sea 3. Jac. c. 1. 2, 3. The arraignment of
Traitors. Speeds History. p. 1254
Gunpowder Treason on the fifth of November, was about nine or ten in the
morning, or after, when the King, Queen, Prince, Lords and Commons should have
m^t together in the Lords-house; (though suspected and in part discovered ten
days before, and actually detected at Midnight;) yet we begin the
solemnization of it, from the foregoing Evening, with ringing of Bells, and the
like. The Birth of many of our Princes has been about noon or after, and their
Coronations about that time: yet we solemnize their Birth-dayes, and
Coronation-dayes, from those days beginnings. The Crown descended to our
present Sovereign King Charles in the afternoon: yet we solemnize not that day
from Noon to Noon, but from Evening to Evening, because the day does then
commence and end, and so the solemnity confined only to that day, that whole
day, not to part of it, and part of the ensuing day. If then all Festivalls
whatsoever begin and end with the days beginning and end on which they are
kept, not at the very time of those days, when the occasions of their
solemnization happened, as these and other infinite other examples testify;
Why should not the Lord's Day begin at Evening, though Christ's Resurrection,
(the chief cause of its sanctification) was not till morning, because that day,
as a day, does then begin and determine? Certainly whatever the Opposites
conceit, it must needs do so, and that for these unanswerable Reasons.

First, because God himself, at the very Creation has set inviolable bounds,
for the beginning and end of daves and weeks; appointing them to be as so many
Royal Standards for the limiting or measuring out of all Festival occasions
happening on them, and reducing them to a certainty; as I have manifested at
large in the fourth Conclusion: wherefore no event or Festivalls, happening on
those days, can alter the limits or beginning of them, nor make them longer or
shorter; no more than the Corn to be measured by the peck or bushel, or the
cloth to be measured by the yard, can alter, limit or measure out the quantity
of the peck, bushel, or length of the yard.

Secondly, because every occasion that may cause a subsequent consecration of a
day, for a Sabbath or Holy day, (and so Christ's Resurrection) does only
dedicate that day, yea all that day on which it falls, not part of that day,
and part of the day ensuing, on which it did not happen; therefore consecrating
only that very day, all that day, and no other day but that, it must needs
begin and end, when that day does. Now that very day on which our Savior
arose, began and ended at Evening, as I have proved: his Resurrection therefore
being the cause of consecrating all that day, (not part of it, and part of the
following day) for the Lord's Day, this day as a Lord's Day, must necessarily
begin and conclude at Evening.

Thirdly, because no occasion of consecrating the day on which it falls,
extends in point of Consecration, further than that very day, which is set as
the utmost limits of it. But should the Lord's Day begin and end at morning or
Midnight, not at Evening, Christ's Resurrection (the cause of its consecration)
should extend beyond the bounds of the day, to consecrate half (or at least a
quarter) of the second day, for a Lord's Day on which he arose; and besides, it
should not consecrate all that day on which it happened, but that part only
which ensued, not that which preceded it, since that day began at Evening, as I
have proved. Both which were absurd to affirm. Therefore it must needs begin at
Evening, The Lords day being only the first day on which Christ arose, and all
the first day, not part of it, and part of the second day, as it is and must
be, in the Opposites computation.

Fourthly, that day on which Christ arose, both as a week day, and as a day,
was precedent to his Resurrection, both in time, nature, and in the
sanctification of it for a Lord's Day: For there must be first a day of the week
before Christ could rise upon it, or any consecrate it for a Sabbath or
Lord's Day: therefore his Resurrection on it, and the consecration of it for a
Lord's Day, did not, could not alter the limits or nature of that day, but both
of them must be regulated, squared by its former bounds.

Fifthly, Christ's Resurrection and the Lord's Day solemnization, have no set
limits of time of their own, being no parts of time, but only measured out by
time: therefore they can give, or proportion out, no limits of time to the
first day, but the first day being a part of time, must set limits of time to
them. And to make Festivalls or their occasions measurers out of the length,
b^ginning or end of days (which the Objectors do) is as gross an absurdity, as
to measure the bush^ll by the corn, or the yard by the cloth; not the corn an^
cloth by the bushel or yard; or as to square the Rule by the tree; measure the
quart pot by the wine; weigh pounds and weights by the wool, flesh, bread,
fruits; not the tree, wine, wool, etc. by the rule, quart, pound, weights.

Sixthly, every memorable accident happening upon any day (and so by
consequence our Saviors Resurrection on the first day of the week) cannot
possibly alter the beginning of that day: For if it falls out just at the days
beginning, it is a reason that the day and Festival solemnized in memorial of
it, should then begin, because both the day and the occasion of its celebration
commence together; if it happen after the day begins (as Christ's Resurrection
did) it cannot nullify or change its beginning, because it was irrevocably
past, and gone before. Et* quod factum, quod praeteritum est, infectum reddi
non potest, no not by God himfelf, much less by any accidental occasion,
which cannot possibly operate to nullify or alter that which was past and gone
before it was in being. Since therefore no occasion happening, either with or
after the beginning of any day can possibly alter the time of its inception,
the Festivity instituted in memory of that occasion, on that day, must
inevitably begin and end when the day does in its natural and usual course,
and so the Lord's Day too, which must begin and end at Evening, because that day
on which Christ rose again did so.

Seventhly, Christ's Resurrection (and so any other memorable accident upon any
days) was but a mere transient act, done, past, almost in a moment, or
minutes space: wherefore it could properly of it self consecrate only that
space of that day which it took up and no more: for the forepart of the day
being past, the following part of it to come, and neither of them in being, but
that space thereof in which he rose again, Christ's Resurrection could not
properly operate to consecrate either the antecedent or subsequent part of that
day, of it self, much less any days ensuing. If therefore the Lord's Day, or
first day should be limited or bounded out by the time on which Christ rose
(which is the Opposites Doctrine) we must either observe no Lord's Day at all,
or else a Lord's Day of a minutes length (and that minute uncertain when to
begin or end, because the hour, or minute of Christ's rising again is unknown:)
Since therefore there is both an expediency and necessity that Christians
should observe a day, a Festival of a greater length, than the very moment in
which Christ rose, in memory of Christ's Resurrection; the instituters of the
Lords day, considering that God himself did ever bound out all Festivalls, by
days, not minutes, hours or half days, (stretching the limits of them farther
than the bounds of their occasions reached; which were commonly short, and
transitory;) partly in imitation of Gods own former proceedings in such cases,
and partl^ out of necessity, did extend the bounds of the Lord's Day beyond the
space in which he was rising, even to the entire day, whereon he arose, and so
to that part of the day preceding, as well as to that succeeding it, the very
act of Christ's Resurrection being but momentany and not so large as the whole
days extent. Whence we may clearly see an absolute necessity of limiting
Festivalls by the days, limits, not by their occasions; of beginning the
Lord's Day at Evening, though the Resurrection, the cause of its future
solemnization, was not till morning; and of making such occasions and the
Resurrection, to relate a part ante, as well as a part post; to consecrate
the precedent as well as the subs^quent part of the days on which they happen,
without any violation of the objected Logic Rule. That the effect cannot
precede the cause; (which is true only in this sense, that the Lord's Day could
not be actually observed as a Lord's Day in memory of Christ's Resurrection on
it, before he actually rose again:) else Festivalls and the Lords*day should be
scarce half-holy-dayes, sometimes not above a minutes or hours length; which
would be dishonorable to God, to Christ, to the Church and disadvantagious
unto Christians.

Eighthly, if Festivalls or their occasions (and so Christ's Resurrection and the
Lord's Day) should alter the beginning and end of days, as the Objectors
pretend, it would bring in an absolute confusion of all tim^s and days: For
then every last occasion of solemnizing any day must change the beginning of
all other days, and reduce them to the time that that occasion happened; and
so every punie Festival should alter the limits of all days and Festivalls
formerly settled; which were injurious, yea absurd; and would cause so many
alterations in day as would render all days, weeks, years, u^certain; or else
every day or Festival should have several beginnings and ends, answerable to
the hours of the several remarkable accidents happening on them, some
beginning at one hour, some at another, some being long, others short, some
beginning at one time in one Country, and at another time in another Country;
which would bring such a perplexity, intricacy into all computations of time,
and all Chronology, as neither God nor man could suffer; breed much confusion,
both in Contracts, Festivals, all divine and humane affairs; overturn Religion,
Laws, Days, Weeks, Months, years, and reduce all things to a mere
incertainty, in regard of time, which has continued the same in all ages and
places from the Creation to this present, without any variation; the week
consisting of seven days, and each of those days of 24. hours only, as they
did at the Creation. Wherefore to prevent this general confusion, incertainty,
disorder in days, and other times, there is a necessity that days, (Gods
Standard Royal, to measure all temporary things, occasions, and solemn
Festivals happening on them) should limit both Festivals themselves, and the
causes of their institution: and so that the Lord's Day should be squared by the
first day of the week, to which it is confined, not the first day, or
Lord's Day, by the time of our Saviors Resurrection on it. And why should not
the Lord's Day be squared by the first day on which our Savior arose? Is it not
celebrated principally in remembrance of his Resurrection on that day? Is not
the Lord's Day the first day, and the first day the Lord's Day? Is not all the
first day the Lord's Day, and no part of the 2d. day? would you not have it like
that first day on which Christ arose, not different from it? If so, then that
first day must be the only measure of it; and it must begin and end at Evening,
as that day did. If otherwise, you make the Lord's Day different from that day
whereon Christ rose, you sanctify but part, not all the first day; you piece
up a Lord's Day of half the first day and half the second day; and make Christ's
Resurrection the measure of the day, when as the day was the measure of it: all
and and either of which is gross^ly absurd. You see therefore in the first
place, that the ground on which the Opposites build their opinion of the
Lords-dayes commencement at morning; is but a ch^in of falsehoods and notorious
errors. And so the objection merely false, in the sense that they intend it.

2. I answer, that though Christ's Resurrection was the principal cause of
Christians celebrating the first day of the week for the Lord's Day, and
Christian weekly Sabbath; yet it was not the sole cause or occasion of it,
there being many other caus^s likewise alleged for it by * ancient See
Augustine de tempore sermo 251. and 154 D. Bound of the Sabbath, p. 44.
and modern Divines and others; as that it was the first day of all others,
whereon God created the light, that God raineed Manna in the Wilderness on it,
that Christ thereon rose again from the dead, and that the Holy Ghost desc^nded
thereon, upon the Apostles. Thus expressed in the Excerptions of Egbert
Archbishop of York, about the year of Christ 750 c. 36. Spelmanni Council. Tom.
1. p. 262. Dominica dies prima dies seculi est, and dies Resurrectionis
Christi; and dies Pentecosten, and ideo SANCTA EST, etc. And thus in some
ancient Saxon Canons, some of uncertain date, yet supposed to be 1000 years
after Christ. Ibidem p 600. c. 24. Taken out of Theodulphus his Epistle An.
83^. apud Bochellum Decreta Ecclesiae. Gald. 4. Tu. ^0. c. 19. p. 5. 96.
Dies vero Dominica, quia in eo Deus lucem condidit, in eo Mannam eremo pluit,
in eo Redemptor humanigeneris spoute pro salute nostra mortuis resurrexit, in
eo Spiritum Sanctum super discipu^os infudit, tanta debet esse observantia, ut
praeter Orationes and Missarum solemnia, and ea quae ad vescendum pertinent,
nihil aliud fiat, etc. On which particulars, many of our modern writers insist.
Now as it was the first day of the world whereon light was created, it clearly
began at Evening, Genesis 1. 5. The Manna falling on it, ^el^ with the dew IN THE
NIGHT. Numb, 11. 9 Exodus 16 13, 14. Christ's Resurrection thereon was early in
the Morning whiles it was yet dark, John 20. 1. Luke 24. 1, 2, 6. Matthew. 28. 1.
6. Mark 16. 1, 2. The Descent of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles thereon; was
about nine of the clock in the Morning, or the third hour of the day, Acts 2.
1. to 16. To these Reasons of its sanctifi^ation, most of our late Divines
annex, Christ's apparition to his Disciples on this day after his Resurrection:
and that was AT EVENING (a little before Sunset) John 20. 19. Now if all these
several occurrents on the first day of the week, concurring jointly toward
its sanctification as a Lord's Day, or Christian Sabbath, should alter its
Primitive beginning and end at the Creation, as the first day of the world,
when it began and ^nded at Evening, to the time and hour of these several
Occurrences thereon; it should have as many several beginnings and ends, at
several times, hours, repugnant to each other; which would make it five
several days in stead of one; yea no day at all, but a Monster of days and
Sabbaths. To reconcile which repugnances, and avoid such confusion; the
Objectors must disclaim their confident objected mistake. That Christ's
Resurrection (being one cause of the Lords-dayes solemnization only) did
actually change the beginning of the day, from Evening to Morning; and grant it
still begins at Evening, as before it did.

3. I answer that this Objection is a mere Petitio principii; a begging of the
thing controverted, as granted instead of proving it. For they lay this for a
foundation; that Christ's very Resurrection did change the beginning of the
Lord's Day (or first day) on which he arose from Evening to Morning: which is
the thing in truth they ought to prove. Yea but they confirm it too as well as
say it: How I pray? Christ rose again in the Morning, Ergo he translated the
beginning of the day to the Morning. But how is this Consequent made good? why
thus: Christ's Resurrection was the cause of the Lord's Day; Therefore the day
must begin when he arose, and not before, for the effect ought not to precede
the cause.

I subioyn that in this Argum^nt is a treble sophisme.

First there is Fallacia dictiouis in the word cause: which signifies either
an o^iginall impulsive cause; (And so it is true that Christ's Resurrection was
the cause of the Lords days solemnization, to wit the cause, why Christians
afterward did solemnize it) or else an immediate efficient consti^utive cause:
Christ's Resurrection was no such cause of the Lords day as I have proved. Yet
the Objectors in this Argument make it so, for that is their meaning. If they
take cause here only in the first sense; then the Argum^nt is a mere
inconsequent; for the original cause or occasion of a thing may in point of
time precede the effect for many hundred years. Adams fall was the cause or
occ^sion of Christ's Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection and Ascension, Romans 56.
to 20. yet these were many thousand yea^s puny to it. The three y^ars famine in
David's time, was occasioned by Saul's slaughter of the Gibeonites many years
before, 2 Samuel 21. 1. Yea most Divi^^s generally affirm, that though. Christ's
Resurrection was he occasion or impu^sive cause of the Lords-day^s i^sti^ution,
yet the institution of it was some space after i^, not contemporary with it.
This Argument therefore is bu^ a mere incons^qu^nt Christ's Resurrection, the
original occ^sion of the Lords day^s institution, was in the m^^ni^g. Ergo* h^
L^^ds day must then begin.

2. Here is ^ik^wise ^ ^^l^acie in arguing, that the Lords day m^st (...) at
Mo^ning, not Evening, because the effect cannon p^^^ed^ the cause; when as the
A^gument should be ^^st contrary. The ^ffect begins ever when the (...) it
does; and is ever co^tan^ous with it; the^^f^^^ t^^ L^^ds day ought to b^gin in
the Morning, because ^^ R^su^^^ction the cause of it b^gan then. The first ^f
the ^ A^^uments is a Non sequitur: because thou^^ the ef^^^t cannot precede the
cause in natural things, as the Son cannot be before the Father was; yet it
follows not, that the effect should ever be as ancient as, or contemporany
with the cause, or the Son be as old as the Father, or born together with him.
So it follows not that because the Lords day, as a Lords day, could not begin
to be observed, hallowed as such a day, before that Morning whereon Christ
arose; Ergo it must begin at Morning, and could not be instituted to begin the
Evening of the next, or any other first day following it. Again the Antec^d^nt
of the latter Argument is falf, for although the original cause or occasion
does usually precede the effect in point of time, (as Christ's Resurrection did
the institution of the Lords day) yet it follows not that the Lords day must
begin at that very point of time when Christ arose. So that there is a fallacy
in this Argument, in arguing from the effect to the Cause, that it cannot
precede it: when as the Proposition ought to be, that it is ever contemporary
and must begin at the same time with it.

Thirdly, There is a Transitio a genere ad Genus; and that in two particulars.

1. In making Christ's Resurrection the cause of the Lord's Day, as it is a
naiurall day, when as it was no cause of it as a day, but only the reason why
it was instituted for a Lord's Day. So that the Argument should be thus
propounded. Christ's Resurrection was the cause, why the first day was
instituted for a Lord's Day: but that began at Morning. Ergo, the Lord's Day must
then begin, because the day must then begin, when the occasion of its
institution for a Lord's Day began: which I have proved to be false:

2. In applying that to the beginning of the day, which is applycable only to
the beginning of its institution for a Lord's Day, in this maxim; that the
effect cannot precede the cause, that is, the Lord's Day must not be instituted
in memory of Christ's Resurrection, before Christ was actually risen, (which yet
may be false, since the Feast of the Passover was instituted at Evening, and
solemnized in part, before God actually passed over the Israelites, and slew
the Egyptians at Midnight following, which was the cause of its institution.
Exodus 12. 3. to 40.) and so might the Lord's Day too, be instituted in this
manner before Christ's Resurrection) Therefore after his Resurrection past, it
could not be instituted to begin the Evening of that first day of the week on
which he arose. Which is a mere inconsequent: For what though Christ did not
rise till the Morning; yet that day on which he arose began at Evening; and
therefore his Resurrection relating to the whole day, as his Resurrection day,
this day of the week (if not before, yet after his Resurrection past) might be
well solemnized for a Lord's Day, even from Evening to Evening, without any
violation of the true meaning of this Maxim; Since we solemnize not the day,
as the precise minute or hour, but as the weekly day of his Resurrection,
every part whereof may be part of his Resurrection day, though not part of that
very hour of the day whereon he arofe. If then these Fallacies be abandoned,
the whole sum and Force of the Objection, is but this in honest Terms.

Christ's Resurrection in the morning was the original occasion why the first
day of the week whereon he arose, was afterward instituted for the Lord's Day,
and so solemnized.

Ergo the first day as the Lord's Day, must begin and end at morning, at that
moment when Christ arose, not at Evening, neither could it be instituted to
begin at Even.

Which as all the premises manifest, is a gross inconsequent.

All that is or can be replied to help out this maimed reason, is this. That
the first day whereon Christ arose, Objection.
had two beginnings. One, as a Lords day, and that was at morning when he
arose: the other as a mere natural day, viz. at Evening: and that Christ's
Resurrection, gave it a new beginning, as a Lord's Day, not as a natural day.

To this I answer, 1. That this distinction is but a mere Forgery, warranted by
no Scripture, reason or convincing Authority; and therefore it ought first to
be proved Answer ^.
ere received.

2. It is but a begging of the Question disputed, not an Answer of the Reasons
objected.

3. It is a mere falsehood:

For 1. That very day whereon Christ arose was not consecrated at his
Resurrection for a Lord's Day, as I have proved: therefore it could not begin at
morning as a Lord's Day, seeing it was no Lord's Day.

2. The Lord's Day is nothing else, but the first day of the week, and the first
day of the week is the Lord's Day, they being terntini convertibiles: therefore
they have but one and the self-same beginning and end.

3. That first day, on which Christ arose, even as his Resurrection day, began
at Evening as I have proved; therefore it began then, as it was the Lords day,
it being the Lord's Day only, as it is his Resurrection day.

4. Had that first day, as a day ^^^un at morning, then it must needs be either
an half-holy-day, ^ut of 12 hours long; the Evening and night preceding it,
being no patt of it; or else it must be a Lord's Day patched up of a piece of
the first day, and a part of the second day, to wit, of the day light of the
first, and the night of second; and not that entire first day whereon Christ
arose. Either of which is an absurdity to aver: therefore as a Lord's Day it
must begin at Evening, to avoid these absurdities. By all which it is now most
clearly evident; that this Grand Objection is both false, absur^ and
fallacious, proving nothing at all against me, and no ground to rely upon.

The third main Argument, to prove, that the Lord's Day Argum. 3.
begins at morning, not at Evening, is that of John 20. 19. The same day at
Evening, being the first day of the Week, when the doors were shut, where the
Disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the
midst, etc. whence it may be objected. That the same first day whereon Christ
rose again, ended not at Evening; as the words (The same day at Evening, being
the first day of the week) import; that Evening being part of the first day,
not of the second; therefore it began not at Evening in Saint John's account,
and our Saviors Resurrection in it translated its beginning from Evening to
Morning.

To this I answer first, that this Text makes nothing at all against me. For
the Scripture makes mention of two Evenings; one of the artificial day (which
we commonly call day) beginning when the sund clines, and somewhat before
sunset and ending with the twili^^t, or Sun ^e^, or when Objection 3. Answer. 1.
the Evening st^^ begins to shine which Evening is a part of the preceding day,
both in our (...) usual and the Scripture S^e Mat. 14. 15. 25. Mark 2 6. 35,
36 47, 48. Joh. 6. 16, 17 com^ared (...) ^.
Computation, the day Evening when this morning determines. Of which The
Evening Sacrifices we read of in Scripture, and our Vespers or Evening prayers,
are o^ this Evening of the day, a little before Sunsetting.
Evening we may read, Prove. 7. 9. Mark 1. 32. Exodus 29 39. ^^^t. 23. 11. Judges
9. 9, 11, 14, 16. Josh. 8. 29. c. 10. 26, 27. 2 (...) 3. 37. Ma^th. 25. 57.
Mark 15. 42. Luke 23. 43, 44. F^x^d 12. 6. Number. 9. 3. c. 28. 4. and Deuteronomy. 21.
23. compared together, which is sometimes styled Evening tide, Josh. 8. 29 Genesis
24. Genesis 24. 63. Josh 7. 6. 2 Samuel 11. 2. Isa. 17. 14. Judges 19 9. The other
is the Evening of the night, beinning after Sun set, or just with the
Starlight, just when the twi^l^ht ends, and the night and natural day in
the Scripture and J^ws account begin, which Evening is a part, and the very
beginning of the ensuing day: of which we may read, Genesis 1, 5, 8. 13. to 24 31.
Exodus 3^. 8, Levit. 11. 24. 40. c. 14. 46. c. 15. 5 ^o 27. c. 17. 15. to 3^. c.
32. 6. c. 23. 32. Numb. 19. 8 10. Deuteronomy. 28. 67. Judges 20. 23 26 2 Samuel 1. 12.
1 Samuel 30 17. Prove. 7. 9. Psalm. 104. 23. Jer. 6. 4. Hab. 1. 18 Zeph. 2. 7. c.
3. 3. Jer. 5. 6 Neh. 13. 19. Deuteronomy. 16. 4. Exodus 12. 6. Levit. 23. 5. Mark 13.
35. compared one with the other. Of both these Evenings we find express
mention, Exodus 12. 6 Number. 9. 3. and 28. 4. Where the Jews are commanded to kill
the Passover BETWEEN the TWO EVENINGS, that is, as most accord, between the
Evening of the day, and Evening of the night; Which space between these two
Evenings both we ou^ selves, and the Prove. 7. 9. 1 Samuel 30 17. 2 Kings 7. 5, 7.
Job 24. 15. Ezechch. 12. 6. 12.
Scriptures call, Twilight, that is, the space between two lights, to wit, the
Light of the Sun, and the Light of the Stars or Candlelight; or the space
between Sun setting and Star-shining; which space most hold belongs to the
precedent day; the Evening, which begins the night and following day, really
commencing, when the Evening See Neh. 4. 21 Job 3. 9. Jer. 31. 35. Genesis 1. 1*
14. 10 19. compared together.
star begins to appear, which Star called Isiodor Hispalensis originum. l 3. c.
40. Cal^pi^e, Rabbanus Maurus de universo l. 10. c. 70. Christianus Grammaticu.
Pasca^ius Rathb^rtus in Matt. 28. v. 1. Honorius Aug^stodunens^s de imagine
mundi, l. 2. c. 32
VESPER, both denominates, and begins the Evening of the night, and the ensuing
natural day. There being therefore these two Evenings, both in the Scripture
computation and our own; the sole Question will be, on which of the Evenings it
was, that Christ thus appeared to his Dis^iples? and what Evening it is, Saint
John here speaks of? Questionlesle, it was the Evening of the day, no^ of the
night: First because the Text is express, that it was the same day at Even,
being the first day of the week; that is, whiles the first day was yet in
being, and before it was quite ended: therefore it was, it must be the Evening
of the day, which in the Scripture and Jewish account (which Saint John
follows) was a part of the prec^ding first day; not the Evening of the night,
which was in their compute, a parcel of the second day, not of the first; as I
have proved.

2. All Divines accord, that this very first day on which Christ arose, and
thus appeared to his Disciples, began and ended at Evening, as the third and
fifth Conclusions manifest. Therefore this Evening can be no other, but the
Evening of the first day, not of the night, since this day, both began and
ended when the Evening of the night began.

3. This Text informs us; that when Christ thus appeared unto his Disciples at
Evening, he showed them his hands and his feet, and that they saw and knew him
perfectly. Now neither Saint John, nor any other Evangelist make Acts 20. 8.
Makes relation when they had lights of those lights; there^o^e the Evan^elists
likewise would have done so, had ^^ere been any, as is most pr^bable.
mention of any lights in the room where they were, by which they might see
him: therefore it is most probable, that they saw him by day light, or
Sunshine, by which they could best of all discern him. And if by day light,
(there being nothing in Scripture to control it) this Evening was
questionless the Evening of the day before Sunset, as soon as ever the
Disciples came all together.

4. Christ's love to his Disciples, (who would not absent himself from them
long, nor leave them in suspense of the truth of his ^esurrection, which they
heard of before, by relation only and other evidences) may induce us to
believe, that it was the first See Psalm. 28 7. to 16. 17.
of these two Evenings, to wit the Evening of the day; and Saint Peter's speech
to Cornelius, (Acts 10. 40. 41. Him God raised up the third day, and showed him
openly: (therefor at day time, as is likelyest by 1 Samuel 12. 11, 12. c. 16.
22. Psalm. 98. 2. Isa. 52. 10. Col. 2. 15.) not to all the people, but unto
witnesses chosen before of God, even to us, who did eat and drink with him
after he rose from the dead) implies as much. This therefore being the Evening
of the day, and so a part of that first day, in the Scripture and J^ws compute,
makes nothing at all against me.

Secondly, This Text mentions not at all this day as a Lord's Day, but only as
the first day of the Week whereon Christ rose; neither does it or any other
Scripture inform us, that Christ made any translation of this days beginning
to the morning. Nor does it follow, that the day must begin at morning or
midnight, because it did not end at that time of the Evening when Christ
appeared to his Disciples, for it might determine soon after his appearance (as
the words, being the first day of the week subjoyned to the premises seem to
infinu^te) and so not begin at morning or midnight. This Objection therefore no
ways impairs the truth of my assertion.

The fourth Objection (upon which some much rely) is that of Acts 20. 7. to 12.
where Paul and the Disciples Objection 4.
at Troas continued their Assembly on the first day of the week, till
day-breaking, and Paul himself then preached until Midnight. Ergo The
Lord's Day begins and ends not at Evening, but at Morning (say some) at
Midnight, say others.

To this I answer, First, that this Ass^mbly of theirs on this day began our
Saturday nigh^, not our Sunday, and Answer 1.
continued till our Sunday, (not our M^nday) morning, as I have formerly proved
at large; and therefore it makes wholly for, not against me.

Secondly, admit this meeting was upon our Sunday at night, (which I would have
the Objectors prove, as w^ll as affirm) yet it concludes naught against my
ass^rtion.

First, Because this Sermon of Paul's continuing till midnight, and this their
continuance all night together, till the morning, was extraordinary, upon an
extraordinary occasion; to wit, Paul's departu^e from them the next morning, v.
7. Therefore no Argument to prove the ordinary beginning or end of the
Lord's Day.

2. As this Sermon and Assembly was extraordinary, so is it singular, without
any pa^al^^ example to second it, either in S^^ipture or antiqui^y; which make
no mention of any such Sermons or Assemblies used on our Sunday nights, (though
of many on our Saturday night, as I have proved) besides this alone, if on it.
As therefore one Swallow makes no Summer, so this one singular example makes no
President for the usual beginning and concluding of the Lord's Day at Morning
or Midnight.

Thirdly, It is abare example but of one Apostle, without any precept to back
it; therefore it can be no conclusive proof, that the Lord's Day ought to begin
at morning or midnight, and he^ to ^^d.

Fourthly, The beginning or ending of a S^^m^n, or one public meeting (^ay the
co^st^^ practis^ of all Churches and places, from the beginning and ending
their public Lords day exer^i^^^, which is much more) is no concluding
Argument of it self (...)* to p^^v^ the true beginning and end of the S^bb^th
(...) Lord's Day. For the Jews themselves, (...) Christ him^^^^ and ^he
Apostles) began their public S^^m^ns and (...) on the Sabbath day, about eight
or nine of the clock in the morning, and concluded them ^^out four or five in
the afternoon, as we and all other Churches ^ow use to begin and end our
public Lords-d^^es, solemnities: can or will any man ther^fo^e hence (...),
E^go, the seventh days: Sabbath and our Lord's Day begin not till nine in the
morning, and conclude at five in the Evening, because the public Ass^m^l^s on
(...), do then usually begin and determine? N^^ v^^ily, ^or this were to make
the Seventh day Sabbath and Lord's Day, consisting each of them of a natural
day of 24 hours length, not above eight or nine hours long, and scarce so much
as half holy days; and to abandon all private Sabbath and Lords-dayes duties,
in allowing no time at all for them. If then the customary constant cause of
our beginning and concluding public Sermons, with other solemn exercises and
Assemblies on the Sabbath or Lord's Day, are no sufficient Argument that the
Sabbath or Lord's Day commence or determine, when these public Sermons,
Exercises, and Assemblies do, much less can this extraordinary singular Sermon
of Saint Paul continued until Midnight, or the prorogation of this Assembly at
Troas, till the morning, of themselves alone infer this Conclusion, that the
Lord's Day begins or ends at Midnight, or morning.

Fifthly, it appears not by the Text, that Saint Paul preached until Midnight,
and continued this Assembly till day breaking, for this very reason, because
the Lord's Day ended not till then. There is no such thing as this insinuated by
Saint Luke: but the reason of it is plainly expressed to be, Paul's departure
from thence the ensuing morning, never to see their faces more: and Saint Lukes
drift in recording this Story, is not to signify, when the Lord's Day properly
begins and determines; but only as an Historian truly to relate the Apostles
Actions; and to record Paul's industry in preaching upon all occasions; with his
love to the disciples at Troas, and their respects to him, and his miraculous
restoring Eutychus to life, who fell down dead from the third L^ft, whiles he
was preaching. Therefore it can be no insallible Argument to prove, that the
Lord's Day begins or ends at Morning, much less at Midnight; since they brake
brend, and did eat and communicate together till the morning.

Sixthly, I would demand of the Objectors, when this Assemb^y at Troas began?
If at Morning or Midnight before: that is improbable, since we cannot imagine,
that Paul made a Sermon at that time of 18 or 20 hours long; half of which
would have tired both himself and his Auditors. If not before our Sunday at
Evening, as they pretend; then it is a stronger Argument to prove that the
Lordsday begins not till Sunday evening; because St. Paul and the Disciples at
Troas met not together to solemnize it till then; then that it ends (and so by
consequence begins) at morning or midnight, because this Assembly dissolved not
till morning, and Paul continued his preaching until midnight.

Seventhly, If this example conclude any thing positively, for the Objectors,
it is only this; That they should continue their ordinary Lordsday Evening
Sermons until Midnight, and their Assemblies till day breaking; as St. Paul
and the Disciples did here. This inference following directly from this
example, without any straining; far better then theirs from it does; that the
Lordsday begins and ends at Midnight or Morning. But this inference I suppose
they will all disclaim in words, as they do in practice, as being a
Nonsequitur; because this example was but singular and extraordinary upon a
special occasion. Therefore by the self same reason, they must disclaim their
present Objections too, or else subscribe to this my inference, which they
cannot avoid unless they quite renounce their own.

Lastly, its clear St. Paul used to preach both in season and out of season:
exhorting Timothy and other Ministers to do the like, 2 Timothy 4. 2. that is, as
most interpret it, to preach both upon Lordsdayes, and all other days and
nights too, as he saw occasion. Why then might not his Sermon at Troas begin
upon the Lordsday at Evening, about our Evening Sermon time, and yet continue
till the Lordsday was past. Certainly, there is no impossibility, nor
improbability, but it might so: Since therefore this text of St. Luke informs
us only, that this Meeting and Sermon began upon the First day of the week,
when the disciples came together to break bread; that the Sermon lasted till
midnight, and the Assembly till day break following, without any expression
that the Firstday was then continuing or ended; admitting this Assembly and
Sermon to be on our Sunday night, (which I absolutely deny) yet it follows not,
that the First day ended not in St. Lukes account and theirs at Troas, before
the Sermon or Assembly concluded. So that this example proves nothing at all
for the Opponents Thesis, nor any thing against mine, for which it is a
concluding evidence, if rightly understood, as I have formerly manifested.

The 5. Objection, for the Lordsdayes beginning at morning, and against its
Evening commencement, is this. Objection ^.
That the beginning of it at Evening, would open a wide gap to all
licentiousnes, Pastimes, Disorders, on Lordsday after-noons, and likewise to
secular employments unsuitable to the day; which the beginning of it at morning
would prevent.

To this, I answer. First, that this Objection is a mere Cavil: For we see by
woeful experience, that the Doctrine Answer
of the Lordsdays beginning in the Morning (which is and has been generally
received of late years in most places of the Kingdom) has no ways prevented,
remedied any of the Abuses, objected, on Lordsday Evenings, which dissolute
persons, who make no consci^nce of sanctifying all the day, will alike
profane, and all godly people equally sanctify, let the day begin and end at
Evening, at Sunset, or Starshining: And there are none who out of Conscience
sanctify and forebear to profane them now, but would equally sanctify those
Evenings too, did they believe the day to conclude at Evening, since they would
be sure to sanctify all the day. This objected mischief therefore is but a
pretense.

Secondly, It is clear that God himself commanded his seventh day Sabbath, and
other Solemn F^stivals, to be solemnized from Evening to Evening. Exodus 12. 18.
Levit. 23. 32. God therefore (infinitely wise foreseeing better than the best,
wisest, holiest and most prudent Christian Magistrates or Ministers all
inconveniences, abuses that might profane his Sabbath, and what beginning,
conclusion of it would best prevent all prophanations, and make most for its
sanctification) instituting hi^ Sabbath and other Festivals to begin and end at
Evening, not at morning or midnight; I may safely infer (against this
present Objection) that this beginning, concluding the Lordsday at Evening,
even in Gods account, and so in verity it self, is least inconvenient, least
mischievous, and the best of all the three to prevent all prophanations, abuses
of the day: Therefore it ought to be embraced, as that which God himself has
prescribed for the best, the meetest of all others.

Thirdly, I have formerly proved, that this beginning of it at Evening, does
best prepare men for its sanctification; that it prevents more prophanations,
Abuses of it committed on and occasioned by disorders of all sorts on the
Saturday night (as we falsely term it) then it could possibly produce on
Lordsday Evenings: To which I shall add, that it likewise excuses all
Husbandmen, Tradesmen and others from being Sabbath Breakers; who in the Winter
quarters, rise early to their weekly labor on Monday morning, some three or
four hours before daybreak; who should be Sabboath breakers in an high degree,
if the sabbath or Lordsday ended not til day breaking, as some Objectors
pretend. Therefore I may conclude, that this beginning of the Lordsday at
Evening, make more for the sanctification of the day, and prevents more
inconveniences, then that at morning, and so ought to be retained.

Fourthly, This beginning and concluding the Lordsday at Evening, cannot any
way produce such effects of licentiousness, and profaneness on Lordsday
Evenings as is suggested; since it puts no period to the Lordsday or its
duties, till after Sunset, when the Stars begin to shine; which is not till
eight or nine of the clock in the Summer, when all orderly people, families are
more ready to betake themselves to their family duties, private devotions and
rest, then to Sports or Pastimes: and about six a clock in the Winter quarter;
after which all civil orderly Parents, Masters, (though not religious) permit
not their Children or Servants to rove abroad; and such who are truly pious,
fall to repetition of the Sermons they heard the Lordsday before, singing of
Psalms, reading the Scriptures and godly Books, Catechizing their families,
Prayer, Meditations, and such like holy family duties, answerable to the piety
they profess, and the holiness of the preceding day. So that it gives no
liberty at all to any dishonest unchristian Sports or meetings, as is
pretended, which commonly break up and end ere the Lordsday concludes in this
account, and which all good Christians ever avoid at all times, especially
after Lordsday exercises of Piety and Religion, with which they have no
anologie.

Lastly, Admit the objection true, that this beginning of the Lordsday at
Evening should prove more inconvenient then that at morning; not simply in it
self, but in regard of men's abusing it; which yet I deny; yet it follows not,
that therefore the day ought then to begin; since the abuse of any Doctrine,
through the corruption of men, makes not the Doctrine less true; and since
Inconvenien^es must not, cannot alter those bounds, which God himself has
immutably prescribed unto days. True it is, that inconveniences backed with
any precepts or scripture for the beginning of days are good Arguments, proofs
of truths; but wanting Scripture authority to enforce them or being objected
against apparent texts, they are no ways conclusive. Such are the
inconveniences here pretended, which whether they will happen, yea or no, will
not, canno, appear, till this Doctrine of the Lordsdayes commencing at Evening,
and the use of public Evening Prayers in all places Saturday Evenings, as a
preparative to the Lordsday Sanctification formerly used, be generally received
as formerly: which men will not so much abuse to Liberty and Licentiousness,
as is pretended; or if they do, the fault is only theirs, not the Doctrines.
Wherefore my Conclusion remains still firm, notwithstanding this Objection.

The Sixth and last Objection is this: That many godly Learned Divines of late
and present times, have in their Objection 6.
Writings, Sermons, delivered this Opinion for a truth; That the Lordsday
begins and ends at morning, not at evening; because Christ rose not till the
Morning: and it is now the common received opinion, practice of all our Divines
and most private Christians. Therefore questionless, it is the truth, and
dangerous to alter it in Thesis or Practice.

To this I answer. First, That it is true, many reverend holy learned late
Divines (whose names for honors sake Answer 1.
I shall forbear to mention) have in their public Writings, and many more in
their Sermons; delivered this opinion (yet many of them only dubiously with an
S^cut autem Sabbathi veteris initium suit a vesp^re: quia and crea^io
incipiebat a vespcre, quoniam Massa communis creata fuit ante lucem: and
cessatio diei ab opere creationis incipicbat etia^ a vespere; sic Diei
Dominicae initium incipere videtur ab illius diei mune: quia resuri^ctio
Christi suit in primo mane. Mar. 16. 9. John 20. 1.
IT SEEMS or IT IS PROBABLE, or LIKELY, not resolutely) and that their
present practice is answerable thereunto: But yet all the learned Godly
Christians in all former ages have held, practiced the contrary, as I have
proved; and some godly eminent Divines among us now, conclude in judgment with
them. The judgment therefore and practice of all Ages, Churches, from the
Apostles time till now, should rather sway the balance of this controversy,
then these few late Divines, though learned and judicious.

Secondly, Most of those godly learned men have taken up this Opinion, and
published it to others upon Wolphius his Authority and ground, without any full
examination or serious study of the point, as appears by this, that they do but
lightly touch it in the by and so away, not seriously or peremptorily resolving
it, grounding themselves upon such reasons as no ways prove their Conclusion;
and in truth are merely falls, in that sense they understand them, as I have
largely manifested in the premises. Therefore their Authorities are not so much
to be regarded.

Thirdly, In all Disputes we must not so much observe what and who the Authors
produced are, as what their proofs and reasons are. If these good learned men's
Arguments, Reasons be unsound, as I have manifested them; no matter what their
Opinions, lives or practices are; fince the learnedest, the holiest are and may
be subject unto Errors, from which none are exempted. Seeing therefore I have
here propounded the best Reasons alleged on all hands, for the Sabbath and
Lordsdayes beginning, at Evening, Morning, Midnight, let the best Proofs,
Reasons win the field; and then I hope the victory will fall on my side without
any more Dispute, who contend not for victory, but truth alone.

Having thus (as I conceive) given full satisfactory answers to all material
Objections, I ever yet read, heard, or conceive against the Lords-days
beginning at Evening; I come now to reply to one grand Exception against that
place of Levit. 23. 32. From Evening to Evening y^u shall celebrate your
Sabbath; a principal Text to prove, that the seventh day Sabbath, (and so our
Christian Lord's Day or Sabbath as it is called) ought to begin and end at
Evening.

To which some reply, that this Text speaks only of the Sabbath of atonement,
which was but Ceremonial; Exception.
not of the seventh day Sabbath; therefore it is no Argument or Proof at all,
that the seventh day Sabbath, or Lord's Day succeeding it, should begin and end
at Evening.

To which I reply, First, that it is true; this Text is meant more particularly
of the Sabbath of atonement, Reply 1.
to which it is here specially applied, but yet it extends withal to the
seventh day Sabbath, (which all confess did ever begin, and end at Evening)
from whence it received both its name of Sabbath, and its limitation too, both
for the manner and time of its sanctification, as is clear by verse 27, 28, 29,
30. 31, 32. compared together.

For 1. This Sabbath of Atonement, was to be a Sabbath, and so the same in
appellation, as the seventh day Sabbath, verse 27, 28, 32.

2. It was to be but a Sabbath of one days space, and no more; (to wit, the
tenth day of the seventh month, verse 27.) as the seventh day Sabbath was.

3. It was to be sanctified and solemnized in the same manner, as the seventh
day Sabbath.

For 1. It was to be an holy Cnnvocation unto them, v. 27. (that is, they must
meet, and keep public, religious, holy Assemblies on it, and do holy duties)
as the seventh day Sabbath was, verse 2, 3.

2. They must rest and do no manner of work upon it, verse 28, 30, 31, 32. as
they were commanded to do on the seventh day Sabbath, Exodus 20. 9. 10 c 23. 12.
c. 31. 15. c. 35. 2. D^ut. 5. 13, 14, 15. neither might themselves, or the
strangers within their gates do any work thereon, Levit. 16 29. as they might
not do on the seventh day Sabbath, Exodus 20. 10, 11.

3. They must offer a burnt offering to the Lord on this Sabbath, verse 27. as
they were to do every seventh day Sabbath, Numb. 2^. 9, 10.

4. This Sabbath of Atonement was, to cleanse them from all their sins before
the Lord, and make them holy, Levit 16. 31. as the seventh d^y Sabbath was both
a means and sign of Gods fanctifying them, Exodus 31. 13. Ez. chapter 20. 22.

5. He that did any work on this Sabbath of Atonement, was to be cut off from
his people, verse 30 as he was to be, that did any work on the seventh day
Sabbath, Exodus 31. 14, 15. Number. 15. 32, 35, 36.

6. On this Sabbath of Atonement, they must afflict their souls, v. 27. 32. as
on the seventh day Sabbath they were to do, though not so solemnly as on this,
by confessing their sins, and by not doing their own ways, nor finding or
doing their own pleasure thereon, Isa. 58. 13. By all which particulars, it is
manifest, that this Sabbath of Atonement was in most things most exactly
squared, regulated by the seventh day Sabbath, as the Sampler by the Copy, or
the picture by the person drawn, participating with it both in its name, use,
sanctification; The sole Querie or doubt remaining to be cleared, is when all
this is to be done, or at what time of the day, this Sabbath of Atonement
should begin and end? God therefore resolves this scruple in the words
alleged, From Even to Even shall ye rest (or celebrate) your Sabbath; that is
in effect, you shall keep it from Evening to Evening, as vou do the seventh day
Sabbath; which begins and ends at Evening: so that the seventh day Sabbath,
being here propounded for the only pattern by which this Sabbath of Atonement
was squared, and this being to begin and end at Even, because the seventh day
Sabbath did, as all acknowledge, and I have proved; this Text (in my conceit)
is a pregnant unavoidable Argument: for the seventh day Sabbaths solemnization
from Evening to Evening, as well as for the Sabbath of Attonements, beginning
and concluding at Evening: whence Saint Augustine with sundry Councels, and
Authorities forequoted, apply this Text to the seventh day Sabbath, and
Lord's Day, as setting out bounds to them, as well as to the Sabbath of
Atonement.

2. I answer, that this Sabbath of Atonement was confined to the tenth day of
the seventh month, verse 27. and to be kept upon that day: since therefore it
was confined to that very day, and to be solemnized from Evening to Evening; it
is apparent that that day, as a natural day, began and ended at Even in Divine
account; and if that day, as a natural day, began and ended at Even; then by
consequence all other days, (being all of one proportion, and one ever
beginning when the other ends) began and ended at Evening. Therefore the
seventh day Sabbath too, appropriated to the seventh day: So that take it which
way you please, it is an unavoidable proof, that all Sabbath days, and the
seventh day Sabbath begin and end at Evening in Divine Computation: therefore
the Lord's Day must do so too, being a Sabbath of sacred rest, as all our
Opposites resolve, and confined to the first days limits, which as a natural
day commenceth, and determines only at Even, in natural, divine and true
account, and as a sacred day of P^est, ^ denoted to Gods service, I have now as
succinctly, and perspicuously as I could waded through this present
Controversy: At what time the Lord's Day ought to begin and end? and if my
Judgment fail me not, I conceive I have sufficiently manifested it to commence
and conclude at Evening, (immediately after Sunset, or so soon as the
Eveningstar begins to appear) not at morning or midnight. If the Truth shall
prove on my side upon the debate, I desire it may captivate the contrary
mistakes, and certify both the judgment and practice of all such zealous
Christians who are yet differently minded. If the error be on my side (as I am
yet fully resolved it is not) I shall be glad to be first informed, then
reformed by men of graver judgments, desiring a to do nothing against, but for
the truth, for which I shall ever contend, to which I shall ever subscribe;
reputing it my greatest * ^ Cor. 13. 8.
felicity to conquer with it, or to be conquered by it, and if occasion require
to suffer cheerfully, gladly for it.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 2. l. 3, 4. at Evening. in page 10. l. 34. dele may, page 12. l. 10. dele
but part. page 21. l. 6. r. is. l. 36. read quality. page 23. l. 29. dele the
l. 36. natural. page 25. l. 36. r. of. p. 26. l. 13. applicas. l. 21. r.
Summa. l. 33. Cordubiensis. l. 36. Covarravias. p. 27. l. 21. pauper. l. 26.
totaliter. l. 31. r. assert. p. 28. l. 3. r. commanding. p. 31. l. 11. ages. p.
37. l. 24, r. ei^. p. 44. l. 12. r. noctem. p. 50. l 32. ventre. p. 54. l. 30.
dele vesperam p. 58. (R.) l. 29. most come in. l. 25. before transcendent. p.
61. l. 28. For God. p. 26. l. 19. r. course. p. 63. l. 5. Such thing. p. 64. l.
10. be contemporary. l. 37. first day.

In the Margin. p. 7. l. 3. Smalta. p. 12. l, 19. hathertus. p. 15. l. 5. Neh.
4. 21. p. 16. l. 3. r. Fulk. p. 22. l. 22. Rastal. p. 31. l. 16. certo
Doctoque. p. 34. l. 27. Apoc. p. 43. l. 2. r. ux^rem p. 45. l. 9.
Gustodunensis. l. 11. Bibl. patr. p. 60. l. 25. r. Serm^. p. 61. 14. praecipuum.


