THE COUNTY OF SOMERSET DIVIDED Into several Classes, FOR THE PRESENT SETTLING
OF THE Presbyterial Government.

HEB DDIEV HEB DDIM
printer's or publisher's device

London, Printed by R. Cotes for Michael Spark at the Bible in Green-Arbor,
1648.

Right Honorable,
WE humbly conceive the County of Somerset, in regard of its spaciousness and
multitude of Parishes (when sufficiently furnished with able Ministers and
Elders) is fit to be divided into Nine distinct Classes; Viz. the Classis of
Bath, Wrington, Wells, Bruton, Ilchester, Ilmister, Taunton, Bridgwater,
Dunster; but by reason of the scarcity of fitting Ministers and Elders to
constitute so many Classes, we have been necessitated to reduce them for the
present into Four, in form following:

Com. Somerset.
The Classis of Bath and Wrington.
AXbridge Bath City Bath Easton Bathewick Batheford Brackley Bedminster
Bishporte Banwell B^^ington Broadweston Blagden, and Bleydon Burnett Bourton
Barrow Brockley Backwell Butcombe Berrington in Wri Brislington, alias
Busselton Beluton Buckland Charlecome Comehay Camerton Charlton Churchill
Compton Bishop Chedder Cameley Chill Compton Compton Congersbury Claverton
Corston and Curston Compton Dando Compton David Clutton Clevedon Chewstock Chew
Magnum Chelvey Coldhenton Chewton Compton Martin Chewton Keynesham Chelworth
Comb near Bath Dundrie Dunkerton Easton Gordan, alias St. Georges
Eastharpetree Easton Katharine Enborowe Freshford Farmeborowe Forcot, alias
Foxcot^ Farrington Farleigh Felton Hampton Hemington Hutton Hinton Charterhouse
Hardington Henton Blewett High Littleton Inglescombe Keynsham Kenn Kilmersden
Kilveston Kingston Semer Lytton Loxton Lokinge Laverton Langridge Lullington
Laurance Week Lie Long Ashton Markesbury Midsoner Norton Nemnett Nailsey
Northstock Norton Malereward Newton St. Lo Orchardley Publowe and Pensford
Philips Norton Portebury Priston Portshut, alias Portshead Puckston Paulton
Radstocke Roborowe Rode Swayneswick South stock Staunton Prior Stowey Saltford
Stone Easton Stanton Drew Sheepham Stoke near Claverdon Telesford Timesborowe
Tickenham Twiverton Thrubwell Ubley Uphill Widcombe, near Westhapetree
Witcombe, near Bath Walton Winford Weston super Mare Weston Gordan Wellowe
Woodspringe Worle Walcott Welton Weston near Bath Wrington Westharptree Wolley
Whitchurch Wriggleton Wolverton Wraxhall Winscombe Yatton.
The bounds of this Classis are from Axmouth and River, by, and including
Blayden, Axbridge, Stone, Easton, Chilcompton, Bluckland, Brackley, where it
ends on Wilts-shire. And when they are in capacity to subdivide, then the
Classis of Bath is to be divided from Stone, Easton, including in it Cambley,
Stowe, Pensforde, Publowe, Keynesham, and Busselton, where it goes out.

Ministers
Mr. Samuel Crook de Wrington Mr. Anthony Parker de Blagdon Mr. William Gregory
de Backwell Mr. Samuel Westoby de Nailsey Mr. John Luffe de Chew Mr. Joseph
Bowden of Bath, and the Ministers of the said City for the time being. Mr.
Thomas Codrington de Keynsham Mr. Will. Tompson de Hillington Mr. William Long
de Priston Mr. William Thomas de Ubley Mr. Sam. Tilly de Compton Martin Mr.
James Ashton de Kilmersden.
Elders
Alexander Popham de Hunstero Esquire Edward Popham Esquire of the same John Ash de
Freshford, Esquire John Harrington de Kelson, Esquire Clement Walker de Charterhouse,
Esquire William Prynn de Swanswick, Esquire Richard Cole of Nailsey, Esquire John
Buckland de Westhartery, Esquire John Hippesley de Stone Easton, Esquire. Henry
Corges de Batcombe in Chedd, Esquire Tho. Hippesley de Camerton, Esquire Tobias Venner
de Bath, Doctor of Physic John Burges de Stanton Drew Peter Lock de Chew
Magnum William Hall de Brackley Ben. Pit de Sanderwick James Rowsell de
Comchey John Collins de Priston John Curle de Freshford John Wood de Bath
Thomas Wornall de Wraxhall John Amery de Wrington Richard Arthur de Backwell
Thomas Baynard senior, de Blayden Richard Grimston de Yatton Henry Plomley de
Easthartrey James Wrenckmore de Axbridge Herculer Comer de Chedder James Nash
de Compton Martin John Salmont de Easton Katharine Henry Hurl de St. George
Edmond Keen de Wrington.
The Classis of Wells and Bruton.
ATford Abbots Comb Ascott Ashwicke Allerton Bruham Burnham Bimger Babington
Bruton Bradley Badgworth Brain, alias Breane Bradley Batcombe Bitsham Buckland
Blackford, Castle Carry Charlton Musgrave Cucklington Chereton Catcott
Croscombe Corton Chester blade Cloford Compton Compton Pansford Doulting
Ditchere Dinder Donyett Elm East Cranmere Ever Creech East Lidford East Brent
East Pennard Froome Selwood Gothill Glastonbury Gillingham Gedney Henstridge
Holcombe Halton Horsington Kilmington Limpersham Lie under Mendhipp Levington
Lamyeat Luckington Marston Bigott Milton Mere Melles Mark Maperton Milborn
Port North barrowe North Wotton Nunny North Cadbury Poyntington Priddie
Polesham Pill Pitcombe Pilton Rodney Stoke Redlinche Shapwhick South Wotton
Stratton on the Force Stokeland Stoake Sutton epi. South brent Stone
Staffordell South Cadburie Shepton Mallet South Barrowe Shepton Mountague
Stowell Street Temple Comb Upton Noble Wells City Wookey Week and Wike
Worseway West Cramere West Comb Wyncanton Wydcome Wear Walton Wales West
Lidford Whethill VVanstrowe VVedmore VVestbury West pennard VVhateley Yenston
Yarlington.
The bounds of this Classis are from Axmouth and River by and including
Bitsham, Wear, Priddie, Chewton, Froome, Frary, Cuclington, Henstridge
Poyntington, Corton, South Barrow, Lidford street, Walton, Shapwick over
Ba^^nbridge, and ends at Grange mouth, and when they they are in a capacity to
subdivide, then the Classis of Wells is to be divided from East Lidford,
including in it Stone Doulting and Stokeland.

Ministers.
Mr. Sam. Oliver de Wells Mr. Fletcher de Mere Mr. Robert Balsum de Shepton
Mallet Mr. Purify Middleham de Westbury Mr. John Whiteburne de Crosecombe
Peter Glasbrooke de Street Mr. Ben. Whitchott de North Cadbury Mr. Richard
Allen de Ditchett Mr. Richard Allen de Batcombe Mr. William Parker de Bruton M.
Christopher Reed de Cloforde Mr. Richard Fairecloth de Melles Mr. William
Wright de Froome Mr. John Darli^ de Temple Comb
Elders
Sir John Horner of Melles Knight Sir Robert Gorges of Redlinch Knight Mr.
Justice Roll of Shapwicke George Horner of Cloford Esquire William Strode of
Downeside Esquire Lisl. bone Long of Stratton Esquire Thomas Horner of Lie Esquire Thatcher
of Queen Cammell Henry Alben of Upton John Sanders of Bruton William Cornish of
Alhampton Stephen Ashford of North Cadbury Francis Plympton of Wincanton John
Keen of Wincanton William Ridout of Charlton Musgrave Richard Bingham of
Henstridge John Accort of Rodden Thomas Millard of Preistley Jo. Pranket of
Bayford William Bennet of Bruham John Wear of Temple Comb George Millard of
Shepton William Tucker of Doulting Thomas Salmon of Wells Stephen Hasket of
Wells Joseph Gallhampton of Wells Aaron Mito of Croscombe Richard Dale of
Glaston Richard Hippesley of Wookey Jeffery Austen of Glastonbury Abraham
Gundery of Street William Meade of Street.
The Classis of Ilchester and Ilmister.
Ashington Abbots He Adber Ashhill Bingham Barrington Broadway Babcarie Berwick
Butleigh Brympton Chisleburrowe Compton Dandon Crewkehorne Charde Chilton Comb
St. Nicholas Chilterne Domer Clauseworth Cudworth Chynnocke Chellington Curry
Evil Cricket Thomas Chilton Donyett Dunington East Charlton East Coker Evil
Burrowe East Dolish Evylton alias Yeauylton Fivehead George Hynton alias Henton
Hewish Hislegrave alias Hilsgrave Higheham Hasilbere Plucknett Hardington Marsh
Ilbruers Ilchester Burrowe Illton Ilmister Kingsburie Kingstone Kingesdon Kings
Weston Kingsbury Knoll Lynington Long Sutton Lambrooke Lang port Luston
Longeham Michael Seving^ Middle Chenocke Mudford Martock Parish and Hundred
Marston Much Lucy Milton Mountague Norton under Hamden North Over North Parrot
Odcombe Pendomer Preston Plucknet Pytney Puckington Queen Camel Rimpton alias
Rymeton Stoke under Hamden Seavington Marie Stockings Magdalen Samford Orcas
Sparkeford Stoklinsh Seaburrow Somerton Stamford Sutton Binghe Shepton Swill
Tyntenhall Thorn Trent West Charlton West Coker Westchinock Wayford Whites
Taunton White Lakington Weston Zoyland West Camel.
The bounds of this Classis are from or near Walton by and including Butleigh,
Babearie, Weston, Trent, Pendoner, Parrott, Winsham, Chard, Whites, Taunton,
Comb St. Nicholas, Broadway, Ashhill, Abbots, Isle Fiveheads, Auler, Higham,
and out of Walton. And when they are in a capacity to subdivide, then the
Classis of Ilchester is to be divided from Clausworth to Auler including them
both and Chinocke Odcomb, and Martock; Currirevell and out at Auler.

Ministers
Mr. Ed. Bennet of South Pederton Mr. John Moore of Auler Mr. James Elliott of
Shepton Beacham Mr. Maine of Puckington Mr. Thomas Budd of Kingsburie Mr. Tim.
Batt of Ilmister Mr. Rainold Leslie of Doniett Mr. Christopher Laurence of
Odcombe Mr. Brain of Lymington Mr. Nath. Debancke of Martocke Mr. Jacob
Tomkins of Crewkerne Mr. Wyatt of Puddemore Mr. Matthew Randall of Higham.
Elders
Henry Henly of Lie Esquire John Saintbarbe of Ashington Esquire Henry Bonner of Comb
St. Nicholas Esquire Rich. Trevillian of Drayton, Gent. George Gibbs of Crewkerne
James Burford of Martocke Will. Redbeard of Norton sub ^anden Thomas Patten of
Chistleburrowe. Robert Webb of Ilmister Thomas Collins Junior of Ilmester
George Sampson of Lopen Charles Warren of Pendomer Robert Dunn of Crewkerne
Edward Atkings of Charde Peter Higdon of Merson William Atkins of Charde
William Strode of Charlton Adams Francis Carswell of Charde George Sampson
junior, of Kingsbury Barnard Gold of Ilchester.
The Classis of Taunton, Bridgewater, and Dunster.
ASh-holt, alias Ashcott Anglesby Andrey Ashbrittle St. Andrews Burrowe St.
Mich. Bishops Lydeard Bushford Bridgwater Bicknell Buckland Fee Beer
Broomfield Bicknaller Brumpton Rafe Brumpton Regis Bawdripe Bagborowe Me^t
Braford Badleton Bitts Comb Chelton Cheripoole Crookham Comb Florie Curry
Mallet Culbone Cutcombe Clatworthy Cart Upton Chair Finch Cotherstone Creech
Cattcott Chedsey Cheddon fitz pain Cassington Chilton Corse Comb With
Chipstaple Dodington Durston Durley Dunster Enmore Eddington Exford Exton
Eastquantock Fitzhead Grenton Goathurst Holeford Hawkridge Hunspill Hatch
Hewish Champflower Hill Bishops Haules Kingston Kittsford Kilton Kilve Laurance
Lydeard Langford Langridge Luxburrowe Linge Luckcombe Morlinche Middlesay
Michaels Church Margarets Church Margarets Thorn Mark Silver preston Minehead
Mary Stoake Munckton North pedderton Nether Stowley Norton Fitzwarren
Nettlecombe Nine head Oak Orchard Oldcleeve Oterhampton Otterford Our Paulett
Perriton Pitmister Purlocke Rinton, alias Rumington Riston Reddington Sutton
Mallet Stockland Staple Beacham Samford Sainford Bret Staveley, alias Stawley
Stowell Selworthy Strengston Skilgate St. Decumans Spaxton Stogummer Staple
grove Taunton Thurlebeere Tolland Trull Treboroe Timberscombe Thurloxton Upton
Westbuckland Williton Wemdon Wiltscombe, alias Wivelescombe Westquantocke
Wollavington Winsford Weston Wellington West hatch Wotton Courtney Whitbey
Poole Withey hill Yarcombe
The bounds of this Classis are from Grange or Brewemouth, by, and including
Hunspill, Wollavington, Cassington, Eddington, Cattcott, Grainton, Michaels
Burrowe, Curry Mallet, Buckland, Yarcombe, Samford, Stavely, Wilscombe,
Alfoxton, Strengston, and Listoake going out at Seavern; and also Dunster-
Classis, from Kilve upon Seavern, by, and including the Quantocke, Coockham,
Clatworthy, Highleigh, Reddington, Skilgate, Dulverton, Hawkergidge, Our,
Parlocke, and goes out at Seavern.

Ministers
Mr. Robert Cross of Luckham Mr. George Bindon of Angerslee Mr. Alexander
Robinson of Norton Mr. Rob. Tirling of Taunton James Mr. George Newton of
Taunton Magdalen Mr. Richard Smith of Creech Mr. John Baker of Curry Mallett
Mr. Forward of Pittminster. Mr Samuel Pretty of Weston. Mr. Henry James of
Chedsey. Mr. John Norman of Bridgwater Mr. Tho. Walrond of Hunspill Mr. Barth.
Yoe of Selworthy Mr. William Chapple of Kingston Mr. John Langford of Exford
Mr. John Hill of Elworthie Mr. Barth. Safford of Bicknaller
Elders
John Palmer of Taunton Esquire George Searle of Taunton Esquire Sir Tho. Worth of
Northpedderton Knight Robert Blake of Bridgwater Esquire John Pyne of Curry Mallet
Esquire Thomas Nicholas of Taunton John Gardener of Rinton Thomas Gatchell of
Anglesby Thomas Coombe of Petmister Roger Hill of Ponsford Esquire William Andrews
of Bridgwater Richard Newton of Northpedderton Robert Good of Perriton Thomas
Summers of Andrey Hill of Weston Thomas Musgrave of Rinton Edward War of
Chipley Esquire Tho. Francis of Combeflorie Gent. Charles Stenings of Selworthy Esquire
Hatfell, alius Whitfield of Mynehead Thomas Beadon of Stogumber John Street of
Bicknaller Robert Quick of Minehead Jasper Chaplin of Taunton Humphry Blake of
Bridgwater Thomas Court of North pedderton.
This is humbly desired that the County of Somerset may be made one entry
Province and divided into nine distinct Classes as aforesaid, when it shall be
furnished with able Ministers and Elders to supply the same.

In obedience to the Commands of the High Court of Parliament signified in a
letter directed to us whose names are hereunto subscribed, we have with the
advice of godly Ministers and others considered how the County of Somerset may
be most conveniently divided into distinct Classical Presbyteries; and what
Ministers and others are fit to be of each Classis; which division and
nomination of persons is here accordingly certified and presented to the
Honorable Houses of Parliament, by

Your most humble Servants, John Horner Roger Gorges William Prynne Hen. Fenley
William Thomas George Newton.


FINIS.

