THE PROPOSITIONS Made by the City of LONDON, for the raising of a Million of
Money, for the quick subduing of the bloody Rebels in Ireland, well weighed, and
considered of, by diverse Gentlemen here in Town, and approved of, and
consented unto, by the Honorable House of Commons, and presented unto the Lords
for their Concurrence therein, and to join in an humble Petition to his Majesty
for his consent thereunto.

Twenty Members of the House of Commons having already subscribed for twenty
thousand Pounds.

LONDON, Printed for John Borroughs, and John Frank, and are to be sold next
door to the Kings Head in Fleetstreet. 1642.

The Votes of the Lords, and Commons, upon the Pro^ositions made by diverse
worthy and well affected persons, for the speedy and effectual reducing of
the Kingdom of Ireland.
THe Lords and Commons, taking into their serious considerations, as well the
necessity of a speedy reducing of the Rebels of Ireland, to their due
obedience, as also the great sums of money that the Commons of this Realm
have of late paid, for the public, and necessary affairs of the Kingdom,
whereof the Lords and Commons are very sensible, and desirous to embrace all
good and honorable ways, tending to his Majesty's greatness, and profit, the
settling of that Realm, and the ease of his Majesty's Subjects of England: And
whereas diverse worthy and well affected persons, perceiving that many Millions
of Acres of the Rebels Lands of that Kingdom, which go under the name of
profitable Lands, will be confiscate, and to be disposed of, and that in case
two Millions and a half of those Acres, to be equally taken out of the four
Provinces of that Kingdom, may be allotted for the satisfaction of such
persons as shall disburse any sums of money for the reducing of the Rebels
there, would effectually accomplish the same, have made these Propositions
ensuing.

FIrst, That two Millions and a half of those Acres may be assigned, allotted,
and divided amongst them, after this Proportion. Viz.

For each Adventure of 200 li. 1000 Acres in Vlster. 300 li. 1000 Acres in
Conaght. 450 li. 1000 Acres in Munster. 600 li. 1000 Acres in Lemster.


All according to the English measure, and consisting of Meadow, Arable and
profitable pasture; The Bogs, Woods, and barren Mountains being cast in, over
and above; These two Millions and a half of Acres to be holden in free, and
common Soccage of the King, as of his Castle of Dublin.

2. That, out of those two millions and an half of Acres, a constant rent
shall be reserved to the Crown of England, after this proportion, vizt.

Out of each Acre thereof in Vlster -- 1 d. Conaght -- 1 ob. Munster, -- ijd
q;. Lemster -- iijd.
Whereby his Majesty's Revenue our of those lands will be much improved, besides
the advantages that he will have by the coming to his hands of all other the
lands of the Rebels, and their personal estates, without any charge unto his
Majesty.

3. That for the erecting of Manors, settling of wastes and commons,
maintaining of preaching Ministers, creating of Corporations, and regulating of
the several Plantations, one or more Commissions be hereafter granted by
Authority of Parliament.

4. That moneys for these great occasions may be the more speedily advanced,
All the undertakers in the City of London, and within twenty miles distant
thereof, shall under-write their several sums before the twentieth day of
March, 1641. And all within 60. miles of London, before the first day of April,
1642. And the rest of the Kingdom before the first day of May, 1642.

5. That the several sums, to be under written, shall be paid in at four
payments, vizt. one fourth part within ten days after such under-writing; And
the other three parts at three months, 3. months, and three months, all to
be paid in the Chamber of London.

6. That, for the better securing of the said several sums accordingly,
Every one that does so underwrite shall, at the time of his subscription, pay
down the twentieth part of the total sum that shall be by him then
underwritten.

And in case that the residue of his first fourth part be not paid in, to such
person or persons as shall be appointed to receive the same, within the ten
days before limited; Then such party shall not only forfeit the twentieth
part of the sum total, formerly deposited, but so much more of his first
fourth payment to be added thereunto as shall make up the one moitie of the
said first payment. And if the same person shall fail in any other of the three
payments, he shall then forfeit his entire first fourth part, and all the
benefit of his subscription, which forfeiture shall accrue to the common
benefit of the rest of the undertakers.

The Lords and Commons, upon due and mature deliberation of these propositions,
have approved of them, and given their consent unto the same, and will become
humble Petitioners to his Majesty, for his Royal approbation thereof, and
that hereafter he will be pleased, upon the humble suit of both Houses of
Parliament, to give his Royal assent unto such Bills as they shall tender unto
him, for the settling of those Propositions, and all other things necessary,
conducing thereunto.

FINIS.

