A full Vindication and ANSWER OF THE XI. Accused Members; VIZ. Denzill Holles,
Esquire Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William
Waller, Sir John Maynard Kts Major Genesis Massey, John Glynne Esquire Recorder of
London. Walter Long Esquire Col. Edward Harley, Anthony Nichols Esquire

TO A late Printed Pamphlet entitled, A Particular Charge or Impeachment, in
the Name of Sir Thomas Fairfax and the ARMY Under his Command; against the said
Members, By his Appointment and the Council of WAR.

LONDON* Printed in the Year* 1647*

A full Vindication and Answer of the accused Members of the House of Commons to
the late printed Charge, etc.
ALthough we be not ignorant of the illegallity and insufficiency of that which
is printed and published, for our Charge, seeming unto us for the greatest part
thereof, rather an arraignment of the Proceedings of the House of Commons, as
supposing them to be acted and c^rried on in a design, by the interest and
prevalency of the persons charged; and that all the particulars mentioned in
this Charge, should be by them committed and done in pursuance of that design;
a thing so contrary to the nature and derogatory to the honor of a free
Parliament, and of a dangerous consequence, to render all suspected and
invalid, which this Parliament has done or shall do; And that this Charge is
brought in the name of an Army, and so is an ^ccusation enforced by power,
contrary to the Statute of ^1. H. 6. c. 1. and no Accuser appearing liable to
satisfy the parties grieved for their damages and expenses, if the accusation
prove false and untrue (as this most certainly is) against the tenor of 13. E.
1. c. 13. 25. E. 3* c. 4. 27. E. 3. c. 18. 38. E. 3. c. 9. 17. R. 2. c. 6. 15.
H. 6. c. 4.
several Statutes made in that behalf: Nor is it unknown, that many indirect
and unjustifiable ways have been practiced in providing the materials of this
Charge, by tampering with persons to become our accusers, setting general
inquisition^ upon som^^us, who have ^aithfully served our Country (most of us,
for the space of near seven years in that House, and the rest of us the time of
our being Members) to the wasting of our estates, prejudice of our healths, and
many inconveniences to our persons by much travel and labor, without those
advantages by way of gift or otherwise, which some of our Accusers and diverse
others have had (for which we bear them no envy at all); Yet books have been
searched; proceedings at Committees viewed, the Kings and Digby's Cabinets and
private Papers, (of which our Accusers had the maidenhead) searched for
intelligence (yet not one syllable found against us in them;) Servants and
Attendants examined to rake up matter against u^ (an absolute breach of
Privilege of Parliament, and not well consisting with the Liberty of the
Subject; All this notwithstanding, which we might very well take exceptions at:
and besides that we now lie under that great disadvantage which the Philosopher
did, who disputed with the Emperor, who commanded thirty Legions, so as all his
Arguments were too weak, nor could he make use of that strength of reason and
truth which his cause did afford; yet we presuming upon our innocence and the
justice of those who must judge us, but principally upon the goodness of the
great God, who is the support and avenger of the oppressed, and has protected,
for several years, some of us, when we have been the object of malice and
power, and marks set up to be shot at for destruction; (to which purpose our
actions, speeches, our privatest converfations have been (as narrowly as could
be) observed and inquired into, prisoners, discontented persons, friends and
foes examined upon us, all manner of persons dealt with, that could be imagined
willing to betray, and able to say any thing against us) yet God having
preserved us, as he did David from the Bear and lion, which encouraged him, to
promise himself likewise deliverance from the uncircumcised Philistin, though
so much more mighty then he; in like manner trust for his assistance and
protection at this time, and shall apply our selves to the particulars insisted
upon and not formerly cleared, and discharged upon a strict examination and
debate in Parliament; and shall give (we doubt not) a satisfactory Account of
our integrity and inn^^ency in them all, in order as they lie.

THe first Article of the Charge (which concerns Holles singly) is partly of
passages at Oxford about three years since, with which he cannot undertake to
Charge his memory at this time, to give particular and positive answers
thereunto: He faith^ there is no new matter at all in this Charge, and that the
whole business received a full and perfect disquisition in the House of Commons,
in the month of July 1645. (now two years past,] when as near as he could
remember, of all done and said by him concerning the particulars, then and now
laid to his Charge, he gave an Account, together with another Gentleman (^ very
worthy Member of the House, and his fellow Commissioner at Oxford) who was then
accused by the Lord Savil, to have joined with Mr. Holles in all the parts of
this Charge; and the House was so fully satisfied of their good intentions in
their Transaction of that business, that after a very long debate of several
days, they ordered it upon the Question, the ^1. day of that July. That the
matter of the report (which was this whole business now endeavored to be
revived in this Charge) should be totally and finally laid (...)* As for the
particular Answers which he gave in the Vindication of his innocence, asserting
the truth and discovering the malice and falsehood of his then accuser, the Lord
Savill, he refers himself to the public Examinations, Proceedings and
Resolutions in the House and what was then and there delivered both by him and
the other Gentleman together with him at that time, most falsely accused by the
Lord Savill* who has since so far bethought himself and testified a remorse
for the injury he then did unto these two Gentlemen, that it is not very long
since he sent a person of Honor, a Peer of the Realm, unto Mr* H^^^^s, assuring
him, that when his Composition was ^nce made and perfected (for this was at the
time that the Lo^^ Savill was upon compounding for his Delinque^^^) he would
then discover unto him (meaning to M. H^ll^s) how that whole business was laid
against him, and who they were that laid it; which when he knew, he would see^^
had no cause to be so angry with him; and therefore desired him not to be
against him in setting the ^ine for his Composition; adding withal, he durst
not discover ^t before, till he was out of their danger, (meaning those who had
laid that design against Mr Holles) for if they had the least inckling of it,
they would certainly r^ine him. This was the substance, and as near as can be
remembered, the very words which were delivered unto Mr Holles by that Lord, in
the name of the Lord Savil, and from him. But Mr* Holles was so far from being
vindicative against those who had expressed so much malice against him and
endeavored his (...); as he wholly put it out of his thoughts; never so much as
sending to the L. Savil after his Composition ^as past; in the making whereof
he did him no differvice at all, as in truth scorning it.

Another clause in the first Article, is concerning a Letter sent from the Earl
of Linsey unto Mr* Holles, containing (as is laid in the Charge) some secret
design: This was likewise examined in the House, and by M. Holles himself first
discovered unto the House (contrary to what is in the printed Paper most falsely
suggested;) and this done by him as soon as it came into his mind; for when he
received it (which was very late one evening by a servant of the Lord Savils)
he immediately after fell sick, which made him clean forget it, nor does he know
what became of the Paper, whether or no he burnt it: the contents of it were
only one line, a recommendation of the bearer the Lord Savil, the very words
whereof were then fresh in his memory and by him repeated in the House, when
that satisfaction was given, as there passed a V^te the 19. of July, 1645. That
the receiving of that note in the manner Mr. Holles did, was no holding
intelligence with the enemy. There is a third part of this first Article, of
the Earl of Linseys moving for a Pass for Mr. Holles to go to Oxford, and the
Kings saying, he did him better service in the Parliament, then he co^ld do
there: which as likewise by the Lord Savil informed to the Committee appointed
for the examination of that business, and so reported to the House; which Mr.
Holles then said, and does still, that he knew nothing of, and was, and is most
confident, that it is most false, for that he never signified any such desire
to the Earl of Lindsey, or to any body else* nor ever had it in his thoughts.

Article, which charges M. Holles and Sir Philip Stapleton jointly, with
sending several messages to the Earl of Dorset, and Lord Digby; and Sir Philip
Stapleton singly, to have sent one to the Earl of Dorset; and then both Mr.
Hollis and Sir Philip Stapleton to have joined in drawing Propositions, and
sending them privately to his Majesty; They both of them do say, for what
concerns both, and Sir Philip Stapleton for what concerns himself (this being
the only thing, in all the Charge that is singly objected against him) that the
whole Article is false, and untrue, in all, and in every part of it.

for meeting together at the Lady Carli^les Lodgings in White Hall; and other
places, with other disaffected persons: for holding correspondency with the
Queen, to put conditions upon the Parliament, to bring in the King upon their
own Terms; and do such other things in prosecution of their evil designs, as
are in that Article mentioned. To all and every branch whereof, they do all
jointly, and each of them severally give a full, positive, and absolute denial;
and affirm, that the whole Charge of that Article is scandalous, and false, in
matter and form. Most of them declare, that within the time there limited for
those meetings to have bin, and at no time before or since, they have at all
bin at her Ladyships lodgings: only Mr. Holles, Sir William Lewis, and Sir
Philip Stapleton do acknowledge, that by her Ladyships favor, they have many
times waited upon her both at her own Lodgings in Whitehall, and elsewhere, yet
never to any such inten^ and purpose, as (...) in the Article most falsely
suggested, but only to pay unto her Ladyship that respect which is due unto her
(a person of so great honor and desert) from them, and in truth from all others
who are well wishers to the welfare of this Kingdom.

And whereas it is said, that they had a great power upon the Treasure of this
Kingdom, and thereby maintained the Queens party, assured her a Pension, and
undertook to do more for the King then the Army would do, (who it seems are
now ambitious in outstripping all others in acting for his Majesty;) It is very
well known, that these persons have not at all meddled in money businesses, have
had least to do with disposing of the public Treasure, and therefore could
not pleasure others with it; as least of all have they received any part of it
for their private uses, some of them having declared themselves in the House,
when the House was pleased to vote them considerable sums in recompense for
their very great sufferings for the Commonwealth,
that they would receive nothing till the Public debts were paid: and none of
them are the men that have grown great in these calamitous times, and been
enriched upon the ruin of others, nor preferred themselves and their friends
to higher fortunes then otherwise they could ever have aspired unto. Therefore
there is neither truth, nor semblance of truth, that they should be guilty of
engaging the Public Treasure and Stock, as the Article charges; nor would any
have believed them if they had been so false and foolish as to have offered it.
In conclusion they say, the whole charge in this Article is utterly false.

THe Fourth Article, which charge Mr. Holles, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir
William Lewis, Sir John Clothworthy, Sir William Waller, and Major-Generall
Massey, to have within the space of three months last past invited the Scots,
and other foreign forces to enter this Kingdom; is by them averred to be
utterly false; as likewise that part of it which charges Mr. Holles, to have
sent unto the Queen, to advise her to send the Prince into Scotland, to come
into this Kingdom in the head of an Army; is by him declared to be most
untrue, and a mere invention of malice against him. And in the last place,
where it charge the Eleven Members, to have listed, or caused to be listed
diverse Commanders and Soldiers, without am^^rity of Parliament, and to have
encouraged Reform^d^ Officers and Soldiers to gather together tumult^ously at
Westminster, to affright and assault the Members of Parliament, there is
nothing of truth in it; and reflects more upon their Accusers, then on them.

Holles, Sir Philip Stapleton, and Mr. Glyn, to have bin obstructers of
Petitions to the Parliament for redress of Public grievances; They say, that
what has been done by them or any of them in matters of Petitions, was done in
the House of Commons, and only there; where they have upon occasion delivered
their opinions concerning some seditio^s Petitions (which they suppose to be
the Petitions intended by the Article;) And for what is said of Mr. Holles and
Sir Philip Stapletons affronting some Petitioners attending a Committee, as
Major Tuleday, and committing Nicholas Tew, without authority; They do say,
that Tuleday and Tew affronted the Commitee, that Tew endeavored to raise a
tumult in the Court of Requests, to the disturbance and danger of the
Committee; whereupon the Committee thought fit, to restrain him untill-the
next morning, when they would acquaint the House with it; That all both
concerning him and Tuleday was reported unto the House, and both of them were
by the House committed upon just reasons, and afterward both of them
discharged or bayled; the one, upon the Motion of Mr. Holles, and the other of
Sir Philip Stapleton. And whereas it is said* that they were not permitted to
speak for themselves; it is notoriously untrue; for Tuleday was heard at the
Bar of the House of Commons, and Tew was heard at the Committee, as long as
he would speak, until he refused to answer any more questions, saying, he was
not bound to accuse himself. In the last place where Master Glyn* is charged,
to have committed Tew to Newgate, for (...) other cause, but for having a
Petition about him, which was to be presented to the House: Master Glyn does
answer, that being Recorder of London, and in the Commission of Peace, he
knows it not to be a Crime to send such Persons to the Jail, as be brought
before him for misdemeanors; and may have Committed Tew, as he has done many
others; but he does believe it to be a mistake in the Accusers, not remembering
any such thing: and does boldly affirm, that if he did Commit him, it was not
for the cause laid down in the Article, but upon just grounds of Law.

TO the Sixth Article, touching the imprisonment of Nichols by Sir William
Waller, Sir John Clotworthy, and Major General Massey; they Answer, That they
being by^ Instructions of the 9th of April 1647. from the Committee at Darby
House, for the affairs of Ireland, authorized to draw off from the rest of the
Army, such as should accept of the Service of Ireland, and Quarter them in such
places as they should think fit; upon the engagement of diverse Officers of
Colonel Lilburnes Regiment to go for Ireland, gave Orders to Lieutenant
Colonel Kempson, to March with such Soldiers of that Regiment, as should
engage for Ireland to Evesham: And the Soldiers so engaging separated from the
Army; and on their March toward Evesham; they on the 24 of April 1647. at
Saffron Walden, after the Generals departure toward London, having received
several informations, that Ensign Nichols, (Ensign to Captain Dormer, one of
the Captains of the said Regiment) repaired into the Quarters of those Forces
drawn off from the Army, in Order to the service of Ireland, there dissuading
the Soldiers to go for Ireland, encouraging them mutinously to demand their
pay of the said Captain Dormer; and then by falsehoods and cunning practices
endeavoring to entise them back to the Army, undervaluing those that went for
Ireland; and incensing them against the Propositions of Parliament for that
Service: And also reading to the said Soldiers the Petition of the Army, after
the same was then lately prohibited by both Houses of Parliament; and being
certified that for those miscarriages the said Captain Dormer, had secured his
person till further Order; The Lords and Commons who were Commissioners, did
thereupon on the said 22 of April, give directions to Lieutenant Colonel
Kempson to take Order, that the said Ensign Nichols should be sent up to
London, with the first opportunity, to be disposed of by the Committee of
Lords and Commons for the affairs of Ireland at Darby house, which was
accordingly done; and upon the report of the business, the said Ensign was
committed by Order of the House of Commons, and the persons that brought him
rewarded for their service therein. In all which proceedings they know of
nothing done, but what their duty and Instructions (in relation to the Service
of Ireland) required at their hands, being contrary neither to the Laws of the
Land nor Articles of War; but conceive upon these informations, (ready to be
produced and testified upon Oath) that the said Ensign according the Law
Marshall, for his said offenses, deserved death, for endeavoring a muteny as
abovesaid. And therefore there is no cause for the Army to complain, in that
the House was so merciful to him as to ^emit that punishment. Whereas it is
charged, that the pockets of Ensign Nichols were searched and diverse papers
taken from him, and that he was sent a Prisoner to London from the
Headquarters, without the Authority or privity of the General: They say, that
no Order was given by them for searching his pockets, or taking away his
papers, and believe no such thing was done; That he was secured by Captain
Dormer, being found in the Quarters of those Forces that were drawn off for
Ireland, actually endeavou^ing to put the Soldiers in a distemper, and to
withdraw them from that Service; and he was sent from those Quarters (not the
Headquarters, as is falsely suggested) to London; And for the privity or
authority of the General, if he had been then present; they conceive their
Authority from the Parliament on that behalf, was sufficient without the
Generals; and as the case stood, They thought it not reasonable, to consult
the Army in the matter of disturbing the Irish Service, when they had there
found so little encouragement before.

TO the Seventh, Sir William Waller, Sir John Clotworthy, Harley, say; They are
very sensible the particulars charged in the Seventh Article do specially
relate to things said or done in the House of Commons, and so not liable to any
Censure, having past the Approbation of that House, which has already
acquitted them by their Votes of the 25 of June, from all things done and
spoken by them in the House, contained in this and the three ensuing Articles,
and so ought not to have them recited in this Charge; yet to vindicate
themselves from the Scandal of Design and Combination against the Army, they
shall give this true Account of what induced them to endeavor the suppressing
of that Petition; Sir William Waller, and Sir John Clotworthy, being
Commissioners of Parliament with the Army for the Service of Ireland, and
Colonel Harley being there to attend the same Service, March 22. 1646. at a
Convention of Officers for the Service of Ireland at Walden, the Petition was
produced, as the Petition of the Soldiers, to be approved by the Officers
there; and was pressed with such eagerness, that an Officer of quality
offering some reasons against it, was told, He deserved not to live in an Army.
They taking notice of the subtle and violent managing of that Petition,
pretended to be the Petition of the Soldiers, but in truth framed then (as
they can prove) by some Officers at Walden,
at a time when the Parliament only proposed the Service of Ireland, and the
Souldery had neither Disposition nor Cause to Patition; the Army (being well
paid for several Months then past, specially the Foot consisting much of
Recruits) had little cause to complain for pay; thereupon they represented
this Information to the General, as that which required his care to suppress,
timely.

But after they returned to L^ndon, they received several Informations (of
which they have good proof) that the Petition was Agitated in several
Regiments and proposed by the Officers to their Soldiers: That some Officers
threatened that those who did refuse to subscribe it should be cashiered; and
Directions were given to return the subscriptions to some principal Officers
at the Head Quarters. What passed in the House of Commons, they presume not to
relate without the leave of the House: But by these particulars (which are
ready to be attested by persons of worth) the Design of raising jealousies
between the Parliament and Army, will really fix upon those who have fal^ly
imposed it on the accused Members, to carry on their own Designs, which are
since more visible.

Harley is charged, That by Combination, he produced to this House a Letter
which could not be made good; He affirms, He did acquaint the House with a
Letter received as he was coming to the House, and sent to him from an Officer
of worth in the Army, who was and is ready to justify the substance of the
Letter to be most true; That Lieutenant Since made a Colonel.
Colonel Pride drew Colonel Harley's Regiment to a Rendevouz, read the
Petition in the Head of his Company* and that the Petition was then subscribed
by most of the Regiment, and that Lieutenant Col. Pride said This is Liberty of
Conscience so much professed and contested for by the Army.
, such as would not subscribe the Petition, should be cashierd; That in this
Colonel Harley did nothing but his Duty, and what the House of Commons
approved by their public thanks to him, and another worthy (Member an Officer
of the Army,) who produced another Letter concerning the same business. For
that which is laid to Master Holles his Charge in this Article, concerning the
drawing of that Declaration; ^e Answers, That it was done in the House, and the
House did allow of, pass it, and afterward sent it up to the House of Peeret,
where it was likewise past. And that any should question it, being become and
made the Act of both Houses (and so a Charge rather against them then himself)
seems strange unto him, whose part in it was only to draw up that Declaration
according to the sense of the House, in obedience to a general call upon him
for it, being exceedingly pressed and urged to do it, when himself was very
unwilling to take that task upon him.

TO the Ninth Article, Wherein it is said, That Colonel Harley, Sir Jo.
Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, and the said other persons did procure diverse
eminent and faithful Officers of the Army, viz. Lieutenant General Hamond,
Colonel Lilborn, Lieutenant Colonel Pride, and others, to be sent for to
appear at the bar of the House, against whom they could charge nothing at
all; insomuch that the House thought fit immediately to discharge them.

It is Answered, That the said Colonel Harley, Sir Jo. Clotworthy, and Sir
William Waller, having been informed, that those who style themselves, such
ominent and faithful persons of the Army, with some others, being very active
in promoting the Petition mentioned in the former Articles, did in discharge of
their duty, faithfully represent to the House what they had heard; and whilst
the House was in consideration thereof, diverse Letters were brought to several
Members of the House, from several parts of the Kingdom, declaring the
apprehension which many faithful Officers of the Army had taken up, if such a
Petition should be permitted to go on; As particularly a Letter of the 28th of
March la^t, directed to Colonel Ross^er an eminent Member of the Army, wherein
it is desired by such as promoted this Petition; that the names of such
Officers and Soldiers as subscribed the Petition, should be sent to Colonel
Hamon^, Lieutenant General Hamond, Commissary General Ireton, Colonel
Lilborn, Lieutenant Colonel Grimes, or any three of them.

On the consideration of what was mentioned in this and other Letters, in
confirmation of what was formerly presented by the Gentlemen Articled against;
the House of Commons did send for several of the persons before mentioned: And
as is conceived, had very good reason so to do.

And whereas it is said, That a Committee was appointed to examine the truth or
falsehood of them; If by the Truth or FALSEHOOD of them, is meant the Truth or
Falsehood of the Persons, styled Diverse eminent and faithful Officers of the
Army; Then how could they be said to be imediately discharged, as such, against
whom nothing could be charged or proved at all.

The Gentlemen articled against do further say, that it is a very ill use, that
is made of the Parliaments indulgence, not to proceed with such severity
against those Persons convented before them (as aforesaid) as to affirm, that
therefore, nothing can be said against them: The like ill use was formerly made
of the Parliaments so far condiscending to the desires of another Paper, said
to come from the Army, concerning the Obliterating of the Declaration relating
to the Petition, both which expressions might well in modesty and duty have
been spared.

And whereas this Article is stuffed with great swelling words of vanity, as
though the Gent. charged by the Article, were pressed to produce their proofs
and evidence, before the Committee (if they had any) It is answered, That the
Persons brought up to the Bar, were by their own confession in this Article
immediately discharged. What need then was there, or to what purpose was it, to
bring any such Proofs against them, when (...) the clemency of the House
discharged them?

In a word, It is most demonstrable, it was the Parliaments indulgence, not the
innocence to several, if not all, of those who were questioned, which brought
them o^f from Punishment; And it were to be wished (in regard of these and
their subsequent proceedings) that some proportion of Meeknes and Ingenuity
toward the Houses, did accompany so much professed integrity, as is va^nted
of, by the framers of this Article and Phamphlet.

TO the 10. Article which charges Mr* Hallis, Sir Philip Stapleton Sir Will.
Lewis, Sir Will. Waller, Sir John Glen^^^^^; and Major Genesis Massy to have been
instruments in (...) the relief of Ireland, and then relates some passages of
(...) the House (which could not be discovered to the Army by way but Members
contrar^ to their Oath and dutyn an high violation of the Houses Privileges,)
they say; that they have faithfully, cordially, and industriously at all times,
and upon all occasions, to the best of their understandings promoted the
service of that poor bleeding Kingdom; That they did desire supplies might
have gone in an entire Body out of the Army, and that as speedily as possibly
could be, so as some of them took the boldness to move, that Sir Tho. Fairfax
might have been sent thither* which not succeeding, yet the House resolving,
eight Regiments of Foot, four of Horse, and one of Dragoones should be sent
out of the Army; they, as zealously as they could, endeavored the putting of
it in execution, and attended the Commit, to which it was referred
constantly* and diligently* And they doubt not but the great God, [who will not
be mocked] will Judge them according to their deserts who have obstructed it,
by discount (...) and of fronting them who offered to embrace that service at
the convention of Officers, March 22. 1646. By See a Vindication of 167
Officers that are come off from the Army, and the Printed Petition of the
Officers to Sir Thomas Fairfax.
Cashiering, assaulting, and turning out of their quarters such as declared
their readiness for that service, under the ignominious notion of the Army;
and as men untrue to the Common interest of the Soldiers, and by a positive
Declaration, that whatsoever faithful Commander should be appointed for the
service of Ireland, they must show themselves averse to that service as is
expressed in a letter of the Agitators to Leiutenant General Cromwell: Dated
April 10. 1647. And in truth* Col. Robert Hamonds high and unreasonable
Propositions concerning the present service of Ireland, viz. That the time of
his employment, and those of this Army going with him in this service, exceed
not two or three months at the Furthest; That the forces going over with him
be not obliged to any whatsoever, more then the possessing or defending of
(...), That Col. Hammond [ himself] may have the comm^nd of the Garrison of
Dublin and all the* forces in it during the said (...) That shipping be ready
in the Harbor of Dublin victual^^ (...) Parliaments charge with sufficient
Conv^^, 14 day^^ before (...) ^xpiration of the said Term to transport the
said forces back again for England: etc. And that upon other terms then th^se
(...) doubts the number would not be considerable that would go (...) for that
space) clearly demonstrates his and the Armies s^range averseness to Irelands
relief; and that all they aimed at, was (...) to possess themselves of Dublin
for the present, for what (...) themselves, and their proceedings since can
best discover.

The Informations which they gave into the House concerning the engagement of
diverse Officers both of Horse and Foot for the relief of Ireland, they avow to
be true, but extremely misrepresented in this Article. For whereas it is
falsely suggested, that (...) informed the House that by their procurement
there were fifty Companies of Foot, and ten Troops of Horse of the Army (...)
for that service upon the ^earmes propounded by the Parliament. The truth is,
that diverse Officers of Horse, relating to so many Troops, and some of the
Officers of about 50. Companies of foot were by subscription, Personal
promise, or assurance from (...) really and truly engaged, as may appear by
the report ma^e (...) the House* unto which they refer themselves. But
afterward many were drawn off again by the Artifice of those who (though
they pretended Irelands relief) have their ends rather upon (...) Confusion of
England then the relief of Ireland* as their proceedings manifest.

Concerning the subscriptions of Col. Butler, Leiutenant Col. Iackeson, Major
Gooday, and others for that service, supposed to be procured in delusion of the
Parliament, to mislead it into a (...) imagination of a strength out of the
Army, which had nothing (...) reality in it, in regard those Officers did then
declare th^^r ^^^willingnesse to go into Ireland upon any Terms whatsoever;
(...) we conceive that Declaration from the Officers bearing (...) the 22. of
March will sufficiently clear both from any dishonorable combination; wherein
it will appear that they ^^^ged themselves no further, then either to engage
in their own Persons or to improve their Interests in their respective (...)
for, that service; which last Obligation they have made goo^ (...) m^n of
Honor.

As for those Officers of Col. Butlers and Sir (...) Wallers Regiments, their
names might be given in by those who knew or might justly suppose that their
Inclinations led them to ^mbrace that service, if their Friends were mistaken
in them or their minds si^ce altered, we know not what Crime can be imp^ted to
any.

Lieutenant Col. Farrington was never presented by them to the House as a
Lieutenant Colonel of the Army, and engaging for himself and his Regiment for
Ireland, but only as a Gentleman that had formerly held the quality of
Lieutenant Colonel, and yet did retain a very great and deserved interest in
that Regiment, and with whom they conceived the Regiment would be very willing
to engage.

TO the 11th. Which charges Sir Phil. Stapleton Mr Hollis, Sir John Clotworthy,
Sir Will. Jews, Major General Massy, Sir William Waller, and Mr Glyn, with
commanding part of three Regiments, advanced for Ireland from Bromsgrave in
Worcestershire, back to Reading, with an evil intent to dra^ forces togeher
for a new War, and this being done upon the Sabbath Day: They answer, that
out of their Zea^e to promote the service for Ireland, they met at all times,
when they were summoned at Derby-House, where the Council ^a^e early and ^ate,
and sometimes on the Sabbath day, being in truth a work of the greatest p^ety
and mercy, which certainly was not for their ease, and they hope rather of
merit, then to be reputed a crime: That that (...) was transacted at a full
Committee, (whither upon the Sabbath day or no they know not,) but they know,
and affirm, that the reason why those Regiments were ordered to come to
Reading, was only, that money might be sent to them for their pay* The
Officers representing to the Committee the great necessities of the soldiers,
and that where they were then (...) they did not know how to convey it ^hither
with ^a^ety, in regard it must pass through the quarters of the army, who had
(...) great displeasure to those fo^ces which were drawn off for Ireland* and
the Committee was the rather induced to it, because they knew the money which
was sent to (...) for (...) Regiment there quartered* when (...) is ordered to
be brought back, (...) violently (...) away by the Soldiers from those
entrusted with that service* and the Committee feared some such attempt for the
intercepting of this money, which occasioned that calling back to Reading, and
not an^ such design, as is most falsely and maliciously in the Article
suggested.

TO the 12th, Wherein Sir Io. Clotworthy is said, to have converted several
great sums of money to his own particular use in the years 1642. 1643, 1644,
and since, which by several. Orders of Parliament and of the Irish Committee
were designed for the relief of Ireland:

First* He answers, That he never received any money from the beginning of
the War until this day for the relief of Iuland in General, but only for
the particular charge he has in that Kingdom, wherewith he was honored in
the beginning of the War by a special order of Parliament.

And for the particular sums in that Article suggested to be received by him
in money, He says, that he never received any such money, and was so far
from making any particular use of such either money or Provisions as were
designed for supporting the Soldiers under his care, to their prejudice in the
least, degre^ that he has dispursed above three thousand pounds out of his
own purse, and by his credit, for their support and relief more then was
received.

He further says that for the sum of 280.l. in the Article mentioned, by an
account delivered to the Committee of Accounts in June 1644. he was so far
from intending the least prejudice either to the State here, or that Kingdom of
Ireland (amongst other sums) he charged himself with the said 280.l. for 20.
Butts of Sack, which he should have received from one Whitscot; who falling
therein, the said Sir John converted the credit of the Ordinance for the said
280.l. into clothes for his Soldiers, as upon full examination and debate
several years since had thereof before the Committee of Accounts may appear:
And by the said Account he is likewise charged with 300. l. in the Article
mentioned for 120. pair of Pistols the most whereof he exchanged [by order]
out of the stoares of his Kingdom, for firelocks, which he sent over to the
Soldiers of this Regiment, and the remainder of the said Pistolls were
delivered to his Troop, and he never converted any of the said Pistolls to his
own use, though he conceives he might have done, having given allowance for
them on his Account; And for the money for the said Pistolls, as no part
thereof ever came to his hands, so he conceives the same is yet due and unPaid
to one Abraham Vandenbe^^d, who provided the said Pistolls on the credit of the
St^te.

For the sum of 700 l. for 2000. swords, he knows nothing thereof, nor ever
received any such sum, but acknowledges that he is charged by his said
account with 175. l. for his part of 2000. swords, which as the former sum of
280 li. has been laid out with much more of his own, for the service of the
state; So as the said Sir John Clotworthy having prevented the informers by his
account long since given in, and there remaining so great a sum disbursed by
him, over and above what he has received, had he deteyned any part toward his
own dis^ursements [which he conceives he might justly have done,] yet could it
not have been charged against him for so heyn^^s a crime, and that in
prosecution of the design in the general charge mentioned, a^ is
impertinently laid down in the said Article.

And for the other diverse sinn^es of money suggested in general to have bin
received from time to ^ime by the said Sir John for the use of Ireland, which
are alleged, not to be imployedge by the several orders was directed and
intended; when he knows the particulars, he hopes to give a satisfactory
answer therein; and wishes that some few of his many accusers may be able to
give ^s just an attempt for the many summ^^ they have received in relition to
their employments, as he has done, and is ready to do for these few sums
directed for his and his soldiers support in that hard war of Ireland.

And whereas by this article it is suggested, that the said Sir John Clotworthy
has within two years last past received several sums of money, Arms and
other provisions for a Troop of Horse which he pretended he had raised in
Ireland.

He says, that he never pretended to have raised any such Troop; though he may
with some confidence affirm, he has to his great charge these 5. years past
maintained a Troop of horse which was formerly under the command of Captain
Vp^on, (...) and after his death conferred on him, which Troop he has (...)
cruised since his command thereof, being about five years space, during which
time there was never received from the State in money above 7. weeks pay with
some little provisions of clothes and Arms, which he duly returned to (...)
said Troop, with some addition of his own, for their better support in
service, judging it a most abominable act, to retain any thing at all,
(especially of so little) designed for (...) necessi^ous soldiers.

And whereas by the latter part of the Article it is most (...) lously
suggested, that the said Sir John, Clotworthy for money and other rewards,
has preferred Io. Davis and William Summers, and others to be entrusted with
the Irish affairs, who have kept correspondency with the Enemy; and defrauded
the state of other gr^e sums of money; and that he has been privy to, and a
sharer is such their actions;

He says: that the said charge is most false and untrue in all the parts
thereof wherein he is concerned; and for the said William^ Summers, he says he
never preferred him to be entrusted with any of the Irish affairs, nor knows
of any employment he ever (...) in that way [it being notoriously known he
never had suc^ imployment] since the Rebellion of Ireland began, so as he was
not in any capacity to defraud the State.

The said Sir John Clotworthy further says, that John Dave^ has been
contracted withal for great proportions of victu^, Arms, and Clothes for
Ireland as a Merchant, wherein the Committee of both Kingdoms and the
Committee for the affairs of Ireland (the consent of the houses first had)
have dealt with him after others refused such contracts as he then accepted and
(...) performed, to most of which the said Sir John was not pri^^, and no
participant at all with the said John Davis in any of the particulars
contracted for, as is now and has been formerly (...) printed pampalets falsely
suggested, But that the said John Dav^s was ever trusted with the affairs of
Ireland other then as a Merchan [whereby he had the opportunity in performance
of his contracts with the State to lay out his own money by (...) and get it
again as he can, whereof there may be now some doubt] the said Sir John
Clotworthy is totally ignorant.

TO the 13. Wherein (among other things) secret intelligence to have been held
with the Lord of Ormond by Cipher, is laid to the charge of the said Sir Io.
Clotworthy, his answer is that he, together with Sir Tho. Wharton, Sir Robert
King, Sir Rob. Meredith and Richard Salway Esquire, or any three of them, being
appointed Commissioners [but not jointly as is pretended] to treat with the
Lord of Ormond for the delivery of the Sword, the city of Dublin etc. After
four days treaty according to their Instructions, [the treaty not taking
effect] the Commissioners resolved That three of them should go for Belfast,
and two of them come to London, And whilst the Commissioners were in
preparation for their departure, upon several just and warrantable occasions,
they repaired jointly and severally to the Lord of Ormond, who seemed to be
much troubled, that the treaty took no effect. professing the only cause
thereof to be, the want of the Kings assent, which he said he hoped to gain,
desiring to have it so presented to the Parlia and that he might acquaint the
Parliament and the Commissioners then going for Be^fast with the Kings Answer,
and lest letters should be intercepted by the Rebels, there was a Cipher agreed
on, which was known to several of the Commissioners when it was delivered, and
of which the said Sir John minded the other Commissioners at Belfast after
their arrival there, and before any thing was written by the same from the Lo.
of Or^mond; And about a fortnight afterward, the Lord of Ormond by the means
of one Captain Ward, conveyed a little open paper in cipher directed to the
said Sir John Clotworthy, who as soon as he received it, did communicate the
same to the rest of the Commissioners, which being discyphered, there was
thereby intimated, That he was more then hopeful they should shortly bear
from him to their content; To which the Commissioners returned an answer, That
they should be glad to bear of the content he was hopeful to give. With all
which, and the other transactions of tha^ affair, the Committee of Der^y-House
were made acquainted, and reported the same to both houses before Sir John
Clotworthy came out of Ireland; And the Houses having approved of the carriage
and endeavors of the Commissioners upon the whole transaction of the business,
have long since so far owned them there (...) they have given thanks unto them
for the same.

This being the only particular wherein the said Sir John Clotworthy is by this
article charged to have held intelligence with the Lord of Ormond, and that
being by the advice of the rest of the Commissioners in manner as aforesaid,
and for so good an end, as the giving his Lordship an opportunity of new
application to the Parliament for rendering to them the City of Dublin, and the
other garrisons under his command, which has since that (...) taken effect
accordingly, to the exceeding great advantage and strengthening this Kingdoms
interest in Ireland; the said Sir John Clotworthy leaves it to the judgment of
all equal minded men whether or no, there be any just cause to exhibit such a
th^^ against him for the same, especially by an Army pretending such good
affections to Irelands welfare.

For the other part of the said Article, concerning the said (...) John
Clotwortheys holding intelligence with the Lord Digby* He directly denies any
such thing, as being utterly false and untrue. For he never saw the said Lord
Digby these many year, (...) one night accidentally, when [being last at
Dublin with the other Commissioners before said] he was sent to the Castle of
Dub^^^ by the said Commissioners, concerning an Officer of Colo^^ Moors, that
had received an Injury by some persons; that rel^ted to the Lord of Ormond: at
which time the said Lord Digby came into the room where he was, but he had no
discourse (...) him, in private, nor at all, other then common talk (several
person^ being present.] Neither has the said Sir John Clotworthy (...) the
said Lord Digby deserted the Parliament ever exchanged letter, Message, or word
with him, directly or indirectly, otherwise* or at any other time, then is
hereby declared.

And whereas by this Article it is charged, that in Order to (...) secret
intelligence (of which he admires a whole (...) England should have such
certain and public Notice, as to (...) it a positive charg and undertake to
prove it upon oath, were it^^^cret as they charg it,) as the Article all ^geth
to have hi^ hold by (...) said Sir Io. Clotworthy with the said Lo. Digby the
Lo of (...) and the said Lord Digby, ^^tely employed (...) S^^gsby, who [as the
article saith] pretends a design about the Prince to come into this Kingdom;
the said Sir John Clotworthy utterly denies to have had any thought of any
such design, or any knowledge of the said Slingsby or of his comeing into the
kingdom, until he heard that one Slingsby [whom he yet knows not] had been
examined before the Committee at Derby house. And the said Sir John presumes,
he has to the said Committee confessed who employed him, and to whom he was
employed here.

TO the 14. which charges Sir John Clotworthy, Mr. H^lles and Sir Philip
Stapleton, with obstructing Articles exhibited against the Lord Inchequin,
calling back the Lord Lisle from the government of Ireland, causing the command
of the forces in that Kingdom to be committed to the Lord Inchequin, he writing
a letter to his Lordship, upon the receipt whereof he should express, he had
direction to put out all those who favored Independents, They do say they
were so far from keeping off proceeding, upon those articles, that they
furthered it all they could, and several times moved it in the House: desirous
to have all cleared concerning the Lord Inchequin; whom as they believed to be
a man of honor and fidelity, so, if upon examination of his actions he
appeared to be other, they were resolved to declare their sense of him
accordingly. As for what concerns the Lord Lisle, they say, his Lordships time
expiring, which was but for one year, either for him or any else to continue
in that command, the Parliament was pleased to dispose of the affairs of
Ireland in an other way; in the agitation whereof in the House, they went
according to their Judgments and consciences, without respecting any person
living. For the Command of the forces of that Kingdom (which as to the Lord
Inchequin can only be understood of Ma^ster) they do not know that ever any
thing was here done in it at all, there having been no occasion for it, as to
their knowledge. And as for the Letter mentioned to have been written by them,
(...) any of them, or from some other person by their or all of their
direction; they say, as it is altogether uncertain and illegal, so it is a
mere fiction (for they never did any such thing,) and tends to draw the Odi^^
of Independents upon them; to whose advancement, both in Ixeland and elsewhere
they fear they may prove obstructive* as this Article clearly insinuates.

TO the 15. Sir Will. Jews and Mr. Glyn, say, that the Order o^ the 13 of
April in the Article mentioned (if there were any such) relates to them only
as Members of the Commit, for whom they intend not to answer: but in truth
there was no such order: it was only a report, not an order, and intended only
for the county of Caermarthen, how ever it came to pass the words were general:
and that was done in order to be reported to the house, and accordingly was
reported, and after repealed by the Committee as they were informed. And as for
the publishing and sending thereof unto every Committee in Wales, they know
nothing thereof, neither was it done by their or either of their directions or
consents.

To the 16. Article, Sir William Jews denies his protecting any Delinquents
in South Wales, as is untruely aleadged.

And as for the Earl of Carbery, he did no more then move in the house of
Commons, to make good what Major General L^^^horn had promised and pressed for
on his behalf, by his letters to the Speaker, and Committee of both Kingdoms*
representing the advantages that came to the parliament by his conformity and
(...) it would further their service to oblige him.

For Mr. Carve of Glammorgan and Mr. Herbert of Breck^^^^shire after their long
imprisonment, they being upon their Compositions at Goldsmiths Hall, he did but
move the ascertaining of their Fines according to the rules prescribed to the
(...) there, having observed, that delays brought a prejudice both to the
Parliament and the parties (...), by abusing the one in their authority, the
other in their estates. And for Mr. Herber^, after his sight of some high
Articles drawn up against him by Mr. Rumsey, he never spoke in his behalf, and
he yet continues a prisoner in Ely House. For Mr. Morgan of Bre^kno^kshire, he
is one the said Sir William has ever used with no more then a civillity
suitable to their being countrymen, and of many years acquaintance, which he
beleives no good man can look on as an offense. For Mr. Gwyn and Mr. Jews of
^adno^shire, ^ of the Committee in that county, and those that by Major
General (...) cert^ficate and Colonel Birth his public testimony, had
furthered the reducing of that county, he did but publicly move in the house,
that some disputes concerning them, and some differences between them and
others of the Committee for that county, might be referred to the Committee for
Gloucester (...) in (...) Row; which he did out of his desire to serve the
Parliament by keeping peace in those remote parts, and for no ends at all of
his own.

And further faith, he was never so much as present at any debate concerning
the sequestration of any other person whatever in either of the forementioned
Counties, save these above^ named; nor ever so much as motioned to any Member
of either: House, [Committee man, o^ other,] either the remitting or favorable
compounding with any, upon any Terms not warrantable by the rules prescribed;
or their compounding with any that were incapable thereof; nor did ever animate
or encourage any (...) this unhappy difference to continue their fidelity to
the Kings cause, promising them, th^^ if they would engage their Frien^^ with
the King for him, he and his would be their Friends in the Parliament, (as is
untruly fur^^shed) looking upon that kind of conditioning, as a thing below the
thoughts of a Gentleman.

What the Delinquents in those parts say of him, or how they (...) upon him, or
how they or any others look upon those that ^rge him, or what shall be his or
their lot at his Majest^^s coming to London, he is ignorant of; but hopes, that
a (...) will discover both (...) and them in their (...), and (...) every man's
return may be according to the singleness and i^^^grity of his affections to
the public peace and welfare of the Kingdom.

And farther he says, that there being an order for the nomination of Justices
of the Peace for the County of Brecknock, he humbly named Mr Roger Vaughan [now
high sheriff of that County] to be added to the Committee formerly named by
the House, Mr. Meredith Lowis, Master George Parrey, and Mr. Edward William^,
as the fittest persons he knew of to supply the necessity there was of justice
in that county: and although he cannot say that when the Kings forces had a
power in those parts, but that many of them may have done that which is not
justifiable, yet for his Brother Master Thomas Jews who was formerly one of
the Committee, he is confident, his innocence is equal with any man's in that
County, and his sufferings as great as any of double his fortune inhabiting
there; he having been carried prisoner by Sir William Vaughans command to
Ludlow Castle with one Master Hugh Williams, where they continued till he laid
down eightscore pounds for their enlargement; And he can confidently affirm,
that no man is left out of Commission, that any honest man can pretend either
by his estate, or affections to the Parliament to deserve to be therein
employed: and he could heartily wish, that he or they that give information on
this article, would have advised, who else should have bin recommended for
Committee Men or Justices. And for Master Edward William^ being made
^ollicitor, his Commission was delivered upon certificate from three of the
four Gentlemen who are the only persons, resident in the County, of those that
are named for the Committee there: and he believes he has been so careful in
his duty, that neither corruption nor remiss^es can be justly charged or proved
against him.

And the said Sir William says, that his son was chosen Burgess for the
Borough of Brecknock by the unanimous assent of the Burgesses, who adjudged
him a fit person to serve for them* and his fitne^ for that place he desires
may be determined of, by th^se amongst whom he has the honor to sit, who have
seen his demeanor, and are the only proper Judges thereof: but that he kept
the writ eight months in his Custody in order thereto, is most untrue. For at
his being in Brecknock-Shire in July 1646. having carried the writ down with
him, and finding at Ragland that Worcester was then but upon delivery to the
Parliament, and that the Commissioners of peace for that County were those that
contin^ed in their authority by their old Commission, thought it then no fit
time for a public meeting in that Town upon such an occasion, lest some ill
consequence might have followed thereon, and thereupon at his return
acquainted Master Prideanx, one of the then Commissioners for the great Seal,
therewith, and with his approbation returned the writ to Master Scoble the
Register, in whose custody it continued, till he again called for it some five
weeks before the election.

TO the 17th. Article, the said Sir Will. Jews acknowledges that by the ever
Honorable, the Earl of Essex his Commission, and the approbation of both
Houses of Parliament, he was in the beginning of these troubles made Governor
of Portsmouth, though not only without his desire but against it, as it is
well^ known to Sir John Evelyn, of Wilt^^ a Mer^ber of the Honorable House of
Commons. That during his service there, he received much of the public
Treasure, for which he gave such an Account, as that he had his discharge from
the Committee for Accounts, bearing date the 15th. day of March, 1644. And the
said Committee coming to the House of Commons with their Certificates of that
Account and others, did there publicly attest it, to be both just and
fr^^gall: whereupon the house was so favorable, as to vote on the 3. of April.
1645. their approbation of his Account so presented unto them: and to Order,
that the Committee of the Revenue should with their soonest and best
convenience pay vote him the sum of 415. l 16. s 8. d. part of what remained
d^^ unto him upon his said Account, as appeared by the Certificate above
mentioned: which evidently disproves that part of the charge, which does most
unjustly accuse him for not accounting, of which he believes his greatest
Accusers are far more guilty then himself, since he never heard any Certificate
made to the house of their account^.

And whereas he is likewise Charged, while he was Governor there frequently to
have held correspondency and intelligence with the Kings party about the
delivery up of the said Garrison: some such aspersions having been very
undeservedly raised on him, during his Command there: the Commit of Lords and
Commons for the safety, were pleased to write to him to some up to London, by
their letter dated the 8 of June 1643. where the said Sir William pressing by
his importunity the said Committee and Earl of Essex, that they would Examine
what ever could be alleged against him, to punish him if faulty, and right
him if injured; upon the Earl of Essex his letter to the said Committee after
a full Examination of the business the Committee by their letter gave his Lord
ship this account following.

May it please your Excellency
WE have examined and debated the business concerning Sir William Jews as your
Lordship did desire, and out of all those jealousies and allegations, which
have been offered against him, there amounts NOTHING (as we can gather) which
can derogate from his honor, or the public confidence reposed in him in his
command at Portsmouth; This account we render to your Excellency, as well to
answer that which has been referred to us by your Excellencies Letter, as that
which is required from us by Sir William Lewis his innocence: this being the
state of this business, it is left in the hands of your Excellency to repair
this worthy Gentleman in what manner you shall please: And so we take our
leave and rest.

Westminster 29. July. 1643. Your Excellencies very affectionate friends and
humble Servants subscribed. Bedford Pembrooke, and Mountgemery, B. Denbigh, W.
Say and Seal, Io. Pym, and others.


The which letter being carried to his Excellency, after his perusal thereof,
he wished the said Sir Will. Jews to repair again to Portsmouth and to take
care thereof; but he having vindicated his Innocence, and to manifest how
little he regarded either places of honor or gain (which others aspire to)
desired to be excused, and quitted the employment.

Why or upon what grounds the said Sir William (with diverse other persons, who
faithfully served the Parliament) was left out of the Proclamation mentioned,
he knows not (being up ways privy to their councels,) nor what his Majesty
was pleased to say of him; but this he knows, and its generally known to
that part of Hampshire where he lived, that about October 1643. there was
plundered from him by the Kings party to the value of between two and three
thousand pounds: mean; whereof his lands being unstocked; he made not
threepence of it in three years. For his estate in Brecknock-shire, which by
the Charge is allowed to be worth about 600. l. per annum, it was not held
worth sequestring in those parts, in regard of the taxes laid upon it: and
during the time of the troubles he made little profit of his estate there or
elsewhere. And as it is no argument, that some Malignants in arms against the
Parliament did hold correspondency with them, because their estates in some
places have not been yet sequestered, through negligence of the officers, or
want of evidence; so he presumes, it can be no proof of his, complying with
the King or his party, in the Judgment of any indifferent person or of his
Accuse^s [who now profess their correspondency with his Majesty without the
houses privity] in their late printed Of Inly. 8 1647.
letters to both Houses, because he was not sequestered upon the same, or any
such like occasion for ought he known the case (he believes) of some other
well-affected Members.

As for concerning Col. Price his estate, upon the sad complaint of Mrs Price
of her necessities, he wrote a letter to the Committee, only to allow unto her
the 5th. part of her husbands estate, according to the Ordinance of Parliament
in that behalf, and to restore her wearing apparel which had bin taken from
her, (an extremity he had not heard of before used to any other, which he hops
his accusers) who now desire justice for and indulgence toward delinquents,
which they charge as a crime in others] cannot dislike But for the letting of
Colonel Prices estate, he did not intermedle, therein, but believes the tenant
that rents it at 50. l. per annum pay a full value for to the state,
considering it is charged with annuities of 120 l. per annum, issuing out of
it; his Wives fifth part, and all taxes and contributions.

And the said Master Glyn, as to the charge of this Article, whereby he is
charged to procure several persons that have been Commissioners of Array in
North Wales, to be named in Commissions of Peace, and other Places of greater
trust and command: He says, the Article gives not any instance of any such
person that he has procured to be named a Justice of Peace, or any other Place
of trust or command, except Col. Glyn (his Brother) made Governor of the Town
and Castle of Carnarvon: And for the said Col. Glyn, he avers, he was never any
Col. in the King's Army, but constantly declared his affection to the
Parliament, and for that cause he was in the beginning of the troubles,
besieged in his own house, with Canon planted against it, where he was taken
prisoner, his Arms seized upon, himself charged with treason, and intended to
be proceeded against at Shrewsbury, had not some persons interposed and
procured his enlargement, upon security, that he should not bear Arms for the
Parliament; and as he has suffered for his affection to the Parliament, so he
has advantagiously acted for them, by inviting Major-Gen. Mitton to come into
North Wales, joining his forces with the said Major-Gen. and relieving the
Parliaments Forces with money, by reason whereof, the County and Castle of
Carnarvon was reduced to the Parliaments obedience, of whose eminent services,
the house of Commons took special notice, in a letter written unto him; and
for recompense of his sufferings for the Parliament, and the great service done
for them, he was made Governor of Carnarvon, for the safety of those parts,
and encouragement of the well-affected there.

To the eighteenth Article, 18.
Whereby Master Glyn is charged to have taken rewards of several persons for
service done them in the house, and in particular 100li paid unto his Wife by
the Drovers of Wales, for service done them: he says, that the same is a false
and a slanderous charge, and for the 100li supposed to be given to his Wife
(who is dead and cannot answer for her self) the same is untrue: for Master
Glyn lent those poor men 100li out of his own Money, to find them Bread, which
was afterward repaid him, when they procured money upon the credit of the
Excise, as will be justified by many persons of quality; besides which, there
was no other 100li that came to his Wives Hands.

To the nineteenth Article, 19.
Master Glyn answers;

First, concerning Delinquents, that the charge is general, and therefore he
can make no particular answer, but generally not guilty.

Secondly, concerning the putting out of the Militia, that he was no way
concerned in it; they were presented by the Common-Counsell, and chosen there
when he was not present, and afterward approved by both Houses: and he cannot
take upon him to give reasons to justify the acts of both Houses, or the
Common-Counsell, who are only impeached by this charge; and must plead not
guilty of intermedling with putting in or putting out.

To the twentieth Article, 20.
where it is laid, That Sir Philip Stapleton, Master Holles, and Sir William
Lewis, have by their power and countenance obstructed justice in the cause
between Alderma^ Langham and Captain Limery, and that of John Gunter.

They answer, That Master Hollis and Sir Philip Stapleton being one afternoon
in the Court of Request, heard that the House of Peers were then to fit, which
made them go to see what the occasion was, and coming into the Lobby, found
there the Earl of Rutland, who told them, their House met about a great
Business betwixt Langham and Limery; and some discourse passed concerning it,
when Master Hollis and Sir Philip Stapleton said, They understood that the
merits of the cause was not at all in question, only the entertaining of it
upon an appeal, which they concelved was the common justice of the Kingdom,
and not to be denied to any. Which having said, they went away; nor was it done
in secret, but spoken publicly, and in the hearing of some of the Counsel for
Limery: And they do utterly deny the speaking of any such words as are
alleged to be said by them; for they were so far from engaging their
interest in it, as they do not to this day know what the Lords did upon it:
And Sir William Lewis, does absolutely deny his being there present as all,
when any such conference was with the Earl of Rutland: and cannot but observe,
there should be that significancy attributed to h^s presence and gesture, as
thereby to discover his thoughts and inclinations, especially when he was not
there in person. And as for the cause instanced concerning John Gu^er, he
conceives it to be a suit depending in Chancery betwixt the Father and Son,
both nearly relating unto him, but no further proceeded in then to Bill and
Answer, that he knows of; and what influence his countenance could have so
early days in the beginning of a suit, let all the world judge.

To the one and twentieth Article, 21.
which concerns Master Nichols only, he says,

That although his election was voted to be void by the Committee of
Privileges (whose mere votes exclude no Member from sitting in the house)
where no Witnesses were heard on his behalf, yet conceives his Election good,
and hopes it will be thought so by the House, when they h^ar a true state of
the cause. And whereas they object, it has layne four yeer^ unreported: Master
Nichols appeals unto the House, and that worthy Gentlemen in whose hand that
report lay (being never prosecuted by his Competitor) whether he has not
endeavored to have that report made, and the business determined, and still
continues his humble request to the House for the speedy determining of the
same.

To the second clause Mr Nichols answers, That he never used any threats,
menaces or indirect practices, for the bringing in of any Members, either out
of Cornwall, or any other County in the West: And it is well known, that those
worthy Gentlemen there elected, and now excepted against, were fairly and duly
chosen by their own interest and public demerits; and their unbyased
integrity is such, that they detest the maintaining of a Faction, or carrying
on of any design other then the common good.

To the third clause of that Article, Master Nichols says, That he continues
in an Office of Master of the A^^nory in the Tower, wherein he has faithfully
served the State for their advantage, and that since the Selfdenying Ordinance
passed the Houses, he never received any penny of his F^e from the Committee of
Revenue, but confesses to have received a rent of thirty four pounds a year,
or thereabouts, and a Fine for two houses, which he is to be ^^^^able for to
the Parliament: And it is well known, that Master Nichols lost a far better
Office both for profit and esteem, then this (the Customers place of Plymouth
and of all the Ports in the County of Cornwall) for his fidelity to the
Parliament, and has received no reparation for the same, as diverse others have
had for their lost Offices. Besides, he has been employed in many long and
chargeable Journeys, and has expended diverse great sums of money in them
(which he has borrowed of his friends) and has yet had no satisfaction from
the Parliament, in consideration thereof, as some of his Accusers have had for
meaner services.

To the two and twentieth, 22.
Master Nicholls says, That neither himself, nor any other for him, ever took
any penny, directly or indirectly, for any thing done in Parliament, or in any
of their Committees (wherein he has had the honor to serve them in the same)
of greatest trust. And whereas he is charged, to bring Sir William Vuedall into
the House upon his coming from York, for the sum of One hundred and fifty
pounds; it is altogether false and scandalous. Upon Sir William Vuedalls return
from York, he came into the House, sat there without any question, and sometime
after had leave to retire himself into the Country; and at his return to
London (near two years after) the dispute grew about his admittance into the
House, and he was admitted into it upon a solemn and serious debate, without
the motion or procurement of Master Nicholls; which admission, if undue, is a
charge against the whole House, not Master Nicolls. True it is, that when Sir
William Vuedall was at York and Treasurer of the Army there, Master Nicholls
having an Assignment made him by his brother Captain Humphrey Nicolls, to
receive an Arrear due to him for his Service in the North, that he writ to Sir
William Vuedall to send him that money, whereupon Sir William Vuedall when he
came to London, sent him a sum of money as an Arrear due to his brother, but
whether so much as is specified in the Article, he knows not, by reason his
papers and accounts of that business are not in Town.

As for Master Nicolls receiving of rewards, he challenges all his Accusers
(many of them having had occasion to use his poor Service) and all others* to
prove him guilty of receiving the least reward for any thing done by him in
discharging of his public trust.

And whereas it is charged, That he discovered a design for the searching of
Greenwich House; He says, That about midnight in August (as he takes it) 1642,
there came an Officer with some Soldiers to his lodging, and brought with them
a Warrant for him to sign for the searching of Greenwich House, which Warrant
he figned; and by the same Officer he sent three lines written in an open paper
to a Noble Lady, who lodged in the House, that she should not be frighted with
the coming of Soldiers in such an unseasonable hour; which Lady was no servant
of the Queens, but one that had given a clear demonstration of her affection to
the Public, by a large voluntary contribution upon the Propositions of Money
and Plate. So that he hopes this will not be thought a fault to send an open
paper to a person of that quality, for such purpose, by the same Officer that
was to put the design in execution.

As to the three, 23, 24, 25.
four, and five and twentieth Articles, which waste themselves in a scandal
touching Master Long alone (for to a printed imputation of cowardice,
covetousness, and treachery, where no particular person appear^ to avouch the
truth or give satisfaction for the falsehood of such an Assertion, no better
name can be given) he yet to give the world a taste of what truth they may
expect in the rest, returns unto these three this Answer:

That howbeit his education had not much acquainted him with Military
emploiments before the late unhappy Wars, (which he thinks to be the case of
many, who now reckon well of their abilities in that profession) yet through
the invitation of his Excellency the late Lord General, Earl of Essex, and the
Committee of the safety of the Kingdom, who thought it of some importance at
that time to interest persons of estate and relations (though not bred
Soldiers) in that emploiment, he did accept the command of a Troop of Horse
under his Excellency, the greatest part whereof were raised by himself and his
friends; and in the Head of that Troop he charged at Edgehill, in the Regiment
then under the command of Sir William Bel^ore, which was the first that brake
into the Enemy; in which charge he lost his horse, and being left dismounted,
did yet with his single pistol in his hand give quarter to several of the
Enemies, and was then by Captain Harecourt (Quarter master of his Troop)
remounted, continued out the Service of that day and the next, and was one of
the last Troops that brought away the A^^munition; a thing happily not known to
them who gave the information for this Article, seeing it was the ill^hap of
some Commanders that day to make an overhasty retreat, and of some others (of
no little Eminency now) never to come there, (much less to charge) though they
quartered very near the Field.

When the unexpected skirmish at Brainford happened, his Troop (as the greatest
part of the Army besides) was dispersed, but so soon as he could get it
together, he went ^hither and stayed there till the business was at an end;
shortly after, his Troop being to march toward Bristoll, where some of his
fellow Captains (whose experience he thought as little as his own) receiving
sudden and great Commands, he declined that Service under them, and intended to
return to his other in the House of Commons: but some disaffections and
backwardness to contribute to the public Service appearing in some persons of
quality in the County of Essex, he was by Commission from his Excellency the
Earl of Essex commanded thither, and author^ed with other Gentlemen of that and
the Counties of Herrford and Bedford, to raise Horse, Arms, etc. upon such as
had not contributed, etc. Touching which emploiment (without drawing the
particulars into a long Discourse) he says, that he acted nothing without the
concurrence of two Gentlemen^ at the least of his fellow Commissioners: and
thereof and of what had been raised by them for the public Service under that
Authority, he (long before any Committee of Accounts settled) did publish* the
particulars in print, and thereof did, immediately (...) that Committee settled,
give and pass an Account upon Oath* which course had others taken (who are
greater Accountan^^ then he) there would happily have been less room for thi^
Accusation: The plundering and oppression in the Article mentioned, he ^eckons
as odious, as it is an ^^true suggestion.

As for Master T^omas Manwood in the Article mentioned, he much doubts
whether there be any such man residing in the County of Essex; sure he is that
no protection from the then Lord General his Excellency, was disrespected by
him; and upon the ^^st enquiry Master Long can make, the person intended by
Master Thomas Manwood, is no way eminent for his good affection, and what was
done toward him was well warranted by the Commission under which Master Long
and those other Gentlemen of that Country were employed, and nothing by
countenance of that Authority was converted to Master Longs private advantage:
and so little has the humor of covetousness (with which the printed Articles
charge him) prevailed, that there will be nothing found in his Accounts to be
demanded for his Colonells pay; an Omission of which he dares undertake to
excuse them that are most willing to accuse him.

The Damages sustained by Master Long (not pretended, 24.
but real) mentioned in the four and twentieth Article (to be the inducement
of that favor conferred upon him by the Chancery. Office) were under^
considerations, and together with his four years imprisonment and sufferance
for his public service in former Parliaments, waighed by the wisdom of that
House, and his capability to execute that place (usually discharged by able
Deputies, as now it is) determined by that judgment which he dares not, and
thinks no men, or company of men, without those Walls, ought to dispute; and
therefore to that quarrel (more against both houses then himself) he thinks
himself bound to give, and believes no wise honest English men will expect, or
well receive any other answer. This only he says, that neither the eminency
nor profit of Some of the^ in the sam Court as M. Speker, and his Son, M^ Smith
and M. Love.
the Office can surely be the cause, that it only of all the Offices and
Benefits accepted from the Parliament, by other Members, should be now subject
to observation, and made a matter of charge.

In answer to the five and twentieth (and perhaps for the weight of it, 25.
the last Article in that printed paper) he says, That if any man has (which
is not known to him) seriously or in scorn, used that s^urrilous phrase of
Parliament-Di^^er toward him, by reason of his more then ordinary diligence,
in persuading and pressing his Fellow Members of the honorable House of
Commons (according to their trust and duty) to remain in that house or return
to it, when any thing has been in debate, which in his apprehension and
conscience required their judgment, wisdom and suffrage there; he is contented
to own the Fact, and leave the abuse to the author: any unlawful carriage in
that particular without the house, he does deny; his demeanor within those
Walls, in that or ought else, no man without them ought to question or control,
or he to give account of. And for a close, he says, that these his Accusers
who have against reason and justice, driven so many Members out of the house at
once, deserve the name of And Parliament-Riders.
Parliament-Drivers, much more then he who defired only to continue Members
within the house, according to his own and their Duty.

The Conclusion.
UPon the whole matter we do say, that it is our Misfortune, not our
Misdoings, that we stand in this manner accused: Power may seize upon us and
destroy us, but not Justice; we mean, the Justice of Man, for, and in respect
of these pretended Crimes; not the Justice of God, which we tremble at, and
submit unto, and see it reach unto us for our sins this Cup of persecution and
affliction by the hands of men, the men of the world, who are themselves but
the hand of God to correct his children for their good; their good in the end,
though for the present it be grievous unto them, and befalls them many times
occasionally and in the eye of men where they think themselves to be least
deserving it, to make them examine themselves, and enquire where man cannot
come, into their own hearts, to find out the true cause which has provoked
their God to afflict them, and so come to the knowledge of those evils and
repent of them, which otherwise would have lain undiscovered and like a
sleeping Serpent awaken afterward to do them a greater mischief; which is at
the present our case, and we trust God will give us the grace to make this use
of it. For certainly upon the strictest scrutiny of our consciences, and
enquiry into our past actions and intentions, we cannot find we have deserved
this return from any that can pretend themselves, to be well-wishers to the
Parliament and to the Peace of the Kingdom; We can speak it for a truth, We are
of those who are peaceable and faithful in Israel; We never sought great
things for our selve; We have mourned for the desolations of this Kingdom (of
three Kingdoms;) We have endeavored our utmost according to our several
Talents, as it has pleased God to enable us in our several places and
callings, as Members of the Parliament, as Members of the Commonwealth, to do
all the good we could, to procure a settlement in Church and State, We have
desired a Peace, We have labored for Peace, and willingly have never done the
least thing to keep it off; We have all of us taken the Covenant, we dare not
say we have kept it to Godward so well as we should, but we will say, no man
can lay the breach of any part of it, as to the King, Parliament, or Kingdom,
to our Charge, nor we hope ever shall: Nothing in this World, that we have more
heartily desired, then to see a happy and firm Reconciliation between the King
and his People, him in his Throne, them in their Liberties, both of them
encompassed with Righteousness and Peace, and glorying in the Parliament, as
the foundation of both their happinesses.

Yet how we are aspersed and misrepresented, let the World judge, by several
Pamphlets and Papers concerning us, and by this printed Charge: We dare appeal
even to the Consciences of our Accusers, if they would speak out: Perhaps with
some it is in truth our Crime, that they know us to be so as we are; perhaps we
stand in the way and prevent some destructive designs: therefore we must be
removed; and that we may so be, we must be represented to be Hinderers of
Peace, Obstructers of Justice, Invaders of the Liberty and Freedom of the
Subject, Abusers and Misleaders of the Parliament; In sum, Whatsoever is
amiss in the Kingdom, we are made the Cause, and must bear the blame of it.

Christianos ad ignem, What public Calamity soever befell in the time of the
Primitive Persecutions, the poor Christians were said to be the Cause, and
must be the expiatory Sacrifice.

But let men say what they will, Eliab was never the more the Troubler of
Israel, because he was so called.

We will say with Job, Our Witness is in Heaven, and our Record is on high;
This is our Comfort and our Confidence: We shall be acquit before the Tribunal
of Heaven; and we trust in the Divine Protection to have our Deliverance and
Justification even here upon Earth by the Judgment of man, that is by the
Justice of the Parliament, notwithstanding the malice of all our Enemies.

Denzill Hollis, Phil. Stapleton, William Lewis, John Clotworthy, William
Waller, John Maynard, Edw. Massy, John Glyn, Walter Long, Edw. Harley, and
Anth. Nicholl, Members of the Honorable House of Commons.

FINIS.

