A TESTIMONY OF THE LIGHT WITHIN.

A glorious Truth, which all the Holy Men of God did bear testimony unto, and
from which they spoke forth the Scriptures, and the end of all Preachings and
Writings was to bring to Light within, to worship God in Spirit and Truth, and
to Christ within, the hope of Glory.

The Truth cleared from Scandals, and some of the Errors and false Doctrines of
two Cornish Teachers laid open and testified against.

WITH A Description of the true Ministers of Christ, and of the free Ministry
both under the Law and Gospel Administration; and how those that preached for
Hire and filthy Lucre, were testified against both by the Prophets, Christ and
the Apostles.

Wherein the National and Parish Teachers in England and else, where, who
preach for Hire and set Maintenances, and sue people at Law for Tithes and
Maintenance, are clearly proved, by several Scripture examples, to be contrary
to Law and Gospel, both in Doctrine and Practice, and in the steps and ways of
those whom the true prophets, Christ and the Apostles testified against.

Also a testimony of the dawning of the glorious day of the Lord, and his
appearing in power in the hearts of his people, which makes the world to
wonder, and formal Professors to rage and persecute the appearance of Christ
in power; with several Scripture Examples, showing how the Lord sent his
Servants to testify against such who had the Form but not the Power of Truth.
And how the Servants and Messengers of God in former ages and generations who
were in the Life and Power of Truth, were hated and persecuted by those who had
the Form, but were not in the Life of Truth as they are now in this Generation.

Here is likewise, in short, declared the difference between the Old Covenant,
where the Law, Temple, Sabbath, Circumcision, and other Services were without,
and yearly offering up Sacrifice for sin, but did make nothing perfect; and the
new covenant, where the Law, and Spirit, and Circumcision, and the life and and
substance of the shadows are witnessed within, and sin and iniquity done away,
and the bringing in of the better Hope known, which makes perfect, which is
Christ within the Mystery and hope of Glory.

Also an Exhortation to all people to cease from Man, and all their carnal and
dead Observations without them, which does not satisfy; and to turn their
minds to the true light, and wait for the appearance of Christ within, who
gives rest and peace, and satisfies the hungry thirsting Soul.

With a few words to those Dear ones who are torn to see the deadness of the
formal profession, who are waiting upon God, whose faces are turned Syon-wards.

Given forth from Christ the light within in love to the souls of all people,
who are groping in the dark without, that out of death and darkness they may be
brought and turned to the true light, that they may have union with me in my
fathers love, who am redeemed and brought forth of Pharoah's Court, and do
count it greater riches to suffer affliction with the despised people of God,
rather than enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Whose Name according to
the Flesh is Alexander Parker.

Written chiefly to the Inhabitants of the Town and Parish of Austell, in the
County, of Cornwall, but may serve for any others who are in the same Nature
and Condition with them.

London printed for Giles Calvert at the Black spread-Eagle at the West end of
Paul's. 1657.

To all You to whose Hands this shall come: OR, To whom soever it shall be
committed to, to read. AND To all in whose hearing it shall be read.
IT is not that I desire to be seen in Print, that was the cause of my writing
of that which here does follow, if otherwise, I might have been cleared. But
thus it was, upon the sixth day of the week, being the seventh day of the
ninth month 1656. there was a Lecture so called, at the Town of Austel in
Cornwall, and as I lay upon my bed in the morning of the day aforesaid, the
living power of the Lord did arise in me, and a great burden fell upon me, and
waiting in the fear of God, where the secrets of the Lord are known, it was
laid upon me to go to the Steeple-house at the place aforesaid, and I knowing
the terror of the Lord, durst not withstand nor consult, but gave up my self in
obedience to the Lord, and to his protection, though I knew the people to be a
wicked gainsaying rebellious people; yet I knew him who limits and sets bounds
to the raging Sea, that it cannot pass its bounds, and my life being given up
in the service and work of the Lord, not fearing what man could do unto me in
the power and dread of the Lord, I went to the Town, and so into the
Meeting Place, where were two of the professed Teachers, and in meekness and
patience I waited (though under much burden of Spirit) until the Priest had
ended his confused, gathered in, imagined stuff: And afterward I standing up
to speak, and to clear my Conscience and the Truth from his Lies, and other
things spoken at that time by him, both the Priests began to pass away, and
would not stay, though in the Name of the Lord I charged them to stay and
answer, for I had some thing to speak unto them, but notwithstanding all this,
they would not stay, but went away, and left me amongst the rude and ungodly
people, where, like ravening wolves, they haled and punched both me and other
of my friends that were there, that so it was I could not clear my Conscience,
nor ease me of that burden which was laid upon me concerning them, though much
was spoken at that time, but little received: after a little time without much
harm, I and my friends came away. But my burden was not taken off, though some
of my friends (seeing their rudeness) persuaded me to let them alone, and not
to come any more amongst them. But on the first day of the week, after our
meeting was ended, I passed down to the Town with some friends, and having
written to the Priest, after one Letter was burnt another was delivered to him,
though at that time he would not read it, neither was very free to speak with
me. Yet notwithstanding though there was little freedom, I passed to the
Priests house, accompanied with one of my friends; where (coming to the house)
I found them very light and scoffing, and little freedom I had to clear the
Truth, though much was spoken, it was but like water cast into the Sea. And
after some little time I shaked off the dust of my feet, as a testimony against
them, and came away.

But I was not eased of my burden, though I labored to put it off, seeing I
had been amongst them: but it lay still upon me, and I waited on the Lord, and
on the second day of the week at night, lying on my Bed, I was commanded to
write, and so in obedience to the Lord I have written what was given to me,
which here is committed to the view of the world. Read with a single eye, and
examine those Scriptures that I have set down both in the Margin and other
places, and then try those men whom you have long looked upon to be Ministers
of the Gospel, and you may see them both in Doctrine and practice to be
contrary to the Ministers of God mentioned in Scripture, and in the steps of
the false Prophets and false Apostles, which the true Prophets of Christ and
the Apostles testified against.

That which I have written it is not in envy to any of their persons; God is my
record, it would rejoice my heart that any one of them might turn from their
wickedness, and unchristian practices, and cease deceiving and making
Merchandise of poor Souls, and lay down their Crowns at the Feet of Jesus, and
learn of him that their Souls might live; and though I be hated of them and
others for my love in dealing plainly, not daring to speak peace to the wicked
whom the Lord has not spoken peace to, but freely declaring the Truth as it is
in Jesus, owning the least appearance of Truth in any where ever I see it, and
cherish it; but do witness against all hypocrisy and outside seeming holiness
and hyocriticall Professors, it is abomination to God, and the very profane
ones, and the Publicans shall enter the Kingdom before such.

I say, if I be hated for this my love in speaking and writing in plainness,
not respecting any man's person, I have peace with God in what I have here
written, which I value much more than all the dearest love or greatest hatred
and frowns of men. So I do admonish all who read this (or any other) not to be
hasty to judge, nor to speak evil of things you know not, but receive in love
what you can reach unto and see to be truth; and do not rashly censure that to
be error which at present you do not well understand, but try all things, and
hold fast that which is good.

From Tregangeeves in the Parish of Austell in the County of Cornwall the 15.
day of the 9. month, called November. 1656. Written by one who is a lover of the
Truth, and tenders all those who love the Truth in sincerity of heart, who wait
for the appearance of Christ in Spirit, who am known to the world by the name
of Alexander Parker.

A Testimony of the Light within, a glorious Truth, which all the holy Men of
God did bear Testimony unto, and from which they spoke forth the Scriptures,
and the end of all Preachings, and Writings, was to bring to Light within, to
Worship God in Spirit and Truth, and to Christ within the hope of Glory.
TO all you People in the Town and Parish of Austel, young and old, high and
low, rich and poor, Priests, Professors, and profane ones, of what sort or
degree soever, to you all am I moved of the Lord of Heaven and Earth to write,
and clear my Conscience, whetheron will hear or forbear, but chiefly to you who
are breathing and hungring after righteousness in whom there are true desires,
and thirstings after the Waters of Life, for you does my Soul travail, and for
your sakes, (and the pure Truth which is daily slandered by false and
backbiting tongues) do I freely declare and write these following lines, it
being so the people of their Town and Parish; many of them being so rude and
brutish, that I cannot have liberty to speak by word unto you, but they are
ready to lay hands violently upon me, and others of my dear friends, who in
meekness and innocence have come amongst you, they have been haled forth, and
abused by the rude multitude; as I my self was upon the sixth day of the week
being the seventh day of the ninth moth, (called November 1656) when I was in
your public meeting place, and heard one of your Teachers whilst he uttered
forth the Divination of his own brain, that which by his study and labor he
had composed and patched up, and so spoke forth his conceiving and imagination,
and not the Word of God; Now I having heard, and having had some discourse with
your Teacher William Vpcot, and another of his Coat, and being that diverse
reports, and many slanders are cast upon me, and my friends, both by the
Priests and others, as that I deny Christ, the Scriptures, Prayer, and the
like, which things are false, and their accusation I do deny; as to my own
particular, all their lies and slanders I do not value, they are as dust under
my feet, and I stand clear and innocent in the sight of God and all just men,
and their lies and slande^s does not touch me at all, I know it is the portion
of the Children of God to be reproached and reviled, scoffed, and scorned, this
is but a fulfilling of Christ's words, who was hated of the world, and
persecuted and put to death by the professing People; and says Christ as they
have done unto me, so they will do unto you; if ye were of the world, the world
would love you, but because I have chosen you out of the world, therefore do
they hate you, but blessed are ye when men revile you, Ioh: 15: 18, 19. Mat: 5:
11, 12.
and persecute you, and shall speak all manner of evil against you falsely for
my sake, rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven, for
so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you, these Scriptures are
fulfilled in these days, upon this Generation; and truly I can rejoice in all
this, and count it joy, that I am counted worthy to suffer for my Lord and
Masters sake, knowing this, Acts 5.4^ 2 Timothy 3.12 Heb. 11 26.
that all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution, so
their reproaches to me are great riches, and truly for my own part I should be
silent, and bear all these things patiently; But for the Truths sake, and for
their sakes who are tender hearted I shall declare and lay open some of their
Deceits and Errors, who profess themselves to be your Teachers, I shall not
speak by hearsay from others, but what I have seen and heard with my own eyes
and ears, in tenderness and love to your Souls, and not in envy to their
persons, Rom 13.8. Mat. 5.44. Acts 13.14 15. Joh: 16: 2. Mat: 12:33. Jude 11. 1
John 3: 12, 15. 2 John 9. Acts 21. 27 28, 29, 30, 31. Luke 10: 3. Mat: 6: 5.
for I owe to no man any thing but love, my desire is, that they might turn
from their wickedness and live, and so I shall declare, and leave it to you, to
consider, and with the Light of Christ in your Consciences, rightly to judge,
John 7.24.

According to the will of God, as I was moved by the living power, contrary to
man's will, upon the sixth day of the week, being their Lecture day so called, I
came into the public Meeting Place, (which you call a Church) in meekness and
innocence, according to the practice of the Ministers of the Gospel, and I sat
down, and imediately Vpcot your professed Teacher, seeing me, envy did arise in
him, and the image of Cain did appear in his face, and he spoke to some of his
hearers to put me forth; in this thing, if it were nothing else, it is enough
to try him, for the tree is known by his fruits, envy is a mark of the false
Prophets, and they who live in envy, are of Cains generation and nature; and he
that envies his brother is a murderer, and so of the Devil, and is no true
Minister; and it was not the manner nor practice of the Apostles to cause any
to be hailed forth, but on the contrary, the Apostles and Ministers of Christ
were haled forth and beaten, and abused, and in this age your Teachers are
found contrary to the Ministers of Christ, not guided by that meek and
Lamb-like Spirit, that they were guided by; but he is plainly manifest to have
a contrary spirit of envy, and so the spirit of error, 1 John 4.6.

The same time one whose name is Halls, went up into the high place and stood
praying there Pharisee-like, which Christ cried woe unto such that did so, Mat.
23. and in his prayer he uttered forth his envy and blasphemy against Christ
the Light, and prayed to his God, that they might not be guided by the Light
within; and afterward prayed, that the Lord would reveal his Truth within: Now
here all who are not wilfully blind may see his confusion, and out of his own
mouth I leave him to be judged, for Christ Jesus is the Truth, and he is the
Light, John 14.6. John 8.12.
and if the Truth must be revealed within, then the Light is within, and where
this Light is manifest, it leads and guids all who are in it out of death and
darkness, and all unrighteousness, into the pure way of life; righteousness and
peace; as Christ has said, whosoever follows me shall not abide in darkness
but shall have the light of life: and all who deny the light within, denies the
New Covenant, Isa: 4^: 6. Jer: 31: 31. 1 Timothy: 3: 9.16.
and the faith of Christ; nay further, they deny the whole Mystery of
Godliness, which is God manifest in flesh; and this I shall prove by Scripture,
that all they who deny to be guided by the light within, denies God, Christ,
and the Spirit, which are all one in substance, though differing in names, for
God is light, and Christ is light, and the Spirit is light, and they are all
one God, 1 John 5:7.
who is light, as John the beloved Disciple declares, and this was his message,
that God is Light, and in him is no darkness at all; as you may read John 1.5.
And Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ declares and testifies of God dwelling
within, as you may read, 2 Cor. 6.16. What agreement has the Temple of God
with Idols, for ye are the Temple of the living God, as God has said, Rev: 21:
3.
I will dwell in them, and walk in them, etc. Again read Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. There
is one body and one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling,
one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all,
and through all, and in you all; Col. 3: 10, 11.
(mind this well, In you all) Again read Col. 1.26, 27, 28. where Paul speaks
of the Mystery which has been h^d from ages and generations, but now is made
manifest to his Saints, to whom God would make known what is the riches of the
glory of this Mystery among the Gentiles, which is Chrict in you the hope of
glory: Again read 1 Cor. 3 16. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and
that the Spirit of God dwells in you: And this is the New Covenant of God,
prophesied of by the Prophet Jeremiah, in the 31. Chap. 31, 32, 33, 34. which
was not according to the old Covenant, Exodus 34:1. Mal. 2:7. Heb: 10: 12
where the Law was written in Tables of Stone, and the Priests lips should
preserve knowledge, and they year by year offered up Sacrifice for sin, etc.
But this shall be the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, after
those days says the Lord, I will put my Law in the inward parts, and write it
in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my People; And they
shall teach no more every man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying,
know the Lord, for they shall all know me from the least of them, unto the
greatest of them, says the Lord; for I will forgive their iniquity, and will
remember their sin no more: And again, read Luke 17.20, 21. And when he was
demanded of the Pharisees, when the Kingdom of God should come, he answered
them (to wit Jesus) and said the Kingdom of God comes not with observation,
neither shall they say, lo here, or lo there (mark well) for behold the Kingdom
of God is within you: Another Scripture I shall mention in the first Epistle of
John 2.20, to the 28. Ye have an Vction from the holy One, and ye know all
things, etc. These things have I written unto you concerning them that seduce
you, but the annoynting which ye have received of him abides in you, and ye
need not that any man teach you, but as the same annoynting teaches you of all
things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it has taught you, ye shall
abide in him: These Scriptures I have set down to prove, that he or they, that
denies to be guided by the Light within, denies God, Tim. 32 26. John 4: 23,
4^: Jer ^: 31: 34. 1:27. Co^h: 16: 13 Job: 8: 1. ^ Joh: 5:29 1 Heb: 10: 16 Luke
17: 21 1 Jo: 2:27. 1 Jo^ 1: 3, 5
Christ, Spirit, and the Scriptures, and in a word, the whole Mystery of
Godliness, which is God manifest in flesh; where the true Worship in Spirit and
Truth is known and witnessed, and the New Covenant enjoyed, where sin and
in^quity is done away, and blotted out of the Lords remembrance; and this is
light, within, which leads and guids all the Children of God, in the ways of
righteousness and peace; where the substance and life of all figures and
shaddows, and the life of all Scriptures is witnessed and enjoyed within, for
the Law is light, and it is within, and the Kingdom of God is light, and it is
within, and the Spirit is light, and the Anointing, and Christ is light, and
these are all one in substance; one God, who is a Spirit of light, and he
dwells within his people, and as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are
the Sons of God, Rom: 8:14. and here you may see the error and blasphemy of
Halls, who prayed that they might not be guided by the light within; Jo: 17:
21: 23. Isa 45: 13. John 6: 45. Ezekiel: 34:15
and in this he has denied Father, Son, and Spirit, which are one God who is
light, and is within, a guider and leader, and teacher of his People, according
to Scripture Testimony, as I have mentioned before.

And the said Halls in his talk was speaking of Antichrist, and false
Teachers, from that Scripture, 1 John 2.18. Little Children it is the last
time, and as you have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there
many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time: Now I shall prove
by Scripture and out of his own mouth, 1 Jo: 2:22.
that he is one of the Antichrists, that is against Christ, and denies him;
read the 22. verse. Who is a liar but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ,
he is Antichrist, that denies the Father and the Son: Now it is manifest and
proved by Scripture that he has denied the Father and the Son, John 10:30 John
14:9, 10, 11 Rev: 21: 3.
who prayed that they might not be guided by the light within, for the Father
and the Son are one, and they are light and dwells within; And again read
another Scripture in the first Epistle of John Chap. 4.3. Every Spirit that
confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God, and this
is that spirit of Antichrist whereof ye have heard that it should come, and
even now already it is in the world: Now to confess Christ come in flesh at
Ierusal^m sixteen hundred and od years ago, that the Pope does confess, whom he
said was the Antichrist, and this most in this Nation of the very prophanest
ones, and many others do confess: But I do further say, 1 John 5: 11, 12. Col:
1: 27. 1 John 2: 22, 23.
that every particular man or woman that does not confess Christ, but deny
Christ come in their mortal flesh, are Antichrists, against Christ, and this
Halls did deny, who denies to be guided by the light within, and so denies
Christ within the hope of glory, and so is against Christ, Antichrist.

Further, the said Halls said, that Antichrist was one that did oppose Christ,
and this I shall turn back upon his own head, and prove him out of his own
mouth to be against Christ: He has denied the Mini^^ers work, which is for the
perfecting of the Saints.
Christ Jesus owned the Doctrine of Perfection, and said in his Doctrine, Be ye
perfect even as your heavenly Father is perfect, as you may read, Mat. 5.48.
and Halls said that none can be perfect in th^s life, and so oposes Christ,
manifesting the spirit of Antichrist.

Several other things were spoken by him, in opposition to Christ and the pure
Doctrine of Perfection, but these few that I have mentioned, are sufficient to
try and prove his Spirit, only one Scripture I shall mention, which he himself
quoted to prove me and my friends to be false Prophets, which was Phil. 3.19.
but read the 18. verse and so on; where the Apostle speaks of false Teachers,
for says he, many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even
weeping that they are the enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose end is
destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who
mind earthly things. Now whether this Scripture does condemn them or us, I
leave it to the honest hearted to judge; for as soon as he had ended his stuff,
they both went away, and though I called after them, and charged them to stay
in the name of the Lord, yet nevertheless both of them with speed went to the
Tavern, and there filled their bellies, Psalm. 1:1, 2. Psa: 145.20 Dan: 6:22.
and left me amongst a company of bruits and heathen-like raging people, haling
and pulling, and punching with their feet, had not the power of the Lord
preserved me and my friends, we might have been torn to pieces amongst the
raging and ravening Wolves, Mat: 10:10
and that day Christ's words were fulfilled, who said, I send you forth as Lambs
in the midst of Wolves: And this was plainly manifest, I came in innocence, and
was as a Lamb amongst them, and they like ravenous Wolves went about to devour,
but the Lord preserved me and my friends out of their mouths, glory to his Name
for evermore. Oh! how do these your Priests walk as Examples to the People, as
the Ministers of Christ did walk as Examples, and their conversation was in
heaven, as you may read, Phil: 3: 17: 20. But these your Teachers their
conversation is below, and if the people should have followed them, they might
have gone to the Tavern, and there filled their bellies, and sit sotting and
drinking, which is a shame to hear tell of, which they glory in, Tit: 1: 16.
and are enemies to the Cross of Christ, though they profess him in words, yet
in works they deny him; and they do mind earthly things, (as those did which
the Apostle speaks of) for if it were not more for love of your earthly things,
than it is in love to your souls, you would have fewer sermons, for take away
their maintenance and give them no money, and you will quickly know what they
preach for; we have tried them and found them so, and so do turn from them,
Isa: 2: 22.
and warn all others to cease from man, and turn to the Lord, that he alone may
teach you, according as he has promised, and according as it is written, all
the Children of the Lord, they shall be taught of the Lord, Isa. 54.13.

After I came from the Meeting Place, I writ to William Vpcot, and sent it down
to his house by one of my friends, who coming into his house, and asked for
him, it was said he was within: Then Vpcots wife came and asked what his
message was, and said she would deliver it to her husband, and she being
earnest to know, he told her he had a letter, and she promised to deliver it to
her said husband; where, upon her word and promise, he gave her the Letter, but
no sooner she had got the paper, not regarding her word and promise, did cast
the letter into the fire and burnt it: and so she was proved a liar, in saying
she would give it to her husband but did not, but cast it into the fire, so she
manifested herself to be of the Devil, a liar: and the Lake of Fire is the
liars portion, as you may read Rev. 21.8.

Thus you may see that the Priest and his wife are both of one Spirit, for she
made no conscience of her wo^ds and promise: but I knowing their spirit, did
keep a copy of the paper, which take as follows.

William Upcot,
Show me an Example in the Scripture, where ever any of the Ministers of Christ
did command any of their Hearers to hale forth, or take away any that came in
amongst them, as thou did this day to some of the people, out of thy envious
spirit, spoke unto them to take me away, because I had my hat on my head, when
thou thy self had a Cap on, and thy fellow-Priest, and several others that
had their heads covered, and yet would condemn and judge me for that which
thou and others were guilty of, and so stirred up the people to do evil. O
shameless man! It grieves my Spirit to see such actions amongst you: Are these
the fruits of thine and others Ministry, when in meekness and innocence as a
Lamb I came among you (as that of God in thee shall one day witness) thou thy
self who should have been an example of good unto the people, was the first
that did appear in envy against the innocent, and went about to stir them up
to cruelty and rage, and to hale me out of your Assembly when in innocence I
stood and heard thy partner and brother in Iniquity until he had ended his
frothy and airy lying stuff, as I shall prove by the several things was
uttered by him, that he has denied the new Covenant, this by Scripture I shall
clearly prove, and do charge him to be one of the Antichrists that the Apostle
speaks of, which should come in the last time. And when I stood up to speak,
and to clear the truth from his lies and slanders, thou and he, like two
hirelings, fled away, and when I called after you, and charged you to stand,
yet you both went away, and left me among a company more like Dogs than Men,
raging and swelling, haling, rending, punching with their feet, and so the
Scripture is fulfilled which Christ spoke, Behold I send you forth as Lambs in
the midst of Wolves. This was fulfilled this day in thy Assembly, who behaved
themselves like savage, wild and bruit Beasts. And this is the nature and the
image which thou have begotten them into: your fruits make you manifest to be
no Christians, but Brutes and Heathens. In the cool of the day consider, do not
wilfully close thine eye, nor stop thine ears, nor harden thy heart against
pure innocent Truth, lest God give thee up to a Reprobate mind. It is the same
Jesus as ever was, and the same Truth which thou and other do oppose. And
surely, if thou do not with speed repent, and turn to the Lord, utter
darkness will come upon thee, thy Talent shall be taken from thee, and into
the pit of misery shall thou be turned, which is the portion of all envious,
bitter, persecuting spirits. I have something further to say unto thee and thy
partner concerning his stuff delivered by him this day, either come up to
Laurence Growdons, or else appoint some other convenient place where I and
other of my friends may freely come, and as you are faithful to your God fail
not.

Send me thy Answer by this Bearer.

Austel 7. day of the 9. month 1656. By a Servant of Jesus, known to the world
by the name of Alexander Parker.


On the first day of the Week in the evening I and my friend Laurence Growden,
did pass down to Vpcots house, and coming in amongst them, Ieer 23 31 Romans 1
25. Job 4:7:
I found them very light and vain, making a scoff at what was spoken, and
turning truth into a lie, but the Lord will plead the cause of the innocent.
Then Vpcot accused me, and said, I denied the Word, and I denied Prayer, and I
denied the Sacraments: And my answer was, I own the Word, and I own Prayer, but
the Sacraments I did deny there was no such Scripture that speaks of
Sacraments. Then he said, I did contemn the Ordinances, and that was because I
stood and sat in the Steeple house with my head covered, Romans 2.3.
when as both the Priest and several of them that were there, had their heads
covered, and yet would condemn me for that which they were guilty of: but as
for keeping on my Hat in contempt, it is false: but for conscience sake I could
not bow to their Image, seeing their hypocrisy and dissimulation, and feigned
humility, making a show of holiness outwardly unto men, Prove. 15 8. Isai 1.1^.
Ier: 6, 20
when they are full of hypocrisy and sin within, the Prayers and Sacrifices of
such arean abomination to the Lord. After I having some discourse with Halls,
about something spoken by him, he not being able to stand before the Truth, he
would have shuffled off, and said, not only by the light within, and would
have put in that word only, which was not spoken by him in the Steeplehouse;
but his words were plainly proved, that they might not be guided by the light
within. He affirmed likewise that the Scriptures were the rule of life, and the
way to salvation, and the will and mind of God. All which things I answered to
at that time, and owned the Scriptures to be a Testimony and an outward
declartion of all these, the rule of life, and the way to salvation, and the
will and mind of God; but the Scriptures themselves, are not the Rule of Life,
nor the way to salvation, nor the will and mind of God, which I shall prove by
Scripture. There is but one Rule of life, and that is the Spirit of God which
is life, and gives life, and makes free from the Law of Sin and Death; and this
is the Comforter which guides and leads into all truth: John 14 26, and 15, 13.
John 6.61. 2 Cor. 3 6. Romans 8, 2. 1 Cor. 2.11.
All who obey and give up to be guided by it, which the world cannot receive.
But there is no life in the Scriptures, it is a dead Letter, and none can
understand it but as they are led and guided by the quickening Spirit: For
though Christ bid the Jews search the Scripture, he does not say there is life
in them, or that they were the Rule of Life, though they thought to have
eternal life in them; but they would not come to Christ that they might have
life, John 5 39 40 John 14.6: John 1.4. 2 Pet. 1.21, 22. Heb. 13 8. Acts 14.12.
1 Cor. 2.16. Acts 4.32.
who was the life, and his life is the light of men, and this Life, and Light,
and Rule was within the holy Men, who spoke forth the Scripture, and the rule
of life is the same now, which is spiritual within, which the Scripture
declares of, but is not it. Secondly, the way to salvation is but one, which is
Christ Jesus, who says, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life, and there is no
man can come to the Father but by me; but the Scriptures are not Christ, so not
the way to salvation, but a testimony of the way. Thirdly, the mind of God is
pure and spiritual, and was within the holy men that gave forth the
Scriptures, and they were all of one mind: but there are many that have the
Scriptures, but have not the mind of God, neither are they all of one mind, but
many minds, and many opinions, and their minds are earthly and carnal: so I
say, That, which a man may have, and not have the mind of God, is not the mind
of God: but a man may have the Scriptures, Luke 1.1. 1 John 5.10.
and not have the mind of God; so the Scriptures are not it; but a declaration
of it, and so I own them, and bear testimony unto the same Truth, that the
Scriptures bear testimony unto, and have the witness within my self according
to Scripture testimony, He that believes has the witness in himself. And the
said Halls being asked if he knew God, and he made a scoff at it because such a
question was propounded to him, and he said he knew God: and I asked him if he
kept the Commandments, he said, No Now try him by the Scriptures and we shall
find him to be a liar; read 1 John 2, 3, 4 verses, Hereby do we know that we
know God, if we keep his Commandments. He that says, I know God and keeps
not his Commandments, is a liar, John 8.44.
and the Truth is not in him. And here out of his own mouth he is proved by
Scripture to be a liar, and so no Minister of Christ. Then he propounded the
same question unto me, whether I knew God and kept his commandments, Mat.
11.30. 1 John 5.3. Psalm. 119.143
which things I answered, and witnessed to truth, being made able by the power
and life of Christ dwelling within me, by whom all things are made easy, and
his commandments are not grievous but joyous, they are my delight. Then he
said, there was none perfect in this life, therefore none can keep the
commandments of God. But his first thing I deny, and it is false, as I shall
prove by Scripture. Read Job 1.8. And the Lord said unto Satan, Have thou
considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect
and an upright man, one that fears God and escheweth evil. Here you may see
the Lords own testimony, and he that says there is none perfect in this life,
is a blasphemer, Psalm 37.37^ 1 Cor. 2.6. Col. 4.12. Phil. 3.15.
who would make God a liar. And David says, Mark the perfect and the upright
man, for the end of that man is peace. And Paul said, We preach wisdom amongst
them that are perfect. And again, one prays in another place, That they might
stand perfect and complete in all the will of God; And let us, as many as are
perfect, be thus minded. Here are many Scriptures that witness the truth of
Christ's pure Doctrine of perfection. For if any be in Christ he is a new
creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. Phil. 5.24.
old things are passed away, and all things are become new, and they that are
Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. Then woe to all
them that live in sin, and plead for sin while they walk on the earth, they be
enemies to the Cross of Christ, Isai. 3.11. 1 Cor. 6 9. 10 John 3, 8. Heb.
11.14. Ephesians. 5.27. Luke 1.74, 75 1 John 3.8.
and deny the end of Christ's coming, who came to take away sin, and to purify
the heart, and purge the conscience from dead works, that his people may be a
holy people to serve the Lord in purity and holiness of life For, for this
purpose was the Son of God made manifest, that he might destroy the works of
the Devil; and all sin is a work of the Devil, and defiles the Temple, Isai:
51.2. Isai. 48.22 Maark 7.22, Ephesians: 2, 12, John 8, 34, 44 Isai: 1, 17, Mat. 11,
28, 29
and separates from God, and breaks the peace with God; and there neither is
nor can be any reconciliation to God, until there be a separation from sin:
For all who live in sin, profess what they will, they are enemies to God, and
strangers from the covenant of promise, and are of their Father the Devil, who
is the author of all sin and unrighteousness, therefore cease from sin, and
learn to do well, that you may live and enjoy rest and peace.

Now whereas it is said in one place of Scripture, 1 John 1, 8 Heb: 10, 16, 17,
18, 1 John 3, 9,
If we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.
This is the refuge for all the Devils Ministers and servants to fly unto, who
live in sin in the old nature, and in the unconverted state, to plead against
the new Covenant and new Birth, where sin and iniquity is done away. And this
Scripture did Priest Halls bring to maintain his argument against persecution.
Then I instanced another Scripture in the same Epistle of John, chap. 5. v. 9.
Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him,
and he cannot sin because he is born of God. And this he would give a meaning
to, and I told him, 2 Pet 1, 20,
the Scriptures were of no private interpretation. An he asked me how I would
reconcile those two Scriptures: and I told him I owned them as they were set
down, for they were spoken to several conditions. And then he began to boast,
and would have turned the truth which was spoken by me into a lie, and said I
owned the Scriptures as they are, and then takes them upon condition; and thus
impudently stood in a lie, and after I spoke my former words and told him, the
Scriptures were spoken to several conditions, and instanced some Scriptures to
prove it, as in Acts 26.18. where the Apostle declares how he was sent forth,
and to what end, which was to open the blind eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they might
receive forgiveness of sins, etc. Here you may see they were in a condition of
sin, unconverted. Again, read 1 John 2.12. where the Apostle writes to them
whose sins were forgiven, Col: 2, 13,
I Write unto you little Children, because your sins are forgiven you. Here
you may see another condition. Again, read Col. 2.13. And you being dead in
your sins, and the uncircumcision of your flesh, has he quickened together with
him, Rom: 9, 20, Rom: 6, 22, 1 Cor: 15, 49, 1 Cor: 15, 22, Ephesians: 2, 1, 2, 3, 1
Pet. 1, 23. 1 John 5, 18, 1 John 3. 6, 7, 8, Gal: 6, 7, Mat: 7, 21, Romans 8.13,
having forgiven you all trespasses. Here again, as your understandings comes
to be opened, you may see the conditions and times they were in, to whom the
Scriptures were written, there was a time when they were dead in trespasses and
sins; and there was a time when they were quickened, and their sins were
forgiven them. And there was a time when they were the servants of Sin, and
free from Righteousness; and there was a time when they were free from sin, and
become servants of Righteousness. There is the first man and the second man,
The first Man is of the earth earthly, and the second Man is the Lord from
heaven. There is the first Adam and the second Adam; In the first Adam all die,
and are dead in sins and trespasses, and they who be there in that state, are
full of sin, and if they or any of them should say they have no sin, they
deceive themselves, and the truth is not in them; but all who are born again of
the immortal seed, are kept by the power of God, and the wicked one touches
them not, for whosoever abides in Christ does not commit sin, for whosoever
sins has not seen him neither known him; he that does righteousness is of
God, and he that does commit sin is of the Div^ll: therefore be not deceived,
for God will not be mocked with your words, it is not your saying, Lord, Lord,
nor your customary worship, and outside seeming holiness, it will not cover
your nakedness, nor bring peace to your souls, as long as you live in sin, for
if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die, and reap corruption, but if ye
through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, then shall ye live. But
some whose eyes are blinded by the God of this world, stumble because it is
said If (We) say, etc. the Apostle takes in himself. Now this I say, That the
Apostles many times do come down to the capacities of others when they
themselves have passed through such conditions. As for example, James the
Apostle in the third chapter of his Epistle, speaking of the unruliness of the
tongue, though it is but a little, yet it is an unruly member full of deadly
poison, therewith bless we God even the Father, and therewith curs we men which
are made after the similitude of God. Here we may see James said (We) but he
himself was no curser, but redeemed from it, and this I instanced to Halls, and
them present at that time, and he said though he was not one, he had been a
curser, and I told him, so had John been a sinner, and so have we all sinned,
and if we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar: John 17.9, 10.
But if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Mark, he does not say from part,
but from all sins; for if we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us
from all sin, and they who deny the light within, and deny the freedom from
sin, deny Christ and the end of his coming, and would make his blood of none
effect: and freely from the Lord do I testify against all such as Ministers of
Antichrist, and they have made a Covenant with Hell and Death, and no longer
time will serve, but term of life; they tell people they must live in sin, and
never be without sin while they live, and flatter them with a vain hope of
going to heaven, when there is but this hope, which does not purify their
hearts, is the hope of the Hypocrite, Isai. 28.15. Job 8 13, and 11.20 Mat.
15.30.
which shall perish, and their end will be woe and utter darkness, the portion
of all such who live in their sins: Therefore fear the Lord, and let every one
that names the name of Jesus Christ, depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2, 19.

Further, the same time Will. Vpcot affirmed, that there was no Ministers of
the Spirit now: which thing I did deny, Isai. 50.2. Heb. 13 8.
and do affirm it to be false; for God is the same now as formerly, and Jesus
Christ is the same to day as yesterday, and the spirit is the same; and all who
are made Ministers by the will of God, 2 Cor. 3.6. 2 Cor. 2.4. 1 Cor. 5, 19.
Isal. 61,2.
are Ministers of the Spirit and of power, and declare the word of life and
reconciliation, and ministers peace and glad tidings to imprisoned souls; and
condemnation, and the day of vengeance upon all Oppressors which keeps the Seed
in bondage.

He further said, that Paul was not a Minister of the Spirit, which thing is
likewise false and a lie, and blasphemy to affirm: read 2 Cor. 3.6. and there
you may read the Apostles Testimony, where he says, Who also has made us able
Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit. Here it
is evidently manifest, that Paul was a Minister of the Spirit; therefore all
that say he was not, are liars, John 8.44. Rev, 21.18.
but William Vpcot did say that Paul was not a Minister of the Spirit;
therefore he is a liar, and so of the Devil; let the Scripture be a testimony
against him.

Further he the said William Vpcot said, that the Scriptures were the Gospel,
and I asked him what part, and he said the New Testament, Matthew, Mark, Luke,
and John, and the Epistles; and he said further, that all the whole Scripture
was the Gospel: All which I deny, the Scriptures are but the report, Luke 1.1.
and fame of the Gospel, but not the Gospel, for the Gospel is a Mystery, and
cannot be bought for money; but the Scriptures which is a declaration, may be
bought for a small sum of money, therefore not the Gospel; for the Gospel is the
power of God unto salvation, unto every one that does believe. Romans 1.16. For
therein is the Righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith, as it is
written, the just shall live by faith; for the wrath of God is revealed from
heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth
in unrighteousness, because that which may be known of God is manifest in them,
for God has showed it unto them, verse 17, 18, 19. The Gospel is glad tidings
to captive and weary souls, which those that preached the Gospel did witness
the Redemption, of, Isa: 51: 1, 2. Rom: 3.24. Ephesians. 1: 7.
and the bonds of iniquity was broken, and the oppressed set free, and this
Gospel, the power of God unto salvation, was in the beginning before all time,
and was manifest in the holy men of God, from which the Scriptures were
declared and spoken forth; and they are a declaration of the Gospel, the power
of God unto salvation, but they are not the Gospel, the power of God unto
salvation.

Several other things was spoken at that time, but these are sufficient that I
have here set down, to all who love their souls and are not wilfully blind, to
try their spirits, to be contrary to the spirit of truth, and so to be turned
away from, as the Ministers of Christ exhorts, 2 Timothy 3.1. etc. and to them I
did speak, and warn them to give over deceiving of the people, and told them
the judgments of God would come upon them, Mat: 10.14.
and shaked off the dust of my feet, as a testimony against them, and came
away; being several times bidden go forth, and threatened to be put forth; and
some that was in the of the house of the ruder sort, 2 These: 1: 7, 8, 9, 10.
did threaten mischief against me, but neither of the Priests, nor any other
did reprove them for it, but did encourage them rather in their wickedness, but
the Lord God of power is now appearing, and will render vengeance in flames of
fire, upon all that know not God, Psalm: 111: 2, 3 Rom: 11.33. Rom: 1: 21: to
the end.
and that do not obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus, who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, when he shall come to be
glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe, read 2
These. 1.7, 8, 9, 10. and truly his work is wonderful and mavelous in our
eyes, his ways are past finding out by any worldy wit or wisdom, as it is
written, the world by wisdom knows not God, for the preaching of the Cross of
Christ is foolishness to worldly, wise, and Scripture-learned ones; but unto
all that believe both Jews and Gentiles, Christ the power of God, and the
wisdom of God, because the foolishness of. God is wiser than men, and the
weakness of God is stronger than men; for says the Apostle, Ye see your
calling brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty,
not many noble, are called; but God has chosen the foolish things of the
world, to confound the wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the world,
to confound the things which are mighty, and base things of the world, and
things that are despised, has God chosen, yea and things which are not, to
bring to naught things that are. Christ Jesus the beloved son of God, when he
chose himself disciples and Ministers, he did not choose them by their
greatness in the world, nor by their great learning, and Scripture knowledge;
he did not choose him disciples of the great Doctors and learned Rabbis of
those times, neither of the Rulers nor chief of the people; and this made the
Rulers and chief Priests to rage and despise, and called him a Carpenter, Mark
6: 3. Jo: 7: 48, 49. Mat: 26: 3, 4. Acts 4: 13. Mat: 4: 18, 21.
and those that followed him a cursed people that knew not the Law, and the
Rulers and chief Priests took counsel against Christ to put him to death, such
as were of great esteem in the world he did not choose, but he choosed ignorant
and unlearned men, and despised ones in the worlds account, many of them Fisher
men, such did Christ make-choice of, 1 Cor. 2 cha.
that the power might be of God, and not of man, that no flesh should glory in
his presence, but he that glories, let him glory in the Lord. And when Paul
came to the Corinthians, he came not with excellency of speech or of wisdom
declaring unto them the testimony of God, for says he, I determined not to
know any thing amongst you, save Jesus Christ and him crucified, and I was with
you in weakness and in fear, and in much trembling; but now trembling is
despised, and made a mock and a scoff at in your Towns, streets, and villages,
and most places, the Children of God, who fear God and tremble at his word, are
made a mock and a byword, under the name of Quakers; it is become their Table
talk, and at their Alehouses and Taverns, and indeed most places where they
come; the children of God are become the reproach, and as a byword amongst
them, every one giving their censures, Jer: 6: 10. Mat: 10: 22. Jam: 3: 15.
one crying one thing, another crying another thing, and all are in confusion;
but these are them whom the Lord does love and regard, who tremble at his word,
as it is written in the prophets; Heaven is my Throne, Isa: 66: 1, 2.
and Earth is my footstool, what house will ye build unto me says the Lord? or
what is the place of my rest? has not my hand made all these things? and all
these things have been, says the Lord, but to this man will I look to, and
regard, he that is of a meek and a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word.
But such are now reproached, and beaten, and whipped and stocked, and sent up
and down the Country as Vagabonds, Prove. 19: 29. Prove: 10 6, 7. Phil: 2: 12.
and abused and sent to prison; but God will plead the cause of the innocent,
and the scoffers and scorners he will judge, and bless and preserve them that
love righteousness, that work out their salvation with fear and trembling. And
further Paul declares that his speech, and his preaching, was not with enticing
words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit and of power, that
their faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God;
howbeit (says he) we speak wisdom amongst them that are perfect, yet not the
wisdom of this world, nor of the Princes of this world that come to naught,
but we speak the wisdom of God in a Mystery, even the hidden wisdom which God
ordained before unto our glory. And this wisdom and this mystery the Lord has
revealed unto us, for his Names sake, that we might be to him a praise, and a
glory, and an honor, in walking answerable, and worthy of his love, in all
humility and godly conversation, and we cannot partake with the world in their
ways of worship, Ephesians: 4: 1, 2. Col: 1: 10. Ephesians: 5: 11. Jam: 3: 15. Tit: 1:
16. Rom: 1: 18.
which is carnal, invented intheir fallen estate, by their carnal wisdom, which
is earthly, sensual, devilish, the root and ground of sin, and the body, and
many branches of the cursed Tree is alive and not killed, and they live in sin,
and pleads for a continuance in sin while they live on the earth, such are they
who profess God in words, but in works deny him; and such are they who hold the
truth in unrighteousness gathering in the Saints words, the Scriptures, which
were given forth from pure life and spirit within; these they gather into their
unrighteous minds, and talks of God and Christ with their vain minds, but
deceit and iniquity lodges in their hearts; Mat: 23: 28.
such a Worship and a formal profession we do deny, and against them do
testify, and cannot join with them, nor have fellowship with them; and
therefore are we hated and reviled, and made a prey upon, and so the Scripture
is fulfilled, which says, Isa: 59: 15.
they that depart from iniquity are become a prey to this generation; 1 Cor: 2:
9, 10
and this wisdom and mystery is hid from the worlds eye, and from their ear,
they cannot see nor hear, nor understand the things of God, as it is written
eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man,
the things which God has prepared for them that love him; but God has
revealed them unto us by his Spirit, for the Spirit searches all things, yea
the deep things of God; for what man knows the things of a man, but the Spirit
of a man that is in him; even so the things of God knows no man, but the
Spirit of God: then all they that deny the Spirit and say there is no Ministers
of the Spirit now, as Priest Vpcot did, knows not the things of God, but what
they know naturally, (which Jude speaks of) as bruit beasts in those things
they corrupt themselves, woe unto them for they have run in the way of Cain,
and run greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, read Jude 10, 11. And woe
unto all such now, that deny the Ministration of the Spirit, and says there is
no Ministers of the Spirit now, their knowledge is natutal and carnal, and they
go in the way of Cain, which is envy, and run greedily after the error of
Balaam for gifts and rewards, as the Priests and Parish Ministers in England
do, and as Vpcot your Teacher does; therefore turn from him, and all such, for
the Lords hand is stretched forth against them.

The Ministers of Christ were not called by Man, nor made Ministers by the will
of Man, Call. 1.1.12 2 Cor. 5.19.
they were not brought up at Schools to get human learning to fit them, but
they were called by God, Romans 10.8. John 17.17. 1 Cor. 3.16 2 Pet. 1.20.21.
and made Ministers according to the will of God, and fitted and prepared by
God, and had the word of Life and Reconciliation committed to them, which was
within them quick and powerful, and wrought powerfully in their hearts; by
which word they were sanctified, and the holy Spirit was within them, and as
the holy Spirit moved, so they spoke forth the Scripture, not by man's will, but
by the will of God, as they were moved by the holy Ghost; But the Teachers of
England are not so made nor called: For in the first place they are sent to
School to learn humane wisdom in the will of man; after, they are sent to
Oxford or Cambridge, and there by their cunning Craft they learn the Trade of
Preaching, having men over them, and Books for that purpose: And when they have
learned their Trade, served their Apprentiship, then their Masters give them
the Commission to preach, and commit unto them the Scriptures, (which were the
Saints testimony within them) but these Priests have it without them, and it is
neither quick nor powerful, but weak and dead, and their hearts are not
sanctified, but they plead against purity and holiness of life, telling people
it is impossible to live without sin in this world, and they do not preach as
they are moved by the Spirit, but they study in the week days what to speak,
and many of them have an hour-glasse, and most of them limit themselves to a
time, and when they have uttered forth all that they have, many times tell the
people, they would have enlarged if the time would permit, when indeed they
have no more to say, and so decieve the people, telling them they preach the
word of the Lord, when it is no more but a divination of their own brain: and
though they use some Texts of Scriptures, that is the greater deceit to color
their hypocrisy, and to make their ware the better to go off. But the Lord is
coming to lay open their deceit, and to take from them their stolen garments,
and the shame of their nakedness shall appear, and none shall buy their
Merchandise any longer. Rev. 18.11.
Here you may see their call into the Ministry is contrary to the Ministers of
Christ, and their preaching contrary, and so they are to be denied.

When Jesus Christ sent forth his Ministers, he did not give them power to take
tithes, Mat. 10. chap. Luke 10. chap.
nor any set or forced maintenance, but as they had recived freely, so they
were to minister freely; And into what City, Town or Country ye come, enquire
who is worthy, and if they receive you, there stay and abide, eating and
drinking such things as they set before you, Mat. 10 14.
for the Labourer is worthy of his Hire, and the Workman is worthy of his Meat.
Here he gave them power to eat and to drink with such as were worthy to receive
them; but they were not to do so amongst those that did not receive them, but
depart and shake the dust off their feet: they were not to compel them to give
them maintenance, nor meat, nor any thing else, but they were to minister
freely, 1 Timothy 6.8.
and if any did freely set meat before them, if they would use their power they
might eat freely. And I do not read in the the testimony of the Apostles, and
Disciples, and Ministers of Christ, that they did ever receive any thing
further than to supply their wants and necessities, for having food and
raiment, they were therewith content. I never read that ever any one was
compelled to feed them, Gal. 4.14, 15.
or give them maintenance, neither indeed was there any need; for the Lord whom
they served, sent his power along with them, and such a love was raised up
among them, that they did receive their testimony, that Paul declares of some,
that if it had been possible they would have plucked out their own eyes and
given them to him, and it is so now with those that receive the Truth in the
love of it, nothing can be too dear for them, for they are as one another
lives; and as they are hated by the world, and opposers and gainsayers of the
Truth with a perfect batred, so they are loved by all those that in singleness
of heart and uprightness receive the Truth with a perfect love.

But the professed Teachers of England are not so, but they have usurped a
power to take Tithes, and set and forced maintenances of 100, 200, or 300
pounds, or as much as they can get by the year; for they not having received
freely (as the Ministers of Christ did) but have given a great deal of moneys
for gaining of their Art, no more can they minister freely. And they are more
like to Heathens than to Christians, they do not Christian-like. Seek the
Kingdom of God and the righteousness of it, Mat. 6.32, 33. Mat. 10.11.
in the first place, neither do they according to command, Enquire who is
worthy: For their first and chief thing is, what place, or some great fat
Parsonage that is vacant, is sought after, and enquire what the people will
give, and so make a bargain with them for so much by the year, to be paid at
such and such times, and they are very loath to preach until they have their
maintenance made sure unto them, and yet they will tell people to believe in
God, and trust God for food for their souls, when they themselves dare not
trust God for their Bellies; and they make little conscience who they be that
they take wages of, believers or not believers, so they can but get it, they
care not: and whether they be believers or unbelievers, if they do not put into
their mouths, they presently go about to compel them by force, which is a
shame to hear of in a Gospel Ministry, the Ministers of the Gospel are ashamed
of such practices, and what ever was received by any of the Gospel Ministers,
it was freely ministered, and was to supply their present necessities, Phil. 4
10. to the 20.
and not to store up and spend upon their lusts, as those Teachers do. Nay
further, in the time of the Law, when Tithes was paid to the Leviticall
priesthood, there was a store house, and the people were to bring it freely
into the store house, and the Priests were not to eat alone, Mal. 3.19. Deuteronomy.
14.32, 20 the end. 1 John. 10, 17, 18.
but the strangers, and fatherless, and widows were to come and be filled, that
there might not be a Beggar in Israel, and the Priests were to minister freely,
a figure of Jesus Christ laying down his body freely, and when any did preach
for hire, it was an horrible and a filthy thing, and the Lord sent his true
Prophets to testify against such, as in Isaiahs time he cried out against the
Idol Shepherds, that sought gain from their Quarter, as you may read, Isai
56.10, 11. His Watchmen are blind, they are all ignorant, they are all dumb
Dogs, they cannot bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber; yea they are
greedy Dogs, which can never have enough, and they are Shepherds that cannot
understand, they all look to their own way, every one for gain from his
Quarter. And Jeremiah he was against the abominations in his time, and against
the false Prophets and Priests, Jeremia the fifth chapter, The Prophets shall
become wind, and the Word is not in them, thus shall it be done unto them, I
will make my words in thy mouth fire, and this people wood, and it shall devour
them; this people has a revolting and a rebellious heart, they are revolted
and gone, your iniquities have turned you away, and your sins has with h^lden
good things from you for among my people are found wicked men, they lay wait as
he that sets snares, they set a trap, they catch men; as a Cage is full of
Birds, so are their houses full of deceit, therefore are they become great and
waxen rich, they are waxen fat, they shi^e; yea, they overpass the deeds of the
wicked, they judge not the cause, the curse of the fatherless, yet they
prosper, shall I not visit for these things? Shall not my soul be avenged on
such a Nation as this is? A wonderful and a horrible thing is committed in the
Land, the Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means,
and the people love to have it so, and what will ye do in the end thereof?
Again, read Jeremiah the 23 chapter, and there you may see how the Prophet was
troubled because of the pro^hanesse of the Pri^sts and Prophets, My heart
within me is broken because of the Prophets, all my bones shake. I am like a
drunken man, etc. So both Prophet and Priest are profane, but read all the
Chapter. And Ezekiel the Lords Prophet, he cries against the false shepherds in
his time, read Ezekiel 34. Chapter, Son of Man, prophecy against the
shepherds of Israel, prophecy and say unto them, Thus says the L^r^ God unto
the sh^pheards of Israel that do feed themselves should not the shepherd feed
the flock? Ye eat the fat ye cloth you with the wool, ye kill them that are
fed but ye feed not the flock, etc read the chapter throughout, and there you
may see the deceits and works of the false shepherds in those days, and the
Lords promise to gather his sheep from their mouths, and feed them himself
upon the tops of the mountains of Israel. And Mica the Prophet of the Lord, who
dwelt in the light of the Lord he was against the hireling, Priests in his
time, as you may read in Mica 3 5. to the end of the chapter, Thus says the
Lord concerning the Prophets that make my people err, that bite with their
teeth, and cry peace, and he that does not put into their mouths, they even
prepare war against him, therefore night shall be unto you, that ye shall not
have a vision, and it shall be dark unto you that ye shall not divine, and the
Sun shall go down over the Prophets, and the day shall be dark over them, then
shall the Seers be ashamed, and the Diviners confounded, yea they shall all
cover their lips, for there shall be no answer of God, the heads thereof judge
for reward, and the Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof
divine for money, yet will they lean upon the Lord and say, Is not the Lord
amongst us? no evil can come upon us. Therefore shall Sion for your sakes be
plowed as a Field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the Mountains of the
House as the High places of the Forest. And as Troops of Robbers wait for a
man, so the company of Priests murder by the way by consent, for they commit
lewdness, Hosea 69. Read Mal. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, Here you may see the testimony of
the Prophets of God against the hirelings and false shepherds, and greedy
Teachers, and those that did not minister freely were cried against, and those
that did not bring their Tithes into the storehouse, they robbed God, as you
may read Mal. 3 8.10 Will a man rob God, yet ye have robbed me; but ye say,
Wherein have we robbed thee; in Tithes and Off^rings: Bring ye all the Tithes
into the storehouse, t^a^ there may be me ^t in mine house, and prove me now
herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open you the windows of
Heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to
receive it. Now here you may see that in the time of the Law, they had a store
house, and those that did not bring their Tithes thither, it is not said they
robbed the Priests, but they robbed God. But the Priests of England that take
Tithes of the peoples, have no storehouse to put the Tithes in, neither are the
Strangers Widows and Fatherless fed, but may sterve for them, or go a begging,
so they are not according to the law. And I do not read in all the Scriptures
of the Gospel Ministers testimony, that ever any of the believers in Christ,
did either take Tithes or pay Tithes, much less to go to law, and sue people
for any outward maintenance; so it is manifest, that the National and Parish
Teachers who take tithes, and sue those at law which do not (or for conscience
sake cannot) put into their mouths, are neither according to law nor Gospel.
And the Ministers of the Gospel did testify against such as went in the way of
Cain, and ran greedily after the error of Balam, for gifts and rewards, Jude 11
And such false Tea hers, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies denying
the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction, and
through covetousness shall they with feigned word make merchandise of the
people, whose judgment now of a long time lingreth not, and their damnation
sl^mbreth not, 2 Pet. 2.1, 23. and a Bishop must be blameless as the steward of
God, not self-willed, not soon angry, not given to wine, no striker, not given
to filthy lucre, Tit. 1.7. And Paul speaks against all covetous practices, and
all self-seeking, and against the love of money, And (says he) having food and
raiment, let us be therewith content; but they that will be rich fall into
temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown
men in destruction and perdition, for the love of money is the root of all
evil, which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and
pierced themselves through with many sorrows. 1 Timothy 6.8, 9, 10. All these
Scripture examples that I have here set down, does condemn the self seeking
Teachers in England and elsewhere, who so much mind earthly things, and the love
of money, that if they do but hear of the death of any of their fellow priests,
if their Benefits be larger than theirs, they long to be there, and strive for
the place, but if the Benefice be less, there is no such striving, and this is
manifest amongst most of the Priests, if they can but get forty pound or
threescore pound a year more in another place, they will leave their own
hearers and go thither, and so love money which is the root of all evil, which
the man of God was to fly these things, and follow after righteousness,
godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness, 1 Timothy 6.11.

Christ said unto his Ministers, Be not ye called of Men Master, Matthew. 23.8.
for ye have but one Master even Christ, and ye are Brethren, and they did not
transgress, but did obey his commandments, for they were not called by the
name of Master Peter, nor Master Paul, and the like, but Peter a Servant of
Jesus Christ, and Paul a Servant of God, an Apostle of Jesus Christ, 2 Pet 1.1.
Titus 1 1.

But those who are professed Teachers in England, are called of Men Master,
contrary to Christ's command and example of his Ministers, and in this they are
contrary to the Ministers of Christ.

The Ministers of Christ did teach the Doctrine of Perfection, and it was the
chief thing and the very end for which they were given forth, as you may read
Ephesians. 4.10, 11, 12, 13. He that descended is the same also that ascended up
far above all heavens, that he might fill all things. And he gave some
Apostles and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Crist, till we all come in the unity of the faith,
and of the the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

And again, read Col. 1.28. where Paul witnesses to this, and for which he
labored, and others, warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom,
that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.

But the National and Parish Masters do deny this doctrine of perfection, and
cries against those that preach it as blasphemers, and they tell the people
that none can be perfect in this world, and so they have denied the Ministers
work, and their preaching is in vain; for if they do not perfect them here, as
the true Ministers office was, as is plain in Ephesians. 4. then where will they
perfect them, will there be any need of their Ministry in Heaven? Surely no,
for there shall be no need of men's teaching there, but the Lord alone will give
them light, Rev. 21.10. to the end.
and all shall know him from the least to the greatest, and shall walk in his
presence, and rejoice in his love, and praise his holy Name, and worship him in
the beauty of holiness for ever and ever.

And many other things there is which they practice, which is contrary to the
practice of the holy men of God declared of in Scripture, as their singing of
David's conditions in Rhyme and Meeter, his weeping, Psalm. 6. Psalm. 119, 120.
Psalm. 51 1. Psalm. 45.1. Psalm. 66.1. Psalm. 131.1.
his wailings, his roarings and cryings, his tremblings and quakings, his
prayers, pr^ises and prophesies, these they give to simple, ignorant, proud,
covetous, and profane people, and s^y they sing to the praise and glory of
God, as, O Lord I am not puffed in mind, I have no scornful eye, I do not
exercise my self in things that be too high, and such like, when both Priest
and people are puffed in mind, and have scornful eyes, they can scarce look one
upon another they are so scornful, and they do exercise themselves in things
that be 100 high, in meddling with the Saints conditions, giving their
constructions and meanings, and private interpretations to the Scriptures: and
thus they cause people to lie in the presence of the Lord, and so they dishonor
God, and when they read the Psalms, they keep on their hats, and when they sing
them they put off their has, and so worship the works of their own hands, when
the Friest has a Cap or two on his head, and so makes a seeming show of
holiness and humiliation, when their hearts are full of gross hypocrisy and
dissimulation, Ia.m 5.13. Isal. 35.10. Hosea 8, 10,
Now whereas it is written in the Scripture, If any be afflicted let him pray,
if any be merry let him sing Psalms: this is owned and witnessed; but who are
those that are merry? truly none but the ransomed ones of the Lord, who are
redeemed from the earth, and from the bondage of corruption, these can truly
sing the songs of deliverance, and they shall return to Sion with joy and
singing, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads. But the Songs of the
wicked shall be turned into howling and weeping, therefore take heed how ye
take the name of the Lord in vain, and sing with your vain minds without
understanding, for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in
vain, Exodus 20.7. Levit. 19.12.

Likewise their sprinkling Infants, and ca^ling it an Ordinance of Christ,
whereas neither Christ nor any of his Ministers did practice any such thing,
therefore I do it deny. Now whereas Christ says, Suffer little children to
come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of God; verily I
say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little Child,
he shall not enter therein, and he took them up in his arms, put his hands on
them and blessed them, Mark 10.14, 15, 16, but he did not sprinkle water on
their faces, and said, he baptized them into his Church, but he sets the child
as an example for its innocence, and shows that all must become as innocent as
little children, for whosoever does not receive the kingdom of God as a little
child, he shall not enter therein. But what example is this for any one to
sprinkle wa^er on the innocent child's face, or what advantage is it for a
proud, covetous, heady, high minded sinful carnal man, to take the innocent
little child which is not capable of believing, what can his prayers, or any
thing he does, John 9.31.
profit or advantage the innocent child. Read without prejudice, and let that
of God in your consciences judge.

There is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, and that one Baptism I own, which
is not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience toward God by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 4.5. 1 Pet.
3.21. Gal. 6.15. 1 Cor. 12, 13. Heb. 10 22.
1 Pet. 3. 21 For it is neither dipping or sprinkling, or not dipping or
sprinkling that avails any thing at all, but a new creature: for that is not
the baptism which is outward with the water, but baptism is that of the Spirit,
having the heart sprinkled from an evil conscience, and the body washed with
pure water, and as many as are baptized into Christ have put on Christ, and in
Christ all are one, Gal. 3.27.28.

And for their Sacrament which they tell people of, I deny the Scripture knows
no such word as Sacrament, but the Supper of the Lord I own and witness, which
is a spiritual eating and drinking of the Body and Blood of Christ; whereby
we, being many, are one bread and one body; For the cup of Blessing which we
bless is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? John 6.56.63 John 8.12.
the bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? for
we being many, are one bread, and one body; for we are all partakers of that
one bread; 1 Cor. 10.16. This bread is Jesus Christ the light of the world, as
you may read John 6.35 I am the bread of life, I am the living bread that came
down from above, he that eats of this bread shall live for ever, and he shall
not hunger; and they that drink of this cup shall never thirst, but it shall be
a Well of living water springing up unto eternal life, John 4.14. But I say,
That the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to Devils, and not
to God, and I would not that ye should have fellowship with Devils, ye cannot
drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of Devils, ye cannot be partakers of the
Lords Table and of the Table of Devils. 1 Cor. 10.21.

Now for a company of profane sinful people, as drunkards, swearers, liars,
scoffers, scorners, proud, lofty, John 8.44, 1 John 3 8. John 6.70.
highminded ones, Whoremongers, Adultere^s, Covetous cruel oppressors, and the
like, for these to meet, and eat bread and wine, and call it a communion, I do
it deny, to be the Communion or Table of the Lord, but the Table of Devils.
Likewise their standing praying before and after their Sermons, as they call
them, and their pulpit, and their taking a Text, as they call it, and add to it
the divination of their own brain, and speak forth their conceivings and not
the word of God: these and all or most things that are used and practiced by
them in the steeplehouse or Idol-Temple, are contrary to the practice of the
Ministers of Christ, and they are to be turned away from, for they do not,
neither shall they profit the people at all, for if they had stood in the
council of God, they should have turned the people from the evil of their
ways, but they run and the Lord never sent them, therefore they shall not
profit the people at all. Jer. 23.32.
Thus I have declared and laid open their deceits and contrary walkings to the
holy men of God, and cleared the truth from their lies and slanders, and do
deny them and all their way of worship, John 4.24. Col. 3.16. John 1.3. 1 Cor.
3.3. Phil. 3.3.
and do own the worship of God in Spirit and Truth, and the Ordinances of God
in Spirit, preaching, praying, and singing with the Spirit, and with
understanding, singing with grace, and making melody in our hearts to the Lord,
and Baptism and the Lords Supper, and the Scripture in the life and
spirituality of them; and the Gospel of peace and glad tidings, and the word of
life and reconciliation, I own and witness, which separates from sin and joins
to the Lord, to be one with him in Spirit, where a I the children of God have
union, even in the pure Spirit and love of God, and are written in one another
hearts, not with paper and ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, and are
taught of God, and worship him in Spirit, and rejoices in his love and
patience for evermore.

Awake, awake, all people, awake to righteousness and sin not, 1 Cor. 15.34 Ephesians
5.14. R^m. 13.12. Luke 21, 27, 28. Isai. 4. chap. 2 Cor 4.6.
arise from your dead sleep of carnal security, put off the works of darkness,
and put on the armer of light, stand up from the d^ad, that Christ may give you
light. For now is the Lord appearing, and arising in his mighty power for the
redemption of Sion, and to put an end to sin and finish transgression, his day
is dawned, and the glorious light of the everlasting Gospel is broken forth,
and shines in the hearts of the Lords people: the Lord is gathering his
scattered-flock together in this his day, where they have many years been
feeding upon the dry husks, and running from mountain to hill, and from hill to
mountain all this cloudy dark day. Now is the Lord coming to bring back again
that which was driven away, and to seek and to save that which was lost, and
bring his sheep into the fold of the the true shepherd, where the sheep shall
lie down in peace, and feed together in one fold, and the Lord alone will be
the Teacher and Feeder of his Flock, and no ravenous beast shall pluck them out
of his hand: for he is the good shepherd that will lay down his life for his
sheep, John 10 1^
and will not fly when the Wolf comes to devour the Lambs, but he does
preserve them all, and carries his lambs in his arms, and gently leads out all
that are with young, all his tender babes he seeds with milk, and nourishes the
tender plants with the water of life, and this is the Lord bringing to pass in
these our days, glory be to his name for evermore, he is fulfilling his
promises made of old, gathering his people into union and fellowship with
himself, Jer. 23: 5 6, 7.8. Isai, 55, 3.4. Psalm. 2.1, 2. Acts 13.40, 41 John
15.18, 19.
where they shall all rejoice together, and be one in the everlasting covenant
of love and life in the Lord Jesus Christ. And this makes the heathen to rage,
and the world to wonder at the mighty works of the Lord our God* But it is no
new thing to be reproached by the world, who knows not God: For says Christ,
If ye were of the world, the world would love you, but because I have chosen
you out of the world, therefore does it hate you. While we were of the world we
were loved of the world, 1 Pet. 1.14.
when we were alive in the old nature, and did partake with them in their ways
of worship, and in their vain conversation, being one with them in vanity, and
run with them to pleasures and vain delights, in vain and foolish jesting, and
idle and vain talking, our tongues being our own, and our wild nature not being
tamed, but we could do as they did, and speak our own words, and think our own
thoughts, and do our own works, no knowing the Cross of Christ, nor bearing
his yoke, but were at ease in the flesh, and in the carnal liberty, feeding
upon perishing things, and created objects, loving the world and the things of
it, and delighting in and loving the Creature more than the Creator. I say,
when we were in that condition one with the world in most things, then were we
esteemed and loved of the world, and they spoke well of us (if we did not
cross their wills) but even then (though we could talk of God and Christ, and
Scriptures) we were strangers from God and Christ, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. Gal. 1.15,
16.
and from that pure life that the holy men of God lived in, that spoke forth
Scriptures, but then it pleased the Lord to manifest himself unto us, and
revealed his truth within us, our understanding was opened by his pure light
shining within, whereby we saw the deceits of the world, and their worship, and
the hypocrifie and dissimulation of professors, Priests and people, and that
their religion was but a show and shadow, and mere outside seeming color, and
talk of words and names, Isai. 29.13.
drawing near to God with their lips, and mouths, when their hearts were after
the things of the world, and there was no life appearing, nor fruits of
righteousness from a true ground brought forth, but pride and self-love, and
covetousness, every one seeking themselves, and to advance themselves by fraud
and deceit, guile and hypocrisy, yea and all manner of wickedness we saw acted
amongst them, which did grieve our spirits, and was a burden to our tender
consciences, and we separated from them, and could not partake with them,
neither in their ways of worship (as it is established) nor in their
conversations; but we seeing, in the light of the Lord, 2 Cor. 6.1.
that they are out of the way, and their worship, doctrine and practices are
contrary to the pure worship of God, and the doctrine and practices of the holy
men of God declared of in Scripture, Tir. 1.16.
as I have showed before: We seeing these things, for Sions sake we cannot hold
our peace, but in love to the souls of all people, do declare and testify
against the world and the unrighteousness of it, and against the deceits and
hypocrisy of the Parish Teachers and Hirelings of these times, and against all
the formal and carnal professors, who in words profess God, but in works deny
him; and for this cause are we hated, reviled, reproached, beaten, whipped,
stocked, stoned, and sent up and down the Country as Vagabonds, and abused and
sent to prison, and this is manifest at this day in England, the war is begun
already betwixt the Beast and the Lamb, but the Lamb shall get the victory;
though all join hand in hand against the innocent, it shall all be in vain,
they shall not prevail, Rev. 17.14. Mica 4.1, 2. Mat. 5.10, 11, 12. John 16.20,
21. Psalm. 30.35. 2 Pet. 1.19. Rev. 21.23 24 Heb. 11.26.
but the Lord over all shall be exalted, and his kingdom shall be established
in righteousness, and the Mountain of the House of the Lord shall be
established in the top of the mountains, and it shall be ex^lted above the
Hills, and people shall flow unto it, and though we now be persecuted and
hated, and troubled on every side, yet it shall not be long, for the Lord will
plead the cause of the innocent, and though sorrow and trouble may endure for a
night, yet joy will come in the morning, when the glorious day of the Lord does
dawn within, and the day star does arise in the heart, then shall darkness be
expelled, and all the children of the Lord shall walk in the light of the Lord,
and rejoice in his presence, and reproaches to us are great riches, for we know
it is our portion from the worldly and carnal professors, those who have the
name and form of godliness, but are not in the life, they are and were ever
found persecuters of the life where ever it did appear. As in the time of Moses
administration, when the Lord did appear darkly as it were, under types and
shadows, Mar. 23.31. John 5.35. John 1.14.
and the people for a time were held under that administration. And in the
times of the Prophets more light was discovered, and they saw through the
shadows, and declared against them, and those who were in the types and shadows
persecuted the Prophets. The Law and the Prophets were until John, and amongst
all that were born of women, there was not a greater than John, for he was a
burning and a shining light, and this was a greater light than the prophets,
yet the least in the kingdom is greater than John. And in the admistration of
the Gospel, when the fullness of time was come, when Christ was manifest in the
flesh, who was the end of the Law and the Prophets. Those who had the form of
the Law, and the Prophets words, Mat. 26 3.4, Mark 15 15. Col. 1.20.21, 22, 23.
they persecuted Christ the life of the Law and the Prophets, as many do now in
these our days, who have got the words of Christ and the Apostles, and cries up
names and words, as the Ordinances of Christ, and the Church of Christ, and the
Ministers of the Gospel, and notwithstanding all this, are persecuting the
appearance of Christ and his life that is now manifest in his people as it was
in former times under the Law, those that multiplied their Sacrifices and burnt
offerings, but their hearts were far off, and the bond of iniquity was not
broken, nor the oppressed set free, but they lived in their sins, and so were
testified against by the Prophet, as thou may read, Isaia chapter 1. The Ox
knows his Owner, and the Ass his masters Crib, but Israel does not know, my
people does not consider, a sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity, a
seed of evil doers, children that are corrupters, they have forsaken the Lord,
they have provoked the holy one of Israel to anger, they have gone away
backward: The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint, from the sole of
the foot even unto the head, there is no soundness in it, but wounds and
bruises, and putrefying soars, they have not bin closed, neither bound up,
neither mollified with ointment. To what purpose is the multitude of your
sacrifices unto me, says the Lord, I am full of the burnt offerings of Rams,
and the fat of fed beasts, and I delight not in the blood of Bullocks or of
Lambs, or of he Goats, when you come before me, who has required this at your
hands? Bring no more vain Oblations, Incense is an abomination unto me, the New
Moon; and Sabbaths, the calling of Assemblies, I cannot away with, it is
iniquity even the solemn meeting: your New Moons and your appointed Feasts my
soul hates, they are a trouble to me, I am weary to hear them, and when you
spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you, when ye make many
prayers I will not hear, your hands are full of blood, wash ye make you clean,
put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil,
learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the Fatherless,
and plead for the Widow, etc.

Now you people of all sorts, who makes a profession of God, and call together
Assemblies, examine your selves truly, and see if you be not in the condition
of those whom the prophet cries against: Mat 7.22, 23.
Are you not revolted from the Lord? Are you not a sinful people, laden with
iniquity, a seed of ev^ll doers? Have not you provoked the Lord to anger by
your unrighteous walking? Are not you corrupted with sin from the sole of the
foot even to the head? Can you deny these things? Nay, I have heard some of you
confess this in words. Then to what purpose is your Sabbaths and your solemn
meetings, as your calling of Assemblies, your days of humiliation, as you call
them, and your Lecture days, and your long prayers, who has required these
things at your hands? It is all burdensome to the Lord, and he cannot away with
it; it is in quity, even your solemn meetings, and your prayers are
abomination, and the Lord will not hear them, for your hands are full of blood,
you are full of envy. Mat. 23 14. Deuteronomy. 32.29. Isal. 47.7, 8, 9 Luke 11.49.
Oh when will ye lay these things to heart, and consider and depart from
iniquity, and relieve the oppressed, and undo the heavy burdens, and plead the
cause of the innocent, and not send to prison nor persecute the his innocent
servants: It is not your saying Lord, Lord, nor your hypocritical prayers, nor
outside holiness that will avail you, nor cover your nakedness in the day of
the Lord; therefore cease from your sin and your ungodliness, and learn the
ways of righteousness, that your souls may live, Isaiah 55.1, 2, 3.

Again, read Isaiah 66.1, 2, 3. There you may see how the Prophet declared
against the Temple, and the Sacrifices, which were outward, Thus says the
Lord, Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my Footstool, where is the House
that ye build unto me? and where is the place of my rest? etc. He that kitleth
an Ox is as if he slew a Man, he that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a
Dogs neck, he that offers an Oblation as if he offered Swines blood, he that
burns Incense as if he blessed an Idol; yea, they have chosen their own
ways, and their soul delights in their abominations. Consider and let this
judge you, who have forsaken the ways of the Lord, and have chosen your own
ways, and delights in your abominations, Mat. 15.8, 9,
the Lord wall plead with you. And Jeremiah cried against those that trusted in
lying words, that lived in oppression and sin. Thus says the Lord of Hosts the
God of Israel, Amend your lives and your doings, and I will cause you to dwell
in this, Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these: For if ye thoroughly amend
your ways and your doings, if ye thoroughly execute judgment between a man and
his Neighbor, if ye oppress not the stranger, the Fatherless and the widow,
and shed not innocent blood, then will I cause you to dwell in this place, Jer.
7.3, 4, 5, 6, 1 Cor. 1.14. 1 Cor, 1.30. Mat. 7.12.
7. Let this judge you all that trust in lying words, crying the Church of
Christ, and the Ordinance of Christ, and the Ministry of the Gospel, and so
makes a great noise and talk of words, for these things are not known to you
while you live in the old nature; but if ye thoroughly amend your ways, and
put off the Old man with his deeds, and put on the New man Christ-Jesus, then
shall the Church of Christ be known, and all the ordinances of Christ lived in,
in the life and power of them, but not while you live in sin.

And again, Mica. 66.7, 8.
the Prophet Mica he saw through the Figures, and saw the upright and just life
which the Lord required, as you may read in Mica 6.6, 7, 8. Wherewith shall I
come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God? Shall I come before
him with burnt offerings, with Calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased
with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousand of Rivers of Oil? Shall I give my
first born for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?
He has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what does the Lord require of
thee but to do justly, and love mercy, and towalk humbly with thy God. These
examples. I bring, that you may see how the Lord did send his Servants and
Prophets to cry against deceit and hypocrisy, and against those that made a
profession, but were out of the life and possession. And those whom the Lord
thus sent, they were hated by those whom they declared against in the time of
their testimony: And afterward another generation comes, and cries up their
words, as the Prophets in the time of their prophecy, they were hated, but
after their death another generation gets their words, but still persecuteth
alike. And this was manifest in the days of Christ, Heb. 8.1.
when he was manifest in the Flesh, who was the substance of Moses Types, and
the end and life of the Prophets; he was hated by the Jews, Chief Priests,
Scribes and Pharisees, who had gotten the words, and painted themselves with
Moses and the Prophets words, and cried up the Prophets, building their Tombs,
and garnishing the Sepulchers of the Righteous, and condemned their forefathers
for killing of the prophets; and yet these were them that crucified the Son of
God, Matthew. 12.2.
who was the life and substance of those things which they upheld, which were
outward and typical, but though they made a fair show and large profession,
and were zealous for their Sabbath, and strict in their observations, yet they
lived in their sins, and Christ saw their hypocrisy, and cries woe unto them,
as you may read Matthew. 23. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, for ye
make clean the outside of the Cup and of the Platter, but within they are full
of extorsion and excess. Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first that which is
wihin the Cup and Platter, that the outside may be clean also.

Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, for ye are like unto whited
Sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward, Mat. 26.3, 4. and 27, 26
Acts 2.41. Acts 7.48, 49. to the end.
but are within full of dead men's bones and all uncleaness: Even so ye also
outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and
iniquity.

Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, because ye build the Tombs of
the Prophets, and garnish the Sepulchers of the righteous, and say, If we had
lived in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in
the blood of the Prophets; wherefore ye be witnesses unto your selves that ye
are the children of them that killed the Prophets: Fill ye up then the measure
of your Fathers. Ye Serpents, ye generation of vipers, how have ye escaped the
damnation of Hel^?

Here you may see that Christ deals plainly with them, and does not wink at
sin, but reproves them sharply: And it was no railing, as some call it now: for
he saw their deceit, and they were in rage and envy against him, and the Chief
Priests and Rulers took counsel against him, and crucified him; but
notwithstanding all this, did not put a stop to the work of the Lord, but he
appeared again unto his Disciples, and filled them with his Spirit of power,
and they went and preached the Gospel, and cried down the Temple-worship, and
the Ceremonies of the Law; and for this they were hated, Acts 8.2, 3.
and persecuted, and some were stoned to death by such as upheld the Temple and
the outward commands, and Saul amongst the rest made havoc of the Church, and
persecuted them from City to City. And thus in the Apostles time they were
persecuted by such as had the form of godliness, but were strangers to the
power and life of godliness. But I do not read in all the Scriptures that ever
the Christians did persecute any who were Christians indeed; so that
persecution is a mark of the Beast, and of Antichrist, and it was ever blind.
After the Apostles time many there was that got the form of truth, 2 Timothy 3.1,
2 3, 4 5, 6, 7, 8, 1 John 2, 18.
and in the Apostles times the Doctrine of Antichrist crept in, which now has
overspread a great part of the world, and darkness has long been over all
Nations; and though some have born the name of Christians, yet far they are
from the Christians life, and these now in our age have gotten the Scriptures:
and as those in the days of Christ had gotten the form of Moses and the
Prophets words, so these have gotten the form of Christ and the Apostles words,
but are far from Christ and the Apostles life: and as they then in that
generation did did condemn their fore fathers for killing the Prophets, Luke
11.47, 48.
and yet did persecute Christ the Life, so these now in this generation do
condemn their fore fathers the Jews for crucifying of Christ, and yet are
found in rage and malice, and persecution against the appearance of Christ in
Spirit in his Saints now: yea those who have been looked upon as godly men, and
preached and prayed for the pouring forth of the Spirit upon sons and upon
daughters, and that the Lord would teach his people himself by his Spirit those
things have been spoken of and talked in this generation by Priests and People.
And now when the day is come, and the Lord has poured forth his Spirit upon
Sons and Daughters, yet because it is not in their way, and in their time, and
according to their expectation, therefore they cry out, and persecute, and
revile and speak against the Lords light and appearance within, as it was
formerly by the enemies and opposers of Truth, and these cry out against
freedom from sin, and against perfection, as a blasphemous Doctrine; but it is
that which the Lord is bringing to pass, Heb. 10.16, 17, 18. Rev. 21.27. 1 Cor.
6.9, 10.
gathering his people into his everlasting Covenant, where sin and iniquity
enters not, but is for ever shut out of the Kingdom and Covenant of God. For
these Teachers and People in these our days, who cry up and profess Christ
without, and a Church and a worship without, and a Law and Light, and Word
without, and their Rule and Ordinances without, and their Teachers and all
other things without, are but in in the state and condition, (nay they are
short) of those who upheld the Temple-worship and Ceremonies of the Law, which
made nothing perfect, though there was in the first covenant Ordinances of
Divine Service, and a worldly Sanctuary: For there was a Tabernacle made, the
first wherein was the Candlestick, and the Table, and the Shewbread, which is
called the Sanctuary; and after the second veil the Tabernacle, which is called
the Holiest of all: And other things as you may read, Heb. 9. the holy Ghost
thus signifying, that the way into the Holiest of all, was not yet made
manifest while as the first Tabernacle was yet standing, which was a figure for
the time then present, in which were offered both Gifts and Sacrifices, that
could not make him that did the Service perfect as pertaining to the
conscience, which stood only in meats and drinks, and diverse washings and
carnal ordinances imposed on them until the time of reformation; and in that
covenant and admin stration there was an outward Temple, and a Law, and
Sabbath, and Circumcision without, and Priests that did offer up Sacrifices and
Burnt Offerings, whose lips were to preserve knowledge; but nevertheless there
was a disanulling of all these things for the weakness and unprofitableness
thereof, Heb: 7: 18, 19. Heb: 10.1. Heb. 8.7, 8. to the end.
for the Law made nothing perfect but the bringing in of a better hope, by the
which we draw nigh unto God, and all these things were but as Types and
Shadows of better things to come, and of a new Covenant, in which sin and
iniquity shall be done away: For if that first covenant had been faultless,
then should no place have been sound for the second, for finding fault with
them he says, Behold the days come says the Lord, that I will make a new
Covenent with the House of Israel and with the House of Judab not according to
the Covenant that I made with their Fathers in the d^y when I took them by the
hand to lead them out of the Land of Egypt, for they continued not in my
Covenant, and I regarded them not, says the Lord, for this is the Covenant
that I will make with the House of Israel after those days, says the Lord I
will wri^e my Law in their hearts, and put my Spirit in their inward parts, and
I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people, and they shall not
teach every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the
Lord; for all shall knew me from the least to the greatest, for I will be
merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and iniquities I will
remember no more.

This is the new Covenant prophesied of the days of Jeremiah, Luke 4.21 A ands
2.16, 17 Exodus 34.1. Exodus 31: 14, 15, 16, Exodus: 40: 12, 13. 1 Chronicles: 17.12.
Genesis 17.10, Exodus 37.29. 2 Cor. 3.3, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17, Romans 2: 28, 29. Matthew.
12.8, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4. Mat. 10.28, 29, 1 John 2, 27. Heb: 4, 12, Rom:
10.8. 1 Cor: 6.11, Heb. 9: 13, 14
and was sulfilled in the days of Christ and the Apostles, and is now
fulfilled, and fulfilling, in these our days; and as in the old covenant the
Law without, written in Tables of Stone, and the Sabbath was without, and the
Priests were without, whose lips were to preserve knowledge; and the Temple was
withont, circumcision and many other things were without, and the anointing
Oil, these things were outward, but did not make the comers thereunto perfect
as pertaining to the Conscience, they did but cleanse the outside. But in the
new Covenant the life and substance is within: the Law is written in the Tables
of the Heart, and the Spirit is within to teach them; and their Bodies are the
Temple of God, and Circumcision of the Heart with the Spirit, and the Sabbath
(or rest) is witnessed, which is Jesus Christ, who is the Rest and the Rock and
Refuge to fly unto, and whosoever does come unto him, and take his yoke upon
them, and learn of him, they shall find rest to their souls: And the Anointing
is within, and the Word of Life and Reconciliation, which is as a sharp Sword
to cut down all sin and all the lusts of the flesh. This word is within, nigh
in the heart, and in the mouth, and by this Word of Life and power within, were
the Saints and holy men of God purified and cleansed, and their consciences
purged from dead works, and were created anew, to serve God in the new life of
Righteousness, and it is the work of God within that does make perfect from
sin, Ephesians: 2.10: Rom: 8.2: 2 Pet. 1.19, 21;
even the law of the Spirit of Life that Paul speaks of, that made him free
from the law of Sin and Death: And from this Word and Spirit of Light within,
was all the Scriptures given forth, and all words or writings that are spoken
or written, are to bring to the Word and Spirit within: For whatsoever was
written or spoken by Moses or by the Prophets, Christ or the Apostles, John
4.24 1 John 1, 7,
being spoken and written from the Spirit and Light within, they are all to
bring out of all Shadows and Figures, Luke 17.20, Col: 2, 20, 21, 22. Heb:
9.9, 10 Heb. 10.1 Luke 15.16, Isaiah 55.2, Luke 24.5, Jer. 2.13. Ezekiel: 3 4, 5,
6, Mica 6 6.14 Mat 7, 22, 23. Mal: 3, 5, John 3.17, 20
and carnal Observations to the worship of God within in the Spirit, where the
Saints union and fellowship is in the Spirit and Light within. So all you, both
Priests and People, in this generation, who are seeking the kingdom in your
Observations, whose worship and Ordinances, and Light, and Word, and Rule, and
other things, are without. I say unto you, your worship is but carnal, and all
that which you practice it does not cleanse you, nor make you perfect; you are
but feeding upon the husks, you are spending your labor for that which does
not satisfy, and spending your money for the which is not bread, you are
seeking the living amongst the dead, you are seeking water among the broken
Cisterns that will hold no water, you are as the woman that sought the lost
Groat without, you are as sheep without a Shepherd, scattered upon the
mountains, but find no rest, you are hungry but are not satisfied: Nay, I know
there is a cry within you for purity and holiness of life, and notwithstanding
all your talking, and your observations, your preaching and your praying, you
are condemned in your selves for your unrighteous walking: and this is the
condemnation of the world, because light is come into the world, and yet men
love darkness better than light, because their deeds be evil.

Therefore take heed of despising the light within, 2 Pet. 1, 19, John 1.5.
John 8, 12, 1 John 3, 5,
but take heed to, and mind the light that shines in your dark hearts, and
reproves you for your sin, that out of transgression ye may come and follow
Christ in the light, which whosoever follows, shall not abide in darkness, but
shall have the light of life; John 14.6. Acts 4.12. John 1.9.
for God is light, and he out of his love has given his Son for a covenant of
light unto the people to lead them out of darkness, and to separate them from
sin, and to join them to the Lord, and there is no way to life but by the Son
of God, there is no other name under heaven given by which any man can be
saved, than by the name of Jesus, who is the light of the world, and does
enlighten every one that comes into the world, and this light is true and
pure, and testifies against sin and evil, though you act sin never so closely,
that none in the world can accuse you, yet this light within you does stand a
witness against you, and condemn you, and though you may alter and change your
ways, and be tossed to and fro by men's changeable Doctrines, yet this light of
Christ within you does never change, but does reprove you for sin and evil,
and make manifest darkness and the deeds of darkness, Ephesians, 5.13.
that is the light; or all things that are reproved are made manifest by the
light; whatsoever makes manifest is light, that which tells you that lying is a
sin, and swearing is a sin, and whoredom and drunkenness, and pride and
covetousness, that which does reprove you when you act any evil, that is the
light that I speak of, and do direct your minds unto, to wait upon God in the
light for teaching, and power over sin, and as you have many years been seeking
without, and talking of Christ and Savior without, but have not found peace
nor freedom, but are alive in your sins, and laden with iniquity; so now turn
in your minds to the light of Christ, and there wait for the appearance of
Christ in you, 2 Timothy 3.6, 7, Col: 1.27, 2 Cor: 4.10, 11. 1 John 3.8, 1 John
5.12, 29. 1 Cor. 3.17. Ephesians. 3.17. Romans 8.10,
and for his life and power to be made manifest in your mortal bodies to kill
and slay sin, and to purify your bearts, that your inside may be clean by the
pure power and life of Christ within, that so your bodies may be Temples of God
holy and pure, that God, who is Light may dwell within you; and Christ Jesus,
who is light, may appear within you: For he is not known in power to kill and
destroy the works of the Devil but as he is known within, and where he is
witnessed come in the flesh, there is peace abiding in him; but while you live
in your sins there is no peace; and as you love that little light within you, 2
Cor. 13, 5, John 14, 27. Isal. 48.22. Mat. 13.31, 32 1 John 2.27, John 3.19,
20, 21. 1 Timothy: 3.9. Ezra 3.19. Psalm 1.6
which at first is but small like a grain of Mustard Seed, but waiting in
patience, and bringing your deeds to it to be tried by it, it will grow and
spring in you, and fill your hearts with joy, and teach you continually; but if
you hate this light, and run to men for teaching, and live in your old nature,
where the curse and wrath is, this light will be your condemnation, and truly
this I say unto you, That if ever you own God, or his truth as it is in Christ
Jesus; or if ever you own a good conscience, where the mystery of faith is
held, you must own this light to be your guide and teacher; so take warning in
your life time, and let not the love of God be tendered to you in vain, lest
you perish in your sins.

Written in love to your Souls by a Labourer in the Lords Vineyard, known to
the world by the name of Alexander Parker.

To all those who are separated from the Worlds public Worship (as it is
called) and for conscience sake cannot join with them.
DEarly beloved friends, you whose hearts are touched, and understandings
opened with the light of Jesus, whereby you are come to see the deadness and
emptiness of all the Formal and Carnal Worships, and profession, that stands
in man's will, gathered in by the strength of the wisdom of the subtle Serpent,
whose head is not bruised, but does rule as King in fallen Man, and leads him
captive at his will to do his lusts: Such are those who profess God in words,
but in works deny him, drawing nigh unto him with their lips and mouths,
crying Lord, Lord, but their hearts are far off, the Devil he keeps possession
there, and sits as King, and they are his slaves who live in envy, wrath and
malice, pride, lust, covetousness, lying, swearing, railing and reviling, and
the like. Such bears the mark of their father the Devil, who has begotten
them into his image and likeness, and their prayers and and sacrisices are
abomination, and stinks in the nostrils of the pure God, and they do not,
neither shall they profit the people at all, but leads them captive laden with
sin, and led away with diverse lusts, ever learning, but never come to the true
knowledge of God, as it is plainly manifest to the children of light. And these
things (friends) the Lord has let you see, and turned you from them and their
carnal worships. Now wait in patience upon the Lord in his light, that you may
receive his power and word of life and reconciliation in your hearts, to
separate you from all sin and uncleanness. That as the separation is made
without in a measure, so the separation may be made within by the pure power,
that your hearts may be purified, and your consciences purged from all sin, and
your Bodies made Temples holy and pure for the Lord God to dwell in, that you
may worship God in Spirit in his holy Temple, and be taught of him in Spirit
according as he has promised, and according as you have been directed by his
servants and faithful witnesses, so wait and walk with the loins of your minds
girt up, and stayed upon the Lord, that his living Word may abide in you, and
quicken your mort all bodies, and raise you up from death and dead works, to
serve and worship God in the new life, that you may truly witness Jesus to be
your Teacher and Feeder. If you should never behold the Face of man more, this
is that which I and and all my friends do wait for, that all of you may eat
your own bread, and have oil in your own vessels, for the time draws nigh
that all who have not oil in their vessels will be shut out of the Kingdom: It
will then be in vain to beg or buy from others. Therefore beloved, as you and
many others have long been looking without, and seeking the kingdom of God in
Observations without, and talking of a Christ and a Savior without, but no
peace nor salvation was found there. Now return home, and seek the lost groat
in your own house, and wait in the light for the glorious appearance of Christ
in you, that his life and power may be manifest in you to save you from your
sins. So as branches abide in the vine Christ Jesus, that you may be fruitful
and abound in love, and all the gifts of God. This I write unto you by way of
remembrance, to stir up your pure minds, that you may be kept watchful and
diligent, waiting in patience until the work of the Lord be perfected in you.
So the Lord God of power breath forth his Spirit upon you, and enrich you with
his spiritual blessings, that you may abound in all good things, and be kept
blameless and harmless amongst this wicked and untoward generation of men,
standing faithful to the Lord in all things, that you may finish your course
with joy, and be crowned with glory, and reign with the Lord God and the Lamb,
and praise his holy Name, and worship him in the beauty of his Holiness for
every and ever.

A. P.


