The Aphorisms of the Kingdom.
1. The Parliament is the moderation of Monarchy. The Laws and not the King
do command. -- Leges non Reges imperant. 2. The power of it is sufficient to
prevent and restrain Tyranny. The Kings Reason is the Kingdoms ruin. --
Ratio Regis Regni ruina.
1 Samuel 8. 9. 10.

3. The essence of the Law is the free consent of the Lawmakers. The power of
Man's Laws is founded in the Will. -- Potestas Legislativa fundata est in
voluntate. 4. The sole Reason of the King is not the sound judgment of the
Kingdom. The Kings judgment is not the Kingdoms judgment. -- Judicium Regis
no^ est judicium Regni. 1 Samuel 8. 10. 1 Samuel 10. 25. 5. All the VOTES in
Parliament are directive to the Law, none destructive. A Vote neither compels
nor is compelled to Consent. -- Votum nec cogit, nec cogitur ad consensum. 6.
The Vote that is directive and coactive, is no ways Nomotheticall. The chief
building Power is most free. -- Potestas Architectonica est liberrima. 7. The
negative Vote of a King is no more than the dissent of one man. No mam can
affirm more than he can deny and contradict. -- Nemo potest plus affirmare
quam negare, and^* contra. 8. The affirmative Vote of a King makes not the Law;
Ergo, the negative cannot destroy it. He that is not the only maker of the Laws
cannot only be the destroyer of them. -- Qui Legum non est solus conditor,
destructor non est. 9. He that cannot destroy a Law made, cannot destroy it in
the making. Whether he shall choose that which is past, or that which is to
come, he has the same will. -- Elegerit sive preteritum sive futurum eandem
habet voluntatem. 10. The Power that makes Laws, repeales and revives them as
reason requires. A Lawmakers as such cannot make Laws to himself. --
Legislator qua talis, non potest sibi Legem imponere. 11. Kings that do good
to their Subjects of bounty, would be free of the obligation. That bountiful
Lords break their Bonds. -- Domini benefici, Luke 22. 25. disrumpantur Lora.
12. Laws are the best directions and obligations for all men to follow. To
submit the Principality to the Laws is more than the Crown. -- Principatum
submittere legibus, majus est Imperio.
The Instructions of Gods Word.
1 Samuel 8. 9. 10. Now therefore hearken unto their voice, howbeit yet protest
solemnly unto them, and show them the judgment of the KING that shall reign
over them. And SAMUEL told all the words of the Lord to the people that asked
of him a KING. And he said, This will be the judgment of the KING that shall
reign over you. etc.
IVdgement is a Word of diverse significations, and which to take in this place
has exercised Divines, and some to flatter Kings have told them from this
place that they have an absolute right to their Kingdoms; and for advantage
have translated the word jus Regis, the right of the King, and justified, that
no man has any property in his goods but as the King pleases: no owner of
ought he has, but his King by the right God has given him, may take from him
all he has, and dispose of it for his own use; and Samuel has yielded so
much to the King in this word, as children, servants goods lands, etc. we will
therefore investigate and diligently search out the multiplicitie of
significations, for there is not a word in Scripture of a larger signification;
for as understanding which is the largest faculty extends to all things real,
intellectual, imaginary; so judgment which is a part of it has the same
extension.

First, in Scripture it is often taken for the act of the mind to judge those
things that Reason has invented. Secondly, for the rule of Reason by the which
those things are judged. Thirdly, for the examples that come under those rules.
Fourthly, for the knowledge of causes, controversies, questions, doubts, or
whatsoever may be determined by reason. Fifthly, for the power to end and quiet
whatsoever may be so controverted. Sixthly, it is taken for the office
administration, function or ordination wherein such a power may be executed,
Seventhly, for the judgment that passes from such an Office, as when Solomon
had judged that intricate cause between two women for a living child, it is
said all Israel heard the judgment which the King judged, and they feared the
King, for they saw that the wisdom of God was in him to do judgment, 1
Kings, 3. 28. Eighthly, for the guilt that deserves judgment Luke 24. 20.
crima, judgment, is put for the guilt, and so Pilate testifies, Luke 23. 22.
Action, I find no cause to justify my sentence of death. Ninthly, it is used
for the punishment it self, 1 King. 20. 40. So shall thy judgment be, thy
self has decided it. Tenthly, it is taken for the manner or custom that is
followed by any man. If in this place we take judgment for an act of
understanding, and so refer it either to God or the King, it may have this
sense, a sinful people have asked a King to judge them; 1 Samuel 8. 5. and they
shall have their request with a witness, I will give over my care to judge
them, and leave them to such a judgment, as they would have, the King shall
deal with them as a Tyrant; for so do the Kings of the Nations, that they
desire to be like unto. If we take it for an ordinance appointed of God, then
the judgment of God is this, that his ordinance must be obeyed; and so he ties
them from rebellion and resistance of the King he shall set over them; for
Kings consented unto and anointed of God, may not be rejected at the pleasure
of the People, I mean their persons, as for their Laws, being the judgments
of their own brains against God and truth may be despised and esteemed as
they are no rules to live by, or be followed by any that loves the peace of his
own concience, or the common peace of the Kingdom, and therefore where God
has given power of better Judgment to be followed, we must maintain it and
stand by it, against the private Judgment of the King himself, and it is no
Rebellion to maintain the Laws of the Kingdom against all such judgments as
oppose them, and the distinction between the person of the King and his power
is plain enough in this judgment; for further then he is the ordinance of
God I am not to obey him, except you will make all his errors Gods ordinances*
and flatter him as BELLARMINE does the Pope, that absolute obedience is due
unto him. If the Pope should command vices and prohibit virtues, the Church is
bound to believe that vices are good, and virtues bad, unless she will sin
against conscience, de Roman. Pont. l. 4. cap. 5. and these elevate this
infallible Judge in his judgment, that they bring him into the absolute
perfections of Christ. We must say that in the high Priest, the Pope, there is
the fullness of all graces; because he alone gives a full indulgence of all
sins; that this may agree to him, which we say of the chief Prince our Lord,
that of his fullness all we have received. de Regimine Principum, lib. 3. cap.
10. and so if we will be drunk with the drunken, we must rest upon the Kings
judgment, and to oppose it is as mortal a sin as to reject the judgment of
Antichrist. But as we know more obedience is due to his Majesty than the Man
of sin; yet we shall be men of sin if we adore the judgment in the Text to
be rule enough to yield the King all we have, and that he can do us no
injustice in any thing he commands us, or takes from us. If we make it a power,
and that to be his judgment, he shows it in all his actions, for we must
hold that just which he does, and complain of nothing. If we translate it
manner and Custom, he has too long been advised by this Text to continue his
customs and ill Counsels, to keep us still in such a thraldom of oppression
and misery, and this Text would no longer be thought of for the purpose, but
that other that Samuel left in writing, 1 Samuel 10. 25. And Samuel told the
people the judgment of the Kingdom, and wrote it in a book, and laid it up
before the Lord, etc.

This judgment of the Kingdom in our books of Laws and Parliaments that
made them, is all we request, and desire no better proof of his Majesty's
judgment than the common judgment of our Kingdom, which two ways he
abandons: First, in taking the Laws made in the sense of his own judgment.
Secondly, in opposing all Laws to be made, except his Vote must be accepted
for more than it is. And we may admire seeing his consent is necessary, that
his dissent is more than necessary. His consent to the making of a Law is
necessary, and if it make it not for his purpose, he has another help that it
shall not be made at all, and so whatsoever Law displeases him, shall never
be; and consequently all Laws depend absolutely upon the King, and when we say
the Legislative power is in the Parliament, we do but mock the judgment of
it; for the whole power is in the King, and that of the Imperial Code is true,
Legum conditor, and interpres solus Rex just existimabitur, the maker and
interpreter of Laws the King alone is justly to be accounted and reputed. He
will not say his Vote alone can make a Law, or give the sense of it, and I
would gladly know the reason what disinables him. He has said many things for
himself that will prove it. The Parliament is merely admitted to counsel the
King, and that in some points, and may not make a transition to any without his
grant, and for the transgression are liable to imprisonment, as long as the
King pleases: and what is his reason? because they may not command, as if
there were nothing in the power of the Parliament but either counsel or
command. His Majesty had need to look for better Logicians and Philosophers
too, than thus to mistake; there is between the understanding and power to
command, the will to consent, and the essence of the Law lies wholly in the
consent: Counsel prepares the matter of the Law in truth, Justice and
wisdom. Laws should be most true, most just, most wise, Deuteronomy. 4. 8. and so
are all Laws made by God, and such should be the Laws of men: but their
understandings come short of the knowledge of the Highest; yet must the
counsel thereof be for the Acts, as well as all men's actions, and Solomon
commends it from the Counselors when they are many. 3. When they are used in
all matters of Peace and War. 3. That they establish the Kingdom by Laws. 4.
Bring safety unto it, Prove. 11. 14, and 15. 22 and 20. 18. and 24. 6. Command
no way makes a Law, it is but the effect of it. The whole Essence lies in the
consent of the will, which comes between counsel, and power to command. He
that commands either the thing he knows not, or wills not, is an egregious
fool: first, Because he commands obedience to ignorance; secondly, To the thing
he wills not. His Majesty may understand that the Parliament requires no more,
but that He must grant them, Their public counsel, and their common consent;
and seeing the first is in the multitude of Counselors, and the second in the
freedom of many; and where the most goes in counsel and consent, there is the
Law: for one man's counsel and consent cannot have a greater power than the
most, and if it have, it is more than counsel and consent; which is that the
King calls Command, and by it proves himself the violater of Laws; for before
they be made, no man may command them, and to command the making and votes, is
violence. There is indeed a Royal confirmation when the Law is made, to
increase the Authority of it, but to the Law is not essential, but
accidental, as we shall show in another place.

The KING is GODS anointed, and man's appointed.
1. Gods anointed, jurae Personae. -- by the Right of his Person, and so we can
do nothing against Him. 2. Man's appointed, jure Coronae -- in the Right of His
Crown, And so He can do nothing against us. 3. Contra Regem non est Lex,
quoad Personam, -- against the King is no Law as concerning His person, Et
contra Legem non est Rex quoad Coronam -- And against the Law He is not a King,
as concerning His Crown. 4. Reges non Leges imperant quoad Personam, -- Kings,
not Laws rule concerthe Person. Leges non Reges imperant quoad Coronam, -- the
Laws not the King rule, concerning the Crown. 5. Judicium Regis, non est
judicium Regni. -- The judgment of the King is not the judgment of the
Kingdom. 6. Judicium Regis paena est. -- The judgment of the King is
punishment. 1. Sam. 8. 9. 10. 7. Judicium Regni, recta vivendi regula. -- The
judgment of the kingdom is the right rule of living. 1. Sam. 10.
The Illustration by Examples.
SAVL and David were both anointed by Samuel, and yet had not the crown till
the people consented, and David was twenty years without it, and Saul returned
to his trade, 1. Sam. 11. 5. And fought one battle before his creation in
Gilgal. He was anointed at Ramah, chosen by lot at Mizpeh, and crowned at
Gilgal. When Samuel told him that God had appointed him not to seek asses but
men, 1. Sam. 9. 20. He in his simplicity or hypocrisy excuses himself by
three arguments, v. 21. First that his Tribe was the smallest in Israel, having
not yet recovered that loss and slaughter of their men, which they received in
the battle with Israel, which was enough to make the Tribe infamous, and all
the Tribes to remember an old injury, (and scorn, as some did, to receive any
Ruler from them.) Secondly, his fathers house was of small account in that
Tribe. Thirdly, himself the least in his fathers house. Modeste regna
recusavit, -- he modestly refused the Kingdom, as Bishops do, (viz) Episcopare
nolo -- I will not be a Bishop. But it may be said of them, as it may be said
of our Cavalliers, Nolunt occidere quenquam, posse volunt, -- they have a will,
when they Nil the thing. It may be Saul was in good earnest, and he had cause
enough, if he had known the burden, and little benefit he had by his Kingdom.
Veraciter se excusavit de honor Regni, says Iunius, -- he did in good
earnest excuse himself of the honor of the Kingdom. And truly his reasons
of refusal are pithie and well heaped together, and his conclusion an earnest
and vehement interrogation, Wherefore then speak thou so unto me? David was
also anointed by Samuel not long after Saul's creation, and yet lived many years
under Saul as a son and servant. He was anointed at Bethlehem, 1. Sam. 16. 4.
and many years after that crowned at Hebron. First by his own Tribe, 12. Sam.
2. 4. Secondly, by all Israel seven years after, 2. Sam. 5. 3. And here David
is said to be anointed again, as an happy sign that God and man joyfully
conspired together to make him King, and that he was as careful to receive the
consent of the people, as the Unction of God, and it is most certain to be the
mind of God, that Kings must neither lay hold of their crowns, nor make laws
nor use Arms, but by the free consent of their people. He that writ the
observations taxes the King that with the original grant of heaven, he makes
no mention of the consent of his people, and in truth it is the error of our
King to think he holds all from God, and nothing from his Subjects: with God he
joins the Law, and that is his second error, if he understand it of the Laws
of the Kingdom, for they are made by common consent; and if he have his Royalty
by them, then the people give it him: and the Observator says truly, That the
Law by the which Kings reign, is the paction and agreement that any Political
Corporation or Society of men make with him, even of those that are pricked by
God, and declared from heaven to be his Ministers, as Saul and David are; His
Prophet anoints them both, and then the people being certified of Gods will*
are not forced to follow their guide, but have their freedom to contract and
covenant with him. Abner in his Message to David; speaks of both rights, 2 Samuel
3. 12. First, That God had by his anointing, given him the Kingdom. Secondly,
That he could not take it by that right, without a league, and he requires
David to make ir with him, and is confident to bring him in all Israel upon the
same condition, and does it, who first acknowledge Gods grant, 2 Samuel 5. 1. 2.
Secondly, Require their own right. v. 3. Saul had done David wrong in taking
from him his wife, and therefore justly requires to have her restored, 1 S^m.
3. 13, 14. The King may call for his own without consent; and though she had an
husband, yet he had no right in her against the lawful owner. David owns not
the Kingdom and Michal alike, which may teach the King another error, that
will have all our Nation to be his without consent, as his own wife is his, and
the Parliament should do him wrong to take her from him, or the Hollanders to
hold her where she is; but they may as lawfully keep his Kingdom from him, as
Abner and Israel did, without his league, and compact with them: If he say he
has made it with them, then let him so hold it, or not complain of them for
holding it as he does. The Observator has done him no wrong; but they that
would make him hold his Monarchy by an absolute right, which in true love they
cannot persuade him unto, but in extreme hatred to our Realm and Religion,
knowing our Parliament so fast set against them, and yet for him in his due
right, which is the way to make him the most honorable Monarch in the world,
as David was; and the other is to make him like Saul, a Tyrant. He meddles no
further with the Observations as good for him, but only in this, That the
beginning of his book destroys Monarchy, which at the first reading I thought
he did; and some words are dangerous, to make the King wholly dependant upon
the people; but I deal plainly (as my title is) That he is Gods anomted, and so
iure personae, in the right of his person, exempt from all men; but he is the
peoples appointed, and so iure Coronae, in the right of his crown, can do
nothing without them; and this is our present case. The Parliament would secure
the person of the King, and yet maintain his Laws which good intention of
theirs if he cannot see it, they must sorrow for him, but not sacrifice the
whole Kingdom to his will. It is a wholesome Maxim in the Law, That the King may
do only that which is just; and a false Aphorism, That all is just he does. A
King may abhor to do evil, and as much abhor to be limited to do good, It is
not dishonorable to a Prince to do his duty, but he counts it most ignoble to
be under any Law or Obligation: David is bound not to touch the Lords Anointed,
and was not Saul by the same reason obliged not to hurt David? David arms
himself and his men to defend themselves, but not to kill Saul; was it not a
sin for Saul to take up Arms to kill his subject? David gives way to the people
to crown him, and pleads not his Coronation by any other Right; and shall men
that are more weakly declared to be Kings, presume they have it because they
are heirs? It were injustice to deny him his Coronation, that has it by divine
Unction and designation, and yet by violence of the peoples Right, he shall
offend as much on the other hand. Votes in Parliament have the most vigorous
power in them to make Laws; and here also the Maxim is, That summa potestas
fundata est in voluntate, The chief power is placed in the will, yea, all
power that is free; as for coactive power, that is over men's bodies, and may be
found in beasts that can bear down one another. Now I demand what power His
Majesty would have in Parliament? coercive or directive, violent or voluntary,
by counsel or command, consent or compulsion? There is no power to force men
to Laws; but in the Forest, as among Beasts, the Lion will be their King, and
the Fox is the freest, and wisely fore-sees that all footsteps that go forward
find no return, and therefore wisely keeps himself out of the Lions Den. Will
His Majesty make his Parliament the Lions Den to hold his Subjects doing, and
to do nothing out what he likes, They will be strange Votes that that are all
forced to one man's Vote, and an absolute negative voice to make* void all
affirmatives, or one affirmative to command all negatives. but His Majesty
will say to the making of a Law his affirmative Vote with the most makes a Law,
but his negative Vote against all or the most destroys ir so that we shall have
no more Laws than he pleases I would ^ut ask this one question, whether
sufficient consent is not the essence of the Law? It will be answered so the
Kings consent be in it, otherwise the Law will want essence, I must ask again
in the freedom of the will. what is more in the Kings consent than in another
man that has as much power to consent as the King himself? will you say power?
I must ask again what power: certainly it must be a free power, and then no
difference for the meanest man in Parliament is as free, as the King to give
his Vote, and no Law can be made without consent so qualified, and he that will
command the making of a Law, is to his Subjects as the Law is obligatory to
all, and so all the Parliament men are as much obliged in the Legislat^ve power
to the King, as all the Kingdom is to the Law when it is made by such a power;
and therefor the whole power of the Law is in the King, and the Parliament men
are but Cypners, or if they be to counsel the King, they may not consent, to
the Law, or if they may, it must not be to the making of it, or if to that, it
must be to the Kings consent, not as consultive with the rest, but coactive to
all, for one may consent to another, as in the Reign of Edw. the third, the
Commons desired they might not give counsel in a commotion, but that the King
with his Counsel would give it, as the more knowing men, and at the last they
gave both counsel and consent, and the King would suffer nothing to be done
without them, and he says, Lex notissima, et provida circumspectione stabilita,
etc. It is a Law well known and by the most provident circumspection
established, that all men should consent to that which concerned them, now if
the Kings consent be mandatory in the Law to them that make it, as well as they
which obey it, they are not free but must be observant to do as the King
commands them, a thing never heard of in Israel, as I shall show in the sequel
in all their Court. As the Parliament suffers so does the whole Kingdom with
them, and that for a Militia denied to them and granted to Oppressors. The
Parliament has made it plain to us that the Commission of Array is not
warranted by any Act of Parliament, and I am content to reason from the same as
the King does, that the Ordinance of Parliament is not only without any one
warrantable President of former times, as he believes, but as he is well
assured, void in Law, His Majesty has lost by his Argument in all the parts
of it. First we know no president warrantable that are alleged against the
Parliament, for it has power to repeal Laws, which His Majesty has not, and
his Commission of Array being repealed he cannot revive it, and to walk by
presidents as he does, is against Law, and to carry them to the conquest, is
against his contract, and to show he means to rule by the sword and not by his
Laws. Secondly, he says an Ordinance in Parliament is void in Law, and of this
He is well assured, and I suppose his reason is because it wants his consent;
To this I can answer strongly, that his consent is no sufficient reason either
to make it void or of force and value* Not void in Law because it has the
consent of the most, and in that consists the being of the Law; for if his
consent cannot make it a Law, when the most are against it, his dissent cannot
make it void when most are for it, for contrariorum contraria est ratio, for if
his affirmative Vote prevail not against the most to make a Law, his negative
Vote cannot make it void when most have consented to it, and if His Majesty
desire to learn from the wisest, even God himself, he shall soon be instructed,
that the Almighty granted no such negative Vote to any King in Israel, or any
other judge in any Consultation or Counsel, but the Votes always went with
the most, even from the Counsel of 3 Judges to seventy one or seventy three.

The Notation of a Counsel is witty, Consilium dictum a communi intention, eo
quod in unum omnes dirigant mentis ^btuitum: concilia enim occulorum sunt, etc.
Isiod. Mer. in suam canon. collect. A C. uncell is derived of Cilia (whence
also supercilium) which imports the common or joint intention, inclination, or
bending of the eyes, both of body and mind, to the investigation of the truth
in that matter which is proposed in any Assembly. His Majesty would have the
castigation, or rather. the casting out of all votes that displease him: and if
his power be so great, I wonder he does not discharge them by a diss^lution, or
take their consultation, and make his own determination. But the continuation
is necessary, and their convocation not to sit and tell the cl^ck as Divines
do, of whom we hear nothing in a time wherein they might be of great use for
th^s great matter of divorce between the King and the Council, and labor
reconciliation, but above all beware of any provocation. I shall add a little
further, That the Parliament does not wholly proceed without his Majesty's
consent, Omnia nostra faci^us, quibus nostram ^mpartimur authoritatem; we make
that our own Act, and our own Law, to the which we have communicated our own
power and authority: Implicitly the Parliament proceeds with the Kings
consent, and what they do, he does, Cod. l. 1. de veter. jure enuc. Justinian,
sancimus v^cem legam obtinere sanctas regulas: we ratify the holy rules of the
Church to before Laws. The Church made them, and the Emperor confi^med them,
Novel. 131. cap. 1. and to might his Majesty, if ill counsel did not persuade
him, corroporate the Ordinances of Parliament. I would beg another
consideration of his Majesty to think on the Parliament and himself, what
arguments they be. The Parliament is Integrum, the whole entire body of the
Kingdom representative: and it is most lively in the Commons, of which the King
being no part yet should love it as his own Body.

The Lords are a part too of the Parliament; and I would not be so nice as some
are, to say the Representative body is only of the people, and not at all of
the King and Lords, as if the counsel were more vulgar and base than great and
honorable, as many take occasion to reproach it; but ill tongues in time may
be taught better language: I shall think of the Parliament in the parts, and
they make but one whole body. Now we have a Rule, That Integrum in majus
membris, totum partibus. Hereupon is that rule of the King and his Kingdom,
That the King is major singulis, minor universis, and therefore the supremacy
of the King, is not above the supremacy of the Parliament: What then have we
two supremacies, and one above another? I answer, we have no supreme King but
one, neither have we any supreme Council but one; and as his Majesty has no
subject above him, so let him suffer no Council to be above this, or take
counsel from any other. Secondly, let him think himself to be less than his
whole Council, and that his subjection unto it, is not to be the subject of
his subjects, but a servant with them for our good: It is no ill still that God
gives him to be his Minister for good. Thirdly, the falling away of the parts
of the Parliament, as long as the whole is not dissolved, still it retains the
name and nature of the whole, and therefore the persons removed have left their
power in the whole, and we are obliged to maintain that, though the desertors
of it perish; I except none but your Majesty, and that not in flattery, but
good reason, as I shall show before I leave my Discourse of the present
Affairs. Consider the parts one with another, as the King with the Lords and
Commons, and them as Subjects, and I must say Rex est Major singulis subditis:
but put them into a Body that may truly be called a Parliament, though many
parts depart, yet as long as the Body is undissolved we must hold it for our
greatest Counsel, follow the directions of it; which to kill their King they
have to, not ever will consent unto but to kill them that would destroy all,
and have begun to do it: I hope he that loves his King, his Parliament,
himself, will not delay to be valiant to the death.


